TEN Introductions: How to read, and in reading, how to understand; and in
understanding, how to bear in mind all the books, chapters, and verses,
contained in the holy Bible. With an Answer For Lawyers. Physicians. Ministers.


LONDON, Printed by A. Islip. 1594.

blazon or coat of arms of Tobias Wood(?), featuring three birds

To the right Worshipshipfull master Tobie Wood, Esquire, and Councellor at
Law, dwelling near her Majesty's Tower in London, the true and undoubted
Patron of this book.
AS three special occasions moved S. Peter to offer his labor in building of
three Tabernacles; Mat. 17, 3.4.
one for Christ one for Moses, and one for Elias: even so (right Worshipful)
three special occasions moved me to offer this my labor in the building of a
spiritual Tabernacle, one for mere 1 Cor. 12, 12.13.14. to 25. Phil. 2,
19.20.21. 1. Cor. 10, 24.
care and Act. 24, 16. Romans 9, 1.2.3.4.5.
conscience to my Leuit. 25.25.48.49. Romans 9, 5.
contrimen in Wales, one to kindle my 1. Sam. 16.2.20, 2.4.9.12.13.17.12, 10.
faithful affections toward you, and one to satisfy the request By his
letters dated, Ianuar. 20. Apr. 5. And one, May 2. 1592.
of a right worshipful gentleman, Sir William Herbert knight, who would join
with me in this work. If the care of my countrymen might be vnsupplied; and if
the worthiness of this learned and zealous knight might be (as he is in the
grave) for ever silenced; yet the hearty affections, the bond of
thankfulness, and the christian duty I owe you, can no way so effectually be
discharged. Wherein also I shall make clear my good conscience toward the
one, and my humble duty toward the other: which if you shall please to
patronize, whatsoever is found wanting by him which is dead, shall be supplied
(I doubt not) to your contentment, by them which are alive. Exo. 37, 7.
As the two Cherubins which Moses made, tended to the preservation of Gods
people, The Method and nine observations.
and therefore both were placed upon the Arc as one: even so (good worshipful
Sir) the two former books which I made, tended to the instruction of Gods
people, in the holy Bible; and therefore I have placed them both in one. Psalm.
62, 11.12.13.
As God spoke once and twice that power and mercy belongs unto him: so I
will speak once, twice, and ever to his majesty, that power may be given by
his spirit, and mercy by his son, to all that long with Zeal to the
knowledge hereof. These are to certify Ier. 9.17.18.19.
you, though not for news, there was great Ezech. 32.1.2.3.
lamentation in Syon, because of Gods justice for their sins, as there was
great lamentation for Pharao in Egypt, because he was a lion in the land, and
a dragon in the sea; and as there was great Hest. 4.3.
sorrow, fasting, mourning, and weeping, among the Jews, because the king had
decreed their deaths: even so there is great cause of lamentation, fasting,
mourning, and weeping here in England, because Ier. 9, 21.
death is scaling our windows, the Eze. 32.4.
beasts of the fields hungering to devour our bodies; our blood ready to
water the land; Eze. 32, 6.
and our Mat, 7, 19.13, 42.43.18.9. Iud. 9, Reu 19, 20.
souls as prepared for the fire of hell, by reason of sins in the Hos. 4,
1.2.
common sort, of horrible cruelty in many of them that are Esa. 3, 12. Hos. 7,
3.4.5.
great, and of the general ignorance of Christ, according to his gospel, in
every sort. If it please you to compare the reign of Kin. 20, 21.
Manasses, sometimes king of Judah, with the reign of Marie; sometimes queen
of England, you shall find little odds in the innocent blood that the one
shed at Jerusalem, and the innocent blood that was shed at London, etc. which
God the righteous judge has not yet fully revenged, because that the
uniformity in the profession of Christ these 36 years, is not yet perfect, and
the persecution of former times are not done away by repentance. For
notwithstanding the great 2. Kin. 22.23.
zeal of Josias, with the obedience of his people, yet the former sins of
Manasses would not be forgotten. Therefore God knows, and most wise men sees,
we have urgent occasions moving us to pray, yea, to pray heartely unto Jesus
Christ the aeternall king, for Elizabeth our queen, and other her subjects,
that either be will utterly forgive, or at the least grant, that the penalty
deserved do not fall upon us, nor upon our children. And albeit we cannot
shake off the general condemnation threatened and known to hang over England,
yet her majesty with us, and we with her, loathing our own sins, and detesting
the abomination of others, shall be singled and severed to preservation, come
the desolation never so terrible and sudden. Jerusalem which was sometimes
the city of the great king, the keeper of the divine oracles, the receptacle
of Angels, and the continual presence of God himself, is now become a place of
sulphir and hellish flames, inhabited with Oules, Estriges, and such like
noisome creatures even so they that have eyes to see, may yet see the tears and
desolation of the great and famous city of London, and they that have ears to
hear, may yet hear the cries of her children, the pitious lamentation of her
women, and the sighs of her men in every street: some for their parents, some
for their children, some for their wives, some for their husbands, some for
money, and some for meat, which the last years plague has ruinated, deprived,
and desolated. Whether this were a revenge of their sins yet living, or a
revenge of their sins already dead, and yet unrepented, it is not known;
but sure it is many woes are past, and many more are to come, if the perusing
and the examination of our selves, work not in us the consideration of that
great zeal of Gods glory, the desire of building the Lords house, and the
practicing of such an upright life as was in the ancient fathers of the church.
Wherefore I humbly entreat you, and in Christ Jesus I desire you, albeit your
place be not to reform these things, so generally out of frame, yet reform
and amend your self and your own household: join with them, that they may
join with you. My good worshipful and Christian friend, as I cannot charge
you nor any of yours, for any disorder, so I cannot leave to entreat and desire
you to walk warily and wisely in this crooked and froward generation, ground
your own foundation sure, take heed to your self, look that noman Reu. 3, 11.
take away your Crown. The devil offreth violence, hold therefore fast that
which you have, watch and pray, O pray continually, power out your
supplications before God morning and evening, both you and your hoshold. Psalm.
5, 3.
Morning and evening (said David) will I direct my prayers unto thee. As the
morning and evening is a sit and a convenient time for suitors to attend upon
great men, and as the morning was a sit and a convenient time to gather Manna:
Genesis 28, 18.
even so (good sir) the morning and evening is a sit and a convenient time,
for you and your household to become suitors unto the great majesty of God, for
the spiritual Manna, the food of your souls. As Moses was commanded to come
up to Sinai, with the two tables of the law, early in the morning: even so are
we commanded to appear before God in our chambers, early in the morning,
before we go abroad, having the two Testaments of God in our hands, learning
how to honor his majesty in the one, and how to use our brethren charitably in
the other, both which are the two principal duties of every christian. As
the learning must needs go before the practicing, so the practicing must needs
follow after the learning. Learn (I beseech you) therefore, and teach your
household the learning of the Lord, morning and evening; not in regard of him to
whom all times are alike, but in regard of your selves, because in the morning
and evening is the fittest and most convenient time, by meditations and prayers
to recommend your souls unto his majesty, and to contemplate of heavenly
things. And thus having endeavored your ease and speedy profit in these my
introductions, by taking some thing away, and by adding other more needful,
with answers to three necessary questions, I take my leave, not forgetting my
humble commendations to your self and to the good Christian Gentlewoman Ms.
Barbara your wife, desiring the majesty of my aeternall God to finish your
labors to the glory of his name, to the good of his saints, and to the
salvation of your and their souls. From Leonard Shorditch, the 18 of October.
1594.

Yours because you be of Christ. Edw: Vaughan.

An admonition to Contemplation for the Reader, and especially for my
countriemen of Wales.
AS among all other ordinary accidences that are incident to the prosperity
or adversity of mankind, there is nothing in earth that more fully
proportioneth the ioys in heaven, than Music, and Marriage: to hear the one,
we leave our meat and drink; and to be joined in the other, w leave father and
mother; even so among all ordinary instructions incident to the earthly
prosperity and aeternall felicity of mankind, there is nothing that more
fully proportioneth our condemnation to be just, than the law; nor any thing
that more fully proportioneth our salvation to be in Christ Jesus, than the
Gospel. In the one we hear thu^dring, earthquakes, lamentations, mournings
and woe: in the other nothing else but sweet voices, pleasant songs, and
instruments of music, all proportioning and perpetually pointing our marriage
with Christ Jesus, in whom we are freed from the curse and threats of the law,
and all other inconveniences whatsoever; who says unto us as unto his bride,
My Dove show me thy self, let me hear thy voice, thy voice is sweet, Cant. 2,
14.4, 1. to 8.
and thy sight comely. Behold thou art fair, behold thou art fair, thou art
all fair my love, and there is no spot within thee. Now then (good christian
Reader) tell me, tell me, I pray you, tell me, who will not leave marrying with a
noble Lady in Israel or in England, to be married with Christ Jesus in heaven?
and who will not leave all the music and all the pleasurs of this life, to
obtain the company of Angels, the ioys of heaven, and the presence of Jesus
Christ himself? The study and the diligent apprehending of these exceeding
great blessedness, do consist in the apprehending of the true use and intent
of the law and the Gospel.

Cease not, cease not, O my good contriemen and friends, whilst you live cease
not to celebrate the wonderful wonders of Iehoua, of Iehoua, our aeternall God
and savior Iehoua, O behold and contemplate who is so great a God as our God;
is not the God of Israel the God of England? and is not the uniformity of his
truth among us as it was among them who lived in tents and tabernacles? O
English Israel, O people of England, the high Sacrificer, the perpetual Aaron
has powered out upon thee as out of a full horn, the dew of Hermon, Psalm.
133.1.2.
the joy of the whole earth. O my love, my spouse (says Christ) thou wast in
the rocks solitary, Cant. 2.14.
like a Dove that had lost her mate, thou wast upon the hills all bruised and
broken, like a bird scarred from her young ones, Psalm. 11.1.2.
and thou wast in the wilderness all weak and blodie, like a woman no rather
delivered of her child, forced to flee, Reu. 12, 1.2.3.
for the safeguard of her own life. Arise now my love, my fair one, and come
away, Cant. 2, 11.12.13.
for behold winter is past, the rain is changed and gone away, the flowers
appear in the earth, the time of the singing of birds is come, and the voice
of the Turtle is heard in our land. As though Christ had said; True it is O my
beloved bride, my wife, my dear one, ye were persecuted too and fro, ye were
hid here and there, ye were in places of small comfort, as in a rock, ye
were in places of scarsitie, as in a hill or mountain, and ye were in danger
of your lives as among wild beasts in the wilderness: but take a good heart,
fear not, cast away every thing that presses down, and the sin that hangs
on so fast betraying the succors which reason offreth. Winter, which is by
relation, The time of desolation, is past. Su^mer which signifies Peace and
Plenty, is come, all arguments in the earth and in the elements inforceth the
proof thereof, for every thing in their order and kind do bring forth a joy
innarrable, by the production of fruit. Well then (my good friends and
countriemen) remember your selves, consider well what you are, where you live,
and the time you live in, take time in time to repent, use the season, observe
the opportunity in which you may bequeath and dedicate your selves to God. Now
is that acceptable time: You have had many joyful jubilees, you have now the
presence of the Ark, nay, ye have the presence of Jesus Christ himself. Moses
rod has eaten up the rods of the Egyptian forcerers; Exodus 7.12. 1. Sam. 5, 4.
the Lord's Ark has thrown down the Philistines Dagon, and the sound of Gods
silver Trumpets have broken the neck of popery, for the voice of the Turtle is
heard in our land. The church, the Sanctified Syon, is this Turtle; the
preaching of the word is her voice, which we have heard this six and thirty
summers, by the godly government of a Turtle, in the same nature and kind, who
lives solely and solitarily, not meet to be matched with any but with Jesus
Christ himself.

The son of Sirach says; There be two manner of people that I abhor, and the
third are no people: the first that sit upon the mountains of Samaria, the
second the Philistines that dwell in Sichimis. They that sit upon the mountains
of Samatia, repose themselves upon the authority of Rome, the Philistines
represent the Turk, Sarazens, and other miscreants; These are the sons of men
(said David;) These are the generation of vipers, (said John Baptist; These are
the children of darkness (said S. Paul;) and these are they (say all men)
that labor to ouer-run our countries, to overthrow our churches, to burn our
houses, to bereave us of our lives, and to deprive us of our queen, and both
her and us of the Gospel. They conspire against God like Hipocrites, against
our quiet queen like traitors, and against our common weal like spoilers. My
good countriemen and kinsmen, if you will adhibite any credit to my council,
if you have any comfort in the mercifulness of God, and if you have any bowels
of Christian affection to your posterity, then now at the last get you Bibles;
leave off your beads, place learned preachers; displace Ieroboams Priests,
walk in the light of the gospel; extinguish the light of Tapers and Torches,
the one brings you the high way to heaven, the other the ready way to hell.

As Ioab took hold on the horns of the Alter for the safeguard of his life: so
now take you hold on Jesus Christ for the safeguard of your lives. All kind of
creatures are in an unity praising God, they call you to join and to unite
your selves with us in one religion. Strange sights have bin seen in the
element and in the earth, calling you to repentance, fire has come down from
heaven, fishes have thrown themselves to land, and beasts have brought forth
untimely monsters, calling you to repentance, the earth has quaked under our
feet, and our houses have shaken over our heads, calling you to repentance. O
join then with us, and we will now join with you, let us go together into the
house of God hand in hand, and heart in heart, let us sing one song as with one
voice, to the praise of our one only God. Thus I have boldly and briefly
admonished you in the Lord; and that you may the better co^template to your
comfort, I have here, as you see, comprised and composed my two former labors
into one, with some substraction and with some such addition as may best
further you to the speech of his divine majesty, in your own person, when
occasion shall be offered for your selves and for your household. One quarter of a
years pains, as I have pointed, will bring you 40 years profit in earth, and at
the expiration thereof, aeternall pleasure in heaven. And when you have
obtained my promise, I desire but your prayers and your meditations to God for
me, and for the posterity of the religious and magnanimious gentleman, Sir
William Herberd knight, who for his own part has run his race in the faith
of Jesus Christ, and finished his course according to conscience toward you,
as may appear; whose body is a sleep in the Lord, and whose soul is in joy
with Jesus Christ. There are three sorts of professors that do suffer great
indignity at the hands, and from the hearts of many picke-thanke Parasites,
stily Sicophants; too too hard, yea heathenish or rather hellish censures are
given in and granted out against them. I know their objections upon long
experience, and I know that upon small skill and little reading their
turnesicke spirit of giddiness may easily be quailed, although through
ignorance and wilful stubbernnesse they will never be answered. Good Christian
countriemen and courteous Readers, I am loath to offend you with tediousness
about these matters, having a great show of endeavor and purpose to draw you to
other matters of greater importance. I have therefore thought good and more
convenient, to speak of them in the latter end of this book. The first does
partly concern this worshipful gentleman, to whom I write for protection.
The second does concern partly mine own bodily health, and the third does
concern the earthly prosperity, and the heavenly faelicity of all the elect,
and therefore I may not pass it, neither may you in any case omit the learning
of it, that with him and me and with the rest of Gods inheritance you may be
ready to defend it. And thus for this time I humbly take my leave, and with
such conueniencie as I may, do now betake my self in the fear of God to the
matter. From Leonard Shordich, and county of Middlesex, nere London.

Yours if you be the Lords. Edw: Vaughan.

A brief recital of the general heads or places of invention contained in
this book.
1 Away to know or to fetch, readily and roundly, all the books in the book of
God, either backward or forward, in the old and new Testament.

2 The Author, the original, the occasion, and the chief matter of every
such book.

3 The books called Apocrypha, how far they are to be received, and their
imperfection, when, where, and by whom, found out among themselves.

4 The principal stories chaining the whole scripture dispersed here and
there, in the old and new: where every such story does begin, and where it
ends, with a recital of the principal matters therein.

5 Sir William Herberts account upon the tenth story, of the age and time from
the birth of Christ, unto the worlds end.

6 Certain principal observations, or special matter to be marked for the
reading and understanding of all such books as are called Laegall.

7 Certain principal observations, or special matter to be marked, for the
reading and understanding of all such books as are called Sapientall.

8 Certain principal observations or special matter to be marked, for the
reading and understanding of all such books as are called Prophetical.

9 Other fourteen places, and most direct rules, how to read and understand
every book, chapter and verse.

10 Other four and forty sure titles or matter supporting or agreeing with all
the scriptures, to be digested or framed into common places.

11 The right use of positive Laws.

12 The necessity of Physic.

13 The excellency of the Ministry.

1 Introduction.
Learn perfectly all the names of the Canonical books, as they are in order,
from Genesis to the Revelation. You must be able readily to render an account
what book is next before or next after any such book taken in hand. Then
return back, and learn how many chapters is in every book.

2 Introduction.
NOw you must go over these books old and new, by some proportion daily, either
morning or evening after this manner, wherein you shall see many profitable
notes, and especially the argument or sum of every book; it will pleasure
you greatly, by the report and judgment of all ancient authors.

The Argument of Genesis.
THis book is called of the Hebrews Verescith, that is to say, Beginning,
Generation, or Creation, giving us to understand, that it contains the
creation of all things. Moses the son of Amram the son of Leui was borne 2430
years after the creation: when he was full 40 years old, he was called of God
to be the leader of his people Israel; by a large measure of Gods spirit he
spoke of sundry things which were done 2414 years before he was borne, and
also profoundly of many other things that should befall the people of Israel,
even unto the birth of Christ. He wrote this book near about 850 years after
the flood. At Joseph's death it had a kind of ceasing. This book comprehends
principally four rhings.

1 Creation, by the word which was made flesh. 2 Destruction, by the
ouer-running of waters. 3 Multiplication of the world, by Noah. 4 Election of
some, as of Abraham, Isaake, etc.
The Argument of Exodus, the second book of Moses.
IT is called of the Hebrews Shemoth, which is names, but of the Graecians and
later writers it is called Exodus, which signifies a departing and going of
Israel out of Egypt: by co^putation it amounts nearly to a story of 405
years, from the death of Joseph, to the lifting up of the tabernacle in Siloh;
this book comprehends principally three things.

1 The Deliverance of Israel out of Egypt. 2 Their Journey toward Canaan. 3
An Order for the serving of God.
The Argument of Leuiticus.
IT is called in Hebrew Vaicrah, but the Graecia^s and later writers Leuiticus,
because it retains a memory of some notable acts which were done from the
beginning of the second year after the release from Egypt, unto the beginning
of the eleventh month of the 40 year, which is in some account thirty years:
and partly because it debateth of ceremonies and such like which were ended in
their time.

This book contains four principal things.
1 Sundry sorts of ofsrings concerning Christ. 2 Civil orders for the practice
of religion. 3 Civil orders concerning life and manners. 4 Diverse feasts
dedicated for religion.
The Argument of Numbers.
THis book is called of the Hebrews Vaied^bber, of the Latins Numeri, because
in the beginning of it Moses numbered the people Israel by their tribes. It
continues the story from the beginning of the second month of the second
year after the deliverance of Israel out of Egypt, unto the beginning of the
eleventh month of the forteeth year of thirty eight years and odd.

It contains four things.
1 The mustring of men, and orders for the preservation of the Arc. 2
Constitutions and laws for religion. 3 Constitutions and laws for life and
manners. 4 Particular laws for reformation.
The Argument of Deutronomium.
THis book is called in Hebrew Ellehaddebarim, in Greek it is called Deuteronomy.
signifying a Remembrance of things past, with an exhortation to the
perfourmance of the law, from the beginning of the twelfth month of the
fourteeth year, unto the twelfth day of the same month, after their departure
from Pharaoes kingdom. This book breefly repeats the greatest matters that
were spoken and laid down in the former books.

The Argument of Joshua.
HE was called Jesus the Emperor of Israel; he ruled them victoriously
seventeen years, he was borne fifty and three years before their going out
of Egypt, he died when he was one hundred and ten years old, 2570 of the
world. He and Eleazar the high priest is thought to have penned this book. It
approves the performance of Gods promises, and that he never saileth by length
of time, nor by distance of place, to remember his ellect: as is showed us by
Joshua, who did conquer the land of Canaan, and divided it among them, even as
the Lord had spoken. The land for the fertility thereof, far beyond all
other lands, did represent the kingdom of heaven, and in regard of the power
thereof, it might well resemble the kingdom of Antechrist Joshua the conqueror
was a figure of Jesus, who subdued all things to himself.

The Argument of Judges.
IT is called in Hebrew Sophetim, according to the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin,
it is called Iudicium, because it conneth the government and religion of Gods
people, from the death of Joshua unto Hely the priest, about 299 years: and it
is supposed that Samuel is the penner thereof: it shows how God detesteth
ingratitude, by the great oppressions which was inflicted upon the people for
the same: they were of all people in the world most victoriously possessed of
all the joys in the world, and yet they were a people worse than those whose
carcases fell in the wilderness: therefore God appointed tyrants over them as
their governors. Here is also a perfect president of pardon upon repentance,
for when they cried unto the Lord, he destroyed those tirants, and gave them
godly rulers.

The Argument of Ruth.
SHe is said to live when Deborah ruled Israel, it is thought that the writer
of Judges is the author of this book; because that the Hebrews do reckon it
with the book of Judges: her nation and kindred whence she came does well
approve the calling of the Gentiles by Jesus Christ, who was to come lineally
even from her body. This book does arm all Christians with patience, as with
the whole armor of God, who in the end will get the fame and report of the
world.

The Argument of the first and second of Samuel.
1. Chron. 29.29.
THe acts of David, are they not written in the book of Samuel the Seer, and in
the book of Nathan the prophet, and in the book of Gad the Seer, by which
words it is plain, that Samuel, Nathan and Gad, did write these books.

In the first of Samuel is showed the misery of the people under king Saul,
which was a token of Gods wrath, because they were not content with their
estate. Saul himself is set forth for an example of unthankfulness, he was
hated of God, he was hated of the people, and he was possessed of a devil.
David is made heir apparent to the crown.

In the second of Samuel, is declared the magnanimity of David, who overcame
all the enemies of Gods people, wherein he was a figure of Christ.

The Argument of the first and second of the kings.
BOth these are in the Hebrew as one. The Authors were these, 2. Chron. 19.29.
(severally a part, or potion) Nathan, Ahiah the Silonite, Iddo the Seer John,
and Semeia.

The first Book of Kings shows us the uncertain state of Gods people in
this life, as by the example of the people under diverse kings, unto the death
of wicked Achab, who for a little joy had great annoy; God also plagued them
because sin was favored, and virtue was discountenanced; their kingdom was
divided into two parts, presently upon the death of Salamon, the one became
open enemy to the other, for the space of 350 years: one kingdom was called
the kingdom of Judah, whose seat was at Jerusalem; the other was called the
kingdom of Israel, whose seat was at Samaria: the one gave themselves to serve
the true God; the other to idols. Here also is the perfect genealogy of
Christ, lineally descending from David.

The second of Kings shows us of all famous acts, from Achab the king, unto
the ransacking of Samaria, the captiuating of the people, and Hosea their last
king; here is also the destruction of Jerusalem, and the people carried to
Babylon.

The Argument of the 1 and 2 of the Cronicles.
PAralipomenon in Greek. With the Hebrews both are one, it signifies omitted,
or things left; the Latins call it Verba Dierum, The words of days; meaning a
Catalogue of things done in former ages: it was composed by Iddo, and Semeia.

1 Cron. comprehends briefly all that was excellently done from the creation,
unto the restoring of the people from Babylon; it handles exactly the
genealogy of Christ.

2 Cron. Comprehends chiefly all such matters as were from the death of
Solomon, unto the captivity of Babylon. Some things in these two books are
more amplified than in the books of the Kings

The Argument of Ezra.
HE was a priest, and toward the law, and the author of this book. It
contains the deliverance of Israel out of Babylon, with great favor and
authority from the king for the reedefying of the Temple at Jerusalem; it was
hindered by the people of the land, yet it was finished according to the time
foretold by the angel to Daniel. This book does prove that God punishes not
the godly according to justice, but according to mercy.

The argument of Nehemiah.
HE was cup bearer to Artaxerxes, and in such credit, that he obtained in the
twentieth year of his reign full authority with license and letters, to
command to the finishing of the decayed places of Jerusalem. This book is
commonly called the 2 of Esdras, because he was thought to be the writer, and
both were joined together the same time in the holy service of God. And in the
Hebrew both books are one, both comprise the story near of 130 years, unto
the last Darius. There were three special men stirred up by the Almighty, for
the comfort of his people, having long lain in exilement, the first was
Zorobabel their captain, the setter forward of chivalry; the second was Ezra
their priest, the setter forward of religion; and the third was Nehemiah, the
setter forward of their building. This book sets out many particulars, to
weet, the builders, the manner of it, their hinderance, their religion, etc.

This book contains a singular favor of God toward them that trust for
redemption by Christ, for that he openly writes their names in his holy city,
that left Babel upon Gabriels prophecy, to build Jerusalem the city, for
Christ the great king: and therefore the old Hebrews bound Ezra next Daniel,
because it depends all upon Gabriels prophecy, Dan. 9. and all the nation
still thence talked of Christ to be their redeemer.

The Argument of Esther.
2, 7.
SHe was named Hadassa, she was married to Darius the son of Histaspis whose
surname was Assuerus, upon the divorce of queen Vasthi: this book was written
by the chonicler of Assuerus, and it was taken out of the records of the Medes
and Persians; Xerxes the great warrior was her son by the king, it is
consonant with the scriptures of God. Some has added to the same six other
chapters of Hester, which are not sound nor answerable to the rest. This book
approves the assurance of Gods mercies toward his elect, in time convenient,
even when all worldly helps fails, as by the example of Mardocheus and
Hester may appear, who as instruments appointed of God, did deliver the Jews
from the decree and dedly sentence of the king: moreover it shows that pride
has a fall, by the example of Haman.

The Argument of Job.
THis story shows the religion of Abraham's other kindred tha^ Israel, how
before the law they held faith and conscience, Abraham's kindred in the family of
Nahor, as Elihu was in Esaus, as Eliphas was in his own better line, as Bildad
of his son Suach was (whom many latins, and all Greeks, commonly make to be of
Abraham by Esau, because the land Vz, in Ier. Lament. is in Edom) this kindred
of hic Abraham, in these families held religion, and had these men prophets,
but prophets alwais had not visions for Gods particular dealings, though for
natural knowledge and rules of virtue they be sinceare. This book in this
argument, is most rare, containing a disputation, of five prophets, God in the
end coming moderator. The shortness of speech, the deapth of matter, the
discourse of Job for his life, of Elihu for natural philosophy, of the rest
for the common plaguing of the wicked, the thrice holy conclusion of God makes
that book better than all ophir-gold. The story fell out about Moses birth,
777 years after the deluge. Job I hold to be of Abraham by Kettura, and the
land Vz to be not that of Esaus Vz, but of Nachors: whether Abraham's sons by
Kettura went to seek dwelling with their eldest cosine of those sons of the
east. And thence so Abraham's sons by Kettura be named. Moses was dead before
Job, for he lived but 120 years, and Job 140, after his temptation. Dina is
said to be Jobs wife, but by men that in sadness follow the jests of the Jews,
who faigne for memory of story, fables. Dina has in scriptures no husband
named, nor Job a wife with her proper name, thereupon Jews (for teaching
children readiness in story) mary Dina (that might be Jobs gra^dmother) to
him; who followed them in sadness were deceived. Herein we are assured, upon
sufficient practice, and proof of Gods eternal favor, that when al
desolations and hazards whatsoever are nearest, even then is that man nearest
unto God, and in the greatest possibility of honor and majesty. Many great
and excellent things are herein contained, therefore I recommend them unto your
christian diligence.

The Argument of the Psalms.
IT is called in Hebrew Sepher Tehilim, by the which the Graecians do express
musical instruments. It was gathered by Esdra. The authors were diverse, as
the Psalms do witness, and some are uncertain, yet the matter is sound and
good; David was the chiefest, 2. Sam. 23
and therefore he was called the sweet Psalmist of Israel: Moses wrote the 90
and 91 as a form of prayer; Ethan and Theman wrote the 88, and 89 who were
men of great wisdom; 1 Kin. 4, 30
the holy Priests and Leuits wrote the 137. David ordained wise and skillful
men to make Psalms, and to prophecy with all sorts of instruments, as Corah
and his sons, Asaph and his sons, Ieduthum and his sons, Heman and his
sons there were ordained before the Arc of cunning musitia^, 2. Chro. 15,
16.25, 1.2. 2. Esd. 12, 40.
288; the instruments were these, Meginath, Mehiloth, Alamoth, Gittith,
Ieduthum, Susa^eduth, Sosainum, Salteries, Harpes, Organes, Trumpets,
Cimballes, etc. and the Psalms serve for diverse purposes, as you may easily
see, if you mark them; some for music, as you may know by then titles; some
for prayers, some for thanksgiving, some for consolation, some for doctrine,
some for prophecy, and some for story.

The Argument of the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles.
1. King 4.32.11.
Solomon was the writer of these three books, as appears by their Titles, and
manner of writing, after his conversion.

In the first, he teaches all people the true wisdom in the using of
Temporal things. In the second he teaches a contempt of all earthly glory,
in regard of ioies in the Lord Jesus. In the third, he sets out the
incomprehensible favor of God toward all such, by their marriage in Christ,
representing a spiritual and an inseparable conjunction, under metaphors,
similitudes, and comparisons.

The Argument of Esaie.
HE was Amos son, taken of many for an Evangelist, he spoke and taught under
Vziah, Ioatham, Ahaz, Ezechia, and Manasses. This book was written by him a
little before his death: it contains the doctrine of reconciliation more
clearly than the rest. It is full of reprehensions and consolations; the
coming of the Messiah is proved, and the uniting of the Jews and Gentiles.

The Argument of Jeremy.
HE was son to Helchia the Priest, he wrote this book and prophesied under
Josias Ioiachim, and Zedechia, at that time as Jerusalem was ransacked, and
the people captiuated, whom Jeremy lamenteth. Baruck was his secretary. This
book shows the captivity of Jerusalem and her people, for her manifold
sins.

The Argument of Ezechiel.
HE was a priest in Babylon, five years of Ichoiachims captivity. This book
does show the murmuring of the wicked against the Prophets, because they
yielded to Nabuchadnezar. Therefore in the first part of this book he
labors to confirm his former doctrine, that they did well in yielding, for
it was decreed by the mouth of God, that they should be captiuated, then he
labors with doctrine to assure them of deliverance again, from this their
servitude and captivity.

The Argument of Daniel.
HE was in Babylon with Ananias, Misael, and Azarius, in Iehoiachims time, and
he thus prophesied under Nabuchadnezer, Euilmeredec, and Baltazar. In this book
is showed what happened to their king and the people, during the 70 years
captivity; what kings reigned, how the people were used, what should be happen
them after their captivity until Christ.

The Argument of Hosea.
IN the days of Osiah, Ioathan, Ahas, and Ezechias, kings of Judah, he wrote
and prphesied. This book shows the Idolatry of the people under Jeroboam,
and their sins by many particulars. This prophet was among them 70 years, and
they despised him and others.

The Argument of Joel.
HE prophesied in the days of Osia, and Jeroboam, concerning Samaria, and
wrote the same. Herin is showed the famine and extreme misery that they of
Judah endured, because of their idolatry and obstinacy.

The Argument of Amos.
IN the days of Osiah and Jeroboam, he wrote this, he was a poor and a simple
shepherd, stirred up of special purpose to set forth Gods glory, by calling
the people to repent.

The Argument of Obadiah.
HE spoke against Edom, at which time the palace of the temple and the city
was set on fire, this book shows how the Idumeans vexed Israel most cruelly,
and continually: in the highest pitch of their pride, God sends this Obadiah to
denounce his vengeance against them, and good success upon his own
inheritance.

The Argument of Jonah.
HE spoke under Amaziah and Jeroboam, he controled Phulbelocus of Niniuie, who
succeeded Sardanapalus. This book shows how little his preaching auailed in
Israel; and how much few words prevailed in Niniuie, to the shame of all
Israel: here is the destruction first of the kingdom of Israel, then of
Judah, chiefly because they contemned the prophets.

The Argument of Nahum.
HE prophesied under Ezechia king of Judah, Hosea king of Israel, and
Salmanazer king of the Assyrians, This book shows the reuolting of Niniuie,
from the true profession which they had taken from Jonah; they became
persecuters of all that professed godliness, therefore their city was
destroyed by Nabucadnezer, among whom there was some godly, whom God remembers
with his comforts, sent by the prophets.

The Argument of Abacuk.
HE wrote this book about the same time, and he lamenteth the desolation of
the godly, and the prosperity of the wicked, who in the end should be
captiuated by the Chaldeans.

The Argument of Sophoniah.
HE prophesied in the days of Josiah, the son of Ammon, king of Judah, The
Moabits, the Assirians, and others, who were enemies to Gods people, shall come
themselves to confusion, but the godly by patience shall possess their souls.

The Argument of Agge.
THis prophet, Zachary, and Malachie, were especially appointed after the
captivity to comfort the people, and to set them forward to the building of
the temple at Jerusalem, which was a sight of the spiritual Jerusalem. This
prophet shows the cause of their captivity, and exhorts to repentance.

The Argument of Zachary.
THis prophet wrote the second year of Darius, in the eight month, the same
matter.

The Argument of Malachie.
THis prophet was the last and the next to John Babtist. He spoke of the
captivity, of the building of Salomons temple, and the story of Esdras, and
Nehemias; he reproues diverse sins, and speaks as the two former.

The Argument of Matthew.
HE wrote this Gospel in Hebrew, eight years after the ascension of Christ.
All the four Evangelists did write in efect one thing, they al entitled their
writing Gospel, signifiing, Good tidings or news from heaven; comprehending
the incarnation, death, resurrection, and ascension of Christ, being the
absolute sum of our redemption, and adoption to eternal glory. This Title
comprehends all the matter shadowed in the law, and performed in the gospel:
whatsoever one writes darkly, the other more largely and plainly. They vary
not in any one thing, though their writing be far in distance, for time and
place, which greatly argues and augmenteth the truth and dignity thereof.
They entreat in some matters more exactly than in other; Matthew laboreth to
setfoorth an historical narration of Christ's body, to weet, of his
incarnation, his kindred, how he was occupied in the time of his life, teaching
and working miracles to confirm the will of his father; he spoke of his death,
and resurrection, with such circumstances as belong thereunto.

The Argument of Mark.
HE was the disciple and interpreter of Peter. Upon earnest request made to him
at Room, he wrote this gospel in Greek, ten years after the Ascension of
Christ. He planted the faith at Alexandria, where he died.

The Argument of Luke.
HE was a physician at Antioch, the follower of S. Paul, who did write this
gospel 15 years after Christ's ascension, he died at Constantinople. This book
most chiefly specifieth of ceremonies which were performed in Christ.

The Argument of John.
HE was son to Zebedeus the brother of James, whom Herod be headded, at the
request of some Bishops in Asia. He chiefly handles Christ's divinity, and
wonderful work of our reconciliation. He wrote this gospel 32 years after
Christ's ascension, he died and was buried amongst the Ephesians.

The Argument of the Acts.
THe same was written in Greek by S Luke, at Rome, and dedicated to one
Theophilus. This book is an abridgment or a chronicle of all famous and worthy
acts of Christ, of his disciples and Apostles: herein is annexed the sermons of
the Apostles, touching faith and manners, the open persecution of the truth, and
the victory thereof in the end.

The Argument of the Romans.
THe Romans were Jews and Gentiles, embracing Christ in Rome, among whom were
many false teachers which moved S. Paul to write this Epistle, by his
secretary Tertius, exhorting them to take heed thereof, and to increase in the
knowledge of Christ. The dignity of works, of faith, of grace, and
justification of the law, and the use thereof, from Corinth, Acts 20. Romans 16.
some few days before he went to Jerusalem.

The Argument of the first to the Corinthians.
THe Corinthians had their original of Corinthus, who built that city; in it
was the temple dedicated to the Goddess Venus. There was that great notorius
whore Lais, spoken of over all the world, and there was many other
abhominatio^s, yet in this city God had his church. S. Paul stayed there
almost three years, but when he departed into Siria, many false teachers
entered in, who taught that whoredom, riot, drunkenness, etc. was lawful,
they denied marriage, and the resurrection; upon which occasion, S. Paul wrote
this Epistle, to withdraw them from all those evils, Act. 19. 1 Cor. 16.
and with exhortations to remain in the doctrine which he had taught. From
Ephesus. 4

The Argument of the second to the Corinthians
HEre he excuses his long absence, by diverse troubles which hindered him, he
wills to excommunicate him that was taken in adultery; he clears himself
of all blame toward them, Acts 20.
he shows a difference betwixt one spirit and another, the agreement of the
old testament with the new. From Philippi. 6

The Argument of the Gallathians.
THe Gallathians were a people of Asia: after S. Paul's departure thence, many
false teachers entered in and taught, That the ceremonies of the law were to be
kept, and they taught evil things against the Apostles, thereby to deface
their doctrine; which moved him to write unto them, discharging himself for
the credit of his calling, and confirming of his doctrine, with the overthrow
of the contrary. From Rome. 13

The Argument of the Ephesians.
THis city of Ephesus was famous by the sea side of Ionius, where was a temple
dedicated to the false Goddess Diana. S. Paul at his first coming stayed
little there, but at the second time he continued three years, perceauing that
God had many souls there to be saved, even among witches, sorcerers, etc.
whereby the mercy of God appeared more abundantly: at his departure he left
among them elders, and Timothy as their Bishop. This Argument agrees nearly
with the Romans and Gallathians. Sent from Rome. 11.

The Argument of the Philippians.
PHilip Macedon was the original of the city, they had domestical troubles,
and many lost for the trueths sake, and therefore he exhorts them to patience
and watchfulness. Sent from Rome. 8.

The Argument of the Colossians.
THe Colossians were a people of that great city Collossa, S. Paul was never
with them, they were taught by Epaphras, Onesimus, and Tychichus, S. Paul
heard that they were troubled with the Jews, about ceremonies, and with the
gentiles about subtle questions and words of philosophy, wherefore he wrote
unto them to confirm them in that they had learned concerning Christ, and to
confute the contrary. Sent from Room. 9

The Argument of the first to the Thessalonians.
THessalonica was a famous city of Macedonia, whence the people had their
names, he was among them, but three Sabaoths, by reason of the Jews. He sent
Timothy unto them, by whom he understood of their conscience, and that they
should consider well of the resurrection. Acts 17,
He sent it from Athens.

The Argument of the second to the Thessalonians.
HE excuses his long absence, showing them the manner of the resurrection and
the coming of Christ, he dehorteth from curious questions. Sent from Athens. 2

The Argument of the first to Timothy.
HIs father was a Grecian, his mother a Jew, which was the cause he was not
circumcised in his infancy, according to the law. His mother Eunice, and his
grandmother Loida, were godly, wherein they brought him up. S. Paul his
master sent him on the Lords business, to diverse places: in the end he was
left at Ephesus as their bishop, to whom he wrote this Epistle, about the
choice of Pastors in the church. At Laodicea. 3

The Argument of the second to Timothy.
HE mourned greatly after S. Paul, therefore Paul did write to comfort him,
and withal to show him how he was held in prison, which was the cause that he
came not to Ephesus according to his promise. Sent from Rome. 12

The Argument of Titus.
HE was a Grecian borne, Paul was his master, who left him at Creete to
constitute ministers in every parish, and to refourme their manners, Titus was
a young man, therefore his master wrote this Epistle that he should do nothing
rashly. What kind of Pastors should be allowed and what not, From Nicapolis
in Macedonia. Acts 20.
5

The Argument of Philemon.
HE was Collocentia, a rich man, and a godly liberal man, he had a servant
named Onesimus, who departed from him by stealth: when he heard S. Paul
preach, he believed in Jesus Christ and confessed his fault, whereupon S. Paul
wrote this Epistle to his master, exhorting him to forgive his servant. Sent
from Rome. 10

The Argument of the Hebrews.
THe truth is by the opinion of the most and best learned, that S. Paul wrote
this Epistle, the Grecians did so allow of it, and the same was confirmed in
the council of Nicen. Nicephorus says that it was written in Hebrew by S.
Paul, and translated into Greek by S. Luke, who altered S. Paul's style and
method of writing. Iraeneus who was Policarpus scholar, said the same; the
truth being received from S. John, who was Policarpus master; such was the
obstinacy of the Jews, resisting the doctrine of Christ, which gave occasion
to S. Paul to write, exhorting them from the hardness of their hearts. Herein
he magnifieth Christ above the prophets, Moses, and Aaron, Leui, and all other
offices, and officers; who fulfilled the prophesies, accomplshed the law, and
offered a far more perfect sacrifice than they all. Sent by Timothy from
Italy.

The Argument of James.
IN the tenth of Matthew mention is made of two James, one the son of
Zebedeus, the other the son of Alpheus, which James was the Author of this
Epistle, he is called Lebbeus and Thaddeus, and he is called the brother of
Jude, Gal. 1, 19.
and the brother of our Lord. Here he instructs al men to live well, and to
believe well, he sets out the conversation of those that are regenerated: the
excellency of faith, of works, of patience, etc.

The Argument of the first of Peter.
THis Peter was called Simeon the son of John the fisher, Christ did name him
Caephas, which is Peter, Mark 3.
he was one of the Apostles, and the chiefest for diverse causes. He spoke of
works after justification, as S. James does: he descends into the duties of
each degree, and to the conversation of the Gentiles. It was written upon the
occasion of Siluanus, being long with S. Paul, and traveling to Babylon, met
with S. Peter, who delivered him this Epistle general.

The Argument of the second of Peter.
HE exhorts all men from day to day, and from degree to degree, to increase
in the works of regeneration, to beware of false teachers, the state of the
last times. He thought his death to be at hand, wherefore he wrote to the
glory of his master Christ.

The Argument of the first of John.
THis John was one of the four Evangelists, he was the son of Zebedeus
beloved of Christ, he wrote the Revelation, he exhorts to faith and brotherly
love, to try and approve the spirits, to avoid false teachers, hypocisie, and
small offenses, and to deck themselves with godly living.

The Argument of the second of John.
HEre he handles mutual love, the duty of widows, to beware of false
teachers, and a way to know them: he did write especially to a godly widow, who
with her children and her household labored after Christ.

The Argument of the third of John.
HE exhorts his familiar friends, and his host Gains to diverse points of
doctrine, and to good works, thanking God for the great comfort received at his
hands, he commends him for a harberour of Gods people.

The Argument of Jude.
HE was one of the Apostles, he instructed the Godly to continue in well doing,
he shows the justice of God against sinners and reuolters, as the Angels, the
Jews.

The Argument of the Revelation.
THis book contains all the doctrine of the prophets, concerning Christ,
which was to be accomplished after his coming, the comfort that comes by his
death, the marriage of the church with the sanctified members, the providence
of God, and the force of his word,

The third Introduction.
WHat may be said of the other books called Apocrypha, you may easily judge by
the consideration of the authors, and especially by the matter, not consonant
with other scriptures. The word Apocrypha according to the Aetymologie thereof,
signifies a mystery, a matter hid, secreat, or kept close. They are books to
be read at home, and not in the congregation.

The first and second of Esdras.
1 Esd. 7, 6. 2 Esd. 8, 4.5.6.
THis Esdras was a Scribe and an expounder of the law: when the people went from
Babylon under the government of Zarobabell, in the time of Cirus, and Darius,
Histaspis son, he was in great report, and bare credit among all people.
Concerning the authority of these books, the matter it self has no certain
ground, especially, That in the first of Esd. the third and fourth, of the
three young men's sentences. In the first of Esdras the 4, and 1. the Angel
reproved Esdras for his curious searching, he was purposed to sorrow, and fast
him self to death, 2 Esd. 10, 4.
both which things argued an imperfect spirit in him. This and the rest,
proves the books not fit to be matched with the Canonical, whose spirit was
never found guilty of controlment.

Tobias.
Tobias lived in the days of Salmanser, and Zenacherib his son, kings of
Assiria, and was taken captive at Niniuie. This book was penned by some godly
man not perfectly known, it was found in the Hebrew, Assyrian, and Chaldean
tongues, very ancient, yet with many blemishes, and imperfections. In the
twelfth and fifteenth it is said, That the Angels did present the prayers of
the saints; which none can do but Jesus Christ himself, for he is our
Advocate, and high sacrificer. In the 4 and 10 old Tobias says, that Alms
delivered a man from death; which is a matter contrary to all holy scriptures.
In the seventeenth he exhorts to give bread for the dead; which in deed is a
show of Idolatry, notwithstanding the man is to be taken for godly and
religious, and his book so far to be taken for credit, as it does agree with
the Canonical.

Judith.
THis book seems toward the last part to have been penned after her death;
by whom, it is uncertain: the story is in the Hebrew and Chaldean tongues,
yet not so received as the Canonical, because of the sundry imperfections
thereof. Cap. 11, 6.16 8.1.11, 1.
She took Gods name in vain, she denied the power of God and the authority
of his Saints, yielding all to Holophernes. Nabucadnezer was Emperor of
Persia, and his seat was at Babylon, but not in Niniuie, as is here laid down.
For these and such like, this book cannot be allowed for sound, yet many good
things are therein, therefore judge soberlie and charitably.

Hester.
THis book was written by some Grecian not truly known, it is very
frivolous, and it is annexed unto the true story of Hester, the variety thereof
shows the contrariety.

Wisdom.
IT is called in Greek Panare^on, that is to say, The book of all virtues;
Jerome writes that Philoiudeus enlarged it with great wisdom and learning
into Greek, being left before as a remnant or piece by Solomon: this
Philoiudeus lived in the days of the Apostles, and he embraced christian
faith. We must grant that there are many excellent things done and spoken
herein, the author being eloquent and learned, but yet every learned and
eloquent book may not be admitted among the saints.

Read Aug. de doct. Christ. lib. 2. De ciuitat. dei, lib. 17, 20. Iunius
preface in Apocrypha.

Baruck.
HE was secretary to Hieremie. This book is not in the Hebrew, but in the
Greek, therefore it was not reckoned among the Israelits, who were of that
language. It is not reckoned in the chronicles of the kings of Judah, nor yet
accounted among the prophets.

Susanna.
IT is not known who did write this book. Although her chastity be
commended, yet the matter is not approved, north author canonized.

Bell and the Dragon.
THe author is not to be found, and the matter is not likely.

The prayer of Manasses.
HE is the author thereof, as it is generally received. It was in Greek, which
did disanull the authority thereof among the Hebrews.

The first and second of Machabees.
THe first was written in Hebrew, in the time of Johannes Hircanus, the son
of Simon Machabeus. It was received as a story: but not of credit, to be with
the books of God.

The second was in Greek, very frivolous and out of order.

The third was entitled Simon the high priest, penned (by all likelihood) by
Philoiudeus, at Alexandria, in Greek. Mark their authority, Judas Machabeus
offered for the dead, and prayed for them, that their sins might be pardoned;
which thing is against all scripture. 12, 42. etc.
The sin which he prayed for, was mortal, and not venial, (as they say who
would have this book to be canonical) yet they pray and sacrifice for them. 2
Match. 2, 5.
It is said that Jeremy hid the Arc of the Tabernacle in a cave, and that
Solomon sanctified the place; 2 Match. 8, 9.10.
which thing Solomon could not do, because it was no part of his office, and
he never did it: the same prophet did even then reprove the seekers after such
places, least there should be any monument or relick of Idolatry: further, the
death of Antiochus is not agreed upon, for in 1 Match. 6, 5.6, 16. it is said,
That he died with sorrow; in the 2. Match. 9, 6.7. the manner of his death is
reckoned to be far otherwise. It is said that Judas Machabeus was slain in
Demetrius army, 1 Match. 9, 18. but in the 2 Match. 1, 10.11. he writes a
letter after his death 36 years unto Aristobolus, 2 Match. 1.10.11.
he doubts of his well doing. Let the fear of God withdraw you from all
vnreuerent handling and judging hereof.

The fourth Introduction.
THe Argument or sum of all the Bible by books and chapters, as they ly,
comprehends ten histories or general matters, chaining the scriptures to the
salvation of one people, in the service of God, and to the destruction of an
another, wilfully nelegcting and obstinatly gainsaying the same: whereby you
shall see, as it were it one view, what was most notably done and spoken in
every age, what difference and change there was, and upon what occasion: you
shall not light into any one book or chapter, but hereby you shall be able to
say, This or that matter belongs to such a story; This is the effect of
every book and chapter; Here this or that begins, and there it ends. I
have set before the particular matter of every story severally, according to
the age and continuance thereof, which being once perfectly learned, shall ever
be remembered, with the increase of knowledge, and with an admirable change in
your self, to your comfort, and to Gods glory.

Story. Books and Chapters. Contents. 1 From Genesis 1, To Genesis 7, The Flood.
1656. years. 2 Genesis 8, Genesis 12, The renouation of the creation. 424. yea. 3
Genesis 12, Exodus 19, The election in Abram and his seed. 430. yea. 4 Exodus 12.
Ios. 1, Their going out of Egypt to Canaan. 40. yea. 5 Ios. 1, Judge. 1. Their
quiet possession in the same. 7. yea. 6 Judge. 1, 1. Samuel. Of Saul their first
king. 450. yea. 7 1. Sam. Nehem. Their captivity in Babylon. 490. yea. 8
Nehem. Their restoring to liberty. 70. yea. Ezra. Hester. 9 Danie. Their
perpetual liberty in Christ. 490. ye. 10 Revel. The birth of Christ, to the
worlds end, by the computation of Elias, 2000. ye.

NOw you must learn what every story does generally contain, what is the
sum or whole drift of the holy Ghost in the same, which I have set down by
particulars. You must mark where and in what book or chapter the substance of
every story lies, and how it is dispearsed in the Bible; most principally
note two things, to weet, what good men was in every age, or in every such
story, and what wicked men.

The particulars of the first story.
Fathers. Genesis 5.
Adam. Signifies Earthly. Seth. Settled. Enos. Sorrowful. Kenan. Godly
repentance. Mahalalel. Praise God. Jared. The lowly. Henoch. The Sabbath
keeper. Methuselah. Long life. Lamech. Heart wounded. Noah. The Comforter.

These were the ten holy fathers before the flood, which the holy ghost
reckons, in whom the religion and service of God was grounded; these
published over the world, that the^ was, all such effectual matters tending to
religion, as was delivered afterward to Moses in two tables of stone, to be
continued and enlarged by sacraments and sacrifices, by ceremonies, and such
like ordinances, even unto the death of Christ: there was nothing done in the
time of Moses, which might not well be derived from the law and profession of
these men, if you compare them by their special instances; and by them you shall
find true religion maintained, and the false detected, moreover by them hard
places are made plain. And if you reckon how long every of them lived, the
whole does perfectly measure the age of that world, from Adam to the flood,
1656. And for these special causes I have laid down briefly their stories.

ADam was a passing and a most perfect creature, disagreeing from all other
creatures, both in the magnanimity of his soul, and in the excellency of his
body; in soul he was like to God himself, for wisdom, for innocence, and
clearenes; in body he did bear the form and fashion of the goodliest male
and female kind that was to be in the world. He comprehended, by the light of
Gods spirit, that the seed of the woman should restore him and all believers
into the favor of God, and therefore he called his wife Heua, that is to say,
Life; and he called his son Seth, that is to say, Settled, and persuaded in
the faith of Christ. In the commemoration of which seed, Adam offered
continual sacrifice, the which in the allowance thereof was ordinarily
consumed by fire, as was the sacrifice of Abraham in the time of the law. By
this he may well be called a king, a prophet, a priest or sacrificer. As the
original whence he came being earth, had relation to what he should return; so
the place where he was created, being mount Moriah, had relation to that place
where Christ the high sacrificer should be crucified, to the joy of the world;
as by many other particulars afterward, was made plain to be Jerusalem, Genesis
22, 2.
where Isaac was offered as a figure of Christ; where Sem or Melchisedech
dwelt, being the king of peace and justice; 14, 18.
where Noah's arc rested; Genesis 8.
where Solomon was commanded to build the temple in the honor of his name. 2
Cron. 3, 1.
When God had chastned the woman, and cursed the serpent, he said unto Adam,
The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpents head. Gen 3, 15.
He lived to instruct Mathuselah in this promise concerning Christ, 243 years;
Genesis 5, 25.10, 11.
the rather, because Methuselah was appointed of God to live long and many
years after, of purpose to teach others.

That Adam fell the day of his creation, all must hold, that love not gross
ignorance, our Lord tells that Satan stood not in the truth. Now his falling
could not be known to us, to judge of that speech, but by the story of the
serpent, which Moses joined with the creation: and it were irreligious
boldness to thrust a practice of life betwixt, in another kind. Moreover, our
Lord tells that satan was a murderer from the beginning, speaking unto
Hebrews. They now his enemies not only grant, but prove by the testimony
universal of all their learned, that the sixth day the serpent deceived Eve.

If Adam fell not same the day of his creation, what did he then on the next
seventh day? how bestowed he the sabbath? if he were idle, then he gave an ill
president to his posterity; if he wrought, then he did worse; and if it be
said that he was religiously occupied in the service of God, then it follows
that he fell the day before, whereupon Christ was promised, and to be adored
the next sabbath.

Again, if Adam fell not the same day of his creation, then Cain was begotten
in innocence; for it must needs be granted acording to the institution and
quality of nature, that day or the next night Adam knew Eve his wife, in which
he was conceived.

The evening sacrifice in the law of Moses, had perfect relation to the cool
of the day, or evening in which Adam transgressed.

The sixth day in which Christ was crucified, and about the euening-tide,
pointed plainly to the day, and to the very time in the which Adam fell; the
course of story, the words of our Lord, and the grant and proof of his
enemies, inforceth men of modesty to believe it, and to think their humors
strange that dare cross the old and new Greeks, protestants, and Romists, to
this day; the differing run into more absurdity than a large volume would
contain; and they who yield not to the most ancient and universal, unless
they bring a reason that all must embrace, show neither skill in learning, nor
any reverence to Christianity.

Seth Was the third son of Adam, begotten in the likeness of his father,
when he was 130 year old, all the world is bound to take instruction of him,
thereby to be settled in Christ the rock.

All places of scripture that do^th import faith and constancy may be reduced
unto this.

Enos Was very zealous, and therefore sorrowful, when he saw the corruption of
religion and good manners, which was like to ensue upon the marriage of the
sons of God, with the daughters of men, who regard beauty and worldly
preferment rather than the promises of life everlasting, by continuing in true
religion.

To this you may refer the zeal of Moses, Elias, Paul, John, etc. who wept
for the sins of the people, and desired rather to be rased out of the book
of life everlasting, than that so many thousands should perish.

To this you may refer all inordinate and unequal marriages.

Kenan Had sorrowfulness, and withal, godly repentance, furnished with a
godly care of amendment.

To this you may reduce all sorrowful and penitent sinners.

Mahalaleell. Had a name very answerable to that acceptable sacrifice which the
creator imposed upon his creation, according to the signification of his own
name.

To this you may reduce all places of thanksgiving and praising God.

So Leah named her fourth son Judah, signifying, Praise the Lord; this ought
to be imitated of all men throughout the course of religion, and trade of life,
the reason why, is showed Psalm. 19, 47, 105, 120.

Iared Had the virtues of his forefathers, which induced him to great humility
and lowliness.

To this you may reduce al such places how God exalts the lowly and meek.

Henoch Walked with God in holiness, he was a man dedicated to the Lord by his
name and trade of life, and therefore taken up into heaven; he is the seventh
from Adam: his years are agreeable with the number of the sabbath, putting all
men in mind of the six days creation, and the seventh days redemption. Seven
is an holy and an infinite number, importing grace and peace, by Jesus Christ.
The number of Seven is taken many times for a time certain and ceasing, but in
evil part, as Nabucadnezer was a beast Seven years, and no longer. The
tabernacle was a building Seven months and no longer.

Seven sometimes is taken in good part, and for a certain time ceasing, as the
land of Canaan was Seven years in conquering. Al notable actions were done in
equal number of Seven, as from Moses to Christ's death by seven seuens; Seven
fifties for the glory of Joseph's house; seven seuenties for the house of
Judah; seven tennes for the captivity; seven seuenties to Christ.

The holy servants of God, as a rare mark to behold, were borne in the equal
number of seven, as Henoch. The 7. from Adam. Heber. Henoch. Isaac. Heber.
Moses. Abraham. Joshua. Ephraim. Ioram. David.

Methuselah Having all the virtues and blessedness of his forefathers, after
his death shall have life aeternall, which his name did teach him by the
signification thereof. As Adam lived 743 years to instruct him, so he lived
with Sem 98. years.

Apply this to the faithful, as a reward of their labors in Christ, to which
all such like places may be reduced.

His age was an exact number or rule of the flood. The waters could not drown
the world while he lived.

The like may be said of Lot, that fire could not fall upon Sodom and Gomorah
until he was in Zoar.

Lamech He was outwardly afflicted by men, and inwardly afflicted in
conscience, by the Devil; he was a prophet, for he spoke of things many
hundred years past, and of the comfort to come by Noah.

To this you may reduce the tribulations, afflictions, and sorrows of the
church.

Noah Found grace and favor with God, to whom almighty God vouchsafed to
speak, next unto Adam, and to establish the covenant with him; his household as
a small remnant left in the Arc, is an aequall proportion of the smalnesse of
the church, in respect of the wicked multitude.

The Dove bringing an olive leaf, signifies peace and plenty: you may reduce
it to the holy Ghost, bringing glad tidings and eternal joy to the church. He
was the tenth from Adam.

The signification of their names being well linked together, makes up a
christian sacrifice, the whole sum of religion, or the lively image and
portrature of Christ. Go backward or forward with their names, by the
signification or Aetymologie thereof; he that has one virtue has all, he that
misseth of one virtue, misseth of all, they cannot be separated.

Forward thus; He that is settled in Christ, as was Seth, is sorrowful for sin
as Enos. He that is sorrowful for sin has godly repentance, with Kenan. He
that has godly repentance, praises God in poverty and in plenty, with
Mahalaleel. He that praises God is lowly in all estates, as was Iared. He that
is lowly sanctifies the sabbath, as did Henoch. He that sanctifies the
sabbath, has long life with Methuselah. He that has these former virtues shall
be heartely wounded in this world, as was Lamech, but in the world to come he
shall have joy and comfort with Noah.

Backward thus; He that has not joy and comfort in Christ with Noah, is not
heartily wounded with the afflictions of this life as was Lamech. He that is
not heartily wounded, has no hope of long life with Methuselah. He that hops
not for long life keeps not the sabbath with Henoch. He that keeps not the
sabbath, is not lowly with Iared. He that is not lowly, praises not God with
Mahalaell. He that praises not God, has not godly repentance with Kenan. He
that has not godly repentance, is not sorrowful for sin with Enos. He that
is not sorrowful for sin, is not settled in Christ. He that is not settled in
Christ, is earthly, miserable, and perishes.

I pray you labor well for the knowledge of this story, let nothing pass,
for all is profitable.

In them the law is thundered, in them the Gospel is preached, and in them the
sacraments are administered.

All the world were enemies to these few, as appeared by Gods judgment upon
them by a flood.

The particulars of the Second story.
Sem. Signifies Renowned. Arphaxad. Healing. Sale. Peace. Heber. Pilgrim.
Peleg. Divided. Regue. Breaking. Sarug. Palm trees. Nahor. Angry or dry.
Terah. A wretch. Abram High father. Genesis 11,


Here the great and mighty creator, in the number of other ten holy fathers,
begins to multiply a new society or sanctified people, and to set up his
own glory in open show to all that should come after, according to the
religion in the former age.

Sem Was Noah's son who afterward was called Melchisedech, because he was to
bear a perfect demonstration or figure of Christ; he was said to be the king
of peace, of justice, and of righteousness, and to be without father and
without mother, Genesis 14, 18. Heb. 7, 1.
without beginning of days and end of life. So long lived he after the flood,
that his kindred was unknown, for in Abraham's time he was a great grandfather
of eight degrees. Melchisedech must be Sem, for none of Chams house, nor any of
Iaphets house, could resemble the son of God, whose religion was to come from
Salem. Noah having found favor with God, and perceiving by a spirit of
prophecy, that his son Sem should be blessed, and of great fame with God and
man, he named him, Renowned; which in the Hebrew is according to the
Aetymologie of his name. Thus of the other nine.

Elam. Their issue Elamits. Ashur. Assyrians. Iud. Lidians. Aram. Aramits, or
Assyrians.

These were the wicked offspring of Sem, Genesis 10, 12,
who became open enemies to him and to other of that sacred line, whence Christ
should come.

Gomer. Their issue. Tartarians. Magog. Turks, and Scythians. Madai. Medes.
Iauan. Their issue People of Asia and Gracia. Ezec 27, 1.2.38, 1.2.
Tuball. Mesech. These were the sons of Iaphet, Genesis 10, 2.3.4.5.
of whom were the Gentiles. Tiras.

Cush. The issue Ninnod a mighty hunter, the builder of Babel. Genesis 10, 8.
Misraim. Egyptians, in Hebrew Misraims. Pute. Black moors. Canaan Canaanites
and Peresits, Genesis 10.

These were the sons of Cham, who became professed and sworn enemies in this
age.

The particulars of the third story.
Ruben. Signifies Water. Simeon. A sword. Leui. A book. Judah. A lion. Dan.
An adder. Nepthali. A Hind. Gad. A banner. Asher. Bread. Isachar. An ass.
Zabulon. A ship. Joseph. A fuictful bow. Genesis 29.
Benjamin. A wolf.

In this age almighty God makes his service and religion more open and
apparent than before, by diverse ordinances, co^stitutions and laws, which he
imposed upon these twelve holy fathers, to be unrepealed until the passion of
Jesus Christ: in the mean time God directed them and guided them as it were by
hand, and fead them in due season, with all things miraculously: out of these as
out of one man, (even Abram their father, to whom the promise was made) there
came a mighty nation, fierce and terrible, against whom the kings of Canaan
could not prevail, no, not the devil in hell; whose kingdom is a kingdom of
power. Our of these twelve came all those of whom God had regard, until Christ.
They are dispearsed in the scripture to great use, therefore learn their
stories, so you shall be able to say something of every one. In the creation
God did foresee this royal nation, derived from the twelve tribes; for in their
journey to Canaan, they came to Elim, where was twelve fountains. He divided
the year according to their number; the twelve stones in Aarons breast, the
twelve stones out of Jordan, and diverse other notable things of that number,
has relation to this people. You must be perfect in their particular stories,
for example thus:

Judah Was the fourth son of Jacob, whom Rachel bare unto him, Genesis 29, 31.32.
she called his name Judah, which is by interpretation, Praise the Lord;
wherein she showed a perpetual memory of Gods mercy, not only because she
being despised and reproched for her barrenness, had now the fourth son, but
also because that of his seed the Messiah should come, in whom all the world
might sing and praise the Lord. Jacob by a spirit of divination did foresee
the same, and therefore among the rest of his brethren, at his death he gave
him a name or a cognizance of great magnanimity and courage, speaking after
this manner; Judah, as a lions whelpe thou shall come upon the spoil, my
son; he shall lie down and couch as a lion, and as a lioness, who shall
stir him up? Here is a plain narration of Christ, compared to a lion, for
his kingly properties, no man daring to withstand him; of whom S. John says,
Revel. 5, 5.
Behold the lion out of the tribe of Judah, has obtained to open the book,
and to unloose the seals thereof; meaning Christ Jesus is he that shuts and
no man opens, and he that opens and no man shuts. Moses that kingly
prophet, at his death blessed these twelve tribes in another sort, and yet
ratefying the former, wherein he remembers Judah above the rest.

These were enemies in this age, with their issue.

Ismael. Esau.
The particulars of the 4. Story.
12 principal stations, or habitatio^s of Israel. Ramases. Ex. 12 Worms
meat. Succoth. 13 Poor cottages. Ethan. 13 Hard ground. Maarah. 15
Bitterness. Elim. 15 Strong hearts. Sin. 16 Thornie. Rephedim. 17 Temptation.
Sinai. 19 Everlasting temptation Jothathae. Nu^ 1, Turning away. Hor. 20
Declaring, or showing. Zalinonah. 21 Shadow of a portion. Moab. 27. Of the
father.

The said twelve tribes were forty years traveling from Egypt, under the
conduct of Moses, toward Canaan. They pitched their tents and rested in two
and forty places, whereof some were pleasant, and some were unpleasant, of
which I have reckoned up these twelve. Read the chapters opposite, and you shall
direct your memory to all that was done in this age.

Enemies in this time. King Pharao. Exodus 1, 5, 14, Amalakits. 1 Samuel 15,


The particulars of the fifth story.
Wherein consider: 1 The strength of Canaan; having relation to Satan's force.
2 The weakness of the conquerours; having relation to the poor church of
Christ. 3 The time of the conquest, which was seven years; having relation to
Jesus Christ the conqueror of conquerours, written and comprised in the
aequall number of Seven, as many other great and famous acts are.


The black Moors, the Canaanites, the Peresites, being the progeny of Chant,
Noah's cursed son, banded themselves, and became an huge army against the
host of Israel.

The particulars of the sixth Story.
Acts 13, 20.
THese 13 Judges or governors continued But in propriety of Chron. 339.
450 years, accounting the years of the oppressors. Their story serves very
well to show the judgment of God against obstinat sinners, and his mercies to
the penitent. There are many weighty things therein, and well worth the
perfecting.

Othoniell. Judge Of the Tribe of Judah. Ehud. 3 Benjamin. Deborah, and Barack.
6 Nepthali. Gedeon. 6 Ephraim. Ahimelech, 8 Ephraim, Tola. 10 Isachar. Iair. 10
Manasses. Iepthe. 11 Ephraim. Abelane. 12 Judah. Eglon. 12 Zabulon. Abden. 12
Manasses. Sampson. 13 Dan. Holy. 1. Sa^. 1 Leui.

Oppressors or enemies, after the death of Joshua, when the people became
secure and careless.

Philistims. Iud. 3, These were stirred up as rods and as scourges for the
people, when they neglected the holy worship and service of the highest.
Canaanites. Sidonians. Heuits. Chusan. Eglon. Judge. 3. Iabin. 4, Madianites 6,
Amalakites 6, Philistims. 10 Amonites. 13 Philistimes

Here you may prove ar large the assurance of Gods love and favor, where good
men do bear rule, and are obaied; and on the contrary his justice, where
wicked men do bear rule, and the people rebellious in his service. I have
distinguished the good from the bad, as they succeeded, so are you to learn
them perfectly. Read the book.

The particulars of the seventh story.
Wherein consider well three kings, before the kingdom of Israel was divided.

Saul. David. Solomon.
Saul Signifies, Desired of the people; He was of the tribe of Benjamin, which
thing was a great prerogatine to that tribe, being the least, and the last.
Because the people dispaired in the mercies of God, and distrusted his power,
having given them manifest assurance of the same, he gave them such a one as
they deserved, to weet, an Hipocrite, and an open enemy to all truth and
sincerity, who slew all that did wear an Ephod, 1. Sam. 10, 13, 18.19.20.17
and took an oath of the people to betray harmless and guiltless David, and
the rest.

David Believed God, and his kingdom was reckoned when the Ark was recovered
to Judah at Easter; so Christ at Easter was proclaimed king. He was of the
tribe of Judah, of the root of Iesse, he killed a Bear, and a great
outrageous Philistine, that defied Israel; wherein he was a figure of Christ.
He had many enemies, and infinite distresses; therein he was a figure of the
church. 1 Samuel 16, 17,
David was upright exept in this, 1. King. 15, 5.

Solomon Signifies peace; so was his kingdom. For his wisdom and order in
religion, he might well be a figure of Christ. Kin. 11, 4.5. 2 Samuel 13, 14, 2
Chro. 3, 1. 1 King. 12, 1 Kin. 11, 1, Ezech, 37, 16.17.18.
He fell to extreme sins, yet he was saved. He laid the foundation of the
temple, in Moriah. His kingdom was divided into two parts, according to the
words of the Lord unto him, but after 490 years were expired, it was thrown
together again.

Immediately after the death of Solomon, the great and entire kingdom of Israel
was divided into two parts, whereof one was called the kingdom of Judah, whose
seat was at Jerusalem, the other was called the kingdom of Israel, whose seat
was at Samaria. The kings of Israel were open and professed enemies to the
kings of Judah, Israel was stronger than Judah, for the one had ten tribes,
the other only two, that held and took part.

When you read the book of Samuel or the book of the Kings, mark diligently
these six necessary questions.

1 Whether the king of Judah, or of Israel? 2 Whether he were good or evil? 3
What prophet, one or more? 4 The religion of the people? 5 Their manners and
conversation? 6 Their prosperity or adversity?
The particulars of the eight story. Daniel.
In this book is set forth a true proportion of Antechrists earthly glory,
which for a time reached unto heaven, and mounted over all nations; the end was
as a tree cut down by the roots, with an axe. And who sees not herein the
providence of God, in the fullness of time, shining upon his sanctuary, which
so long had lain waste? To make this plain, and to direct your memory sure,
I can devise no better instruction short and plain, than that which is in my
former book of method.

Two things must be well marked.
The one, what kings reigned in Babylon during the captivity.

The other, what kings reigned and ruled after the captivity, until Christ.

Three kings during the captivity.
Nabucadnezer Euilmeredech. Baltasher. Dan. 12, 3.4. 2. King. 25, 27. Dan. 5,
8.
What is to be said of them.

Nabucadnezer Saw a vision; A great Image, Dan. 2, 31.
whose glory was excellent, and very terrible, bearing these 5 parts and
proportions:

His Head was as fine gold, Breasts and arms of silver. Belly and thighs of
Brass. Legs of iron. Feet part of iron and part of clay.


The true exposition of this image, according to the parts thereof, as the holy
Ghost sets it down, signifies Nabucadnezer; who for his greatness is
compared to a tree, reaching to the heavens: that which he saw as a most goodly
and glorious image, Dan. 4.16,
Daniel saw it in a vision, very fierce and terrible, as a lion with Eagles
wings chopped off. It was lifted up and set upon his feet, as a man, and a man's
heart was given unto him.

The other two kings, to weet, Euilmeredech, and Baltashar, are referred in
comparison to the first, who reigned just 45 years as appears thus.

He took Iehoiachim king of Judah, in the eight year of his reign.

Euilmeredech his son who succeeded him, lifted up Iehoiachim out of prison
where he had lain, seven and thirty years, in which Iehoiachim was raised up,
that makes just five and forty years, being the whole reign of this first king.

Euilmeredech reigned 22 years. Baltashar reigned 3 years.
Thus you may see plainly the seventy years were fully ended in the particular
reign of these three kings, Iere. 25, 12.
according to a prophecy.

Now the head of gold is gone off, and quite taken away, the kings of Babel are
extinquished, and the seventy years expired. In this age the church was
exiled, under rulers of cruel and beastly affections.

The particulars of the ninth story.
WHen the seventy years were accomplished, Leui. 26, 40. 1. Kin. 8, 46.
which were foretold, Daniel prayed unto the Lord for the restoring of the
desolation of Jerusalem, which so long had been exiled, and in disgrace;
whiles he yet spoke and prayed, the Angel of the Lord came in have about the
evening sacrifice, who uttered these words:

Seventy years are determined upon thy people, and upon thy holy city, Dan.
9, 24,
to bring in everlasting righteousness.

Here is an even reckoning and a just account cast out of all the times from
Daniels vision, at the Edict, 9, 21.
unto the death of Christ the prince of peace.

Every week has seven days; the Angel means for every day in a week a
year; seven days, seven years, Leuit. 29, 8.9.10
after the reckoning of the Iubile year, the whole is 490 years.

The same Angel for plainness, deuides the same seven weeks, Dan. 9, 25.
into three parts, after this manner.

The first part shall be seven weeks, that is to say, forty and nine years,
from the going forth of the commandment that the people of Israel should be
freed in the first year of Darius, unto the building and finishing of the
temple at Jerusalem, the proof whereof is thus.

The Jews confess forty and six years, Ioh. 2, 20. Ezra.. 4, Nehc. 4, Ezra
6, Neh. 7, 8.9.10, 13. Dan. 10, 1.2.
in which the temple was a building: in the other three years they were
hindered from their work, in which three years of trouble Sirus reigned; yet
according to the Almighties former reckoning it was finished.

The kings and rulers that were in this age or division of time appears thus:

Arms and breasts of silver, being part of the image which Nabucadnezer saw,
Dan. 2, 39.
signifies ten kings of the Medes and Persians, who continued one hundred and
thirty years, who are these.

1 Cirus or Darius. 2 Artaxerxes or Cambises. 3 Assuerus or Darius. 4
Histaspes. 5 Xerxes.
These reigned twenty and nine years, in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes or
Darius the Temple was built, being full forty and nine year.

These other kings were after the building, who made up the hundred and thirty
years.

6 Ochus. 7 Artaxerxes. 8 Ochus. 9 Arses. 10 Darius the Persian.
These kings which seemed to the world to be glorious, as the arms and breasts
of silver, Daniel sees them like a savage and a cruel bear, with iij. ribs in
his mouth, saying; Arise, let us devour much flesh, so did they macerate the
saints of God, but at their death the arms and breasts of silver is said to be
cut off, being kings of Madai and Paras.

The second part of the Angels division of time. Dan 2, 16.


Sixty and two years shall be a troublesome time for Gods people, after the
which the prince of peace, the king of glory shall be slain, even he shall
destroy the city and the sanctuary.

The belly and thighs of brass does signify king Alexanders power.

To this belongs the vision of Daniel, 8, 3.4.
a Goat buck with a horn, which being broken off, comes out in steed thereof
four heads, signifying Alexanders four captains fighting two and two, which
two first is also the legs of iron and clay and their successors, and the 4
beast with 10 horns. Alexander continued six years.

His legs of iron.

Dan. 7, 7.
Is the beast which Daniel saw very fearful and strong, with iron teeth burst
in pieces, and stamped the residue under his feet, who was the fourth kingdom
in the earth, subduing all to himself. ^3.


The ten horns are ten king stronger than the Jews, that shall rise out
of Siria and Egypt, whereof one is said to be a little horn boasting against
the most highest. 8, 7.11.


Iron like.
1 Solennicus Nicator. 2 Antiochus Soter. 3 Antiochus Theos. 4 Solenicus
Callicus. 5 Solenicus Serauius. 6 Antiochus Megas. 7 Solenicus Philopater. 8
Antiochus Epimanes.
Iauan kings of Egypt, iron like, to make up the ten horns.

9 Ptolomeus Lagi. 10 Ptolomeus Philodelphus.
His feet part of iron and part of clay, were Iauan kings of Babell clay like
in number twelve.

These kings as beasts ruled most beastly and unnaturally, very strong 294.
years to Cleopatras death, who presumptuously confirmed Herod king over Judah.

The third part of the Angels division of time, consisting in these words.

He shall confirm the covenant with many for one week, and in the midst of
the week he shall cause the sacrifice to cease. Dan. 9, 27.


These words has plain relation to Jesus Christ, his death, resurrection,
etc. for one week in the account of the Iubile year aforesaid, stands for
seven years, a year for a day.

In the midst of the same week, that is to say, in the midst of this last
seven years, Christ was baptized, and did preach this last half seven years,
confirming his authority with miracles, signs, and wonders, until the same
three years and half, the end of Daniels week, was ended.

In which he suffered his passion according as it was before determined many
thousand years in the council of the everlasting Trinity.

To the elect Lady Florence Herberd, late the wife of a worthy knight, Sir
William Herberd, of S. Iulians, in the County of Munmoth, disceased.
AS a precious Cant. 1, 2, 1. Ioh. 2, 20.27.
ointment being poured forth casts out, and spreads abroad a sweet, a
fragrant, and an odiferous smell far and near: even so (good Christian Lady)
the name and fame of such as are anointed with the holy Ghost, does cast out
and spread it self far and near, very sweet to the nosthrils of the
Almighty, and very delightful to the members of Christ. Though the distance
of place, and the conueniencie of time, has not ministered unto me any
acquaintance with you, nor occasions to see you, yet your Act. 10, 2.
devout behavior, your fullness of alms, and your continual praying, with
other your modest and chaste conuersations, being cast out and spread abroad
far and near, makes me bold to write unto you, as to one perfectly known,
and well acquainted, and that with no less than three special and weighty
occasions, moving and urging me. The first is, to assure you and to protest
unto you that I have truly, sincerely, and faithfully, published this your
husbands labor, annexed with my own, as he desired (by the favor of a
worshipful gentleman who has undertaken to patronize the same with the rest.)
The second is, to desire pardon of your Ladyship for the long delaing thereof,
sithence my importunities are just, and my excuses reasonable. The third is, in
the mercifulness of Christ Jesus to exhort you, and to comfort you onward in
the good way and right course which your Christian husband has left you. He
has broken the yse to his pains, you may see the clear water at your
pleasure: he has crazed the shell to his very death, you may take the kernel
all your life: and he has sauored of the sauce that was sour, now you may
assay and eat of the sweet. His pains has brought him at the last to drink
of Christ, the water of life: his continual hungring after righteousness,
has brought him to eat of spiritual Manna, the food of his soul: and his
bitter annoy is changed into heavenly and eternal joy. 1. Cor. 15, 49.
He that bare in the earth the image of the earthy, now bears the image of the
heavenly. He once was subject to sin because he was subject to the law, and
being subject to the law, he was subject to death, but thanks be to God, who
has given him victory in Jesus Christ. Death is now dead, death is swallowed
up, his death is dead, and how? 1. Cor. 15, 57. Hos. 13, 14. Esa. 25, 8.9. 1.
Cor. 15, 54.55.56.
Sin is the sting or the life of death, the life of sin is the law; now,
take away the law, take away sin; take away sin, then death is dead, death is
gone and utterly destroyed: Luke. 7,
and to conclude, your husband (sweet Lady) is alive, he is not dead but
lives, he was a knight on earth, he is now a Gal. 5, Re. 1, 6. Cant. 5, 1.
king in heaven. And since his chance was to make such an exchange, good Madame
be merry, though his company was your comfort, yet be not against his
preferment, and know this to be a common and a commendable saying, Past cure,
past care. Out of remedy, out of remembrance. 1. Sam. 12, 20.21.22.23.
David whilst his son was alive, fasted and wept bitterly, but when he was
dead, he was merry and reioysed greatly. As it is sure whilst your husband was
alive, you did the one, so now seeing he is dead let it be surely seen for good
example that you do the other. As David said of his son I shall go to him,
but he shall not come to me: so say you, (good worshipful Lady) I shall go to
my husband, my husband shall not return to me. Bear you the cross valiantly,
which you have taken up zealously, no manner of disco^tentment is joyous for
the present time, but grievous, nevertheless afterward it brings quiet
rest. As fine Gold is wrought in flaming fire, and white silver in black
pitch, even so glory is to be gotten with the depth of danger, and pleasure
with the price of pain. As the roots of a tree are bitter and the fruits
sweet, even so of bitter annoy comes pleasant joy, and of an heavy suit,
happy success. That it may be a parcel of your joy in heaven to see him which
was your joy in earth, remember the instruction he gave you whilst he was
living, remember the council he gave you whilst he was dying, and remember to
keep in practice seriously, and sinceerely, among your household, the study
and the exercise of true religion, according to the doctrine of Jesus Christ.
To whose holy tuition and merciful providence I leave your Ladyship, with so
many good desires for your godly deserts, as miles has severed S. Julian and
S. Leonard.

Yours in the Lord, Edw: Vaughan.

Sir William Herberd knight his particulars upon the tenth story, to weet, from
the birth of Christ to the worlds end.
COnsider the times from the birth of Christ to the end of the world, which by
the doctrine of Elias amounts to 2000 years, the whole time may be divided
into seven successiue ages, according to the Seven Churches. Revel. 1, 4.
Seals. 5, 1. Trumpets. 8, 6.

The two first are ascribed to the church of Ephesus and Smyrma, which
accomplished the first 300 years, for it is manifest that the things spoken to
those churches concern the first 300 years after Christ, that is to say, The
examination of false Apostles, the hating of the Nicolaitans heresies, the
enduring of the extreme malice of the Jews, Reu. 2, 10.
and of the ten persecutions, with patience and constancy, is called the
tribulation of ten days.

The third division belongs to the church of Pergamus, to which, as to each
that follow, we attribute 340 years, which reaches from the year of our Lord
till the 640. That age is commended for constancy in the truth, and because
there were then some that doted upon images, and had ordained dedication to the
Idols temple, to the martyrs and vigils, in their honor, which was a
spiritual fornication, practiced of the Nicolaitans, this age was therefore
thus reproved: I have a few things to say to thee, because thou have
maintained the doctrine of Balaam, which taught Balac to put a stumbling block
before the children of Israel, and that they should eat things sacrificed to
Idols, and to commit fornication. Reu. 2, 14.


The fourth division or age is appropriated to the church of Thiatira,
extending from the year 640, to the year 980. The church in this age is
commended for her great devotion, but because it permitted the church of Rome
to usurp authority, and to be another Iesabel in Samaria, drawing people to
Idolatry, it is therefore reproved, the plagues that God would bring upon the
church of Rome, are declared, and the children of the true church exhorted to
continue in the ancient faith which they have already received.

The fifth division or age is the church of Sardic, which begins at the year
980, continued till the year 1332. In this age the spirit of Iesabel was
grown so strong, and her Achab so wicked, that the visible church bare only
the name of a church, the doctrine generally corrupted, and things reduced,
touching the public worshipping of the Almighty, unto that miserable estare,
that they resembled the reign of Achab and Iesabel, wherein Elias had so
greatly complained, yet God had then his secreat elect expressed in these
words, I know thy works and where thou dwell, Reu. 2, 13.
even where Satan's throne is, thou keep my name, and have not denied the
faith.

The sixth division appertains to the church of Philodelphia, which contains
the times that we live, and all the years from 1320, till the year of our
Lord 1660. In this age of the church the truth of the doctrine is replenished,
and the truth of the Gospel flourished, notwithstanding all endeavors against
it, the faithful are endued with spiritual strength, thus; I have set before
thee an open door, and no man can shut it, for thou have a little strength,
and have kept my works, Reu. 3, 8.
and have not denied my name.

The seventh division or age, is attributed to the year 2000, this age
forgetting the mercy of God will prove to be careless of heavenly things,
being neither hot nor cold. Therefore God will loath and abhor this age,
manifest in these words; I know thy works, and tribulation, and poverty, but
thou art rich, and I know the blasphemy of those which say they are Jews, and
are not, Reu. 2.8.9.
but are the synagogue of Satan.

Besides these mysteries of the seven churches, let us receive farther
instruction in the opening of the seven seals, concerning those things from
the birth of our savior, unto the end of the world.

THe first seal being opened, is discovered the preaching of the Gospel, and
the victories of Christ, in subduing multitudes to his truth. I beheld, and lo
there was a while horse, and he that sat on him had a bow, and a crown was
given unto him, Reu. 6, 1.2.
and he went out conquering that he might overcome. Hereof speaks that
princely prophet David, Psalm. 45.
Good luck have thou with thine honor, ride on, because of the word of truth,
of meekness, and righteousness, thine arrows are very sharp, and the
people shall be subdued unto thee even in the midst among the kings enemies,
thy seal (O God) endures for ever, the scepter of thy kingdom is a right
scepter.

1.
The second seal being opened; the bloody persecutions of the Idolaters,
Roman Emperors, and in Gods justice, these cruel wars, and bloody deaths
are prefigured in these words; And there went out another horse that was red,
and power was given unto him that sat thereon to take peace from the earth, 3.
and there was given unto him a great sword.

The third seal being opened, the darkness, ignorance and heresies, the
famine both spiritual and temporal was discovered, that horrible persecutions
and wars should bring into the world, in these words; I beheld, and lo a
black horse, and he that sat thereon had a balance in his hand, saying, A
measure of wheat for a penny, and a measure of barlie for a penny, and oil and
wine thou shall not hurt. 5.6.


Notwithstanding all the persecutions, heresies and scarsitie both of true
teachers and of true doctrine in the church, yet the spiritual wine and oil,
being the old and new testament, (the law and the Gospel) were preserved and
vncorrupt as you hear, this is the wine and oil that the good Samaritane
poured into the wound, which he thereby both cleansed and cured: this wine of
the law searches our infirmities, and this oil of the gospel is the oil of
gladness, wherewith we be anointed that be the true members of Christ. It is
the oil that in the lamp of our souls kindles and continues the light of
our faith. This oil the five wise virgins were furnished with, and the five
foolish wanted; and it is the oil and the unction that supplies our
understanding. 1. Ioh. 2.20, 27.


The fourth seal manifested the Romish Iesabel, and the persecuting church of
Rome, by palenesse pretending whiteness, by hypocrisy pretending piety,
spreading his authority over the earth, and destroying many, some with the
sword, others with spiritual hunger, others with spiritual death, etc.
expressed by these words; And behold, a pale horse, and his name that sat
thereon was death, and hell followed after him, and power was given unto him
over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with the sword, Reu. 6, 8.
with hunger, and with death.

The fifth seal being opened, appeared the souls of them that were killed for
the testimony of the truth, requiring justice at the hands of God for their
blood, but it was said unto them, that they should rest a little while, until
their fellow servants were also killed.

The sixth seal being opened, the judgment of God upon the persecutors of his
chuch, the horror of their conscience, and the anguish of their minds, was
declared in these words; And the kings of the earth, and the great men hid
themselves in dens and among the rocks, saying, Rocks fall on us, and hide us
from the presence of him that sits upon the throne. 12.13.14.15.16.17.


The seventh seal being opened, prefigured the beginning of aeternall rest.

Now mark what the holy Ghost discovers upon the sound of the seven
trumpets, Reu. 8,
it makes plain all that was between the birth of Christ, and the end of the
world.

THe first and second trumpet has relation and sit cohaerence to the church of
Ephesus, and the church of Smirma, and to the opening of the first and second
seal, that is to say, to the first 300 years after Christ. The event
demonstrated is first the persecution of the church, by the Roman Emperors,
whose cruelties were so sharp and bloody, that they are represented by the
terms of hail and fire mingled with blood: this storm of persecution fell
upon Christ's husbandry, so that the third part of the trees, that is to say,
the third part of the people, and all the green grass, meaning the ministers
bedued with spiritual grace, yielding plenty of food unto their flock, were
burnt up and consumed. The justice of God upon these persecutors, in afflicting
them with horrible wars, which like a great mountain burning like fire, was
cast into the turbulent sea of their tumultuous estate, so that the third part
of their dominions was replenished with bloud-shead, the third part of their
subjects slain, and the third part of their provinces, cities, and
governments, which are resembled to ships sailing upon the sea of that
Empire, was destroyed.

The third Trumpet is answerable to the church of Pergamus, and to the opening
of the third seal, representing the time from 300 years after Christ, till
the years 640. Superstition and idolatry, the doctrine of Balaam, and
scandalous endeavors of Balac, the black horse of darkness, ignorance and
famine of Gods word, began then to take root. And before the end of those
years, as this trumpet declares, a great star no less than the Bishop of
Rome, fell from heaven burning like a torch, and it fell into the third part of
the rivers, that is, into the third part of the doctrine of the church, and
into the fountain of waters, that is, into the principal points of religion.
And the name of the star is called Wormwood, or Corruption; and the third
part of the waters became as wormwood, that is, corrupt and false doctrine

The fourth trumpet, according to the times of the church of Thiatira, and the
opening of the fourth seal, that is, from the year of our Lord 640, to the
year 980. In this time the Romish Iesabel had taken heart and deceived the
children of God, and made them commit spiritual fornication. In these times
the pale horse of the hypocritical church of Rome was far onward on his race,
carrying Death upon his back, and haling hell after him, having power over the
fourth part of the earth, and killing with the sword, with famine, and with
death, no marvel then if this trumpet tells us, In those days the third
part of the sun, that is, the Evangelical light; and the third part of the
moon, that is, of the church, which receives all her light of Gods word; and
the third part of the stars, that is, of the pastors and ministers, were
darkened; and the day was smitten, that is, the doctrine both of the gospel, and
of the law, was so darkened and so corrupted, that they wanted the light
wherewith they should have illuminated their minds.

Reu. 9, 1.2.3.
The fifth trumpet agrees with the times and state of the church of Sardie, and
with the opening of the fifth seal. In the ending of the period of years of
the church of Sardie, at the which Antechrist was grown to his full
greatness, and had set up by public order the adoration of the sacrament,
and thereby brought in an idol to be worshipped as God, which was decreed at
the council of Laterane, the year of our Lord 1315, and within seven or eight
years after, no doubt generally received in the churches of Christendom, we
see the words of Daniell performed taking his days for years, and from the
time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away (which was abolished at Christ's
passion) the idol or desolation set up, there shall be 1290 days, which
points to the year 1323. The next verse has relation to the beginning of
the times of the church of Philodelphia, when as the truth began to be taught,
blessed is he that waits and comes to 1335 days. That extreme pollution
of the spiritual temple was such as it has an alogie with the utter
destruction of the temple at Jerusalem, by Vaspatian and Titus. It was
prefigured in the year and half, and odd days of Antiochus horrible tyranny
in Jerusalem, from the fourth year and some months more of his reign,
whereas he caused the law of Moses to be abolished, the sacrifices to cease,
the temple to be defiled, the abominable idol of Jupiter Olimpius, to be
worshipped for the space of 1290 days, till the eight year that Judas
Machabeus cleansed the temple, and decked it with crowns and shields of Gold, a
figure of Christ Jesus. The time of extreme darkness and tyranny of
Antechrist, by Achab and Iesabell, had Elias been of this age, he would have so
cried out as he did then; but God would have answered, I have a few names in
Sardie that have not defiled their garments. The seal opened opens unto us,
that in this age the souls of the Martirs cries for vengance at the hands of
God, who lost their lives for the truths sake, and for that they would not
embrace falsehood. But it was told them that they should rest till the number of
their brethren were fulfilled, who should also be slain by Antechrist. This
trumpet tells us, He had gotten the key of the bottomless pit and opened
the gulf of hell, and hence produced an innumerable company of Locusts, that
is to say, of friars, monks, and such like, the smoke of whose errors darkened
the bright sun of the Gospel, and the air of men's minds, but these have not
power over Gods elect.

The sixth trumpet comprehends the times of the church of Philodelphia, and
the opening of the sixth seal, Reu. 9, 8.
in these the gospel is preached, the Babylonians fallen, the synagogue of
satan shall be subdued, the elect of God are sealed, Antechrist with his kings
and confederates shall be astonished. At the judgment of God, they shall cry,
Mountains fall upon us. This trumpet shows, that not only the spiritual
temple shall be re-edified by the true Zorobabel, Jesus Christ, and the gospel
preached generally, but also many particulars touching the same, which (to
avoid tediousness) I must leave.

The seventh trumpet is agreeable to the event of the church of Laodicia, Reu.
5, ^.
whom the Lord (as soon as he tastes) will spew out of his mouth. It has
resemblance to the opening of the seventh seal, which does intimate unto us
the everlasting sabbath and rest, for a mighty angel lifted up his hand to
heaven, and swear by him that lives for evermore, which created all things,
that Time should be no more, but in the days of the voice of the seventh
angel, when he shall begin to blow the trumpet. And there were great voices in
heaven saying, The kingdom of this world are our Lords, and his Christ, and he
shall reign for ever. Then the 24 elders which sat before God, fell upon
their faces, and worshipped God saying, We give thee thanks O Lord God
almighty, etc.

The fifth Introduction.
YOu shall do well to observe this order, and thereby you may be able to
unfold hard and intricate places, and to expound all such parts or parcel of
the scripture, as do come in question doubtfully.

The five books of Moses and the four Evangelists do comprehend generally and
most principally the rules of justice, discerning betwixt good and evil, which
was in the beginning grafted in the souls of our first parents, and afterward
in writing, that we might the better know our creator, and our selves, with
threats restraining us from evil, and with promises persuading us to virtue;
which books in my method were called Laegall.

The twelve next books that are in the old, and the acts in the new, does
comprehend all those things that were either famously done or famously spoken
in good or evil, called historical. For the reading and speedy understanding
thereof, you must learn by heart these three particulars.

Principal,
1 Times. 2 Places. 3 Persons.
If Time, Whether Past. Present. To come.



If place, Whether For war. For religion. For worldly affairs.



If persons, Whether Politic. Religious. Public. Private.



The sixth Jntroduction.
THese books following next in order, to weet Job, Psalm. Pro. Ecclesiastes,
Cant. 14 Epistles of S. Paul, and seven other being catholicall Epistles, do
comprehend the wisdom of God for the instruction of every member of Christ,
particularly, as occasion by time and place is offered. They are called
Sapientall, which are thus to be understood.

1 Consider the chapter or verses going before or following after any such
matter taken in hand, you shall find that it helps much. 2 By some quotation
opposite in the margent. 3 By some notes after this sort marked as a star *
at the beginning of some verses, and sometimes at the end, the one expounds the
other, if you compare them. 4 By these notes showing the end of one matter, and
the beginning of an other. 5 These notes at the end, in the middle, or in the
beginning, points you to the margent for some short definition of words,
desscription of places, or aetymologie of names. 6 To what Parable, miracle, or
history, that do pertain which you have in hand. 7 The time, whether hours,
days, weeks, months, or years, night, or day, sunday, or holyday. Confer it
with the like else where, by marking what was done. 8 If there be any thing
spoken of God the creator, as of his head, his arm, his hand, or any part of
his body, etc. By the head you must understand his principallitie, or
government; by the arm, his strength; by the hand, his giving and helping, and
so throughout the rest of his members, named in scripture. The like is to be
considered of all other creatures bearing life, which are used in scriptures,
for the better explaining of hard places. You are very carefully to consider
the nature and property of every such thing, and then make your comparison by
a spiritual application. 9 If there be a speech of the quantity, length,
breadth, height, depth, etc. or of the quality, as hard, soft, bitter, sweet,
gentle, currish. 10 If there be any thing spoken in one place that is not to be
leueld and made plain in another, then take it not literally, you must seek
for some other sense. 11 If it be spoken by similitude, phrase, comparison,
figure, parable, etc. then go no further, the interpretation thereof is easy,
marking well their manners, properties and kind. 12 If there bemention made of
these numbers 3, 4, 6, 7, 10, 12, the matter adjoining will show you whether it
be good or evil; then compare every such mumber with the like. If there be
any thing of faith, of religion, of life and conversation, then compare it with
the like else where.
The seventh Introduction.
THe sixteen Prophets, and the Revelation, comprehends great and notable
things, past, present, and to come; in reading whereof mark well these that
follow, called Prophetical.

1 Under what king in Israel or in Judah, any such prophet did live, one or
more, good, or evil.

2 What were the manners of the people and their religion, under such and such
a king; compare it with the doctrine of that Prophet.

3 Whether such a prophecy were before the captivity, or after.

4 Whether it were before the incarnation of Christ, or after.

Compare the books of the kings with the observation or the former inue^tion,
with the books of the prophets, and you shall thereby make plain the one by
the other, for you shall find that the prophets did apply their doctrine
according to their manners, where they had to do.

The first and second of Chro. will serve very well for the interpretation of
the prophets, because it does enlarge many things spoken in the books of
Samuel and Kings.

The eight Introduction.
THus I have advisedly considered and briefly disposed few principal places,
how you shall after another sort make interpretation of holy scripture,
particularly by applying or comparing the old Testament with the new, or the
new with the old: you must be very perfect in them, and then make diligent
examination which of them shall happen to be in any one place that you have to
use for the time.

Consider whether the scripture that you have in hand be set forth by
Commandment. Promise. Ceremony. Type or figure. Prophecy. Similitude.
Example. Phrase. Contradiction. Parrable. Miracle. Allegory. Sacrifice.
Sacrament.


Least you should miss by taking one for another, I have very briefly
composed and laid you down their plain definition, with examples.

Commandment Is an imposition, a charging, willing, or requiring of a man
from his own will, seem it never so good, to the accomplishment and doing of
another man's will. And the Lord commanded the man saying; Genesis 2, 16.
Thou shall eat freely, but of the tree of knowledge of good and evil thou
shall not eat. 17.


Promise Is to assume, to undertake, to covenant, to indent, bargain, and
agree, is all one thing, and to one sense.

If thou will obey diligently the voice of the Lord, then the Lord will set thee
on high, above all nations, and these blessings shall fall on thee, Deuteronomy. 28,
1.2.3.4.
Blessed in the city, and blessed in the field. etc.

Ceremony Is an order, a constitution, disposition, rite, an element, or
tradition. It is an outward representing under a material and earthly thing,
an infallible matter tending to religion and the service of God, urged and
commanded by the greatest of power, as time, place, or person does require,
having an end, as

Circumcision Being the outward cutting of the foreskin of the flesh,
represents the mortification of carnal and earthly affections and lusts, and
the quickening of the spirit. This had an end by Baptism, which is also a
ceremony, and has an end at the second coming of Christ. Genesis 7, 10.11.


Tipe, or figure Is that which can be referred neither to religion, to manners,
nor to truth. If it command any wicked thing, or do forbid any good thing,
then it is a type or a figure. When it may be taken two manner of ways, one
way to good, Genesis 9, 26, 14, 8. Haeb. 7, 1. to 15. Genesis 12, 1. to 18.22, to 19.
2. Cor. 12, 4.
and another way to evil, then is it a type or figure.

Sem or Melchisedech was a perfect figure or type of Christ Jesus, both
concerning his kingdom and priesthood.

Prophecy Is a divining, foretelling, an interpreting, an exorting, or
aedifying. Exodus 7, 1.2. 1. Cor. 14.3.4 1 Thessalonians. 5, 20. Eze. 13, 1.39, 1.2.


Son of man prophecy against the prophets of Israel, and say unto them, that
prophecy out of their own hearts thus says the Lord.

Similitude Is that which bears a resemblance, proportion, fashion, likeness,
show, distinction, or more plain manifestation of another matter. A similitude
is not the same in every particular as that which was likened unto it, but it
is sufficient if it be like in one. Similitudes are never set out to confirm
or confute, but to adorn or to make a matter more plain; and it is evermore
inferior to the matter in hand, as for example:

Psalm. 144.
Man is like a thing of naught, things of naught worth are still thrown out,
cast away, not sit for any good purpose, therefore to be cast out, rejected,
and trodden under feet; so is man as a thing of naught.

My beloved is like a Roe or a young Heart. Cant. 2, 9.
Here you must consider the quality of a Roe or a young Heart, then you shall
see what the beloved of Christ is.

Like the lilly among the thorns, Cant. 2, 2. Luke 13.19.21. Math. 20, 1.2.
so is my love among the children of men.

Like the grain of mustard seed; to leven; to vineyard; so is the church.

Mark well the particulars or the sundry property, quality, condition, or
effect of every similitude, then apply it to this or that thing, or to that
matter, and you shall be greatly delighted, and enlightened.

Example Is a matter like in effect, though not in substance. It is the
confirmation of another matter when it has the self same sense, although not
the self same words. It is well said to be a fit example, when a like matter
being general does prove a particular. An example is a matter done and extant
in print and in writing.

Ensample Is that which we see with our eyes daily in the work of God, or
conuersations of men, which is not printed or written. It is an ensample when
we ourselves can witness the seeing of it, and the performing of it. An
Example is that which has an end or purpose either to exhort, or to dehort
from some thing, and so is an Ensample.

The drowning of Pharao in the sea, was an example of Gods justice against
obstinate sinners, Exo. 14.21.
persecuting the godly, and resisting the will of God.

The falling of the tower of Siloh, was an example that others should take
heed. Luke 13, 4.


The destruction of the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, Genesis 19, 23.
was an example that we should not delight in sin.

Phrases The holy Ghost for our better capacity and understanding, uses to
speak and to deliver great and weighty matters after a phrase or common
speech, used in the world among ordinary men, as thus;

Nathan said to Saul, 1. Sam. 15.
The Lord has cast thee away: meaning thereby, as men do cast away things of
naught, things good for nothing, so God has rejected and cast him off, he has
given him over as a thing naught worth. Men say of base and simple things, We
will cast it away.

Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies; meaning by kings government,
Romans 6, 12.
that sin should not govern nor have dominion over us. To reign, to rule,
and to have dominion, is a common speech or phrase that is used for them that
have gotten the upper hand, the masterie, and the authority, to command
others.

Difficulty or Contradiction Is when one place crosses another, by a
contrary letter or sense, thus:

The male in whom the foreskin is not circumcised shall be cut off from the
people. Genesis 17.


If you be circumcised, Christ shall not profit you to salvation. Gal. 5.
This is a contrary to the former in letter, one place crosses or gainsayeth
another.

Exodus 20,
Honor thy father and thy mother.

Luke. 14,
If a man will come unto me, he must forsake father and mother. This is a
contrary in sense.

God is not contrary to himself, which seems here by the letter, nor so
abhorring the laws of nature, as to command a man to forsake his father and
mother that nourished him up. etc. But by way of companion, forsake father and
mother, yea, life and all, rather than God.

Parable Is a wise, a hidden, a secreat, and a dark saying, under earthly
things to set forth heavenly. Pro. 1, 6.
Parrable has many things in it to be considered of necessity. Christ speaks
to the wicked by parables, because in hearing they should not hear, and in
reading they should not understand; Mar. 4, 31.
he makes al plain to his disciples.

Christ spoke in a parrable of a Sower, Mat. 13, 3. another 24.25. another 31.
another 33. Mar. 23. to 28. A certain man had a fig tree planted in his
vineyard. Luke 13, 6.

Miracles Is a wonder, a strange action, things applied and turned clean
contrary to their course and nature, as water turned to wine. Things only
performed by the power of God.

Miracles performed by Moses and Aaron, at Gods commandment. John 2, 1. Exo.
4, 1.2.


The Lord did these great miracles, Ios. 24.17.18.
in the sight of the people.

Christ heals incurable diseases, Ioh. 5. Mat. 8.9, 11.
he fed many with little.

Allegory Is one thing pretending in words, Ioh. 6.1.
another in sense, either in the old, or in the new Testament.

Allegory in words.Now is the axe laid to the root of the tree, every tree
that brings not forth good fruit, etc. Mat. 3, 10.


Allegory in sense.The sense and meaning is, that they should use the time and
take the opportunity of repentance, and faith in Christ, least suddenly they
should be destroyed.

Words.The harvest is great, and the laborers are but few,

Sense and meaning.There are few good magistrates in the church.

Sacrifice is an oblation, and offering, or a giving of praise, pouring of
prayers unto God. Exo. 8, 25.
It is a mention, a relation or prognostication of great and holy things to
come.

Sacrifices are of diverse sorts, and of the best and finest creatures,
representing holiness. Leuit. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.6, 7, Psalm. 4, 51. 2. Pet. 2, 1.2.


Sacrament Is a mention and plain demonstration of holy things already come
and in hand. It is a manifest assurance of Sanctification and redemption in
Christ, so far as by any earthly creature may be represented, or related,
which may not be upon policy, or kingly ordinance, but upon the ordinance and
commandment of the hiest, and that without adding or diminishing. Whereof
there were but two in the time of the law of Moses; and other two abolishing
them now in the time of the Gospel, which are these.

And as they did eat, Jesus took bread, and when he had given thanks, Mat.
26.26
he brake it and said, Take eat, this is my body.

Also he took the cup, 27. Mar 14, 22. Luke 22, 19. 1. Cor. 11.24.
and when he had given thanks, he gave it them saying, Drink ye all of this,
for this is the blood of the new Testament. etc.

And Jesus when he was baptized, came straight way out of the water, and the
heavens were opened, and John saw the spirit of God descending like a Dove, and
lighting upon him. Mat. 3, 16.


Go ye into the world, and preach the Gospel, baptizing them in the name of
the Father, Mat. 28, 19.
the Son, and the holy Ghost.

The ninth Introduction.
THat you may the better make good and perfect use of the former invention, and
places of special account, consider well and learn by heart these that
follow, in manner and form as I have set them down before you.

If a Commandment.
1 Who commands, Whether God or man. 2 Who is commanded, All or some, public,
or private. 3 What is commanded, Things pertaniing to God, or man. 4 To what
end. To Gods glory, or to man's commodity.
If a Promise,
1 Who promises, Whether God, or men of power. 2 What is promised, Temporal
things, or spiritual. 3 To whom it is made, To such as are in authority, or
to all general.
If Allegory,
Then see 1 What is pretended in words. 2 What is intended in Sense.

If Prophecy,
Then consider 1 What Prophet. 2 What prophecy. 3 Under what king.

If Similitude,
1 The nature and quality of that earthly thing which bears the similitude
particularly. 2 To what it is likened, to God, or to good men; to the Devil,
or to wicked men. 3 To what part of the similitude the thing likened does
agree.
If Example,
1 Whether the matter be good or evil. 2 For what cause it was so done. 3 For
whose sake and Example it was
If Phrase.
1 Whence the phrase is derived. 2 The meaning of the holy Ghost. 3 Whether in
the law, or in the gospel. 4 Whether for good or for evil.
If difficulty or contradiction.
1 Whether contrary in letter or in sense. 2 The words before and after. 3 The
manner of doing or speaking. 4 The time when it was. 5 The place where it was.
If Parable.
1 What the matter or subject is, in the nature and quality thereof. 2 What
the spiritual matter is. 3 Why it was spoken in Parables. 4 When it was
spoken.
If Miracle,
1 The person who wrought it. 2 For whose sake. 3 Before whom. 4 To what end.
If Allegory,
1 What the words are. 2 What the sense is. 3 Whether in the old or in the new.
4 Who speaks it. 5 To whom it was.
If a Sacrifice,
1 Whether it be Praise, or of prayer. 2 Of earthly things commended in the
law. 3 Of spiritual, commended in the Gospel. 4 The manner of it.

If a Sacrament.
1 Look for a commandment. 2 The nature of the outward Element. 3 The inward
graces represented by it. 4 The promise of salvation.
Thus you shall examine and find out a true sacrament, from that which is
imagined, for these four must needs be in every perfect sacrament.

The tenth Introduction.
THe conclusion of all arts and studies do consist of three parts; to weer,
Reading, Noting, and Exercise.

To the end you may make perfect use of your Reading, I have thought good to
co^pose this order for your Noting; then (Gods spirit assisting) your Exercise
will be easy. The names or aetymologies of the twenty holy fathers, of the
twelve Patriarchs, of the twelve standings or habitations where Israel pitched
in their journey from Egypt to Canaan. You must digest in a writing book of
two quires, after the manner of common places: one of the same places or titles
must be at the upper end of every second leaf in Quarto; and be sure to place
nothing underneath but such matter as the place and title requires. And when
you have so gone over and written all your book, then cast it aside, and take
another after the same order, which being also finished, compare it with the
first, and you shall see your self much amended in skill. Thus do once more
in another book, and then you shall be able readily and roundly, to speak
artificially and divinely of all things necessary to salvation, forgetting not
the use and helps of the introductions aforesaid, one quarter of a year will
profit you more than forty years reading, after the common and general order.

1 You shall not read any parcel of scripture, but you may reduce them to some
one of these. 2 It will sharpen your conceit and judgment. 3 It will show you
what place is most principal and necessary in every book and chapter. 4 You
shall know what matter belongs to Exhortation, Reprehension, Confirmation,
Confutation, and Consolation. 5 You shall know what matter belongs to the first
Table, and what to the second. 6 Your memory will be staid, as in one sight or
view, whereby you shall have in a readiness all things.
You shall have a brief definition, or interpretation of every one opposite,
least you take one for another, or miss of the sense.

The names or aetymologies of the first ten Fathers.
Earthly, Vanishing, descending, subject to decay, corruption. Settled,
Constant, unremovable, persuaded, resolute, believing, determined. Sorrowful,
Perplexed, vexed, grieved, hating, loathing, detesting. Godly repentance, Sorry
for sins past, grieved for displeasing of God, and not for any worldly loss
or coffeehouse whatsoever. Praise God, That is to be content in all estates,
to bless God, to praise him, and to thank him. The lowly, Not to be puffed up
with worldly conceits, nor to stand upon our own merits, but in humility and
lowliness to expect after Christ. The Sabbath keeper, Is he that dedicateth
his body and soul to spiritual contemplation, and to the saving of needful
things. Long life All gifts temporal and spiritual is signified. Heart
wounded, Molested with the tribulations and miseries of the life. The
Co^mforter, When all worldly helps fails to the wicked, then there is help
and comfort to the Godly in Christ.

The names or aetymologies of the second ten Fathers.
Renowned, Famous, excellent, in good credit with good men, and with God.
Healing, This is a close narration of our clensing, Healing, and restoration.
Peace, Tranquillity, rest, joy and Peace, quietness and ease. Pilgrim, When
we ascend to God, we descend from our selves, and from all the pleasures of
this life: whence we are pilgrims. Divided, In the heat of our journey to God,
we are divided, separated, and sequestered from father and friends etc. to serve
God. Breaking This shows the parting, the cutting off and disloialtie of the
wicked, for want of faith and patience. Palm Trees, As the Palm Tree the more
it is pressed, the more it springs, even so the godly, etc. Angry, or dry,
The wicked is soon moved to wrath, and so dry and unfruitful. Wretch, The
son of such a father hardly proves valiant, ever he is wretched. High
father, That is, by a new begetting, new regeneration to be godly, and so in
favor.

The names or aetymologies of the twelve Patriarchs.
Water, Consider the nature of Water is to wash, to mollify, to fructify, to
drown or destroy, etc. all is to one effect, and must be under one Title.
Sword, Consider the use thereof. Also it is to be taken for Cruelty, Jrefull.
Book, It has relation to Learning, to Knowledge, Skill, Offices, etc. Lion,
Understand Courage, Valiant, Mighty, Kingly, Victorious, etc. Adder, The
quality: as to sting, to hurt, to defile, to vex, etc. Hind, Swift, speedy,
flying, poasting, and such like beast. Banner, Warriors, fighters, weapons,
armor. Bread, Food, apparel, and all such things as belong to the back, and
to the belly. Ass, Slothful, sluggish, and such like beasts. Ship,
Seas-sailing, ventring, fishes, Merchants. Fruitful bough, Prosperous,
powerful, increasing, spreading abroad. Wolf, Extirping, rooting, and other
beasts of that nature.

The names or aetymologies of the twelve Standings.
Worms meat, Such are we in nature, and in bodily substance. Poor Cottages, So
are our habitations and continuance in this world. Hard ground, So are our
worldly commodities, hard and unprofitable. Bitterness, After a little ease
and rest, we fall into diverse trials. Strong hearts, So God encourages the
weak and wearied, seeking him. Thornie, The cares and pleasures of this life
and lets and hindrances. Temptation, Riches and pleasures are prouocations to
sin. Everlasting temptation, Has the godly, and prouocations to sin.
Turning away, As Cerah and the rest rebelled. Declaring or showing, This has
relation to Mountains. Shadow of a portion, Riches, and such like, are
Portions. Of the Father, To this you may refer Genealogies, kindred, or
progenies.

An entrance to the answering of the three questions recited in the beginning
of this book.
I Have heard many men of diverse trades, callings, and professions, and some in
the parish where I have cure and charge, using speeches derogatorie to the
credit, good estate, and prosperous continuance of Lawyers, Physicians, and of
the Preachers of the word of God: the ple^tie of which three sorts of learned
and honest professors, are the manifest arguments of Gods most special favor
toward his church: yet notwithstanding, I perceive they are neither liked nor
loved of the ignorant and envious multitude; wherein they do so much as in them
lies, abuse the means of their comfort, and reject the graces of God which
they daily pray for; yet when they, by reason of their ungodly or distemperate
behauior, are brought to the hazard of their liberties, their livings, or their
lives; then some of them master and worship the Lawyer. Others being but a
little sick, post and have their messengers to the Physicians, then they
entreat them and entertain them with diverse paiments and promises. And some of
them, though the smaller number, when their wills be made, and their souls
bequeathed, send for the minister, unto whom they then speak fair, and cry
God mercy, I have been a sinner, Master Parson pray form: or words to like
effect, I doubt me to small purpose. Wherefore these things considered, I think
it not amiss (good christian Reader) to contriue their questions and my
answers Dialogue wise, as between the Pastor and Parishioner, after this manner.

Parishioner. WHat is your opinion and judgment of Lawyers? They are men
generally hated and ill reported, and as I think very justly: for they do by
delays and shifts in law, hinder and undo many.


Pastor. The laws of this realm, made and ordained by policy and wisdom,
and maintained by authority, are said to consist of perfect reason, ancient
custom, yea and of the law of God; very perfectly pointing to every man his
own, as God has limited out of the creation, leaving nothing common or
vndesposed, but the fishes of the sea, the fowls of the air, and the beasts of
the wilderness. And it has his denomination Lex a Ligando, because as a bond
does knit and hold many things together, and as of many links is made one
chain, Ephesians. 4, 1.2.3. Exo. 28, 1.2.3.4.5.6.
and as by the sinews, our joints and parts of our natural bodies are tied
and bound together; even so by law, the politic body of a common weal, is
united and knit together as one, for the preservation of peace, in the
profession of one true everliving and ouer-ruling Lord. It requires in it
self the captiuating of our own wills, and obedience to the will of the maker
thereof, upon pains and penalties enforcing the same. The laws so considered,
make difference betwixt right and wrong, betwixt good and evil men: the laws
of this Land, if they be duly and truly handled, have that end and purpose as
the law of Almighty God, which is, to reduce men from savageness to
ciuilnesse, from ignorance to knowledge, and from vice to virtue; Romans 13, 3.4.
therefore S. Paul said, Princes are nor fearful, by their laws, to them
that do good, but to them that do evil. Will thou be without fear? do well
then: so shall thou be praised, then is he the minister of God, for thy wealth:
but he is the minister of God, to take vengeance on them that do evil. These
our laws are laudable, and very near (for excellency and sincerity) to the
laws of God, as does partly appear by the definition thereof, Lex est sanctio
sancta iubens honesta and prohibens contraria. The law is a holy ordinance
commanding good things, and forbidding the contrary. Why then is it
dispraised? nay rather why is it not most highly commended, liked, and allowed?


Parishioner. All this that you have said of the law it self, I partly grant,
but what makes this for the calling of Lawyers, and their practice, as
Counselors, Doctors, Attorneis, Proctors, Sollicitors, Petty-foggers, and such
like? there were no such men allowed in the judicial laws of God, every man
was heard of the judge to say what he could for hmselfe, and why should not our
laws have that proceeding? Is there any matter so hard and intricate that the
party grieved cannot utter it himself, and where a cause being never so hard
and tedious, might be ended within ten days after the defendants answer, it
is now drawn to three or four years handling, by the deceit, and for the
lucre of Lawyers, upon whom all the world cries out with open mouth.


Pastor. It should seem you speak of conscience, as wishing all things well,
or of extreme malice being some way grieved by them: the best of both pleads
you guilty, in accusing all for some. It was not so hard a matter for Moses to
judge all Israel at the first by himself, as it was afterward to judge them
by himself and others, when Iethro councelled him for his ease to choose many
more helpers. And more tedious it is to determine all the causes moved by the
subjects here in England, than it was for Moses when he had most to do in
Israel for complaints, Exodus 18, 13. to 23.
injuries, and wrongs, are increased, so that many hundredth judges could not
deliberatly hear and consideratly determine all the causes arising here,
although the plaintiff and defendant were suffered to speak but ten words a
piece; where indeed, if they should have their allowance, 2000 would not serve.
Again, ignorant and unlearned men are not able to set forth or report to the
judge the points and truth of their own causes. Besides if they were, yet is
not any judge so exquisite and perfect in the laws, or any man's wit so
pregnant, or memory so ready, as upon such sudden, to minister justice to
every man as his cause requires: therefore learned lawyers, as Counselors,
Doctors, Attorneis, and Proctors, are necessary and fit men, to open, argue,
and debate causes, whereby the judge may see more clearly, who has wrong, and
who has right, and be called to mind by their motions, what sentence or
judgment is fit to be given betwixt them. And further, if the parties should
plead their own cause, such might be the skill and subtlety of the
wrong-doer, and the simplicity of him that desires redress or recompense,
the judge being ignorant De veritate facti, for want of information might
approve the wicked, and condemn the innocent: wherefore I say again and
again, that Counselors, Doctors, Attorneis, Proctors, yea, and Sollicitors,
and the officers used in and about the execution of law and justice, are fit
men, necessary, and profitable in a Christian common weal. But for a
Petti-fogger, it is a word of disdain, I know no such calling allowed in the
law.

And whereas you speak of delays and shifts used by lawyers, whereby they
hinder and undo many; you must understand, that seeing the causes and suits in
this land are many, as is aforsaid, and seeing there is a prioritie of one suit
before another, in regard of the commencement thereof, and therefore also must
needs be a prioritie in the proceeding therein, and likewise also in the
hearing and determining of the same, every one being heard in his course, some
competent and reasonable time must therefore be allowed unto every cause, for
the continuance thereof. But if there be any that profess the law, that are
either so unskillful and unlearned that they cannot council their clients for
their best expedition, or so couetously bent, and so addicted to gain and
lucre, that they will for their own benefit, protract and delay any man's
cause, (as amongst many, of what degree or calling soever, there are some bad)
seeing there are others (God be thanked) a great many, that are conscionable
and honest, and again learned and wise; if any fall into the hands of the
former unlearned or ungodly lawyer, it is to be accounted his own folly, for
that he, when it was his own election to retain whom he list, would make
choice of such a one, when he might as easily and with as small cost, have had
him that had bin learned and godly. But in deed commonly the fault is in the
clients themselves, who are so cruelly and spitefully bent, that what lawyer
soever they have, they will themselves seek infinite ways and devises to
delaie their suits, and to detain their adversaries a long time in trouble and
expense of law: insomuch as I have credibly heard of some, who knowing their
cause to be unjust, and yet also knowing themselves of wealth and ability to
exceed those against whom they have dealt, and therefore meaning by reason of
their wealth to suppress the truth, and by long delays so to impouerish their
adversary, as they should never be able to bring the cause to hearing, have in
the bitterness of their heart, and in the heat of their fury, uttered these
words; I will not leave him worth a great. I will make him dance the beggars
galliard before I have done with him, with such other cruel and unchristian
speeches. And these and such like minded men, for the better effecting of this
their wicked intention, labor and endeavor to seek unto themselves such
lawyers as will sit their humors: whereupon if God for the hardening of their
hearts, do send them unto to such a one, then they have their desire: if
otherwise they light upon such a lawyer that will not favor nor further that
their extreme bitterness and cruelty, then they themselves partly by wrong
informations given to their lawyer, and partly by other subtle and secret
practices, find out the means to delay and lengthen their suits, and to hold,
detain, and keep both themselves, and their adversaries, in long and tedious
actions, to the poor men's great decay and impouerishment, if not to their
utter undoing. By means whereof, the law is evil spoken of, and the lawyers
are slaundered, whereas indeed the law it self is good and holy, and may be
well used, and so is by a great many of the professors thereof; and when it is
otherwise administered, the fault is not in the law, but in the practisers
thereof, that are defective either in learning or conscience, but most commonly
in the clients themselves.


Parishioner. As you thought me to speak ill of Lawyers upon spleen only, by
reason of some grieuance received by or from some of them, so I think that you
speak well of Lawyers, by reason of some favor or good done unto you by some
Lawyer, as partly it appears by the dedication of your book. There were many
better men, and greater in account, more likely to gratify you than a Lawyer.


Pastor. Esa. 15, 20.21.
As he that justifies the wicked, is subject to woe, so he that condemns the
godly, is subject to woe: as it is a sin to arrogate for him that deserves
ill, so it is a sin to derogate from him that deserves well: you can not
deny but all that I have said concerning the law, and the professors,
generally is true. And whereas you seem to charge me with some benefit past
which makes me partial, I confess that even he was the pleader, and that by
his learning and pains (yea, without fee) he delivered me from a greedy
Informer, who through his subtlety and my simplicity, had condemned me in a
hundred marks more than I was worth: to which worshipful Lawyer I dedicate this
my labor, thinking it a sufficient gratification, in that it pleases him to
patronize the same, and me also, who as a poor Dove among Kites and Crows, am
thrown into the world into many dangers, and hard adventures; whose love and
faithful friendship toward me, I assure my self, is sealed and delivered;
whose readiness likewise to help all such as are helpless, if it be desired,
and whose uprightness in his profession toward all, has many years
appeared. And shall I suffer this man to be obscure? no, no, I will not; no, he
is not; no, if I, you, and 1000 more with us, both took in hand to dim that
he has done, the saints in earth would praise him, and the angels in heaven
would pray for him, that God might regard and reward him.

Carpturum alios immaculatum esse oportet.


Parishioner. For my question I rest satisfied. Now therefore I pray you what
is your opinion and judgment of Physicians? they rob men of their livings,
and spoil men of their lives; under the pretense of doing good, they heal few
and kill many.


Pastor. Physic is a preserver of health, Hipocrates De art.
and the repulser of sicknesses. Physic is a putting too, and a taking from;
that is to say, It does add, increase, strengthen, and augment good blood;
where it is decayed, by age, by imperfection of nature, by surfait, or by any
other means howsoever: and it does take away, cut off, kill, destroy, purge, or
by some such way, it does discharge the body of that which is over and above
nature, as of chollor, rheum, corrupt blood, impostumes, etc. The body of man
is subject to infinite diseases, and therefore through the corruption thereof,
it is likened by the holy Ghost, Esa. 6, 4.
to a filthy clout, or the cloth of a menstruous woman. Exo 9.9.17, 2. King.
1, 2. 2. Cron. 11, 14.
It is subject to the leprosy, to the pluresie, to the dropsy, to the
frenzy, to the palsy, to the botch, to the canker, and to other infinite
diseases, which will soon infect, ouerrunne, and destroy the body, if it be
not aided, maintained, supported, and defended by Physic: whence our savior
Christ said, The whole have no need of the Physician; as well to confound the
opinion of those that trusted in their own righteousness, as also to show that
it was a matter necessary and requisite, Mat. 9, 22.
that he which was sick should seek to the Physician. Answerable to this,
Eccle. 38, 1. etc.
Jesus the grandfather, and Jesus the nephew, gave in commandment highly to
esteem, and reverently to account of the Physician, with this great word,
Honor, which indeed is a word of great dignity, and commonly yielded to Lords
of nobility. Honor (says he) the Physician, with that honor which is due unto
him, which is as much to say, He deserves to be honored, it does pertain unto
him; it is his right and his duty to be had in aestimation, and to be
reverenced, not because it does any way good unto him, not that he has any use
of thy honor, reverence, or service, but in respect of thy own necessity,
for thine own need; thou shall have continual occasion to use him, Honor
therefore the Physician, because of necessity. And for another reason he is to
be honored, because the Lord has created him, the Lord has ordained and
constituted him forthy sake, and for thy good: as thou will not be found to
neglect the good gifts, the good ordinances of almighty God, Honor the
Physician. A third reason enforces this honor, to weet, his study, his
calling and his profession, which comes of God, his majesty has created it,
he it is that has instituted and ordained it. If Physic be not the ordinance
of Almighty God, I would feign know what use have we of diverse roots, herbs,
flowers, trees, plants, licours, and many other things, in beasts, in fowls,
in fish, and creeping creatures, whose effects are very strange and
wonderful, all working the health and preservation of man's body? or were they
created in vain? we have in our knowledge no other use of the Rose, than the
sight, the sap, and the savor, yet it has many other excellent uses and
effects, simple, or compounded. What shall be done with the Toad, the Ant, the
Adder, and such small things? all the creatures of God are good, Genesis 1, 31.
as he himself veresieth, and as the proof thereof plainly shows. They are
to be used in their season, and to be taken in their kind, so shall we have
use and comfort by them. Luke the Evangelist, was a Physician in Antioch, whom
Christ would not have accounted, much less appointed for an Apostle, if his
profession had not been lawful and necessary. And why shall I stand coloring
of pure Corrall? or preserving of pure Ciuet, that will never leese his savor?
as the one will not receive to it, and the other will not leese from it; even
so Physic is so exquisitely excellent, that it need not have any counterfeit
help: and the other have their commission so lawful, that they cannot be
condemned, nor justly disdained. Nature and Necessity are two handmaids that
attend upon Physicians, the one enforced to seek their help, the other
enforced to yield the^ their guerdon and reward. As it is to be proved by Gods
word, damnable sin for a man to kill himself with fire, water, sword, or with
such like; so is it sin for a man to destroy himself in not seeking after
Physicians and Chirurgions, when time and opportunity is offered for recovery.
As men may be too careful in seeking after Physicians to remove the diseases
of their bodies: so may they be too too careless in seeking after Christ, to
remove the sins of their souls. Whence comes all manner of infirmities and
diseases of the body? comes it not from the sins of the soul? All the
inconveniences, dangers, Pro. 18, 7. Iere. 26, 19. Eze. 18, 4. Mat. 17, 26.
miseries, troubles, and wretchedness whatsoever upon the body, comes as a
punishment for the sin of the soul. Thence comes the original, thence comes
the cause. A good Physician or Surgion will first remove the cause, ere he
begin to heal, even so he that enterpriseth his health, must first of all go
unto Jesus Christ, the Physician of the soul, that the cause may be removed,
then Physic has virtue and power to heal, and not before. All power of
healing and doing good, proceeds from him. As the virtue attractiue, to draw
Elisha from his work, was not in Elias cloak, 1. King. 19, 19.20.
but in the power of the word: even so the virtue of healing is not in the
Physicians, nor any thing they take in hand, but in the Lord of life. From the
most high comes healing; Eccles. 38, 2.3.4.
the Lord has created medicines, God has given men knowledge, that he might be
glorified in his wonderful works. Men may not seek to Physicians, (nor blame
them if they be not healed) when they must seek to God; neither may they seek
to God, when they should seek to Physicians. The best Physician cannot heal,
where God sets not to his hand, Luke 8, 43.
therefore blame them not. As for their lives and conuersations, to speak
truly, and in the fear of God indifferently, I take them for the most part to
be men most civil in their behavior, chaste in their bodies, moderate in their
diet, and most religious in the service of almighty God. And so I end for the
Physician, desiring God to increase his graces in them, and to bless their
labors in others. Their cause is good.

Vi^um hoc gestit veritas,
ne ignoranta damnetur.
Men do hurt and endamage themselves, by committing their bodies into the
hands of such as are not warranted by the degrees of learning to be Physicians
indeed. If you adhibit any credit to my council, be sure to know the knowledge
and the conscience of the Physician, before you commit your life into his
hands; every one cannot heal a sore, that can make a salve: so every one is
not a Physician, that makes the profession.


Parishioner. You have said well for the Lawyer and the Physician, now I pray
you what is your judgment concerning preachers and ministers? for all the
world says, they feed themselves with the sweat of other men's brows. Whilst
they are busied with the cares of their wives and their children, they starve
the souls of Gods people: and their ill life marres all.


Pastor. YOu blame the ministers for neglecting their charge, and for their ill
life and conversation; you make no exception, you conclude all and every one
within the compass of your condemnation, as the Pope does comprehend all
England within the compass of his curse. The Elder that is fullest of pith, is
smallest of strength; the empty Caske will give a great sound; and the bird
Taurus has a great voice, but a little body; even so you, and such like, have
great will, you have many great words, but God be thanked, no power to hurt.
And again, that which you allow, is ill; that which you mislike, is good;
because you have no knowledge to judge according to truth, you have no
conscience to judge according to charity, and you have no place of office
publicly to judge according to justice. Your accusing of others, is but the
excusing of your self; your meddling with the ministers, shows that you cannot
away to be reproved; you hate to be reformed, as the holy Ghost witnesses
saying, Ioh. 12, 35. 1. Cor. 3, 1.2 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2. Pet. 2, 1. John. 2, 1.
He that walks in darkness, hates the light; meaning that such as live
lewdly and lasciuiously do hate them that live godly and honestly. A matter
very strange to be showed, and hard to be believed, that vice should hate
virtue, or that the sheep should control the shepherd: therefore Christ
foreseeing it, answers by way of interrogation, 2. Cor. 6, 14.15.16.
What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? what communion has
light with darkness? and what concord has Christ with Beliall? wherein his
divine majesty does show the ods, the difference, the contrariety, the
debate, and the inequality that is between the right and the unright; between
the ignorant and the learned; between Atheists, Epicures, and such like, and
the true followers of Christ. The unrighteous, the open and the obstinate
sinner, cannot away with the godly and sinceere man; the ignorant can not away
with the learned; the base-borne cannot like with the noble, and it is too
true, that the careless and unconscionable livers, will shun and avoid the
company of the members of Christ. You, and the rest of your fellow brethren,
and partners, have no other quarrel to the ministers of God, but that they
also do disdain, shun, and avoid your companies; there is such inequality
betwixt you and them, that they admit not of your favor, neither do they at
any time fear you. Therefore I need not study to answer your frivolous
questions particularly, but rather in few words to reprove, and with plain
terms to reprehend your baiardly boldness, in meddling with such as are so
far above your self, as you are herein beyond the measure of modesty, and
christian duty. Every base and beggarly fellow, every lewd and wanton
mistres, every profane and rusfianly ge^tleman, every swearing
swash-buckler, and many such as make show of honesty, and conscience of
religion, in their feasting, in their gaming, in their riding, in their going,
yea, in all their affairs, they will be meddling and sensuring of ministers.
Some will blame them because of their conversation, some will despise them
because of their wives, and some will slander the^ because of their apparel
some will disdain them because they be poor, some will scorn them because
they be rich, and some will condemn them because they be covetous; some
cannot like them because they preach often, some will disco^mend them because
they preach seldom; and some will not favor them because they preach too
plain and easy, and some will not love them if they preach too prosound and
deep; some will not love them if they pray for Bishops, some will not love
them if they pray not for Bishops; some cannot away with Latin, Greek, and
Hebrew, some cannot away without it; and some can not away with neither. Alas
poor silly souls, of all sorts the greatest, some mislikes you, scorns you,
disdains you, hates you, and condemns you. O how few are there that likes you,
and loves you? But be of good cheer, (says Christ) I have ouercommed the
world, Ioh. 15, 20.
The servant is not greater than his master, if they persecuted me, they will
also persecute you, all these things will they do unto you for my names sake.
1. Cor 15 14. to 21.
Blessed are ye, etc. rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven.
If our reward were not with God, then were we of all men most miserable.


Parishioner. You are beholding to your self, and the rest of your brethren
have cause to praise you, and to pray for you. You have condemned me as a man
of no knowledge, of no conscience, and of no charity, and you have made others
my partners and assotiats, that said nothing at all to you, to justify your
self and all sorts of ministers good and bad, and yet nevertheless you assure
your selves of Gods blessing in earth, and of aeternall favor in heaven.


Pastor. Good Sir, I have said nothing of my self, nor for my brethren but
that the Lord has said and warranted out of his holy word. He it is that
condemns all such as you are for meddling with other men's matters, 1 Thessalonians.
3.11.
the holy Ghost councelleth you to be quiet, to meddle with your own
business, and to work with your own hands. Vziah was stricken dead when he
did but set his hand to stay the Lord's Ark from falling; 2. Sam. 6, 6.7.8.
and shall you remain alive, yea and unhurt, that put your hands, not to help,
but to hinder the Lords proceedings? Mat. 18, 1.2.3.
Christ did promise a woe and a heavy judgment against him that offends a
little one in the church, or in the society of the faithful; and shall you
escape this woe and heavy judgment, that maliciously, wilfully, and
tirannously, do entreat and handle such as are great, such as are the
ministers, the disposers of Gods secreats, and his heavenly Ambassadors? no,
no. I speak not in the commendation of any such as deserve condemnation, much
less did I warrant their justification or blessing from the Lord. If their
conversation be evil, and their doctrine good; take the one, leave the other:
their doctrine does belong unto you, their life and conversation to themselves.
You shall answer for their doctrine, and not for their doing. The Scribes and
Pharisees were counted hipocrites, painted Sepulchers, and deuourers; Ma. 23,
1.2.
yet Christ willed the people to hear them, so long as they sat in Moses
chair, meaning so long as they preached truly, and taught the law of Moses.
And I pray you is the gospel of Jesus Christ more defiled, and of less force
by the ill demeanors of the ministers, than the law was through the vileness
and abominations of the Pharisees? no, no, so great a majesty, and so great
might the preaching of Gods word has, as it cannot be diminished by the
vileness of the vilest, nor augme^ted by the virtue of the most holiest: and
therefore it is a question generally concluded, That a vicious minister,
preaching the Gospel truly and continually, does more good and less harm in
the church of God, than an honest minister and good housekeeper, that cannot
or will not feed the souls of his people, with the continual preaching of the
word. As a seal of copper, or of wood, if it be well graued does make as good
an impression in wax, as a seal of silver or of gold: so the holy word of God
being well divided and delivered by an ungodly man, does make as good an
impression in the souls of the saints, as if it were divided and delivered by a
most honest and an upright man. God forbid, yea, let it be far from any man
to think, much less to teach, that the vileness of the minister should
derogate any working, or withhold any force or effect from so great a majesty
as the word of Reconciliation, for then Lord what good shall it do? all men
are sinners, we have all sinned, we have done amiss and dealt wickedly. We can
not exclude the ministers out of this number. S. Paul speaking of the
Sacrament of Christ's death, 1. Cor. 11, 29.
says; Whosoever eats and drinks thereof unworthily, eats and drinks
his own damnation. Is he accounted an unworthy receiver in respect of the
minister? or in respect of himself? if it be in respect of the minister,
because he is vile, etc. then must you make God contrary to himself, who
says, Deuteronomy. 24, 18. 2. King. 14, 6. 2. Chro. 2.25, 4.
The soul that sins shall die, and shall nor bear the iniquity of
another: and then you must also grant, that faith in the receauer has no
effect; which is contrary to S. Paul, 1. Cor. 13.5.
who wills all men to search and to prove themselves for the same, thereby to
make them worthy. If the receiver be counted unworthy, in respect of
himself, then it follows that the receiver either good or evil, does not
help nor hurt in the administration of the sacrament. As the virtue attractiue
to draw iron, is not in the iron, but in the A damant, even so the virtue and
power of salvation lies not in the minister, but in the power of the word,
wrought by the spirit. As the rain and the snow comes down from heaven, and
returns not thither again, but waters the earth and makes it fruictfull:
even so (says the Lord) my word shall not return unto me void, Esa. 55.10.11.
but it shall accomplish that which I will, and it shall prosper in the thing
whereto I sent it. Thus much briefly concerning the truth and dignity of the
word preached. Wherein I have said nothing to excuse, much less to justify
the unlawful and dissolute lives of some ministers, and least of all to
pronounce them a blessing, as you objected unto me. I must leave them as the
builders of an Arc for Noah's safeguard, Genesis 7, 1.
who notwithstanding were drowned themselves. Exo. 25, 8.10.11.
I must leave them as the curious workers of the sanctuary for the Lord to
dwell in, and were shut out themselves. I must leave them as the makers of the
Arc, Nehe. 3.1. etc.
the Tabernacle, and the mercy seat upon it, to shadow and to defend others
and not themselves. And I must leave them as the several builders of Salomons
temple, and were not of the temple of God themselves. They are like to the
Jews, who cried, The Temple of the Lord, Iere. 7.4.5.
The temple of the Lord, this is the Temple of the Lord; when they most of all
profaned and defiled the Temple of the Lord. They are like unto the great and
learned Philosophers, who with the effects of Gods spirit, taught al men the
right way; who wanting the graces of the same spirit, could not find the good
and perfect way for themselves to be saved. And they are like to them of whom
S. Paul speaks, Romans 2, 17.18. to 24.
that were teachers, instructers, and preachers to others, for the avoiding of
adultery, stealth, and such other sins, when indeed they were the same
themselves, and so by the judgment of God, Castawaies. 1. Cor. 9, 27.



Parishioner. I pray you tell me how are those ministers to be excused in this?
If any of their parish offend them, they will preach it in the pulpit. They will
rather than fail take a place of scripture fit for such a purpose, and one
thing often. This is a very foul fault, and I assure you it is misliked of
many, and besides forsooth they take so much upon them, as no man in the parish
can be their betters, and unless he be a judge or a justice at the least, not
so good as they.


Pastor. Here you offer me occasion to speak infinitely, and world without end,
of two things especially which you mislike in the ministers; one is their
vnorderlie preaching, the other is their arrogancy and pride. Nevertheless I
will be brief.

2. Tim. 3, 6.
All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and it is profitable to teach, to
improve, to correct, and to instuct in righteousness.

Here you see that the scripture has sour profitable uses, and therefore it
may be divided into four parts, which are dispersed here and there. The first
for doctrine, necessary to confirm a man in that good he has begun. The
second is to confute false opinions and heresies. The third to rebuke the vile
and filthy conuersations of men. And the fourth is to comfort the weak, the
wearied, and troubled conscience. It remains in the discretion of the
disposer hereof, to take such a place, one or more of these, as the state and
condition of his people requires. As he is said to be an unskillful Physician,
that ministers a purgation to cleanse idle humors, when he should minister a
potion or ointment to strengthen and comfort them: even so is he said to be an
unskillful and an indiscreet Preacher, that takes in hand to comfort and to
strengthen his auditorie, when they should be sharply reproved and corrected.
The true deriuation of an Orator, and right use of a Preacher, is to make
choice of such matter for the congregation, as is easy, profitable, and
necessary. All the books of God have their particular uses, as the people
ministers occasion, and specially the Epistles of S. Paul, and the Sermons of
the Apostles. There is no one in the congregation among many thousands, but
shall hear himself as it were directly pointed at, and spoken unto. But now
the guilty consciences of many, will apply it to the malice or vndiscreetnesse
of the Preacher, as if the Preacher speak against drunkenness, then the
adulteror will blame him; if he speak of usury, then the covetous man will
blame him; and if he speak of counterfeit and dissembling mourners, then he
that wears a mourning cloak or gown will blame him. There is such affinity and
alliance betwixt these and such like sins, as was betwixt Hipocrates Twins,
when the one wept, the other wept, when the one laughed, the other laughed, and
when the one was touched, the other was touched, ones joy was another joy, and
ones grief was an others griese. Even so is it with the wicked and reprobate
impes of the devil, speak against one, speak against all; touch one, touch
all, so wise they are in their generation, as they will not say, The Preacher
or the Priest spoke against me, but he spoke against such a one. Wherein they
take away from the word, the majesty due unto it; which is to reprove all men;
wherein they do disanull to themselves the graces that they should receive by
it, which is to comfort all men: and wherein they do arrogate to themselves a
more special interest to the word, than indeed is due unto them. As there is
no law by the which a Preacher for his doctrine may be punished, if he speak
not against the Prince, so there is no divinity by the which a Preacher is
particularly prescribed, or generally ordered, if he speak not against God,
the mighty Prince of peace.

I will turn my self to the censures and judgment of the learned in this
point.

AD pudorem cogendus est qui malefacit, hoc fit, quando malefactum aperte ac
disertis verbis obiscitur delinquenti. Alioqui vt est apud Isocratem, in
oratione ad Philippum Macedoniae Regem.

Quod omnibus dicitur, nemeni dicitur.

Vnde fit vt generales istae castigationes vitiorum tam parum promonent hodie
in Ecclesia. Musc. in Mat. 14, page 4, 18,
Nam nemo pudore afficitur, propterea quod nemo nominatim corripitur.

Baptista Herodem reprehendit. 1 Su^mu^ Tira^num. 2 In faciem. 3 Aperte in
publico. 4 Diserte non licebit tibi.


Si quis vel potator est, vel auare agit, vel durius cum vxore aut familia
versatur, aut etiam aliquod aliud, quod non decet christianum, sectatur
studium: talis si venerit ad Pastorem, non debet recipi a Pastore, priusquam
pastor viderit emendationem. Non hic habebit rationem personae, sed ministerij
sui, non timebit inimicitiam, non odium, non amissionem facultatum, non
exilium, Hem. de Pastore page 166.
non mortem, sed Deum timebit, cuius vicem gerit, and Christum, pro quo
legatione fungitur.

Ambrosius excommunicauit Theodosium Imperatorem, cum in Thessalonicenses tam
grauem tyrannidem exercuisset. Pet. Mart. in loc. commu. de Magistratu 10. In
Iudic. 19. ad finem. Lege Necephorum eccl. hist. lib. 12, cap. 41. Lege lib.
13, cap. 34. and lib. 5, cap. 41.

Magnum discrimen est Dei sermones tacere, ob triplicem causam:

Vel propter Timorem. Pigritiam. Adulationem.


Hier. super illud, si dicente me ad impium.

Ars artium regimen animarum.

Greg. in Past.

In Arca erant Tabulae. Virga. Manna.


Sit discretio virgae quae seriat, Greg. 3.
Sit and consolatio baculi, quae sustentet.

Multo consilio and prudentia opus est Pastori, and mill vt dicitur occulis ad
speculandum vndique hebitudinem earum, quas gubernat animarum Chrisost. in
dialog. lib. 2.

Eadem sepius inculcanda. Non est fidelis ministri, prurietibus auditorum
suorum auribus seruire, and singulis conscionibus noui aliquid adferre in
medium: sed diligenter obseruare quid illis immineat mali quod vigilantur sit
precauendum; deque illo fideliter iterum atque iterum praemonere, etiamsi non
omnibus saepe iterata admonitio arrideat.

Decies repetita placebunt. Horat. eadem scribere vobis, Phil. 3.1.
me quidem non grauat, vos autem tutos, vel cautos reddit.

Eadem scribere, mihi quidem non pigrum, vobis autem necessarium; eadem
scribere vobis, me quidem haud piget, vobis autem tutum est.

Quapropter haud negligam vos semper commonere de his, tam etsi sciatis, and
confirmati sitis in praesenti veritate, etsi periti. Hem. 2. Pet. 1, 12.


Bis, ter, gloria, Dimosth.


Bis, ter, idem. Cicero in oratione.


Non vnum hodie, cras aliud, Chrisost. in Ioh. 13.
sed semper idem.

NOw concerning the pride and arrogancy of Preachers.

I would not willingly leave you in any thing unanswered, if happily it please
God by your repulse and shame others may walk more warely and wisely in their
own profession, and not to busy themselves in other men's callings.

Let there be an inquisition had, and a proclamation made. If there be any
minister that is a gentleman, either in regard of his birth, or in respect of
his degrees in learning, or else in consideration of his public place in the
commonweal, that does seek his own profit, and not the Lords praise; that
does desire his own gain and not the Lords glory; or that does exalt
himself above the lowest of the poor members of Christ, by virtue thereof,
when they should be humble; or that of envy or malice does for his revenge
draw the sword of Gods word against any man by private or public
administration, then let him be bound faithfully to do the service of Christ,
Phil. 1, 1.2. 2. Tim. 2, 1 Ki n. 19, 19. Mat. 9.9.
as S. Paul was. Let him be presently commanded to serve the Lord as Elisha
was; and then let him be enforced to forsake his accounts, as Matthew was; and
if he be not content to do this, and withal to be a Jew, 1. Cor. 9, 19.20.21.
to win the Jews; to be meek, to win them that are meek; and to use all
means to win some unto Christ: 1. Sam. 15, 8.9. to 26.
then let Gods spirit depart from him as it did from Saul; and then let his
place be given to another, Mat. 28, 3.4.5.6. Acts 1.15. to 26.
as it was from Judas; let him be choked and strangled to death, as a thief
and a murderer; and let his bowels be drawn, and his body be quartered for
the fouls of the air, as a traitor and co^spirator. 2. Tim. 3, 1.2 3. Phil.
2.5.6.
Christ made himself of no reputation, although worthy to be taken and
esteemed among the worthiest, yet he abased himself, etc. as he said; Mat 20
28.
I came not to be served, but to serve. He washed his disciples feet, when they
should have washed his. He paid tribute to Caesar, when Caesar should have
paid him tribute. Christ did it not to be praised of men, his praise was of
God; and he did it not to augment his own glory, for he had already the
fullness of the Godhead, but to throw down the pride of al men, and especially
of the ministers. He cared not what he did so he might win a soul. He thought
his time well spent, and his life well bestowed, if at the least he might win
some.

Let there another proclamation be made, and an inquisition had:

If there be any lawful Preacher, how poor soever, that does derogate from
the worthiness of his calling, the reverence, the duty, the aestimation, the
favor, the love, and the honor that is due unto him, for fear of men, or for
love of money, or does submit himself to my Lord or to my Lady, in any service
that is not beseeming and meet for so great and so stately a professor; then
after the first and second admonition let him be shut out from the society of
the Saints. Mat. 18 15. to 19.
Let him have no use of the word and sacrament. Let his goods be confiscated to
the use of the poor, and let his body be buried among the beasts of the field.

A minister is not a man basely to demean himself: so great is the majesty of
his message. A minister is not meet for the company of mean men, so great is
his calling: and a minister is not to be servant to a king, that will make him
servile. As the words of a lord Chancellor are said to be great because it
comes from the King: so the words of a minister are said to be great, Exodus 4,
because it coms from God. Thence the Preachers are said to be the mouth of
God, and their words a two edged sword. Reu. 19.
As fire and smoke comes out of the mouths of Locusts: so Gods judgments do
come from the mouths of ministers, by the preaching of the word. Joshua 1.
As God said to Joshua; Whosoever will not obey the words of thy mouth, shall
die: even so he that obayeth not the words of Gods holy ministers, shall surely
die. Almighty God has constituted and ordained the salvation of all men to be
received by the ministry of the word, therefore he has sanctified it, he
has beautified and adorned it with the use of excellent creatures, with the
adoration of Kings, with the service of all angels, and with the continual
presence of his own majesty. Cornelius was an excellent man, a man full of
moral virtues, yet the angel told him that he wanted one thing; the angel
might have told him that one thing, Acts 10, 1. to 48
had not Christ determined his perfection, his instruction, and salvation to be
received by the preaching of the word. The Eunuch was feign to admit of Philip
to preach unto him, and to baptize him. Acts 8, 28, to 40.
O the might and majesty royal of Gods most holy word! How may the disposers
thereof be lightly regarded? nay, by what reason, conscience, or law, may they
be abused? Will any man that has a son or a servant that is profitable unto
him in great matters, will he cast him off, deface him, and euilly entreat him?
no, no; but these men are profitable unto you in all things, both for this life
and for the life to come, much more then ought they to be accounted, by how
much the more they do profit you and prefer you. Naaman though a great lord
of king Arams court, with his horses and chariots and all his train waited at
the door for poor Eliseus. Obadiah a Lord of Achabs court, 2 King. 5, 15.
fell at Elias feet and said; Art thou my Lord Elias? The noble Shunamite fell
at Elishaes feet; and the great Lord of the Queen of Candaces court, 1. King.
18, 7 King. 4, 37,
thought poor Philip a fit and a meet man to ride in his chariot. This makes
plain the authority and the great worthiness of the ministers. Reu 25 8,
If the Prophets had this aestimation and honor, who were speakers of the law
and of Christ to come, much more now the ministers who are speakers of the
Gospel, and warranters that Christ Jesus is already come. As the Gospel is
to be preferred before the law, for the worthiness of it: so the ministers are
to be preferred before the Prophets for their worthiness. Kings scorning the
reproof of the Prophets, have bin defaced to the face of the world. 1. Chro.
18, 19.
The ministers have names of greater Emphasis, of greater accent and
authority, than Moses, Aaron, and the Prophets.

Here now (my good Parishioner) I make an end, with my hearty prayer to
Almighty God for you, and for all such as wander out of the way, that
henceforth you may walk worthy in your own calling, and grounding your own
foundation sure, least being troubled with other men's faults, your self be
sound guilty of slaundering Gods most holy word, being the instrument of your
salvation, by slandering the ministers of the same; to whose most merciful
direction, I humbly recommend you now and henceforth.


Qui pergit, que volt dicere, que non volt, audiet. FINIS.

