THE SVMME OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION: Delivered by ZACHARIAS VRSINVS in his
Lectures upon the Catechism autorised by the noble Prince FREDERICK, throughout
his dominions:

Wherein are debated and resolved the Questions of whatsoever points of moment,
which have been or are controuersed in Divinity.

Translated into English by HENRY PARRIE, out of the last and best Latin
Editions, together with some supply of wa^ts out of his Discourses of
Divinity, and with correction of sundry faults and imperfections, which are as
yet remaining in the best corrected Latin.

AT OXFORD. Printed by JOSEPH BARNES, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at
the sign of the Tygres head, 1587.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, HENRY EARL OF PENBROOKE, LORD HARBERT OF CARDIFF,
MARMION, AND S. QVINTINE, KNIGHT OF THE MOST NOBLE ORDER OF THE Garter, and
Lord President of WALES, Grace and peace, with increase of Honor.
IF in this time of trouble, and disorderly age of the world, it may not
seem, right Honorable, ouer-great boldness in me to press your Honor with
these my labors, who are already ouer-pressed with your own, which with
continual and incessant care and watchfulnes you undertake for the quiet and
repose of this our Church and Country: I shall humbly crave of your Honor to
lend a favorable eye unto this little work, and to reach your hand of
approbation unto it, that so being fenced with your honorable protection and
countenance, it may the more securely and freely put it self in the view, and
bear the face and countenance of others. The reasons and causes which have
induced me to presume thus far, are such as I make no doubt, but upon
declaration of them to obtain and find your Honor most ready and easy in
yielding your assent. For, were it that your ancient favor and good will
manifoldly extended to my father, who long since departed this mortality, had
not at all stretched to met his son, but had with him alone both lived and
died: Yet might not I, without some skar of impiety, commit that ever the
memory of that should die in me, the profit and pleasure whereof I knew in him
so long to live. But seeing it has further also, as I lately was given to
understand, so pleased your Honor, that this happy course of your favor should
not begin and end in one, but should continue and lineally run on; and that the
force and virtue thereof, should pass continuately from the root unto the
branches: much more blameable verily would be my silent forgetfulness, and
double would the fault be, where duty doubly is required. In which
considerations, if I should have made any distrust of your good acceptatio^, or
should any way have with-drawen this small present, by misdoubting the welcome
it should receive at your Honors hands: I might have been most justly
arraigned and condemned of an undutiful and ungrateful cogitation, being
without al either color of excuse, or shadow of pretense to free and acquit
me from it. And that especially, seeing the Author, whom I interpret, and the
matter which he contains, are both of that quality, as, if I stood to
wait and expect a fit time and a worthy person for them, no time might seem
fitter than this for which I should reserve them, no person worthier than your
self to whom I might present them.

For this being the time, and these the evil days, wherein Satan and the
powers of darcknesse have broken loose upon the chosen of God, and the brood
of Antichrist, hatched long ago, but never flush until now, have, by the
commission of their Dam, taken their flight out of their nests, in which they
roosted for a season, and are flowen in flocks abroad into all coasts and
countries christian, to charm with sweet, but false notes of heretical melody
the hearts of silly people, and the wits even of the Gallants of this world:
what greater opportunity and more fit occasion, in respect of these and the
like occurrences, could have offered it self unto me, or I have wished, for
the bestowing of either my pains on this Book, or this Book on my dear
Country? Which as it gives place to no Realm nor Region of the earth in the
constant love and fast embracing of the book of books the Volume of the
highest, and the blessed truth of God almighty: so is it not behind them in
being assaulted and shaken every way, what by the casts and complots of
forrainers, what by Devilish practices, conspiracies, and proditions of
Domesticals, that some-way at least it might be thrown down, clogged with a
yoke of servitude, and enthralled to the slavery of the man of sin.

For the better effectuating of which their purposes, and more cunning and
current bringing them to pass, how of late years, yea and days, many
fugitive persons of this our Country, ordained and sacred by their Superiors
to this good end, have made their return in swarms unto us with outlandish
minds and Doctrine, to inspire the people with heresy and rebellion: none so
far in any course of life removed and estrainged from public action, whose
ears have not been moved, and his very heart wounded with these tidings. No
time or season which they have omitted, no place, no creek, no corner in this
land which they have not sought out, no person from almost the highest
potentate to the lowest woorme, whom they have not felt, and, except he has
been too sound, sounded and wagged and lifted at too, that they might plant
and supplant, set and unset, root in and root up, D. Allen, in his Apology
of their two Seminaries; and in other his treatises of like tragedy.
and all, as one of their old whining Prophets soothly and solemnly with tears
full often tells the Christian world, to bring us home unto the lap of our
mother, holy Church, of which their Lord the Pope is holy father. Well may
he be her father, but then such a father doubtless has he been unto her, as
is recounted by ancient History Aruntius a Roman to have bin unto his virgin
daughter Medullina, Plutar. in Parallel.
with whom in the dark, rapt with a pang of drunkenness, he committed incest.
But were the Church of that remorse of conscience and resolute courage in
revenging herself for this spiritual villainy, as was that virgin for
suffering that corporal force and rauishment: She would burn within her
inflamed with a fiery zeal of holy indignation, and drawing out this
incestuous Roman, who has defiled her in the darkness of Idolatry, himself
drunken with the cup of fornication, would bring him unto the altar, even that
altar of the Lord, which he has made a witness of so many his hateful
pollutions and incests, and there slay him before God, for the appeasing of his
ire and wrath toward her, and for the washing away of this so grievous a blot
and high reproach of her Virginity.

The which that the poor seduced people of our land, may be the better
enabled, and more thoroughly animated to take in hand and put in execution,
who now as shaken and shattered reeds are carried and blown away with every
puff and blast, every breath and wind of Jesuitical mouths: I have, in
charitable regard and commiseration of their cases most miserable, taken into
my hands this learned Abridgement comprising in no great room the very full
body and course of all Divinity and Christianity, and opened the hidden
treasures thereof unto them in their mother-speech, that now no longer, (after
they are once brought to the light and knowledge of their whole duty, what to
God, what to their Sovereign, what to every man and their native Country they
must perform) they suffer themselves to be slocked away, by wily merchants,
from Christ their Master; neither stand in a mammering, as men rent in sunder,
a part here, and a part there, a part with Belial, and a part with Christ, a
part with Spain, and a part with England, a part with the Pope, and a part
with Queen Elizabeth: but all may in an unanimity of consent strive one way,
follow one Christ, live loially in their own Country, under their own blessed
Liege and Lady, with all prosperity.

Whose person then, in a work of so great moment and so good importance,
might I have preferred before, or matched in equal balance with your Honor,
to whose favor and patronage I should commend it: of whose zeal, wisdom and
industry most constantly showed in this cause of God, her Majesty, the Church
and public weal of this kingdom, thousands of those, who are now living in
those Provinces, over which you are placed, cannot but yield their testimony
to that, the fruit and benefit whereof they live and joy in, and which
deserves not only a present remembrance, but a perpetual registring and
recommendation to all succeeding ages.

In which most worthy and noble endeavors, as it has pleased God to make and
appoint you a chief and principal instrument for the continuance of his
Gospel, and for the eternising of his name and glory here amongst us: So
beseech I him, that it will please him so to make and appoint you still, and
with an enlarged bounty and liberality so to increase the riches of his
graces and gifts in you, that you may with strength go forward, continue, and
never give over in this holy and honorable race of your life, and in the
glorious quarrel of Christ and his spouse; until when in the end without end
you may reign with him in glory.

Your Honors most humble at command, HENRY PARRIE.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READERS HENRY PARRIE WISHES GRACE AND PEACE THROVGH IESV
CHRIST OUR LORD.
WHereas but a small and short remnaunt of days is allotted unto every of us to
try the hazard and adventure of this world in Christ's holy Merchandise, (yet
forty years, and the youngest may, the oldest must depart) I being subject to
this common case, and most certain uncertainty of our life; neither knowing,
if perhaps at this present my staff stands next the door: have been and am
desirous and earnest in this behalf, so to bestow all my possible endeavors
and labors in this my Lord and Masters trafique, as that neither I may return
unto him with a Talent in a napkin, and withal may leave behind me some poor
token and testimony of my love and duty toward him and his blessed Spouse,
with future posterity.

Which my desire and earnest deliberation struggling and striving so long within
me, until it had gotten the conquest of such shamefast and fearful motions,
wherewith men are well acquainted, who are at al acquainted with their own
infirmities: I was thereby at length drawn to this bold and hardy resolution,
as to commit something to the press, and so to the eyes of them, whose great
and sharp censures, I have ever with trembling thought of heretofore, and even
now would fly them with all willingness.

Wherefore also in respect hereof, and of the greennes of my age, so has the
flame and heat of my desire been slaked and cooled with the water as it were of
fear, wherewith I shake in mine own conceit: as I have not presumed to draw
any shaft out of mine own quiver, or to present the world with an untimely
fruit of so young a tree: but rather have made choice of a shaft out of the
Lords armory, framed by the hand and skill of the Lords workman, fit to make
the man blessed who has his quiver full of them.

If yet in this I have been presumptuous, if bold, if indiscreet, if foolish:
my brethren, for your sakes have I bin so: for your sakes have I bin
presumpteous, bold, indiscreet, and foolish, even for you and for your
children. The greater is my hope and trust, that these whatsoever my pains and
labors shall find favor and grace in your sights, and receive good
entertainment at your hands; because for you they have bin undertaken, and the
gains and commodity, that shall arise thereof (if by the blessed will of God any
shall arise) shall redound unto you and yours for ever.

It is a case lamentable, deserving the bowels of al Christian pity and
compassion, and able to cause the tears of sorrow to gush out and stream
down the face of a man, who is not frosen too hard in security and in an
uncharitable carelesnes: when he shall but lift up his eyes, and see the wast
and desolation of so many distressed souls, who in so many places of this our
land and country have bin and are daily either pined away and consumed to the
bone for lack of Gods susteinance, the bread of life, the word of God, the only
preservative of the soul; or, through the deceitful poison of that old
Sorceres and Witches Children, infected and baned unrecoverably. Alas poor
souls, fain would they have somewhat to keep life within them: and therefore
as famished and starued creatures, which have been for a space pounded up and
pin-folded in a ground of barrennes, debarred of al succor and relief, when
ever they may light of any thing that may go down the throat, be it as bitter
as gall, and as deadly as poison, they swallowe bitterness as sugar, and lick up
death as sweet honny. And yet, (I rue to speak it) such is the hard-hartednes
and brutish unnaturalness of many merciles men, if yet men, who have so flinted
their foreheads, seared and sealed up their minds and consciences in all
impiety: as that they have entered as it were into a league and bond with
themselves to forget Christ, never to know the man more, never to speak in
the name of Jesus; never to feed the flock of Jesus, whose souls are even as
great and dear to him, as the price they cost him. For, had not these men
swornlike Of Valennus the Ca^dinals religion, who (graceles man) abiur his
ecclesiastical voc^tion, to be^ lifted up t^ temporal Dukedom^ Sabellic.
E^nead. 10. li^
sons of the earth to possess the earth for ever, and to leave heaven and the
heirs of heaven, even the chosen of God, to God himself to look to: it were
incredible, naie, impossible were it, that after so many threats and warnings
from heaven, from earth, from God, from men, from their foes abroad, and their
frinds at home, they should not yet once, not once descend into a dutiful
consideration of this their heavy trespass, and so with a speedy industry and
assiduitie reenter and recover those their forsaken charges, which a long while
have languished and worn away for want of pasture, and ly now (the deer lambs
of Christ Jesus) stretched on the ground for faintnes, fetching their groans
deep, and their pantes thick, as ready to give over and to yield up the
Ghost. O Lord, are not thine eyes upon the truth? Ierem. 5.3
thou have stricken these men, but they have not sorrowed; thou have consumed
them, but they have refused to receive correction: they have made their faces
harder tha^ a stone, and have refused to return. Not the losses and
unsupportable calamities of Christ's people, not the miserable apostasy and
grievous falling away (woe to us therefore) of multitudes of the ignorant and
unlettered men from the Apostolic faith and the Church of Christ, not the
certain dangers and hazards of their own persons, Wives, Children, and
Kinsfolks (with all which rods of his fatherly chastisement God has lately,
in his justice tempered with surpassing mercy, visited them) can awake or rouse
them out of that dead and deadly slumber, whereby they have as much as in them
lies betrayed to the powers and forces of Satan Gods sacred enheritance, and
laid open the precious flock of Christ to the mouths and teeth of Woolues.

But would God the burden of this sin rested only on the necks of these
rechlesse persons, whose extreme barbaritie yet in letting, through their
profane absence, their harmless sheep to drop away by famine of the word,
has raised a louder cried and clamor against them in the ears of God, than
any we are able to make by our most just complaint in the ears of men. Another
swarm of Caterpillars there are, the very trash and rifraffe of our nation:
who deeming it a more easy life to say service in the church, than do service
in the house, and to stand at the altar of God, than to follow the plough of
their Master, have, like men of idle and dissolute quality, only moved thereto
in a lazy speculation, laid their wicked and sacrilegious hands on the Lord's Ark, irreverently entered, with shoes and all, into his Temple, taken his
undefiled Testimonies in their defiled mouths, disgraced, defaced, and
diffamed the glory and majesty of divine rites and mysteries, through their
beggarly entering into, and base demeaning themselves in so high an office. Gape
not these men, trow you, for new miracles to rain out of heaven? As if Christ
must needs for their sakes lay the foundation of his Church again, and call
again from the net, and the receipt of custom, and other trades of this world
such as he would dispatch abroad for this holy Message, that so these artisans
might be invested with Apostleships, Doctorships, and the rooms of Prophets, as
ready men after a nights sleep, or an hours trance to turn the book of God,
and menage the keys of Heaven. But my frind, be not deceived: awake out of
sleep, and dream no more. Zach. 13.^
Thou art no Prophet; thou art an husbandman, and taught to be an heardman from
thy youth up. Get away therefore with speed from the Lords house, if thou be a
cleauer, to thy wedge and ax if a hind, to thy Masters plough; but meddle not
with Gods affairs, least he break out upon thee and destroy thee.

But in vain spend I words to brass and Iron: who, though the Lord has held
in his hand for a long time the full viol of his wrath, and is now weary with
holding it any longer, and about to pour it out upon them for this their
horrible transgression; yet staggar they not a whit at it, but run on like
hu^gry companions with an eye only to the flesh pots, and so sell both
themselves and their people for a morsel of bread, and a mess of pottage to
the devil. Shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord? Ierem. 9.^
Or shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this? Yes doubtless, he,
who is able to muster the clouds and winds, and to fight with heavenly powers
against us, shall and will, if we leave not off to make such hauok of his
children, be avenged on us; he shall raise up the standard, and make the trumpet
blow, nether shall suffer the sight of the one to pass our eyes, nor the sound
of the other to forsake our ears, until destruction come upon destruction,
death upon death, plague upon famine, and sword upon both, to the utter
overthrow both of our selves and Country perpetually. Nay rather, O God, if
there be any place for mercy, (and why should we doubt of mercy with thee the
God of mercy?) look not upon this dross and filth wherewith thy holy house
has bin polluted, but sweep them out; but look, O Lord, with thy tender eye
of compassion upon thy silly people (for what have they done?) and stir them
up daiely for Pastors and Prophets wise and skillful men, whose lips may keep
knowledge, and whose hands may break unto them the bread of life.

Now, that this may have a more mature and happy success, I am humbly to
beseech and solicit (if so this my simple work come unto their hands) the
Reverend Fathers of this Land, to whom I acknowledge al duty and submission in
the Lord, and whom with all reverence I solicit in this the Lords cause, that if
their authority be not able to stretch so far as to the throwing out of these
dum, deaf, and blind watchmen out of Gods tabernacle, into which they have
been shuffled (against many of their Honors wills) by those accursed Simoniacal
Patrons, who have sodred and simoned the walls of their houses with the very
blood of souls: yet it may please their wisedoms to constrain and compel
these, wheresoever they shall find them in any of their Dioceses, to the reading
and diligent studying of those books which their own countrymen, moved with
mere pity toward them and their flocks, have painfully delivered unto them
in a tongue familiar and common to them all.

And if it shall seem so good and expedient to their Honors, to adioine these
my labors unto the pains and travels of many the servants of God who have
with great praise endeavored in the like matter on the like respects heretofore:
I make no doubt, but that out of this short, yet full Sum of Christian
Religion, God adding his blessing thereunto, they may in short time receive
such furniture and instruction, as they shall save both themselves and others,
who both else are in case to perish everlastingly. But if their feet will walk
on in the way of blindness, and themselves refuse to come out of the darkness of
ignorance into the bright light of Gods knowledge: yet will I not faint in hope
for Israel but will look when yet once again God himself shall smite on
rocks, and water shall flow out of them, that his people in this time of
drought may drink.

Even so, O God, for thy promise sake, and for thy troth of old plighted in
thy beloved Son unto thy chosen, open the rock of stone again, let again
the waters, the living waters of thy word flow out, and let the saving rivers
of thy Gospel run, and stop not, through al dry places of our Land, that
men and Angels may see the felicity of thy Chosen, and rejoice in the gladness
of thy people, and give thanks, and praise, and glory, and honor, with thine
inheritance, unto thy blessed name for ever.

A CATECHISM OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION.
1 What is thy only comfort in life and death?
THat both in soul, and body 1. Cor 6.19. 1. These. 5.10.
, whether I live or die Romans 14 8.
, I am not mine own, but belong 1. Cor. 3.23.
wholly unto my most faithful Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: who by his precious
blood most fully satisfying 1. Pet. 1.18. 1 John. 1.7. and 2.2.
for all my sins has deliue^ed 1. John. 38. Heb. 2.14.15.
me from all the power of the devil, and so reserueth John. 6.39.
me, that without the will of my hea^enly Father, not so much as a hair may
fall Mat. 10.30. Luke. 21.18.
from ^y head: yea all things must Romans 8.28.
serve for my safe^y. Wherefore by his Spirit also he assures 2 Cor. 1.22. and
5.5. Ephesians. 1.14.
me ^f everlasting life, and makes Romans 8.24.
me ready, and pre^ared, that henceforth I may live to him.

2 How many things are necessary for thee to know, that thou enjoying this
comfort may live and die happily?
Three Luke 24.47. 1. Cor. 6.11. Romans 8.16. Tit. 33.4.5.6.7 8.
. The first, what is the greatness John 9.41. Romans 3.
of my sin, and misery. The second, how I am delivered John. 17.3.
from all sin and misery. The third, what thanks I owe Ephesians. 5.10. 1. Pet.
2.9. and 3.10.11.12. Romans 6.11.12.13. Mat. 5.16. 2. Tim. 2.15.
unto God for this delivery.

There is a threefold order, or there are three parts of the study of
divinity.
THE first is a Catecheticall institution, or brief sum of Christian
doctrine, which is called a Catechism, and is a brief explication of the
general points of the same doctrine. This part is necessary. For both the
learned and unlearned ought to know the foundation of religion.

The second, a handling of common places, or common places, which contein a
larger explication of every point, and of hard quaestions, together with their
subdiuisions, reasons, and arguments.

The third, a diligent meditation of the scripture, or holy writ. This is the
highest degree, for which we learn all the rest: to wit, that we may come
furnished to the reading, understanding, and propounding of the holy Scripture.
Those former parts are taken out of the Scripture: and again common places do
lead us unto the Scripture, which is as it were a rule, by which they are
directed.

What a Catechism is.
A CATECHISM is a brief doctrine, framed for youth and the ruder sort,
containing in it the sum of the doctrine of the Law and Gospel, or of
Christian religion, which being delivered, is required again at the hands of
the auditors. It is so called of a Greek word, (...), which signifies to
resound, or to return a voice back again Eccho-like: because that children did
by mouth make rehearsal of those things which were asked them, and which they
had hard. Catechumeni in the primitive church, were those who learned the
Catechism: that is to say, such as were now of the Church, and were instructed
in christian Doctrine. Neophyti, or Nouices, were those who were but new come
unto the Church, so called from two Greek words, (...) and (...), which
signify a new plant. Of the Catechumenes there were two sorts. 1 Those who
first being of some years, whether of the Jews or of the Gentiles, afterward
came unto Christ, but were not as yet baptized. These were first instructed in
the Catechism, and afterward baptized, and admitted to the Lords supper. 2.
Those who were borne in the Church. That is, the Children of Christians. These
eftsoons after their birth, as being members of the Church, were baptized, and
after they were grown a little elder, they were instructed, and confirmed by
laying on of hands, and so dimissed out of the company of the Catechumenes,
so that it was lawful for them thence-forward to draw near unto the Lords
Supper.

This Catechizing doctrine has ever been in the Church. For in the old
Testament God himself in briefe-wise delivered the doctrine of the Law and
Gospel, the Decalog and the promises, as when he says, Walk before me, Genesis
17.1. Genesis 22.18.
and be thou perfect. Likewise, In thy seed shall al nations of the earth be
blessed. Now these things God would that Abraham and his posterity should
teach their Children, and their whole family: and therefore this doctrine was
framed fit for the capacity of Children, and the ruder sort. In the old
Testament furthermore there were also sacrifices, prayers, and other things, in
which the youth were instructed. In the new Testament, in the Apostles time,
there was likewise a Catechizing doctrine: as the author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews reports. Therefore, leaving the doctrine of the beginning of Christ,
Heb. 6.1.
let us be led forward unto perfection, not laying again the foundation of
repentance: that is the beginning of Christian doctrine, which comprehends
repentance and faith. These first beginnings or principles of Christian
doctrine are called in the same place the doctrine of baptismes, because they
that were of some years before they came to christ, were first instructed,
before they were baptized. It is called also the doctrine of laying on of hands,
because the Catechism was required at their hands (that they should be able
to answer in it) on whom hands were laid, that is to say, of the children of
Christians, who were baptized in their infancy. The parts of these rudimentes
of Christian doctrine, which they call Catechism, are the Law and the Gospel,
or (as it is said in the place before named unto the Hebrews) repentance and
faith in Christ. Semblably the fathers also write Brief sums of doctrine:
certain remnants of which we see as yet in Popery.

Now it behooves that the youth be by and by instructed in this doctrine, and
do know the foundation. 1. Because of the commandment of God, ^eut. 6.7.
Thou shall tell them unto thy children. 2. Because we are so corrupted, that,
except we be timely informed of the will of God, hardly, or never we learn to
do things acceptable unto God, and scarsely suffer ourselves with much ado to
be withdrawn from those errors which happily we drunk in, in our childhood. 3.
Because we are to hold the foundation, upon which we may build, and unto which
we may refer those things which we read.

4. Because God receaueth not into favor those, who by their judgment cannot
discern between things honest and dishonest (this is to be understood
touching those, who are able to receive instruction) neither does salvation
befall to those who have understanding, without agnising and profession of the
truth, or without faith and repentance. This is life eternal, John. 17.3. Romans
10.17.
that they know thee to be the only very God. And, faith comes by hearing.
Now no man believes in him of whom he has never heard. There must therefore
in the Church be delivered such a sum of doctrine, of which the ruder and
younger sort also may be capable. 5. Because of order and seemlines. For as the
Children of the Jews after Circumcision were instructed in the Law: so it
beseems us also after Baptism to instruct our little ones in the first
principles of Religion. 6 It is necessary also for the rude and younger sort
that they be severed and discerned from the Heathen. Objection. But we may
have an implicit or confused faith. Therefore no need of instruction.
Answer. No faith is without knowledge: therefore there is need of instruction.
Romans 10.14. John. 3.36.
How shall they believe in him of whom they have not hard? He that believes not
in the Son, the wrath of God abides on him.

OF THE HOLY SCRIPTVRE.
WE see all men, who at leastwise strive not to cast off all sense of
humanity, to embrace and profess some opinion of God and his will, as also
some manner of worshipping him, partly drawn from nature her self, and partly
by persuasion received: which is it that they call Religion. Now albeit al will
easily grant that to be the true Religion, which has been delivered by God
himself, neither will they seem to have come unto that degree of impudency, as
not to yield their assent unto God when he speaks of himself and of his own
will: yet notwithstanding, which may be that Religion delivered from above, will
never be agreed upon amongst men, until our Lord Jesus Christ returning to
judge the quick and dead, do decide the controversy. There are two opinions
of Religion. The one deemeth that in every Religion, which does lead a man
toward God, salvation is to be found. The just man shall live by his faith,
that is, every man (as these men interpret it) shall live by his faith, what
manner so ever it be. But this opinion is not true: because there is but one
true Religion: others are false, lying at variance with the true, according as
it is said: He that believes not in the Son, the wrath of God abides on
him. The other opinion thinks (and that rightly) that that is the true
Religion, in which God is truly worshipped, and that to be but one, and that
in it only men shall be saved. But the Church of God does certainly know, and
though all the Devils and wicked ones stamp at it, does profess that this is
the alone true and wholesome doctrine of God and his worship, which God
himself even from the creation of man delivered by his own voice to our first
fathers, and afterward would have to be contained in the scriptures by the
Prophets and Apostles. Since then whatsoever we may affirm of God and the
salvation of men, does depend on the written word, we will first consider these
four things as touching the Scripture, before we come to make recital what
our selves affirm.

1 What the holy Scripture teaches: or, how Christian doctrine is divided.

2 What Religion, delivered in the Scriptures, differs from other religions:
or how we ought to discern the true Church, and to disseuer her from other
sects.

3 From whence it appears, this Religion alone to be true and divine: and al
others to be forged.

4 For what cause no doctrine besides the holy Scripture is to be received
into the Church.

OF THE FIRST QVESTION.
What the holy scripture teaches.
THE argument and sum of the whole sacred Scripture cannot be more rightly,
nor more simply, nor with more perspicuous brevity comprised, the^ the holy
Ghost has comprised it in the ten commandments, and Creed, in which the
Articles of our Faith are rehearsed: which will be manifest enough if we
remember that the whole Scripture consists of two parts, the Law and the
Gospel. The Catechism of Heidelberg makes mention of three, of which yet the
first and the third appertain unto the Law. Others make five parts: The
Decalog or ten commandments, the Law, the Creed, the Sacraments, and prayer.
But the Decalog is the sum of the Law: and therefore is it to be referred
unto the Law, which is the former part. The Creed contains the sum of the
Gospel: and therefore must it be referred unto the Gospel, which is the second
part. The Sacraments are as appurtena^ces adioined unto the doctrine of the
Gospel: therefore also they are referred unto the second part. Prayer is a part
of the worship of God; and therefore to be referred unto the Law. There are
also who say, this doctrine of the Church is divided. 1. Into the doctrine as
touching God, 2. into the doctrine concerning his will, 3. into the doctrine
concerning his An argument from the division.
1. For all the doctrine concerning God is either of the nature, or of the will,
or of the works of God. Wherefore what the nature of God is, is taught in the
Law and Gospel. His will is seen either in his commandments, or in his
threatenings, or in his promises. Now his works either are his benefits, or the
judgments of his will, which are to be beheld in the creation, after the fall,
and in the restoring of man. Besides these, the sins also of men and devils
are described. And of all these we are taught, either in the Law, or in the
Gospel, or in both. Wherefore the Law and the Gospel are the chief general
heads which comprehend all the doctrine of the Scripture.

2 Christ himself has made this division, saying: So it is Testimonies.
and to rise from the dead the third day, and that in his name should be
preached repentance, and remission of sins. Now all this is contained in the
Law and the Gospel.

3 Because the Law and the Gospel do comprehend the

4 We do gather also the self-same argument of the holy From the definition of
the subject, to wit, the covenant.
that the books of the Prophets and apostles are called the old and new
Testament. For it is well known that here by the name of Testament is meant the
covenant. If then the covenant which is between God and the faithful be
described in these books, it must needs be that in them is declared what God
promises and what he does unto us, to wit, his favor, remission of sins,
his holy spirit, righteousness, and life everlasting, and preservation of his
Church in this life, by and for his son our mediator: as also what he
requires of us, that is to say, faith, by the which we receive his benefits:
and a life framed according to his commandementes, by which we declare our
thankfulness. And these are the things which are taught in the Law and Gospel.

5 Neither is the meaning of the holy Ghost otherwise, From the Subject
correlatiue of the covenant.
when in a word he says, that Christ is taught in the whole Scripture, and
that he alone is to be sought there. For Paul truly, as also the rest of the
Apostles, did not propose a maimed, but a whole doctrine unto the churches,
even as himself witnesses, Act. 20. That he kept nothing back, but showed
all the counsel of God concerning the Ephesians. And yet the selfsame
Apostle 1 Cor. 2. says: That he knew nothing but Jesus Christ, and him
crucified. And Cap. 3. That the foundation of the doctrine of the Church is
Christ alone: And that this foundation is common to the Prophets together with
the Apostles. Wherefore the Doctrine concerning Christ, is the sum and scope
of the Scripture, and the foundation laid by the Prophets and Apostles, on
which whosoever rely not, they are not stones of the Temple of God, that is,
members of Christ's Church.

OF THE SECOND QVESTION.
SINCE that we do understand, what is the Doctrine of the Church, Wherefore
true religion is to be discerned from others.
contained in the books of the Prophets and Apostles, to wit, the sound and
vncorrupt voice of the Law of God and the Gospel concerning Christ: easy it
is and necessary for us to discern it from al other religions. 1 Because of
the commandment of God, 1 Cause. The commandment of God. 1. John 5.39. 1.
Cor. 10. 1 Cor 6.17. Apoc 18.4. E^a^ 52.11. ^ John. 10. 2. ^^me. The glory of
God. 2. Cor. 6.15.
which ought to suffice us whether we know the cause, or no. Fly Idols, Depart
from her, my people. Be not yoked with Infidels. Be ye holy. Touch no unclean
thing, ye that bear the vessels of the Lord. He that brings not this
doctrine, bid him not, God speed.

2 For the glory of God: who as he will not have him-self coupled with idols
and devils: So also he will have his truth severed from lies, and his household
to be separated from the enemies of the Church, that is, from the children of
Satan. It were contumelious so to think of God, as that he would have such
Children, as persecute him. There is no agreement between Christ and Belial.

^. Our salvation.
3 For our own salvation, and that in two respects. 1. That the Church may be
known, that is, may be beheld, unto the which the faithful may join
themselves. Whereas if thou can not discern the true Church from the false,
thou shall ^ot know unto which to join thy self, and what manner of woorship
thou ought to follow. For God will, that all which are to he saved be
gathered unto the Church, according as it is said, Out of the Church there is
no salvation. 2. In regard of our comfort: that every one may know of what
kingdom they are, and whether they be of those unto whom God promises
salvation. This can thou not know, except thou can discern the true Church
from false churches.

4 The doctrine of other sects, 4. The confirmation.
and the difference is necessary to be known, that our faith and comfort may
be the surer, when as we see that to be in our Church, which ^is wanting in
others: likewise when as we perceive what is the cause, why they who make
profession of our doctrine he saved, but all other sects together with their
sectaries be damned.

5 Least we being deceived should embrace the doctrine of some other sect, for
true Religion. 5. The eschuing of danger. Act. 4 John. 10.
For there is no salvation in any other: neither among men is there given any
other name vn^der heaven, whereby we must be saved. Therefore is it said, He
that is the shepherd of the sheep, him do the sheep follow: because they
know his voice: and they will not follow a stranger, but they flee from him; for
they know not the voice of strangers. It is necessary therefore that the sheep
know how to discern the voice of the sheepherd from the voice of wolves,
according unto the rule 1. John. 4 Believe not every spirit. For Satan is
wont to transform himself into an Angel of light, and the most part of
Heretics do imitate the words of true teachers, whereas their opinions are
most different. And we oftentimes see that the ruder sort, when as they
perceive some similitude in some either rites or opinions, are easily lead to
believe, that the adversaries of the Church do profess either the same
religion with us, or not so bad as we make it: or since that they have some
thing common with us, that it is not much material whether they let pass some
things, or ad some others. Wherefore least some show of likeness may beguile
any man, it is profitable that the manifest and universal differences of the
true and false religions may be laid open to the sight.

6 Least we be partakers of the punishments which are to 6. Punishment.
come on such men. Apoc. 18.4.
Go out of her, that ye be not partakers in her sins, and that ye receive
not of her plagues.

7 That the wicked may be left vnexcuseable.
7 That the wicked may be left vnexcuseable. For albeit an acknowledging of God
is neither sufficient to salvation, nor true without the doctrine of the
Church: yet so much of God is manifested unto al men, as is sufficient to take
away al excuse from them for their impiety. For neither unto these very things,
which may truly be gathered concerning God by the light of nature and frame
of the world, do they give their assent, neither go they forward to seek a
more full knowledge of God, unto the which those things are as it were spurs
to prick them forward: but either they do quite and clean reject them, or
they draw them unto an other meaning, and stitch their own inventions unto
them, besides and against the testimony of the whole nature of things and
their own consciences. So that they are ignorant indeed of God, but that of
stubbornes and of purpose.

And this is the very cause why at length they are oppressed with desperation,
because they are convicted by the force of the truth to have stubbornely
sought after error and blindness.

The difference of this true doctrine from others.
1 This doctrine was delivered from God: other Sects are sprung from men, and
have been invented by Devils.

2 True Religion has firm testimonies, divine, such as quiet consciences, The
Law by nature known, yet darckened.
and convince al other Sects of error.

3 In the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles is delivered the whole Law of
God, rightly understood and vncorrupt: and both the Tables of the Law are
perfectly kept. As for other Sects, they cast away the principal parts of Gods
Law, that is to say, the doctrine concerning the true knowledge and worship
of God, which is contained in the former Table of the Decalog: as also they do
reject the inward and spiritual obedience of the second Table. That little
good and true which they have is a part of the commandment concerning the
discipline contained in the second Table, or concerning the outward and civil
duties toward men.

The Gospel by nature not known.
4 The whole Gospel of Christ, and that rightly understood, is in the true
church alone taught, and in this true doctrine alone is it contained. Other
sects either are clean ignorant of it, as the Ethnickes, Philosophers, Jews,
Turks, who also are as very enemies of the Church: or they do patch some
little part of it out of the doctrine of the Apostles unto their own errors, of
which part yet they neither know nor perceive the use, as the Arrians, Papists,
Anabaptists, and al other Heretics, of whom some concerning the person, others
concerning the office of our mediator, maintain errors. Al these, though they
arrogate unto themselves the title of the Church, and profess the name of
Christ: yet (since that they depart from that only foundation of the Church
which is Christ, that is, since they do not acknowledge Christ either to be
true God, or true man, neither do seek for righteousness and salvation wholly in
him) they are not the members of the true Church not so much as in outward
profession, as it is said, 1. John. 4. Every spirit which confesses not that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God: and this is the spirit of
Antichrist.

The difference of this true Doctrine from Philosophy.
It is true that we study Philosophy, and not the Doctrine of other sects:
but yet there is a very great difference between these two Doctrines. 1.
Philosophy is wholly natural: but the principal part of this doctrine (that
is, the Gospel) is revealed from above even from God. 2. Only this doctrine
declares the Gospel: Philosophy is quite ignorant of it. 3. The Doctrine of
the Church shows the originals of our miseries: Philosophy does not so. 4
This doctrine whereas it does assure us of eternal life, it does minister
comfort unto our consciences, and shows us the way how to wade out of
dangers: Philosophy teaches us not so much as this. 5. Of this we are taught
the whole Law: Philosophy lets pass the chiefest parts. Indeed
Philosophy contains two parts profitable for man's life, as Logic,
Mathematikes and others which God would not deliver in this doctrine: But as
concerning this doctrine, Philosophy has but a little part of the Law, and
that obscurely, and that taken out but of a few precepts of the Law. It has
certain common comforts: those that are not common it has not, as being proper
unto the Church. Common comfortes are these. 1 The providence of God, or the
necessity of obaying him. 2. A good conscience. 3. The woorthines of virtue.
4. The final causes or the ends which virtue proposes. 5. The examples of
others. 6. Hope of reward. 7. A comparing of euentes: because a less evil is
compared unto a greater. Those comforts which are not common but proper unto
the Church, are, 1. Remission of sins. 2. The presence of God in miseries
themselves. 3. Our final delivery.

Certain notes or marks, by which the Church is distinguished from others.
The marks, which distinguish the Church, or the professors of true doctrine
from others, are these. 1. Purity of doctrine. 2. The right use of the
Sacraments. 3. Obedience toward God and his doctrine, both in life and
manners. Many times truly great vices do grow in the Church, but they are not
maintained, as falls out in other Sects. For the true Church is the first
her self that does comprehend and condemn them, before any other. As long as
this remains, so long remains the Church.

OF THE THIRD QVESTION.
Whence it may appear that this Religion alone was delivered of God which is
contained in the Scripture.
GOD in the very creation of the woorld put this bridle in the mouth of all
reasonable creatures, that no man without extreme and manifest impudency, such
as was the Devils in paradise, durst say that any thing, if it were once
apparently known to have been spoken or commanded by God, might be called
into question, or that any man might refuse to obey it. Here-hence are those
things so often inculcated in the Prophets, Hearken O heavens, and hearken O
earth, For the Lord has spoken. Thus says the Lord. The word of the Lord
came to Esaias, Ieremias, etc. Since therefore it appears that the books of
the old and new Testament are the words of God, there is no place left of
doubting whether that be the true Religion and doctrine which is contained in
them. But whether these books were written by divine instinct, and by what
proofs and Testimonies we are certain of so great a matter, this is a
question not to be let pass of us. Wherefore this question is necassary.
For except this above all other things remain steadfast and immovable, that
whatsoever we read in the books of the Prophets and Apostles, does as truly
declare the will of God unto us, as if we did hear God openly speaking to us
from heaven: it cannot choose but that the very foundation and whole certainty
of Christian Religion must be weakened. Wherefore it is a consideration worthy
those who are desirous of the Glory of God, and do seek for sure comfort, to
enquire whence it may appear unto us that the holy Scripture is the word of
God. To this question now long since answer has bin made by the Papists, that
forsooth it is not otherwise certain, The first part. The authority of the
Scripture does not depend of the Church.
then because the Church does confirm it by her Testimony. But we, as we
neither reject nor contemn the Testimony of the true Church, so we doubt not
but their opinion is pestilent and detestable, who often say that the holy
Scriptures have not their authority elsewhere then from the word of the
Church.

For first, wicked is it and blasphemous to say, 1. Reason. The reproach of God.
that the authority of Gods word depends of the testimony of man. And if it
be so, that the chiefest cause, why we believe that the scriptures were
delivered from heaven, be the witness of the church, who sees not that heerby
the authority of man's voice is made greater, then of the voice of God? For he
that yields his testimony unto an other, so that he is the only or the
chief cause, why credence is given unto the other, out of all doubt greater
credit is given unto him, then unto the other who receives his testimony.
Wherefore it is a speech most unworthy the majesty of God, that the voice of
God speaking in his holy book is not acknowledged, except it be confirmed by
the witness of men.

Secondarily: 2. Reason. Our comfort. Faith is grounded on approved witness,
therefore not on man's.
whereas the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles does preach of so great
matters, as the certain knowledge of the^ is so greatly desired of all, who
are well disposed, and the conflictes of doubtfulnes in all men's minds are so
great: what full assurance of our faith can there be, what sure consolation
against the assaults of temptations, if that that voice, on which our
confidence relieth, be no otherwise known unto us to be indeed the voice of
God, but because men say so, in whom we see so much ignorance, error, and
vanity to be, that no man scarcely, especially in matters of some weight,
does attribute much unto their word, except other reasons concur with it.

3 Reason. The confutation of our enemies.
Thirdly, the truth of God and christian religion is plainly exposed unto the
mockes and scoffs of the wicked, if we going about to stop their mouths do
therefore only desire that we should be credited, that our Religion is from
God, because our selves say so. For if they be by no other confutation
repressed, they will with no less show of truth deny it, than we affirm it.

4 Reason. Witnesses.
Last of all, the scripture it self in many places is against this opinion, and
does challenge a far higher authority unto it self, the^ which hangs upon
men's words. For so says Christ himself, John. 5. I receive not the record of
man: signifieng thereby, that his doctrine stood not, no not on John Baptists
testimony, although yet he did allege it, but as of less account, that he
might omit nothing, by which men might be moved to believe. Therefore he
adds, But I say these things that you may believe, I have a greater witness
then the witness of John. And if Christ now being humbled said these things
of himself, then surely shall they be no less true of him being in glory, and
sitting in his throne: And 1. Corinthians. 2. Paul says: My word and my preaching
stood not in the entising speech of man's wisdom, but in plain evidence of
the spirit, and of power, that your faith should not be in the wisdom of men,
but in the power of God. If so be then our faith must not rest no not upon
reasons wisely framed by men, much less shall it depend on the bare word of
men. Ephesians. 2. the Church herself is said to be builded upon the foundation of
the Prophets and Apostles. If then the confidence and confession of the Church
staieth on the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, as on the foundation: the
certainty of the Scripture cannot hang on the Churches witness. For so should
not the Church be vpheld by the testimony of the Prophets and Apostles, but by
her own. And 1. John. 5. it is said; If we receive the witness of men, the
witness of God is greater. If it be greater, then the authority of it hangs
not on the record of man: But we are to give more credence unto God witnessing
the Prophets and Apostles writings to be indeed his voice, then unto the
Church affirming the same.

Now that it is said of the contrary, That they are true, the Church alone does
witness. Answer. The minor is false.
That by the Churches this we grant not. For God far more certainly
testifyeth both in the Scripture and in the hearts of his Saints, that no
fained or forged thing is in these books, the^ it can be by the Church, and all
the creatures of the world confirmed. They therefore who stand upon the
Churches testimony alone in this point, show that themselves have not as yet
felt or understood the chiefest testimonies.

Furthermore they say, that the books authentike, The discerning of books.
Answer. The Minor is false. 1 The working of the holy Ghost.
or as they Canonical of both Testamentes are discerned from the Apocryphal by
the Churches judgment: and therefore that the authority of holy canon does
depend on the churches wisdom. But that this difference of the books is not
determined by the churches judgment, but being imprinted into the books
themselves by the Spirit of God is only acknowledged and approved by the
Church: this is easily to be understood, if the causes of this difference be
considered. For either in these which are called Apocryphal the force and
majesty of the heavenly spirit does less evidently appear in the weight and
vehemence of words and matter, then in others, of which it is clear that they
are the heavenly oracles therefore set down in writing by divine instinct,
that they might be the rule of our faith: or it cannot be determined, neither
out of these books themselves, 2 The certainty of authors.
nor out of others, which are canonical, that they were written either by the
Prophets, or Apostles: because either they were not penned by those, whom God
by certain testimonies has warranted unto us to be endued with a prophetical
spirit: or themselves do not show any certain authors of them: or by their
form of speech or other reasons it may be gathered, that they were not left of
them, whose names they bear. Now as touching either this evidence of the
spirit, or certainty of the authors, we build not our judgment on the
testimony of the Church, but of the books themselves. And therefore not for
the Churches judgment only do we judge some books to be canonical, and the
foundation and rule of our faith, and do therefore accept of the doctrine of
other some, because they agree with the canonical: but rather for the very
causes of this difference which we find in the books themselves.

The Church is more ancient than the Scripture. 1. Answer. The minor is false.
As for that, which some men say, that the Church is ancienter then the
Scriptures, and therefore of greater authority, it is too trifling. For the
word of God is the everlasting wisdom in God himself. Neither was the
knowledge of it then first manifested unto the Church, when it was committed to
writing, but the manifesting of it began together with the creation of mankind,
and the first beginnings of the Church in paradise: yea, the word is that
immortal seed of which the Church was borne.

The Scripture is first in nature as the cause.
The Church therefore could not be, except the word were first delivered. Now
when we name the holy Scripture, we mean not so much the characters of the
letters and the volumes, but rather the sentences which are contained in them,
which they shall never be able to prove to be of less antiquity then the
Church. For albeit they were repeated and declared often after the beginning of
the gathering of the Church: 2. Answer. The Mayor is false. A younger workma^
may be more skilful than an elder.
yet the sum of the Law and Gospel was the same for ever.

To conclude, neither is that which they assume, always true, That the
authority of the ancienter witness is greater tha^ of the yo^ger. For such may be
the condition and quality of the younger witness, that he may deserve greater
credit then the ancienter. Christ being man, bare witness of himself: Moses
also and the Prophets had long time before borne witness of him: neither yet is
the authority therefore greater, no not of all the other witnesses, then of
Christ alone: In like sort the Church witnesses that the holy Scripture, which
we have, is the word of God: The Scripture it self also does witness of it
self the same, but with that kind of witness, that is more certain and sure
than all the oaths of Angels and men.

There is alleged also to this purpose a place. 1. The pillar of truth.
to Timot. the Church is called the pillar and ground of the truth. But since
the Scripture does teach otherwhere, and that not once, that the foundation of
the Church is Christ and his word: it is manifest enough that the Church is the
pillar of the truth, not a foundamentall or upholding pillar, but a
ministerial, that is, a keeper and spreader of it abroad, and as it were a
mansion place or sure seat, which might carry the truth left with her, and
committed unto her, in the open face of all mankind: Acts. 9. Gal. 2. 1 These.
2. 2 These. 1. Tit. 1.
even as the holy Apostle Paul was called an elect vessel to bear the name of
God before the gentiles and kings: neither yet did Paul get credit unto the
Gospel, but the Gospel unto Paul. So likewise are the Apostles termed
pillars, Galat. 2. not that the Church rested on their persons, but that they
were the chief teachers of the gospel, and as it were the chieftaines and
masters of doctrine. For a man is not bound to believe those that teach, on
their bare word, but for the proofs which they bring of their doctrine.

Furthermore, they allege a sentence of Austin out of A place of Augustine. 1
Answer. An example makes no rule.
chap. 5. I (says Augustine) would not believe the Gospel, except the
authority of the catholic Church did move me thereunto. But first, if it
were true that either Austin or some others did give credence unto the Gospel
only for the Churches authority: yet might there not be fashioned a rule
hence of that, which all men either did or ought to do.

But that this is not the meaning of Austine, 2 Answer. He speaks of
himself as yet not converted, or not sufficiently confirmed.
which these me^ would have, they do easily perceive, who weigh both the whole
course of this place, and the phrase of speech which is usual unto Austen. For
Austen going about to show, that the Manichees were destitute of al proof of
their doctrine; first he opposes one, who as yet believes not the gospel, and
denies that such a one is able any way to be convicted by the Manichaeans: for
he were to be convicted either by arguments drawn out of the doctrine it
self, of which the Manichaeans have none; or by the consent of the catholic
Church, from which themselves were departed: for example sake, he proposes
himself, who should not have had believed the Gospel, except the authority of
the catholic Church had moved him thereunto. Austen therefore speaks this not
of himself, as he was then, when he writ these things against the
Manichaeans, but of himself, before he was yet converted, or not sufficiently
confirmed. And that he speaks not of the present, but of the time past, the
words that follow do manifestly declare: whom then I believed, when they said:
Believe the Gospel: why should I not believe them when they say: Believe not a
Manichean? For hence it appears, that when he says he was moved especially
by the authority of the Church, he means it of that time, at which he obeyed
the Churches voice, that is, departed from the Manichaeans unto the true
Church. But after that once he was converted, and had perceived the truth of
doctrine; that his faith was not now any more builded on the authority of the
Church, but on a far other foundation, himself is a most sufficient witness for
us, whereas in the selfsame book, Therefore he did believe the Church
especially, before he was able to perceive it.
cap. 14. he says on this wise: Thou have purposed nothing else but to commend
that thy self beleeuest, and to laugh at that which I believe. And when as I
of the other side shall commend that which myself believe, and laugh at that
which thou beleeuest: what do thou think we must determine, or do, but even
to shake hands with them, who bid us to know certain things, and afterward
will us to believe things that are uncertain: and let us follow them, who bid
us first to believe that, which as yet we are not able to perceive, that being
more enhabled by faith it self, we may discern to understand that which we do
believe, not men now, but God himself inwardly strengthening and illightning
our mind. Wherefore they do manifest injury unto Austen, who draw that which
himself confesses of himself, when he was not yet converted, or was but
weak, unto that time, when he affirms far otherwise not of himself only,
but of all the godly.

For so reverent a regard ought we to have of the word of God, and such also
is the force and efficacy of the holy spirit in confirming the hearts of
believers, that we believe God, yea without any creatures Testimony: even as
Elias forsook not god, 1. Reg. 19. The application of the answer.
no not when he thought that himself only was left alive of the true
worshippers of God. If therefore either Austen, or whosoever else being not as
yet converted unto religion, nor as yet having experience of the certainty of
it, in his heart, That follows not which they would.

1 Because there is more in the Consequent, than in the Antecedent.

2 Because thereis a fallacy of the Accident. A declaration of the like example.

1 The Samaritan.


was moved rather by humane the^ divine Testimonies to embrace it: it cannot
thereof be gathered that the certainty of the holy scripture depends on no
other Testimonies, or that by no other we are assured of it: because that,
that some are moved especially by humane voices to reverence it, comes not
thereof to pass, for that the Scripture is not maintained by any other
authority: but it chances through the fault and weakness of them, who sticking
upon humane records, do not feel as yet, or understand divine. An image and
example of these degrees of faith is in the story of the Samaritan woman,
John. 4. For many of the Samaritans are said to have believed in Christ,
because of the speech of the woman who testified, that he had told her
whatsoever she had done. But after that they had had Christ with the^ for two
days, many more believed because of his own speech: and they said unto the
woman: Now we believe not because of thy saying: for we have heard him our
selves, 2 The Emulation of the Jews.
and know that this is indeed the Christ the Savior of the world. Al men come
not by the same occasions, nor have not the same beginninges unto faith. Romans
11. Paul says, that salvation was come unto the Gentiles, and that he did
magnify his ministry, that the Jews might be provoked to follow the
Gentiles. In the first of Peter, cap. 3. 3 The honesty of wives.
wives are willed to be subject unto their husbands, that eue^ they which obey
not the word, may without the word be won by the conversation of the wives,
while they behold their pure conversation which is with fear. Even then as the
Samaritans were moved, first by the speech of the woman to believe in Christ,
but after they had seen Christ and heard him, they were so confirmed, that they
said they would now believe though the woman hold her peace: so also may it
be, that they which are not as yet converted, or are but weaklings, may be
moved especially by the Churches testimony, as which runs more into their
eyes, to give credence unto the Scripture: who yet nevertheless after they are
once illuminated with a more plentiful light of faith, do find by experience,
that they are confirmed by a far superior and more certain testimony, that the
Scripture is the word of God, and do know by the force and evidence of it,
that they must keep their faith, were all the Angels and men perswaders to the
contrary: as it is said by the Apostle: Though we or an Angel from heaven
preach unto you otherwise the^ that which we have preached unto you, Gal. 1.
The conclusion of the first part.
let him be accursed. By these things therefore it may be understood, that
the voice and consent of the catholic Church may and ought amongst other
testimonies to serve for our confirmation: and yet the authority of the holy
Scripture not to hang upon it: but that out of the Scripture it self rather
we must learn, by what arguments we may be brought to know that it was
delivered from God. Because that God himself does witness it: and also such is
the force and quality of that heavenly doctrine, that although all men should
gainsay it, yet it would not be any otherwise more manifestly and certainly
known to be the voice of God, then by it self.

The 2. part. Arguments showing the certa^ntie of the scripture
But least any man may think, that by any arguments, which eue^ reason by a
natural light judges to be sound, without the singular grace of the spirit
this may be wrought in the minds of the wicked, as either to obey the truth,
or to leave off to reproach it: first he must remember that the arguments or
testimonies are of two sorts, which show the certainty of Christian religion,
and maintain the authority of the Scripture. For there is but one only
testimony, which is appropriated unto them alone who are regenerated by the
Spirit of Christ, and unto them alone is it known, the force of which
testimony is so great, that it does not only abundantly testify and seal in
our minds the truth of the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, but it also
forcibly inclines and moves our hearts to the embracing and following of it.
Other testimonies whatsoever may be brought, they are understood indeed both
of the godly and the wicked, and do compel their consciences to confess, that
this religion rather than others is pleasing unto God, and that it came from
him: but unless that one other come also, which is known of the godly alone,
these testimonies will never bring to pas that me^ shall embrace the truth,
although it be known unto them. The arguments therefore which show the truth
and certainty of the scripture are these.

1 The purity of doctrine.
1 Purity and perfectnes of doctrine. For we have the pure and perfect
doctrine as of the Gospel, so also of the Law. Now other sects have not both
the tables of the Law perfect: the first many have in part: the second but in
some part also, and that stained with many lies.

2 The Gospel it self. 2 The Gospel showing our deliverance.
Because it yields sure consolation to men's consciences, showing the only
way of escaping sin and death. The nature of man was not created to
destruction. Wherefore that doctrine, which shows delivery, without violating
the justice of God, is undoubtedly true and certain.

3 The antiquity of this doctrine: 3 Antiquity.
because it is found to be most ancient, partly by conference: For if we
confer this with other doctrines, we shall find it to be pure and most true,
as delivered from God, from which men afterward fell away. Other sects have
sprung up at other times, and again have perished: this has continued, though
it has bin mightily oppugned by her enemies.

4 Miracles proper unto the Church, 4 Miracles.
which tend to the same end, that they may declare and confirm this doctrine.
1 Objection. Others also have miracles.

Answer. It is not true.


For albeit mention is made also of some miracles of the heathen, and it is
said of Antichrist and false prophets, that they shall work signs and great
woonders, so that the very elect themselves, if it were possible, should be
seduced: yet these neither in number, nor in greatness are equal unto the
miracles of the Church; and by the end, for which they are done, it may easily
be discerned, that they are not wrought by any divine power. Wherefore there is
a double difference especially by which true miracles are severed from false.

For first those miracles which are vaunted of by the enemies of the church are
such, They differ. 1 In the substance.
as without changing the course and order of nature may be done by the
sleightes and iuglings of men or devils: and seem therefore to others to be
miracles, because they perceive not the causes of them, 2 In the end*
and the means whereby they are wrought. Furthermore they have this as their
chief end, that they may confirm idols, superstitions, manifest errors and
mischiefs. But the miracles with which god has set forth his church, are
works either besides or contrary unto the course of nature and second causes,
and therefore not wrought but by the power of God. The which that it might be
the more manifest, god has wrought many miracles for the confirming of his
truth, whose very show the devil is never able to imitate or resemble: as are
the raising of the dead, to stay or call back the course of the Sun, to make
fruitles and barrain women fruitful. But especially the miracles of God are
distinguished by their ends from the devilish and fained. For they confirm
nothing but which is agreeing with those things which before time were revealed
by God, and that in respect of the glory of the true God, of godliness, and
holiness, and the salvation of men,

And therefore is it said of the miracles of Antichrist, 2. Thessal 2. That his
coming shall be by the working of Satan, with all power and signs, and lying
wonders, and in all deceiueablenes of unrighteousness, among them that perish.
etc. Now if any be so bold as to call in question, 2 Objection. They are
doubtful. Answer. The Antecedent is false.
whether or no the miracles which are reported in the Scriptures were done so
indeed, he is out of al question of over great impudency. For he may after the
same manner give the lie to al both sacred and profane histories. But let us
first understand, that as other parts of the holy story, so especially the
miracles are recited, as things not wrought in a corner, but done in the publik
face of the Church and mankind. In vain should the Prophets and Apostles have
had endeavored to get credit unto their doctrine by miracles, which men had
never seen. Furthermore, the doctrine which they brought, was strange unto the
iudegement of reason, and contrary to the affections of men: and therefore
their miracles, except they had bin most manifest, would never have found
credit. Also it clearly appears, both in the miracles themselves, and in the
doctrine which is confirmed by them, that they who writ them, sought not
their own glory or other commodities of this life, but only the glory of God,
and men's salvation. To these arguments agrees not only the Testimony of the
Church, but the confession also of the very enemies of Christ, who surely, if
by any means they could, would have denied and suppressed even those things
that were true and known, much less would they have confirmed by their
Testimony ought that had been forged or obscure.

5 Oracles. Objection The Heathens also have Prophecies. Answer.
5 The prophecies which were fulfilled in their due time do yield their
testimony unto this doctrine: in like manner the foretellings of things to
come, and the correspondence of euentes, which could not be foretold but by
God revealing them. And albeit the heathens also, and others boast of their
prophecies, and oracles: yet great and manifold is the difference between them
and the sacred Prophecies, which shows evidently enough, that these were
uttered by divine instinct; but those to have been Leigerdemains of the Devil
going about by a fained imitation to darcken the truth and glory of God. For
they squared from the truth and justice of God before time revealed: they
countenanced wickedness and idolatry: they were poured out by Prophets who
were stirred with a furious and devilish pang: they were dark, or doubtful:
and whereas they were uncertain, oftentimes by a false hope they allured those
who listened unto them into hurt and destruction: at leastwise they were
uttered of such things, whose events the Devil through his subtlety may after
a sort conjecture by tokens going before, or else because he did know that by
the permission and commandment of God he should bring them to pass.
Wherefore neither do they confirm and make good the Religions of those men
amongst whom they flourished; neither do they diminish the authority of the
holy Scripture, in whose oracles we may see al things contrary unto that which
has bin now spoken of these.

6 The confession of the enemies themselves, 6 The confession of the enemies.
because whatsoever is true and good in other Sects, that also Christian
Religion has, and that more clearly and better: neither can those natural
principles be refelled. And if other sects have any thing which agrees not
with our doctrine, that may easily be refuted: but if they have any thing which
cannot be refuted, they have stolen that from us, which is the Devils wont.
Yea our very enemies themselves are constrained to confess that our doctrine
is true: yea the Devil himself too: Thou art the Son of God. Luke. 4.41.
For of that force and nature is the word of God, that it does so much the
more grievously strike and wound the consciences even of those who are not
converted, how much the more stubburnelie they kick against the prick. Even
as it is said, Heb. 4. The word of God is lively and mighty in operation, and
sharper then any two edged sword, and enters through even unto the dividing
asunder of the soul and the spirit, and of the iointes and the marrow, and is
a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. And Luke. 21. I will give
you a mouth and wisdom, wher-against al your adversaries shall not be able to
speak or resist.

7 The hatred and oppugning of the devil and the wicked. John. 8.44.
7 The hatred and oppugning of this doctrine by the devil and the wicked, which
is a testimony that it is true: For the truth breeds hatred: The devil was a
lier from the beginning: He endeavors therefore to oppress the Law and the
Gospel, that faith and honesty may be destroyed. He does therefore together
with his accomplices persecute the truth: because it does more sharply accuse him
than other sects. John 7.7
The world hates me, says Christ, because I testify of it, that the works
thereof are ill.

8 The marvelous preservation.
8 The maruailous preservation of this doctrine against the furies of Satan, and
enemies of the Church. None is so much assailed; none also continues so sure.
Others are not assailed, and yet they perish most speedily.

9 The punishments of the enemies.
9 The punishments of the enemies, as of Arius, Julian, and others. Albeit in
the world for the most part the wicked flourish, and the Church is oppressed:
yet that it falls not The enemies of the church do flourish. Answer. For a
short time.
neither because God is pleased with them, the events witness, and the Scripture
very often does iterate it. For the Church is always preserved, even amidst
her persecutions, when as the short felicity of Tyrants and wicked imps has a
most doleful and aeternall destruction following it. But God suffers them
for a while to have their swinge, and to flourish, that by the scandal of the
cross the faith and patience of the godly may be more exercised and tried and
unto the wicked there may be left a time of repentance, and when they abuse the
long-suffering of God, that then at length so much the iuster and heavier
plague may light on them. And therefore the holy Scripture in so many places,
as in the Psalms, 37.52.57.58. and often elsewhere comfort the godly
against this kind of tentation, foretelling, unto them, defense and delivery,
but destruction Not all.
Neither is thereby the force of this proof weakened, because that all the
persecutours of the Church are not in Tragical manner taken out of this life.
For whiles God does take vengeance on most of them in this life, he does
sufficiently show what he would have to be thought of the rest, verily, that
they are his enemies, whom without they repent, he will plu^ge into aeternal
plagues, the beginning and feeling of the which is desperation, in which all
the enemies of Christian Religion end their days, yea they who are not
oppressed with any other calamities of this life. To conclude, that it may be
manifest, Not for this cause. Answer. Yea, for this cause.
that they are

Now that which the wicked alone do, there is no doubt but that is in the
number of their Sins, for which they suffer punishment. Wherefore the
overthrows of the enemies of the Church are no obscure Testimony of the wrath
of God against them, even as God himself says of Pharao, To this same purpose
have I stirred thee up, Exodus 9. Romans 9.
that I might show my power in thee, and that my name might be declared
throughout all the earth.

10 The consent of true doctrine, 10 The consent of the parts of doctrine. 11
The confession and constancy of Martyrs.
and the iarring of others, even about the chief points.

11 The testimonies and confessions of Martyrs, who sealing with their blood
this Doctrine, do show even in the midst of death that they indeed do so
think, as they taught, and that they draw that comfort out of it, which they
did preach unto others. And hence also it appears Does the certainty of
doctrine depend of men?
though the constancy of Martyrs and other godly men give comfort unto us. For
albeit the Testimony of the Saints too does concur, as a less principal
proof, unto our confirmation: yet in their examples is seen a far other, eue^
the testimony of God himself, who strengthens and comfort them, so that
they are ready to sustain any thing for his name sake. Neither ought that to
move us a whit if other sects also tell us of their Martyrs. For first Others
are Martyrs also.
which the Church has. Answer. They differ.
Again there is not that alacrity and cheerfulnes found in them, in suffering
punishments, which is in most of the martyrs of Christ, so that it may easily
appear that they never feel that security of conscience, and joy of heart in
God, which the Godly feel. And thirdly, which is chiefly to be considered,
the defenders of wicked doctrine suffer, as being co^uicted of their errors.
But the godly, no falsehood being showed in their confession, are Tyrannically
by their persecutors drawn unto punishment, whereas the persecutors themselves
are convicted of their impiety and injury, even as the Lord promises. I will
give you a mouth and wisdom where-against al your adversaries shall not be
able to speak or resist. Wherefore albeit sometimes some men suffer for their
doctrine, the certainty whereof they are not able to confirm neither to
themselves, nor to others: yet do they it not fenced by any divine strength
and comfort, but being blinded by their own stubburnes or pride, and the
illusions of the Devil they run headlong to destruction: contrariwise, it is
said of the godlies Martyrdom: Philip. 1. It is given unto you for Christ,
not only to believe in him, but to suffer for his sake.

12 The godliness and holiness of those, of whom the sacred Scriptures have been
written, and who truly embrace this doctrine.

13 Their plain dealing in detecting of vices. 14 The Testimony of the holy
Ghost.
13 Their ingenuitie and plain dealing in opening faults committed either by
them or theirs, whom the holy ghost has used in committing this doctrine to
writing.

14 The testimony of the holy Ghost which cries in the hearts of the godly,
Abba father. This testimony does not only prove (which all the former also
do) but it persuades too. For faith is nothing else, then a firm assent, by
which we agree unto all the word of God delivered unto us, and a confidence,
by which every one of us do know and resolve, that God, according unto the
tenor of this Scripture, is merciful and good unto us. Which confidence there
follows ioyfulnes resting in God, and calling on him, with an assured hope of
obtaining those good things, which according to the prescript of his word we
beg of him. Now that both of these, that is, both this assent or assurance
of our doctrine, and the lively consolation which thence springs, neither do
rest upon the testimony of me^ nor of any creature, but is inflamed and
strengthened by no other doctrine then of the Prophets and Apostles, read, heard
and meditated of by them: this every one of the godly through a lively and
certain feeling of their hearts have experience of. This spirit therefore God
adioyneth as a witness unto his word. Esai. 19. This is my covenant with them,
says the Lord, my spirit that is upon thee, and my words, which I have put
in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out out of the mouth of
thy seed, says the Lord, from henceforth even for ever.

This spirit also Christ promises as the chief witness of his doctrine unto
his Disciples: John. cap. 15. When the comforter shall come, he shall bear
witness of me. And cap. 16. When he is come which is the spirit of truth, he
will lead you into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself, but
whatsoever he shall hear shall he speak, and he will show you the things to
come. He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it
unto you. To this witness do the Apostles appeal, as being the chief, and
alone sufficient. The Apostle Paul 2. Cor. 1. And it is God which stablisheth
us with you in Christ: who has also sealed us, and has given the earnest of
the spirit in our hearts. And 1. These. 1. For our Gospel was not unto you in
word only, but also in power, and in the holy Ghost, and in much assurance.
And 1. John. 2. But ye have an ointment from him that is holy, and ye have
known al things. Wherefore we must ever remember this, that by the alone
witness of the holy spirit we are moved forcibly in our hearts, to believe the
Scripture, and to submit our selves unto it as unto the voice of God: and that
by all the other before alleged Testimonies al men indeed are convicted, and
the godly also profitably confirmed, but no man is turned unto God thereby,
without the spirit witnessing within him.

For whenas he once breeds this most assured persuasion in our minds, that
the doctrine which is contained in the holy Bible is of a truth the will of God,
and works that comfort and change of our minds and hearts, which is promised
and taught in this book: by our experience and feeling it is so confirmed,
that while this remains within us, though al Angels and men should say
contrary, yet we would believe this to be the voice of God: Objection. The
scripture bears witness of the spirit; therefore the spirit not of it. Answer.
but if that remain not or be not in us, though al should say it, yet we would
not believe it. Neither does not the spirit therefore establish the authority
of the Scripture, because we are to examine what the spirit speaks within us
by the rule of the Scripture: for before that this is done of us, the spirit
himself declares unto us, that the Scripture is the word of God and inspired
by him, and that he will teach us nothing in our hearts, which is not agreeable
unto that Testimony before set down of him in the Scripture. And if this be
not first most certainly persuaded us of the spirit himself: we will never
recall our opinions of God and his worship to the Scripture, as the only rule
to try them by. Now then after it is declared unto us by divine inspiration,
that the Scripture is a sufficient witness of that divine Revelation in our
hearts, then at length do we find our selves to be confirmed by the mutual
Testimony of the same spirit in the Scripture and in our hearts, and we
believe the Scripture affirming of it self, that it was delivered by divine
inspiration to the holy men of God: as it said, 2 Timothy 3. and 2. Pet. 1.

OF THE FOVRTH QVESTION.
For what cause no doctrine beside the holy Scripture is to be received in the
Church.

The scripture is of God; therefore the rule of faith.


WHEREAS it appears unto us that it is the word of God, which the Prophets
and Apostles have left in writing: there is no man which does not see, that the
Scripture must be the rule and squire, by which all things which are taught
and done in the church, must be tried. Now all things, of which there uses to
arise questions in the Christian Church, do appertain either unto doctrine,
or unto discipline and ceremonies. That the word of God ought to be the rule
unto both sorts, it is out of doubt. But in this place we speak of the
doctrine of the church, which consists in the sentences and decrees, which
we are bound by the commandment of God to believe or obey: and therefore they
can not be changed, by the authority of any creature: and they are become
obnoxious unto the wrath of God, whosoever submit not themselves in faith and
obedience unto them. To these decrees and precepts the Papists add many
sentences, which not only are no where delivered in the Scripture, but are
repugnant unto it; and they contend, that the Church or the Bishops have
authority of decreeing: yea contrary and besides the Scripture, what the
Church must believe or do: and that men's consciences are bound by those
decrees no less than by the words of the holy Scripture to believe or obey.
Contrariwise we believe and confess, that no doctrine is to be proposed unto
the Church, not only if it be repugnant unto the holy Scripture, but if it
be not contained in it.

And whatsoever either is not by the express testimony of the holy Scripture
delivered, The difference of the Scripture, and of other men's opinions
or does not consequently follow out of the words of the Scripture rightly
understood, that we hold may be without any hurt or conscience believed, or
not believed, changed, abrogated, and omitted. 1 The Scripture only is of it
self to be believed, and the rule of faith.
For we must ever hold a necessary difference between the books of the
Prophets and Apostles, and the writings and doctrine of others in the Church:
first, that the Scripture only neither has, nor can have any error in any
matter; other teachers both may err, and oftentimes also do er, when they
depart from the written word of God. Again, that the Scriptures are believed
on their own word, because we know that God speaks with us in them: others
have credit, not because themselves say so, but because the scripture
witnesses so, neither a whit more than they can prove by the Scripture.
Wherefore we do not reject others doctrine and labors in the Church: but only
setting them in their own place, we submit them unto the rule of Gods word.
This doctrine first is delivered of God himself, and that not in one place
only of the Scripture: as Deuteronomy. 4. You shall not ad unto the word which I speak
unto you, neither shall you take away from it. And in the last Chapter of the
Apocalypse: I protest unto every man, that hears the words of the Prophecy
of this book, if any man shall ad unto these things, God shall add unto him the
plagues that are written in this book. And if any man shall diminish of the
words etc. Neither only by these words is forbidden, that no false things and
openly repugnant to the written word be added to the doctrine of the church,
but also that no uncertain things, or things not appertaining unto it be
mingled therewith. For it is not in the power of any creature to pronounce what
we are to think of God and his will: but this is only to be learned out of
that which is disclosed in his word. And therefore the men of Beraea are
commended, Act. 17. Who searched the Scriptures daily whether those things
were so.

2 Faith is grounded only of the word.
Secondly, faith, which is spoken of in the Church, is a part of divine worship,
that is, the sure assent, by which we embrace every word of God delivered unto
us, because it is impossible for us to be deceived by it if we understand it
aright. Further also, that it may breed in us a true woorshipping of God and
comfort of our souls, it must stand sure and immovable against temptations.
But there is no certain doctrine concerning God and religion besides that which
is known to be revealed in his word. We may not therefore give the honor
which is due unto God, unto men: neither may we go from certain things unto
uncertain, but cleave only to the word of God in the doctrine concerning
religion: and therefore humane decrees must not be accounted amongst those
precepts which we are to embrace by faith. Faith comes by hearing, hearing
by the word of God. etc.

3 Things necessary to be believed or done are part of divine worship: But
things not prescribed are not part of divine worship. Therefore they are not
necessary.
Thirdly, for so much as the woorship of God is a work commanded of God,
performed by faith, to this end principally, that God may be honored: it is
manifest that to believe and do those things, which can not be denied or
omitted without offending of God, is the woorship of God: and contrariwise that
God can not be woorshipped, but by the prescript of his will, both the
consciences of al men, and God himself in his holy word does testify: as
Esai. 29. and Matt. 15. In vain do they woorship me who teach the doctrines
and commandments of men. It is as wicked therefore to number those things
which are not expressed in the word of God, amongst those which are
necessary to be believed and done in matters of religion: as it is unlawful
for any creature to thrust upon God that woorship, which himself never
required.

Fourthlie, 4 The Scripture is sufficient.
there cannot be any thing added of men unto his doctrine without great
injury and contumely done unto the holy Scripture. For if other things
besides these which are written, are necessary to the perfection of true
Religion; then does not the Scripture show the perfect manner of worshipping
God, and of attaining to Salvation, which fights with the plain words of
Scripture, which affirm that God has opened unto us in his word as much as
he would have us know in this life, concerning his will toward us, as Christ
says John. 15. Al things which I have hard of my father I have made known
unto you. And Paul Act. 20. I have kept nothing back, but have showed you all the counsel of God. And 2. Tim. 3. Knowing that thou have known the holy
Scriptures from a Child which are able to make thee wise unto Salvation
through the faith which is in Christ Jesus. For the whole Scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to improve, to correct and to
instruct in righteousness.

Fifthly, 5 Other Doctors may er; the Prophets and Apostles cannot; therefore
they are tied to these.
we are to consider the degrees of them who teach in the Church. For therefore
is the authority of the Prophets and Apostles far higher, then of other
Ministers of the Church: because God called the^ immediately, to declare his
will unto other men, and adorned them with Testimonies of miracles and other
things, by which he witnessed that he did so lighten and guide their minds
with his spirit, that he suffered them to err in no one point of doctrine:
other ministers are called by men, and may err, and do err, when they depart
from the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles. Wherefore the Apostle Paul,
Ephe. 2. says: That the Church is builded upon the foundation of the Prophets
and Apostles. And 1. Cor. 3. That he had laid the foundation, and other then
that could no man lay: others build upon it gold, silver, precious stones,
wood, hay, stubble. Now it is manifest that they, who may err, ought to be tied
unto their doctrine, who are warranted by the testimonies of God that they can
not err. Wherefore all other teachers in the Church must not bring any new
point of doctrine, but only propound and expound those things unto the
Church, which are delivered by the Prophets and Apostles.

For these causes therefore does the whole ancient Church with great consent
submit it self unto the rule of the sacred Scriptures: whose authority yet
ought of right to be somewhat greater than these men, who both in words and
deeds fight against this opinion. Basil in his Sermon of the confession of
says, says: that it is a falling from the faith, and a fault of pride,
either not to admit those things which are written in the holy Scriptures, or
to add any thing to them. And August. in his third Epistle: For neither ought
we to account of every ones discourses, though they be catholic and worthy
men, as of the canonical scriptures, that it may not be lawful for us,
without impairing the reverence, which we owe to those men, to dislike and
refuse any thing in their writings, if peradventure we shall find that they
have thought otherwise the^ the Scripture has, as it is by Gods assistance
understood either of others, or of our selves. And Epist. 112. If ought be
confirmed by the plain authority of the divine Scriptures, of those, which are
called in the Church canonical, we must without any doubting believe it: as
for other testimonies, by which any thing is moved to be believed, thou may
choose whether thou will believe the^ or no. But against these testimonies of
the Scriptures and the ancient church the adversaries of the truth contend,
that besides the doctrine, which is comprised in the holy Bible, other decrees
also, made by the authority of the Church, are no less unchangeable, and
necessary to salvation, then the oracles Prophetical and Apostolic.
Objections of the Papists.
And that they may not without some show and pretense take upon them this
authority of decreeing what The scripture does not remain perfect.
in which some writings of the Prophets and Apostles are mentioned: which are
not come to our hands: as Number. 21. is named the Book of the wars of the
Lord. Ios. 10. The Book of the just. And often in the books of Kings, The
Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah. In the Epistle catholic of
Jude, are alleged, the prophecy of Enoch, and the story of the body of
Moses: And lastly the Apostle Paul, 1. Cor. 5. and Ephesians. 3. makes mention of
his Epistles, which now the Church has not. Hence therefore these men will
conclude, that the doctrine of the sacred Scripture is maimed, and that
therefore the defect hereof must be Supplied by the Church. But first of all
concerning the holy Scripture we are to know, that so much thereof has been
preserved of God for us, as was necessary and profitable for the doctrine and
comfort of the Church: even as John witnesses: that Jesus did many things
before his disciples, 1 As much of the history as is sufficient, does remain.
John. 21.
which are not written in the story of the Gospel. And that these things,
which are extant, were written, that we might believe that Jesus is the Christ
the Son of God, and that believing we might have life everlasting in his
name. Furthermore, 2 The holy Scripture is perfect in sense* though not in
words.
concerning doctrine and precepts, albeit some things written by the Apostles
be not extant, whatsoever yet of necessary doctrine was in them, it is
certain that it is contained in those, which we have: both because that Paul
in both places does repeat that which he has written in those Epistles: and
also because it has bin before showed that God has delivered the whole
doctrine of our salvation, in the Scripture, which is extant, and will preserve
it unto the end of the world.

They bring other places also, by which they endeavor to Some things were
spoken by word of mouth.
that Christ and his Apostles did deliver some things unto the Churches by
mouth, which are not comprised in the writings of the Apostles. As Mat. 28.
where Christ sends his Apostles to preach: John. 16. I have yet many things
to say unto you, but you cannot bear them now. Act. 16. Paul and Timothy
delivered unto the Churches the decrees to keep, ordained by the Apostles, and
elders, which were at Jerusalem. 1. Cor. 11. I will order other things when I
come. 2. These. 2. Keep the instructions, which you have been taught either by
word, or by our Epistle. And cap. 3. Withdraw your selves from every brother
which walks not after the instruction, which he received of us. And in the 2.
and 3. Epistles of John. I have many things to write unto you: but I would not
by paper and incke, but I trust to come unto you and speak mouth to mouth. 1 Timothy 6. Tit. 1. and 2.
And Paul charge Timothy to keep that which was committed unto him, and to
commit those things, which he had heard of him, to men fit to teach. Lastly
they say, That before the books either of the old or new Testament were
written, the doctrine was delivered unto the Church by mouth. But neither the
Prophets, nor Christ, nor the Apostles have delivered any other precepts by
mouth, then those which are written: And if they ordained any ceremonial
things in the Churches, which they committed not to writing, neither were they
contrary to these which are written, neither ouermany, or unprofitable,
neither put on them with an opinion of necessity. For neither was there any
other Gospel, from the beginning, neither did Christ command any other to be
preached, then that which we have written. Neither were those things any other
which the Apostles then could not bear through infirmity, then the selfsame
which the Lord had taught them before, which the spirit should call into their
minds and expound unto them, which themselves afterward did deliver in writing
to the church: neither were they otherwise then suitable to those things, which
they had before received of the Lord, neither old wives to is, such as a great
part of the Popish traditions are: but the most authenticke doctrine of the
Gospel, either unknown, or repugnant unto the reason and wit of man. But what
Paul in the Acts is said to have delivered unto the churches is there
expressed, even the decree of the counsel of Jerusalem, concerning blood,
strangled, and things offered to idols. Unto the Corinthians he promises
that he will take order for matters of ceremonies even such as appertained to
the ministering of the Lords Supper. Now by the instructions which he speaks
of to the Thessalonians, he understands, not any Laws concerning
ceremonies, but the whole doctrine of the Gospel, which he had taught even the
self same both by word and writing: which he had committed to Timothy: and
by the declaring of which mouth to mouth, John promises to bring true joy
unto his auditors. But be it that Paul spoke never so much of keeping
traditions, or ordinances which were not written, as 1. Cor. 11. when he
says, Now brethren, I command you, that you keep the ordinances, as I
delivered them unto you: yet should not the adversaries therefore obtain, that
their traditions either are to be kept, or are Apostolic, whereas most of them
are singularly repugnant to the Apostles doctrine; neither yet that there were
more ordinances then in the Church, then are written, since that the Apostles
did ordain no rites, by which the consciences of men should be bound.

examples of the Apostles, That the Apostles have decreed against and besides
the Scripture. Tit. 1.
as if they did make any ordinances or Laws either besides or against the
Scripture: as when Paul ordaineih many things of choosing Bishops and Deacons,
of widows, of weomen to be covered and to contain themselves in silence, of
not deuorcing the husband, if he be an infidel, of controversies between
Christians. 1 Timothy 3. 1 Cor. 11. 1 Cor. 14. 1 Cor. 7. 1 Cor. 6.
But these men remember not that their authority is not equal unto the Apostles
authority: neither consider they that there is nothing in all these things
appointed of Paul, which is not agreeable to the rest of the word of God
contained in writing, and that many of those things which they allege is
comprehended in the commandments of the Decalog. More trifling is it, 1
Answer.
that they say the form of Baptism appointed by Christ was changed by the
Apostles, because it is read in the Acts. 2.8. and 19, that they Baptized in
the name of Jesus Christ. For in those places not the form of Baptism, but the
use is declared, that is, that men were baptized, for to testify that they did
belong to Christ. Neither yet by the example of the Apostles, who interdicted
the Churches things offered to idols, blood, and that which was strangled, is
it lawful for Councels and Bishops to make decrees and Laws to tie men's
consciences. For first, here again there must needs be retained a difference
between the Apostles by whom God opened his will unto men (whereupon they also
say, It seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us) and other ministers of the
Church, who are tied unto the Apostles doctrine. Further, as concerning this
decree of the Apostles, they decreed nothing else, then what the rule of
charity commands, which at all times would have; that in things indifferent
men should deal without offense.

Now if they urge, that these ordinances are called necessary: again it does
not thereupon follow, that the traditions of Bishops are necessary, especially
such as are the Bishops of Rome. Then, that necessity, whereof the Apostles
speak, was neither to last continually, neither did it bind consciences for
fear of the wrath of God, if these things were not observed: but it dured but
for a time, for their infirmity who were converted, from Iudaisme to Christ, or
were to be converted, as Paul does at large teach, 1. Cor. 10.

To these they ad the examples of the Church, whom they say Present examples.
but contrary to the Scripture. They bring forth the selfsame decree of
Jerusalem, concerning things offered to idols, and blood: which being made of
the Apostles, and expressly set down in the Scripture, was yet abolished by the
Church. But it has bin already ready said, that that constitution was made,
not that it should last for ever, but for a time, for a certain cause, eue^
for the infirmity of the Church, which was gathered from among the Jews: and
after that cause ceased, that ordinance takes place no longer. Neither yet did
it at that time fetter men's consciences, as if the worshipping or offending of
God did lie in it: wherefore the abrogating of it is not contrary, but does
very well agree with it. To these the observing of the Lords Day. We truly
as we do believe this to be an Apostolic tradition, and perceive it to be
profitable, and a far other manner of one, then for the most part they are,
which they would feign thrust upon us under the Apostles name: so we do not
put any worship of God to consist in this thing, but know it to be left
arbitrarie unto the Church. Even as Coloss. 2. it is said, Let no man But they
affirm also that some things not written are believed, which yet to call in
question, we our selves confess to be unlawful: as, That infantes are to be
baptized: That Christ descended into Hell: That the Son of God is
co^substantial unto the eternal father. But they are too impudent, if they take
unto themselves a license of hatching new opinions, because the Church, for to
expound the meaning of the Scripture, uses some where words, which are not
exta^t in the Scripture. But impious are they and blasphemous, if they say the
doctrine it self, which the Church professes in these words, is not extant in
the Scriptures.

5 Objection. The holy Ghost is to teach the Church, therefore not the Scripture
They say also, that the holy Ghost is promised the Church, that it may teach
those things, which are not delivered in the Scriptures: as John. 14. But the
co^forter, which is the holy Ghost, who^ the father shall send in my name, he
shall teach you al things. And cap. 16. when the spirit of truth shall come, he
shall lead you into al truth. But here they maliciously omit that which is
added; And shall bring all Again, He shall bear witness of me. Again, He will
reprove the world of sin, of righteousness and of judgment. Again, He shall
glorify me, for he shall receive For out of these it is manifest that the holy
Ghost should speak nothing, but that which was written in the Gospel, and
Christ himself had before time taught his disciples: so far is it that he
should bring any thing contrary to the^. For neither can he dissent from
Christ, nor from himself. So also, when they allege that of Ier. 31. I will
put my Law in their inward parts, and in their hearts will I write it. And 2.
Cor. 3. Ye are the Epistle of Christ written not with incke, but with the
spirit of the living God: not in tables of stone, but in fleshie tables of the
heart: they do not mark, that the spirit cannot speak in men's hearts
contrary unto these things, which he revealed in the Scripture: neither would
God write any other Law, in men's hearts, but that which is already revealed
and written; and that therefore the Apostle Paul opposes not the matter
written, but the manner of writing in tables and hearts, one against another:
for because that the same was written in both, but there with ink, and here
with the spirit of God. It has less color, which If you be otherwise minded,
God shall reueile even the same unto you: If therefore, say they, the Church
think any thing different from the written word, that proceeds from the
holy Ghost. For the Apostle comfort and confirms the godly, that albeit
they did not understand somewhat of that which there he had written, or were
of another judgment in it: yet that hereafter they should be taught it of
God, and should know those things to be true, which he had written. Whenas
therefore it is denied that the holy Ghost reuealeth any thing diverse from that
which is written: the rule and maistership of the spirit in the Church is not
taken away, but the same spirit is matched with him self, that is with the
rule of Scripture, least those things should be thrust upon us under his name,
which are not his.

Further they make their boast that the Church cannot err: 6 Objection. The
Church does not er.
and that therefore the decrees of the Church are of equal authority with the
holy Scripture: because the Church is ruled by the same spirit, by which the
Scripture is inspired: even as it is promised, Matthew. 18. If two of you shall
agree in earth upon any thing, whatsoever they shall desire, it shall be given
them of my Father which is in heaven. For where two or three are gathered in my
name, there am I in the midst of them. And cap. 28. I am with you always unto
the end of the world. So, 1. Ioh. 2 Ye have anointment from him that is holy,
and ye know all things: Likewise, The anointing which ye received of him,
dwells in you: and ye need not that any man teach you: But as the same
anointing teaches you of all things, and it is true, and is not lying, and
as it taught you, ye shall abide in him. But first of all we know that it is
the true Church only, 1 Answer. The true Church. Mat. 13. Mar. 4. Luke 8.
which erreth not, and is ruled by the holy spirit, which is gathered in the
name of Christ, that is, which hears and follows the voice of the Son of
God: And therefore these things do nothing appertain to a wicked multitude,
which openly maintains doctrine contrary to the Gospel, though it never so
much vaunt of the Churches name, yea and bears sway and rule in the Church:
according to that which is said, To him that has shall be given: But from him
that has not, even that which he seems to have, shall be taken away. So
did the Pharisees, and Sadduces amongst the Israelits er, not knowing the
scriptures: neither were they the true Church, though they seized upon the name
and place of it. 2 Answer. Universally.
Secondly: the true Church indeed erreth not universally. For always the
light of the truth, especially concerning the foundation of doctrine, is
preserved in some men's minds: whereupon the Church is called the pillar and
ground of truth. But yet nevertheless some also of the godly oftentimes fall
into errors through ignorance and infirmity: yet so, that they hold the
foundation, neither do they defend their erroneous opinions contrary to their
conscience, and at length they forsake them, even as it is said: If any man
build upon this foundation gold, 1 Cor. 3. Ephesians. 4. 1 Cor. 12
silver, etc. And Philip. 3. If ye be otherwise minded, God shall reueile even
the same unto you. Last of al, there is given unto every man grace according
unto the measure of the gift of Christ. And the spirit distributeth to every
man severally as he will. The Apostles before they had received the holy Ghost
at Whitsontide, were the lively members of the Church: yet erred they
concerning the kingdom and office of the Messiah.

There were of the Chiliasts opinion great men in the Church, as Pasias,
Irenaeus, Apollinarius, Tertullian, Victorinus, Lactantius, Methodius, Martyr.
And therefore, although the Church er not universally: yet oftentimes some of
her members err, when as they swerve from the word: which God suffers not
seldom to happen unto them, for to keep us, being warned of our weakness and
blindness, in modesty, and his true fear, and in daily inuocating of him; and
withal to teach us, that the truth of doctrine is not to be measured by the
title of the church, but by the word delivered of him by the hands of the
Prophets and Apostles: as it is said: Thy word, O Lord, is a lantern unto my
feet, Psalm. 119.
and a light unto my paths. Likewise 1 Timothy 6. Keep that which is committed
unto thee, and avoid profane and vain bablinges.

This ground being once laid, 7 Objection. The Church ought to obey Bishops
by the commandment of God.
that so far forth the Church erreth not, as it does not swerve from the
written word of God, it is easy to answer to that which they make show of to
the contrary; that the Church is ruled by Bishops, and therefore must obey
them: as it is said, Act. cap. 20. Take heed unto all the flock whereof the
holy Ghost has made you overseers, to govern the Church of God. And Mat. 18.
If he refuse to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man, and
a Publicane. Luc. 10. He that hears you, hears me: and he that despises
you, despises me. And to the Hebrews 13. Obey those who bear rule over you.
For both they must rule, and the Church must obey them, according unto the
prescript of Gods word: as it is said, If any man preach any other doctrine,
let him be accursed. Answer. Necessarily in those (...) things which belong
to the ministry: freely in traditions. Gal. 1.
Whatsoever therefore the ministers propound out of the word of God unto the
Church, we must of necessity obey it; that which the Lord teaches Matt. 23.2.
when he says, The Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses chair. All
therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do. For they sit
in Moses chair, who teach Moses doctrine in the Church. If also they ordain
any things indifferen^ and of a middle sort, which are profitable, these also
are to be observed for maintaining of order, and avoiding of offense. But if
they require us to believe or observe things repugnant to the word of God, or
things that are in their own nature indifferent, with putting an opinion of
necessity in them, and of woorshipping of God, they sit no longer in Moses
chair, but in the chair of scorners: and of them it is said, John. 10.
The sheep heard them not. Likewise 1. Tim. 4. In the latter times some shall
depart from the faith, and shall give heed unto the spirits of error. And that
the decrees of the Bishops also are not to be received among the precepts and
decrees of the Church, is confirmed by the example of the civil magistrate,
whose just and good Laws bind the consciences of the subjects. 1 Inst.
For the dissimilitude of the examples consists in that, that God himself by
express word has decreed a necessity of obedience to the Laws and
commandments of the civil magistrate, 1 Instance. The magstrate does bind the
consciences; therefore Bishops.
which are not repugnant unto his Law: but has given a liberty of conscience
in traditions of the Church: so that he pronounces himself to be angry with
him, who obeieth not civil magistrates, as long as they command nothing
repugnant to his Laws: but not with them, which without offense do contrary
to the constitutions of Bishops. For of the magistrate it is said, Romans 13. We
must obey him for conscience sake. But of things indifferent in the Church,
Coloss. 2. Let no man condemn you in meat or drink, or in respect of a holy
day. 2 Instance. The higher power does more bind. 1 Answer.
Likewise, Gal. 5. Stand fast in the liberty, wherewith Christ has made us
free. Now if again they reply, that the office of Bishops is above the civil
power, and therefore has greater force, then that, to bind men to obey: first,
we grant, that more obedience is due unto the superior power then to the
inferior, as long as it commands nothing contrary to Gods word. As long
therefore as the ministers propound the word of God unto the Church, and for
avoiding of offense, command such things to be observed as appertain to
decency and order, they do not now offend against them, but against God,
whosoever obey them not. But if they require their laws concerning things
indifferent to be observed with putting an opinion of necessity in them and of
the worship of God, and do make them necessary, when there is no danger of
offense to ensue; Because this charge is contrary to the word of God, no
obedience we confess that greater obedience is due unto the superior power in
those things, in which it is superior, that is, in which God would have other
powers to obey it. But the ministerial power is superior unto the civil in
those things, which belong properly unto the ministry, that is, which are of
God delivered, commanded, and committed unto the ministers, that by them they
may be declared unto the Church. But of matters indifferent, concerning which
nothing is either commanded or forbidden of God, the civil power is superior,
by reason of the authority, which God in these matters has given unto the
civil magistrate, and not to the ministers of the Church.

That we also do allege the Testimonies of councels and fathers in
confirming the doctrine of the Church: which were but in vain for us to do,
Fathers and councels ar cited.
if their sentences had not the force and authority of Ecclesiastical
doctrine. But we neither bring nor receive the Testimonies of the ancient
Church with that mind, as if without the authority of the holy Scripture, they
were sufficient for confirmation of any point of doctrine. Neither yet is the
regard had of them in vain. For both they which are rightly minded, after
they are instructed by the voice of the Scriptures concerning the truth, are
yet more confirmed by the Church, as by a Testimony of lower degree: and they
which attribute more authority unto them then they should, or abuse their
sayings against the truth, are very well refuted by the testimony of them,
whom they have made their judges.

Also they say: That order and decency in the Church is necessary Traditions
are order. 1 Cor. 14.
Let al things be done comely and in order. For God is not the author of
confusion. Now the order and discipline of the Church does a great part consist
in traditions Ecclesiastical, wherefore they conclude that by the violating of
these, men's consciences are wounded, and God offended. But as God commands
some order to be appointed and kept in the Church, Answer. Of mere particulars
there is no concluding.
so has he given a double liberty in it unto his Church: first that it be
arbitrarie for the Church to appoint as may be most commodious for it, what
order shall be in every place and at every time observed. Then, that also after
any thing is certainly ordained, may be kept or not kept without hurt of
conscience both of the whole Church, and of every one of the godly, if there
be no danger of offense. For it is necessary that ever a difference be put
betwixt the commandments of God, by the observing whereof God is worshipped,
and offended by the breaking of them; and those things, which God has left to
men to appoint, neither is worshipped or offended, as himself pronounces,
either by the altering or omitting of them, so long as there is no cause or
danger of offense. And the same Apostle, Gal. 5.
who commands all things to be done comely and in order, wills us to stand
fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and that we should be
condemned of no man in meat or drink, or in respect of an holy day.

Wherefore not they, who without contempt of divine things, or wantonness, or
danger of offense, do something otherwise in there things then is appointed,
but they rather offend against the commandment of God, concerning keeping
order, who either would have no order in the Church, or trouble that which is
well appointed.

Obscure things do not suffice without interpreration. Answer. The minor is
false, if they respect the ground.
These men find fault also with the obscurity of the holy Scriptures, which
they prove both by examples of hard places of Scripture, and also out of the
second epistle of Peter cap. 3. where it is said: That there are some things
hard to be understood in the epistles of Paul. And therefore, since that
things darckly spoken, without they be expounded, can not suffice to perfect
and wholesome doctrine, they urge that the interpretation of the Church also is
necessarily to be received with the Scripture.

But here above all things they injury the holy Ghost, ascribing darkness
and obscurity unto him, who of purpose endeavored to apply himself in
simplicity of speech to the capacity of the common people, and the rudest.
For those things which appertain to the ground of doctrine, which is
necessary to be known of all, as are the articles of our belief, the ten
commandments: they are so plainly recited, so often repeated, so plentifully
expounded in the Scriptures, that they are open and easy to any, but to him
who will not learn: even as the 119. Psalm teaches, Where the word of the
Lord is called a Lantern to our feet, and a light to our paths. Again, The
entrance into thy words shows light, and gives understanding to the
simple. And 2. 1 Instance. The ground of doctrine is unknown to many.
Peter 1. The word of the Prophets is called a light shining in a dark
place. To which ye do well, says he, that ye take heed as unto a light
that shines in a dark place, until the day dawne, and the day star arise
in your hearts. And Solomon in the first of the Proverbs, affirms, that he
writes to give the simple sharpness of wit, and to the child knowledge and
discretion: Again, that wisdom cries without, and utters her voice in the
streets. Paul also 1. Cor. 1. says, that Christ sent him to preach the
Gospel not with wisdom of words, least the cross of Christ should be made
of none effect. The ground therefore and sum of doctrine is not obscure,
except it be unto the reprobates, who contemn the truth, or stubburnlie
reject it: as the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 4. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid
to them that are lost: in whom the God of this world has blinded their minds,
that is, of the infidels, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ
should not shine unto the^. And the prophet Esai. 65. and the Apostle, Romans 10.
All the day long have I stretched forth my hands to a disobedient and
gainsaying people. And Psalm. 36. The words of his mouth are iniquity and
deceit: he has left off to understand and to do good. And Mat. 11. I give
thee thanks, o Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these
things from the wise men, and men of understanding, and have opened them unto
babes.

Now if they reply again: 2 Instance. Divine matters are obscure unto al men.
that divine matters are hard and obscure to all men, as it is said, 1. Cor. 2.
The natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God: for they are
foolishness unto him: neither can he know the^ because they are spiritually
discerned: they should first have called to mind, that this ignorance and
hardness rises not of the obscurity of the scripture, but of the blindness of
man's mind: and furthermore, that this obscurity, since in very deed it is not
in the Scripture, but seems to be the fault of our nature, does not always
remain in those who are regenerate, but is removed from them by the
illumination of the holy Spirit, according to those sayings, Luc. 8. It is
given unto you to know the secrets of the kingdom of God, but to others in
parables, that when they see, they should not see: and when they hear, they
should not understand. And 2. Cor. 3. Until this day when Moses is read, the
veil is laid over their hearts. Nevertheless when their heart shall be turned
unto the Lord, the veil shall be taken away. 3 Instance. The Scripture a long
time not known.
From this very place may we easily refute that which they object: That we
our selves, in that that we say the Scripture has not bin understood for these
many ages in the Popish Church, do confess the obscurity of it. For the
ignorance, which has bin from the beginning of the world, and shall be to the
end, in the adversaries of the truth, is not to be imputed to the obscurity
of the Scriptures, but to their own perverseness, who have not a desire to
know and embrace the truth. As the Apostle says, 2 These. 2. Because they
received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved, therefore God
shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe lies.

Whereas therefore it appears that the ground and sum of doctrine is not
obscure: 4 Instance. Many places obscure.
yet we confess that there are some places of Scripture, which have loss
light and more difficulty, then others. But first, they are such, that although
they were not understood, yet the ground may both stand and be understood.
Furthermore the interpretation of these places depends not of the authority of
me^, but the exposition of the^ is to be sought, by the conference of other
places of Scripture, which are more clear: or if we can not find it: yet
least we should affirm any uncertain thing concerning divine matters, our
conscience not satisfying us in it: we must suspend our judgment, until God
shall open unto us some certain meaning: and in the mean season, we are to
hold those with thankful minds, in which God has left no place of doubting
for us. 5 Instance. Of the necessity of interpretation. Act. 20.
But when we answer thus unto our adversaries, they rise again upon us out
of those things which we grant them. For because we confess that some places
of Scripture are harder to be understood then others: and that by occasion of
the dulnes and slownes of man's mind in learning divine matters, neither those
things which are most clear, are understood of the people, as the Eunuch of
Queen Candaces does complain: How can I, says he, except I had a guide? And
that the ministry it self was therefore ordained of God in the Church, for
that it seemed good unto the holy ghost to ad for our instruction an exposition
of the Scripture, which is done by the voice of the Church.

To be short, because our selves in writing and teaching do expound the
Scriptures, and do exhort al men to the reading and hearing the exposition
thereof: Out of these they conclude, that besides the reading of the Scripture,
the interpretation of the Church is necessary: and that therefore what the
Church does pronounce of the meaning of the Scripture, that is without
controversy to be received. But we first confess that the interpretation of
the scripture is necessary in the Church, not for that without this to come
unto the knowledge of heavenly doctrine is simply impossible, whereas both God
is able, when it pleases him, to instruct his even without the Scripture it
self, much more then without the exposition of his ministers: and the godly
learn many things out of the Scriptures without interpreters: and of the
contrary side except the eyes of our minds be opened by the grace of the holy
spirit, heavenly doctrine seems always alike obscure unto us, whether it be
expounded by the word of the Scripture, or of the church: but for that it
pleased God to appoint this ordinary way of instructing us, and himself has
commanded the maintenance and use of his ministry in the Church, that it
should be an instrument which the holy Ghost might most freely use for our
salvation. Again, Interpreting must not be a deprauing of the Scriptures.
although interpretation of scripture be necessary, yet this is so far from
granting any license unto the ministers to bring new ordinances into the
Church, that nothing does more tie them to this doctrine alone, which is
comprehended in the Scriptures, then this very function of expounding the
Scriptures. For to interpret another man's words, is not to feign at our
pleasure a meaning either diverse from them or repugnant unto them: but to
render the same meaning and Sentence either in more words, or in more plain
words, or, at least, in such, as may be more fit for their capacity, whom we
teach: and withal, when there is need, to show, that this is the mind of the
author, which we affirm to be. Three points to be observed in interpreting.
Now such an interpretation of Scripture is made by these means: that first
the phrase be considered, and the proper sense of the words found out: then,
that the order and coherence of the members or parts of the doctrine, which is
contained in the text of Scripture, be declared: Thirdly, that the doctrine be
applied to the use of the Church, which it has in confirming true opinions, or
refuting errors, in knowing of God and our selves, in exhorting, in comforting,
and in directing of our life: as Paul commands, 2. Tim. 2. Study to divide
the word of truth aright. And to. Titus, cap. 1. A Bishop must hold fast the
faithful word according to doctrine, that he also may be able to exhort with
wholesome doctrine, Lib. 2. conhaereses.
and improve them that say against it. And wisely did Epiphanius advise: Not
al words of Scripture have need to be allegorised or construed according to
a strange sense, but they must be understood as they are: and further they
require meditation and sense for the understanding of the drift and purpose of
every argument. That is, Al places of scripture are not to be transformed into
allegories: but we must seek out the proper sense of the words, by meditation
and sense, that is, using the rules of art, and having a regard of the
propriety of tongues and our own experience, by which we know the nature of
those things which are signified by words commonly used in the Church.

6. Inst. Concerning the diciding of a controversy about the text and meaning
thereof.
But here is cast in another difficulty, for that in controversies concerning
the text and the meaning thereof, such a judge is required, whose authority
and testimony may suffice for determining of the meaning of the text. For when
both parties, say they, who strive about the meaning, plead each of them that
his interpretation is true, except judgment be given of such a judge, from
whom it may not be lawful to make any appeal, the contention will never be
decided, and we shall still remain doubtful of the sense of the Scripture.
Furthermore this judgment must needs belong unto the Church: for in the Church
alone we are to seek for an examining and determining of controversies
concerning Religion. What the Church therefore does pronounce in these matters,
we must of necessity rest upon that as the assured meaning of the Scriptures.
And hereof they say it is manifest, that the decrees of the Church are of no
less authority then the express sentence of the Scripture. But we, as we
willingly grant, that the controversies of the Church must be at length
determined, Aun. Not the Church, but the holy ghost is judge in the word.
and that according to the Sentence of that judge, of whom we may be
certainly assured that we can not be deceived: So we acknowledge this judge
to be not the Church, but the holy Ghost himself speaking unto us in the
Scripture, and declaring his own words. For he is the supreme judge, whose
judgment the Church only demands, declares, and signifies: he can not be
deceived, whereas all men are subject unto the danger of error: in a word, he
being the author of the Scripture, is the best and surest interpreter of his
own words. And therefore the Scripture it self in all doubts recalleth us and
binds us unto it self: as 2. Pet. 1. We have a most sure word of the
Prophets, to the which ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that
shines in a dark place. John. 5. Search the Scriptures. Esaias. 8 To the Law,
and to the Testimony: if they speak not according to this word, The Church
does not always speak the words of the holy Ghost.
it is because there is no light in them. For although the holy Ghost speaks
also by the Church: yet because she does not always speak the words of the
holy Ghost, she can not be the supreme and chief judge of controversies in
Religion. For this judge must be such a one, whose sentence may by no means be
called in question. But we have none such, besides the word of God registered
in the Scriptures. Deciding of controversies is not taken away.
Neither do we at all take away the deciding of controversies, when we make
Scripture judge of the meaning of the scripture. For although contentious
persons always seek sophismes, by which they may delude and shift off the
testimonies of Scripture; yet do they this against their conscience: and the
lovers of the truth require no other interpreter of the Scripture, but the
Scripture: and do acknowledge and confess themselves to be plentifully
satisfied by it.

For whereas unto men also it is granted, to be themselves the best
interpreters of their own words: how much more ought this honor to be yielded
unto the holy Scripture? The way how to decide doubtful places. 1 The Analogy
of faith.
Wherefore if controversy be moved concerning the meaning of some place in
the Scripture, we ought much more to do that here, which we would do in other
writings. First of all, to consider and respect the anologie of faith, that
is, to receive no exposition which is against the ground of doctrine, that is
against any article of faith, or commandment of the Decalog, or against any
plain testimony of Scripture: 1 Cor. 3. 2 Examining of Antecedents and
Consequents.
even as Paul admonishes, forbidding to build wood, hey, stubble upon the
foundation. Secondly, to weigh the things that go before, and follow after
that place, which is in question: that so not only nothing contrary to these
may be feigned on it: but also that that may be set for the meaning of it,
which these require. For these either not being observed, or being
dissembled, the meaning of the Scripture is not seldom depraved. Psalm. 91.
So those words of the Psalm, He shall give his Angels charge over thee, that
they shall bear thee in their hands, that thou hurt not thy foot against a
stone. The Devil tempting Christ, interprets them as if they served to
maintain ouer-rash and curious attempts: when yet that which is added [In all
thy waies] does show that they are to be understood of men doing those things
that are proper unto their calling. Thirdly, 3 Resorting to places which teach
the same more clearly
we ought to search every where in the Scripture whether there be extant any
place, where it stands for confessed, or is manifest, or may be showed, that
the same doctrine in other words is delivered touching the same matter which
is contained in that place, which is in controversy. For if the meaning of the
clearer and undoubted place be manifest unto us, we shall also be assured of
the place which is doubted of, because in both places the same is taught: as
when Romans 3. it is said: We conclude that a man is justified by faith without
the works of the Law: That in this place, to be justified by faith is not to
please God for the worthiness of faith, but for the merit of Christ apprehended
by faith: and that the works of the Law signify not the ceremonies only,
but the whole obedience of the Law, chiefly the moral, other places do teach
us, which in more and clearer words deliver the same doctrine concerning the
justification of man before God: as in the same chapter, By the works of the
Law shall no flesh be justified in his sight: for by the Law comes the
knowledge of sin: But now is the righteousness of God made manifest without
the Law, having witness of the Law and of the Prophets. The righteousness of God
by the faith of Jesus Christ unto all and upon all that believe: for there is no
difference: For all have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God: and are
justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus.
4 Conferring like places together.
Fourthly, we must confer places of Scripture, where though the same words
be not spoken of the same thing, yet the like words and forms of speaking
are used of the like things. For if the interpretation of the like place be
certain, and there be the same causes for the like interpretation to be
given in the place that is in controversy, which are in the other, then of
like places we must give one and the same judgment. The Lord wills, Mat. 5.
to put out our eye, to cut off our hand, if it be a cause of offense unto us.
Now whereas the Law forbids us to maime our body, Thou shall not kill: that
therefore by this figure of speech the Lord would have us that we should
rather forsake things most dear unto us, then that by the lust and motion of
the^ we should suffer our selves to be withdrawn from God: the like form of
speech otherwhere used, to signify things most deer and precious, does show,
as Ierem. 22. If Iechoniah were the signet of my right hand, yet would I pluck
thee thence. And Deuteronomy. 32. He kept him as the apple of his eye.

5 The catholic Church.
When once according to these rules the controversy concerning the text and
meaning thereof is judged, we may lawfully also descend to the consent of the
Church, yet putting great space betwixt, and not without great aduisement. For
least by the name of the Church we be beguiled: first of all no sentence or
meaning is to be received, which these rules of examining and judging, which
have bin now declared, do not suffer. Then must we consider, what times, and
whose writings are purest: what points of doctrine have bin, and in what ages
either rightly expounded or depraved with errors: lastly whose interpretation
either is of the author, or may be of us confirmed by the testimony of the
Scripture. And to this deciding of all controversies about the meaning of the
Scripture, drawn out of the Scripture it self, do all the godly and lovers
of the truth agree, even as it is said, John. 8.47.
He that is of God hears the words of God: now the testimony of the
ancient and catholic Church, so far as they see it to accord with the
Scripture, they do with glad and thankful minds embrace, and are so much the
more assured of the known truth. But if any quarrelling men do not yield unto
the Testimonies of the Scripture, we must not seek, because of them, a judge
higher then the word of God, but must leave them unto the judgment of God, as
the Apostle counsaileth us to Titus. 3. Reject him that is an heretik after
once or twice admonition, knowing that he that is such, is perverted, and
sins being damned of his own self. And 1. Cor. 14. If any man be ignorant,
let him be ignorant. And in the last of the Apocalypse: He that is filthy, let
him be more filthy. Neither verily does he, whom the word of God does not
satisfy, rest on the authority of men, as the truth it self does show. But as
these things are sufficient to shut the mouths of them who gainsay the
truth, 6. Prayers.
or at leastwise to manifest their impudency: so is there further required
for the fencing of the consciences of all the godly in debate of religion,
besides a care of learning the doctrine of the word of God, an ardent and
daily inuocating of God, by which we may desire that we may be taught and
guided by his holy spirit: This if we shall do he will not suffer us to make
stay in error, Mat. 11.28. Esaie. 57.15.
which may pull us from him: but will open unto us the true and certain meaning
of his word concerning all things necessary to our salvation, that our faith
may depend not on humane, but divine authority, even as it is promised in the
seventh Chapter of Matthewe, Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and ye
shall find: knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For whosoever asks,
receives: and he that seeks, finds: and to him that knocks, it shall
be opened. And in the eleventh of Luke, How much more shall your heavenly
Father give the holy Ghost to them that desire him? Also in the first of
James, If any of you do lack wisdom, let him ask of God, which gives to
all men liberally, and reprocheth no man, and it shall be given him: but let
him ask in faith, and waver not.

To their former arguments our adversaries add, that it It is unmeet that the
holy Ghost should be subject unto another
and therefore we must not examine him by the rule of the Scripture. But seeing
that the same spirit speaks in the Church and in the Scripture: when we do
examine the voice of the Church by the Scripture, we do not subject the holy
Ghost to another: but we compare him with himself. And by this means first we
give unto him the praise of truth and constancy, while we do acknowledge and
testify that he is always like himself, and does never square from
himself: then also we confess that the supreme authority of pronouncing the
will of God belongs unto him, while we do not seek, whether those things be
true and certain which he has spoken, but whether those be his words, which
men ascribe unto him: and this we do even after the selfsame manner which he
has prescribed us: and after that we find out by the rule of the written
word, that any thing has proceeded from him, to that without making any
controversy we submit our minds and wills. Contrariwise it is easy to see that
our adversaries themselves are guilty of that contumely against the holy
Ghost, of which they accuse us. For while they will have the authority of
giving judgment, concerning the meaning of the Scripture, and of deciding
controversies, not to belong unto the Scriptures but unto themselves: by this
very thing both they imagine that the holy Ghost may dissent from himself,
and do make themselves judges higher then the holy ghost and the word of God.

The letter kills, the spirit quickneth.
Lastly, whereas Paul says, 2. Cor. 3. That he is the minister of the new
Testament, not of the letter, but of the spirit: for the letter does kill, the
spirit does quicken: some men do thence gather, that we are to hear, not what
the written word of God sounds, but what the spirit speaks by the Church
or in our hearts. Yea there has grown an opinion heretofore, that the
gra^matical and literal meaning of the Scripture is pern^^^cus, except all be
transformed into allegories. But a manifold paralogisme in this argument does
easily appear if it be considered what the letter, and the spirit signifies
in Paul. For that all the doctrine and knowledge touching God, as also the
outward observation of the Law in those that are not regenerate, is called
the letter, by the Apostle: and the spirit, first the holy Ghost himself:
Secondly, the true doctrine concerning God, when the holy Ghost is of force
and efficacy by it: Thirdly, faith and conversion, and motions pleasing God
being kindled of the holy Ghost through the word: it appears by the words
going before. For, for that which here he says, that he was made of God a
minister, not of the letter, but of the spirit: he said before, that the
Epistle of Christ was ministered by him, and written not with incke, but with
the spirit of the living God, in tables of the heart: that is, that his
preaching was not in vain, but of force and efficacy in the hearts of men, the
holy Ghost woorking by it. And in like manner, Romans cap. 2. he calls the
ceremony without conversion, circumcision in the letter: but conversion it
self, circumcision of the heart in the spirit. And Rom 7. He wills us to
walk in newness of spirit, and not in the oldnes of the letter: that is, in
true holiness, such as is begun by the spirit in the regenerate: not in the
sin and hypocrisy of them who know verily the will of God, and make practice
also of outward discipline and behavior, but remain without faith and
conversion.

Wherefore first, as the doctrine by the fault of men, 1 The letter kills not
of it self, but by an accident.
and not of it, remains only the letter: so also not of it own nature, but
because of the corruption of men it kills, that is, it terrifieth men's minds
with the judgment of God, and does stir up a murmuring and hatred against God,
as we are plainly taught by the Apostle, Romans cap. 7. The Law is holy, and
the commandment is holy, and just, and good. Was that then which is good,
made death unto me? God forbid. But sin that it might appear sin, wrought
death in me by that which is good, that sin might be out of measure sinful by
the commandment. For we know that the Law is spiritual, but I am carnal, sold
under sin. But the proper effect of the Scripture is to quicken men, that is,
to lighten them with the true knowledge of God, and to move them to the love
of God. As it is said 2. Cor. 2. We are unto God the sweet savor of Christ in
them that are saved, and in them which perish etc.

Secondly albeit the letter, that is, 2 It kills as it is without the Spirit.
the doctrine without that spiritual motion, kills: yet the operation of the
holy ghost accompaning it, when now it is not the letter, but the spirit, and
power of God to salvation, unto every one that believes, it does not kill, but
quicken, as it is said, Psalm. 119. Thy word quickneth me. Wherefore that the
letter kill us not, we must not cast away the Scripture, but the stubburnes of
our hearts: and desire of God that he would let his doctrine be in us and
others, not the letter, but the spirit: that is, that he would forcibly move
our hearts by it, and turn them to him.

The spirit quickneth, agreeing with the word.
Thirdly, that it is added, that the spirit quickneth: that calls us not away
from the Scripture to other opinions or revelations. For that spirit quickneth,
which dissenteth not from the Scripture: but teaches and minds the same,
which he has uttered in the scripture. But that spirit which leads men away
from the Scripture, it quickneth not, but may be said much more truly to kill
then the letter, that is, not by an accident or external cause, but of it own
nature. For the spirit of Antichrist is a liar and a murderer, and therefore be
it accursed unto us.

4 The Apostle misconstrued by them.
Fourthlie, they who by the letter understand either the characters of letters,
or the proper and literal sense, whether it be of the whole Scripture, or of
those speeches which are allegorically and figuratively spoken: and by the
spirit, the interpretation of those speeches: it is manifest that they swerve
far from the mind of Paul, both by those things which have been spoken
concerning the meaning of Paul, and also because not only every sentence of
Scripture, whether it be proper, or figurative, but also every interpretation
of it, is and remains the killing letter, except the quickening force of the
holy Ghost come unto it.

Wherefore since that neither for interpretation, nor revelation, nor
authority, nor any other pretense it is lawful, leaving the Scripture of the
Prophets and Apostles, to depart to whatsoever decrees of religion which are
not confirmed by the Testimony of the Scripture, let us hear it as an oracle
sounding from heaven, bringing to the reading thereof, not minds forestalled,
neither with opinions, conceived either of our own brains or elsewhere, neither
with affections, neither with preiudices: but the love of God, and a desire of
knowing the truth. So shall it come to pass, that both we shall know the true
meaning of the Scripture, and by it godliness and sure and sound comfort shall
be kindled in us and get increase.

OF THE TRVE COMFORT of the Godly.
THE scope and end of this doctrine is, that we may have sure comfort both in
our life and at our death. And that we may have this, we are especially to
learn the doctrine of Christianity. Now the sum of this comfort does
consist in this, that we are the members of Christ: that is, that we are
engraffed into Christ by faith, that he is careful of us: and that by him we
are loved of God, reconciled to God, and conjoined with him. This comfort the
devil goes about to take from us after this manner. 1. Thou art a sinner:
therefore thou art not acceptable in the sight of God.

Answer. But Christ has made satisfaction for me with his precious blood. 2.
But thou must die the death. Answer. But Christ has delivered me from the
power of death, and I know that by Christ I shall escape out of the hands of
death. 3. But how if thou leese the grace of Christ? For thou may fall and
perish; because it is a long way to heaven. Answer. Christ has not only
merited his benefits for me, but also bestows them on me, and preserves
them in me, and gives me perseverance, that I may not fall from grace. 4.
But what if these things appertain not unto thee? and how know thou that
thou art Christ's? Answer. 1. Because I have the testimony of the holy Ghost
within me. 2. Because the general promise appertains to all the faithful. If
I have faith therefore, that promise appertains unto me. But I know I have
faith by the effects of faith. 1. Because I have a will to obey and believe
God, albeit I am but weak. 2. Because I have good works, which are signs of
true faith. Therefore I have true faith, and by a consequent, Christ and his
benefits appertain unto me.

This comfort is necessary. 1. For our salvation: that we despair not. 2. For
the woorshipping of God. For that we may woorship God, we must come out of
sin and death: not rush into desperation, but be sustained with a sure
comfort unto the end. This comfort, though other sects promise, yet can they
not make performance thereof, because their conscience and experience
oftentimes goes against them. The doctrine of the Church alone makes
performance of it, so that men's consciences are at rest, because this alone
shows the fountain of all miseries, unto which mankind is subject: and this
also alone prescribes the way of escaping them.

The partet of this comfort are, 1. Our reconcilement to God by Christ, to
which Christ alone we belong: and therefore we are not at our own liberty, so
that we may freely sin, neither lies our salvation in our hands or power.
For if it were so, we should leese it every moment. 2. The manner of our
reconcilement, even by the blood of Christ. 3. Our delivery from miseries. 4.
The preservation and maintenance of our reconcilement and delivery: Mat. 10.30.
so that not so much as an hair may fall from our head, without the will of our
heavenly father. Objection. But the godly are daily slain. Answer. These
things do not hurt, but help forward our salvation. Romans 8.28.
All things work together for the best unto them that love God. 5. The
testimony of the holy Ghost woorking true comfort in our hearts and true
conversion unto God. By this testimony of the holy Ghost we know that we
are Gods, after we are once delivered from these miseries. For the holy ghost,
which is the surest pledge of this thing, does witness in our hearts that they
truly belong unto us. For he makes us to serve God without fear. Luke 1.74.
Gal. 4 6.
And this Spirit of Christ, which God has sent forth into our hearts, cries
Abba Father. 6. Our certainty of everlasting life. This part differs from
the fifth: because that is the certainty of the things themselves: but this
is our certainty, by which we know these things to be certain. And this is
the beginning of faith.

Three things to be observed for the attaining unto this comfort.

1 The knowledge of our misery. 2 Our delivery. 3 Our thankfulness.

That we may attain unto this comfort, three things are to be considered of
us. 1. The knowledge of our misery, that we may desire deliverance, and be
thankful to God. 2. Our deliverance: without which we have not comfort. 3. Our
thankfulness, without which we are not delivered. Herein is contained the sum
and purpose of the whole sacred Scripture. And these do plainly accord with
the division of the Scripture, or Catholic doctrine, into the Law and Gospel,
and with the differences of these parts. For unto those three members are the
Law and the Gospel referred: to the first and third apperteineth the Decalog or
ten commandementes, because there is a double use of the Law, the knowledge
of our sin, and the rule of our life. To the second member appertains the
Creed, because this speaks of our delivery, and is the sum of the Gospel:
The Sacraments likewise are to be referred unto the second part, because they
seal that which is taught in the Gospel. They are those appurtenances as it
were adjoined to the promise of grace, and the seals of justification by faith.
Prayer belongs unto the third part, that is, to thankfulness: because prayer
is the chiefest part of thankfulness.

Out of these arise four questions. 1. From these arise four quaestions. 1
Quaestion.
For what cause these three are necessary for our obtaining of comfort. 2.
Whence we may know these three: even out of the Law and the Gospel. 3. How.
4. Wherefore.

The knowledge of our misery is necessary for our obtaining of comfort. 1.
Because if we knew not our misery, Why these three are necessary for the
obtaining of our comfort. Why the knowledge of our misery is necessary. Mat.
11.28. Isaie. 57.15.
and even the greatness of it, we should not know the greatness of our happiness,
neither should we desire delivery out of evils. If we desire not delivery
out of evils, we do not seek it: if we seek it not, we obtain it not:
because God gives delivery only to those who seek it: it is opened only to
him that knocks: and so has God his end in them, even his worship. Blessed
are they who thirst after righteousness. Come unto me al ye that labor. I dwell
in a contrite spirit. That which we have now said, is confirmed also by this
syllogism, or form of argument. That which is necessary for to stir up in us a
desire of deliverance, that is necessary for our comfort: But the knowledge of
our misery is necessary for the desire of salvation, or deliverance:
Therefore the knowledge of our misery is necessary for the obtaining of our
comfort: yet not for the comforting of us: for we are terrified by this
knowledge of our misery. But this terror is good for us, because, except we
know our misery, we desire not delivery. And they that desire not delivery,
receive it not.

2 The knowledge of our misery is necessary for the obtaining of our comfort:
because we should be ungrateful if we were ignorant out of how great miseries
we were delivered and drawn: For how much the more we feel the greatness of
our evil, so much the more desire we and with for a remedy, and so much the
more thankful are we toward God, because he gave us a remedy against sin.
3. Because by the preaching of the Law, is made a preparation to the preaching
of grace: otherwise there follows carnal security, and our comfort is made
unstable. Whereof it appears, that we draw the knowledge of our misery
chiefly out of the Law, and that therefore we must begin from the preaching of
the Law, as the Prophets and Apostles have done, and that to the end that men's
consciences and hearts may be cast down before God, and prepared to
repentance, and to the receiving of the gospel. Except this be done, men will
become more careless and stubburne, and pearls shall be thrown to swine to be
trodden under feet.

Why the knowledge of our delivery is necessary. Igno^ nulla cupido.
The knowledge of our delivery is necessary for our comfort. 1. Because a
good thing, not known, is not desired: according to that, There is no coveting
after an unknown thing. When we have found it also, if we know not what it
is, we desire it not, and therefore do not obtain it. Yea that very means,
by which we attain unto our delivery, requires the knowledge of our
delivery. For thou shall er in the desire of thy delivery, except thou know
what, and of what quality it is, and after what manner it is received.
Furthermore, we are made by faith partakers of this delivery. But faith is
not without knowledge. Wherefore the knowledge of our delivery is necessary,
both that we may obtain it: and also because the mean and instrument it self,
by which we do obtain it, cannot be without the knowledge of our delivery.
2. A good thing not known does not comfort: that therefore it may comfort
thee, thou must know how great and what manner a good thing it is. 3. The
knowledge of our delivery is necessary, that we may be thankeful: because for
a thing not known to be good we use not to give thanks, for that we make
light account of it: and if we will be indeed grateful, all the circumstances of
that good thing are known and desired of us. We know our delivery, out of the
gospel. 1. By hearing it. 2. By learning it. 3. By assenting unto it, and that
out of the gospel: because the Gospel alone does promise delivery unto those
that believe in Christ. Now we must diligently also observe the manner of our
delivery, that we do not our selves imagine, or receive imagined by others
any manner of delivery to the reproach of Gods name, and hazard of our own
salvation.

The knowledge of our thankefulnes is necessary for our comfort. Why the
knowledge of our thankfulness is necessary.
1. Because no man can do any thing grateful unto God, except he first know
what is grateful unto him: For he will be worshipped, and have us grateful unto
him, not after that manner which we will but which himself has prescribed.
Except therefore thou know, what is grateful unto him, thou shall reap
thence no comfort. 2. Because there is first of all true consolation, where
there is thankfulness: for except thou be thankful, thou can not apply unto
thy self the merit of the Son of God. For it is offered and applied only to
us being thankful: now thou can not show thankfulness, except thou know
after what manner the Lord bestows on us his benefits. 3. The knowledge of our
thankfulness is required necessarily, because it is the chief end and scope
of our delivery: 1 John. 3.8.
for this purpose appeared the Son of God, that he might destroy the works
of the devil. 4. That we may know that those things which we do are no merit,
but only a declaring of our thankfulness. And what thou give thanks for,
that thou know that thou have not deserved. 5. By this thankfulness our faith
and comfort is confirmed in us. Objection. That which of it self follows, is
not necessary to be taught. But thankfulness must needs follow of it self:
Therefore it is not necessary to be taught. Answer. Thankfulness follows
delivery. But not the manner of thankfulness likewise: for of this we are to be
instructed out of the word of God. Furthermore that proposition is not
universally true: for a thing may be taught, which of it self does greatly
follow, for greater and fuller knowledge and confirmation. Now thankfulness it
self we know, 1. Out of the Gospel; because it promises delivery, with a
condition of repentance. 2. Out of the Law, because the Law in special does
declare and determine the kinds of obedience. Seeing that then the true, sure
and only comfort of the faithful is the scope of the whole doctrine of
christianity: and seeing that to that comfort these three are necessarily
required, that is, The consideration of man's misery, of his delivery, and of
his thankfulness: it appears that these three are the chief parts of
Christian doctrine. And therefore we will entreat of the^ hereafter in order.

THE FIRST PART.
OF THE MISERY OF MAN.
Whence know thou thy misery?

OVT of the law of God Romans 3.20.
.

What does the Law of God require of us?

That does Christ summarily teach us, Mat. 22. Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy mind, and with all thy
strength Luke 10.27.
. This is the first and the great commandment, and the second is like to
this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. On these two commandments
hangs the whole Law, and the Prophets.

Art thou able to keep all these things perfectly?

No truly Romans 3.10. and 23. 1 John. 1.8
: For by nature I am prone to the hatred of God and of my neighbor Rom 8.7.
Ephesians. 2.3. Tit. 33.
.

Did God then make man so wicked and perverse?

Not so Genesis 1.31.
: But rather he made him good, and to his own image Genesis 1.26. and 27.
, that is, endewed with true righteousness and holiness, that he might rightly
know God, his creator, and heartily love him, and live with him blessed for
ever, and that to lawde and magnify him 2 Cor. 3.18. Col. 3.10. Ephesians. 4.24.
.

Whence then arises this wickedness of man's nature?

From the fall and disobedience of our first parents, Adam and Eve Genesis 5.
Romans 5.12.18.19.
: Hence is our nature so corrupt, that we are all conceived and borne in sin
Psalm. 51.5. Genesis 53.
.

Are we so corrupt, that we are not at all apt to do well, and are prone to
all vice?

Indeed we are: except we be regenerated by the holy Ghost John. 3.5. Genesis
6.5. Job. 10.4. and 15 14.16. and 3^ Esaie. 53 6.
.

Does not God then injury to man, who in the Law requires that of him, which
he is not able to perform?

Noe John. 3.5. Ephesians. 4.24.
. For God had made man such a one, as he might perform it: But man, by the
impulsion of the devil Luk 10.30.
, and his own stubburnesse, bereaved himself and all his posterity of those
divine graces.

Does God leave this stubburnesse and falling-away of man unpunished?

Noe: But is angry in most dreadful manner Romans 5.1^. Heb. 9.27.
, as well for the sins wherein we are borne, as also for those which our
selves commit, and in most just judgment punishes them with present and
everlasting punishments, as himself pronounces: Cursed be he that
confirms not all the words of this Law to do them Deuteronomy. 27.26 Gal. 3.10.
.

Is not God therefore merciful?

Yea verily, he is merciful Exodus 34.6.
: but so, that he is also just Exodus 20.5 Psalm. 5.5. 2 Cor. 6.14
. Wherefore his justice requires, that the same which is committed against the
divine Majesty of God, should also be reco^penced with extreme, that is,
everlasting punishments both of body and soul.

IN THIS first part concerning the Misery of man, there are three places
handled.

1 Of sin. 2 Of the creation of man, which makes to the understanding of the
former place concerning sin. 3 Of free will.
How we come to the knowledge of our misery and sin. By the Law.
We know our misery, and that we have sinned, out of the Law of God, which
exacteth and requires of us the contrary to that which is in us. For we are
prone to hate God and our neighbor, which is very sin it self: but the Law
requires of us the love of God. Now the name of misery stretches farther
then the name of Sin. By the name of misery, we understand, the evil of
trespass or offense, that is, al sin: and the evil of punishment, which
comprehends all the destructions of our reasonable nature, as griefs,
torments, calamities. To be short, the evil of punishment comprehends al
miseries and sins that follow after, wherewith sins that go before are
punished. So the numbering of the people, committed by David, is both a
punishment and a sin. That our misery is learned out of the Law, it
appears sufficiently by this syllogism or reason, whose That is proved by a
syllogism, Whose mayor being set by the Law, Deuteronomy. 27.16. Gal. 3.30. Mat.
22.38.
Mayor or first proposition the Law it self mentions: Accursed be every one
who abides not in the perfect love of God and his neighbor. Now this love of
God, Christ calls the first and greatest commandment. Likewise our
conscience adds the And Minor added by our conscience, The conclusion must
necessarily follow, as an approbation of the sentence of the Law. Mat. 22.37.
The part of the mayor explicated. 1 Why In perfect love, and what that is.
Minor or second proposition: I have not abidde^ in all: of these two
propositio^s arises the conclusion, which is the approbation or alowing of the
sentence of the Law: therefore I am accursed. So then out of the Law comes
our knowledge of sin.

Nevertheless the Mayor, or first proposition, is to be declared more at large.
First it is said, whosoever abides not in perfect love, that is, as Christ
expounds it, he that loves not God with all his heart, with all his soul,
with all his cogitation, and with all his strength. With all his hart] by which
are understood all the affections, inclinations and appetits, or desires. For
God will have himself alone to be acknowledged the chiefest, and himself to
be loved above al things: and, that men may rely on him, he will have the
whole heart to be yielded up to himself, not part to him, and part to another:
and to this is opposed, not to walk before God with a perfect heart. Objection.
If we ought to love God with all our heart, then ought we not to love our
Parents. Answer. It is lawful for to love other things also besides God, but
nothing above God. We ought to love our Parents, but not chiefly. For we ought
to love al other things for God. It follows, with all thy soule] by which he
comprehends that part which is willing to any thing, or the motions of the
will: then therefore he means, with thy whole will and purpose. Thirdly,
with all thy cogitations] by which he understands the understanding and mind:
so much as we know of God, 1 Cor. 13.10.
so much also do we love him; therefore when we shall know him perfectly, that
which is in part shall be abolished. And therefore our love of God which now is
but in part, shall then be perfect. Lastly, with all thy strength] in which al
inward actions agreeable to the Law of God are contained. Secondly, it is
said, In the Love of God: 2 Why In the love of God, and what that is.
as unto whom, being once manifested and doing good unto him, man is bound:
whereupon the Lord calls himself our God. Now to love God, is to acknowledge
him to be the chiefest good, and to be the chiefest good to us: and so to
love him, that thou will rather forgo all things then thou will depart from
him, or not be joined with him: for that which is best, that thou do most
desire, and do covet most of al to be joined with it.

Thirdly it is said, In the love of thy neighbor. 3 What is, In the love of
thy neighbor
To love thy neighbor, is for the love that thou owe unto God to wish well
and do well unto thy neighbor, and to do all things to him which thou
would in aequitie and, according to the Law to be done to thee.

The Love of God is the sum of the Law, Why the love of God is the sum of
the Law. Why it is called the first commandment.
because it is taken for our whole obedience, as being the cause of our
obedience. The love of God is called the first Commandment, because it is the
spring and fountain of the rest. It is the fountain of the rest. 1. because
it is the efficient and impulsive cause. 2. because it is the final cause or
end which the rest propose, which is, for to declare our love toward God. In
like manner it is called the greatest commandment. 1. because it is the end of
all the rest of the commandments, and of our whole obedience* for therefore
thou ought to do well unto thy neighbor, because thou love God: and
again, that thou may show thy obedience to him. 2. because that is the
principal woorshippe for which the ceremonial laws were ordained, and so is
opposed unto the ceremonial woorship, which was appointed for this moral law.

Objection. The second commandment is like unto the first, therefore the
first is not the greatest. Answer. The love of our neighbor is like unto the
love of God. 1. Because that commandment of loving our neighbor is opposed
unto the ceremonies. 2. Because the obedience of the first table is the cause
of the second. Thirdly, because the breach of the second table does as well
deserve eternal punishments, as the breach of the first. 4. Because it
appertains to the moral woorship, which is described in the first and second
table. 5. It is like, because of the coherence of both, for that neither can be
observed without the other. 6. Because one is author of both. 7. Because both of
the^ contain our whole obedience. Hence now appears the answer to this
objection. Therefore our neighbor is to be set aequall with God, and to be
aequally worshipped. For ir has been said before, Thou shall love God alone
with all thy heart. Now the love of our neighbor is like unto the love which we
owe unto God, in respect of the kind of worship, but unlike in respect of the
degree. And it is also unlike first in respect of the obiectes, or things
loved. For God and man who are to be loved are diverse obiectes. 2. For that the
love of our neighbor rises from the love of God: but it falls not so out of
the contrary. 3. As it was said, it is unlike in respect of the degree of our
love to God. Objection. If the love of God be the chiefest commandment, then
the love of God is greater then faith. Answer. Love is here taken for our
whole obedience which we owe unto God: under which faith is comprehended,
which is the cause of all the rest of our actions. For in that we are
commanded to love God, we are also forbidden to offend him: for no man
offends him whom he loves.

Why the love of our neighbor is called the second commandment.
The love of our neighbor is called the second commandment. 1. because it
contains the sum of the second table: for if thou love thy neighbor as thy
self, thou will not murder him, thou will not hurt him. 2. because the love of
our neighbor must rise out of the first table, even from the love of God: and
so is that also explicated, which is added of Christ: That on these two
commandments hangs the whole Law and the Prophets, that is, that all the
other legal obedience which is contained in Moses and the Prophets does spring
from our love of God and our neighbor. Objection. In the Prophets also is the
promise or doctrine of the Gospel: therefore Christ seems not to speak
aright in this place. Answer. He speaks of the doctrine of the Law, not of
the promises of the Gospel, which appears by the question of the Pharisie
demanding, which was the chief commandment, not which was the chief
promise: and therefore Christ answers him unto the purpose. Hitherto reaches
the declaration of the Mayor or first proposition concerning the abiding in the
perfect love of God and our neighbor.

Now remains the Minor Proposition, which is, But I have not abidden in all,
that is, I have neither loved god nor my neighbor as I ought: whence the
conclusion arises: Therefore I am accursed: and so it appears that indeed
the knowledge of our misery and of our punishment, which is contained under
the name of misery, is drawn out of the Law. That, which also is proved by
another argument, The Law shows our punishment, because it binds us either
to yield obedience, or to suffer punishment: But no man performs that
obedience: Therefore it binds us to suffer punishment. Furthermore, the Law
shows that al evils happen unto us because of our sins. Again, it shows
the justice of God, the greatness and heaviness of the wrath of God against
sin. Hence arises a question, whence sin comes, especially since that
the Lord made man good, and to his own image. To this question apperteineth
the common place concerning sin, the creation of man, and free will: which
three places we will discourse of in order.

THE COMMON PLACE OF SIN.
THE questions here to be observed, are these.

1 Whether sin be, or whence it appears to be in us. 2 What sin is. 3 How
many kinds of sin there are. 4 What be the causes of sin. 5 What he the
effects of sin.
That sin is not only in the world, but in us also, We know that sin is in
us. 1 Out of the Law of God.
we know, 1. Out of the Law of God, that is, by comparing our selves and the
Law together, in considering what the Law requires, and what we have
performed. The Law requires whole and perfect obedience, both inward and
outward. But this we find not in our selves. Object. That which teaches us to
seek for righteousness elsewhere then in our selves, and does show us to be
guilty of sin, by that we have knowledge of our sin: But the Gospel wills
unto to despair of ourselves, Ob. We know it by the Gospel also. Ans. Not
principally.
and to seek for righteousness elsewhere. Therefore by the Gospel we have
knowledge of our sin. Answer. I grant that we have after some sort knowledge
of our sin by the Gospel, but not principally. For this is the principal use
of the Law. But the Gospel presupposes that which the Law has proved, that
is, that we are sinners, before it sends us to Christ. So also sciences,
which are in order directly one under another, take their principles o^ chief
grounds from the sciences next above them, and proceed according to them, not
proving them, but taking them as granted. Again, the Gospel does only in
general accuse us of sin: but does not in special declare what and which be
our sins. But this is the principal and proper function of the Law:
therefore do we not put the Law as excluding the Gospel, 2 By the Law of
nature.

3 By testimonies of Scripture.

4 By punishments ensuing.

5 By sermons which treat of repentance.


as if by the Law alone we had knowledge of our sin: but chiefly and properly.
2. We know that we have sin in us, by the Law of nature, or by that
judgment of conscience, which is in all men. 3. By the testimonies of the holy
Scripture, as Psalm 14 and 53. Esaie 59.4. By the punishments and miseries
which follow sin. 5. By the sermons which treat of repentance.

Now this question is set down, 1. against the Libertines. 2. for the
exercise of repentance. And here the question is not, whether sin be in some
thing, or in some men, but whether it be in all men. And because that without
the knowledge of those things neither dew honor can be given to God, nor
salvation befall to us: God will have the nature and causes of sin and the
punishments thereof to be known and searched out of us.

But even as of the beginning of mankind, so also of his corruption and
restoring, none know the certainty besides the Church, which is instructed by
the voice of God concerning these so weighty matters. And therefore the
Philosophers do err about the very definition and declaring the nature of
sin, while they judge either outward actions only, or purposes and desires
which agree not with honest discipline to be sins: but not corrupt
inclinations and affections, ignorance, errors, and doubtings of God and his
will: and in a word, whereas they do not understand wholly the law of God, it
cannot be but they must make account of many most heinous sins as of no
sins. They err also about the cause of sin, for because whereas they are
ignorant of the falling away of the devils from God, and of the seducement and
corruption of men's natures in our first parents, they imagine that sin was
not borne together with us, but that all as they grow in years, so by their
own will they do fall into it. Last of all, they err about the effect of
sin, because both they are ignorant of the everlasting punishments, neither
are they able sufficiently to conceive of the horrible wrath of God against
sins, no not though they were taught it out of the word of God. The Apostle,
Romans 7. I had not known lust, except the Law had said, Thou shall not lust.
John. 16. The holy Ghost shall reprove the world of sin, because they
believe not in me. Psalm. 90. Who knows the power of thy wrath? For according
to thy fear is thine anger.

WHAT SIN IS.
IT is agreed on of all men, The nature of sin.
that sin is a thing displeasing God, contrary to righteousness, and
deserving punishment, as it is said, Psalm. 5. Thou art not a God that loves
wickedness. As therefore the rule of righteousness is the will of god: so of the
contrary, we are not otherwhere to know what sin is, then by the same rule of
man's life and actions. Therefore the definition of sin in the 1. Epist. of
John. cap. 3. is the truest and plainest: Sin is a transgression of the Law:
or, what soever is repugnant to the Law. But because here men's minds seek
further, what those evils are, which are forbidden and condemned by the law of
God: we must add an explication of this definition out of the Sermons and
declarations of the Law scattered throughout the whole Scripture: to wit, That
sin is a defect, or an inclination, or action repugnant to the law of God,
offending God, and making him that sins together with all his posterity,
guilty of temporal and eternal punishments, except remission be granted for
the Son of God our Mediator.

The The Logicians call it Genus, which is the more common nature of a thing, or
the matter of it.
general nature of sin is a defect. Likewise, an inclination, or action. Now
there are called defectes in the mind, ignorance, and doubtfulnes of God and
his will: in the heart, a privation of the love of God and our neighbor, of joy
in god, and of an earnest desire and endeavor to obey God according to al his
commandementes, and an omitting of inward and outward actions, which are
commanded by the Law of God. Or, This defect is an absence, 1 Of good
inclinations in our mind. 2. Of the knowledge of God. 3. Of motions to obey
the Law of God. 4. Of inward actions, which are required in the Law. 5. Of
outward actions, which follow the inward.

Now corrupt inclinations are said to be, stubburnes of the heart and will
against the Law of God, or against the judgment of the mind, as touching
honest and dishonest actions: or a pronesse and willingness of nature to do
those things which God forbids, which evil they call concupiscence. Or, A
corrupt inclination is a quality of the mind, which has an action following
it, even so that albeit we are not willing as yet actuallie to do those
things which the Law forbids, yet are we willing by inclination of mind.
That sin is a defect, shall be proved in the question of original sin.
That sin deserves eternal punishments, shall be proved in the question of
the effects of sin.

The difference of sin.
Now the difference of sin, which makes it to differ from all other
defectes, is, that it is repugnant unto the Law of God.

The proper quality of sin.
The property of it is, that it makes a creature guilty of the eternal
wrath of God. For as the special and peculiar difference of sin is,
repugnancie with the law of God: So a propriety necessarily adioined unto it,
is the guilt of the person sinning, that is, a binding of him to temporal and
eternal punishments, which is done according to the order of Gods justice and
will. And this is that which they commonly say, that there is a double
formalitie or difference of sin: repugnancie with the Law and guilt: or that
there are two respects, of which one is a comparison or a dissimilitude with
the Law: the other as it is ordained to punishment. For sin is considered
with this respect in the Church, that we may have the whole description of it,
not only as an evil habit of the will which is called vice of the
Philosophers. But that guilt in men does not only enwrappe the sinners
themselves, but also their posterity in the judgment of God: as it is said,
Exodus 20, Visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the
third and fourth generation of them that hate me. And Deuteronomy. 28. Cursed shall
be the fruit of thy body.

Last of al an An accide^t is that which so belongs unto a thing, as it is
not of the nature thereof but so belongs unto it, as it may also not belong.
accident of sin is contained in these words: Except remission be made for the
satisfaction of the Son of god: which is therefore added, least this might
seem to be said in the definition of sin, That all, whosoever have sinned,
perish, without all recall, together with their posterity. For although there
follow the nature of sin, which is to be repugnant to the law of god, the
condemnation of the sinner and his posterity: yet both are exempted from it,
if they apply unto themselves the merit of Christ by faith, and be converted.

3. How many kinds of sin there are.
There are five principal divisions of sin.

The first division is this: There is one sin Original, and another Actual.

OF ORIGINAL SIN.
THat there is Original sin in all men, Original sin in all men.
is proved and maintained against the Pelagians, and the Anabaptists, 1. By
the Testimonies of Scripture: As, Job. 14.4.
who can bring a clean thing out of filthiness? Psa. 51.5.
In sin has my mother conceived me. Ioh. 1.1.13.
Which are borne not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of
man, but of God. John. 3.36.
He that believes not the Son, the wrath of God abides on him. Romans 5 16.
The fault came of one offense unto condemnation. Ephe. 2.3.
We were by nature the children of wrath. 2. Because infants also are subject
to sin: because they die. But they have not sin by imitation: therefore by
propagation. Which is also confirmed by Testimonies of Scripture. Genesis 6.5.
All the imaginations of man's heart are only evil, and that continually.
Isaie. 48.8.
I called thee a transgressor from thy womb. Romans 7.23.
I see another Law in my members rebelling against the Law of my mind.

Against this doctrine of Original sin, The Pelagians and Anabaptists against
Original sin.
in times past did the Pelagians strive, as at this day do the Anabaptists,
denying that there is any Original sin: For because that neither the posterity
are guilty by reason of the first Parents fall, neither is sin derived into
them from their ancestors by propagation: but every one sins, and
becomes faulty by imitation only of the first Parents. Others grant, that
all became faulty by reason of the first sin, but not that withal such
corruption was bredde in us, as might deserve condemnation and the wrath of
God: for that the defectes, as they think, with which we are borne, are no
sin.

What we are to oppose against them.
But that we may altogether fortify our selves against Pelagians and
Anabaptists, and others of the same litter, these four things are proposed
diligently to be considered.

1 That al mankind is held guilty for the disobedience of our first Parents,
except by the benefit of the Mediator they be exempted from it.

2 That there are in us, besides this guilt, defects and inclinations repugnant
to the Law of God, even from the hour of our birth.

3 That these defects and inclinations are sins, and deserve the aeternal
wrath of God, except we be delivered by his Son. For Christ freeth us, not
only from the guilt, but also from the corruption. For as a double evil
befell us from Adam, even our guilt for the sin committed in him, and the
corruption of our nature propagated from him unto us: So by Christ, the other
Adam, a double grace has befallen us: even Imputation of righteousness, and
Regeneration. These two are proved together in the scripture. As, Romans 3.23.
Al men have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God, and are justified
freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. Gal. 3.22.
The Scripture has concluded al under sin, that the promise by the faith of
Jesus Christ should be given to them that believe, God shall circumcise thy
heart, and the heart of thy seed.

4 That these evils are derived not by imitation; but by propagation of a
corrupt nature from our first Parents unto al their posterity, Christ only
excepted. So then we know, that there is Original sin: let us now see what it
is.

Original sin is the guilt of al mankind, by reason of the fall of our first
Parents, and a privation of the knowledge of God, and his will in our mind,
What Original sin is.
and of all inclination to obey God with our will and heart: and of the
contrary, in these there remains a wicked inclination to disobey the Law of
God, ensuing upon the fall of our first Parents, and derived from them unto al
their posterity, and so corrupting their whole nature, so that al by reason of
this corruption are become guilty of the everlasting anger of God, neither can
they do any thing pleasing and acceptable to God, except remission be granted
for the Son of God the Mediator, and a renewing of their nature by the holy
Ghost. A more brief definition of the nature of Original sin is this,
Original sin is a wanting of that original righteousness which ought to be in
us. Now original righteousness, is a conformity and perfect obedience, as well
inward as outward, according to the whole Law of God: because man at first
pleased God by that conformity.

The formal cause of sin, as it has respect to punishment, The formal cause
of sin.
is the guilt. Now the guilt is, to be obnoxious to punishment, and to be
ordained to everlasting torments: and to be worthy of these, because of the
offending of God. That the cause of this guilt was the fall of Adam, is proved,
1. By testimonies of Scripture. As by one man sin entered into the world, and
death by sin, Romans 5.12.
and so death went oueral men. By one man's disobedience many were made sinners.
2. It appears also by this antithesis, or contrariety. As delivery from
sin is, not to be guilty, because of the satisfaction of Christ: so of the
contrary, Original sin is the guilt which for the fall of our first Parents
was derived unto al their posterity.

That the privation or want of the knowledge of God is sin, The privation of
the knowledge of God is sin.
is proved by this argument. Whatsoever is contrary to the Law is sin. The
privation of the knowledge of God is contrary to the Law: Therefore it is
sin. Now that privation of the knowledge of God is contrary to the Law, the
reason for it is, 1. Because the Law of God requires in men gifts and
faculties opposite to these defectes and inclinations. For, Accursed be every
one that abides not in all. But there is commanded in the Law, the true
knowledge of God, and a correspondence of all the powers in man's nature with the
will of God, when he says: I am the Lord thy God: Thou shall have none other
Gods before me. Likewise: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart.
Whosoever therefore do roue and swerve in opinions concerning God, not
acknowledging him accordingly as he is manifested in the Scriptures, and they
whose hearts do not so turn with the love of god, that nothing may withdraw them
from him, these, as much as lies in them, are fallen from aeternall life, and
are subject unto the curse. 2. To this belongs all the sayings of the
Scripture, which tax our ignorance of God. Ye err, not knowing the
Scriptures. The gospel is said to be hid to those which perish. Ignorance of
the Gospel is sin.

That a corrupt inclination to disobey the Law of God is sin, A corrupt
inclination is sin.
is proved. 1 By the tenth and last commandment: Thou shall not covet. For the
Law requires inward and outward obedience, and that we have an inclination to
love God. That corrupt inclination therefore is a defect and sin. Sin is the
transgression of the Law. 2. By other testimonies of Scripture. The frame or
imagination of man's heart is evil, Genesis 8.21.
even from his youth. We were by nature the children of wrath. 3. By death and
other punishment which followed. The wages of sin is death. Inclinations
therefore to will or do il are sin.

1 Objection. That which is not voluntary, neither can be avoided, is not
sin: Inclinations are not voluntary. Therefore they are not sin. Answer.
It is true in civil matters, that that which is not voluntary is not sin,
but not in spiritual matters. For the Scripture teaches both that the
wisdom of the flesh cannot be subject to the Law of god: and, that al who are
not subject unto the Law, are subject to the wrath of God. Wherefore the
justice of God requires that every creature who is endewed with reason be
condemned and punished of God, whenever he is disobedient unto his Law,
whether willing or unwilling, whether he be corrupted by his own fault, or by
the fault of his ancestors. For so great and so inviolable is the majesty of
God, so great evil is there in sin, that the defection of one man from God is
sufficient to provoke the anger of God toward al his posterity.

2 Objection. Punishments are not sins. These inclinations and defects are
punishments of the first fall: therefore they are not sins. Answer. It is
true that punishments are not sins, if we respect the course of civil
justice: but not so, if we respect Gods justice. For God oftentimes punishes
sins with sins. Which is specially showed, Romans 1. and 2. Thessa. 2. For
God has power of depriving his creatures of his spirit: which power his
creatures have not.

3 Objection. Privation is sin. God inflicteth it, creating in us a soul not
adorned with those gifts, which he would have had bestowed upon us, if Adam had
not transgressed. Therefore God is the author of sin. That is, privation being
an accident, and having a diverse nature according to the diverse respect as it
is of God inflicted, and as it is by us received; in the objection deceitfully
this diversity is dissembled.
Answer. It is a fallacy of the Accident. For as God inflicteth it, it is
Gods justice: but as it is drawn on us by the fault of our Parents, and our
selves also do willingly receive it, it is sin. Reply. But God should not
have punished this fault with such a punishment, seeing he did know that so
great evil would ensue. Answer. Let God execute his justice, and let the
world perish. Therefore he should do it, because it was just.

4 Objection. The desires of things that are object unto them are natural:
therefore they are not sins. Answer. True: ordinate desires of their proper
objects, which God has ordained for them: but not inordinate, and such a^ are
against the Law. For to desire, of it self, is not sin: But the desire is
of it self good. But a desire against the Law is sin.

5 Objection. Nature is good. Therefore there is no Original sin. Answer. 1.
True it is that Nature is good, if you consider it before the corruption. All
things were very good which God made. 2. Even now also Nature is good, in
respect of the substance and being of it, and as it was made of God: but not in
respect of the quality of it, and as it is corrupted.

That these evils are not only drawn by imitation, but also are borne with
us, whiles our corrupt nature is propagated from our first Parents unto al
their posterities, these testimonies do manifestly show. Job. 24. Who can
bring a clean thing out of filthiness? John. 1. Which are borne not of blood,
nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. Romans 5. By one
man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death went over
all men, for as much as al me^ have sinned. and cap. 7. We know that the law is
spiritual but I am carnal, sold under sin. Ephesians. 2. We were by nature the
children of wrath, as well as others. Last of al, seeing infantes also are
subject to sin, whereupon also they die, and are to be baptized, as before
time they were circumcised: and they cannot as yet sin by imitation: it must
needs be that sin is bred in them, as it is said, Genes. 8. The cogitation of
man's heart is evil even from his youth. And Isaie. 48. I called thee
transgressor even from thy womb.

Against this doctrine it is objected: first, Object. Of the deriuation of the
soul from the soul of the parents.
If sin be propagated from the Parents unto their posterity, either the soul
stained with original sin, is derived by deduction out of the soul of the
Parents, or is created by God of nothing infected with sin, and is infused
into the body: or else being created pure by God it draws corruption and
naughtines of the body, unto which it is united. But since that a spiritual
substance may not be cut into parts, souls are not propagated by deduction out
of the soul of the Parents, neither are they created corrupt of God, because
God by this means should be made author of sin, contrary to that which has
been said: God saw al which he had made, and they were very good: neither are
the souls depraved by the bodies: partly for that it would be against both the
end, unto which man was created, even to life everlasting, and also against the
goodness of god, for a pure and innocent soul to be joined with a body of which
it should be depraved: and partly for that sin can not be propagated by the
body, which ^ senseles, neither exercises any action on the soul, but by the
soul. Wherefore the children are not borne corrupt of corrupt parents.

1 Answer. The souls are corrupted by the bodies.
To this the answer is double. First they can not prove that, which in the
third place in their Minor they affirm: That the souls can not draw
naughtines and corruption from the bodies. For our first Parents also were
created to eternal life, and yet were depraved falling from god. Wherefore as
the creation of our first parents, and their trial by temptation, and in
temptation their falling away (which being put, their corruption was certainly
to follow:) so also the uniting of the souls with their bodies, in which
certainly they shall be corrupted, is not contrary to the goodness of God:
partly because God is so good, as also he will show forth his anger against
sin, and his justice together with his mercy in his works: partly because
he has appointed a remedy in his son, unto the which who fly are delivered
from this hereditarie and necessary corruption, and from the danger of
damnation: neither is it disagreeing from his goodness, rather to save men freed
from sin and death, by the death of his onele begotten Son, then if they had
never fallen into these miseries. Neither is it absurd, that the nature or
temperature of the body, though it be senseles, yet should be prone to evil,
and no fit instrument for the good actions of the soul: and that the soul not
being established in that purity, in which it was made, should follow the
inclinations and corrupt temperature of the body, and should fall from that
integrity in which it was, as soon as it is united unto the body: and seeing
that the body proceeding from sinful and guilty parents, is one part of a
man, that God should be offended with the whole man, for that part of his which
is guilty, and should withdraw the grace of his spirit, that the other part
also, that is, the soul being deprived of spiritual gifts, may fall into
wickedness and malediction.

But be it that they were able to prove that Minor proposition, 2 Answer. The
souls are together created and united to their bodies.
yet there is another sufficient answer to the Mayor: so that we have no
need to enter into any doubtful dispute, about the deducting of the soul
from the soul of the parents by generation, neither of the manner how
Original sin is propagated. For although we grant that the souls of all
men, as soon as they begin to live, are created of god: yet it is not to be
imagined, that the souls have a being some time, before they are united to
the bodies.

For at one and the same time they are both created and united to their bodies:
as it is said, The soul of man is at the same time both created and united to
the body.
He breathed in his face breath of life. But as the substance also of bodies,
though it be taken out of the substance of the parents, yet is rightly said to
be created of God, that is, framed by him: and the substances both of men and
devils, who both are sinful, are preserved of God, neither is yet God the
author or maintainer of their sin or malice: so also the substance of the
souls and their natural faculties, God together both creates, and bereaueth
of his gifts: which gifts he gave of that condition to Adam, that he would
also give them to his posterity, if himself did keep them: but would not
give them, if he by his unthankfulness should cast them away. Now the soul
being destitute of the spirit and spiritual light, although it be inclined
to desires and operations, yet is it blind, not inclined to such desires and
actions, as the law of God requires. And by this means the inclinations,
being despoiled of their rightnes, are become of their own accord evil, and
are repugnant to the law of God. And those defectes, in the mind and will,
and heart of our first parents, are the just punishments of sin committed by
our first parents, and by their seed in them, as they are inflicted by God:
but the inclinations corrupted by these defectes, and the defectes themselves,
because they are a cause that man neither is, nor can be conformable to the
law of God, they are sins, as they are drawn, by men sinning, upon
themselves and their seed, and as they have from them and their seed their
being.

2 Objection. That which the Parents themselves have not, they cannot derive
unto their posterity. Original sin is taken away from the godly. Therefore at
the leastwise these do not derive it to their posterity. Answer. Original
sin is taken away from the godly and saints of god, as concerning the guilt
of it, that is, so as it is remitted them for Christ's sake. But as it is a
sin repugnant to the Law, so it abides in them. For although they be withal
regenerated by the holy ghost, unto whomsoever their sin is forgiven: yet
that renewing is not perfected in this life. Wherefore the godly also do
derive such a nature to their posterity, as themselves have, that is, a
corrupt one, Unrighteousness and damnation from our parents, but righteousness
by the grace of Christ.
subject to defects, and evil inclinations. If they reply that therefore the
guilt stretches not to the posterity, because the Parents are freed from it,
the Answer is, that that is not derived from the Parents to their posterity,
which the Parents by nature have not: and that they are freed from the guilt
not by nature, but by the grace and benefit of Christ. Wherefore they derive
unto their posterity, not righteousness, which is freely imputed, but
unrighteousness, and damnation, unto which themselves by nature are subject.

Why the Parents righteousness is not derived unto their children.
And the cause why they derive their guilt unto them, and not their
righteousness, is this: because their posterity are not borne of them according
to grace, but according to nature: neither is grace and justification tied to
carnal propagation, but to the most free election of God. As it is said, John.
1. Which are borne not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of
man, but of the will of god.

3 Objection. It is said by the Apostle, Romans 11. If the root be holy, so
shall be the branches also. Answer. This hinders nothing at al. For he
understands not here by holiness, remission of sins, and regeneration: but
this worthiness of Abraham's posterity, for that God, for his league made with
Abraham, had appointed always to convert some of his posterity, and to indow
them with true and inward holiness.

Romans 9.
4 Objection. It is said unto holy Parents: Your children are holy. Answer.
The Apostle in that place shows, that neither all the children of holy men
obtain remission of their sins, or are regenerated by the holy ghost,
neither the holiness of the children proceeds from carnal propagation. For of
Jacob and Esau it was said, when they had neither done good nor evil, I have
loved Jacob, and have hated Esau. The meaning therefore of Paul is, that the
children of godly Parents, although one of the Parents be an infidel, yet
they are holy, in respect of the external fellowship of the Church: that is,
that they are to be counted for members, or citizens of the Christian Church,
and so also for the chosen, and inwardly sanctified of God, except themselves
declare are themselves to be others by their unbelief and impiety. But neither
is outward, nor inward sanctify of the nature of the parents, seeing neither
is found in it, but both befall, as well to the children as to the Parents, of
the free mercy, and covenant, or promise of God.

5 Objection. They are more miserable unto whom their sins of al their
ancestors are derived, the they unto whom have stretched but the sins of some
of their ancestors. But if sin pass from the Parents, unto the children,
then unto the latest of their posterity come the sins of all the ancestors,
unto the former only their sins who lived before them. So then are the latter
more miserable then all the rest, which would be absurd, and not agreeable to
the justice of God. The first answer to this is: that it would be neither
absurd nor unjust, although god should punish more heavily, and more forsake
the latter of the posterity, then the former. For how many more sins are
committed, and heaped up by mankind, so much the more vehemently is his wrath
kindled, and the punishment is more aggrauated. Whereupon are those sayings,
Genes. 15. The wickedness of the Amorites is not yet full. Matt. 23. That upon
you may come all the righteous blood. 2. God therefore suffers the sin of
our first Parents to pass unto al their posterity, as concerning the
corruption of nature and guilt: that he might satisfy his own justice, and
that himself might have occasion of exercising his mercy in his son. Romans 5.
and 11. But of the actual sins of every man he says, that he visits the
iniquity of the father on the children unto the third and fourth generation:
that is, according to his justice he punishes the sins of the parents in
their posterity, and yet of his mercy does set bounds and limits for sin,
that the posterity may not always pay for the sins of their ancestors, or
imitate them, and that it may not be of necessity that the children of evil
Parents should be evil, or worse, or more miserable then their Parents: even
as also he exercises his mercy unto the thousand generation of them that love
him, and yet retains the liberty of his election, so that not always good
Parents have their posterity good also. The reason of this difference between
Original and Actual sin is, because that righteousness and life everlasting
was not lost first by the posterity, but by our first Parents.

Objection. But God will not punish the posterity for the Parents sins.
Answer. 1. True, except they persist in them. 2. If the Parents had not
received this conformity with God both for themselves and their posterity, so
that if they did retain it, their posterity also retain it: and if they did
leese it also from their posterity. 2 Causes, for which God does justly punish
in the posterity both their own sins and their parents.
Hereof it may be understood, that god for two causes does justly punish in
the posterity both their own sins and their ancestors: first, because the
whole nature of the Parents sinning is guilty: and the children are as it were
a part of the Parents, because they proceed out of their substance or mass.
Wherefore that cannot be but guilty as well after, as before the propagation
from the Parents, unless by some singular benefit remission of that fault
befall unto it, which now before in the Parents themselves it did commit:
Again, because the Parents have received the gifts of God to be imparted also
unto their posterity, of that condition, if the Parents them selves did
retain them: and if they did cast them away and leese them, that their
posterity also should be deprived of them. Wherefore after the Parents did
bereave themselves of righteousness and the grace of God, they cannot, being
themselves unclean, bring forth clean, but corrupt children, and like to
themselves, and therefore guilty as well of their own as of their Parents
sin, because they partake of it being derived unto them, consenting unto it
either in act, as to us who are come to some years; or by inclination, as
infantes, except by the singular mercy of God this their inbred corruption be
corrected.

Why after the fall, came this general corruption.
There was added, in the definition of Original sin, that this corruption of
nature ensewed upon the fall, in our first parents. For of man not yet fallen
it is said, that he was made to the image of God: and all things which God had
made, were very good: but of man fallen and his posterity, All the
imaginations of the heart of man are only evil continually.

Wherewithal we are taught, that the whole nature of of man, that is, his
mind, will, and heart, and all his faculties are so depraved, that without
renewing, they can bring forth none, but vicious actions, and such as
displease God, according to those sayings, Romans 7. For we know that the law
is spiritual: but I am carnal, sold under sin. Again, For I know that in me,
that is, in my flesh, dwells no good thing. And Romans 8. So then they that are
in the flesh can not please God. Matt. 7. A corrupt tree cannot bring forth
good fruit. And truly the reason, why it must needs be so, is not obscure. For
whatsoever is not exactlie agreeable to the rule of the Law, that cannot
please God, but deserves malediction and the wrath of God everlasting, as it
is said: Accursed be every one that abides not in all which are written in the
book of the Law. And S. Iam. ca. 2. Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet
fails in one point, he is guilty of al. But no action of men since the fall
has been wholly agreeable unto the Law: wherefore no action of theirs can
please God. The minor is hereof manifest: because the Law, in every action,
requires the knowledge of the true God, agreeing with his will revealed in the
Scripture: and this end, as principal, that the true God, by that obedience of
the reasonable creature, may be honored: and furthermore requires such a
desire of obeying god, and such a love of god, as for a man rather to leese al,
then to depart even in the least matter, from the will of god: and that there be
none, no not the least affection, or desire, or inclination, that may call him
from that exceeding and most ardent love of god, and from obedience toward his
Law. 1. Cor. 10. Do al things to the glory of God. Deuteronomy 6. Thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy mind, and with all thy
strength. But they who are not regenerat, in all their actions, they do not so
much as acknowledge the true god, much less do they refer al to his honor, or
love him above al things, but are turned away from him, and are his enemie^
Romans 5. When we were enemies, we were reconciled to god. And cap. 8. The
wisdom of the flesh is enmity against god. Wherefore no action of theirs,
whatsoever it appears to the show, agrees with the rule of the Law of God.
As it is said, Romans 14. Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

The doctrine of Original sin, profitable to be held in the Church.
This doctrine concerning Original sin is to be held in the Church. 1. That
the knowledge of sin be perfect. 2. Because god will have our corruption to
be known to be so great, as we can not so much as begin our obedience by
our selves without his grace, and his holy spirit. 3. That we may know what
sins are in the godly, and what be the differences of the sins which are
in the regenerat and in the reprobate.

What Actual sin is.
Actual sin is every inward and outward Action, which is repugnant to the Law
of god, as well in the mind, as in outward actions: and the omitting of those
things which the law commands, as to will, to think, to follow, to do
evil: not to will, to fly, to omit to do good. Likewise motions and
passions contrary to the Law. Hither belongs that division into sins of
fact, and sins of omission.

The second division of Sin.
Reigning sin.
THere is Reigning sin, and sin Not-raigning. This division is taken out of
the Apostle, Romans 6. Let not sin reign in your mortal body. Sin Reigning
is all sin which is not repented of, and which is not resisted by the grace
of the holy Spirit, and for which not only according to the order of gods
justice, but also for the thing it self he is guilty of eternal
punishments, who has it. And it is called Reigning, 1. Because it is
pampered: 2. Because it has rule over a man, and makes him guilty of eternal
damnation. Al sins in the wicked are reigning sins.
Such are all sins in the wicked, who believe not the Son, and are without
faith and repentance. That is also in the elect before their conversion,
although it be remitted according to the secret purpose of God: yet they do not
as yet know it. In the elect also, before their conversion. 1 John. 3.8.
But after they are converted, they strive against it, that it may not bear
rule over them.

It is called also Mortal, in which who perseuereth, and dies in it,
perishes. He that commits sin, that is, he that of purpose and with delight
sins, is of the devil. Where he speaks of Reigning sin. Sin reigning is
all sin in the regenerate, before their conversion: in the not regenerat,
continually: whether they be defectes, o^ inclinations, or errors, or Actual
sin.

Sin not Reigning, is that which is repented of, and which is resisted by the
grace of the holy Spirit, Sin not Reigning.
and whereof we obtain remission: And this sin is in the godly. If we say we
have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us. This says
John, Of sin Not-raigning. It is no more I that do it, Romans 7.
but the sin that dwells in me.

Sin Not-raigning is called also Venial, Why not reigning sin is called
venial.
not for that it deserves remission, or that it is not worthy of punishment,
but because remission follows such sin. Nevertheless I had rather use the
names of Reigning and Not-raigning sin, 1. Because the names of Mortal and
Venial sin are obscure, and doubtful. For all sins are mortal. And John
also calls Mortal sin, or sin to death, the sin against the holy ghost.
2. Because of the errors of the Papists, who say that they are called venial
sins, which are light, and deserve not aeternal pains: whereas yet it is
said, Accursed be every one who abides not in all. 3. Because the Scripture
uses not these terms, especially the name of Venial sin.

1 Objection. But the elect fall not from grace. Answer. Finally they do not.
But they who sin mortallie, and do not repent, perish. This falls not to
the elect, that they should fall finally: but before the end, they fall easily
and often.

2 Objection. The will of God is unchangeable. But he will the salvation of the
elect, and remission of their sins. Answer. I grant that it is true,
concerning the purpose and counsel of God, but not concerning our affiance,
which we have of the remission of sins. For our comfort stands not together
with errors, which are contrary to the foundation, and with sins committed
against our consciences. For then are we said to have remission of our sins,
when we apply these benefits to our selves. Ephesians. 2.13. Now in Christ Jesus ye
which once were far off are made near by the blood of Christ. And Osc. 2.23.
I will say to them which were not my people, thou art my people. And they shall
say, thou art my God.

3 Objection. He that is borne of God sins not. Therefore the regenerat sin
not. Answer. 1. He sins not to death. The elect may sin against their
conscience, yet not to death.
For the elect do not wholly forsake God, albeit they sin against their
conscience: but they retain still some beginnings of true godliness, by which as
by sparcles they are stirred again to repentance, as David, Peter, Manasses.
2. He sins not, as he is regenerated: but he sins as long as he
abides in this life, sin not reigning in him, and yet some times reigning
too: as he is not regenerated by the spirit of God, Regeneration but b^gun in
this life.
but is as yet carnal. For regeneration, or the renewing of us to the image of
God is not perfected in an instant, but is begun only in this life, and in the
life to come is at length finished. 1. Ep. c. 1
For so does John himself pronounce of himself, and all the Saints in this
life. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and truth is not
in us. If we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just, to forgive us
our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. This is therefore the
meaning of John, that the regenerate indeed do sin: but yet not so, that they
make much of their sin, or do so at any time yield and assent to evil
desires, that they cast away all love of godliness, and repent not. For always
in the regenerat there remains some remnant of a regenerat nature, which
causes either a strife against sin, or else true repentance: that is, it
suffers them not to sin to death or everlasting destruction, or wholly to
forsake God. And this consolation so long they enjoy, as they know themselves
to be regenerated, that is, as they keep faith, and a good conscience.

4 Objection. It is said, 1. John, cap. 3. His seed remains in him, neither
can he sin, because he is borne of God. And. 1. Pet. 1. Being borne anew not
of mortal seed, but of immortal, by the word of God who lives and endures
for ever. If therefore the seed of Gods word never dies in them that are
borne anewe, they ever remain regenerate, The regenerate in this life may, and
do oftentimes leese the grace of God, in part, but not in whole.
and ever retain grace, neither ever fall into Reigning sin. Answer. The
regenerat may leese, and do often leese grace and the holy spirit, as
concerning some gifts, sometimes more, sometimes fewer: although they leese it
not, if we respect all the gifts. For there abides in the^ some beginning or
print of true faith and conversion, which although, when they yield to evil
inclinations or desires, it is so oppressed, and darkened, that it neither can
be known of others, neither confirm them of the grace of God and their own
salvation, for the present: yet it suffers them not wholly to forsake God and
the known truth, and to cast away their purpose of embracing by faith the
merit of the son of God. So David prays Psa. 51. Create in me a clean heart O
God, and renew a right spirit within me. Again, Restore to me the joy of thy
salvation. He had lost therefore cleannes of heart, rightnes, and newnes of
spirit, and the joy of salvation, which he beggeth of God to be restored unto
him: and yet did he not wholly want them: for otherwise he would not have
asked, neither would he have looked for from God this renewing and restoring.
The seed of God, that is, the word of God working true faith and conversion in
the elect, abides and dies not in the regenerate, as concerning their
conversion and small perseverance, how-euer they fall often grievously before
their end, 1. Ioh. 2.19. If they had been of us, they would have continued
with us.

5 Objection. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit. Man in this life is
not simply good, and therefore his woorks are not always good.
Answer. It cannot, as it is good. For if it be simply good, all the fruit
thereof is good: which shall so come to pass in the life to come But if it be
partly good, and partly evil, such is the fruit also; which we have trial
and experience of in this life.

Heretofore it has been said, Al sins mortal in their own nature, but
pardonable by the grace of God.
That all sins are in their own nature mortal. Against this sentence, some
oppose that which is said, Psalm. 32.5. I will confess my wickedness unto the
Lord, and thou forgauest the punishment of my sins. And Prouer. 24.16. A
just man falls seven times, and rises again. Whence they gather that there
are some sins, the committers whereof continue still just, and therefore
deserve not eternal death. But they reason amiss from that which befalls to
sin but by an accident, to that which is by it self in sin. For it is true
indeed that there are many sins, for which the Saints do not leese
holiness and righteousness, neither become obnoxious to the wrath of God. But
this comes to pass, not by the smalnesse, or nature of the sin, whatsoever
it be, but by the grace of God, who does not impute, neither will punish with
eternal death those sins, which yet in their own nature deserved it. This
does the Prophet most evidently show, in the same Psalm. when he says, Blessed
is he whose wickedness is forgiven. And Psalm. 143. Enter not into judgment
with thy servant: for in thy fight shall none that lives be justified.

2 Objection, It is said Matthew. 5.22. Whosoever is angry with his brother
unadvisedly, shall be culpable of judgment. And whosoever says unto his
brother, Racha, shall be worthy to be punished by the Counsel. And whosoever
shall say, Fool, shall be worthy to be punished with hellfire. Whence they
conclude, seeing Christ himself makes degrees of punishments and sins, so
that of these former, he threatens hel-fire, but unto the third only,
therefore there are some sins smaller, than those who deserve eternal
punishment. But the Answer unto this is manifest out of the words
themselves: which is, that Christ does not speak of civil judgments and
punishments, when he mentions Judgment, and a Counsel. For he does not here
speak of the civil order, but disputes against the corruptions of the
Pharisees, concerning the true meaning of Gods Law, and concerning the
judgment of God against both inward and outward sins.

For neither can, nor ought to be punished, by the magistrate with corporal
punishment, either such gestures as signify some bitterness or contempt, or
bad affections if they have not accompanieng them, an endeavor to do any man
injury. Now whereas in the third place he names hel-fire, he does not exempt
the other two kinds of sin from eternal punishments, but signifies that the
third shall receive a sharper punishment at Gods hand than the other.

3 Objection. It is said, Mat. 12. Every sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven
unto men, but the blasphemy against the holy Ghost shall not be for-giuen to
men, neither in this world, nor in the world to come. Hence they will gather,
That some sins are for-giuen in this woorlde, some in the world to come,
that is, in purgatory, and some are never for-giuen, of which these be mortal,
but the others venial in their own nature. But first, neither here, neither
elsewhere, does Christ teach that some sins are forgiven in the world to
come. Sins are remitted in this world only.
For that all other sins are forgiven not in the woorld to come, but in this
woorlde, both Christ signifies in this place, and the Scripture elsewhere
teaches: because it is certain that sins are not remitted, but only to
those who repent.

No sin, which may not be remitted; except the sin against the holy Ghost.
But he denies that the sin against the holy Ghost is remitted either in this
world, or in the world to come, that he might more significantly express the
denial of pardon to it. Secondly, Whether they say for-giuenesse to be in
this woorld, or in the woorlde to come, yet this stands immovable, that it
comes not of the nature or corruption of the sin, but of free mercy for
Christ's sake. And if every sin be so grievous, that it could not be purged
but by the blood of the Son of God; then doubtless they do great despite and
contumely unto that blood, who so extenuate any sin, as to deny that it
deserves eternal punishment, unto which the death of the Son of God is
equivalent. Farther, even by their own confession, There are many mortal
sins, which notwithstanding are forgiven in this life. Wherefore either they
must make all these to be even in their own nature venial, or they will never
prove out of this place, that the smalnes of the sin, is the cause of
forgiveness.

4 Objection. It is said, Romans 1. The wrath of God is reueiled from heaven
against al ungodliness. And, 1. Cor. 6. Know ye not, that the unrighteous
shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Out of these and the like places they
gather, that seeing they are mortal sins which shut men out of the kingdom
of God: and all sins do not so: therefore there are some sins which in
their own nature are not mortal. But they conclude more than follows by
force of reason. For that some sins are venial, there is no doubt, but that
comes by grace remitting those sins, which without remission, would shut
men doubtless from the kingdom of God.

5 Objection. It is said, 1. Cor. 3. If any man's work burn, Al sins shut
men out of the kingdom of gods were they not remitted by the grace of God.
he shall loose: but he shall be safe himself, nevertheless yet as it were by
fire. Therefore, say they, some sins cast men into fire, that is, into some
punishment, but not eternal. This also we grant, not in respect of the nature
of sin, but in respect of pardon, which befalls to those who hold the
foundation, which is christ. For to build on the foundation wood and stubble,
that is, to parch the word of god, with unnecessary questions, humane opinions
and traditions, which often are occasions of schisms in the Church, and often
of Idolatry and errors; it is not so light a sin as they deem it, who do
it; but deserves eternal malediction, except remission be made for the Son
of God, as it is declared in the Revelation Chapt. 22.

6 Objection. It is said, Heb. 5. A high priest taken from among men is bound
to offer for sins, as well for his own part, as for the peoples. This place
shows that the sins of the priest are not venial by themselves, or of their
own nature, but for the sacrifice of Christ, which was signified by the
typical sacrifices: and therefore it quite and clean overthrows the opinion
of our adversaries. For if al sins even of a righteous Priest, are in the sight
of God so great, that they cannot be purged but by the death of the Son of God;
it necessarily follows that they of their own nature deserved everlasting
death.

7 Objection. It is said, Iam. 1. When lust has conceived it brings forth
sin; and sin when it is finished brings forth death. Here, say they, James
says that there is one sin finished, when as the will upon deliberation
consents to evil lust: Actual sin is an effect of Original sin, and a
cause of death; which though purchased by Original, yet is aggrauated by
Actual.
another not finished, when a man sins without deliberation: and to sin
finished he ascribes, that it brings forth death. We answer that the
consequence of this is not of force, because that a property which belongs to
diverse kinds, when it is ascribed to one kind, it follows not thereof that
it is to be removed from the other. For S. James distinguishes the kinds or
degrees of sins, Original, and Actual: and says that death follows after
Actual; not as if death did not follow after Original, but because that Actual
is a middle between Original sin and death, as a cause of this, and an effect
of that, and does aggrauate death or punishment, which already was purchased by
original sin. Neither does he chiefly speak of the degrees of punishments,
but of the cause and original of them to be sought in the corruption of our
own nature.

8 Object. It is said, Iam. 3. In many things we sin al. Hence our adversaries
will prove, that the sins of the just are venial, because they fall either into
few sins, or into no mortal sins. To this, as also to most of that which has
gone before, we answer, that the sins of the just, who by faith retein or
receive righteousness, are venial, not of their own nature, but by grace.

Gods justice is not at variance with his mercy, though it judge the least
sin worthy of eternal death.
9 Objection. God is not cruel but merciful, neither light in his love, but
constant. Wherefore he does not for every light sin judge a man worthy of
eternal punishments. But they imagine that the judgment of God concerning sin
is at variance with his mercy: which are not at variance, but do very well
agree. For God is in such wise merciful, as he is also just. Now the justice of
God requires, that he judge all even the least offense and contempt of his
majesty, worthy of eternal damnation. This judgment against every sin, the
mercy and constancy of Gods love does not take away; but for the showing and
declaring thereof it is sufficient, that he reioiceth not at the destruction of
them that perrish, and that for testimony thereof he inuiteth all to
repentance, and forgiueth them who repent their sins, which by themselves
were worthy of everlasting death; that is, he punishes them and causes
satisfaction for them not in the sinners, but in his own son sent to take
flesh, by punishment answering and satisfieng his justice.

10 Objection. It is said, Mat. 5. Whosoever shall break one of these least
commandments, and teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of
heaven. This they interpret after this sort. That he, who both by sinning and
teaching does against the law, is fallen from the kingdom of god, and not he
who in teaching subscribeth to the law, although sometimes he does a little
contrary to that he teaches. But first the opposition or contrariety which
Christ adds, But whosoever shall observe and teach them, the same shall be
called great in the kingdom of God, does show that Christ in the former part
of the speech does understand those who break, that is, violate the law which
they teach; so that the meaning is: although one teach well, and yet violate one
of these commandments, which the Pharisees term the least, that is, of the
commandments of the Decalog: he shall find these commandments so not to be the
least, but the greatest, as himself shall thereby become the least, that is, in
no place, in the kingdom of God. Secondly albeit it be granted unto the^, that
in the words of christ, to teach so, is the same, that to teach contrary to the
law: yet can it not at al be gathered thence, that they alone shall be the least
in the kingdom of God, who by teaching and sinning break the law, and not
they also, who by sinning only, and not by teaching transgres it. The first
reason is in the very words of Christ: Christ calls them the least, not as in
his own judgment, but as in the judgment of the Pharisees. And so he
imitateth them in thus speaking.
because he calls those commandments the least, by a figure of speech
called imitatio^, which are the greatest, and the breach whereof, whether it be
committed in deed, or in doctrine, or in both, god judges worthy the shutting
out of his kingdom, even by our adversaries confession; that is, the whole
Decalog, which the Pharisees did set behind their traditions. The other reason
is in those words which Christ adds, For I say unto you, except your
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall
not enter into the kingdom of heaven. In these words Christ shows that a
far other righteousness is required by the Law of God, than the Pharisees
thought of: and that those sins also are so great, that they shut men out of
the kingdom of heaven, which the Pharisees accounted either for light, or no
sins, as To be angry with thy Brother unadvisedly, To say unto him Racha, or
Fool: To be troubled with an evil affection, or desire of revenge. For even
these things also he says are to be avoided, if we will avoid Hell fire, and be
the children of our heavenly father. Therefore he says: Whosoever looks on
a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery with her already in his
heart. And 1. John 3. Whosoever hates his Brother, is a man-slaier: and ye
know that no man-slaier has eternal life abiding in him. And therefore not
they only which commit the greater sins, but they also who commit the lesser
cannot escape everlasting death, but by the satisfaction of christ imputed to
them.

Sins made venial unto the repentant, by grace for the intercession and
satisfaction of Christ.
But as our adversaries accuse this sentence of too much rigor; That al sins
are by themselves of their own nature mortal, that is, deserve aeternal death:
so also the other sentence, That sins are made venial to those who repent,
which of their own nature are mortal, they reprehend as too gentle and
repugnant to Gods justice: because to call that for venial, which is mortal,
is contrary to truth and justice. But the answer is ready, That God, if we
respect the nature of sin, adiudgeth al sin worthy of everlasting death:
and gives pardon to none but of free grace for the intercession and
satisfaction of his son our Mediator.

The third Division of Sin.
What sin is against the conscience.
There is sin against the conscience, and sin not against the conscience.
Sin against the conscience is committed of those who wittingly and willingly
sin. So David wittinglie and willingly committed adultery and murder. Sin
not against the conscience is that, which we either not witting, or not
willing commit, or which is committed of those who know the will of God,
acknowledge and bewail their sin, but are not able to avoid it: as are
Original sins, sins of omission, ignorance, infirmity, even in the
regenerate and Saints. They omit many good things, which they would not
omit; or commit evil things, which they would not commit, being sudainly
overtaken and overcome by infirmities: and therefore are most grievously angry
with themselves for their sins committed, so that they are not more grieved
at any thing, than for that they offend God daily by their sin; and therefore
desire and groan after nothing more than the grace of the holy spirit, whereby
to resist sin. Such sins are not imputed to the regenerat, neither do they
cast off grace, the holy spirit, and faith. Such a sin of ignorance Saint
Paul says his blasphemy was, which he committed, before he was converted,
against God, as also his persequuting and violence against the Church, and
therefore God had mercy of him, 1. Tim. 1.13. Another kind of those sins
not against the conscience, to wit infirmity, the same Apostle describes,
Romans 7.19. I do not that good which I would, the evil which I would not that
do I. Yet not I do it, but sin that dwells in me. Hither also is to be
referred the sin of Peter, who wittinglie denied Christ, but not willingly,
for he had not the power to do otherwise. It was not reigning sin: because
he acknowledges and bewaileth it, and holds fast his faith, Luke 22.32. I
have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not. Much less was it the sin
against the holy Ghost: because he loved christ no less, when he denied him,
than when he bewailed his offense, though that affection did not at that time
for fear of imminent danger show it self. Moreover this third division of
sin and the definition of both sins Christ has expreslie delivered Luke
12.47. The servant that knew his masters will, and prepared not himself,
neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes: But he that
knew it not, and yet did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with
few stripes.

The fourth Division of sin.
THere is sin pardonable, and sin unpardonable. Al sin repented of is
pardonable.
Al sin is pardonable, whereof men repent and obtain pardon. Unpardonable is a
purposed denial and oppugning of the known truth of God and his will and
works, of which the conscience is convicted, whereof no man obtains pardon:
because it is punished of God with a perpetual forsaking, and blindness, They
are shut from pardon, who are shut from repentance.
so that they who so sin never return to God by true repentance. Now they
who are excluded from repentance are also necessarily excluded from remission
of sin. Christ Mat. 12. calls this kind of sin, The sin or blasphemy
against the holy Ghost, when he says: Wherefore I say unto you, every sin
and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men: They are shut from repentance who
sin against the holy Ghost.

Why it is called in special a sin against the holy Ghost.


but the blasphemy against the holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men. But
it is not therefore called the sin against the holy Ghost, as if the holy
Ghost might be offended by any man, and not the father also and the Son: but
because the revealing of the heavenly truth is the work of the divinity, which
is immediately wrought by the holy ghost. And therefore they who witting and
willing resist this, are blasphemous indeed against all the persons of the
Godhead, but in a more singular and special manner, against the holy ghost, that
is against his proper and immediate operation and working in their minds. That
this kind of sin is signified by this name, it hereby appears, for that none
can after a peculiar manner sin against the holy ghost, but they on whom he has
bestowed a peculiar and proper benefit, that is, a benefit immediately given by
himself, and appertaining to his sanctifieng or office, which he exercises in
the Church, which is the very light of truth kindled in their minds. The same
appears by the speech of Christ: and Mark, 3. plainly declares (when he
says, For they said he had an unclean spirit) that Christ did attribute this
sin unto them, who being convicted as concerning the doctrine of Christ, and
his divine works, yet notwithstanding did against their conscience ascribe
these things to the devil. The same is showed by other places, where this sin
is described. As Heb. 6. For it is impossible that they which were once
lightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift: and were made partakers of the
holy Ghost etc. if they fall away, should be renewed again by repentance.
And 2. Pet. 2. If they, after they have escaped the filthiness of the woorlde,
thorough the knowledge of the Lord, and of the Savior Jesus Christ, are yet
tangled again therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them than
the beginning. Who sin against the holy Ghost.
Out of which sayings first we understand, that not all the reprobate, who
perish, not obtaining remission of their sins, do sin against the holy
Ghost: but that this sin falls only on them, who are lightened by the holy
Ghost with certain knowledge of the truth: that which happens not to all the
reprobate, although so much nevertheless is revealed to al of them concerning
God, as may suffice for the just condemning of them and their posterity. For
the holy ghost is not given but to them, who are endued with the knowledge of
the heavenly doctrine, as it is said, John 14. whom the world cannot receive,
because it sees him not, neither knows him. Likewise, Luke 12. The servant
that knows the will of his master. Wherefore some perish, unto whom the holy
Ghost has not given this light of truth, and therefore they do not commit
this peculiar sin against the holy Ghost.

If it be objected, The difference between other sins not pardoned, and this
sin against the holy Ghost.
That every unpardonable sin is a sin against the holy ghost, because
Christ says that the sin against the holy ghost is unpardonable: But final
perseverance in whatsoever sin without repentance, is remitted to no man. And
therefore it is a sin against the holy ghost: and by a consequent, all that
perish sin against the holy ghost. The ambiguity of unpardonable sin
makes four terms in this Syllogism. For in the Mayor it signifies that kind
of sin, which is never remitted to any: because whosoever commit it, whether
at the end, or before the end of their life, they persevere in it even to the
end without repentance: But in the Minor it signifies not a certain kind of
sin but al their sins who repent not: which indeed are not remitted to
them, because they persevere in them to the end without repentance, and they
are unpardonable not before the end, but in the very end of their life: yet are
they remitted to others who persevere not in them, but repent. For perseverance
in sins is nothing else, than the sins themselves, which are continued unto
the end, and therefore this is the meaning of the Minor: Sins, in which men
persevere without repentance unto the end, are not pardoned them who persevere
in them. But now all men do not persevere in them, as they persevere in the
sin against the holy Ghost, even whosoever once fall into it. And christ in this
speech shows not, for what sins men are punished with everlasting death. For
it is certain that it befalls for all sins, of which men repent not: but he
shows, what sins are such, as whosoever do commit them, they do never
repent. This he affirms of no kind of sin, but only of blasphemy against the
holy Ghost.

Secondly, out of the testimony alleged we gather that the sin against the
holy Ghost, is not every Raigning-sinne, The peculiar nature of the sin against
the holy Ghost making it differ from al other Reigning sin.
whether committed against our conscience, or against the known truth: but a
sin against the whole first table of the Law, and not one only part of it,
but a defection from al religion, or godliness: and such a denying, or
oppugning, or contumelious handling of the true doctrine of God and his will,
as proceeds not of weakness or terror, or fear, or torment, but of a purposed
and stubburn maliciousnes. For the obedience of the first table is, after a man
has once tasted of the word of God, reverently to obey and subscribe unto it.
Neither depart they from a part of doctrine, but from all religion, who so
fall, that they crucify again to themselves the son of God, and tread him
under foot, and count the blood of the testament as a profane thing, and
despite the spirit of grace. Neither do the Jews sin of weakness, in ascribing
the works of Christ to the devil, or heretical men, after they are once
convicted of their errors by certain and manifest testimonies of the word of
God: neither they, who under the name and show of Christ remain still dogs and
swine returning at length to their vomit and wallowing in the mire, from which
for a while in outward profession and hypocrisy they abstained. And hereby may
be esteemed and judged in some sort the grieuousnes of this sin, whereas it
comes nearest to the sin of the devils, who knowing the truth, yet stood not
in it, but do despite it with hatred and horrible fury, and endeavor utterly
to oppress it.

The elect can never fall into this sin against the holy Ghost.
Thirdly, hereof also it follows that the elect and those who are truly
converted can never fall into this sin against the holy ghost: and that they
who commit it were never possessed of true faith and repentance. For all those
who are chosen of God to everlasting life, are converted in this life: and al
they who are truly converted ought certainly to think that they are in the
number of the elect, and therefore shall never so sin, as withal to perish:
according to those sayings, John 10. My sheep shall never perish, neither shall
any pluck them out of my hand. Luke 22. I have prayed for thee that thy faith
fail not. 2. Timoth. 2. The foundation of God stands sure, and has this
Seal, The Lord knows who are his.

How many of the reprobate are said in scripture to be lightened and sanctified.
That many of the reprobate are said to be lightened and to be made partakers
of the holy Ghost, to have tasted of the heavenly gift, the good word of God,
and of the powers of the world to come, and last of al to have bin sanctified
with the blood of the Testament: likewise in Peter, to have escaped from the
filthiness of the woorld: the Apostles themselves show that this is to be
understood of the knowledge of the truth, and the foregoing and detestation of
errors and vices for a season, and lastly of the sufficiency of Christ merits
even for the wiping away of their sins also, and the offer thereof made unto
them by his word and Sacraments: which they show, when they interpret that
lightning and taste to be the knowledge of the truth and righteousness, and call
the^ dogs and swine, 2. Pet 2. Heb. 6 7.
not made so again, but returning to their vomit and wallowing in the mire,
and further compare them to the earth drinking in the rain, but bringing forth
instead of good herbs thorns and briars. For these things agree not to true
faith and conversion.

Fourthly, by these things which have bin said, We are not rashly to pronounce
any man a sinner against the holy Ghost, until we see him give up the Ghost
in Apostacy and blasphemy.
it appears that we are not rashly to pronounce who they be that sin against
the holy ghost: and that we may not judge of this sin until the end, that is,
until we know them, who once had the truth and confessed themselves to be
convicted and persuaded of it, with hatred thereof to persecute and reproach it,
or to end their life in hatred and despite against it. The reason hereof is
manifest, because we are not the beholders of men's hearts.

If it be objected, that, 1. John 5. it is said, There is a sin unto death: I
say not that thou should pray for it: If he will not that we shall pray
for those who sin to death: it must needs be that we may discern them
from others. We answer, that John does not universally forbid, that we
pray for any so sinning; but at such time, as that is manifest unto us either
by some divine testimony, or by manifest arguments and the sinners own
profession. But before this is certain and manifest unto us, we ought to desire
of god the conversion of al men, and as much as in us lies, to endeavor it, as
it is said, 1. Tim. 2. I exhort that first of al supplications, prayers,
intercessions and giving of thanks be made for all men. And 2. Tim. 2 The
servant of the Lord must not strive, but must be gentle toward al men, apt to
teach, suffering the evil men patiently, instructing them with meeknes, that
are contrary minded, proving if God at any time will give them repentance that
they may know the truth, and that being delivered out of the snare of the
devil, of whom they are taken, they may come to amendment and perform his
will. And Matthew. 5. Pray for them which hurt you, and persecute you. And Acts
7. Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. Our prayer for the adversaries
of the truth must be conditional, with submission to Gods will.
If it be replied, that so it will come to pass that our prayer shall be
contrary to the will of God, if not knowing of it we pray for them who sin
against the holy Ghost: the answer is ready: That prayer is made for them,
with a condition, by which we submit our will and desires to the counsel of
God, that he will convert and save the adversaries of the truth, if they may
be recovered: but that he will repress them and punish them, if he have not
appointed to recover them.

Our prayer for them being but conditional, it argues not but that their sin
may be notwithstanding unpardonable.
By the same answer is this argument dissolved, Their sin is not
unpardonable, for whom we must pray: But we must pray for all men:
Therefore no man's sin is unpardonable. First we deny the Minor: because if
it appears by any divine testimony, or by manifest arguments and their
own profession that they are castawaies, whether they sin against the holy
Ghost, or otherwise do not repent; we must not pray for them. Secondly neither
is the Mayor true. For if we know not, whether they sin against the holy Ghost,
or are rejected of God or no, we must pray for them, but with that condition,
if they may be recovered.

Out of these things also which have been spoken, answer is made to this
objection. He that must fear lest he has any unpardonable sin, The fear of
unpardonable sin belongs to the wicked, not to the faithful.
can never be assured of remission of his sins and of life everlasting: But if
there be any sin unpardonable, which is committed before the end of a man's
life, no man can be assured, that he has not, or shall not have such sin:
Therefore either there is no such sin, or no man can be assured of the grace
of God, and his own salvation. For the Minor of this reason is false,
concerning those who believe. For they must certainly think, that they neither
had, nor have the sin against the holy Ghost; because there is no
condemnation to them, who are in Christ: neither that they shall have this
sin, because no man can pluck the sheep of Christ out of his hand.

Adam and Peter sinned not against the holy Ghost.
1 Objection. Adam and Peter obtained remission of sins: Adam and Peter sinned
against the holy Ghost, because they denied the manifest and known truth of
God: Therefore some men sinning against the holy Ghost obtain remission of
sins. Answer. The proof of the minor is a false definition: For not every
denial or reiection of the truth is sin against the holy Ghost, but that
only, which has accompanying it an inward hatred of the truth, and which of
a purposed intent and with horrible fury endeavors to oppress it: which
hatred of truth was not in Adam or Peter. Augustine therefore says: Faith
failed not Peter in his heart, when confession failed him in his mouth.

2 Objection. The sin of Cain was not unpardonable. God sparing Cains life does
not thereby show his pardoning of his sin, but a further revenging of it.
Because God would not have him killed: therefore he pardoned him his sin. But
Cains sin was committed against the holy ghost: Therefore some sin against
the holy Ghost is not unpardonable. Answer. In the proof of the Mayor is a
fallacy, putting that which is no cause as if it were a cause. For the cause
why God would not have him killed, was not, for that he had pardoned Cain his
sin, not repenting himself of it, but that the murderer might be the longer
tormented with the furies of his conscience, that in so long time not
repenting, he might be made inexcusable; and further also, that murders might
not wax rife among men.

3 Objection. They who are altogether ignorant of Christ, Every sin of the
unregenerate unpardonable, because not repented of, which to others through
repentance are pardoned.
sin not against the holy Ghost. But all that know not Christ have
unpardonable sin: because it is never pardoned them. Therefore some
unpardonable sin, is not against the holy Ghost. Answer. We grant the whole
reason, if in the Minor and conclusion thereof be understood, by unpardonable
sin, those sins of the unregenerate, which are not indeed remitted unto
them, for that they persist in those sins to the end without repentance: yet
to others they are remitted, who persist not in them, but repent of them in
this life. For not al who commit them, persist in them. But if that kind of
sin be understood, it is never remitted to any man, because al they who
commit it persist in it to the end of their life without repentance: then is
the Minor false. And so it there no consequence in this reason.

The sin against the holy Ghost, and sin against the conscience differ, as a
general from a particular. Sin against the conscience, is the general. For a
man may also through infirmity and ignorance deny the truth, not through a
hatred of it: as Peter and Paul did. So that then the sin against the holy
Ghost is a sin against the conscience: but every sin against the
conscience is not a sin against the holy Ghost. And therefore this is more
general; the other more particular.

The difference between the sin against the holy Ghost, and sin against
the conscience.
The sin against the holy Ghost, is said to be unpardonable, not that it
exceeds, or surmounteth the greatness of the merit of Christ; but because he
is punished with a final blindness, who commits it, neither is it at any
time granted him, to repent. Because it is a special and singular kind of
sin, therefore has it a singular punishment, that such sinners should not at
all repent. And without repentance there is granted no remission of sins.

The fifth Division of sin.
What is sin of it self, and what sin only by an accident.
THere is some sin, which is of it self sin, and some which comes to be
sin by an accident.

Sins of themselves, are al those things which are forbidden of God in the
Law, or whatsoever things the Law condemns: as are inclinations disagreeing
from the Law of God, and some actions also, which are sins in respect of us:
but in respect of God are punishments.

Sins by an accident, are things either commanded of God, or neither
commanded, nor prohibited, that is indifferent things, which are not done
after the same manner, neither to the same end, unto which God would have them
to be don, that is, without repentance, or with great defect. Things commanded,
in the unregenerate are sins, because although the actions and doings of those
things are commanded, yet the person, from who^ those actions proceed, pleases
not God, neither is reconciled unto God. Further, that which the unregenerate
do, they do it not to that end, whereunto they ought, that is, to the glory
of God, neither is their action grounded of faith. For they know not whether or
no they have God favorable to the^, or whether that be pleasing unto him which
they do. But these conditions and circumstances are necessarily required to a
good work: for it suffices not to do good works after a civil manner. Those
civil works indeed are good, as they proceed from God: but as they are in
unregenerate men, they are evil: even as it is sin, when a wicked man gives
alms: because it proceeds not from the love of God and therefore not from
faith, neither is referred unto gods glory.

But yet those things which men do being forbidden in the Law of God are of
themselves and properly sins, because the nature or definition of sin does
properly agree unto them: which is, that they are don against the express
commandment of God. And therefore in the Scripture things which are so done
of men, are ever called evil, but never good. But those things which are
commanded of God, when they are done by the unregenerate, or in hypocrisy,
they are so discommended, as yet nevertheless they are counted and praised for
good: and that not only in respect of God, who is the efficient of those things
in men, in respect of whom all the actions of the wicked are just: but also in
respect of the men themselves by whom they are done, so that they also are said
to have done well, as 1. Kings 21. See thou how Ahab is humbled before me?
Because he submits himself before me, I will not bring that evil in his
days. And 2. Kin. 10. The Lord said unto Iehu: Behold, because thou have
diligently executed that which was right in my eyes etc.

Neither is there cause why any man should here say, that inclinations and
actions are of themselves good, How inclinations and actions are in themselves
both good and bad.
because they are things in nature made and raised of God. For they are of
themselves good, as they proceed from God: but as they are in men corrupted, or
as they are don by men, they are of themselves evil and vicious, because they
are committed against the Law of God.

But neither of the contrary follows it, Why the works of the unregenerate
cannot please God.
that the works of the unregenerate, whether they be ciuillie or morallie good,
are not therefore sins, and displeasing God, because they are commanded of
him. For that the woork be good and pleasing to God, not only that which is
commanded must be done, but it must be done after that manner also which is
commanded, or, which is all one, it must agree not only in part but in whole
with the Law of God. And since the woorks of the unregenerate are not so done,
though not wholly yet for a great part they swerve from the Law of God, and are
destitute of that perfection and rightnes, without which they cannot please God.

If any man urge, That the works even of the regenerat also are not perfect,
Why the works of the regenerate do please God.
neither yet for all that are they counted sins: and that therefore we must not
so severely give sentence against others: the answer is at hand: that faith
shines on the works of the godly, but not on the works of the wicked. And
therefore they please God, and their imperfection is covered through the
satisfaction and intercession of Christ, which falls not so out with the
works of the wicked. And lastly in those is begun the true and inward
obedience of the will and heart: but in these not so: and therefore these are
hypocrisy, which is severely condemned by God himself.

So also if they be said to be recompensed with reward, and therefore not to
be sins: First we answer, that to be approved and rewarded in them which is
good: but that evil which co^curreth is not only condemned and punished, but
the good also, which the wicked do, is deprived of the honor and name, and so
of that eternal reward of those works which are indeed good and please God.
Secondly we answer, that these are sometimes recompensed with temporal
rewards, but never with aeternall. Thirdly, that they are recompensed of God
with these rewards, not as that he simply likes of them, or so acknowledges
the^ for good, that he does not withal repute them for evil: but that he might
inuit by these rewards others as well unbelievers as believers to keep and
observe external discipline and honesty: Because he will that in mankind there
be kept some order necessary for the preservation of the society of man, yea
even amongst the wicked and hypocrites. Fourthly, those rewards are rather a
diminishing and mitigation of their punishments than any rewards: because
they make naught for their salvation to whom they befall. And God will
according to the order of his justice, punish greater sins with greater
punishments, and lesser with lesser, both in this life and in the life to come.

The moral actions of the unregenerate are not therefore to be omitted of us
because in them they are sin; but we must avoid the sin and perform the
action.
Moreover this is a fallacy of the accident, If any collect and gather that we
must not do the moral works of the unregenerate, because they are sins.
For those works which are of themselves sins, that is, are forbidden of God,
we ought of necessity to avoid: but those which are sins but by an
accident, ought not to be omitted of us, but corrected by us, and so done, that
they may be performed without any sin concurring or intermingled with them.
For they are not condemned for themselves, but for the sins which are
adjoining to them. Now it follows not, that that good which remains,
should be rejected or abolished, because of the imperfections and defects: but
rather it should be nourished, and increased, and cleansed from those evils
wherewith it was stained.

Discipline therefore is necessary, eue^ in the unregenerate, Wherefore external
and civil discipline is necessary in the unregenerate.
in respect of the commandment of God; for avoiding the grieuousnes of
punishments, which ensues upon the breach of Discipline: for the preservation
of the peace and society of mankind: for a way and entrance to conversion
which is stopped by perseuering and persisting in manifest offenses.

If instance be given: The good action of hypocrites is not to be omitted, but
their hypocrisy therein only to be eschewed.
Hypocrisy is sin of it self and is to be avoided, as Math. 6. it is said,
Be not as Hypocrites: But the Discipline or outward behavior of the wicked is
Hypocrisy. Therefore it is sin of it self, and they should omit it. We
answer to the Mayor by distinguishing the diversity of Hypocrisy. There is
a double hypocrisy: one is in works not commanded of God, done for
ostentation sake or to deceive, as those which Christ mentions, Math. 6. To
make a trumpet be blown before him, when he gives alms, to pray standing in
the Synagogues and in the corners of the streets, to look sourely, and
disfigure his face in fasting, and all other superstitious and humane
traditions which appertain not to the edifiyng of the Church. That these
things are to be omitted and left undone, there is no doubt; as it is said,
In vain do they worship me, teaching doctrines the dommaundements of men.
And therefore they are here expressly condemned and forbidden of Christ. There
is another hypocrisy in works commanded of God, but not done after that
manner, which God requires. These are not to be left undone, but to be
corrected, and to be done without hypocrisy, that is with true faith and
godliness: as in the same place Christ teaches of alms, prayer, fasting, not
to be omitted of the godly, but to be otherwise performed, than they were of
hypocrites.

By this which has been spoken it is manifest, The use of the difference
between sins which are of themselves sins, and those which are made so by
an accident.
for what cause this difference of sins, which are of themselves sins, and
by an accident sins, is necessary: least that a false persuasion of their
own righteousness or merits should rest in men's minds, and least with sins
which are of themselves sins should be cast away also good things which
come to be sins but by an accident, and so should be increased and heaped
up the sins and punishments of mankind.

The works of the regenerate and unregenerate differ seven manner of ways.
IN this place is to be observed the difference between the works of the
regenerate, and unregenerate. They differ seven ways. Why one and the same
work is good in the regenerate and sin in the unregenerate.
For one and the same work commanded of God, is good in the regenerat, and
sin in the unregenerate. 1. Because the regenerate are reconciled to God: The
unregenerate are not. 2. The regenerat do it to the glory of God: The
unregenerate no way do so. 3. In both of them that good work is imperfect. but
that of the godly is covered by the satisfaction and intercession of Christ:
that of the ungodly not so. 4. The work of the godly is joined with a
beginning obedience: that of the ungodly with sin reigning. 5. The good work
which is in the wicked, is made evil. But the good which is in the godly,
though it be contaminated with sin; yet because it is hidden by the
satisfaction of Christ, it is not punished; neither is it objected unto him,
that he does defile the gifts of God with his sins, neither does the Lord
for that work bereave the regenerate man of everlasting life: all which he
does in those who are not regenerat. 6. The good work in the wicked is only
adorned with temporal rewards; and that not as if it pleased god, but for to
inuit by this means others to honesty. But the good work in the godly is
freely adorned not only with temporal but also with eternal benefits; and
that also because it pleases him in our mediator, Math. 5.16.
and not only thereby to inuit others to honesty; according to that of
Christ's: So let your light shine before me^, that they may see your good works
and glorify your father which is in heaven. Wherefore the good works of the
godly are oftentimes in the old testament shadowed by an acceptable incense,
wherewith God is honored and pleased. And godliness, as the Apostle says, has
the promise of this life and the life to come. 7. Good works in the unregenerate
make only to the mitigatio^ of their punishments, that they may not suffer more
grievous pains, as other wicked persons do: but the good works of the godly
do not only serve for this, that they may suffer lighter and easier
punishments, but also that they may be quite freed from all evil.

Things indifferent in themselves may be also sins by an accident, that is,
How things in themselves indifferent by an accident become sin.
if they be done with offense or without faith. For whatsoever is done without
faith is sin. Unto the pure all things indeed are pure; but it is evil for
the man which eats with offense. Out of these and the like places is this
division taken. For when the Apostle says that all things are unclean to the
unclean and wicked, he intimates also that those things which of themselves
are good, are notwithstanding unclean or sins unto the wicked.

In all these divisions it is affirmed, that also in the ^aintes of God is
sin. Wherefore we must hold the difference between the sins of the
regenerat, and the unregenerate. There are diverse sins truly in the Saints:
as 1. Original sin. 2. Many actual sins, as of ignorance, omission,
infirmity. 3. Some also fall into errors which fight with the foundation it
self, or into sins against their conscience, for which they leese a good
conscience, comfort, many gifts of the holy Ghost, and should be condemned
except they did repent. But nevertheless very much do the regenerate in sinning
differ from the wicked. 1. Because the purpose of God is to keep the godly for
ever. 2. In the godly there is assured and certain repentance in the end. 3.
In the very sins themselves is the true beginning of faith, sometimes more,
sometimes less, and the godly so resist and strive against sin, that they
fall not without repentance into errors against their conscience, and repugnant
to the foundation.

4. What are the causes of sin.
1 SOme derive the original of sin from the destiny of the start, Men seek
the cause of sin any where, rather than where it is.
saying, I sin because I was borne under an unlucky Planet.

2 Others when they sin and are rebuked for their sin, they make answer,
Not I, but the Devil was in fault, that I committed this deed.

3 Others, leaving excuses, directly cast the fault upon God, saying, God would
have it so: for if he would not, I should not have sinned.

4 Others, when God (say they) might have hindered me, and yet did not,
himself is the author of my sin.

It is no new thing, for men to sharpen their blasphemous tongue against God.
For our first Parents, when they had sinned and were accused of their sin by
God, they translate and pass over the fault committed from themselves to
others, neither ingenuously confess the truth. Adam returns the fault not so
much upon his wife as upon God himself: The woman, says he, which thou gave
to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat: as if he should say*
except thou had joined her to me, I had not sinned. But the Lord gave him not
his wife, that she should be an occasion of evil unto him, but that it might
be the better and more comfortable for him. The woman simply imputes the fault
to the Devil, saying, The Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. These are the
most false and corrupt judgments concerning the original of sin, impious
and detestable, whereby the majesty, truth and justice of God is grievously
offended.

Destiny no cause of sin.
1. They, who make destiny a cloak for sin, 1. define destiny to be a
linked order thorough all aeternitie, and a certain perpetual necessity of
intents and works according to the counsels of God, or according to the
evil planets. Now if you ask them who made the planets, they have not ought
to answer, but God. Therefore these men lay their evil to Gods charge. But
such a destiny did not all the founder Philosophers maintain, much less
Christians. 2. S. Austine, against two epistles of the Pelagians, unto
Boniface, lib. 2. cap. 6. They, says he, who hold destiny, maintain that not
only actions and events, but also our wills themselves depend of the position
of the planets, at the time of every ones conception or nativity which they
call constellations. But the grace of God surpasses not only all the stars,
and all the heavens, but also all the Angels. Let us conclude these things with
the word of the Lord by his Prophet Jeremy, pronouncing to this sense, Thus
says the Lord, Learn not the way of the heathen, and be not afraid for the
signs of heaven, though the heathen be afraid of such: for the customs of the
people are vain. Wherefore that the Astrologers call the planet of Saturn
unmerciful, sharp and cruel: and the planet of Venus favorable and gentle,
it is the vanity of vanities. For the stars have no force of doing good or
ill. And therefore the fault of sinners ought not to be imputed unto them.

2. That the Devil is not the only author of sin, who when as we commit
sin should bear alone the blame of the sin, and our selves be free from
fault, The Devil not the only author of sin.
it is most of all declared in this, that he is able to induce and entice a man
to evil, but not to compel him. For God keeps under the Devil, by his
power, that he cannot do what he will: but only what, and so much as God
permits him. Nay he has not so much as power over filthy swine, much less
over the most noble souls of men. He has indeed a subtilty, and great force
in persuading: but God is stronger, who also never cease himself to put good
motions into man's mind. Neither permits he more to Satan, than he makes
profitable for man. Which we may see in that most holy man Job, in the example
of Paul, and in his words: God is faithful, which will not suffer you to be
tempted above that you be able. Wherefore they are vain men, who unload the
blame of their wickedness on the Devils shoulders.

It remains that we show, God no cause of sin.
that also God is not the author of sin. Genesis 1. and 2. God saw those things
which he had made, and they were very good. Psalm. 5. Because thou art not a God
that loves wickedness. James. 1. Let no man say when he is tempted, I am
tempted of God. Eccle. 15. Say not thou, it is through the Lord that I turn
back: for thou ought not to do the things that he hates. To these and
very many the like speeches may be added the great and most perfect goodness
of God, so that no effect of his is evil. And because God is true, and far
from all dissembling and guile, neither can destroy or deny himself; 2. Tim.
2.
it is certain that plain contradictorie wills cannot be in him. But he
testifies in his law (which is as it were a glass of that purity which is in
God) that he has a horrible hatred of sin. Wherefore he does not will any,
and much less causes or furdereth it. Moreover, that which one himself
works in an other, he cannot of right punish. But God does most justly
punish al sins. Wherefore he neither will nor causes any sin. Romans 3. Is
God unrighteous which punishes? God forbid: else how shall God judge the
world? Lastly God does neither will nor cause that which destroieth his image:
sin is the destruction of the image of God. Wherefore God does neither will nor
cause it. Of this we conclude, that God is not the author of sin; but that
the original of evil springs from man himself, by the instigation of the
Devil: yet so nevertheless, that we say, that the Devil being at the first
corrupted did corrupt man, The cause of sin is to be sought in our first father
(through the Devils instigation) and so by descent to be found in us.
but could have done nothing, except man of his own accord had consented to
evil. Here are we to remember again the fall of our father Adam. God made
Adam to his own image, and similitude, that is, he made him most good,
vncorrupt, holy, righteous, and immortal: he furnished him with most
excellent gifts, that nothing might be wanting unto him to all blessedness in
God. Wherefore his understanding was wholly divine: his will most free and most
holy, he had power of doing good and evil: a law was given him of God, which
showed him what he should do, or what he should not do. For the Lord said,
Thou shall not eat of the fruit of the tree of knowledge both of good and
evil. God simply required of him obedience and faith, and that whole Adam
should depend of him, and that not constrained by necessity, but should do
it freely. God made man from the beginning, and left him in the hand of his
counsel, saying: If thou will thou shall observe the commandments, and
testify thy good will. Therefore when the Serpent tempted man, and counseled
him to taste of the forbidden tree, man was not ignorant that the counsel of
the Serpent did not agree with the commandment of God. The Lord compelled
him not: neither did Satan compel him in the Serpent. For God had said: Ye
shall not eat of that tree, neither shall ye touch it, least ye die. Wherefore
it was in the hand of his counsel, to eat or not to eat. God declared unto
him his will, plainly charging him, that he should not eat, and adding the
peril, he did withdraw him from eating, least perhaps thou die. Satan also, as
neither could he, did not use any force: but did probably move him unto it,
and at length did overcome him. For when the will of the woman declined to the
word of the Devil, her mind departed from the word of God, and rejecting a
good law, she commits an evil work: afterward she drew on her husband
willingly following her to be partaker of her sin. That does the Scripture
inculcate in these words: So the woman (seeing that the tree was good for
meat, Genesis 3.6.
and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to get
knowledge) took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also to her
husband with her, and he did eat. Here have you the beginning of the evil,
the Devil: and that which moved the will of man, that is: the false
commendation of the Devil, and even a mere lie, and the delectable show and
sightlines of the tree. Wherefore Adam and Eve do of their own accord, that
which they do, being lead with a hope of more excellent wisdom which the
Seducer had lyingly promised them. The beginning of sin from the Devil, and
the free election of man corrupted by his seducement.
We conclude therefore that sin has his beginning, not from God who
forbids evil, but from the Devil, and the free election of man, which was
corrupted by the Devils falsehood. And therefore the Devil and man's corrupted
will obeying him are the most true cause of sin. This evil flowed from our
first Parents unto all their posterity, so that sin has not else whence his
beginning, than from our selves and our corrupt judgment, and wicked will, and
the suggestion of Saran. For an evil root, and that first corruption brings
forth of it a rotten branch, agreeable to the nature thereof, which Satan now
also sets forward and laboreth it as it were plants, by his guiles and
lies: but in vain does he labor; except we yield our selves to be fashioned
and dressed by him.

That is called original sin, which proceeds from the first original,
that is, What is original sin.
was derived from the first parent into all by propagation or generation. For
this sin we bring with us in our nature out of our mothers womb into this
life. I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me. And
of the Devil Christ speaks thus: He has been a murderer from the
beginning, and abode not in the truth: because there is no truth in him. When
he speaks a lie then speaks he of his own: for he is a lier, and the
father thereof.

To this may be added this reason: that sin cannot be a proper and natural
effect of any cause but of that which has power to do against the law. But
this no nature has power to do, Sin the proper effect of a reasonable
nature transgressing the law.
besides the nature of Angels, and of men: For God is a law unto himself, and
can not do or intend any thing against his law. And other creatures, whereas
they are not endued with reason, and therefore the law not made for them, they
cannot commit sin: because take away the law, and there is no place left for
sin. Wherefore it necessarily follows, that sin is such an effect, as
agrees to those Angels alone who fell, and to men.

The first cause of the first sin, the Devil. The second, man's will. The
first sin cause of all sins thence following.
But there is an order to be observed in these causes. For the cause of the
first sin in Paradise is the Devil, instigating, and the will of man
assenting or obaying; and these former sins are the causes of all that
follow. The reasons, 1. Because by one man sin entered into the world. 2.
Because man and the Devil are able by their own nature to sin against the
law. And that first sin or first fall in Paradise is the cause of original
sin, both in Adam, who fell, and in others who have their descent from him.
Original sin is the cause preparatiue as it were of all actual sins,
according to that of Paul, Sin that dwells in me does it, and evil and
corrupt inclinations do carry me to evil actions. Causes impulsive of sins
are those obiectes which solicit men to sin. Yea actual sins are the
causes also of those sins that follow them.

Former actual sins cause of others which follow after, not only in them
which first sinned, but also in others.
Furthermore whereas the scripture teaches that the sins which follow are
the punishments of those that went before, and the fault or desert is an
impulsive cause of punishment; it is manifest that actual sins which go
before are the causes also of those that follow them, even as of other
punishments or calamities, which are purchased by our sins. And that is to
be understood as well of the falls of those that commit the sin, as of others
falls, with which as well they are punished, whose falls they are, as they, who
first sinned: as the sins of the Parents are punished by the sins of the
children, the sins of the subjects by the sins of the Magistrates, or
contrariwise: as cap. 1. to the Romans, of purpose is declared. Wherefore God
gave them up to their hearts lusts, unto uncleanness. And 2. These. 2. Whose
coming is by the working of Satan, with all power and signs and lying wonders,
and in all deceiuablenes of unrighteousness, among the^ that perish. And Exodus 2.
I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the sins of the fathers upon
the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me. And 2.
Sam. 12. Thus says the Lord, behold I will raise up evil against thee out of
thine own house, and will take thy wives before thine eyes, and give them unto
thy neighbor.

God the causer of sins as they are punishments, but not as they are sins.
If humane reason do here object: That God is the author and causer of
punishments? If therefore sins be the punishments of sins, it follows that
God is the cause of sins: We answer that there is a fallacy of the accident
in the Minor. For it comes to pass by an accident, that is by the fault of
those who sin, that when by the just judgment of God either themselves or
others are punished by evil men, they in the mean season (God permitting, that
is not showing them that he would have those things to be done by them for to
punish them, which things yet he hates, and which he will punish both in this
life and the life to come) do fulfill their desires swaruing from the law of
God, and estrainging themselves more and more from God by sinning, do purchase
more grievous punishments unto themselves. Or if we will distinguish the
Mayor, it is in effect the same. For punishments come from god as author and
causer of them, as they are punishments: but in as much as they are sins, so
they come, God neither willing them, nor approving them, nor causing, but only
permitting. For to permit this kind of punishments, which sinners by sinning
inflict either upon themselves or others; is nothing else, than not to cause,
that evil men should do this, which God would have done for punishment, to
the same end, that they may obey this will of God.

So also we answer to that Argument: The privation or want of righteousness and
divine wisdom god inflicteth as a punishment upon men: but that privation is
sin. Therefore god is the causer of sin. For this privation is not sin,
as by the just judgment of God it is inflicted, but as it is of men themselves
voluntarily brought upon them by their own misdeedes and demerites, and is
admitted or received into the mind, will and heart: even as evil actions are
not sins, as they are governed by god, but as they are done by men.

They say further: He that minds the end, minds also the means. God
minds the ends of sin, Punishment and the manifestation of Gods glory and
justice are not the ends of sin, because men are not by them moved to sin.
that is punishment and the showing of his justice and wrath in punishment.
Wherefore he minds sins also, by which those ends are come unto. But the
Minor is to be denied, that punishment and the manifestation of the glory of
god are the ends of sin. For the end is that which moves the efficient
cause to bring forth an effect: but punishment or the manifestation of the
glory of god, do not move the sinner to sin. These cannot therefore be said
to be the ends of sin. But those are the proper ends of sin, which the
Devils and men respect in sinning: that is the destruction of men, the
fulfilling of evil desires, the oppression and reproach of God and his truth.

God respects those as ends not of men's sin, but of his permission of their
sin.
If they reply, that men indeed have not those ends, but that god respects
them: For that which god permits, to show his justice by punishing it, the
end which god proposes thereof, is the punishment of the sinners, and his own
glory. But he permits sin to punish it, and to declare himself just by
punishing it: therefore these are the ends of sin, in respect of the purpose
and intent of god: we deny the Mayor. For God suffering sin to be committed
respects as the end (not of an others work, that is of the sin of Devils or
me^, but of his own work, that is of his permission of sin) the punishment of
sins, and the manifestation of his own justice. For sin is one thing, and
the permission of sin another, whereof is spoken, Exodus 9. For this cause
have I appointed thee to show my power in thee, and to declare my name
throughout all the world, Proverb. 16. The Lord has made all things for his
own sake: yea even the wicked man for the day of evil. Roman. 9. God being
willing to show his truth, and to make his power known, has suffered with
long patience the vessels of wrath prepared to destruction. Wherefore
punishment is not the end, but the consequent or proper effect of sin, and an
accidentary effect thereof is the manifestation of the glory of God: as Paul
shows, Romans 3. For if the verity of God has more abounded thorough my lie
to his glory etc.

If here again they reply: He that will the consequent will also the
antecedent: How God is said to will punishment which is the consequent of
sin, and not sin it self, which is the antecedent.
But God will these things which are the consequents of sins, that is,
punishment, and execution of his justice: therefore he will also the
antecedent, that is, sin it self, without which these should not follow or
be conseque^ts: we deny the whole consequence of this reason. For nothing
follows or can be concluded in reason, when both the former propositions are
mere particular. For the Mayor of this reason is not universally true, but
only then holds it, when as the antecedent together with the consequent
agrees with the nature of him which will the consequent: and not when only
the consequent agrees, and not the antecedent. For when it falls thus out,
then is the consequent by his will, but the antecedent is not by his will, but
only by permission. For God is said to will those things which he likes, as
agreeing with his nature and rightnes; but to permit those things which yet he
disliketh, abhors and condemns, but nevertheless for just causes hinders
them not from being done. And therefore it is said in the scripture, that he
will and causes life everlasting, which is the consequent, and the conversion
of men which is the antecedent and goes before: and that he will not, but only
permits punishment as it is sin which follows and is the consequent of
sins: as is delivered in holy Scripture Romans 9. and Ephesians. 1.

If again they urge: He that forbids not sin, The reasons why God not
forbidding sin is yet no cause of sin.
when he may forbid it to be committed, in him is some cause and fault of the
sin: but God permits it, when he might forbid it: therefore there is some
cause and fault of sin in him: we deny the consequence: because the Mayor is
not universally true. For it is only true of him, who does not perfectly hate
sin, and therefore forbids it not, when he may: and who is bound to hinder
sin that it be not committed. But it is not true of God who with unspeakable
anger accurseth and condemns sin, neither yet hinders it from being
committed; because he is neither bound to do so, neither does he permit it,
without most good and just causes. Farther, God might by his absolute power
hinder evil; but he will not corrupt his creature, and man being just and
righteous. Wherefore he deals with man after the order of man. He proposes
laws unto him: he proposes rewards and punishments: he wills him to
embrace good, and fly evil. To the doing of which thing neither denies he
his grace, without which we can do nothing, neither refuses he our diligence
and labor. Hereif man cease and give over, the sin and negligence is ascribed
to man, not to God, though he could have hindered it, and did not because he
ought not to hinder it, least he should trouble his appointed and settled order,
and destroy his own work. Wherefore God is not author of evil or sin.

If they object farther: God does not evil when he permits evil*
He that does evil that good may come of it, does not well, Romans 3. God when
he permits evil for good ends, does evil that good may come of it:
Wherefore he does against his justice and law: and by a consequent is bound to
hinder evil: we deny the Minor. For God when he permits evil, does not
evil, but good. For the permission of sin is one thing, which is the good
and just work of God: and sin is an other thing, which is the evil and
unjust work of the Devil, or man sinning and transgressing the law.

Lastly they say: what God permits willingly, that he will to be done: God
permitting sin, does not will sin to be done.
but he willingly permits sin: wherefore he will sin to be committed,
and by a consequent is the cause of sin. But the Mayor is to be denied: God
will the permission, that is the privation of his spirit and grace: but the
sin of his creature, which concurreth with it, he will not: because he
neither minds it, nor approves it. They confirm their Mayor by this
Argument: To permit is neither to will, or not to will: But it is not, not to
will; for then either that should not be done, which God is said to permit;
or something should be done that God would not: both of which are absurd.
Wherefore to permit is the same that to will, and by a consequent God when he
permits sin, does will sin. We deny the consequence, because there is
not a sufficient enumeratio^ of the diversities of will in the Minor, for God
is said to will, and not to will a thing after two ways. Either to will, as
when together he both likes and works a thing, or as he likes a thing
only, (under which also is comprehended his commanding) but does not work it.
And he is said not to will any thing, either as he both disliketh and hinders
a thing, either as he only disliketh it, but does not forbid or hinder it.
Both which kinds of will are contained in the Mayor: but only one of them in
the Minor: which is, both to dislike and hinder a thing from being done.

For if God in that sense would not sin to be committed, then those
absurdities should follow which they speak of. But when we say that God will
not sin, we understand that they do greatly displease him, and yet that god
hinders them not from being committed: which also is not, to will, but to not
will sin. For god can will nothing, but that which is agreeable to his own
nature and goodness: neither does the holy Scripture show any where that god
will those things which are contrary to his nature, in such sort as they are
contrary.

This is also objected: God the cause of man's will, but not of the corruption
of his will, is not a cause of sin, whereof man's will corrupted is a cause.
He that is the cause or the efficient of a cause, is also the author of the
effects of that cause, if not the next, yet a far off. But god is the cause
of that will, which is the cause of sin: therefore is he the cause of the
effect of the will, that is of sin. We answer to the Mayor, by
distinguishing of the cause. For a cause which is a far off a cause, is
sometimes by it self, and sometimes only by an accident a cause. That is a
cause by it self, of an effect, which does not only bring forth the next
cause of the effect, but also does move and govern it in bringing forth the
effect, which it self intended, or unto the which it was appointed: as when
god frames and bends the will of men which himself made, to good works, or
to such actions as himself will have done: when the Father or Master brings
up his Son or his Scholar to good things, and the learning which he
instilleth into his mind moves him to do well: when the Sun and rain
make the earth fertile, and the earth brings forth Corn. But when the cause
which is a far off a cause either does not move the next cause of the effect,
or does not intend and mind the effect, neither is appointed thereunto; it
cannot be said to be a cause of that effect, but by an accident: as when of a
good father is borne an evil and euil-liuing son: or of a good father a good
and wel-liuing son: when a godly Magistrate by his commandment moves the will
of a wicked executioner, to execute a guilty person, and he being impelled
either by desire of revenge, or by hatred, or by cruelty, reioiceth at his
evil, whom he executes, and so commits murder before God: and lastly, when
one makes a sword, and another uses it either well, or il. Now as often as the
next cause is either before the bringing forth of the effect depraved, or in
the very bringing of it forth, either by it self, or by another cause: then
brings it forth a bad effect, which the cause removed or a far off, that
either brings forth or moves this next cause, neither intends, neither as
by any ordination or appointment unto it, produces: As when the will and hand
of the cleauer purpose to cut a thing, and the iron being too dull causes that
to break which is taken in hand to be cut. So also God makes and moves the
will: but because the will of men is depraved by the devil and it self, it
brings forth sin, which God neither when he makes nor when he moves the
will, intends or minds to bring forth. Wherefore it follows not at al,
that God is the cause of those sins which are committed by his creatures
depraved and corrupted of themselves.

Likewise it is objected: Second causes are able to do nothing without the
first cause, which is God. Wherefore neither is sin brought forth, neither
do they deprave themselves, but that also the first cause works it with
them. God the first cause does not concur with secondarie causes to the
bringing forth of sin.
We answer to the antecedent: The second causes do nothing without the first
cause, that is, without the first cause preserve them and move them to do, so
far forth as it is good which they do: but they do without the first cause
concurring with them to the bringing forth of evil, as it is a fault, or of
sin. Isa. 30. We to the rebellious children, says the Lord, that take counsel,
but not of me, and cover with a covering, but not by my spirit, that they may
lay sin upon sin.

How the good will of man corrupted it self.
Likewise they object: That which is good, cannot by sinning corrupt it self,
except it be some other way corrupted: as it is said, A good tree cannot bring
forth evil fruit. The will of the devil and Adam, before the fall of both, was
good: Therefore it could not corrupt it self by sinning, except it were by
some other means corrupted. We deny the Mayor. For although the creature be
good, yet God not preserving his goodness, that is moving or willing that his
will should be moved by outward objects, neither in the mean season lightning
and governing the will with the knowledge of his own divine will, it is not only
possible, but it must necessarily follow that he must sin, become an evil
tree, and thorough his own will and fault auert himself from God, run to worse
and worse, and purchase blindness the just punishment of sin both unto him and
his: as it is said: Without me ye can do nothing. Again, it is objected: He
that withdraws grace from the sinner, without which sin cannot be avoided, he
is the the cause of sin: God did withdraw his grace from man, without which
he could not persist in righteousness. Wherefore God was the cause of man's
sin. We deny the Mayor. First, because God was not bound to man, to preserve
that grace in him which he gave him. Secondly, because he withdrew his grace
for man being willing thereunto, and rejecting it of his own accord. Thirdly,
because he withdrewe his grace, not that he did envy man, righteousness and
eternal life, or that he is delighted with sin, but to try him, that is, to
show how the creature is able to do or keep no goodness, without the singular
goodness and mercy of his creator: and so god is not at all the cause of sin,
although sin does necessarily follow this withdrawing in him, from whom the
grace is withdrawn. So then when God did withdraw his grace from man, not God
withdrawing it, but man rejecting it is the cause of his own sin and
destruction.

Again they say: God will the temptation of man: yet not the sin of man.
He that will have him to be tempted whom he knows certainly will fall, if he be
tempted, he will the sin of him who falls. But God would that man should
be tempted of the devil, who^ he knew certainly would fall, for otherwise man
could not have bin tempted. Wherefore God is the cause of his fall. Here also we
deny the Mayor. For he is not the cause of sin, who will have him that will fall
tempted, for to try or to make manifest the weakness of his creature; but the
devil tempting man to this end, that he may sin, and be separated from God,
and man obeying the tempter against the commandment of God, are the causes of
sin. For the antecedent, which being put must necessarily have another thing
consequent thereof, is not the cause of the consequent, except it works
somewhat in producing the consequent. But God neither in withdrawing his grace,
neither in that he does will the temptation of man, works in producing of sin,
as it is sin, because he never intended it.

Again they object: That is not of God but of man and the Devil which makes
sin.
He that is the cause of those things which make sin, is the cause of sin. God
is the cause of those things which make sin, that is, of the action, which is
the matter, and of the privation of rightnes in man, which is the form of sin.
Wherefore he is the author of sin. To these the answer has been made before.
For the Minor is to be denied. Because the action, and privation of the divine
light and direction do make sin, as they are contrary to the Law. And they
are contrary to the law of God, and make sin, as they are committed by man, and
are in him: but as they are guided by God and inflicted, they are not sin, but
a trial of him that would sin, or a punishment of him that had sinned.
Wherefore that is not of God, but of man and the Devil which makes sin.

Whether God would the fall of Adam, and how.
Last of al they urge: Seeing that God would the fa^ of Adam either as it was
sin, or as a punishment, and could not will it as a punishment, because no sin
had gone before which should be therewith punished; it seems to follow that
God would that work as it was sin. But this consequence also is deceitful,
because there is not a sufficient enumeratio^ in the Mayor. For although the
first sin was no punishment, yet God would that action, not as a sin and
contrary to his will and nature, but as in punishing, and receiving again
mankind into favor by his Son it was a way and occasion of excercising and
manifesting his justice and mercy, and an example of the weakness of all
creatures, yea of the most excellent, if they be not by the singular goodness
of the Creator preserved; as it is declared, Romans 11. God has shut up al in
unbelief, that he might have mercy of all. And in the same place it is
showed concerning the blindness of the Jews, That partly this obstinacy was
come to Israel, until the fullness of the gentiles were come in: and that the
Jews are enemies of the gospel for our sakes; and that we have obtained
mercy through their unbelief: That is, that god would this their obstinacy,
not as it was a sin of the Jews, neither only as a punishment of other
sins, but also as an occasion of translating the gospel unto the gentiles.
And it is said, Romans 3. That God in the preaching of the Law respects this,
That all the world be culpable before him. Wherefore this also he respected and
would in permitting of sin: which if it had not come between, the Law had not
made the world culpable before god.

God made Satan good, and himself evil.
1 Objection* Satan was made of god. And therefore the malice also of Satan.
Answer. God made indeed all the Angels; yea those which became Apostataes and
Devils: but yet he created all the Angels at the beginning good. But Satan is
said not to have stood steadfast in the truth. Then before his fall he stood
in the truth. But afterward he treacherously fell from his alleagiance, and
sinned against God: and therefore the crime of evil sticks in that runaway
the Devil. For since that time, after he fell, there is no truth in him, no
faith, no integrity, no fear of God, no light, no goodness. He that
commits sin is of the Devil, etc. For he is the first sinner and the
fountain of sin.

2 Objection. God made Adam. Therefore he made sin. Sin not made of God,
because it is no creature but the corruption of a creature.
Answer. Sin is the corruption of a nature created good of god, but not any
creature, made of god in man. God made man good, who, by Satan's persuasion,
corrupted willingly that goodness which be received of god: so that now sin
is man's, and not a creature of god created in man. Neither is the nature of man
the cause of sin. For god who created all things, and the very nature of
man, created them all good: wherefore the very nature of man also was created
good. But sin is an Accidental quality, Sin a natural property of man
corrupted, but not of man simply, as he was first created.
which befell unto man in his fall, and after his fall, being even from the
beginning such as now it is; but no substantial property, nor of the nature of
man. Now indeed whereas we are borne in sin, sin is a natural property
of men, according to the judgment of Augustine Against the Maniches, Cap. 9.
But and if we say any man to be naturally evil, we say so because of the
original of the old sin, in which all our mortality now is borne.

3 Objection. God gave not man a will and power to work evil, but to do good.
But the will and power which was in Adam was from god. Therefore sin also is
from god. Answer. God gave not man a will and power to woork evil. For he
made a law to forbid evil. Wherefore Adam himself did ill bestow that will
and power which he received of god, in ill using them. The prodigal son
received money of his father, not that he should lash it out wastfully, but
that he might have as much as suffices need. Wherefore when himself does
ill bestow his money, and perishes, he perishes through his own default, and
not by his fathers, though he received the money of his father. Therefore the
fault is in the abuse. He that gives thee them, leaves the use of them unto
thee. If he be just, he gives them thee for to use, and not to abuse. When
thou abusest them, the fault is laid on thee who abusest them, and not of him
who gave them. So god gave a will and power to Adam to do good, not to work
evil.

4 Objection. God made man so as he might fall, It was necessary that man
should have free power either to stand or fall. Romans 9.20. Isai 45.9.
neither did confirm and establish in him the goodness of his nature.
Wherefore he would have him to fall or sin. Answer. The Scripture beats
back this frowardness of men wickedly curious. Who art thou which pleadest
against god? W^ be unto him that strives with his master. Except god has
made man so as he might fall, there had been no praise of his work or virtue.
And what, if it were necessary that man should be so made as he might fall?
For so did the very nature of God require. God does not grant his glory to
any creature. Adam was a man, no god. And as god is good, so is he also just.
He does good unto men, but he will have them to be obedient and thankful
unto him. He bestows infinite goodness upon man, therefore he should have
been thankful, and obedient, and subject unto him. For he declared by his
Law what he would, and what he would not. Of the tree of the knowledge of
good and evil, says he, thou shall not eat; When thou eatest, thou shall
die. As if he should say, Thou shall regard me, thou shall cleave unto
me, obaie me, serve me: neither shall thou elsewhere seek for rules of good
and evil but of me, and so shall thou show thy self obedient unto me.
Reply. God foreknew the fall of man, which if he would, he might have
hindered. But he did not hinder it: Therefore God was in fault that Adam
sinned. Answer. Unto this objection answer has been made before: neither
does that necessity follow upon the foreknowledge of God, that Adam must
needs have sinned, because God did foreknow that he would sin. Some wise
father did foreknowe by some signs and tokens that his son should hereafter
at sometime be slain with a sword. Neither does this his foreknowledge deceive
him: for he was thrust through for fornication. But he is not therefore
thought to be slain, because his father did foreknow that he should be slain:
Lib. 2. De. vocat. Gent. cap. 4.
but because he was a fornicator. So says Ambrose speaking of the murder which
Cain committed: Verily God did foreknow, to what the fury of him being in a
rage would come: neither yet was the attempt of his will forced of necessity
to sin, because the knowledge of god could not be deceived. Li. 3. de libero
arbitrio, cap 4.
And Augustine: God is a just revenger of those things, of which yet he is not
an evil author.

Wherefore those sins which ensue and follow, are in respect of god,
considered as most just punishments, which as they are punishments, have their
being from him as their author and causer: but as they are sins, in respect
of men they come, God neither willing nor causing them, but permitting only,
seeing he does not cause men to do that, which he would have done for a
punishment, to this end, as for to obey therein his will. For one and the same
work is good and holy, in respect of God: and sin, in respect of men, by reason
of the diversity both of the efficiences and of the ends. For first, man, by
reason of his great both ignorance and corruption, will and works evil only.
But God because he is exceeding good, and the very rule of goodness and
righteousness, doing in all things what he will, will and works always only
that which is good. Secondly, men have such an end of their actions as is
disagreeing from the Law of God, that is, what they do, they do not to that
end, to obey God, but to fulfill their bad and corrupt desires. But God has
the end of all his works, agreeing with his nature and Law, even that he may
declare and execute his justice, goodness, and mercy. By these two things it
comes to pass, that the reasonable creature woorking together with God, God
woorking uprightly and holily, does nevertheless it self work vnholylie and
corruptly.

5 What are the effects of sin.
NOw that it is defined what sin is, and from whence it came, we are to
consider also what be the evils which follow sin. For except this also be
known, we know not yet, how great evil there is in sin, and with how great
hatred God pursues it. It has been said before, that evil was of two sorts:
one of crime or offense, which is sin, the other of pain or punishment: The
evil of punishment, is the effect of the evil of offense. That this may be the
better understood, we must here again remember, that of punishments, Some are
only punishments, as are the destruction of nature, or torments; others both
punishments and sins, as al sins, which have followed since the first fall.

1 The sins which follow are effects of those which go before. Sins
ensuing, effects of sins which go before.
So original sin is the effect of the sin or fall of our first parents. By
one man's disobedience many were made sinners. And secondly, All actual sins
are effects of original sin Sin took occasion by the commandment, and
deceived me. And thirdly, The effect of actual sins is the increase of them,
that is, greater guiltines by reason of the most just judgment of God; because
God punishes sins with sins. Wherefore God also gave them up to their hearts
lusts. Romans 1.24. 2 These. 2.11. Mat. 25.29. Other men's sins oftentimes
effects of actual sin.
And therefore God shall send them strong delusio^, that they should believe
lies. From him that has not, shall be taken away also that which he has. And
fourthly, The effects of actual sins are also oftentimes other men's sins, by
reason of scandale or example, whereby some are made worse of others, and are
entised or moved to sin. So the persuasion of the devil caused man to decline
from God: and now it works in stubburn-minded men. The devil put it into the
heart of Judas to betraie Christ, Ioh. 13. Evil speeches corrupt good manners.
So evil teachers do withdraw men from god to errors, idolatry, and other
sins. So a use of liberty out of season offends, and draws men to sin.

An evil conscience an effect of sin.
2 There follows sin, in the immovable and perpetual order of Gods judgment,
an evil conscience which is the knowledge and dislike which we have in our mind
of our own sin, and the knowledge of the judgment of God against sin, and
that proceeding out of the knowledge of Gods Law, upon which ensues the fear
of the wrath of God and punishment, according to the order of gods justice, and
a flieng and hatred of God who destroieth sin, which is the beginning of
desperation, and eternal torments, except it be cured by the comfort of the
gospel. Romans 2. The gentiles show the effect of the Law written in their
hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing one
another, or excusing. And Isaiah: There is no peace to the wicked.

Temporal and spiritual evils effects of sin.
3 Temporal and spiritual evils: as temporal death, and in a word all the
calamities of this life. These evils are only punishments, that is, torments
and dissolution of nature.

If any man object, that they also are subject to temporal death, and other
calamities, who have all their sins remitted them; and therefore al temporal
evils are not the punishments or effects of sin: Temporal evils in the
regenerate are effects of sin, not as punishments, but as chastisements.
but some have other causes: we answer, that the consequence holds not from
the denial of one particular to the denial of the general. For albeit the
calamities of the regenerate are not effects of sin as a punishment, which is
inflicted on men sinning, that so the justice of God might be satisfied: yet
are they effects of sin as chastisementes and exercises, whereby sin is
repressed, and more and more purged out, until at length by corporal death
the whole be abolished. Now that of the blind man, Ioh. 9. Neither this man
has sinned nor his parents: Christ means not simply that they had not
sinned, or that their sins were not a cause of this calamity: but that their
sins were not the principal cause, why he was borne blind; but that the
works of God should be showed on him, Christ by a miracle opening his eyes.

4 Eternal death which is the effect of al sins, Eternal death the effect
of sin.
as they are sins. For all of what quality soever they be are punished either
with eternal pain, as in the reprobate; or with equivalent pain to eternal,
as in the son. This death does begin in the reprobate, even in this world,
that is, anxiety, and torment of conscience: which we also should feel, except
we were delivered by the grace of God. Now by the name of eternal death, is not
understood the destruction of the soul or body, or the separation of them:
but the abandoning and banishing of the soul and body living from the face of
God, a continual horror and torment, and a feeling and flying of Gods wrath
and judgment, and a horrible murmuring against God, taking vengeance of their
sins.

If they object, that the sins of those who believe in Christ, The regenerate
though they sin, are not punished with this death, because Christ has suffered
an equivalent punishment for them.
are not punished with eternal death: we answer that those were punished in
Christ with a punishment, which both for the grieuousnes of the punishment, and
for the dignity of the person who suffered it, is equivalent to those eternal
punishments which were to be inflicted upon us for our sins. As it is said,
Esa. 53. He has laid upon him the iniquities of us all.

Against that which we affirm, that eternal death is the effect of al sins,
yea even of the least: The 1. Objection is: Why the during of punishment ought
to be alike to al sins, but not the degree of punishment.
Like is not to be given unto things unlike. But sins are not alike.
Therefore al ought not to be punished with eternal death. Answer. There is
more in the conclusion of this reason, than was in the premises. For only this
follows to be concluded. Therefore all sins ought not to be punished with
like punishment. For all sins, even the least, deserve eternal punishment;
because all sins offend against the eternal and infinite good. Wherefore as
concerning the lasting of the punishment, all sins are punished with like
punishment: but not as concerning the degrees of punishments. All sins are
punished with eternal torments, yet so, as not with equal torments. The
servant who knows the will of his master, and does it not, shall be beaten
with many stripes. It shall be easier for them of the land of Sodom in the day
of judgment, than for thee.

Al sins are not equal.
Here the Stoics object; That al sins or vices are joined with any one vice,
and therefore all are alike and equal. But neither is this consequence of
force, whereas also things unlike and unequal may be joined together: neither
is the antecedent granted. That seems to be proved by the saying of James,
cap. 2. He that fails in one is guilty of al. But James says not, that all
sins or vices concur and are joined with one: but first, that in the breach of
one point the whole law is violated, as the whole body is said to be hurt,
when one part is harmed. Then, that there concurreth with every sin the
fountain or cause of al other sins, that is, the contempt of God. And this
evil being seated in the heart does violate the love of God, and so al other
parts of our obedience toward God. For no woork, which proceeds not from the
perfect love, dread and reverence of God, can agree with the Law of God, or
please God. And yet have we experience that this hinders not, but that he
which is infected with one vice may be propense and prone to some sins more,
and to some less, especially since vices themselves also are one opposite to
another, by the one of which contraries and not by both at one time every man
violateth virtue.

Neither are those principles also of the stoicall philosophers to be granted:
That how far soever thou go in sinning, after thou have once past the line
or middle, which is virtue, it is not material for the increasing or augmenting
the fault of passing beyond the line: And that al virtues are alike and equal
one to another, so that no man is stronger than a strong man. For whereas sin
is a swaruing from the middle, it is manifest, that how much greater the
swaruing is, so much is the sin more grievous: And that virtues are both in the
same, and in diverse men otherwhile greater, otherwhiles lesser, even as much as
the qualities of the body are different in degrees, experience does witness.
Wherefore in the judgment of god also there are degrees put as well of
punishments as of sins.

2 Object. Gods great mercy and his justice neither impeached by other in
punishing sin with eternal punishment.
He that is exceeding merciful does not punish all sin with exceeding and
extreme punishment, neither is to al eternity angry with sin, or looks
upon the torments of his own work. For extreme justice, which does strictly
follow right and law in punishing, admits no favorable equity, which yet
mercy, especially exceeding mercy, does use and show. But God is exceeding
merciful. Therefore he does not punish all sin with exceeding, that is,
everlasting punishment. Or, God punishes all sin with extreme punishment,
Therefore he is not merciful. Auns. First we are to distinguish the
ambiguitie of the Mayor. He that is exceeding merciful does not inflict
exceeding and extreme punishment, that is, except his justice require it. But
that God should punish all sin with everlasting punishment, his exceeding
justice requires, which is, Psalm. 5.5.
earnestly and exceedingly to hate and punish all whatsoever is not agreeable
to his Law: So that except he did punish it with sufficient punishment, he
should not be merciful, but light and cruel. Secondly, we deny the
consequence of the reason: because it is a sophisme reasoning from that which
is not the cause, as being the cause. For the judge is not therefore
unmerciful, for that he executes a robber on the wheel: because he does it
according, to justice, neither is delighted with the torment and death of a
wretched man, but had rather he were saved, if so the Laws permitted. Right
so, God, according to his infinite wisdom, even in inflicting extreme
punishment on all sin, does notwithstanding show immeasurable and manifould
mercy, and contrariwise in showing exceeding mercy does most straightly and
exactly execute his justice. For 1. He punishes our sins sufficiently and
fully, not in us, but in his only begotten son, our guilt being translated
on him. 2. He offers remission of sins and grace to al men, who receive his
Son the Mediator with true faith and conversion. 3. He woorketh also that
faith and conversion by his spirit in the Elect. 4. He preserves his elect in
afflictions. 5. At length he fully delivers them: And all these things he
does of his free mercy, not bound or obliged thereto by any merit of ours. 6.
He is not delighted with the destruction of the reprobate, who refuse that
grace offered: but by differring their punishment, and by other great and
diverse benefits he inuiteth them to repentance. Wherefore the execution of
Gods justice is not repugnaunt to his mercy, neither does his mercy take away
or make breach of his justice, but they are both coupled with a marvelous
temperature in preserving and saving us.

How God is said remit nothing of his justice, and yet to be merciful.
3 Objection is against this; That god does so exercise his mercy, as he does
not thereby make breach of his justice. He that remitteth nothing of extreme
justice, is not at all merciful, but only just: God remitteth nothing of
extreme justice, because he punishes all with a sufficient punishment.
Therefore God is only just, and not merciful. Answer. We deny the Minor.
For god gives us his Son, and punishes him for us, of his mere mercy, not
of any right, not bound thereunto by any merits of ours. Besides, the Mayor
of the second Objection is to be distinguished. It is the property of him that
is merciful to exercise mercy; true; on believers, and such as are penitent.

1 Reply. It is the property of him that is merciful to pardon men, whether
they be penitent or not penitent. Answer. This is a false definition of mercy.

2 Reply. Faith and repentance are not the cause of mercy: Therefore by this
answer, neither should the penitent obtain mercy, that is, deliverance from
death. Answer. I grant that faith and repentance are not the cause of
mercy, and that it is not done for their repentance but for the satisfaction
and punishment of Christ only: yet with this condition, that we apply this by a
true faith unto our selves and repent. Reply. Naie, neither on the penitent
does God exercise mercy: For if god punish all sins with sufficient
punishment in Christ, he is not merciful. Answer. I deny the consequence of
this proposition: because he gave us his Son freely, who should satisfy for
us. This satisfaction did the Gospel add.

God remitteth freely our sins, in that he gives us freely that recompense
which he takes for them.
4 Objection. He that remitteth not without all recompense, does not remitte
freely, and so not of free mercy. God remitteth not without all recompense.
Therefore he remitteth not freely. Answer. God remitteth not unto us our
sins freely in respect of christ, but freely in respect of us, because he
exacteth nothing of us, and freely gives unto us Christ's satisfaction.
Although then he will have satisfaction to be made by another, even by Christ:
yet does he remit unto us our sins freely, because he (as it has been said)
gives us Christ of his free mercy, who might satisfy for us; and from him
proceeds this satisfaction and application, of it unto us. For he causes us,
both by his election, and the satisfaction of Christ freely given of him unto
us, and by the giving of his holy spirit, to receive Christ by faith: and this
he does for no other cause, but only of his free mercy. Ye are saved by grace.
First, because satisfaction is not made by us. Secondly, because the price for
sins is imputed unto us. Reply, What mercy god extends to the wicked.
against that which was answered to the second Objection, that is, that the
mercy of God is extended also to the wicked; The Prophet Jeremy says: Forgive
not their iniquity, neither put out their sin from thy sight. The mercy
therefore of God is not extended to the reprobate. Answer. 1. It is true,
when God denies his mercy unto them repenting, and except he have just cause
why he does not save all. But God has most just cause, why he suffers some
to perish, even the manifestation of his justice and power in punishing the
wicked. 2. It is to be understood of that degree of his mercy, which he
shows toward his chosen, even of this mercy, whereby he gives them
remission of sins, his holy spirit, and life everlasting. But it is not to be
granted, concerning that general mercy whereby he guides and governs all
creatures.

Reply, against that which is said in the same Answer to the Second
Objection; That God is not delighted with the destruction of the wicked. The
Lord says in Isaiah. Ah, I will ease me of mine adversaries. Therefore God is
delighted with the destruction of his enemies. Answer. These and the like
speeches are spoken after the order of men by an anthropopathie or humane
affection, and by them is signified, That God will the execution of his
justice: but is not delighted with the death or destruction of men, as being
his creatures.

It is requisite that this doctrine be known in the Church, That knowing how
great an evil sin is, The use of this doctrine of sin in the church
we may yield the praise of justice unto God, who does most severely punish
it: and that we may abhor al sins with our whole heart, and desire the more
earnestly to be fensed and defended of God against all sin; and that not
extenuating or lessening any, we flatter our selves in a conceit of our own
righteousness, or in hope of escaping: that measuring our sin by the Law of
God, neither esteeming evil good, or good evil, we loose our consciences
when God binds them, or bind them when God loses them: and acknowledging
the remnant of sin in us, and our manifold fallings, we should not despair
of pardon, flieng to God the mediator with boldness; that also we may be
able to discern our selves from the wicked and profane men in whom sin
reigns, and from all those that sin against the holy ghost, and that we
may conceive in our mind hope and confidence of Gods mercy: that we lay not
the cause and fault of our sins and destruction on God, but remember that it
is to be sought in our selves; that knowing there are degrees of punishments
and sins, we ad not sins to sins, but consider that lesser sins shall be
punished with lesser punishments, and greater with greater: that remembering the
sins of the parents are punished also in their posterity, we spare not only
our selves, but our posterity also in avoiding sin, that we may give and
render thanks unto God for this benefit, that he for his own glory and the
gathering and salvation of his Church, does maintain and continue also amongst
the wicked some order of virtue and discipline. And last of all, that true and
perpetual thankfulness may be kindled in us toward God and his Son our
Lord Jesus Christ, in that he has delivered us from these great evils, sin,
and the pains and punishment of sin.

OF THE CREATION OF MAN.
The necessity of this Doctrine.
SEEING that God would especially open and manifest himself in the creation of
angels and men, necessary for man is the knowledge of himself; both for that
God will be known by his own image, which he engraued in man's nature, and also
because without it we neither aspire, nor attain to that end, to the which we
were created. Now the knowledge of our self is twofold: That is, of man
uncorrupted, such as he was made of God, and shall be after his restoring
accomplished: and of man fallen into sin and corrupted, such as he now is. The
first is of the excellency and happiness, the other of the misery of mankind.

Now this common place is annexed unto the former of sin: 1. Because when it
is proved that there is sin, Why it is placed next the discourse of sin.
and that the nature of man is sinful, the question straight arises, whether
God created man subject to sin. And if not so, how then? For out of the
doctrine concerning Original sin this objection seems to follow. Man is a
sinner. Man was created of God. Therefore God created man a sinner. Whereunto
our answer is, that it is a fallacy of the Accident, or that more is brought
in the Conclusion, than was in the Antecedent. Secondly, This place is annexed
that it may be understood out of what dignity and felicity man has thrown
himself by his own unthankfulness. Thirdly, that we may know whence sin came,
and so not think God to be unjust. Fourthly, that we may know the greatness of
sin in us. Fifthly, that there may be kindled and increased in us an earnest
desire of recovering our first felicity, yea and far greater than that was.
Sixthly, that we may be thankful for the restoring of it. But there occur
many things, which prove God not to be the author of sin. 1 The nature of
God. He is of his own nature good, God not the author of sin, which was also
proved before page 101.
and the chief good: how then should any evil thing come from him? 2. It is
written Genesis 1.31. All that God had made, was very good. 3. It is proved by
the law of God, by which he condemns all evil things and sins, and
commands good things. Wherefore he is not the author of sins. For the law
of God is as it were the glass of that purity which is in God. 4. It is proved
by the punishments which God inflicteth upon sinners: but he were unjust, if
he should punish that in man, whereof himself were author. 5. By the
description of sin, which is a destruction of the image of God in man,
according to which man was made. This image was righteousness. And therefore not
sin. More unto this purpose has been spoken in the former place of sin.
To this place of the creation may be referred the place of the Image of God.
Likewise the place of the first sin of Adam and Eve. Those two places we will
handle next after this, that so afterward we may come to the place of
freewill, which is also joined with this of man's creation.

THE QVESTIONS OF MAN'S CREATION ARE ESPECIALLY TWO.
1 What, man was created of God. 2 To what end, or for what, man was created.
1 What, man was created of God.
This question is proposed even for the same causes, for which the whole place
it self is. 1. That it may appear, that God is not the author of sin. 2.
That we may know the greatness of the sin of man's unthankfulness. 3. That we
may pray to God and crave earnestly for his grace, and our delivery from
sin. 4. That we may be thankful for our delivery from sin.

MAn was created, first consisting of body and soul. His body was fashioned
of a mass or lump of earth, Man created perfect both in body and soul.
immortal, if he stood still in righteousness; mortal, if he fell: for
mortality ensued on sin. His soul is a substance incorporeall,
understanding, and immortal: this was by god infused and united to an
isntrumental body, to inform or quicken it, and together with it to make and
constitute one person or Subsistent, namely man, to work certain motions, and
actions external and internal, by the ministry of the body and without the
ministry of the body, just and pleasing God, all which the soul
accomplisheth in the body, and some also by the body as an instrument, some
by it self, without the body, that is, not using the body or any part
thereof as an instrument of his operations. Secondly, man was created
perfectly wise. Thirdly, Perfectly holy, and just. Fourthly, Lord over other
creatures. Fifthly, Truly and perfectly blessed and happy. And this is to be
created to the image of God.

Object. Perfect wisdom, righteousness, and blessedness are in god alone. Man
perfect but in a certain degree and measure, not infinitely as God.
Man is not God: therefore these could not be perfect in man. Answer. This
reason is a fallacy deceiving by reason of the equivocation or ambiguitie of
the word Perfect. For in the Mayor proposition is understood, The perfection
of the Creator, which is the very immensitie and vnmeasurablenes of his essence
and properties, by reason whereof nothing can be added more unto God, whereby
he may be greater, or better, or happier: of which perfection if the Conclusion
also speak, we grant the whole reason: for this perfection is communicated
reallie to no creature at all, no not to the flesh of Christ. But it is an
other perfection, which is in creatures, namely a perfection in parts and
degrees. For all creatures, even the most excellent, have only parts and
degrees of good things distributed of the Creator unto them, every one such
as are agreeable to their nature and place.

All things therefore, are in their own kind or sort most good and perfect,
when they are and remain such, as God would then have every of them to be,
when he created them. So in man at his creation was perfect wisdom or
knowledge, perfect Righteousness, perfect Blessedness, not that nothing could
be added more unto them, or that they did match and equal the perfections of
God, but because they had that degree of perfection, in which degree God would
have them to be in man. Wherefore for man's perfection, it was sufficient, if
he knew all those things concerning God and his works, which God would
have him to know; and further, if he did show and perform that conformity,
which God exacted of him. It was not required to man's happiness, that he
should know all things, or be perfectly just, holy, blessed, and happy:
for that had not perfected man, but transformed him into God. The same is to
be conceived and thought concerning the perfect wisdom, Righteousness, and
Blessedness of Angels.

2 For what, man was created.
THe last and principal end of man's creation is the glory and praise of god.
The principal end of man's creation, to praise and worship God.
For therefore god created reasonable creatures, that being known of them he
might be magnified. It is an action proper unto man to know and magnify god.
Therefore he was created to know and worship God: that is, to profess him, to
call upon him, to give thanks unto him, and to obey him; Lastly to love God
and his neighbor.

The worship of God comprehends Profession and Invocation on the name of God,
Thanksgiving, Prayers, and Obedience, Other ends of man's creation are, The
knowledge of God.
which consists in our love and duties toward God and men. Many other ends
are subordinated to this principal end. For unto the worship is substituted
the true knowledge of God. For God not being known can not be worshipped. This
is everlasting life, that they may know thee alone to be the true God.
Further, To the knowledge of God is subordinated or next in order the felicity
and blessedness of man, which is the fruition and everlasting participation of
God, Man's felicity.
in which consists glory and eternal life. To this is subordinated the
manifestation of God, The manifestation of God.
or the declaration of Gods mercy in his chosen to everlasting life, and of
his justice and wrath against sin to be punished in the reprobate. For that
thou may know God, and be happy, it is needful also that he make himself
manifest unto thee. Unto the manifestation of God is subordinated the
preservation of society in mankind. For except there were men, God should
not have whom to manifest himself unto. The preservation of the society of men.
I will declare thy name unto my brethren. To this preservation there follow
next in order the duties of nature, and the mutual good turns, and benefits
of one man toward an other. For no society or conjunction or conuersing of
men together can be or consist without mutual duties passing enterchangeably
between them. Wherefore the society of men, and mutual communicating and
imparting of duties between them, are the subordinate ends of man created,
serving for the obtaining of the principal end, which is the manifestation,
participation or fruition, knowledge, praise and worship of God. When
therefore God is said to be the end of man, it is meant of him manifested,
participated, known, and worshipped. And in this end, as being the chief and
last, the whole felicity and blessedness, and glory of man consists.

1. Object. Heaven, earth, and other creatures which are void of reason, Other
creatures are said to praise God as being the matter of his praise: which yet
they should not be, if man and Angels were not.
are said to worship and magnify God: Therefore the worship and praise of
God is not the proper end why man was created. Answer. This reason has a
fallacy of equivocation or ambiguitie. Creatures void of reason are said to
worship and praise God, not that they understand ought of god, or know and
worship him: But because they bearing certain prints and steps of Divinity in
them, are the matter of gods praise and worship. But the creatures endewed with
reason are said to praise and magnify god, not only, because in them are
extant most conspicuous and notable testimonies of god, but chiefly, because
they being endewed with a power and faculty of understanding, and of
conforming themselves to the will of god, know by the beholding and
contemplation of gods works in themselves and other creatures, the infinite
goodness, wisdom, power, justice, bounty, and majesty of god, and are raised
and stirred up to worship god aright both in mind, and in word, and in the
whole obedience, according to his divine law. And if god had not created
creatures of reason and understanding, who might behold, consider, and with
thankful mind acknowledge his works, and the order and disposing of things
in whole nature: other things which are void of reason, might no more be
said to praise and worship god, that is to be the matter and occasion of
praising him, than if they had never been at all.

2. Objection. The felicity and blessedness of man is a quality, or condition
and estate, in which or with which man was created; that is, it is a part of
the image of God, and a form or property of man. Therefore it belongs to
the first question, what man was created, and not to this of the end of man's
creation. Answer. This has no contrariety in it; for the same may be in
diverse the final cause and the formal. For the soul and the properties or
faculties thereof, are both the formal and final cause of a living body: the
form, as they actuate and give life unto the body: the end, as the body is
framed of nature for this, that the soul may inform it, and exercise by it
his operations and actions. In like sort the blessedness of man, or
participation or fruition of god, as also the knowledge of god, is a property
and part of the image of god in man, in respect of the beginning, when man by
his creation began both to be, and to be just and blessed: it is the end
of man in respect of continuance and perseverance, that is, as god created man
wise, just, and blessed for this, that he should continue so for ever: that
is, man was created just and happy, and he was created for this, that he might
be just and happy. Wherefore albeit the existence of blessedness and the
continuance and abiding of the same are the same in the thing it self: yet in
consideration and respect they are diverse. By reason of which diverse respects,
felicity, wisdom, holiness, are both a quality and an end of man, that is,
are referred to the questions, WHAT and FOR WHAT man was created.

This first creation of man is diligently to be compared with the misery of
mankind, as also the end for which we were created with the aberration and
swaruing from the end: that so by this means also we may know the greatness of
our misery. For how much the greater we see the good was, which we have
lost; so much the greater we know the evils to be, into which we are fallen.

OF THE IMAGE OF GOD IN MAN.
The chief questions hereof are, 1. What the image of God in man is. 2. How
far forth it is lost, and how far it remains. 3. How it is repaired in
man. 4. How it is in Christ, and how in us.

1 What the image of God in man is.
The image of god to be considered not in the body, but in the soul.
Seeing god is not corporeal, neither has a body: we must consider this image,
not in the body, but in the soul of man: and because it is very much
darckened, and almost blotted out by sin, we must judge of it not by that
state, in which men began to be after sin was committed, but by the
repairing, which comes by Christ, that is, by the nature of man regenerated.
And to conclude, whereas there is but a small beginning of regeneration in this
life, we shall at length in the everlasting life and glory behold and
understand perfitely the image of God wholly restored shining in us.

It is not to be sought only in the substance, but chiefly in the qualities
and gifts of the soul.
Further, that we are not to seek the image of God in the substance alone of
the soul, but chiefly in the virtues and gifts, with which it was adorned of
God in the creation; it is even thereby manifest, for that the nature and
substance of the soul remains even in the unregenerate, but the image of
God for the most part is lost: yet notwithstanding, because the soul is an
understanding spirit, the more excellent spirit, the more excellent part of
man's substance, separable from the body, immortal, the beginning and cause of
life, and moving in a living body: we must confess that the nature thereof,
though unregenerate, is some shadow of that Divinity. But the image of God
(seeing the substance as of spiritual natures in general, so of the mind of
man is unknown to us in the mist and darkness of this life) is to be
considered in those faculties and operations, in which we see man to excel
other creatures, and know him by the word and works of God, to be agreeable
and conformed unto God. These faculties are especially two: The understanding,
and will: The inward senses are adioined to the understanding, and the
affections to the will.

The image of God in man, The description of the image of God.
is a virtue knowing aright the nature, will, and works of God; and a will
freely obeying God, and a correspondence of all the inclinations, desires,
actions, with the will of God: and in a word, a spiritual and unchangeable
purity of the soul, and the whole man, perfect blessedness and joy resting in
God, and the dignity of man, and majesty, whereby he excels and rules
other creatures. Or, The image of God in man is, 1. The soul it self together
with the faculties thereof, endewed with reason and will. 2. In the soul,
wisdom, and knowledge of God, his will, and works: even such as god
requires of us. 3. A conformity with the law of god, or holiness and
righteousness, under which we comprehend the heart, and all affections. 4.
Felicity without misery and corruption; perfect blessedness, joy,
abundance of all good things, and glory, wherewith the nature of man was
adorned. 5. The rule and dominion of man over the creatures, as fishes, fowls,
and other living creatures. In all these things the creature after some sort
resembles his creator: yet can he by no means be equalled unto his Creator.
For in God all things are immense and without measure, and even his essence
infinite. Ephesians. 4.24.
The Apostle Paul puts Righteousness and holiness, as the chief parts of
this image: which yet do not exclude but presuppose wisdom, and knowledge.
For no man can worship God unknown. But neither does Paul exclude perfect
blessedness and glory: for this according to the order of Gods justice, is
necessarily coupled with perfect holiness, or conformity with God. Whereupon
it follows, that where true righteousness and holiness is, there is the
absence of all evils, whether of crime and offense, or of pain and punishment.
Righteousness and holiness in this text of the Apostle may be taken for one
and the same, or distinguished So that Righteousness may be meant of the
actions, and Holiness of the qualities. Righteousnesie, that is, a conformity
and congruitie of the will and heart with the mind judging aright, that is,
according to the word of God.

1. Cor. 15.47.
The first man was of the earth earthly; the second man the Lord from heaven.
As the earthly was, such are they that are earthly: and as is the heavenly,
such are they also that are heavenly. And as we have borne the image of the
earthly, so shall we bear the Image of the heavenly. The Apostle does not
here take away the image of the heavenly man from Adam when he as yet stood;
but compares his nature and estate as well before as after his fall, with that
heavenly glory, into which we are restored by Christ, that is not only the
nature of man corrupted through sin by death, but the degree of the image of
God in man's nature before the fall, and before glorification, with that which
follows his glorification.

2 How far forth the image of god was lost, and how far it remains.
The remnants of the image of god.
THe image of god in man was not wholly lost, but for the greatest part. For
there remains in all as well the unregenerate, as regenerate, 1. The
incorporeall substance of the soul together with the power thereof: likewise
liberty in his will, which whatsoever it will, it will freely. 2. Many
motions, as of those things which we know by sense, as are natural principles;
some motions also of god, his will, and works. 3. Some prints of virtues, and
an ablenes concerning outward Discipline and behavior. 4. The fruition of
many good things. 5. The Dominion also over the creatures is not wholly lost.
He is able to rule many and to use them.

Why God preserves these remnants in us.
These remnants are therefore preserved of god. 1. That they might be a
testimony of the bounty of god toward those who were unworthy of it. 2.
That god might use them to the restoring of his image in man. 3. That he may
leave the reprobate without excuse. Now the image of god remains not. 1. What
is lost of the image of God in us.
In respect of the true, saving, and sufficient knowledge of god and his will.
2. The integrity and perfection of the knowledge of gods works, and a
dexterity of discerning the truth. 3. Rightnes, and co^formitie of al
inlinations, desires, and actions in our will, heart and outward parts: by the
loss whereof ensue actual sins, and merit eternal damnation. 4. Whole and
perfect dominion over the creatures. For those beasts which feared man before,
now assault him; his enemies are hurtful unto him, and do not obey him. The
fields bring forth thorns and thistles. 5. The right and interest of using
these creatures was lost, because he granted it to us his children, not to
his enemies. 6. Life everlasting was lost, and in place thereof is come death
both temporal and eternal, with calamities of all sorts: that is, we lost the
felicity and happiness both of this life and of the life to come.

Objection. The Heathen have many great virtues, and atchieue great works.
Therefore it is not true, that the image of god is lost in them. Answer. All
these works are not pleasing to god, because they proceed not from the true
knowledge of god, neither are wrought to that end, that all the glory may
redound to god. Those their virtues, are only of outward behavior and
discipline, but not from the heart, thereby to obey god, whom they fly, and to
whose glory they can do nothing.

3. How the Image of god is repaired in us.
THe repairing of it is wrought by god alone, The repairing of the image of god
in us is the work of all three persons.
who gave it unto men: For in whose power it is to give life, in his also it is
to restore it being lost. The manner of restoring it is this. 1. The Father
restores it by his Son. 2. The Son by the holy Ghost immediately regenerating
us. We are changed into the same image, 1. Cor. 3.18.
from glory to glory, as by the spirit of the Lord. 3. The holy ghost
restores it by the word: the gospel is the power of god unto salvation. 4.
This is so done by god, Romans 1.16.
as that in this life it is only begun in the chosen, and then is confirmed
and augmented unto the end of their life, and is made perfect in the end of
this life, as concerning the Soul, but as concerning the whole man, at the
resurrection of the bodies. Wherefore it is to be observed, who is the author,
and what the order and manner of this repairing.

How the Image of God is in Christ, and how in us.
Christ both essentiallie the image of the father according to his Divinity,
and according to his humanity a created image of God, though in far more
excellency than Saints and Angels.
NOw if it be objected, that this honor is proper unto Christ to be the image of
god, Coloss. 1. and Hebr. 1. it is well known that Christ is after an other
sort the image of god, than other men. For he is in respect of his Divinity
the image not of himself, neither of the holy Ghost, but of his eternal
father, coeternal, and consubstantiall, and coequall with his Father, in
essence, essential properties, and works, and is that person, by which the
Father does immediately reueal himself in creating and preserving all things,
but chiefly in saving the elect. Secondly, In respect of his humane nature, he
is the image of God, and that of the whole Trinity, because the three persons
together bestowed on Christ's humanity these gifts, properties, and majesty,
which are the image of God. Now albeit this image of God is created and finite,
not immense: yet does he by many degrees, and in number of gifts, as in
wisdom, righteousness, power, glory, far excel al Angels, and men: and after
a peculiar manner resembles the fathers nature and will unto us, in doctrine,
virtues, and actions, because as the human nature which he took unto him, so
all the properties and actions thereof, are proper unto the Substantial and
coeternall word of the eternal father. John. 14. Philip, he that has seen
me, has seen my father. Beleeuest thou not that I am in the father, and the
father in me? The words that I speak unto you, I speak not of my self; but
the father that dwells in me, he does the works. Angels and holy men are
termed the image of god as well in respect of the son and the holy ghost, as of
the eternal father: as it is said, Let us make man in our image according to
our likeness: and that not for the likeness or identity of essence, or some
equality: but for the agreeing of some properties, not in degree or essence,
but in kind and imitation which are essential and infinite in god, but in the
creatures finite and accidental, that is, qualities and motions framed in the^
by god to represent in some sort his nature.

They also, who, as in time past the Anthropomorphitae, will have the image of
god to be the form of man's body; Adam not the image of God according to his
body, but according to his soul.
say that whole Adam was made to the image of God; and therefore according to
his body also. But they perceive not the usual manner of speaking of a person
composed of diverse natures, which is called The communicating of properties,
when that is communicated to the whole person in the concrete, which is only
proper to one of the natures; as in the same place: Adam was made a living
soul. Now as the scripture mentions the nature of the soul, so also does it
mention such an Image of God, as agrees not unto the body.

Again they object. Christ is the image of god. The faithful not in all things
like unto the divinity in which they are like Christ: because Christ himself
in his body was not like unto God, but unto man.
But the faithful bear in their body the Image of Christ, Heb. 2. and 4.
Philip. 4. Therefore the body also is the image of Christ. There are 4. terms
in this Syllogism: because christ is not in his body, but in his Divinity the
image of his father: and in soul or in the gifts or properties thereof, and
actions, he is the image of the whole Divinity or godhead. Wherefore the image
of god is in the faithful the same which the image of god is in Christ: neither
are they in all things like unto the godhead, in which they are like Christ:
because there is somewhat in Christ besides his Divinity, and the image of the
Divinity which is in the soul, that is, his body, which has an affinity not
with the divine nature, but with the nature of our bodies. Again they say: The
frame of man's body is made with admirable skill and cunning: wherefore there
shines in it and is beheld as in an image the wisdom of the creator. But it
follows not hereof that the body is the image of god. For so should al things
be made to the image of god, seeing that in all gods works, his power, wisdom
and goodness do appear, which yet the scripture does not permit: which sets
out only the reasonable creatures with this title and commendation; and
places the image of god in those things, which belong not to the body but to
the soul. Here also question is made concerning the place of the Apostle, 1.
Cor. 11. Man is the image and glory of god; How man is said of S. Paul to be
the image of god, and not the woman.
but the woman is the glory of the man: where Paul seems to attribute the
image of god only to man, and to take it away from the woman. But the Apostle
means, that man only is the image of god, not in respect of his nature, being
partaker of divine wisdom, righteousness, and joy; neither in respect of his
dominion over other creatures: for these are common to man and woman: but in
respect of civil, domestical, and ecclesiastical order, Genesis 3.1. Cor. 14. 1.
Tim. 2.
in which he will have the public government and administration to belong unto
the man, not to the woman.

Quest. Seeing that man was made to the image of God, it is demanded, whence
came this state in which now we see all things contrary? Ans. From the sin of
our first Parents.

OF THE FIRST SIN.
Next unto the place of the image of god, is adjoined the place of the first
sin. For seeing man was created to the imade of God, that is, perfectly wise,
perfectly righteous, and perfectly blessed, the question has been not without
cause in all times, whence this present estate of man comes, wherein he,
except he be born again by the holy ghost, cannot do other than sin, and be
obnoxious to calamities of all sorts, and at length to death it self. To this
question answer cannot be made but out of the doctrine of the Church only:
which is, that all this confusion and misery flows from the first sin of
our first Parents. We must see therefore what that sin is: concerning which,
four things especially come to be considered.

1 What it was. 2 What the causes thereof. 3 What the effects. 4 Why god
permitted it.
1 What that first sin of Adam and Eve was.
The manifoldnes of the first sin. 1 In pride against God.
IT was diverse and manifold: and many and most grievous sins are seen in
that first sin. 1. Pride against god, ambition, and an admiration of
himself. For man not content with that state wherein god had placed him,
desired to be eequal with God. This does God charge him with, when he says;
Behold the man is become as one of us to know good and evil. 2 In incredulity
and contempt of Gods justice.
2. Incredulity, and unbelief, and contempt of Gods justice, and mercy:
because he thought not that God could and would inflict on man transgressing
his commandment, that punishment, which he had threatened. Wherefore he tempted
God, and charged him with a lie: For God had said, Thou shall die the death:
The Devil denied it, saying, Ye shall not die: and Adam believed the Devil.
Now not to believe God, and of the contrary to believe the Devil is to
account god for no true god. 3 In stubbornes and disobedience.

4 In unthankfulness.

5 In unnaturalness.


3. Stubbornes and disobedience. For he is become disobedient unto God. 4.
Unthankfulness for benefits received at his creation; as for these, that he
was created to the image of god, and to eternal life. 5. Unnaturalness,
injustice, and cruelty. For there was a neglect of love in him toward his
posterity: because those good things were not given unto him only, but also
to his whole posterity. Therefore he had them, that he should keep them for
himself and his, 6. In Apostasy.
or should make loss of them from both. But all this he neglected. 6.
Apostasy, or manifest defection from God to the Devil whom he obeyed, whom he
believed, whom he set in the place of God, withdrawing and sundring himself
from God. He did not ask of God, those good things which he was to receive,
but rejecting the wisdom and direction God, by the advice of the Devil, will
aspire to be equal with god. Whereof it is apparent that Adams first sin was
no light fault, but horrible sin, and worthy of so great punishment as it was
punished withal.

2 What were the causes of the first sin.
THe first cause of the first sin was the Instigation of the devil. The
second, The cause of sin.

The devils instigation, and man's will freely yielding unto it. God no willer
or causer of it, but permitter only.


Man's will freely consenting to the Devil against Gods commandment. Now
although God would that man should be tempted by the devil, and did withdraw
that his grace from him, whereby he should resist the temptations of the
Devil; yet he was not the cause of that sin, which Adam, destitute of divine
grace, did commit. For he was not at all obliged or bound unto man, to keep
and mantaine that grace in him, which he had given him. And further he
withdrewe it from man willing, and also himself rejecting it: neither yet
therefore withdrew he it, as that he would or did purpose or intend sin, or
were delighted therewith, but to prove and to try man, and to show, how unable
the creature is to do or retain ought that is good, God not preserving and
directing him by his spirit. Wherefore he suffered together with his trial
of Adam, the sin of Adam to concur, but he was no cause or efficient of it.

3 What are the effects of the first sin.
THe first and next effect is, Original sin, or the corruption of man's whole
nature, and the destruction of Gods image as well in our first parents, as also
in all their posterity. 2. A further and later effect are all actual sins; for
that which is the cause of the cause, is also the cause of the effect. If
original sin be an effect of the first sin, the^ are also actual sins, which
are the effects of original, effects of the first sin. 3. Whatsoeue evils of
pain or punistment: because it is the cause of sins, therefore is it also the
cause of punishments.

Now although that first sin was committed many ages past: yet notwithstanding
the effect thereof, which is a privation or want of the true wisdom and
direction of god, and of rightnesse in our inclinations and desires remains
ever since that sin was committed, in the whole posterity, by gods just
judgment. Wherefore those things also which necessarily ensue this privation,
continu, except by the singular benefit and mercy of God the prauity of our
nature be corrected, our sin being pardoned and remitted.

4 Why God permitted the first sin.
GOD permitted it, that is, gave not his grace of resistance to our first
parents, as to the blessed Angels; 1. because ( as the Apostle says, The
causes of gods permission of the first sin. 1 To show his own justice and
power.
Romans 9.) he would show his justice, anger and power in punishing eternally the
sins of the wicked: but his mercy and love toward mankind in saving his
Chosen, not imputing sin unto them for his Sons sake. And Romans 11 32. Gal.
3.22. God has concluded all under sin, that he might have mercy on all, 2
To show man's weakness and infirmity.
that every mouth may be stopped. 2 That it might stand for an example of the
weakness and infirmity of al creatures, even the most excellent, if they enjoy
not the special blessing of their creator, and be preserved in that rightnes
wherein they were created. The necessity and use of this doctrine of man's
creation.
This doctrine concerning the creation of man is necessary for the Church, for
many causes and uses which it has. We must know that man was created of God
without sin, least God be imagined the author or cause of sin. Whereas
man's body was fashioned of cley: let us think of our frailty, that we be
not lifted up with pride. Seeing that the workmanship of God is so admirable
in the framing of man's body, and seeing it was created for the ministry of
Gods worship, and for god to dwell in, and for everlasting life: let us neither
abuse it to dishonesty, neither willingly destroy it, nether make it a fly of
devils, but keeping it chaste and clean, endeavor that it be a temple and
instrument of the holy ghost to worship god. Seeing that god would have mankind
to consist of two sexes, each is to have his due place and honor, neither is
the weaker to be contemned, or oppressed by tyranny, or lust, or to be
entertained with injuries and contumelies, but justly to be governed and
protected. But especially seeing man was created to the image and likeness of
God, this great glory is to be acknowledged and celebrated with a thankeful
mind, neither through our leudnes and malice is the image and likeness of god
to be transfourmed into the image and likeness of Satan, neither to be
destroyed either in our selves, or others. And seeing it is destroyed by sin
thorough our own fault: we must acknowledge and bewail the greatness of this
unthankfulness, and the evils which followed, by comparing therewith those
good things which we have lost. We must earnestly desire the restoring of this
felicity and glory. And because the glory and blessedness, which is restored
unto us by the son of god, is greater than that which we lost in Adam, so
much the more must the desire of thankfulness and of profiting and increasing
in godliness be kindled in us. And seeing we hear that all things were created
for the use of man, and that the dominion over the creatures lost in Adam is
restored unto us in Christ; we must magnify the bountifulnes of God toward
us: we must ask all things of him, as being our creator and soueraign Lord,
who has the right and power of giving al good things, to whom, and how far he
will himself: and use those things which are granted to our use, with a good
conscience, and to the glory of god, who gave them. And that this may be done,
we must not by our infidelity cast our selves out of that right which we
receive in Christ: and if god of his own power and authority either gives us
less than we would, or take away from us, that which he has given, we must
submit our selves patiently to his just purpose and most profitable for our
salvation. And seeing the soul is the better part of man, and the happiness
of the body depends on the happiness of the soul, and seeing also we are
created to immortal life, we ought to have greater care of those things which
belong to the soul and eternal life, than of those which belong unto the body
and this te^porall life. And at length, seeing the end and blessedness of man,
is the participation and communicating of god, his knowledge, and worship; let
us ever tend unto it, and refer thither al our life and actions. And seeing
we see one part of mankind to be vessels of wrath to show the justice and
severity of God against Sin, let us be thankful to God, for that of his
mere and infinite goodness he would have us to be vessels of mercy, to
declare through all eternity the riches of his glory. Last of all, that we
may learn, consider, and begin these things in this life, let us to our
power tender and help forward the common society, and salvation of others, for
which we are borne.

OF FREE WILL.
WHEREAS God is a most free agent, and man was created to the image of God, The
causes of diverse controversies arisen about free will.
yea and was furnished with liberty of will, it seems to many not to agree
that all the actions of man's will are governed by the unchangeable providence
of God, and that the nature of men is so corrupted by the fall of our first
parents, and Original sin, that it is able to bring forth nothing but that
which is evil and displeasing God, without the renewing and especial benefit
of the holy Ghost. For neither do they acknowledge that for liberty, which is
tied to any necessity; neither seems it that we should grant the whole
liberty of the will to have been lost by sin; because also after the fall
there are left in men some prints and steps of Gods image, and the blame and
crime of sin cannot be laid on men, except the will be free. To this is added
the pride of man's wit, which admits nothing more hardly, than that the
glory and original of all good should be transferred from men to God alone.
Further also the notable virtues of men not regenerated: and lastly the
judgment of our sense and reason, which does not mark without the light of
Gods word the secret government of Gods providence in humane actions.

Wherefore hereupon have risen controversies and debates concerning free will,
while the old divines yielding too much unto the Philosophers swelling with a
vain persuasion of wisdom and righteousness, and the latter ascenting unto
the former, have either spoke more magnificently than they ought to have done
of the strength and power of man's will, or have endeavored to arrogate that
unto men, which is not found in them since the first fall. But let us remember
that this doctrine of free will, is a view and contemplation not of men's ability
and excellency, but of their weakness and misery; which is therefore to be
joined with the doctrine of the creation and fall of man, that we knowing the
more from what top of dignity and felicity, into how deep a gulf of ignominy
and misery we are cast by sin, may not more deeply plunge our selves by a
vain confidence of our own strength unto evils, but may incline to a true
humility and thankfulness toward God, and be of him revived, quickened and
healed.

For, that the scope of this disputation may be known, and the use thereof
perceived: The state of the maine question about free will.
we must understand that the principal question in it is this, Whether as man
auerted himself from God, and corrupted himself, so of the other side he be
able by his own strength to return to God, and to receive grace offered by
God, and to amend himself: And further, whether the will of man be the first
and principal cause why others are converted, others persist in their sins, and
as well of the converted as not converted others are more, others less good or
evil, and in a word do either good or evil, some after one manner, some after
another. To this question the adversaries, Pelagians, and the like, make
answer, That so much grace is both given of God, and left by nature to al men,
that they are able to return unto God and obey him; neither ought we to seek
any other cause before or above man's will, for which others receive or retain,
others refuse or cast away divine succor and aid in avoiding sin, and do
after this or that manner order and institute their counsels aad actions.

Contrariwise, we have learned out of the sacred scripture: That albeit by
nature so much of God and his will is known to all, as may suffice for taking
away all excuse from them of sin: and although it be manifest that many woorks
morally good may be done even of the unregenerate, and the will does in them
freely make choice either of good or evil: yet no work pleasing to God can be
undertaken, or performed by any man, without regeneration and the especial
grace of the holy spirit: neither can more or less good be in any man's
counsels or actions, than God of his free and purposed goodness to every one
does cause in them: neither any other way can the will of any creature be
inclined, than whither it shall seem good to the eternal and good counsel of
God: And yet all the actions of the created will, both good and bad, are wrought
freely.

The chief questions here to be observed are five.

1 Of the word, liberty, or freedom. 2 What is the liberty of the will. 3 What
is common, and what diverse in the liberty of will, which is in God, in Angels,
and man. 4 Whether there be any liberty in us, and what. 5 The degrees of free
will.
1 Of the word, Liberty.
Liberty from bond and misery.
THere is one kind of liberty from bond and misery. And this signifies a
relation or respect, that is the power or right, or ordering either of person
or thing, made either by ones will or by nature, to deal at his own
arbiterment or motion according to honest Laws, or order agreeable to his
nature, and to enjoy commodities convenient for him without inhibition or
impediment, and not to sustain the defects and burdens or encomberances which
are not proper to his nature. So is God most free, because he is bound to no
man. So the Romans and the Jews were free, that is, stood not charged with
such gouernementes and burdens, which a man might want without any swaruing
from justice. So are we made free by Christ from the anger of God, and
everlasting death, and leuitical ceremonies. So a City, field, house is free
from servitude, danger, or any burden. So a bird is free in the air.
Wherefore under liberty in this sense is comprehended, as a special under his
general, civil liberty, which is a right or ability for a man to do and
dispose of himself and his affairs at his own pleasure, according to honest
and good laws. Wherefore this liberty is opposed to bondage and servitude. Of
this there is no question in this place: because it is a greed upon, that we
are all the servants of God; for we are all obliged by his Law, either to
obey him, or to suffer punishment, if we do not obey: neither is it put in our
will or pleasure, to obey, or not to obey; to suffer, or not to suffer
punishment. For our will, will many things freely, the liberty of performing
whereof notwithstanding we have not, either some prohibition, or other
impediment hindering us from it.

2 What is the liberty of will.
THere is another liberty, of will, which is a power, right, or ability proper
unto a reasonable nature, to will any thing, to choose or refuse any object,
represented unto it by the understanding, and to move it self (by an
internal cause of motion, that is, which has in it self a cause of moving
it self) by her own proper motion, (being apt to will or not to will, and
being without an external cause) without any constraint or violent impulsion
from any external cause, the nature of the will remaining still entire and free
to do this or that, or also to suspend, forbear and differ any action. These
six things therefore concur to constitute and make the liberty of will.

1 An object, whether that be any end proposed, Six things required to liberty
of will.
which still is considered as good, or the means, whereby the end is come
unto. 2. The mind knowing and understanding the object. 3. The will alike and
equally apt to choose or refuse the object represented unto it. 4. The will
doing one of the two upon former deliberation. 5. Doing it of her self, or
having the cause and beginning of her motion internal and without her: and
this is to do by her own and proper motion. 6. Not being constrained by any
external agent.

Furthermore, that which is endewed with this faculty or ability, is called
free, that is, doing as it self will without constraint. For that is said to
be a free agent, What is said to be a free agent.
which, whether it be moved of it self only, or also of some external
cause, yet notwithstanding has such an internal cause of the action which
proceeds from it, as thereby both it is apt to this motion; and it self
moves while it is moved, that is, is moved by an inward cause to do after
this or that manner, suffering no force or constraint thereto of any external
agent. Wherefore an agent does not cease to be free and voluntary, albeit it
be moved of an external cause, so as it be not constrained, and have in it
self not only a Passive, but also an Active Original and cause of the
action which it woorketh. Now that which is voluntary is opposed to that which
is violent or constrained, That which is voluntary may be necessary but not
constrained. Necessary is more general than constrained, and therefore agrees
to more than does Constrained
but not to that which is necessary. For God and the blessed Angels are
necessarily and always good, yet not constrainedly, but with most free will.
For that is said to be constrained, which has only an external beginning and
cause of motion, and not also an internal, whereby it may also move it self to
do on this or that manner. Wherefore the difference between constrained and
necessary is to be observed, as also between contingent, and free. Constrained
is in respect of necessary, as a special in respect of his general. For
whatsoever is constrained is necessary, but not whatsoever is necessary is
constrained. So Continge^cie is opposed to Necessity: and those things are
said to be done contingently, which are not necessarily don, but might in
respect of their own nature as well not have been done
Contingent in respect of free is as a general in respect of his special. For
whatsoever is free is continge^t, but not all that is contingent is free. And as
that which is constrained may be also contingent, but cannot be either free or
voluntary: So that which is necessary may be voluntary, or free: and
contrariwise, that which is voluntary may be necessary, but cannot be
constrained.

Moreover free Arbiterment differs from the liberty or freedom of will.
Arbiterment is as the The concrete is that which signifies the subject
together with some accident or quality or essence in the subject: As
arbiterment signifies not will only, which is the subject, but will choosing or
refusing, which is an accident of the will.

The abstract is the accident or quality or essence in it self, which does not
withal in signification implie the subject.


concrete, and signifies the will it self, but, as it chooses or refuses a
thing, the judgment of the understanding going before. Wherefore it
comprehends both faculties or powers, to wit, both the judgment of the
mind or understanding of the object, and the will either receiving or refusing
it. Now freeness or liberty is as it were the abstract, that is, the
quality or manner of doing, proper unto the will. Free arbiterment therefore is
a faculty or power of receiving or refusing, (without constraint, by proper
motion and aptitude to either part) that which the understanding advises to
be chosen or refused. Or, it is the judgment it self and will in a creature
endewed with reason, choosing or refusing any object represented unto it by the
understanding. And this faculty or power of the soul is called Arbiterment, in
respect of the mind, showing unto the will an object to be chosen or refused:
And it is called free in respect of the will. 1. Because the will does of her
own accord follow the judgment of the mind and understanding. 2. Because it
is by nature equally fit to receive or refuse. 3. Because it moves it self
by her own proper motion, either having within it self, or rather being it
self the beginning and cause of her own motion, to choose or refuse any thing
that is object unto it. 4. Because in this election or reiection it suffers
no impediment, and no force or constraint of any external agent, whether that
be God, or the devil, or men, or any thing else whatsoever.

And this is it, which they say, to do any thing upon deliberation or
aduisement going before. which manner of doing is proper unto the will. For
this is the difference between a nature agent, and a voluntary; The
difference between a natural agent and a voluntary.
that the natural cause is ordained or appointed, or fit and apt to one
certain manner of woorking, neither can it forbear working, if the object be
present whereon it should work: as fire cannot but burn a body put unto it,
if it be of such matter as will take fire. But the will is able and apt to
choose or refuse contrary or diverse objects, or to forbear and differ the
choice thereof: as a man may have a will to walk, or not to walk, or may
differ his will of walking. To do therefore any thing with free arbiterment
and will, is, to do upon a fore-deliberation, according to the will of god,
sometimes simply, and sometimes in some respect only: and against it also
sometimes in some respect, but never simply against it. For the liberty of
woorking is not taken away in any creature, if God be said so to rule and bend
their wills, that they be not inclined any other way than whither god will have
them inclined, either simply or in some sort. But free arbiterment is a faculty
or power of working upon deliberation, and without constraint, or rather the
very will it self so woorking.

Wherefore if the name of free arbiterment be so taken and expounded, as has
been said; The name of free arbiterme^t may be tolerated in the Church, though
it be not used in the scriptures.
albeit it be not used in the Scriptures, yet may it be tolerated and
borne-with: because both the description thereof, such as was even now
delivered, agreeeth with the Scripture, and the ancient writers have also used
the same name. But if it be taken for such a will of free working, which
excludes all action and woorking of the first cause guiding, inuiting, and
bending the creatures wills, whither it self lists, such a free arbiterment
cannot be admitted. For example sake: Abimelecke abstaining from Rebecca, and
the Jews crucifieng Christ, both did it with free arbiterment: because those
forealeaged conditions, which make free arbiterment, did agree unto both:
neither yet could they at that present do otherwise than they did, God so
guiding and directing the ir wills.

3 What is like or common, and what diverse or different in the liberty of
will, which is in god, in Angels, and man.
Common to men and Angels with God, to will a thing without constraint.
THese two things are common to God, and reasonable creatures, that is, Angels
and men, that they do things upon deliberation and advise, and will without
coaction those things which they have considered and thought of: that is, Their
will being by nature fit to will the contrary or diverse from that which it does
will, or also to differ and forbear the action, does incline to the other part
of it own accord, and by a proper force which is within it. For it is said of
God, Psalm. 115. He has done all things, which he would. And of men, Mat. 23.
Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy children, and ye would not?

The differences of our liberty of will, and Gods. 1 God knows al things of
himself, perfectly, perpetually.
But the differences also of this liberty in God and in the creatures are to be
considered. The first is, in the understanding. God understands and knows
all things of himself perfectly and perpetually; neither can any ignorance of
any thing, or any error of judgment, fall into God at any time. But the
creatures know neither of themselves, neither all things, neither the same at
all times, but at such time, and so much, as is revealed unto them. Who has
known the mind of the Lord? Of that day and hour knows us man. God gives
understanding. Neither is there any thing which is not manifest in his sight.
He illighteneth every creature. To behold all things which are infinite,
requires infinite power and wisdom, which is proper to God alone. Mention is
here made of the understanding, because a thing not understood is not either
desired or refused. 2 His will depends of none but himself: ours of him.
The second difference is in the will. The will of God is governed or moved, or
depending of no other cause, but of it self. The wills of Angels and men are so
the causes of their actions, that nevertheless they are carried by the secret
counsel of God, and his power and efficacy, which is euerie-where present, to
the choosing or refusing of any object: and that either immediately by God, or
mediately by instruments, some good, some bad, which it seems good unto God
to use, so that it is impossible for them to do any thing beside the eternal
decree and counsel of God. And therefore the word (...), that is, to be
absolutely his own, at his own will, and in his own power, agrees most
properly unto God, who perfectly and simply is his own, and at his own will.
But of the creatures, more rightly is used (...), that is, voluntary and free,
which word the Apostle uses to Philemon, verse. 14. Heb. 10.26. 1. Pet. 5.2.

That God is the first cause of his actions, God the first cause both of his
own actions and ours. Psalm. 115.3. Dan. 4.52. Genesis 29.7. Exodus 3.16. Act.
2.23. and 3 17. etc. and 4.17 etc.
the Scripture does declare. He has done whatsoever he would. Who according to
his will works in the army of heaven, and in the inhabitants of the earth. But
that the wills and counsels of the creatures depend of God who is above them,
these and the like speeches do prove. The Lord shall send his Angel before
thee. Go and gather the Elders of Israel together. Him being delivered by the
determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God ye have slain. I know that
through ignorance ye did it. and, But God has fulfilled these things: and,
Herod and Pontius Pilate gathered themselves together: to do whatsoever thine
hand, and thy counsel had determined before, to be done. By these and the like
places it is manifest, that all second causes, as they were created of God, so
are they ruled of him as their first, supreme and soueraign cause. But the will
of God depends on no one of the creatures, because then a second cause should
be put before the first cause. And as God has not any efficient, so neither
has he any moving or inclining cause without him. Moreover God so rules and
guides the will of his creature, that he does not draw or enforce it, but bend
and incline it, that is by obiectes represented to the mind he effectually
moves, affects, and allureth the will to will that which then the mind judges
good, and refuse that which seems evil: so that the will it self also upon
deliberatio^ going before, and a voluntary assent following chooses that, which
God will and shows to be chosen.

3 It appertains as well to the understanding as unto the will, that God as
he unchangeably knows all things, 3 God determined all things which he will
from everlasting and will them vnchangeablie* we determine what we will in time,
and many times change from that which we first determine.
so also has determined from everlasting, and will vnchangeablie al things
which are done, as they are good, and permits them, as they are sins. Now as
the creatures notions and judgments of things, so also their wills are
chaungeable, so that they will that, which before they would not, and will not
that, which before they would. For seeing that all the counsels of God are most
good, most just, and most wise, he never disliketh, corrects, or changes
them, as oftentimes men do, when as they do perceive themselves to have
determined any thing unadvisedly before. Neither does God depend on their
second causes, either motions, actions, or mutations, or does advise according
to them, as does the creature: but himself being the first cause, all the
actions of al creatures depend on him. For he does not, as men, take advise
concerning the end, by view of means or things antecedent leading thereunto,
but according unto his decree concerning the end and consequent he does decree
and ordain the means and antecedents: that is, God woorketh not thereafter as
he sees the second causes to work, but he causes or permits the second
causes so to work, as he himself has decreed and purposed to work. Hither
appertain those sayings, Number. 23. God is not as man, that he should lie. Mal.
3. I am the Lord, and change not.

The unchangeableness of Gods purpose takes not away the liberty of his will.
Objection. He that can not change his counsel and purpose, has not
free will. But God cannot change his counsel and purpose, which he has once
appointed. Therefore his will is not free. First we deny the Mayor. For not he,
which does not change his purpose which he has once appointed, has not
liberty of will, but he which could not purpose any other thing being let by
some external cause. But the liberty of god consists not in the change of his
will or purpose, but in this, that God will all things whatsoever he will,
altogether with his will, and of himself, and could have had otherwise
decreed, or not decreed all things, which he decreed from everlasting of the
creation, preservation and government of things, according to these sayings,
Matthew, 19. Luke 18. With men this is impossible, but with God al things are
possible. These and the like sayings show, that God has so appointed from
everlasting with himself the creation of things, and the gathering and saving
of his church, not, as if he could not have not don this, or not have appointed
it otherwise, but because so it seemed good to him: neither must men seek any
superior cause tha^ his will of al his divine works which he exercises in his
creatures; neither is there any other necessity to be found in them, than
which depends of the most free appointment of god himself. For as to resolve
of such a purpose as is to be changed, so also to change it either to better or
to worse, is rather servitude or bondage, than freedoome and liberty: For it
proceeds of ignorance or impotencie. For they change their counsels and
purposes, who either or in taking them, or are not able to perform the
counsel which they have taken. But to resolve of such a purpose, as might
alike either have been decreed or not decreed, and which after it is decreed,
is neither changed nor to be changed at any time, this is perfect and divine
liberty. Now God whatsoever he has decreed, could either not have decreed it
at al, or have decreed it otherwise. And that he changes not that which he
has once decreed, the perfectnes of his nature, even his infinite wisdom and
goodness is cause thereof. For most wisely and rightly does he decree all
things, and constantly persisteth in that which is good and right. Wherefore
the immutability in god does as well not diminish his liberty, as his
immortality, and other things which are proper unto his divinity.

Secondly if any man urge, that it is a point of liberty, not only to resolve
of any advise what he will, but after he has resolved to be able either to
follow it, or to change it: we understand by those things which have been
already spoken, that this does agree to the creatures, which may or in their
purposes, and therefore stand in need of changes and alterations: but not to
god, who can never er, and therefore requires no change of his purpose.
Lastly, if they reply, That not to be able to alter a purpose once undertaken
is a defect of ability or power, and therefore against the liberty of God: we
answer that the antecedent of this reply is true, if the change of it be
impossible by reason of some impediment, coming from some external cause, or
by reason of defect of nature, or ability: but the antecedent is most false, if
the impossibility of change proceed from a perfection of that nature, which is
not changed, and from a wisdom and rightnesse of that purpose which is
unchangeable, and from a perseverance and constancy of the will in that which
is good and right, after which sort it is apparent to be in God.

Gods directing of out will takes not away the l^bertie thereof.
But against that, where it was said, that the wills of all creatures are so
guided by God, that neither they are able to will, what he from everlasting
has not decreed, neither not to will, what he has decreed for them to will:
more question is used to be made. 1 That which is ruled by the unchangeable
will of God, does not woorcke freely; The will of Angels and men is ruled by
the unchangeable will of God. Therefore either it has no liberty, or the
choice which it makes is not tied to the will of God. Answer we make to the
mayor by a distinction. It is not a free agent which is so ruled by God, as it
has no deliberation and election of his own. But that which GOD so rules, as
he shows the object unto the understanding, and by it effectually moves
and affects the will to choose it; that does notwithstanding freely work,
albeit it be inclined, at the beck and will of GOD, whither he will have it.
For to woorcke freely in the creatures, is not to woorcke without any ones
government, but with deliberation, and with a proper and selfe-motion of the
will, although this motion be elsewhence raised and ruled. Wherefore it is not
the immutabilitie and operation of the divine will and providence, which is
against this liberty, but a privation and constrainte of judgment, which is
an impulsion or a motion proceeding not from an inward cause or faculty, but
only from an outward cause, beside or against the nature of that which is
moved. Now such an impulsion falls not into the will: but God moves it,
leading and bringing it on as it were by objects, to choose that which he will.
For the faculty or ability and power of the will cannot be brought into act,
that is, to show and express it self, without an object; and, We are, live
and move in God, Acts. 17. But to be moved of no other cause but of himself
only, Necessity takes not away liberty of will in us.
this is exceeding and infinite perfection and liberty, agreeing to God alone,
which the creature cannot desire, much-lesse arrogate and challenge unto it
self, without notorious blasphemy.

Further it may easily be showed, that the necessity or immutabilitie, which
arises not from constraint, but from the nature of the will, or from the
commotion of it stirred by other causes to choose or refuse an object thought
of by the mind, does not at al withstand or hinder the liberty of will.

First, because this necessity does not take away, This necessity proceeds
from Gods woorking in us, which rather preserves thi^ liberty. Absolute
necessity does not take away in God greater liberty: muchlesse can a less
absolute necessity take away a less liberty in us.
but effectuateth and preserves the judgment of the mind, and free or
voluntary assent of the will, in as much as god does cause and work in men
both the notions, and election of objects.

Secondly, Because God, albeit he is by nature, that is, by exceeding and
absolute necessity good, and has begotten his son, and had his holy
spirit from all eternity: yet will he, not by a constrained, but most
free will, be, live, be blessed and good, have his son and holy spirit, and
will all his purposes and works to be good and just, although it be impossible
that he should will any thing contrary to these which he has already
determined. If then this absolute necessity of willing things, in God, does
not take away even the greatest liberty; there is no doubt but that
necessity, which is but only conditional, that is, according to the decree
and government of god, does not take away that liberty, which agrees unto
the creatures, that is, judgment and election free and voluntary.

Thirdly, Angels and saints in heaven have greater liberty of will, and yet
greater necessity.
The holy Angels and blessed men in the celestial life, even by our
adversaries own confession, are endued with greater liberty of will, than we
are in this life. But they necessarily will those things only which are right
and just, and hate and abhor all things whatsoever are evil and unjust;
because they are made such of god, and so established by him, and are so
illuminated and guided by the holy ghost, that they cannot otherwise will or
work: neither by this necessity of willing those things which are good and
pleasing to god, is the liberty of will taken away or diminished in them, but
rather is increased, and confirmed, as who with all willingness choose and do
those things only which are just.

Fourthly, It is showed by many testimonies of scripture, Many paces of
Scripture co^firm the necessity of those actions, the liberty of which yet both
we and our adue^^ries acknowledge.
that the wills and voluntary actions of good and wicked men, which our
adversaries mantaine to be and to have been free, and we also, according to
the right meaning of this word Liberty, do willingly confess, are so guided
by the secret and unchangeable purpose of god, that they neither can nor could
either do or be otherwise. Wherefore either so many manifest places of
scripture must be denied, or openly corrupted; or it must be granted, that one
and the same action of the will is free and contingent in respect of the will,
and necessary in respect of Gods government.

Contingent effects leese not their contingencie by reason of any necessity
imported by Gods decree. The same is to be said of the effects of the will
which are in respect thereof contingent, that is, free, and might as well not
be done as be done.
Fifthly, it is declared by many places of scripture, that all contigent
effects do retain their contingencie, which they have from the nature of
their causes, although they be done by the unchangeable determination of the
purpose or providence of God. But all voluntary effects or motions are
contingent, in respect of the will, which by nature was like able to have done
the plain contrary unto them. They therefore retain their contingencie, that
is, their liberty (for this is the contingencie of the actions of the will)
although they be so determined of by gods will, that there can be no other.

The reason of the Mayor in this argument is, for that GOD so moves the
second causes, and by them brings to pass what he will, that in the mean
season by his providence he does not destroy or abolish their nature, which
he gave them at their creation, but rather preserves, and nourishes it; so
that as concerning their nature, some woorcke contingently, some necessarily,
although in respect of the liberty of Gods purpose, all work contingently,
and in respect of the vnchaungeablenesse of his decreee, all woork necessarily
so as they do. For when GOD by the rising of the Sun lighteneth the woorlde,
he makes not the Sun so, as if being risen it did not necessarily lighten,
or were apt by nature not to lighten: and yet is it in the power of God, either
to change the nature of the Sun, or, that remaining as it is, not to lighten
the woorlde: as he showed in Egypt, and at the passion of Christ. In like
manner, when the Quails light at the Tents of the Israelites, and the Ravens
carry meat to Elias, and one Sparrowe falls on the ground, GOD does not
make the nature of these living creatures such, as could not be carried
elsewhere: and yet that they can have no other motion than that which they
have, by reason of the will of God interposed and coming between, the
Scripture plainly affirms. Whereof it is manifest, that as in other things
which work contingently, their contingency, so in the will the liberty which is
given it of God, is not taken away but rather preserved by gods government.

Now then, if our adversaries in their argument understand that Liberty which
consists in the deliberation of the mind, and free assent of the will, we
do not only grant, but also better mainetaine than they, the liberty of will
in all actions thereof: and so the Mayor of their argument shall be false, to
wit, that those things which are done by the unchangeable decree of God, are
not done by the free will of men and Angels. For this liberty the providence
of God does so not hinder but rather establish and confirm, that without this
that liberty cannot so much as be: for God both keeps his order which he
appointed at the creation by his perpetual efficacy and operation, and does
inspire into all by his virtue true notions and right election. But if they
challenge a liberty unto the creatures depending of no other cause whereby it
is guided, we deny their whole argument, as knowing such a liberty of
creatures to stand against the whole Scripture, and that it only agrees unto
God. For him alone do al things serve: In him we live and move, and have our
being: he gives unto al not only life or power of moving themselves, but even
breathing too, that is, very moving it self.

To the same tends this Objection also. If the will, The will works
together with God, and is not mere passive.
when it is converted of GOD, or turned and inclined to other Obiectes, cannot
with-stand; it is even mere passive, and so woorcketh not at all. But this
consequence deceives them, because there is not a sufficient enumeration, in
the Antecedent, of those actions which the will may have, when it is moved of
GOD. For it is able not only to withstand God moving it, but also of it own
proper motion to assent and obey him. And when it does this, it is not idle,
neither does it only suffer, or is moved, but it self exercises and moves
her own actions. And yet this is to be understood of the actions of the will,
not of the new qualities or inclinations which it has to obey God. For these
the will receives not by her own operation, but by the working of the holy
Ghost.

The will of man withstanding the reueiled will of God is yet guided by his
secret will, and therefore resisting does not resist.
Thirdly they say: That which withstandeth the will of God, is not guided by it:
But the will of men in many actions withstandeth the will of God: It is not
therefore always guided by the will of God. But the consequence here fails,
because there are four terms. For the Mayor is true, if both the revealed and
the secret will of God be understood, so that simply and in all respects it
be withstood, and that be done, which simply and by no means it would have
done: that which is impossible to come to pass, because of the omnipotency and
liberty of God. But in the Minor the will of God must be understood, as it is
revealed. For the secret decrees of Gods will and providence are ever ratified,
and are performed in all, even in those, who most of all withstand Gods
commandments. Neither yet are there contrary wills in god. For nothing is
found in his secret purposes which disagreeth with his nature revealed in his
word: And God opens unto us in his Law, what he approves and likes, and
what agrees with his nature and the order of his mind: but he does not promise
or reueal, how much grace he will or purposes to give to every one to obey his
commandments.

God though the mouer of wicked wills, yet not the mouer of the wickedness of the
will.
Fourthly, as touching this Objection: If all motions even of wicked wills are
raised and ruled by the will of God, and many of these disagree from the Law
of God, and are sins: god seems to be made the causer of sins: The
answer is, that it is a paralogisme of the accident. For they disagree from
the law, not as they are ordained by, or proceed from the will of god (for thus
far they agree very well with the justice and Law of God) but as they are done
by men, or Devils: and that by reason of this defect; because either they do
not know the will of god when they do it, or are not moved by the sight and
knowledge thereof to do it; that is, they do it not to that end, that they may
obey God, who will so have it. For whatsoever is done to this end, it
disagreeth not from the Law: seeing the Law does not but with this condition
either command or forbid any thing, if God has not commanded a man to do
otherwise. So does the Law of God forbid to kill any man, except whom God
has commanded any to kill. Who then kills a man, God not commanding it,
he out of doubt does, and offends against the Law. Neither does God dissent
from himself or his law, when he will have some thing done either by his
reueiled, or secret will, otherwise than according to the general rule
prescribed by himself in his Law. For he has such ends and causes of all
his purposes, as that they cannot but most exactlie agree with his nature and
justice.

Fifthly they object: Liberty which is guided of another can not be an image
of that liberty which depends of no other, which is in god. But the liberty
of man's will, is the image of the liberty, which is in god. Therefore the
liberty of man's will depends not or is not guided by the will of god. We
deny the Mayor. For seeing that every thing which is like is not the same
with that unto which it is like, to conceive in some sort the liberty of God,
it is enough that reasonable creatures do work upon deliberation and free
election of will, albeit this election in the creatures is both guided by
themselves and another, in God by no other than by his own divine wisdom.
The image of a thing is not the thing it self: and the inequality of degrees
takes not away the image, as neither the likeness and similitude of some
parts takes away the dissimilitude of others. Wherefore the liberty of
reasonable creatures both is governed of God, and is notwithstanding a certain
image of the liberty which is in God, because it chooses things once known
unto it by her own and free or voluntary motion. For as of other faculties or
properties, so also of liberty it is impossible that the degrees should be
equal in God and his creatures: whereas all things are infinite in God, and
finite in his creatures. Seeing therefore wisdom, righteousness, strength,
in the creatures is the image of the unmeasurable wisdom, righteousness and
power which is in god: a portion also of liberty agreeable and competent for
the creatures may be the image of the liberty which is in God.

The will is not idle or mere passive when God works by it, no more than the
sun, rain and such like instruments of Gods operation.
Sixthly, they say, If the creature cannot but do that which God will have done,
and cannot do, what god will not have done, the will has no active force, but
is wholly passive, especially in our conversion, which is the work of god:
Likewise there is no use of laws, doctrine, discipline, exhortation,
threatenings, punishments, examples, promises, and lastly of our study and
endeavor. We deny the consequence: Because the first or principal cause
being put, the second or isntrumental cause is not thereby taken away. For as
god lightneth the world, and does quicken the earth, brings forth corn,
nourishes living creatures, and yet are not the instruments of gods working
idle, as the sun, the rain, the earth, husbandmen, and food: So god conuerteth
men, rules their purposes, wills, and actions, that is, teaches and moves
them to approve and choose what he will, by laws, by magistrates, by doctrine, by
rewards, by punishments, and lastly by their own will, which al he uses as
instruments, not as if he could not without these illighten the mind with
notions, and incline the will: but because it so seemeeh good to him to exercise
his power by these.

Albeit God was able to have wrought what he would without the will, yet
because he will work by the will, the working of the will is not in vain.
If they reply, That that would necessarily come to pass so, which is don, and
even without them, and therefore they are in vain used: we deny the antecedent.
For although god were able to move men's wills without these, and if he had so
decreed to do, men doubtless should do without these, what now they do being
moved by these: yet whereas god has once so decreed the effects, as he has
also appointed their second isntrumental and impulsive causes: that verily
shall be done which god will have done, but yet not without middle and second
causes, by whose means and working coming between and interposed, god will
bring his purposes and decrees to pass. Luke 11. He will give his holy spirit
to those who ask him. Romans 8.10. Whom he has predestined, them has he also
called. If they reply again: Although it be granted that these are not in vain
in those in whom god will show his force and be effectual by them: yet in others
who are not moved by them, there is no use of them: we answer, 1. Although
there were no use: yet because that is not known unto us, whom god will move,
or not move, we are to labor in teaching and urging all, and to commit the
event and fruit of our labor to God, 2. Tim. 4. Preach the word, be instant
in season etc. Ezech. 3. If thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his
wickedness, he shall die in his iniquity, but thou have delivered thy soul.
Secondly we answer, the consequence follows not from the denial of one
particular, to the denial of the general, or from a not sufficient
enumeration. For although many obey not teaching and admonitions, neither are
moved with rewards and punishments: yet this use is great, that by this means
their naughtines and stubbornnes is opened, and so the justice of God made more
manifest in their punishment: Ioh. 15. If I had not done works among them
which none other man did, they had not had sin. Romans 1. God has showed it
unto them, to the intent, that they might be without excuse. 2. Cor. 2. We are
to God the sweet savor of Christ in them that are saved, and them who perish.
Seauenthly: Heb. 9. External Discipline is called the righteousness of the
flesh: Therefore it depends on man's will. The consequence of this reason is
to be denied, which does not hold from the position or putting of the second
cause, to the removing of the first cause. For as it follows not, the Sun
causes day, therefore God does not: so neither does this follow: the
unregenerate perform outward Discipline, therefore they do it, god not
causing it in them nor ruling and directing them.

8 Objection. They allege testimonies also, How the scriptures admit liberty
of will.
which confirm that men do evil or good with freewill. As Exodus 35. The
children of Israel offered free gifts unto the Lord. Deuteronomy. 30. I have set
before thee life and death, good and evil, blessing and cursing: therefore
choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live. But in these and all the like
places only that liberty of man's will is affirmed, which has been spoken of
before, that is, that the will obeieth or withstandeth the precedent judgment
of the understanding with free and voluntary motion without any constraint:
but the government of god is not at all removed from voluntary actions. For
it was showed before, that this liberty of will does not stand against that
necessity which by the providence of God does accompany it.

9 Object. What necessity the scripture remoueth from voluntary actions.
They bring forth testimonies also in which necessity is removed and taken
away from voluntary actions. Leuit. 22. Of these ye shall offer willingly. Act.
5. Whils it remained, appertained it not to thee? And after it was sold, was
it not in thine own power? 1. Cor. 7. verse. 37. He that stands firm in his
heart, that he has no necessity, but has power over his own will etc. 2.
Cor. 9. As every man wishes in his heart, so let him give. 1. Pet. 5. Feed
the flock of God, caring for it not by constraint, but willingly. But these
sayings speak of obligation or binding, which sometimes is signified by the
name of necessity, as the freeing from any bond by the name of liberty; as
Leuit. 22. Act. 5. partly of coaction, or constraint, as 2. Cor. 9. and 1. Pet.
5. or also of need, as 1. Cor. 7. which yet may be referred to obligation or
bond, by which the Parents are bound to have regard of the infirmity of
their children. So also the power of will in the same place signifies the
right or power of determining any thing, no obligation or bond hindering it.
But the removing of any obligation or coaction does not at all take away the
vnchaungeablenes of voluntary actions, which unchangeableness hangs on the
decree of God. For as well his will, who is not bound, neither by any need or
want constrained, is guided and moved by the purpose and counsel of Gods
providence; as his whom either bond or need constrains to resolve of any
purpose. Wherefore the scripture denies not, that the will is moved and ruled
by God, when it is not driven by bond or want or fear to do any thing: for
there are besides these many other reasons and causes by which God can move it
either to will or not to will.

How in scriptures God is said not to will that which yet he will.
10 Objection. They bring places of scripture, which testify that men will or
do somewhat, God bidding and willing otherwise. Ierem 7. Because I have called
you, and ye have not answered, I will do unto this house, as I have done to
Sylo. Mat. 23. Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy
children, even as the hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would
not? If then they did that, which God would not; their actions did depend only
of their own will, and not of Gods. Anwere. It is a fallacy concluding that
which is in some sort so, to be in all respects and simply so. For God will not
the actions of sinners, as they are sins: But he will them, as they are
punishments of sins, and the execution of his just judgment. Wherefore this
consequence holds not: God will not the actions of the wicked, as they are
sins. Therefore simply he will not have them to be done, but they depend only
on the will of the wicked. For if God simply would them not, they could by no
means be done. And except there were somewhat in them, which did agree with
his justice and nature: he would not by reason of his goodness infinite and
passing measure suffer them to be done.

If they reply, That God would things contrary to those which men do, as it
is said, How often would I have gathered thee, and therefore it is done only
by the will of men, whatsoever men do, the same answer serves: that God
would the obedience of all his reasonable creatures toward his law as
concerning his commanding and approouing it. For he requires it of all, and
binds all to it, and approoueth it in all, as being agreeable to his nature
and purity: but neither will he always it, nor in all, as concerning his
working and grace, whereby they who are directed and guided do that which God
approoueth and requires. Deuteronomy. 29. The Lord has not given you an heart to
perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear, unto this day.

4 Whether there be any liberty in us, and what it is.
THat there is liberty of will in men, it is proved, 1. Gen 1.26. Eccl. 15.14.
and 15.
Because man was made to the image of God. And free will is part of the image
of God. 2. By places of scripture. Let us make man in our image, according to
our likeness. God made man from the beginning, and left man in the hand of his
counsel. 3. By the definition of that liberty, which agrees to man. For man
works upon deliberatio^, that is, freely, knowing, desiring, and refusing
this or that object. And because the definition agrees unto man: therefore
also does the thing which is defined agree unto him.

1 Object. If there be in man liberty of will, The doctrine of Original sin
not overthrown by that liberty which we hold to be in man.
the doctrine of original sin is overthrown: for these are contrary, not to
be able to obey God, and to have liberty of will. Answer. They are not
contrary: because we have liberty to will and do good, only in part, to wit,
as we are regenerated by the holy spirit, but not in whole, and full, neither
in that degree, in which before the fall we had it, and shall have it in the
life to come. Again, although the unregenerate are only able to will those
things which are evil; yet they will them upon deliberation, without
constraint, even by their own proper and inward motion: and therefore freely.

Ability to choose as well good as bad, is not necessarily joined with
free will.
2 Object. He that has not ability to choose as well good as bad, has not free
will and arbiterment, But man has not ability to choose as well good as evil.
Therefore he has not free will. Answ. The Mayor consists of a bad definition
of free will. For the liberty of reasonable creatures consists in the
judgment and deliberation of the mind or understanding, and in the free assent
of the will, not in a power to will as well good as evil, or contrary. The
good Angels by reason of the wisdom and rightnes of their judgment, and of
the great and constant propension or readiness of their will to that, which
they know to be good and right, cannot will evil and unjust things, but
only things good and honest; and yet notwithstanding they most freely choose
and do those things which are just. Right so, men by reason of their inbred
ignorance, and corrupt judgment of those things which are to be done, and of
the end, as also by reason of the stubbornnes and frowardnes of their will,
can will only those things which are evil: which also they follow and
pursue with exceeding willingness and pleasure, until they are regenerated by
Gods spirit.

3 Objection. That is free, which is ruled of none other but of it self only;
The will of man is servant to sin, and yet inclines to sin freely.
or which is bound to none. Men's will is not ruled of it self only, but of
another, and is bound to the law: therefore it is not free. Answer. The Mayor
is true, if it be meant of that liberty which is in God, but false being
meant of man's liberty. For, man to be ruled of none, is not liberty, but a
shameful barbaritie, and a wretched slavery. But the true liberty of the
creature is, to be subject unto honest and just laws, and to obey them: It is
a power of living as thou will, according unto the law of God.

4 Objection. That which is a servant and in bondage is not free. But our will
is a servant and in bondage. Therefore our will is not free. Answer. There
is an ambiguity in this reason, or it affirms that to be simply so, which
is but in some respect and sort so; or the conclusion fetches in more, than
was in the premises. That which is in bondage, is not free, that is, not in
that respect or consideration, as it is in bondage. Our arbiterment or will is
in bondage, to wit, under sin. Therefore it is not free, that is, from sin,
which it is not able to shake off by any force which it self has, except it
be freed and delivered by the grace of God. But hereof it follows not:
therefore simply no way it is free. For it is free, as touching the objects
represented unto it by the understanding: because it chooses or refuses them
being once known, or suspendeth and forbeareth her action, by her own and
proper motion, without constraint. The sum of all is: We grant the
conclusion, if free be taken for that, which has ability to do those things
which are good and pleasing to God: for so far is it in servitude under
sin, and has power only to sin: but we deny the whole, if free be
taken for voluntary, or deliberatiue, which chooses the obiectes represented
unto it by voluntary motion, not constrained or forced thereto by any
external agent.

5 There are four degrees of freewill.
IT may easily be understood by the degrees of the liberty of man's will, what
the liberty it self is. Now there are four degrees of that liberty which is
in man, which are distinguished according to the diverse states or conditions of
man's nature.

The first degree of liberty was in man not yet fallen, The first degree of
liberty in man before his fall.
before sin; even that power and ability given unto man from above, by which
the mind was lightened with the perfect and certain knowledge of God and his
divine will, whereby the will also by the proper inclination thereof and free
motion did yield perfect obedience unto the known will of God. But yet the will
was not so confirmed in this inclination and knowledge, but that it could
decline and defect from that obedience by her own proper and free motion, if
hope or show of any good to come by defecting were offered unto it. Or shorter
thus. Before the fall it was such a power in man, as that he was able to will
and yield perfect obedience, to be comfortable to god, and to make choice of
that co^formity: And further was able if he listed to forsake that conformity.
Or to be yet shorter. Man before his fall had perfect liberty either to
continue good: or to fall.
Before the fall there was a fitnes and aptitude in man to choose good or
evil: and man was perfectly conformed to god, because he was made to the
Image of God. Again, All things which God made were very good. Now that there
was in our first Parents some weakness joined with perfect knowledge and
obedience of God, which might be overcome by the greatness and force of some
temptation, Man though most free, yet not so strong but he might fall, God not
assisting him.
the event it self does evidently enough declare. And that by the especial
purpose of god there was not so much grace bestowed upon our first Parents, as
thereby they were not able to be seduced by the tentation of Satan, and be
moved to sin: the Apostle witnesses Romans 11. when he says: God has shut up
al in unbelief, that he might have mercy on all. Likewise Romans 9. say^^g,
That the vessels of wrath are prepared of god to destruction; ^e shows, that
god therefore suffered mankind to fall, because it seemed good to him not
only to declare his mercy toward his chosen, but his anger also, and power
and justice, in punishing the reprobate. Furthermore, whereas nothing is done,
without the everlasting and most good purpose and counsel of god; the fall also
of our first Parents may be so much the less exempted from it, by how much the
more god had precisely and exactly determined from everlasting, concerning his
chief work, even mankind, what he would have done. Lastly, the creature can by
no means retain that righteousness, and conformity with God, except God who
gave it, keep it, neither can he leese it, if god will have it kept: according
to these sayings. James. 1. Every good giving, and every perfect gift is from
above, and comes down from the father of lights. John. 1. In it was life,
and the life was the light of men: which lights every man that comes into
the world. Psalm. 51. Take not away thy holy spirit from me. Psalm. 104. If
thou hide thy face, they are troubled. 2. Tim. 2. The foundation of god
remains sure and has this seal, The Lord knows, who are his. And of our
confirmation and establishment in the life to come, Math. 22. In the
resurrection they are as the Angels of god in heaven. As then man could not
have fallen, except god had withdrawn his hand, and not so forceably and
effectually affected his will, and ruled it in temptation: so neither could he
persist in integrity, when he was tempted, except god had sustained and
confirmed him, even as he confirmed the blessed Angels, that they should not
defect and fall away together with the other Apostataes. Seeing therefore such
was the first man's estate, from which he wittingly and willingly fell; the
crime and fault of sin neither can nor ought to be laid on God, but on man
only, albeit notwithstanding he fell by the eternal counsel and will of God.

Humane reason fansiyng her own wit, in deriuing the blame of sin from
herself, The causes of humane reason refuted which lay the fault of the first
sin on God.
when she hears these things, is troubled and keeps a stir, and faineth
many absurdities to follow, except such a liberty of doing well or evil be
given to man, that his perseverance or falling depend of his own will alone.
First, that God was the cause of that first sin, and by consequent, of all
other sins, as which came all of the first fall: Likewise, that he was the
cause of the sin of the Devil seducing man: especially seeing the first
sin is not to be accounted a punishment, as other sins: for no sin had
gone before, How the first sin might be a punishment unto t self, and to
that end permitted of God.
which should be punished with that sin: and therefore seeing God could not
will that as a punishment, he may seem to have willed it as a sin. But
although there be nothing to the contrary why sin may not be the punishment
even of it self: whereas in the same action both the creature depriving
himself of that conformity which he had with God might sin, and god
depriving him of that good, which he of his own accord casts away, might
punish, as it is said of covetousness, Syrach. 14. There is nothing worse than
when one enuieth himself: and this is a reward of his wickedness: Yet
notwithstanding there are other ends besides punishment, for which it was
convenient for God to will the action both of the Devil, and of man. God
would the temptation of man which was done by the Devil, as a trial of man,
by which it might be made manifest, Other ends and causes why God would the
action, though not the sin both of Satan and Adam.
whether he would persevere in true piety toward God: Even as God himself
does tempt Abraham immediately, when he commands him to do that, which yet
he would not have done. God would that assent of man, by which he did yield
unto the Devil, against the will of God as a manifestation of the weakness
and feebleness of the creature, which cannot keep the gifts wherewith he
was adorned by God, without Gods especial instinct and aid. Likewise, He
would have this done, as an occasion or a way to manifest his justice and
severity in punishing, and his mercy in saving sinners. As Exodus 9. Romans 9.
Now God respecting and willing these things in that persuasion and enticement
of Satan, and in man's assenting and yielding thereunto: did notwithstanding all
this while hate the sin of both, and therefore did not will it, neither cause
it, but justly permitted and suffered it to be done. For first, whatsoever
things God does, they are always just. 2. He was not bound unto man to
preserve and confirm him in goodness. 3. He would have man to be tempted and to
fall, that he might try man's perseverance in true piety toward God. 4. That
he might manifest the weakness of the creature. 5. That this fall might be an
occasion and way, to manifest Gods justice and mercy. These things very well
agree with the nature and law of God. Now that they say, That man did not fall
of his own free will, except he had equal power as well to persist in
obedience as to fall: the consequence is not of force, because they reason from
an ill definition of man's liberty, which they imagine cannot stand, if it be
determined and ruled by God. But the whole scripture witnesses that it
suffices for the liberty of the creature, if the will be inclinable of it
self to the contrary, of that which it chooses, and does of it own accord
choose that which the mind either likes or disliketh.

And hence also is that dissolved, that they say, that man is not justly
punished of God, if he could not avoid his fall. For he that sins
willingly, or does draw on himself the necessity of sinning, is justly
punished, his own conscience accusing him: neither is it unjust that he is
forsaken of God, and deprived of the grace of the holy ghost, who wittingly and
willingly casts it away, and that he suffer the punishment of this his
ingratitude and contempt of God, although he cannot, God forsaking him, do
otherwise. For none is forsaken of God, except he be willing to be forsaken. As
Math. 18. It must needs be that offenses shall come, but woe be unto that
man, by whom the offense comes.

At length they say, that God is made cruel, envious, and far from bounty and
mercy, Gods denial of grace no cruelty, but a way to greater mercy.
if he did not bestow that grace upon man without which he knew man could not
stand or consist in temptation; and yet would have him tempted of the Devil.
But these and the like tauntinges and reprochinges of the works and
judgments of God, out of doubt are joined with great impiety, because they
ouerturne that ground and principle, which is the first degree and step to
godliness and reverence toward God, that is, that whatsoever God does, it is
good and just, and not disagreeing from his nature and law, whether the reason
thereof be known unto us, or unknown. Wherefore this answer should
suffice, that it disagreeth not from the mercy and goodness of god,
whatsoever he does. But there is not want also of other answers. As, that that
denial of grace does not disagree, but very well agrees with the mercy and
bounty of god, when god will have this to be an occasion of bestowing a
greater grace and benefit: as it is apparent in the fall and restoring of man.
Again, that that is not disagreeing from mercy, or any other virtue, which
does appertain to the manifesting of the glory of the chief good, which is
god. For although it be mercy not to rejoice in the ruin or destruction of
his creature; yet mercy ought not to fight with justice. Now it is just, that
more regard should be had of the chief good, that is, god, both by himself
and by others, than of all the creatures: Wherefore very well do agree
together in god his mercy which will not the death of a sinner, and his
justice which suffers mankind to fall, that by his fall the severity and
goodness of god may appear.

The second degree is in man fallen into sin, The second degree of l^bertie
after the fall, in man not regenerate.
and being unregenerate. In this state the will verily does work freely: but
yet is carried to evil only, and can do naught else but sin, except it be
regenerated by the holy ghost. Or shorter; It is the fitnes and pronenesse in
man after his fall, being unregenerate, to choose only evil. The reason is,
because men by the first Parents fall, are destitute of the true knowledge of
god, and of all inclination to obey him. Therefore no actions of the
unregenerate, be they never so notable, can please god, seeing they are not
referred to this end, that god may be honored by their obedience. This
blindness and corruption of man's nature does the scripture lively depaint out in
very many places. All the thoughts of man are evil. Psalm. 59.11. 2. Cor. 3.5.
Ephe. 2.3. Iere. 13.23. Math 7.18.
We are not able of our selves to think any good thing. We were by nature the
sons of wrath. Can the black Moore change his skin? Then may ye also do good,
that are accustomed to do evil. An evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit.
Wherefore the will and ability to do good work^, is no more in the vnregenerats
power than their creation.

The liberty which is in man now after his fall, and not yet regenerated and
recovered, is the very bondage of sin.
This liberty of the unregenerate is the most wretched servitude of sin, and
very death in sins, whereof the scripture treats in many places: as John.
8.34. Whosoever commits sin is the servant of sin. Romans 6.16. Know ye
not that to whomsoever ye give your selves as servants to obey, his servants ye
are to whom ye obey, whether it be of sin unto death, or of obedience unto
righteousness? 2. Pet. 2 19. Promising unto them liberty, and are themselves
servants of corruption.

Free will to outward good action without an inward faith and obedience, is not
freewill to good.
1 Objection. Nothing more easy, says Erasmus, than to keep a man's hands from
stealing. Again, Socrates, Aristides, and many others have showed and
exercised many virtues. Therefore they had free will to good before
regeneration. Answer. 1. This is an ill definition of a good work and of
free will to good, which is a power of yielding obedience pleasing to God. The
unregenerate steal within by their lust and desire, though not by outward
fact. That the unregenerate contain their hands, that is, observe outward
Discipline, this is also Gods benefit, who by his general providence governs
also the hearts of the wicked, and bridleth their inbred wickedness, that it
break not forth and effect that which it would. But hereof it follows not
that it is easy to begin inward obedience, or that to contain their hands
from stealing is simply a good work. The outward actions good in themselves,
are made evil by want of an inward faith.
Neither are those good works before God, that is, pleasing unto God, which
have not joined with them faith and inward obedience. But faith and inward
obedience could not be in them, because they were not regenerated.

Reply. 1. The works of the law are good: Heathen men did the works of the
law: therefore the works of heathen men were good. And by consequence,
heathen men also or unregenerate, have liberty of doing good. We answer to
the Mayor by a distinction: The works of the law are good; true, by themselves:
but they are made ill by an accident, and so are these works of the law made
ill by an accident, of the unregenerate: because they are not done by them for
that end and after that sort which God commanded.

The remnants of spiritual life in the unregenerate are not sufficient to make
their works good.
Reply 2. There remain also many true notions in the minds of the unregenerate,
concerning god, and his will, and the right ordering of their life. Wherefore
the will working according to these notions and the direction of true reason,
does not sin, but works well. Answer, first, Those legal notions whether
they belong to the first, or to the second table of the Decalog, they are not
perfect and sufficient: And therefore God cannot be rightly worshipped
according to these remains or relics of spiritual light, except there come
thereunto the knowledge of God and his divine will out of the word of God which
is delivered unto the Church. Further, Men not brought up in the Church do
patch many false things with these true imprinted notions of nature, and do
heap sins upon errors. Thirdly, Such is the frovvardnes of the will and
affections even against the judgment of rightly informed and ruled reason,
that they obeie not so much as those natural notions, much less those which
are to be adioined out of the word of god. Whence also are those complaints
even of the heathen: I see the better and I like them, but I follow the worse;
and that accusation of the Apostle, Romans 1.18. The wrath of god is reueiled
from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, which withhold
the truth in unrighteousness: wherefore those notions without the grace of the
holy ghost do not engender true godliness in them.

2 Objection. God commends us for good works. The praise and commendation
which is given of God to our good works does not prove that they proceed from
our selves, but rather are his gifts.
Therefore good works are in our power and will. Answer. This is a
fallacy concluding of that which is no cause, as if it were a cause. God
commends our good works, not because they are or can be performed of us,
without our renewing by the holy ghost; but because they are agreeable unto his
law, and good, and pleasing unto him: yea because they are his own gifts and
effects in us; and we his instruments unto whom he communicates himself
and his blessings: according as it is said Romans. 8. Whom he predestinate,
them also he called.

Reply. Who does not in such sort work well, as that it is in his own
power to do either well or ill, he deserves neither commendation nor
revvard: but those good things which men do are not in their power and
arbiterment, therefore they deserve not either commendation or rewards for
their virtues. Answer. If the question be of desert, we grant the whole
Argument. For it is true, that no creature can deserve or merit ought at gods
hand; neither ought the praise or commendation or glory be given to us, as if
the good which we do were of our selves, it being god who works whatsoever
is good in all. But if they say that neither reward nor commendation is
justly given; more is in the conclusion, than was in the premises. For God, to
testify that righteousness pleases him, and to show forth more and more his
bounty and goodness, does adorn it with free rewards.

How God is said to wish our conversion and good works; and yet they not
thereby proved to be in our power.
3 Objection. What God does wish and will to be done of us, that we are able
to perform by our selves: but God does wish and will our conversion, and our
good works: Deutronom. 32.29. Luke. 19.42. Therefore we are able to perform
them by our selves: And so consequently, we need not the operation and
working of the holy Ghost.

Answer. This reason is a fallacy deceiving by the ambiguitie of the word
Wish. For in the Mayor proposition it is taken, as it uses properly to
signify: in the Minor, not so. God is said to wish, by a figure of speech,
called Anthropopathie, making God to be affected after the order of men; and
therefore the kind of affirmation is diverse in the Mayor, and in the Minor.
But God is said to wish, in two respects. First, In respect of his commanding
and inuiting. Secondly, In respect of his love toward his creatures, and in
respect of the torment of them that perish, but not in respect of the execution
of his justice. Reply. 1. He that inuiteth others, and is delighted with their
well doing, it follows thereof, that their well doing is in their own power,
and not in his who inuiteth them. But God inuiteth us, and is delighted with
our well doing: Therefore it is in our selves to do well. Answer. We
deny the Minor; because it is not enough, that God inuiteth us: but our will
also to do well must be adjoined, which we cannot have but from god only.
God therefore does wish our conversion, and does inuit all unto it, that is,
he requires obedience toward his law of all, he likes it in all, and for
the love which he bears unto his creature he wishes nothing more, than
that all perform it, and all be saved: but yet a will to perform it, they
only have, whom god does regenerate by his spirit. Deutronom. 29.2. Ye have
seen all that the Lord did before your eyes: yet the Lord has not given you
an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear unto this day.
Reply. 2. He that commands things impossible to be done is unjust. GOD
commands such obedience, as is impossible to be done. Therefore he is
unjust. Answer. The Mayor is to be distinguished. He is unjust that
commands things impossible, except himself first gave an ability to
perform those things which he commanded: and Secondly, except he, who is
commanded to perform them, has lost that ability through his own fault:
Lastly, except there be some other ends and uses of the commandments
besides his obedience, who is commanded. But God had made man such a one as
was able to perform that obedience, which he requires of him. Wherefore man
by his own fault and folly leesing, and of his own accord casting away this
ability, God nevertheless has not therefore lost his right to require obedience
of him, being dew, and by him owed unto GOD his creator: But rather he does
in right require it of all: First, in respect of his glory: because he is
just, and therefore does of right require no less now, than before Adams
fall, our conformity and correspondence with the whole Law. Secondly, that we
may subject and submit our selves unto God, and implore and crave his grace,
when we see him of right to require that of us, which thorough our own fault
we are not able to perform. Reply. 3. But not we, but Adam, received and
lost this ability of perfourming obedience unto GOD. Therefore the Law is not
impossible unto us thorough our own fault. Answer. Adam, as he received
this ability for himself and his posterity, so he lost it from both.

Wherefore God does in right deprive both Adam and his posterity of his gifts
and gtaces: Even as a noble man by his disobedience leeseth a Lorde-shippe in
fee granted him of the Prince, not only from himself, God commanding
things impossible, does yet command them for good causes and to good ends.
but also from his posterity: neither does the Prince any injury to his
Children, if he restore not unto them the Lorde-shippe lost by their Fathers
fault and disobedience. And if he do restore it, he does it of free grace
and mercy. Reply. 4. But yet, he that commands things impossible, does in
vain command them, which is neither the part of a wise man, nor of a just.
GOD in requiring good works of those, who through the corruption of their own
nature have no liberty or ability to do them, commands things impossible:
Therefore he commands them in vain. Answer. The Mayor is false, if it be
meant of him, who in commanding things impossible does withal make some able
to perform them; and who has also other causes which he respects in
commanding them, besides the doing of that which he commands. But God does
so require obedience, which unto the unregenerate is impossible to perform,
that in requiring it he does withal make it possible in his chosen to be
performed. For in these by exhortation and precepts he woorketh, 1. That they
give unto him the praise of justice and righteousness. 2. That they acknowledge
their own weakness and impotency. 3. That they know hat they ought chiefly to
ask of God, even remission of sins, and the grace of the holy ghost, for the
alone satisfaction of Christ. 4. That they being reconciled unto god, and
renewed by the holy ghost, receive power and ability to obey god according to
his whole Law, here in part and beginning, and in the life to come fully and
perfectly. Wherefore the requiring of an impossible obedience, is in respect of
the elect a great benefit: because it is the way to receive a possibility. Now
in the reprobate, God, in commanding them that which they shall not be able to
do, has besides other uses also these.

1 That they may at leastwise observe outward order and discipline 2. that
their wickedness and stubburnnes may be opened. 3. That they may be left
excuseles, and the justice of god in punishing them made more conspicuous and
manifest. Wherefore god does not in vain require those things of the reprobate
which they by their own power cannot perform. Reply. 5. But God seems to be
cruel, who proposes commandments, whereby some, being destitute of grace
to obey, may be the more hardened and more grieuouslie condemned. Answer. He
is not cruel First, because he is not delited with the frowardnes, destruction
and torment of the wicked. Secondly, because he does not owe that gace unto
any: so that if he had suffered al mankind to perish, he could not therefore
have been accused of cruelty. Thirdly, because in his just judgment, willing
to show in some, both the weakness of the creature, and also his justice and
power in punishing sin, he leaves them in sin and destruction, into which
he permitted them to run. Romans 9. And hereby we easily understand, in what
sense those common sayings of Hierom are to be taken, Let him be accursed, who
says, that God commands things impossible: And, Let him be accursed, who
says, that the Law is possible without grace. For it is impossible to the
unregenerate: it is possible, as concerning perfect obedience to man not yet
fallen, or wholly restored: but to the regenerate which are not yet glorified
and wholly restored, it is possible, by the imputation of Christ's satisfaction,
and by the inchoation or beginning of newnes of life, which is wrought by the
holy ghost in them, in this life.

4 Objection. That which cannot be avoided is not sin. The ineuitablenes of
an ill action does not take away sinfulnes from it.
The unregenerate cannot avoid sin. Therefore their woorks are not to be
accounted sins. Answer. We deny the Mayor. For it is enough to make it
sin, if it be voluntary. And how much the more necessarily men sin, with
so much the greater will they sin. They cannot therefore pretend necessity to
cloak their fault. This does the example of the Devil prove, who sins so
much the more grievously how much the more necessarily he sins, wittingly
and willingly striving against God, and contumeliously despiting him. But they
do vainly and wickedly cauil, That the justice of God does not impute those
sins to the Devil, which he necessarily does commit after his corruption:
Likewise, That the Devil is now finally and without hope of pardon cast away of
god, but men have power yet in this life either to persist in sin, or to
forsake it, and therefore those actions only of theirs are sins, in which
sin cannot be avoided. For God is wrath with all sins of men and Devils, and
punishes all sins with eternal pains, or with equivalent punishment unto
eternal. Neither does therefore necessary and inevitable or unavoidable sin
cease to be sin, for that there is or is not hope of obtaining recovery and
pardon. For whatsoever is committed against the law of God, that is sin,
whether it can be avoided, or not avoided, whether he who sins forsakes his
sin, or persisteth in it.

5 Objection. They who cannot but sin, They who necessarily sin are not
unjustly punished, be-
are unjustly punished. But the unregenerate cannot but sin. Therefore God
does unjustly punish them. Answer. They who necessarily sin, are unjustly
punished, except that necessity come voluntarily, and by their own will. But men
have drawn upon them that necessity voluntarily, in the first parents, and
themselves also do willingly sin. Therefore God does justly punish them.

6 Objection. They who have not equal and like ability to choose good or
evil, must needs be either all good or all evil. The unregenerate have not
like ability to choose good or evil, but only liberty to choose evil.
Therefore they must needs be all alike evil. Answer. If the argument be
understood of humane nature, as it is without the grace of the holy spirit,
it is wholly to be granted: for it is certain that all men before
regeneration are alike and equally estranged from faith and conversion, yea
neither would they observe outward discipline and behavior, except God bridled
them, that they should not commit outrages. Genesis 20. I kept thee, that thou
should not sin against me. But if they conclude, that all must needs
continue alike evil, when the holy spirit moves and inclines their hearts
and minds to conversion, there is more in the conclusion, than in the former
propositions. For as it is impossible that they should be converted whom God
moves not, so is it not only possible, but also necessary, that they whom he
voutsafeth the grace of regeneration, should be converted. Ioh. 6.37. All that
the father gives me, shall come unto me. Reply. It is said, Hose. 13. Thy
destruction comes of thy self Israel. Isa. 59.2. Your iniquities have
separated between you and your god. Therefore the cause of this difference, that
some are converted, and some not; is in the will of man, and not in the
bestowing or withdrawing of Gods grace: that is, before the grace of
regeneration is bestowed, so are some better than others, as that they take
that grace which others refuse. But Hose as adds an answer. In me only is
thy help. He shows that our safety does so depend of God, that we cannot
have it without his singular mercy and grace: wherefore destruction comes of
those that perish, as concerning the merit of punishment: but this takes not
away the superior cause, that is Gods reprobation. For the last cause takes
not away the first cause. The same is answered to that of Isa. Sins separate
the chosen from God for a time, the reprobate for ever; but yet the divine
purpose and counsel of God going before, by which God decreed to adioine those
unto him, or to cast them from him, whom it seemed good to him so to deal
with. Romans 9.18. He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens.

7 Objection. He that has not liberty to do good, The word of god not
without good cause declared to the unregenerate.
and eschevve evil, is in vain pressed with precepts and doctrine: but the
unregenerate have not liberty to do good works and omit evil: therefore
obedience is in vain commanded them. Answer. The Mayor is to be denied, for
when god does suffer his will to be denounced to the wicked, either he does
together lighten them and move them within by his spirit to obey his voice, or
pricketh them with the pricks of conscience, either to observe external order
and discipline, or not so much to persecute the known truth; or he does
discover their hypocrisy and madness in oppugning it, or he makes manifest
their weakness and ignorance, and at length makes them inexcusable in this
life and in the last judgment. Reply. 1 Whose conversion and obedience
depends of the grace of god, he has no need of exhortations and precepts.
But in them also who are converted, their conversion depends of grace.
Therefore precepts are vain and needelesse. We make answer to the Mayor, by
a distinction. If conversion depend of grace, so that the spirit does not
adioine doctrine as an instrument, whereby to teach their minds, and move
their hearts; let this verily be granted: although as it has been before
said, there remain as yet other uses of Doctrine. But when it has pleased
God by this instrument both to lighten and move or incline men's minds to
faith and obedience, the Mayor is false. For it is written, Romans 1. The
gospel is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believes.

2 Reply. It is not mercy, but cruelty to propound precepts and Doctrine to
those, who are denied the grace of obeieng, and who are by it more hardened,
and more grieuouslie condemned. God therefore does not this who is exceeding
merciful. We deny again the Mayor. 1 Because Gods exceeding mercy does not
take away his justice. 2 Because he so will have them to be made inexcusable
by the preaching of his heavenly Doctrine, as that in the mean season, he
rejoices not at their destruction, and punishment: But for the manifestation
of his justice, (whereof that greater regard should be had than of all the
creatures, even Gods justice it self requires) he will that which otherwise
he abhors in his mercy and goodness toward all creatures, as Ezechiel
says, 21. I will not the death of him that dies.

4 Readiness of mind to receive grace is not before conversion but after.
8 Objection. He that prepares himself to receive grace by which he may do
good works, he now does works, pleasing to God: But men prepare themselves to
receive grace. Therefore also before regeneration they do works pleasing to
god. We deny the Mayor: which yet these places seem to prove. 1. Sam. 7.
Prepare your heart unto the Lord. Act. 10. The prayers and alms of Cornelius
before he was taught and baptized of Peter, come up into remembrance before
god. But in these and the like places to prepare, or to have in readiness, or to
confirm the heart, is not to do works before the conversion, by which god may
be invited to bestow the grace of regeneration upon men: but it signifies
that a ready and firm will of obeying god and persisting in true godliness
is showed of those which are already regenerated and converted. For the people
of Israel had repented when Samuel said this unto them. For there goes
before in the same place, all the house of Israel lamented and followed the
Lord: Likewise Cornelius before he was taught of Peter that Jesus was the
Messiah, is said to have been then godly and serving god, and so calling and
inuocating on him, that his prayers pleased God and were heard.

Albeit good woorks are said to be ours, yet it follows not that we are
authors of them, but the instruments whereby the author works them.
9 Objection. The works which are not in our power to perform, are not our
works, neither are truly and properly said to be done by us: But good woorks
are said to be ours, and to be done by us: Therefore it is in our will to do
them, or not to do them. We deny the Mayor. For they are not therefore said to
be ours or to be done by us, because they are of our selves: but because God
works them in us, as in the subject, and by us as instruments, and that so,
as our will does them of her own proper motion, although not except it be
renewed, raised, and guided by the holy ghost. For being regenerated and moved
by him we are not idle, but he working in us we our selves also work well, and
that freely without constraint. For by regeneration the will is not taken away,
but corrected, as which before would only that which is evil, will now that
which is good. Ephesians. 2.10. We are his workmanshippe created in Christ Jesus unto
good works which god has ordained that we should walk in them.

10 Objection. God helps us in working, and yet begins our working in us.
He that is helped by another in conversion and in beginning good works, does
somewhat of them himself, before he is helped. For he that has help begins
the action. God helps us, wherefore it is of our selves to begin good works.
The Minor is proved. Marc. 9. I believe Lord; but help my unbelief. Romans 8.
The spirit helps our infirmity. Answer. Nothing ca^ follow in conclusion of
mere particular propositions. For the Mayor here is not universal, seeing not
only he may help who begins a work, but he also in whom it is begun and
accomplished by another. Now so does god help us, that himself does first
breed and engender in us true knowledge of him, and an inclination to obey
him, and the beginninges of good motions, and does increase also and perfect
the same begun by him. But he is therefore said to help us, because he does so
work in us, that we are not idle but work while he works: and yet we are able
no more to persist, or to bring it to an end, without him, than to begin it.
And therefore we being inclined, moved, and governed by him, will also our
selves of our own accord, and are able to work well, and do work well, that is,
because God works good things not only IN us, but also BY us as joint
workers with him. Phil. 1.6. he that has begun this good work in you vvil
perform it until the day of Jesus Christ. and 2. 13. It is god who works
in you both the will and the deed, even of his good pleasure. Reply. The
beginning, and proceeding and accomplishment of conversion is the free work and
gift of god. Therefore man's will when he is converted does nothing, but is mere
passive. There should be no use also (as has bin said before) of laws,
discipline, doctrine, exhortations and such like. Answer. We deny the
consequence of this reason: because the reason proceeds from the putting of
the first cause, to the removing of the second or instrume^tal cause. Again it
is a mere fallacy co^cluding that to be simply so, which is but in some respect
so. For first, the will as also the whole man renewed, is both the subject and
instrument cooperating and jointly woorking of his conversion, that is, is
converted of god, and does convert himself. For the action of god converting
and inclining the will goes before the assent of the will, not in time, but in
nature only. Secondly the holy ghost regenerating and co^uerting us, woorketh
in us both new qualities, in receiving whereof we are mere passive and work not
our selves (For we cannot make to ourselves a fleshy heart of a stony, No
general preventing grace in us which we have in our own power to use o^
refuse: but the special grace of the spirit only works in us conversion,
the want whereof causes our continuance in sin.
and God works in us even to will) and also new actions, in working which we
are both passive and active. For we being regenerated by gods spirit are not
stocks but joint workers with him, because we are made of unwilling and unfit
to good, willing and fit, and able to do good. Thirdly the holy ghost works
this regeneration not without precepts, doctrine, and other means, but by the^:
because it so pleased him. Wherefore they cannot be neglected without showing an
impious and wicked contempt of god himself. But here especially our adversaries
will reply again, that indeed we cannot be converted to god, except his grace
prevent us, and move us to conversion: but this grace preue^ting those who are
to be converted, is so far given to al, as it is in themselves, or in their own
power to use it or refuse it, that is, to be turned from, or to persist in sin.
And then at length, they who have used rightly that first and universal grace
preue^ting al men, that is, have by their liberty applied themselves to choose
that good, unto the choosing whereof they are solicited, but yet not
effectually moved of god. Unto these is given also the subsequent, and
ioint-working grace, so that what they could not have performed without this,
this now coming between, they may do, that is, may truly turn unto god and
persevere. This they prove by sentences of scripture which seem to hang the
grace of god upon the condition of man's vvil. Zac. 1. Turn to me, and I will
turn to you, Isa. 1.19. If ye consent, ye shall eat the good things of the
earth. Ier. 7. I called you and ye answered not. But it is certainly manifest
out of the Scripture, that neither any man can be converted, except the holy
ghost be given him, neither is he given to al men of god, but to those only
who^ he of his free mercy vouchsafes this benefit, so that the cause is not
to be sought in me^, but in god alone, why these rather tha^ they, believe gods
voice and ar turned unto him: and therefore al truly might be converted as
concerning the liberty and power of god, and the cha^geable nature of man's will,
but not, both in respect of the auerting of their nature from god, and of that
inbred corruption in all which may indeed betake^ away by god, but cannot
without his working, be laid aside or put off by us, and also in respect of the
unchangeable decree of god, whereby god has determined to leave some in sin and
destruction, into which he has permitted them to fall: and therefore either not
to lighten their minds with his knowledge, or not to renu their hearts and wills
with new inclinations or powers; nor effectually to move the^ to yield
obedience to the known truth. Neither do the testimonies teach otherwise which
the adversaries ale age. God wills us to turn to him, that he may turn to
us, that is, may turn away and mitigate our punishments, and bestow his
benefits upon us; not as if our conversion were in our own power, but because
he will effectuat and confirm these precepts and commandments in the hearts of
his chosen. He promises good things to those who will obey him, not as if it
were in our power to will obedience, but because he will stir up by his promises
that will in us. He charge the stubburn with their wickedness, not as if it
were in their own power to put it off, but because he will by accusing their
wilful stubburnnes take away al excuse from them when he judges them.

Again they urge, The will of receiving Gods grace goes not before faith and
conversion, but is part and the beginning thereof.
Although no man can be converted to do well without grace, yet not only the
consequent gifts and benefits of god, but the first grace also of his holy
spirit whereby we are converted, al who are willing may have, seeing god
promises that he will give to al, that will. As Isay. 1. Apoc. 3. Isay. 31. Al
ye that thirst, come to the waters. But al may will. Therefore al may be
converted. We deny the Minor. Reply. The will of receiving goes before the
receiving it self. Therefore they who as yet have not grace, may have will to
receive it. We deny the Antecedent as concerning the grace of conversion. For
no man can desire this, except he have the beginning of it in him. For it is
god who works in us, both to will and to do. Wherefore the will of believing
and repenting is the very beginning of faith and conversion, the which
whosoever have true and unfeigned, it is increased and perfected in them, as it
is said; Gods promises, not unprofitable though made with an impossible
condition to the unregenerate, which yet is made possible to the regenerat by
Christ.
He that has begun this good work in you will perform it

11 Objection. They gather also and collect these sayings which promise Gods
bounty with a condition of our obedience. As, If thou vvilt enter into life,
keep the commandments. Likewise, Do this, and thou shall live. Out of these,
thus they reason, A promise which has adioined an impossible condition is
unprofitable and mocketh him, unto whom it is made. But Gods promises have an
impossible condition. Therefore they are all uncertain, yea never to be
performed, and nothing but a mockery. Answer. First we deny the Mayor. For
the promise even in those, who receive it not, has this use, that it may be
made manifest, that God does not rejoice at the destruction of any, and that
he is just in punishing, when as he does so inuit the^ unto him, who through
their ingratitude contemn and refuse gods promises. Secondly we distinguish:
that unto them indeed the promise is unprofitable, to whom the condition
adioined is never made possible through faith and grace of justification by
Christ, and of regeneration by the holy Ghost. But so it is made possible unto
the elect. Wherefore God deludeth nether, but earnestly declares to both of
them, what they ought to be; unto whom he gives everlasting life, and how
unworthy they are of Gods benefits, and shall never be partakers of them,
unless by the free mercy of God, they be exempted from destruction: further
also he allureth more and more and confirms the faithful to yield obedience.
Lastly they cite also other sayings which seem to place conversion and
good-woorks in the will of men; Psalm. 119. I have applied my heart to fulfill
thy statutes. 1. Ioh. 5. verse 18. He that is begotten of god keeps himself.
These and the like sayings attribute the work of god unto men: first because
they are not only the object, but the instrument also of gods woorking which
the holy spirit exercises in them. Then, because they are such an instrument,
which being renewed and moved by the holy spirit; does also it self work
together and move it self. For there is not one effect ascribed unto the
holy ghost, and another to man's will, but the same to both: unto the holy
ghost as the principal cause, unto man's will as a secondarie and isntrumental
cause.

The third degree of liberty in man regenerated
The third degree of liberty, belongs to man in this life, as he is
regenerated, but not yet glorified, or in whom regeneration is begun, but not
accomplished or perfected. In this state the will uses her liberty not only
to work evil, as in the second degree, but partly to do ill, and partly to
do well. And this is to be understood two ways: First, that some works of the
regenerate are good and pleasing to God, which are done of them according to
Gods commandment, but some evil and displeasing to god, which they do contrary
to the commandment of God: which is manifest by the infinite fallings of holy
men. Secondly, that even those good works which the converted do in this life,
albeit they please God by reason of Christ's satisfaction imputed unto them,
yet are they not perfectly good, that is, agreeable to Gods law, but imperfect,
and stained with many sins: and therefore they cannot if they be beheld without
Christ, stand in judgment and escape damnation. The cause of the renewing and
beginning of this liberty in man to good, is the spirit working by the will.
The cause for which the will begins to work well, is this: because by the
singular grace or benefit of the holy spirit man's nature is renewed by the
word of God, there is kindled in the mind a new light and knowledge of god, in
the heart new affections, in the will new inclinations, agreeing with the Law of
God, and the will is forcibly and effectually moved to do according to these
notions and inclinations, and so it recouereth both the power of willing that
which God approves, and the use of that power, and begins to be conformed
and agreeable to God, and to obey him. Deuteronomy. 30.6. The Lord thy God will
circumcise thy heart and the heart of thy seed, that thou may love the lord
thy god with all thine heart. Ezec. 36.26. A new heart will I give you, and a new
spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your
body, and I will give you an heart of flesh, and I will put my spirit within you,
and cause you to walk in my statutes. Act. 16. The Lord opened the heart of
Lidia, that she should attend to those things which were spoke of Paul. 2. Cor.
3. Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. Why the will in the
regenerate uses liberty not only to good, but to evil also.
The causes for which the will uses her liberty not only to the choosing of
good, but of evil also, are in number two. The first, for that in this life
the renewing of our nature is not perfect, neither as concerning the knowledge
of GOD, neither as concerning our inclinations to obey GOD: and therefore in
the best men, while they live here, remain still many and great sins both
original and others. The Second, for that the regenerate be not always ruled
by the holy spirit, but are sometimes for a time forsaken of GOD, either for
to try, or to chastise, or humble them, but yet are recalled to repentance,
that they perish not. Of the first cause it is said, Romans 7. I know that in
me, that is, in my flesh dwells no good thing: for to will is present with
me, but I find no means to perform that which is good. Marc. 9. I beeleue
Lord, but help thou my unbelief. Of the second cause it is said Psa. 51. Take
not away thy holy spirit from me. Isaiah 63.17. O Lord, why have thou made us
to err from thy ways, and hardened our heart from thy fear? Return for thy
servant sake. 1. Kings. 8.57. The Lord our God be with us that he forsake
us not, neither leave us. Therefore the regenerate man in this life does
always go either forward or backewarde: never continues in the same state.

Hence are deduced these 2. conclusions: first, as man corrupted, before he be
regenerated can not begin new obedience pleasing and acceptable unto: God So he
that is regenerated in this life, although he begin to obey God, that is,
has some inclination and purpose to obey God according to all his
commandments and that unfeigned, though yet weak and struggling with evil
inclinationes, affectiones, and desires, and therefore there shine in his life
and manners a desire of piety toward God and his neighbor: yet can he not
yield whole and perfect obedience to God: because neither his knowledge, nor
his love of God is so great and so sincere, as the law of God requires, and
therefore is not such righteousness as may stand before God, according to that
saying, Psalm. 143.2. Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy
sight shall none that lives be justified. The second: They who are o^cuerted
can no farther retein good inclinations, neither thoughts and affections, and a
good purpose, to persevere and go forward therein, than as the holy spirit
works and preserves these in them: for if he guide and rule them, they judge
and do aright: but if he forsake them, they are blind, they wander, slip and
fall away: yet so, that they perish not, but repent and are saved, if so be
they were ever truly converted. 1. Cor. 4. What have thou, that thou have not
received? If thou have received it, why reioicest thou as if thou had not
received it? Philip. 1. I am persuaded that he who has begun this good work
in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ. Phil. 2.13. It is God
that works in you both the will and the deed, even of his good pleasure. Ioh.
15. Without me you can do nothing. 1. Cor. 1.8. Who shall also confirm you
unto the end that ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
1. Cor. 10.13. GOD is faithful which will not suffer you to be tempted above
that you be able, but will even give the issue with the te^tation, that ye may
be able to bear it. 1. Pet. 1.5. You are kept by the power of God through faith
to salvation. Reasons to prove the former doctrine,


This doctrine, that the regenerate neither perfectly nor continually can obey
God, and that as the beginning so the continuance of our conversion depends
of God; is confirmed, besides these testimonies, by evident reasons; as, that
we receive all good things from God, James 1. much more then these good things
which are the greatest of all, that is our conformity with God, and
perseverance therein.

2 Again: Nothing can be done besides the eternal decree of God. But the good
works, which the converted do, God from everlasting did decree; Ephesians. 2.10.
We are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has
ordained that we should walk in them: Ier. 1.5. Before I formed thee in the
womb, I knew thee, and before thou came out of the womb, I sanctified thee.
wherefore they are able to do neither more nor less of such works, than God
has decred to work in the^ by his spirit.

3 Again: The gifts of the holy spirit are not in the will and power of men,
but in the power of the spirit who dispenses them. 1. Cor. 12.11. All these
things works even the selfsame spirit, distributing to every man severally
as he will. Ephesians. 4.7. Unto every one of us is given grace, according to the
measure of the gift of Christ. 2. Thessal. 3.2. All men have not faith. Now
perseueraunce in true godliness, and a will and desire to persevere, and the
craving of the confirmation, strengthening and aid of the holy spirit, are no
less the gift of the holy spirit, than regeneration it felfe, and faith, and
conversion, as has bin showed before. Wherefore to persevere in faith and
conversion, is no more in our power, than to believe, and to be converted.

4 Again: In whose power and arbiterment our perseverance is, he is the
preservation of our safety. But God, and not we, is the author and preserver of
our safety. John 10. No man shall pluck my sheep out of my hand: Therefore
our perseueraunce is not in our own power and arbiterment, but in Gods.

5 Lastly, As our conversion, so also our perseueraunce is the free gift of
GOD: that is, As God finds no cause in us why to convert us: so neither
finds he cause in us, whereby he should be moved to keep us being
converted, that we do not defect or fall. For neither is there cause in us why
he should more keep us from falling away, than our parents in Paradise:
Neither is the chief cause in the Saints themselves, why God should defend
some rather than some against tentations and sins, as Samuel and Iosaphat,
rather than Sampson and David. But if to persevere were in our power, or not to
persevere, then the cause of this diversity should be in us. Wherefore
perseverance in godliness, and absteining from sin is not to be ascribed to
our selves, but to the mercy of God.

But against the former sentence, to wit, that even the best woorckes of the
Saints in this life are not perfectly good: and therefore are not able to
stand in the judgment of God and to please God, but by the imputation of
Christ's satisfaction, the papists oppose themselves.

1 Objection. The woorks of Christ and the holy spirit, say they, cannot be
impure, and not please God. The good works of the regenerate, Christ works
in them by his spirit: wherefore it is necessary and must needs be that they
are pure and perfect, and please God even as they are considered in themselves.
For God cannot condemn his own works, although he examine them according to
the rigor of his judgment. We answer to the Mayor: The works of God are pure
and worthy no reprehension, The good works of the regenerat are not perfect so
long as themselves who work jointly with the spirit, are not perfect.
as they are the works of God, and such as God woorketh: but not as they are
depraved by the creatures: neither are they always pure, which are not the
works of God only, but the creatures also. For these, as they are of God, are
void of all fault: but as they are done by the creatures, they are good also
and without reprehension, if the creature, by which God works them, be
perfectly conformable to the will of GOD; but impure and imperfect, and
according to the sentence of the Law subject to damnation, if the creature, by
which God woorketh the^, be corrupt and vicious, that is, depraved by the not
knowing of God, and by auerting from God.

2 Objection. God cannot condemn the members of his Son. Romans 8. The
imperfections of the regenerate and their works ar blotted out and pardoned in
Christ.
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. The regenerate are
the members of Christ. Therefore even as they are considered in themselves,
they and their works cannot be condemned in the judgment of God. Answer.
There is more in the conclusion than in the premises. For this only
follows, That the Saints cannot be condemned: but this comes in respect
of Christ his satisfaction imputed to them, not in respect of their own
obedience, which pleases GOD: not because it perfectly agrees with the Law,
but because the defectes, and faults which cleave unto it, are pardoned
through Christ.

3 Objection. How Christ will render unto every one according to his works.
Christ in judgment will render unto every one according to his works. But
the severity of Gods justice does not render good according to works which
are not perfectly good. Wherefore the works of Saints are so perfect, as
that they can not be condemned in the judgment of God. We answer unto the
Mayor: The justice of GOD does not render good, but according unto perfect
works, if he judge legallie, according to the covenant of perfect obedience
toward the Law. But he rendereth good also, according to imperfect works,
and such as deserve damnation, except the sin that cleaves unto them be
pardoned, when as he judges according to the gospel, that is, not according
to the covenant of works, or our own obedience, which should satisfy the
Law, but according to the covenant of faith, or of the righteousness of
Christ applied unto us by faith: and yet according to works, as according to
the tokens, or testimonies of faith, from which they proceed, and which they,
as effects thereof, do show to be in men.

4 Objection. The Scripture in many places ascribes perfection of good
works to Saints, even in this life, and says that they are perfect, and did
walk with their whole and perfect heart before God. Psalm 119. I have sought
thee with my whole heart: and in the same Psalm, Blessed are they that keep
his testimonies, and seek him with their whole heart. Genes. 6. Noah was a
just and upright man in his time. 2. Chron. 15.17. The heart of Asa was perfect
in all his days. Matthew. 5. In what sense the Scriptures sometimes ascribe
perfection of works to the regenerate in this life.
Be ye perfect, as your father, in heaven is perfect. Answer. First these
and the like speeches speak of that perfection which is not of degrees, but of
parts, or of the integrity and syncerity of the obedience begun in them.
Perfection of degrees, or obedience perfect in degrees, is that which has not
only all the parts of obedience, but that degree also, which the law requires
in us. Such a perfection have not the regenerate in this life: They have
indeed all the parts of obedience begun in them, but yet weakly, so that
they are here daily more and more perfected, but attain not to the chief and
due degree thereof until they enjoy the life to come. The perfection of parts
is the integrity of obedience, or whole obedience, begun according to the whole
law: or, it is a desire and endeavor to obey God, and withstand corrupt lusts,
according not to some only, but to all the commandments of his law. The
perfection of security, is a desire or study of obedience and godliness, not
fained, but true and earnest, albeit somewhat be wanting to the parts, as
touching the degree. This perfection, to wit, both the integrity and syncerity
of obedience, is in all the regenerate. For unto them is it proper, to submit
themselves to the commandments of God, even to all without exception, and to
begin in this life all the parts of true godliness, or obedience. This is
called also the justice of a good conscience, because it is a necessary effect
of faith, and pleases God through Christ.

And albeit in all men, even in the most holy, much hypocrisy remains, as it
is said, Every man is a liar: yet there is a great difference between them,
who are wholly hypocrites, and please themselves in their hypocrisy, having no
beginning or feeling of true godliness in their hearts, and those, who
acknowledging and bewailing the remnantes of hypocrisy which are in them, have
withal the beginnings of true faith and conversion unto God. Those hypocrites
are condemned of GOD: these are received into favor, not for this beginning of
obedience in them, but for the perfect obedience of Christ which is imputed
unto them. And therefore to this declaration or exposition, another is also to
be added: That they who are converted are perfect in the sight of God, not
only in respect of the parts of true Godliness, which all are begun in
them, but also in respect of the degrees of the true and perfect righteousness
of Christ imputed unto them: As it is said, Coloss. 2.10. Ye are complete in
him. Heb. 10.14. With one offering has he consecrated for ever them that are
sanctified. But they reply, that the perfection also of degrees is attributed
unto the Saints in the Scripture. 1. Corint. 2. verse. 6. We speak wisdom
among them that are perfect. 1. Cor. 14. Be perfect in understanding. Ephesians. 4.
verse. 13. Till we all meet together in the unity of faith and knowledge of the
Son of God, unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the age, of the
fullness of Christ. But these places also do not call them perfect, in respect
of the Law of God, that is, in respect of that degree of knowledge and
obedience which the Law requires in us: but in respect of the weaker, who have
less light and certainty and readiness, confirmed by use and exercise to obey
God, to resist carnal lusts, and to bear the cross. For so is this
perfection expounded, Heb. 5. and Ephesians. 4.14. That we be no more children,
wandering and carried about with every wind of doctrine. Philip. 3.12. Not as
though I had already attained to it, or were already perfect. They oppose
against these aunsweres a place out of 1. John 4. verse. 17. Herein is the love
perfect in us, that we should have boldness in the day of judgment for as he
is, even so are we in this woorld. There is no fear in Love, but perfect Love
casts out fear, for fear has painfulnesse: and he that fears is not
perfect in Love. But Saint John means not that our Love toward GOD, but
Gods Love toward us is perfect, that is, declared and fully known unto us by
the effects or benefits of GOD bestowed upon us in Christ; Our regeneration
and newnes of life does assure us of our justification, as being an effect
thereof.
or as Saint Paul speaks, Roman. 5. Where he says, that the Love of GOD
shed abroad in our hearts, by the holy Ghost, is the cause, why we do
without fear, and with boldness expect the day of judgment: And of this
mercy and free Love of GOD toward us he signifies, that by this token or
testimony we are assured, because in this life we are reformed by the holy
spirit to his image. For by our regeneration we are assured of our
justification, not as by the cause, of the effect, but as by the effect, of the
cause. Now though regeneration be not perfect in this life, yet if it be
indeed begun, it suffices for the confirmation and proouing of the truth of
our faith unto our consciences. And these very words, which S. John adds:
Love casts out fear; show that Love is not yet perfect in us, because we are
not perfectly delivered in this life from fear of the wrath and judgment of
God, and eternal punishment. For these two contrary motions are now together in
the godly, even the fear and love of God in remiss and low degrees, their
fear decreasing, and their love and comfort or joy in God increasing, until
joy get the conquest, and perfectly cast out all trembling in the life to come,
when GOD shall wipe away every tear.

Diverse places of Scripture to be understood of the uprightness of a good
conscience, not of any perfect fulfilling of the Law in the godly.
Objection. John. 3.21. He that does truth, comes to the light, that his
deeds might be made manifest, that they are wrought according to God. 1. John
3.20. If our heart condemn us not, then have we boldenes toward God. Psalm.
119. I have not declined from thy Law. Therefore the good woorckes of the
regenerate may be alleged and stand in Gods judgment as perfectly
aunswerable unto his Law. Answer. These and the like sayings do not
challenge to the Godly in this life perfect fulfilling of the Law; but the
vprightnes of a good conscience, without which faith can not consist or stand:
as neither can a good conscience, without faith. As it is said, 1. Timot.
1.18. Fight a good fight, having Faith and a good conscience. And Roman. 5.1.
Then being justified by Faith, we have peace toward GOD thorough our Lord
Jesus Christ. For a good conscience is a certain knowledge, that we have
faith and a purpose to obey GOD according to all his commandments, and that
we and our obedience, though maimed and scarce begun, please GOD; not for
that it satisfies his Law, but because those sins and defectes which
remain in us are for-giuen us for the satisfaction of Christ which is imputed
unto us. For as new obedience is begun by Faith, so by Faith also it
pleases GOD. Wherefore the Godly slack not to bring forth their life into
the light, neither shake and shiuer they at the tribunal of Christ, but comfort
themselves with the conscience, or inward knowledge thereof.

Objection. 2. Pet. 1.10. Give diligence to make your calling and election
sure: for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall. 1. John. 3. Whosoever
is borne of GOD, sins not. Answer. These sentences in times past the
Pelegians also and Catharistes, and now the Anabaptists abuse, to establish
perfection of new obedience in the regenerate: but to fall and to commit or do
sin, signifies in those places of Peter and John, to have Raigning-sinne,
and to yield unto it, and persevere in it: and in this sort the regenerate sin
not. But that there remain n^twithstanding remnants of sins and defectes in
them, is expressly showed, 1. Ioh. 1.8. If we say we have no sin, the truth is
not in us.

Objection. Mat. 6 Luke 11. The similitude which is used by Christ calling the
ey the light of the body, does not enforce the lightsomnes of the mind.
The light of the body is the eye: if then thine eye be single, thy whole
body shall be light: hereof they gather, that the minds of the regenerate are
so purged in this life, that the whole heap and multitude of their works is
light and pure, that is, perfectly aunswerable to the Law. But seeing the
speech of Christ is conditional, it is manifest that neither the Antecedent,
nor consequent, but only the sequel thereof is affirmed: and that the
Antecedent also being supposed, the consequent is no otherwise put, than is
the Antecedent. Wherefore Christ does not affirm by this similitude of the eye
guiding the body, that the minds of men are lightsome, and so all their
actions to be well directed, and without sin, but rather he accuses the
frowardnes of men, who go about to oppress and put out even that light which
is left them by nature, and do withhold the truth, as S. Paul speaks, in
unrighteousness, and therefore are wholly that is, in all their actions,
dark, corrupt, and worthy of damnation. Furthermore, the purity of actions can
be but so far supposed, as the purity and light of men's minds is supposed. For
the light of nature being supposed, actions morally good follow: spiritual
light supposed, actions also spiritually good, or good works follow:
imperfect illightening supposed, imperfect obedience; perfect illightening
supposed, perfect obedience also follows. Seeing then in this life perfect
light and knowledge of God and his will and as much as the law of God
requires, is not kindled in the regenerate, but is differred until the life
to come. 1. Cor. 13. For we know in part, and we prophecy in part; but when
that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be abolished:
Therefore neither in other parts perfect conformity with the Law can be in
this life; yet neuerthesse even now concerning imputation of perfect purity
it is true, that the godly are pure and without sin in the sight of God, when
he beholds them in Christ, which is then when the light of faith is kindled
in their hearts.

So also that, Ephesians. 5. is to be taken: Christ gave himself for the Church,
that he might sanctify it, and cleanse it by the washing of water through the
word, that he might make it unto himself a glorious Church, not having
spotte, or wrinckle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy and
without blame. For the Baptism of water by reason of the word of promise
adioined signifies and seals to the faithful a clensing by the blood of
Christ, which is most perfect, and presents us in this life unblameable
before God: and a clensing by his spirit which is begun in this life, and
perfected in the life to come, and therefore cannot pacify and quiet our
consciences.

There are also objections against the second part of the former Doctrine,
concerning the third degree of liberty, by which objections they contend that
it is in the power of the regenerate, either to persevere in righteousness, or
to depart from it.

They who have liberty, say they, to choose good, have liberty to persevere.
The regenerate have liberty to choose good. 2. Cor. 3. Where the spirit of the
Lord is, there is liberty. Therefore they have power to persevere.

Answer. If the conclusion of this reason be rightly meant, the whole reason
may be granted, to wit, that the regenerate have so far forth liberty to
persevere, as they are lightened and guided by the holy ghost.

For the liberty which they have to choose good depends upon his working and
motion. But if it be meant that the godly have this liberty either always, or
so, that their perseueraunce depends of themselves; there will be more found
in the conclusion, than was in the premises; and that for two causes. First,
Because they have liberty always to persevere, who are never destituted of
the guiding of the holy spirit: which shall be in the life to come. Secondly,
Because even their liberty also to good, who are never forsaken of the holy
spirit, yet depends not of themselves, but of God.

But here they reply: The regenerate deserve the departure of gods spirit from
them through their manifold sins, which yet the merit of Christ, and his
power preserves in them.
He that is not forsaken of the holy Ghost, except himself first withstand
the motion of the holy ghost, has always the aid and assistaunce of the
holy Ghost ready, that he may persist in that good which he purposes. But
the godly are not forsaken of the holy Ghost, unless themselves first
withstand him: therefore they have always the assistance of the holy Ghost
ready, that they may persevere. But he who has this has in his own power
to persevere, or to decline: because the cause is in his own will alone why
he does either obeie or resist the spirit moving him.

When we deny the Minor of this reason they prove it thus. The justice of
GOD does not inflict punishment, but on those who sin: but to be forsaken of
the holy Ghost, is a punishment of sin, and unthankfulness: Therefore no
man is forsaken of the holy Ghost, but who has first deserved that forsaking
through his own stubbornes. The answer hereto is double. Fisst, the Argument
may be granted, as concerning the regenerate. For in them, as long as they are
in this life, there is always so much remaining of sin, as they deserve not
only temporal, but eternal desertion and forsaking: and although, because
the sin which remains in them is forgiven them for Christ, therefore they
are freed from everlasting punishment* yet are they not free from
chastisementes, so long as the remnaunts of sin abide in them.

There is therefore in respect of their sins also always most just cause why
sometimes for a season God would bereave them of the grace and guiding of his
spirit. As, it is in the second of Samuel the twenty and fourth Chapter: And
the wrath of the Lord was again kindled against Israel, and he moved David
against them, in that he said, Go and number Israel and Judah.

Every forsaking or rather sleeping as it were of the holy ghost in the
regenerat is not a punishment, neither done to that end.
Secondly, we answer to the Minor, that every forsaking is not a punishment, or
done to that end as to punish: but sometimes also for trial, that is, for to
make known and open the weakness even of the best and holiest both to
themselves and others, that they may learn that they cannot for one instant or
moment stand against the tentations and assaults of Satan, if they be not
presently sustained and ruled by the conduct of the holy spirit; and that so
they may be made more watchful, and more earnest to call hereafter for the
assistance of the holy spirit, and to beware of relapses and fallinges.
Lastly, that both in this life, and in the world to come they may the better
know and set forth their own unworthiness, and the mercy of God toward them,
who has reclaimed and recalled them out of so many and grievous sins unto
himself, and having deserved a thousand times death and destruction, has not
yet suffered them to perish. For these causes it is said, 2. Cor. 12. Least I
should be exalted out of measure through the abundance of revelations, there
was given unto me a prick in the flesh. And Romans 11. God has shut up all in
unbelief, that he might have mercy of all.

Against this they say; That God does promise the assistance of his holy
spirit to all that ask it. But this is general only concerning final
perseueraunce, but not so as touching continual perseverance. For God promises
no where that he will so guide his saints by his spirit in this life, that
they shall never fall.

By this which has been said, that objection also vanishes to nothing, when
they say, That the converted, seeing they have in their own power to depart
from that which is right, and to resist, have also perseueraunce in their own
power. For although he constrains not or violently draws their wills, but
makes them of rebels, and enemies, willingly and of their own accord to
become the sons of God; and as concerning men's wills in this life, there is
nothing more prone than they to evil: yet as touching the counsel, purpose and
working of God, evidence of truth constrains even the adversaries themselves
to confess, that it cannot be, but that the will of man must then obey, when
God according to his everlasting counsels has decreed forcibly to move and
incline it either to conversion, or to perseverance. Neither does this
immutabilitie and efficacy of Gods purpose take away the liberty of will, in
the converted, but rather increases and preserves it; and how much the more
effectually God moves it, with so much the greater propension, and readiness it
both will and does good, which the example of the blessed Angels confirms.
This is also more frivolous, that they say, That the godly are made careless and
slothful, and the desire to persevere is diminished in them, if they hear
that their perseueraunce depends of the grace of the holy spirit alone. For
we may very well inuert this and return it upon our adversaries: seeing
nothing does more give an edge unto the saints and those who are indeed godly,
to a desire and endeavor to beware of falling, and to a daily and earnest
calling upon God, than if they know, that they cannot so much as one moment
stand against the tentations of the Devil and their flesh, except by the
virtue and instinct of the holy spirit they be withdrawn from evil, and be
forceably moved to good: but contrariwise that opinion as experience teaches,
makes men careless and less minding to beware of sin, by which men imagine
that it is in their own power, to depart from god, listening a while and
yielding to their own lusts, and to return again to God, as often as
themselves think good so to do. Now if so be this sentence concerning true
perseverance depending of the grace of the holy spirit, breed in the reprobate
and profane men a carelessness and contempt of God; it is both foolish and
injurious, to judge of the elect and godly by their humor, or for their
frowardnes to hide and smoother the truth. Lastly, against the defectes of
liberty in the second and third state or degree of man they object after this
sort: If whole conversion and perseverance do so depend of Gods will, and do
the work of God in men, that neither they can have it, in whom he does not
work it; neither they cannot but have it, in whom he will work it: that then
not only the liberty, but all the action and operation of the will is taken
away, and there remains only that it be constrained and suffer: which is
against the scripture, experience, the inward strife and combat of the godly,
and our own confession. But we answer, that the will is not therefore idle
when as it does not resist the spirit forciblie moving it. For to assent also
and obey is an actio^ of the will. The working of the isntrumental cause, which
is our will, is not taken away, when we put the working of the principal cause,
which is God.
But when they reply, That we make that obedience of the will in conversion and
perseuera^ce wholly the work of god, and so leave nothing to the will, what to
do: they run into an other paralogism of conseque^t, whereas they remove the
working of the second or instrumental cause, for that the first cause or
principal age^t is put. For that which is so wholly the work of god in man that
man is only as the subject, in which god works; in that we grant that the will
is only passive and suffers, and does work nothing: as in imprinting or
working, or maintaining in the will and heart new qualities or inclinations.
But that which is so the work of god, that the will of man is not only the
object, but the instrument also of gods working, and an agent by it own force
given it of god in producing an effect; in that the will is not only passive,
but both active and passive, for as much as it is to this end moved of the
spirit to work, that it self might do that, which God will work by it: which
also so comes to pass in all the good actions of the will; even as in ill
actions also, when it is incited either by the Devil or other causes, it self
is not in the mean season idle. Wherefore in Ezechiel it is added, 36. I will
cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgments, and do
them.

The fourth degree of liberty is in man perfectly regenerated after his
glorification.
The fourth degree of liberty is in man perfectly regenerated after his
glorification, or after this life. In this liberty the will shall be only free
to choose good, and not to choose evil: and this shall be the perfect liberty
of our will, by which we shall not only not sin, but shall abhor nothing more
than sin, and also shall not be able to sin any more. The reasons hereof are
these. Because in the mind shall shine the perfect knowledge of god and his
will, in the will and heart a most perfect and exceeding inclination to obeie
god, an exceeding love of god, and a joy resting in god, and an agreeablenes or
conformity with god. Wherefore no place shall be for ignorance, for error, or
any doubting of God, yea or for the least stubbornes against God. Lastly, That
conformity in the elect, of all their inward powers and faculties with God,
and the effectual guiding of the holy Ghost shall be continued to all
eternity. For the blessed Saints are never forsaken, but continually ruled by
the holy Ghost in all their actions, in the celestial life. For which cause
it cannot possibly be, that any motions or actions of man there should once
swerve from rightnesse. And therefore it is said, Math. 22. They are as the
Angels of god in heaven. This last degree of liberty after man's glorification
greater than the first before his fall, because this excludes all possibility
of falling, the other did not.
Neither by this means is the liberty of will taken away, or diminished, but
is truly confirmed and perfected in the blessed Angels and men: for as much as
both the understanding is free from al error, ignorance, and doubtfulnes, and
lightened with the perfect knowledge of god; and the heart and will free from
all stubbornes, and without all soliciting or suggestio^ to withstand god, is
carried with an exceeding love of god, and an alacrity to obey the known will
of god. And hence it appears also how much more excellent our state shall be,
than was Adams before his fall. Adam truly before his fall was perfectly
conformed to god, but he could will both good and evil, and therefore had some
infirmity joined with his excellent gifts; eue^ a power to depart from god and
leese his gifts: that is, he was changeablie good. But we shall not be able but
to will good only. And as the wicked are only carried to evil, because they
are wicked: so shall we also only love and choose good, because we shall be good.
It shall be then impossible for us to will any evil: Because we shall be
preserved by gods grace in that perfect liberty of will, that is, we shall be
unchangeably good.

It is necessary that this doctrine Of the similitude and difference of
free will which is in god, and his creatures, The use of this doctrine
concerning the diversities of liberty which is in God and in man, and of the
diverse degrees of man's liberty.
and in diverse states and degrees of man's nature, delivered hitherto out of the
scripture, should be manifest and known in the Church for many and weighty
causes: 1. That this glory may be given to god, that he alone is the most free
agent, whose liberty and wisdom depends of no other: and that all the
creatures are subject to his government. 2. That we may remember, that they
who wittinglie and willingly sin, or have cast themselves into a necessity of
sinning, are not at al excused: and so not god, but their own wills declining of
their own accord from gods commandments, to be the cause of their sins. 3.
That we may know, god alone to be of himself and unchangeably good, and the
fountain of goodness: but no creature to be able neither to have, nor to keep
more goodness, than god of his free goodness will work and keep in him, and
therefore we must desire it of him, and ascribe it received to him. 4. That we
knowing god to be a most free governor of al things, may confess that he is
able for his glory and our safety, to change those things which seem most
unchangeable. 5. That we knowing from what excellency of our nature we have
fallen by our own fault, may the more deplore and bewail our unthankfulness;
and magnify Gods mercy, who aduaunceth and lifts us up even to a greater
excellency. 6. That knowing the misery, and naughtines of our nature and
disposition, if once god forsake us, we may be humbled in his sight, and
ardentlie desire to wade and come out of these evils. 7. That having knowledge
of that liberty, into the which the son of god restores us, we may the
more desire his benefits, and be thankful unto him for them 8. That knowing
we are by the mercy of god alone severed from them that perish, that we rather
than they might be converted; we be not lifted up with an opinion of our
own goodness or wisdom, but ascribe the whole benefit of our justification
and salvation, not to any cause appearing in us, but to the mercy of god
alone. 9. That acknowledging the weakness and corruption which remains even
in us regenerated, we may seek for justification in Christ alone, and may
vvithstand those evils. 10. That knovving our selves not to be able to stand
against tentations without the singular assistance of the holy spirit, we
may ardently and daily desire to be preserved and guided by god. 11. That
understanding that we are not preserved against our wills, but with our wills,
we may wrestle with tentations, and endeavor to make our calling and election
sure. 12. That understanding the counsel of god concerning the converting of
men by the doctrine of the gospel, and ministry of the Church, we may
embrace earnestly and desirouslie the use thereof.

OF EVILS OF PUNISHMENT.
IN this question also we are to speak of the effects of sin, that is, of
the other part of man's misery, even of the evil of pain and punishment. It
is said that God does most grieuouslie, most justly, and most certainly
punish sin. Most grieuouslie, for the greatness of sin, because the infinite
good is offended thereby. Most justly, because every sin violateth his law:
and therefore even the least sin meriteth eternal abiection and casting away.
Most certainly, both in respect of his justice, which abhors and punishes
whatsoever is not agreeable unto it; and in respect of his truth, because he
had denounced before that he would punish men, if they obeyed not his
commandment. God therefore, seeing he is true, does never change this his
sentence.

1 Objection. But the wicked flourish here. Answer. The wicked flourish but for
a short time, to be cast at length into eternal torments, except they repent.
Yea in this life also they are punished. First, they are miserably vexed with
the torments and terrors of conscience, which in the reprobate are the
beginning and sense of eternal pains. 2. Even those good things which they
use with greatest pleasure, serve for their punishment and destruction; and
verily so much the more, how much the less they know and acknowledge them for
a punishment. For it is a most grievous punishment, not to receive gods gifts
in respect of gods promise, nor to know the right use of them, neither with his
gifts to receive a will and ability also to use them well. For if these
things concur not in the fruition of good things, men's sins and punishment
must needs be the more increased and exasperated: and thereby, except there
come conversion, eternal destruction or death is certainly purchased. 3. They
are afflicted with other punishments also most grievous oftentimes; yet with
more grievous in the life to come, where it shall be a continual death, not to
be dead.

2 Objection. But God made not evil, and death. Answer. The evils of sin and
punishment had not come, if man would.
He made them not in the beginning; and further also after the beginning
neither evil, nor death should have been, except our selves had would: For
they ensued on the voluntary sin of man, God forcibly inflicting them, as a
most just punishment.

3 Objection. If God punish sins with present and everlasting punishments, he
punishes the same twice, and is unjust: but God punishes sins with present
and everlasting punishments: therefore he punishes the same sin twice, and
is unjust. Answ. The Minor is to be distinguished: for it is but one
punishment, but has several parts. For present punishments are the beginning
of everlasting, because they are not sufficient to satisfy Gods justice.

4 Objection. If God punish sins with eternal punishments: Then either all
of us perish; or Gods justice is not satisfied. Answer If God should punish
our sins in us with eternal punishments, we should all perish, neither should
we ever recover us thence: but he does not so punish them in us: neither yet
is Gods justice impeached or violated, because he punishes our sins in
Christ with a punishment temporal, but yet equivalent to everlasting. This
equability does the Gospel add unto the rigor and severity of the law.

5 Objection. The justice of God permits not that the same sin be twice
punished: but our sins are most fully punished in his son, and this
punishment is imputed unto the godly or believers. Therefore the same ought no
more to be punished in the godly, and so they are unjustly afflicted.
Answer. The afflictions of the godly are not punishments and satisfaction for
their sins, but only fatherly chastisementes, and the Cross, whereby they
are brought to humility. Which that it may be better understood, we are
necessarily here to speak of afflictions or calamities.

OF AFFLICTIONS.
The chief questions are, 1 How many kinds of afflictions there be. 2 What
be the causes of them. 3 What comforts are to be opposed against them.


1 How many kinds there be of afflictions.
SOme afflictions are temporal, and some eternal. Eternal, are the torments
of the soul and body, proper unto the wicked, into which all the Devils are
to be thrown, and all wicked men who are not converted in this life.

The quality of these torments is expressed, when they are called in
scripture, a worm, fire, horror, everlasting torment; likewise, everlasting
death, which is not a destruction of the body and soul, or a perpetual
senselesnes, but an infinite and endless continuance of those torments which
the wicked in this life dispairing begin to feel: or, it is, never to be dead,
and yet to die continually; that is, to live, forsaken and abiected of God,
subject to all torments both of body and soul.

But we are here to collect testimonies of scripture against Epicures (of
which heard not a few are found even in the Popes court) thereby to
demonstrate, that the pains and torments of the wicked both in body and soul,
Why the punishment of sin ought to be eternal.
shall be eternal. 1. Isai. 66.24. Their worm shall not die: and their fear shall
not be put out. Mar. 9.43. Into hell into the fire that never shall be quenched,
where their worm dies not and the fire never goes out. Mat. 25.41. Go into
everlasting fire which is prepared for the Devil and his Angels. 1. Pet. 4.18.
If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner
appear? Mat. 10.28. Fear him who can cast both body and soul into helfire.
The soul is the cause and fountain of sins: the body, as a thing without reason
and brutish, does execute that which the soul shows and commands: wherefore
both the author and instrument of sins shall be punished. 2. The reason also, why
the pains and punishments of sins should be eternal and infinite, is evident:
because for sin committed against the infinite good, an infinite punishment is
justly exacted: neither could there be made by any temporal punishment of a
mere creature sufficient satisfaction unto gods infinite and eternal justice:
and therefore the temporal punishment of Christ, that it might be sufficient to
deliver the elect, was to be equivalent to eternal pains.

Here the Epicures object: He that is exceeding merciful, How Gods mercy and
his justice stand together in inflicting eternal punishment.
cannot behold the eternal torments of his creatures, much less inflict such
on them. God is exceeding merciful; because his mercy does far exceed our
sins: Therefore he does not suffer his creatures to remain in eternal torments.
Answ. The Mayor is true, when exceeding and most exact justice, such as is in
god, does not exact, and require that exceeding sin have exceeding
punishment. Reply. Exceeding strict justice does not stand with exceeding
mercy: because that admits no mitigating equabilitie. In God is exceeding
justice, therefore not exceeding mercy. Answ. Both the Mayor, and the proof
thereof is false. Because God, punishing of his exceeding justice our sin with
exceeding punishment, does notwithstanding show exceeding equability and
fauorablenes, whiles he translateth the punishment thereof from us, and lays
it upon his son. They frame also the same reply on this wise: With him, that
follows extreme or strict justice, mercy and equabilitie has no place. But
god in punishing sins follows strict justice. Therefore he is not merciful.
To which we answer. 1. that the Mayor is false in respect of him, who for his
wisdom knows means to mitigate punishments, or to exercise mercy, as that
notwithstanding his justice may remain inuiolated, and himself be satisfied.
So god does execute extreme and exquisite justice in punishing our sins,
showing nevertheless exceeding and marvelous equabilitie and lenity, while he
punishes them in his Son, and not in us. And therefore one degree of mercy
denied, does not straight enforce the denial of others. God punishes sin in
the reprobate with eternal punishments: and yet is he merciful, while he is not
delighted with the death of him that dies: but does by differring, and
mitigating the punishment, and by bestowing benefits inuit all men to
repentance. When a Judge puts a robber to death, he executes extreme
justice: yet may he be merciful withal, if he rejoice not at the destruction
of the man, but had rather he were saved, if so the law permitted.

Temporal afflictions belong both to the wicked and the godly.
Temporal afflictions belong to both: both unto the godly and to the
reprobate. These are either punishments, or the Cross. The punishment, is
either destruction or torment inflicted by order of justice on the person
guilty of sin. And this is proper unto the reprobate, because it is inflicted
on them to this end, that Gods justice may be satisfied. For the law binds
all men, either to obedience, or to punishment.

In the wicked they are punishments, in the godly the cross.
Objection. But the evils which the wicked suffer in this life are lighter than
that they should satisfy Gods justice. Answer. They are a part of their
punishment, though not their whole punishment. Now as every part of the Air
is called Air, so every part of punishment, is punishment. The degrees
therefore of the punishment and pains, which the wicked suffer, are to be
observed. The first degree is in this life. For when the conscience of their
misdeedes and wickedness does gnawe, vex, and terrify them, then begins
their hellish and infernal worm. The second degree is in temporal death:
When they departing out of this life without comfort, come into the place of
torment and vexations, Luke. 16. The third degree is at the day of judgment,
when again to every of their bodies, raised from the dead, their souls
shall be reunited. For then at length shall the pains of hell be consummated,
and shall fall in troops together on both body and soul.

The Cross, is the affliction of the godly. The Cross of the godly is of
four sorts.
For this is not properly a punishment, because it is not inflicted, that
thereby Gods justice should be satisfied for their sins. Now the Cross is
of four sorts, which are drawn from the ends, for which it is laid on the
godly. First, the Chastisementes, 1. Chastisements.
which GOD lays on the godly, for the remnaunts of sin in them, and
oftentimes also for some peculiar sins committed by them, that they may be
admonished of their uncleanness, and stirred to repentance, and the study of
godliness and good works, least persisting in their sins, they be
condemned.

For they are not according to justice inflicted, to be any satisfaction or
recompense for their sins: but according to mercy, for their amendment and
salvation. For by these chastisementes they are admonished of the anger of GOD
against sins, and of eternal punishment, which GOD will inflict on them, if
they repent not. Secondly, 2. Trials.
The proofs and trials of their faith, hope, invocation, fear of GOD, and
patience: that the elect may go forward in these virtues, and the same also
be made known to others. Such was the affliction of Job. Thirdly,
Martyrdomes, 3. Martyrdomes.
which are testifications concerning their doctrine. For when the godly are,
for the confession of true doctrine, pressed with calamities, or slain, these
afflictions are no punishments of certain transgressions, but martyrdomes,
whereby they testify and witness, the doctrine of the gospel which they
profess, to be true, and doubt not to seal this with their blood, and
whereby also they witness that they in exceeding torments and death feel and
have experience of that comfort, which they did promise out of that doctrine,
in their teaching unto others. They witness also and testify, that there
remains another life, and an other judgment after this life. Fourthly and
lastly, the Cross is their Ransom, even the obedience of Christ alone, 4.
Ransom.
which is a satisfaction for our sins, consisting of his whole humiliation,
from the very first point of his Conception in the womb, to his last agony on
the Cross.

A brief type or table of man's afflictions.
Afflictions are some Temporal In the wicked: as punishments properly, and in
special so called. In the godly, as the Cross: and that is, 1 Chastisements.
2 Trials. 3 Martyrdom. 4 Ransom.

Eternal: as the hellish torments of the damned.

2 What are the causes of afflictions.
The impellent cause, sin.
Sin is the impellent cause (because it is an evil merit and deserves
evil) of punishments in the wicked, and also of the Cross in the godly: yet
after a diverse manner and in diverse respects. It is a cause of punishment in the
wicked, that sin may be recompensed with just punishment. In the godly, the
cause of the Cross is not to satisfy Gods justice, but that sin may be
known, and so relinquished and put off. The impellent cause then of
punishments in the wicked is their sin to be punished or recompensed. The
chief efficient, Gods justice.
The principal efficient cause is the justice of god inflicting punishment for
sin. Isntrumental causes thereof are diverse: Instrumental causes, all
creatures.
Angels and men, both good and bad, and all other creatures, which are all
armed against sinners, and fight under GODS banner. The final cause is, that
the justice of GOD may be satisfied.

The causes of the cross of the godly.
The causes of the cross of the godly are, 1 The acknowledgeing and purging
out of sin. God does not give the bridle unto the godly, but by fatherly
chastisementes restrains, recalleth and amendeth them. 1. The acknowledging,
and relinquishing of sin.
1. Corin. 11.32. When we are judged, we are judged of the Lord. Psalm.
119.71. It is good for me, O Lord, that thou have humbled me. But he gives
the raines to the wicked, that they may gallop to destruction: he endoweth them
with the commodities of this life, and suffers them to enjoy a short joy,
thereby to show his love toward his creatures, and to convince them of
unthankfulness, and to take away al excuse from them. 2. The hatred of the
Devil and the wicked. 2. The hatred of the Devil and wicked men.
John. 15.19. If ye were of the world, the world would love you. The Devil
especially lies in wait and ambush against the church and assaulteth it, both
by tyrants, and by heretics, to pull many from God. 1. Pet. 5 8. The devil
goes about like a roaring Lion. 3. The trial in exercise of godliness, 3. The
trial or exercise of godliness.
that we may be established and go forward in spiritual gifts, and that both
unto our selves and others our hope, faith and patience may be made known.
Eccle. 34.10. He that has not been tempted, what knows he? So then it is
apparent that glorying in prosperity is but vain. Romans 5.4. Experience
brings hope. 4. 4. Particular defects in the godly.
Particular defects and fallings in the Saints. Diverse have diverse defects: and
therefore Gods chastisements also are diverse. God shows that he is angry
also with the sins of the godly, and is desirous that they return from them.
The scriptures are rise and full of examples hereof: As in David when he numbered
the people, when he committed adultery, and added murder unto it, God showed
his wrath in plaguing the people for the former, and in taking away by death
the child borne in adultery, he showed his anger against his adultery. Again,
he showed how desirous he was to have him rise again, by sending his Prophet
to make his sin known unto him, and so to call him to repentance. So many
times dealt he with the Israelites also, whose often falling, as also Gods
often recalling them is in the Scripture frequent. 5. The confirmation or
testimony of their doctrine in their martyrdomes. Ioh. 21.18. 5. The
confirmation and testimony of the truth by their martyrdom.

6. Their glorious delivery.


Peter is foretold, by what death he should glorify God, and confirm the
doctrine of Christ which he preached. 6. The glorious delivery, that is, the
manifestation of the immeasureable wisdom, power, mercy, and justice of God,
in the miraculous and wonderful deliverance of the church. God brings his
into extreme dangers, and finds out and shows a way of delivery, where no
creature could save or deliver them. 1. Sam. 2.6. He brings down to hell, and
brings back again. 7. The making of a conformity between the members and
Christ their head, 7. A conformity between them and Christ.
both in afflictions and in glory. 2. Tim. 2.12. If we suffer with him, we shall
also reign with him. Romans 8.29. Those which he knew before, he also
predestinate to be made like to the image of his son. Ioh. 11.16. and.
16.20. Mat. 10.24. The servant is not greater than his Lord, neither the
Disciple above his master. 8. The afflictions of the godly in this life are a
testimony and confirmation of the judgment and life to come. 8. A confirmation
of the life to come.
Because the justice and truth of God requires, that at length it go well with
the good, and il with the bad. But this comes not so to pass in this life.
Therefore there is remaining yet another life. And hence we are to answer the
argument which the world uses against the providence of God.

The Church of God (say they) is not the Church, because it is oppugned
throughout the whole woorld, and trodden under foot of al men. Answer. This
argument may be well inuerted on this wise: The company of those that embrace
the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles are in a good cause unjustly oppugned,
and afflicted by the wicked and reprobate: Therefore they are the true Church,
and the people of God, and are to be at length certainly, fully, and
gloriously delivered, the wicked being cast into eternal torments. For God is
just and true: Therefore he will be one day a revenger of those injuries,
whereby not only the Godly in this life are hurt, but the glory also of God
himself is by the wicked obscured, and darkened, and trodden under foot.

3. What are the comforts and consolations, which are to be opposed against
afflictions.
OF comforts in afflictions, some are proper unto the Church, some are common
to it with Philosophy. Comforts in afflictions.
Proper, are the first and two last of those, which shall be recited. The rest
are common, and that but in outward show only and in name, Remission of
sins, and reconciliation unto God.
but not being further entered into and discoursed of 1. Remission of sins
and reconciliation unto GOD. This is the ground and foundation of the rest:
Because without this we cannot rightly apply the rest unto us, neither reap
any comfort from them: But if this be well settled, the rest follow of their
own accord. For they who are not certain of the remission of their sins,
always doubt, whether the promise of grace belong unto them: but he who is
certain of this, knows that the anger of GOD, punishments and eternal death
are taken away, and that those evils which are laid upon him, are no
punishment, but a fatherly chastisement, Roman. 5.1. Being justified by faith
we have peace toward GOD. Again: If when we were enemies, we were reconciled
to GOD, much more being reconciled we shall be saved. Roman 8.3. If GOD be
on our side, who can be against us? The reason is, because, take away the
cause, and you take away the effect: take away sin, and the punishment also
of sin is taken away. 2. The necessity of obeying GOD, 2. The necessity of
obeying God, and the love which we ow him.
and the love due unto him. The Godly know, that they must obey the fatherly
will of GOD in suffering evils, both because he will that they suffer them: and
also because he has so deserved of them, as that they ought for his sake to
suffer far greater, and lastly because they are his fatherly chastiseme^ts.
Job. 2.10. Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and not receive evil?
Psalm. 3.9.9. I held my peace, because thou did it. Job. 1.21. Blessed be
the name of the Lord. The Philosophers also say, that it is patie^tly to be
suffered, which can not be altered or avoided, and that it is foolishnes to
kick against the prick. But in the mean while they hold a fatal necessity,
and in suffering calamities submit not themselves to god, neither acknowledge
them to be a just punishment, neither suffer the^ to that end, as thereby to
obey him. And therefore they find either small or no comfort at al hereof. 3.
The worthiness of virtue.
3. The worthiness of virtue, that is, of obedience toward God which is true
virtue, for which a man is not to cast away his courage in bearing the cross.
Mat. 10 37. and 16.25. He that hates not his father and mother for my sake, is
not worthy of me. He that seeks to save his soul, shall leese it. This
dignity of virtue do the Philosophers most of all urge, but coldly, 4. A good
conscience.
because they are destitute of true virtues. 4. A good conscience. The godly
are assured of remission of sins in Christ, and have a purpose to obey God:
and therefore bear a good conscience unto themselves in Christ. The
Philosophers comfort not theirs on this manner. For the Philosophers being once
afflicted, thinks, why does not good fortune follow a good conscience? And
therefore he murmureth against God, and fretteth, as did Cato and others. 5.
The final causes in their chastisementes, trials, 5. The final causes of their
afflictions.
and Martyrdomes. Those causes are, first, Gods glory. The torment is less to
the godly, when they know that GOD is honored by their sufferings, and that
thereby they show their thankfulness unto him. Psalm. 119.75. Thou art just,
O Lord, and thy judgments are right. Secondly, Our salvation, which is
accomplished by afflictions. Psalm. 119.71. It is good for me that I have
been afflicted. 1. Cor. 11.32. When we are judged we are chastened of the
Lord, because we should not be condemned with the woorlde. Thirdly, the
salvation of others, that is, their conversion and confirming. For Acts 5. The
Apostles rejoiced (even because they saw many by their ministry to be
converted unto GOD, and faith to be confirmed in others, by the example of
their afflictions and constancy in the truth and doctrine) that they were
counted worthy to suffer rebuke for Christ's name. The Philosophers say, It is
a good end for which thou suffer, that thou may save thy country, and
attain unto everlasting renown and glory. But yet in the mean season,
wretched man, he thinks, what will these things profit me, when my self
perish? But we are chastised that we may not perish with the world. 6. The
comparing of ends and euentes.
6. The conference and comparing together of euentes. It is better for a short
time to be chastised of the Lord, with certain and assured hope of a glorious
delivery, than to live in plenty and abundance of things, and to be pulled
from God, and to run into everlasting perdition.

The Philosophers conferring and comparing evils together, find but little
good, arising out of so many evils: 7. The hope of recompense.
Because the true good, for the obtaining whereof they suffer evils, they are
wholly ignorant of. 7. The hope of recompense. Matthew. 5.12. Your reward is
great in heaven. We know that there remain other blessings for us after
this life, nothing to be compared with these momentary afflictions. Even in
this life also the Godly receive grater blessings than other man. For they
have GOD pacified and pleased with them, and other spiritual gifts, and the
beginning of eternal life. Therefore also corporal blessings are profitable
for their salvation. Marc. 10.29. There is no man that has forsaken house, or
brethren, or children, or lands, for my sake, and the Ghospels, but he shall
receive a hundred-fould now at this present, and in the woorlde to come
eternal life. Psalm. 37.16. A small thing to the just man is better than great
riches to the wicked. Roman. 5.3. We rejoice in tribulations. A recompense in
small evils does in some sort comfort the Philosophers, but in great evils not
at all: because they think that they had rather want that recompense, than
buie it so dear: the reason whereof is, because the recompense is but
uncertain, small, and transitory. 8. The example of the Son of GOD. For the
servant is not above his Master, John 15.20. 8. The Examples of Christ and
his Saints who have suffered before us.
And God will have us to be made like to the image of his Son. Roman. 8.29.
And Philip. 2.5. Let the same mind be in you that was even in Christ Jesus.
2. Cor. 8.9. JESUS CHRIST being rich for your sakes, became poor. Let us
accompany therefore Christ in ignominy and in glory. For both the
thankfulness, which we owe, requires this: and seeing Christ has died, not
for his own profit, but for ours, why should we refuse to suffer any thing
for our own profit and commodity? Likewise, the examples of other holy and
godly men, who have suffered with the saving both of themselves and others, and
have not perished in afflictions, but have been marvelously saved and
preserved. Mat. 5. So did they persecute the Prophets, which have been before
you. The examples therefore of holy Martyrs do comfort and hearten us, while
we think, that we are not better than they, but rather worse. And therefore
ought we much more patiently to bear our cross. Again, seeing they have
been preserved by GOD amiddest their afflictions, and have escaped out of
them, we have confidence also that we shall be preserved and delivered,
because the Love of GOD toward his is immutable, and knows no change. 9.
9. The certain presence and assistance of go^^
The presence and assistaunce of GOD in all cases and chances of our life. We
know that God has a care of us even in our cross: that he will defend,
comfort, strengthen, and establish us by his spirit, that we may not through
grief and pain forsake him. 1. Cor. 10.13. God does not suffer us to be
tempted above our power. Psalm. 19.15. I am with him in his tribulation. John.
14.16. I will send you another comforter. John. 14.23. I and my father will
come unto him. Ioh. 14.18. I will not leave you comfortles. Esaias. 49.15. Can a
woman forget her child, and not have compassion on the Son of her womb? Though
she should forget, 10. The final and full delivery.
yet will I not forget thee. 10 The final and full delivery. For as of
punishment, so also of delivery there are three degrees. The first is in this
life, where we have the beginning of eternal life. The second is in our bodily
death, when the soul is carried into Abraham's bosom. The third is after the
resurrection of our bodies, when we shall be both in body and soul perfectly
blessed, that is, fully delivered from all both sin and punishment. Ioh.
10.28. No man shall pluck them out of mine hand. Romans 8.30. Whom he
justified, them also he glorified. Reu. 21.4. God shall wipe away all tears
from their eyes. Wherefore as the first consolation is the foundation and
beginning, so this last is the finishing and accomplishment of all the rest.

THE SECOND PART.
OF MAN'S DELIVERIE.
12 Seeing then by the just judgment of God, we are subject both to temporal,
and eternal punishments; is there yet any means or way remaining, whereby we
may be delivered from these punishments, and be reconciled to God?

GOD will have his justice Exodus 20.5. and 23.7.
satisfied: wherefore it is necessary that Romans 8.3.
we satisfy, either by our selves, or by another.

13 Are we able to satisfy by our selves?

Not a whit. Naie rather we do every day Job. 9.2.3. and 15.15. Mat. 6.12.
increase our debt.

14 Is there any creature able in heaven or in earth, which is only a creature,
to satisfy for us?

None. For first, God will not Heb. 2.14.
punish that sin in any other creature, which man has committed. And further,
neither can that which is nothing but a creature, sustain the wrath of god
against sin, and Psalm. 130.3. Job. 4.18. and. 25.5.
deliver others from it.

15 What manner of Mediator then and deliverer must we seek for?

Such a one verily, as is very man, and perfectly just, and yet in power above
al creatures, that is, who also is very 1. Cor. 15.21. and 25. Ier. 23.6.
Isai. 53.11. 2. Cor. 5.14. Heb. 7.16. Isa. 7.14. Romans 8.3.
God.

16 Wherefore is it necessary that he be very man, and that perfectly just
too?

Because the justice of God requires that the same humane nature which has
sinned, do it self likewise make recompense for sin: But he To. 5.12. and
17.
that is himself a sinner, 1. Pet. 3.18.
cannot make recompense for others.

17 Why must he also be very God?

That he might by the power of his Godhead Isay. 55.3. and 18. Acts. 2.24. 1.
Pet. 3.18.
sustain in his flesh the burden of Gods wrath, and 1. John. 1.2. and 49.10.
Act. 20.28. Ioh. 3.16.
might recover and restore unto us that righteousness and life which we lost.

18 And who is that Mediator, which is together both very God, and a very
perfectly just man.

Even our Lord Jesus Christ, Mat. 1.23.1. Tim. 3.16. Ioh. 14.16.1. Tim. 2.5.
Luke 2.11.
who is made to us of God wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and 1. Cor.
1.30.
redemption.

19 Whence know thou this?

Out of the gospel, which God first made known in Genesis 3.15.
Paradise, and afterward Genesis 22.18. and 49.10.11. Romans 1.2. Heb. 1.1. Act.
3.22. etc. and 10.43.
did spread it abroad by the Patriarks and Prophets: Ich. 5.46. Heb. 10.7.
shadowed it by sacrifices and other ceremonies of the law: and lastly Romans
10.4. Gal. 4.4. and 3.24. Heb. 13.8.
accomplished it by his only begotten Son.

20 Is then salvation restored by Christ to all men, who perished in Adam?

Not to al: but to those only who by a true faith are engraffed into him, and
Ioh. 1.12. and 3.36. Isa. 53.11. Psalm. 2.12. Romans 11.20. Heb. 4.2. and 10 39.
receive his benefits.

21 What is faith?

It is not only a knowledge, whereby I surely assent to al things which God has
Heb. 11.13. Ia. 2.19. Gal. 2.20.
revealed unto us in his word, but also an assured Romans 4.16. and 5.1. and
10.10. etc. Iac. 1.8.
trust kindled in my Romans 1.16. and 10.17. 1 Cor. 1.21. Mar. 16.16. Act. 16.14.
heart by the holy Mat. 16.17. Ioh. 3.5. Gal. 5.22 Phil. 1.19.
ghost thorough the gospel, whereby I make my repose in God, being assuredly
resolved, that remission of sins, everlasting righteousness and life Hab. 2.4.
Mat. 9.2. Ephesians. 2.7.8.9. Romans 5.1.
is given not to others only, but to me also, and that freely through the mercy
of God, for the Romans 3.24.25. Act. 10.43.
merit of Christ alone.

22 What are those things which are necessary for a Christian man to believe?

All things which are Ioh. 20.31. Mat. 28.10.
promised us in the gospel: the sum whereof is briefly comprised in the Creed
of the Apostles, or in the Articles of the Catholic and undoubted faith of all
Christians.

23 Which is that Creed?

I Believe in God the father almighty, maker of heaven and earth. And in Jesus
Christ his only Son, our Lord: which was conceived by the holy ghost, born of
the virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried,
he descended into hell, the third day he rose again from the dead, he ascended
into heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the father almighty, from
thence shall he come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the holy
ghost, the holy catholic church, the communion of saints, the forgiveness of
sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting.

AMEN.

24 Into how many parts is this Creed divided?

Into three parts. The first is, of the eternal father and our creation. The
second, of the Son and our redemption. The third, of the holy ghost and our
sanctification.

25 Seeing there is Deuteronomy. 6 4. Ephesians. 4.6. Esa. 44.6. and 45.5. 1. Cor. 8.4.
but one only substance of God, why namest thou these three? The Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost.

Because God has so Esa. 61.1. Luc. 4.18. Psalm. 110 1. Mat. 3.16.17. and
28.19. Io. 14.26. and 15.26. Tit. 3.5.6. Ephesians. 2.18. 2. Cor. 13.13. Gal. 4.6. 1.
Ioa. 5.7.
manifested himself in his word: that these three distinct persons are that
one true everlasting God.

OF THE FATHER.
26 What beleeuest thou, when thou say, I believe in God the Father
almighty, maker of heaven and earth?

I believe the everlasting father of our Lord Jesus Christ who Genesis 1. and 2.
Psalm 33.6. Job. 33.4. Act. 4.24. and 14.15. etc. Isa. 45.7.
has made of nothing heaven and earth, with all that are in them, who
like-wise vpholdeth and Psa. 104.3. and 115.3. Mat. 10.29. Heb. 1.3. Romans 11.36.
governs the same by his eternal Counsel and providence; Ioa. 1.12. Romans
8.15. Gal. 4.5.6.7. Ephesians. 1.5.
to be my God and my Father for Christ's sake: and therefore I do so trust in
him, and so rely on him, that I make no doubt, but he will provide all things
Psalm. 55 23. Mat. 6.26. Luc. 12.22.
necessary both for my soul and body. And further whatsoever evils he
sends on me in this troublesome life, he will Rom 8 28.
turn them to my safety, seeing both he is able to do it, as being Isa. 46 4
Romans 10 12. and 8.38 etc.
God almighty; and willing to do it, as being Mat 6. and 7.9.10.11.
a bountiful father.

27 What is the providence of God?

The Almighty power of God every where present, Act. 17.25. etc. Psalm 94 9.
etc. Is. 29.15. etc. Ezec. 8.12.
whereby he does as it were with his hand uphold and Heb. 1.2.3.
govern heaven and earth, with all the creatures therein: So that those things
which grow in the earth, as likewise rain and drouth, fruitfulnes and
barrainnes, meat and Ier. 5.24. Acts. 14.17.
drink, Ioh. 9.3.
health and sickness, Prou. 22.2.
riches and poverty, in a word, all things come not rashly or by chance, but
by his fatherly counsel and will.

28 What does this knowledge of the Creation and providence of God profit us?

That in adversity Romans 5.3. etc. Iac. 1.3. Job. 1.21. etc.
we may be patient, and Deuteronomy. 8.10. 1 Thessalonians. 5.18.
thankful in prosperity, and Romans 5.4.5.
have hereafter our chiefest hope reposed in God our most faithful father,
being sure that there is nothing which may Romans 8.38.39.
withdraw us from his love, for as much as all creatures are so in his power,
that without his will they are not Job. 1.12. and 2.6. Prouer. 21.1. Acts.
17.25. etc.
able not only to do any thing, but not so much as once to move.

OF THE SON.
29 Why is the Son of God called Jesus, that is, a Savior?

Because he saves us from al our Mat. 1.21. Heb. 7.25.
sins: Neither ought any safety to be sought for from any other, nor Act.
4.12.
can elsewhere be found.

30 Do they then believe in the only Savior Jesus, who seek for happiness
and safety of the Saints, or of themselves, or elsewhere?

No. For although in word they boast themselves of him as their savior, yet
indeed they deny the only Savior 1. Cor. 1.13. and 30. etc. Ga. 5.4.
Jesus. For it must needs be that either Jesus is not a perfect Savior, or
that they, who embrace him as their Savior with a true faith, possess all
things in him which Heb. 12.2. Isa. 9.6. Col. 1.19.20. and. 2.10. Isa. 43.11.
and 25. Ioh. 1.16.
are required unto salvation.

31 Why is he called Christ, that is, anointed?

Because he was ordained of the Father, and anointed of the holy Ghost the
Ps. 45.8. Heb. 1.9. Deuteronomy. 18.15. Acts. 3.22.
chief Prophet and Ioh. 1.18. and 15 15. Mat. 11.27. Ps. 110.4. Heb. 7.21. and
10.21.
Doctor: who has e opened unto us the secret counsel and all the will of
his father concerning our Redemption; And the High Priest, who with that one
only Sacrifice of his body has Rom 8.34. and 5.9.10.
redeemed us, and does continually Ps. 2.6. Luke 1.33.
make intercession to his father for us. And a king, who rules us by his word
and spirit, and defends and Mat. 28.18. Ioh. 10.28.
maintains that salvation which he has purchased for us.

32 But why art thou called a Christian?

Because through faith I am a member of Jesus Acts. 11.26. 1 Cor. 6.15.
christ, and 1. Ioh. 2.27. Is. 59.21. Ioe. 2.28.
partaker of his anointing, that both I may Mat. 10.33.
confess his name, and present my self unto him a lively Romans 12.1. Apo.
5.8.10.1. Pet. 2.9.2. Tim. 2.12. Romans 6.12.13. Apo. 1.6.
sacrifice of thankfulness, and also may in this life fight against sin and
satan with a free and good conscience, and afterward 1. Tim. 1.18.19.
enjoy an everlasting kingdom with christ over al creatures.

33 For what cause is Christ called the only begotten son of God, when we
also are the sons of God?

Because christ alone is the coeternal and natural son of the eternal Ioh.
1.14. Heb. 1.2. Ioh. 3.16. and 4.9.
father, and we Romans 8.5. Ephesians. 1.6. Ioh. 1.12. 1. Ioh. 1.3.
are but sons adopted of the father by grace for his sake.

34 Wherefore call thou him our Lord?

Because he redeeming and ransoming both our body and soul from sins, not with
gold nor silver, but with his precious blood, and delivering us from all the
power of the devil, has set us 1. Pet. 1.18. and 10.1. Cor. 6.20. and 7.23.
Ep. 1.7. 1. Tim. 2.5.6.
free to serve him.

35 What beleeuest thou when thou say, He was conceived by the holy ghost and
borne of the Virgin Mary?

That the son of God, who Ioh. 1.1. and 17.5. Romans 1.4. Col. 1.15. etc. Ps.
2.7. Mat. 3.17. and 16.16.
is and continues true and everlasting Romans 9.5. Is. 7.14. and 9.6. 1. Io.
5.20. Io. 20.28.
God, Ioh. 1.14. Gal. 4.4.
took the very nature of man, of the flesh and blood of the Virgin Mary, by
the woorking of the holy Ghost, Ps. 132.11. Act. 2.30. etc. Romans 1:3.
that withal he might be the true seed of David, like unto his brethren in all
things, sin excepted. Mat. 1.18.20. Luc. 1.35.


36 What profit take thou, by Christ's holy conception and nativity?

That he is our Heb. 2.16.17.
Mediator, and does cover with his innocence and perfect holiness my sins,
Phil 2 7.
in which I was conceived, Heb. 4.15. and 7.26.
that they may not come in the sight of Psalm. 32.1.1. Cor. 1.30. To. 8.3.4.
Gal. 4.4.5.
God.

37 What beleeuest thou, when thou say, He suffered?

That he all the time of his life, which he lead in the earth, but especially
at the end thereof, 1. Pet. 2.24. and 3.18. Is. 53.12.
sustained the wrath of God, both in body and soul, against the sin of al
mankind, that he might by his passion, as the only 1. Ioh. 2.2. and 4.10. Romans
3.25.
propitiatory sacrifice, deliver our body and soul from everlasting damnation,
and purchase unto us the favor of God, righteousness, and everlasting life.

38 For what cause should he suffer under Pilate as being his judge?

That he being innocent and Luke 23.14. Ioh. 19.4.
condemned before a civil judge might Psalm. 69.4. Is. 53.4.5. 2. Cor. 5.21.
Gal. 3.13.
deliver us from the severe judgment of God, which remained for all men.

39 But is there any thing more in it, that he was fastened to the cross, than
if he had suffered any other kind of death?

There is more: For by this I am assured that he took upon himself the curse,
which did lie on me. For the death of the cross was Deuteronomy. 21.23. Gal. 3.13.
accursed of god.

40 Why was it necessary for Christ to humble himself unto death?

Because the justice and truth of God could by no Genesis 2.71.
other means be satisfied for our sins, but by the very death of the Heb.
2.9.14.15. Phil. 2.8.
Son of God.

41 To what end was he buried also?

That thereby he might make manifest, that he was Acts. 13.29. Mat. 27.60. Luk
23.53. Io. 19.38. etc.
dead indeed.

42 But since that Christ died for us, why must we also die?

Our death is not a satisfaction for our sins, but the abolishing of sin,
and our passage into Ioh. 5.24. Phi. 1.23. Romans 7.24.
everlasting life.

43 What other commodity receive we by the sacrifice and death of Christ?

That by the virtue of his death, our old man is crucified, slain, and To.
6.6.7. etc.
buried together with him, that henceforth evil lusts and desires may not
Romans 6.12.
reign in us, but we may Romans 12.1.
offer our selves unto him a sacrifice of thanksgiving.

44 Why is there added: He descended into hell?

That in my greatest pains and most grievous tentations I may support my self
with this comfort, that my Lord Jesus Christ has Isay. 53.10. Matthew. 27.46.
delivered me, (by the unspeakable distresses, torments, and terrors of his
soul, into which he was plu^ged both before, and then especially, when he
hanged on the cross) from the straits and torments of hell.

45 What does the resurrection of Christ profit us?

First, by his resurrection he vanquished death, that he might 1. Cor. 15.16.
and 54.55. Romans ^4.25. 1. Pe. 1.3. etc. and 21.
make us partakers of that righteousness, which he had gotten us by his death.
Again, we are now also Romans 6.4. Col. ^ 1. etc. Ep. 2.5.
stirred up by his power to a new life. Lastly, the resurrection of our head
christ, is a 1. Cor. 15.12. etc. Romans 8.11.
pledge unto us of our glorious resurrection.

46 How understand you that, He ascended into heaven?

That Christ, his Disciples looking on, was Act. 1.9. Man 16 19. Luc. 24.51.
taken up from the earth into heaven, and yet still Heb. 4.14 and 7.25. and
9.11. Romans 8.34. Ephesians 4.10. Col. 3.1.
is there for our sakes, and will be, until he come again to judge the quick
and Act. 1.11. Mat. 24.30.
dead.

47 Is not Christ with us then until the end of the world, as he has Mat.
28.20. Mat 26.11. Io^ 16.18. and 17.11 Acts. 3.21.
promised?

Christ is true God, and true man: and so according to his manhood he is not
now on earth: but according to his godhead, his majesty, his grace, and spirit,
he Ioh. 14 17. etc. and 16.13. Ep. 4.8. August tract. 50. in Ioh
is at no time from us.

48 Are not by this means the two natures in Christ pulled asunder, if his
humanity be not wheresoever his divinity is?

No: for seeing his divinity is incomprehe^sible, and every where Act. 7.49.
and 17.27. etc. Ier. 23.24.
present: it follows necessarily that the same is without the bounds of his
human nature which he took unto him, and yet is nevertheless in it, and Col.
2.9. Ioh. 3 13. and 11.15. Mat. 28.6.
abides personally united to it.

49 What fruit does the ascension of Christ into heaven bring us?

First, that he 1. Ioh. 2.1.2. Romans 8.34.
makes intercession to his father in heaven for us. Next, that we have our
flesh in heaven, that we may be confirmed thereby, as by a sure pleadge, that
it shall come to pass, that he who is our head will Ioh. 14.2. and 20.17. Ephesians.
2.6
lift up us his members unto him. Thirdly, that he Ioh. 14.16. and 16.7.2.
Cor. 1.22. 2. Cor. 5.5.
sends us his spirit instead of a pledge between him and us, by whose
forcible working we seek after, not earthly but heavenly things, where he
himself is Col. 3.1. Phil. 3.20. etc.
sitting at the right hand of God.

50 Why is it further said, He sits at the right hand of God?

Because Christ therefore is ascended into heaven, to Ep. 1.20. and 5.23. Col.
1.18.
show there that he is the head of his church, by who^ the father Mat. 28.18.
Ioh. 5.22.
governs al things.

51 What profit is this glory of our head christ unto us?

First, that through his holy spirit he Ephesians. 4.10.
powers upon us his members heavenly graces. Then, that he shieldeth and Ps.
2.9. and 101. 2. Ioh. 10.28. Ephesians. 4.8.
defends us by his power against all our enemies. Lu. 21.28. To. 8.23.24.
Phi. 3.20. Tit. 2.13.


52 What comfort have thou by the coming again of Christ to judge the quick
and dead?

That in all my miseries and persecutions I look, with my head lifted up, for
the very same, who before yielded himself unto the judgment of God for me,
and 2 Thessalonians. 1.6.7. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. Mat. 25.41.
took away all malediction from me, to come judge from heaven, to throw al his
and my enemies into everlasting pains, but to Mat. 25.34.
translate me with all his chosen unto himself into celestial ioies and
everlasting glory.

OF THE HOLIE-GHOST.
53 What beleeuest thou concerning the holy ghost?

First, that he is true and coeternall God with the eternal father and the Genesis
1.2. Is. 48.16. 1. Cor. 3.16. 1. Cor. 6.19. Act. 5.3.4.
Son: Secondly, that he is also Mat. 28.19. 2. Cor. 1.2.
given unto me to Gal. 3.14. 1. Pe. 1.2. 1. Cor. 6.17.
make me through a true faith partaker of Christ and all his benefits, to Act.
9.31.
comfort me, and to Ioh. 14.16. 1. Pet. 4.14.
abide with me for ever.

54 What beleeuest thou concerning the holy and Catholic Church of Christ?

I believe that the Son of Ioh. 10.11.
God does from the Genesis 26.4.
beginning of the world Romans 8.29.30. Ep. 1.10. and 1. Pet. 1.20.
to the end gather, defend and Is. 59.21. To. 1.16 and 10.14.17. Ephesians. 5.26.
preserve unto himself by his spirit and Act. 2.46. Ephesians. 4.3.4.5.
word out of whole Mat. 16.18. Ioh. 10.28.
mankind a company 1. Ioh. 3.21. 2. Cor. 13.5.
chosen to everlasting life, and agreeing in true faith: and that I am a lively
1. Ioh. 2.19.
member of that company, and so shall 1. Cor. 1.8.9. Romans 8.35. etc. Psalm.
71.18.
remain for ever.

55 What mean these words, The communion of Saints?

First, that al and every one who believes, are in common Ioh. 1.3. Romans
8.32. 1. Cor. 12.13. and. 21. 1. Cor. 6.17.
partakers of Christ, and all his graces, as being his members. And then, that
every one ought readily and 1. Cor. 13.5. Phil. 2.45.6.
cherefully to bestow the gifts and graces which they have received; to the
common commodity and safety of all.

56 What beleeuest thou concerning remission of sins?

That god, for the satisfaction made by 1. Ioh. 2.2. 2. Cor. 5.19.21.
Christ, has put out all the remembrance Ier. 31.34. Ps. 103.3.4.10.11. Romans
7.24.25. Romans 8.1.2.3.
of my sins, and also of that corruption within me, wherewith I must fight
all my life time: and does freely endowe me with the righteousness of christ,
that I Ioh. 3.18.
come not at any time into judgment.

57 What comfort have thou, by the Resurrection of the flesh?

That not only my soul, after it shall depart out of my body, shall presently be
Luc. 23.43. Phil. 1.23.
taken up to christ, but that this my flesh also, being raised up by the power
of christ, shall be again united to my soul, and shall be 1. Cor. 15.53. Job.
29.25.26. 1. Ioh. 3.2. Phil. 3.21.
made like to the glorious body of christ.

58 What comfort take thou of the article of everlasting life?

That for as much as 2. Cor. 5.2.3.
I feel already in my heart the beginning of everlasting life, it 1. Cor. 2.9.
John. 17.3.
shall at length come to pass, that after this life I shall enjoy full and
perfect bliss, wherein I may magnify God for ever; which blessedness verily,
neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, neither has any man in thought
conceived it.

59 But when thou beleeuest all these things, what profit redoundeth thence
unto thee?

That I am righteous in Christ before God, and an heir of Heb. 2.4. Romans 1.17.
Ioh. 3.36.
eternal life.

60 How art thou righteous before God?

Romans 3.21.22.24.25.28. and 5.1. Gal. 2.16. Ep. 2.8.9. Phil. 3.9.
Only by faith in Christ Jesus: so that, although my conscience accuse me, that
I have grievously trespassed against all the commandments of god, and have not
Romans 3, 9. etc.
kept one of them: and further am as yet Romans 7.23.
prone to all evil: yet notwithstanding (if I Romans 3 42. Ioh. 3.18.
embrace these benefits of christ with a true confidence and persuasion of
mind) the full and Tit. 3.5. Ep. 2.8.9.
perfect satisfaction, righteousness and holiness of Christ without any 1 Ioh.
2.2.
merit of mine, of the mere Romans 3.24. Deuteronomy. 9.6. Ezec. 36.22.
mercy of God, 1. Ioh. 2.1. etc.
imputed and Romans 4.4. 2. Cor. 5.19.
given unto me, and that so as if neither I had committed any sin, neither any
corruption did stick unto me: yea as I my self had perfectly 1. Cor. 5.21.
accomplished that obedience, which Christ accomplished for me.

61 Why affirmest thou, that thou art made righteous by faith only?

Not for that I please god through the worthiness of mere faith: but because
only the satisfaction, righteousness and holiness of Christ is my
righteousness before 1. Cor. 1.30. etc. 1. Cor. 2.2.
God: and I 1. Ioh. 5.10.
cannot take hold of it or apply it unto my self any other way than by faith.

62 Why cannot our good works be righteousness, or some part of righteousness
before God?

Because that righteousness which must stand fast before the judgment of God,
must be in all points perfect, and Gal. 3.10. Deuteronomy. 27.26.
agreeable to the Law of God. Now our works, even the best of them are
imperfect in this life and Isa. 64.6.
defiled with sin.

63 How is it that our good works merit nothing, seeing God promises that he
will give a reward for the^, both in this life, and in the life to come?

That reward is not given of merit, but of Luke 17.10.
grace.

64 But does not this doctrine make men careless and profane?

No. For neither can it be, but they, which are incorporated into Christ
through faith, should bring forth the fruits of Mat. 7.18. Ioh. 15.5.
thankefulnes.

OF THE SACRAMENTS.
65 Seeing then that only faith makes us partakers of Christ, and his
benefits, whence does it proceed?

From the holy Ghost, who Ep. 2.8. and 6.23. Ioh. 3.5. Phil. 1.29.
kindles it in our hearts by the preaching of the gospel, and Mat. 28.19.20. 1.
Pet. 1.22.23.
confirms it by the use of the sacraments.

66 What are the Sacraments?

They are sacred signs and seals set before our eyes, and ordained of God for
this cause, that he may declare and seal by them the promise of his gospel
unto us, to wit, that he gives freely remission of sins, and life Genesis
17.11. Romans 4.11. Deu. 30.6. Leu. 6.25. Heb. 9.8.9. Eze. 20.12.1. Sam. 17.36.
Isa. 6.6.7. and 54.9.
everlasting not only to al in general, but to every one in particular that
believes, for that only sacrifice of Christ which he accomplished upon the
cross.

67 Do not then both the word and Sacraments tend to that end, as to lead
our faith unto the Sacrifice of Christ finished on the cross, as to the only
ground of our salvation?

It is even so. For the holy Ghost teaches us by the Gospel, and assures us
by the Sacraments, that the salvation of al of us stands in the only
sacrifice of Christ Romans 6.3. Gal. 3.27.
offered for us upon the cross.

68 How many sacraments has Christ ordained in the new Testament?

Two. Baptism, and the holy Supper.

OF BAPTISM.
69 How art thou admonished and assured in Baptism, that thou art partaker of
the only sacrifice of Christ?

Because Christ Mat. 28.19. Act. 2.38.
commanded the outward washing of water, adioining this Mar. 16.16. Mat.
3.11. Romans 6.3.
promise thereunto, that I am no less assuredly washed by his blood and
spirit from the uncleanness of my soul, that is, from all my sins, than I
am Mar. 1.4. Luc. 3.3.
washed outwardelie with water, whereby all the filthiness of the body uses
to be purged.

70 What is it to be washed with the blood and spirit of Christ?

It is to receive of God forgiveness of sins freely for the blood of
CHRIST which he Heb. 12.24.1. Pet. 1.2. Apoc. 1.5. and. 22.14. Zac. 13.1. Eze.
36.25. etc.
shed for us in his Sacrifice on the Cross. And also to be renewed by the
holy Ghost, and thorough his sanctifying of us to become members of Christ,
that we may more and more die to sin, and Ioh. 1.33. and 3.5. 1. Cor. 6.11.
and 12.13. Romans 6.4. Col. 2.12.
live holily and without blame.

71 Where does Christ promise us that he will as certainly wash us with his
blood and spirit, as we are washed with the water of baptism?

In the institution of Baptism; the words whereof are these: Mat. 28.19.
Go and teach all Nations, Baptising them in the name of the father, the
son, and the holy Ghost. Mar. 16.16.
He that shall believe and be baptized, shall be saved: but he that will not
believe, shall be damned. This promise is repeated again, whereas the
Scripture calls Baptism, the Tit. 3.5.
washing of the new birth, and Act. 22.16.
forgiveness of sins.

72 Is then the outward Baptism of water the washing away of sins?

It is not. For the Mat. 3.11. 1. Pet. 3.21. Ephesians 5.26.
blood of Christ alone cleanses us from all 1. Ioh. 1.7. 1. Cor. 6.11.
sin.

73 Why then does the holy Ghost call Baptism the washing of the new birth,
and forgiveness of sins?

God speaks so not without great cause: to wit, not only to teach us, that
as the filth of our body is purged by water, so our sins also are Apoc. 1.5.
and 7.14.1. 1. Cor. 6.11.
purged by the blood and spirit of Christ: but much more to assure us by this
divine token and pledge, that we are as verily washed from our sins with the
inward washing, as we are Mar. 16.16. Gal. 3.17.
washed by the outward and visible water.

74 Are infantes to be baptized also?

What else? for seeing they Genesis 17.7.
belong as well unto the covenant and Church of God, as they who are of a full
age; and seeing also unto them is promised Mat. 19.14.
remission of sins by the blood of Christ and the Luc. 1.14.15. Psalm. 22.11.
Isa. 24.1.2.3. Act. 2.39.
holy Ghost the worker of faith, as well as unto those of full growth: They are
by Baptism to be ingrafted into the Church of God, and to be Act. 10.47.
discerned from the children of infidels, in like sort as in the old Testament
was done by Genesis 17.14.
circumcision, in place whereof is Col. 2.11.12.13.
Baptism succeeded in the new Testament.

OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
75 How art thou in the Lords Supper admonished and warranted, that thou art
partaker of that only sacrifice of Christ offered on the Cross, and of all
his benefits?

Because Christ has commanded me and all the faithful to eat of this bread
broken, and to to drink of the cup distributed in remembrance of him, with
this promise Mat. 26.27.28. Mar. 14.22.23.24. Luc. 22.16.20. 1. Cor. 10.16.17.
and 11.23.24.25. and 12.13.
adioined. First, that his body was as certainly broken and offered for me on
the Cross, and his blood shed for me, as I behold with my eyes the bread of
the Lord broken unto me, and the cup communicated to me: and further that my
soul is no less assuredly fed to everlasting life with his body, which was
crucified for us, and his blood, which was shed for us: than I receive and
taste by the mouth of my body the bread and wine, the signs of the body and
blood of our Lord, received at the hand of the Minister.

76 What is it to eat the body of Christ crucified, and to drink his blood
that was shed?

It is not only to embrace by an assured confidence of mind, the whole
passion and death of Christ, and thereby to Ioh. 6.35.40.47.48.50.51.53.54.
obtain forgiveness of sins and everlasting life, but also by the holy Ghost,
who dwells both in Christ and us, so more and more to be Ioh. 6.56.
united to his sacred body, that though he be in Act. 3.21. Act. 1.9. etc. 1.
Cor. 11.26.
heaven, and we in earth, yet nevertheless are we flesh of his flesh, and
bone of his Ephesians. 5.29.30.32. 1. Cor. 6.15.17.19. 1. Ioh. 3.24. and 4.13. Ioh.
14 23.
bones; and as all the members of the body are by one soul, so are we also
quickened and Io. 6.56.57.58. Io. 15.1.2.3.4.5.6. Ephesians. 4.15.16.
guided by one and the same spirit.

77 Where has Christ promised, that he will as certainly give his body and
blood so to be eaten and dronken, as they eat this bread broken, and drink
this cup?

In the institution of his supper; the words whereof are these: 1. Cor. 11.23.
etc. Mat. 26.26. etc. Mar. 14.22. etc. Luc. 22.19. etc.
Our Lord Jesus Christ in the night that he was betrayed, took bread. And when
he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat, this is my body which
is broken for you: this do you in remembrance of me. Likewise also he took
the cup when he had supped, and said, Exodus 24.8. Heb. 9.20.
This cup is the New Testament in my blood: Exodus 13.9.
this do as often as ye shall drink it, in remembrance of me. For as often
as ye shall eat this bread and drink this cup, ye show the Lords death till
he come. This promise is repeated by Saint Paul, when he says: The cup of
thanksgiving, wherewith we give thanks, is it not the Communion of the blood
of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of
Christ? 1. Cor. 10.16.17.
For we that are many are one bread and one body, because we all are
partakers of one bread.

78 Are then the bread and wine, made the very body and blood of Christ?

No verily. But as the water of baptism is Math. 26.29. Mar. 14.24.
not turned into the blood of Christ, but is only a sign and pledge of those
things that are sealed to us in Baptism: So neither is the bread of the Lords
Supper the very body of 1. Cor. 10.16. etc. and 11.26. etc
Christ: Although according to the manner of Sacraments, and that Genesis 17.10.
etc. Exodus 26.27.43.48. and 13 9. Act. 7.8. Exo. 24.8. Le. 16.10. and 17.11.
Isa. 6.6.7. Tit. 3.5. Act. 22.16. 1. Pet. 3.21. 1. Cor. 10.1.
form of speaking of them which is usual unto the holy Ghost, the bread is
called the body of Christ.

79 Why then does Christ call bread his body, and the cup his blood, or the
new Testament in his blood; and Paul also calls bread and wine, the Communion
of the body and blood of Christ?

Christ not without great consideration speaks so: to wit, not only for to
teach us, that as the bread and wine sustain the life of the body; so also his
crucified body and bloodshed are indeed the meat and drink of our soul,
whereby it is John. 6.51.55.56.
nourished to eternal life: but much more, that by this visible sign and
pledge he may assure us, that we are as verily partakers of his body and
blood, through the working of the holy ghost, as we do 1. Cor. 10.16.17.
perceive by the mouth of our body these holy signs in remembrance of him:
and further also, that his suffering and obedience is so certainly ours, as
though we our selves had suffered punishments for our sins, and had satisfied
God.

80 What difference is there between the Supper of the Lord, and the Popish
Mass?

The Supper of the Lord testifies to us that we have perfect forgiveness of
all our sins for that only Sacrifice of Christ which himself once fully Heb.
7.27. and 9 12.26.28. and 10.10.12.14. John. 19.30 Mat. 26.28. Luc. 22.19.20.
wrought on the Cross: Then also that we by the holy Ghost are graffed into
1. Cor. 6.17. and 10.16. and 12.13.
Christ, who now according to his humane nature is only in heaven at the right
hand of his Heb. 1.3. and 8.1. etc.
Father, and there will be Joan. 4.21.22.23. and 20.17. Luc. 24.52. Act.
7.55.56. Col. 3.1. Phil. 3.10. 1. These. 1.9.10.
worshipped of us. But in the Mass it is denied, that the quick and the dead
have remission of sins for the only passion of Christ; except also Christ be
daily offered for them by their Sacrificers. Further also it is taught, that
Christ is bodily under the forms of bread and wine, and therefore is to be
In canone Missae: item de consecrat. distin 2.
worshipped in them. And so the very foundation of the Mass is nothing else
than an utter denial of that only Sacrifice and passion of Christ Jesus, and
an accursed Idolatry.

81 Who are to come unto the Table of the Lord?

They only who are truly sorrowful, that they have offended GOD by their
sins; and yet trust that those sins are pardoned them for Christ's sake:
and what other infirmities they have, that those are covered by his passion and
death; who also desire more, and more to go forward in faith and integrity of
life. But hypocrites and they who do not truly repent, do eat and 1. Cor.
10.21. and 11.28. etc.
drink damnation to themselves.

82 Are they also to be admitted to this supper, who in confession and life
declare themselves to be Infidels and ungodly?

No. For by that means the covenant of GOD is profaned, and the wrath of GOD
is 1. Cor. 11.20.34. Is. 1.11. etc. and 66.3. Ier. 7.21. etc. Ps. 50.16. etc.
stirred up against the whole assembly. Wherefore the Church by the
commandment of Christ and his Apostles, using the keys of the kingdom of
heaven, ought to drive them from this Supper, till they shall repent, and
change their manners.

83 What are the keys of the Kingdom of heaven?

Preaching of the Gospel, and Ecclesiastical Discipline: by which heaven is
opened to the believers, and is Math. 16.19. and 18.18.
shut against the unbelievers.

84 How is the kingdom of heaven opened and shut by the preaching of the
Gospel?

When by the commandment of Christ it is publickely declared to all and
every one of the faithful, that all their sins are pardoned them of God for
the merit of Christ, so often as they embrace by a lively faith the promise of
the Gospel: but contrarily is denounced to all Infidels and hypocrites, that so
long the wrath of God and everlasting damnation does lie on them, as they Joan.
20.21.22.23. Mat. 16.19.
persist in their wickedness: according to which testimony of the Gospel, God
will judge them as well in this life, as in the life to come.

85 How is the kingdom of heaven opened and shut, by Ecclesiastical
Discipline?

When according to the commandment of Christ, they, who in name are
Christians, but in their doctrine and life show themselves Romans 12.7.8.9. 1.
Cor. 12.28.
aliens from Christ, after they having been sometime admonished will not depart
from their errors or wickedness, are made known unto the Church or to them
that are appointed for that matter, and purpose, of the Church; and if neither
then they obey their admonition, are of the same men by interdiction from the
Sacraments shut out from the Congregation of the Church, and by God him self,
out of the kingdom of heaven: And again, if they profess and indeed declare
amendment of life, are Mat. 18.15.16.17. 1. Cor. 5.3.4.5.2. These. 3.14.15. 2.
Ioh. 10.11. 2. Cor. 2.6.7.10.11. ^. Tim. 5.17.
received as members of Christ and his Church.

AFter it has been showed in the first part, that men are become obnoxious
unto everlasting pains and punishments, by reason of obedience not yielded
unto the law; a question by and by arises, Whether there is, or be granted
any escape or delivery from these punishments. To this question the law
makes answer, that a delivery is granted, so that perfect satisfaction be
made unto the law and the justice of God, by sufficient punishment, paid for
the sins committed. For the law binds either to obedience, or that being
not performed, to punishment. The performance of both which, both of obedience,
and punishment, is perfect righteousness and justice: and on both follows the
approbation and allowing of him; in whom that righteousness is. Now, the
means and manners of satisfaction are two: one, by our selves; which the law
teaches, and the justice of God requires: for we have sinned. But this
satisfaction delivers not from eternal malediction; because it is never
sufficient, and finished, but indureth to all eternity. The other means of
satisfiyng is by an other, that is, by Christ. This means does the Gospel
show, and the mercy of God freely offer: neither yet is it repugnaunt to his
law and justice; because in no place the law misliketh or rejects it. This
satisfaction or punishment is temporal, and yet sufficient, that is,
equivalent to everlasting punishment, and therefore a price worthy enough for
our deliverance. Wherefore since Christ has paid in our behalf unto the law
a sufficient punishment for our sins, the justice of God, and the sentence of
the law altogether wills and requires, that we be admitted unto a
reconcilement with him, that is, be approved of God, and received into favor.
Furthermore, by the questions of the Catechism a little before propounded, two
things are taught concerning man's delivery. The first is, that it is possible;
and after what sort. The second is, by whom, and by what manner of Mediator it
may be achieved. The places here to be discoursed of are three.

1 Of Man's delivery. 2 Of our Mediator. 3 Of the Covenant.
OF THE DELIVERIE OF MAN.
THe questions to be considered hereof, are five.

1 What man's delivery is, or in what things it consists. 2 Whether any
delivery might be wrought after the fall. 3 Whether it be necessary, and
certain. 4 What manner of delivery it is, and whether it be perfect, that is
a delivery from the evil both of crime and pain. 5 By what means it may be
wrought.
1 WHAT MAN'S DELIVERIE IS.
THis word Delivery is respective. For all delivery and liberty has a
respect to somewhat: to wit, it is a grant, whereby any one is licensed
according to honest laws, or the order of nature, to be free from subiections,
defects, and burdens not proper unto his nature, and to do things agreeable
unto his nature without let or hinderaunce. The delivery of man, an
immunitie from misery and the gilt of sin.
So the Delivery of man is an immunitie from misery, that is, from the guilt
and subjection or tyranny of sin: or, it is the right and power restored by
Christ, to live freely, according to GODS law, and to enjoy those commodities
which were at the beginning granted by GOD unto man's nature without
prohibition or impediment. For thus to live, agreed unto man's nature, in
respect of his creation: and not to live thus, is man's most miserable and
shameful servitude. As therefore the misery and servitude of man
comprehends sin, and death, or punishment: so his delivery, is a delivery
from sin and death; or a restoring of righteousness and life everlasting.

Now Delivery from sin, is the perfect, both pardoning of sin, that it
may not for ever be imputed; And also the abolishing of it in us by
regeneration, or newness of life, which is begun here, but to be perfected
in the world to come. Delivery from death, is a Delivery, both from
Desperation, or the feeling of GODS wrath, which being in the wicked here
begun, shall continue everlastingly, and is called everlasting death: and
secondly, from corporal death and all calamities and miseries by our
Resurrection and Glorification. In sum: That Delivery is a full restoring of
life everlasting, that is, of Holiness, Righteousness, and felicity, or
perfect Blessedness, and so of all good things which are contrary to those
evils. It is called Delivery, because men, without Christ's satisfaction, are
held as it were fettered in gyues, and Captives of sin and hell.

2 Whether any Delivery might be wrought after the fall.
THis question is necessary. For if there be no delivery of us out of
misery, in vain make we question of the rest. Again, there is some cause to
doubt thereof, to them especially, The delivery of man possible. The causes of
which possibility in God only.
unto whom the doctrine of the Gospel is unknown. The Delivery therefore of
man is possible. And the causes of the possiblenesse thereof are in GOD alone,
declared in the sacred Scripture.

The first is his mercy and immeasurable goodness, which that he would
exercise in saving of us, not impeaching his justice, he has uttered in his
word. John. 5.21. The father quickens whom he will.

The second is, his infinite wisdom, whereby he knows, how to turn the
purposes of the Devil imagined and devised to the reproach of GOD himself, by
corrupting mankind, and to the overthrowing of the salvation of Gods chosen,
even to the manifesting of his own glory, and to the salvation of his chosen.
God therefore, by this his wisdom has found out an admirable temperament,
and such as no creature could have found, of his justice and mercy, in
delivering man, that is, such a way, whereby he might show his exceeding both
mercy and justice.

The third is Gods omnipotency, wherefore he is able to perform that
delivery of man from sin and death, which he through his immeasurable
mercy, and wise counsel decreed. Luc. 1.37. With God nothing shall be
impossible. To deny then man's delivery, is to spoil God of infinite
wisdom, goodness, and power, against that which is said, 1. Sam. 2.6. The
Lord brings down to the grave, and raises up. Psalm. 68.20. To the Lord God
belong the issues of death. Isai. 59.1. The Lords hand is not shortened.

Objection. What the unchangeable justice and truth of god requires, that is
unchangeable. But the justice and truth of god requires the casting away and
damnation of man: for god had expresselie threatened everlasting death to the
transgressors of his law: and the justice of god will destroy every thing
that is not conformable thereunto. Therefore the casting away of man from the
face of god is unchangeable, neither is it possible that without the impeaching
of gods justice and truth man should escape everlasting damnation. Answer.
The Mayor is to be distinguished. What the justice of God requires, to wit,
simply without al condition, that is simply unchangeable. It requires the
casting away of man with this condition, except there be interposed a full and
perfect satisfaction. Wherefore the justice of GOD requires that a sinner
either satisfy, or be cast away. Matthew 5.36. Thou shall not come out thence,
until thou have paid the utmost farthing. Reply. But impossible is it for us
to satisfy for our sins, or to bear sufficient punishment, so that we may
come from thence. Answer. It is impossible in respect of our selves, but not
in respect of God. He knows the means how by an other full satisfaction may
be made for us.

Adam after his fall, before by special revelation he was assured of the
promise, could not hope for deliverance.
But that our delivery by another is possible, is known only by the promises
of the Gospel, and the revealing of the holy Ghost forcibly moving our hearts
to believe the Gospel.

Here arises a question: Whether Adam after his fall might have certainly
promised himself delivery? We answer, that he could not, without
especial promise, and revelation. And before he had this, nothing could
present it self unto his mind, but the great justice and truth of God exacting
of him everlasting punishment, for not yielding obedience. For flesh and blood
reueal not those things, which are the peculiar and proper benefits of the
Mediator. But some man may except: that the self same causes notwithstanding
do remain, even now after the publishing of the Gospel, to wit, the justice
and truth of GOD, who is never changed. If then Adam could not hope for
delivery before the promise was published, neither could he after the
publishing thereof. For so he might have reasoned: It is impossible that the
justice and truth of GOD should be impeached. But man's recovering and
escaping out of punishment, would impeache the justice and truth of GOD,
because everlasting punishment should not be inflicted on man which yet the
justice and truth of GOD require. For, the punishment to be everlasting, and
yet man to wade and escape out of it, are things contradictorie, and of flat
repugnauncie. Therefore man's escape and delivery out of punishment is
impossible.

This Objection or temptation Adam might by the promise now made have repelled
on this wise. The Minor is true, if the escaping be such, that sufficient
punishment and equal to the sin be laid neither upon the sinner himself,
nor on another who offers himself in the sinners place. But the justice of
GOD has inflicted punishment sufficient for our sins, on his own Son who
offered himself of his own accord to sustain it for us. Wherefore man's
escaping out of misery, by the full satisfaction performed by the Son of
GOD, does not impeache but rather establish Gods justice.

But again it is replied: That which necessarily does not conclude punishment
to ensue, does leave some hope, neither wills us to despair of delivery
from punishment. But the event has taught, that the casting away of man is not
necessarily concluded or inferred upon the first fall of Adam. Therefore Adam
being fallen, no not before the promise published concerning the seed of the
Woman, ought altogether to have dispaired of his delivery. Answer. He ought
not verily to have dispaired, neither could he have inferred upon his fall
necessarily, that his delivery out of misery was simply impossible; but
neither could he of the otherside have certainly promised unto himself, or
hoped for it, before the publishing of the Gospel. Because neither he nor any
creature was able, Humane reason might probably conjecture, but not
necessarily conclude man's delivery.
or should for ever have been able of himself to perceive, or so much as
imagine unto himself a manner of escaping punishment, not repugnant to the
justice of God: except GOD had declared and revealed the same by his Son. He
might truly (as others likewise, who live out of the Church destitute of the
word of promise) have probably reasoned, that one day there should be a
delivery. First, because it is not meet, that man the most excellent creature
should be made of GOD to sustain the greatest punishment, and that for ever.
Again, For that it seems not likely, that GOD would have delivered a law
to man to no effect, that is, which should never be perfectly performed by
him.

But except the voice of the gospel had come, man would never have been able
by these reasons long to have withstood the tentation of the Devil, who would
easily have refuted them by his own example. Wherefore albeit these two
reasons are of themselves most true (for GOD did not make mankind unto
perpetual misery, neither made he a law to no effect) yet man being fallen
is not able, by reason of his blindness and corruption, without the promise
and grace of the holy Ghost to assent unto them, that is, is not able of them
certainly and necessarily to infer, that he knows and hops for his
deliverance out of pain and misery.

3 Whether Delivery be necessary and certain.
THat some should be delivered and saved from destruction is necessary.
Objection. But it is free unto God, The delivery of some necessary.
even to save none. Answer. It is free unto God, to save either al, or none,
or some: for he was not bound to us, that he should save us. Romans 11.35. Who
has given unto him first, and he shall be recompensed? Yet is it necessary
that he should save some, not by any absolute necessity, but by such as is
called necessity by supposition.

First, because God has most freely and unchangeably decreed, The necessity
not absolute, but depending on the unchangeable will and decree of God.
and promised this delivery published. A syllogism thereof may be framed on
this wise: It is impossible that God should either lie or deceive. But God has
avouched and promised by an ^th, that he will not the death of a sinner, but
will that he be converted and live. The conversion therefore and delivery of
man, not only may be wrought, but necessarily also is wrought.

Secondly, In the beginning God created man, that he might for ever be
magnified of him. Epes. 1.6. He has made us to the praise of the glory of his
grace. And Psalm. 89.48. Have thou made al men for naught? Wherefore seeing God
is not frustrated of the end of his counsels, it is necessary that some be
delivered.

Thirdly, God did not in vain send his son into the world, and deliver him
over unto death. John. 6.39. I came down from heaven to do his will which
has sent me. And this is the fathers will which has sent me, that of al
which he has given me I should loose nothing. Mat. 9.13. I am come to call
sinners to repentance, and 18.11. The Son of man is come to save that which
was lost. Romans 4.25. He died for our sins, and is risen again for our
justification.

Fourthly, God more enclineth to the exercising and setting forth of his mercy,
than of his anger. But he shows his anger in punishing the wicked. Therefore
he must show his mercy in saving the Godly.

4 What manner of Delivery this is.
THe delivery and setting of man at liberty is necessarily complete, that
is, in all ponites perfect, Our delivery most perfect.
even from both evils, both of crime, and of pain. First, because God is not a
deliverer in part only, but saves and loves perfectly those whom he saves.
1. John 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin, to wit,
as touching both the formal parts thereof, the guilt, and the corruption of
sin.

Secondly, because he does perfectly punish the wicked, that his justice may
be exactly satisfied by their punishment: Therefore does he perfectly deliver
the godly from punishment; because he is more inclining and propense to mercy
than to anger. Thirdly, because we were fully and perfectly lost in Adam. But
Christ's benefit is not imperfecter, or of less force than the sin of Adam,
which it would be, if he did not perfectly deliver: because al have lost al
their righteousness, salvation, and blessedness in Adam. Therefore righteousness
and felicity is restored by Christ.

Each of these deliueries, both from the evil of crime, and from the evil of
pain or punishment, is necessarily perfect. Because the image of God, glory
and blessedness, which is restored unto us by Christ our redeemer, is more
glorious, and greater than that, Our delivery from eternal death perfect in
this life, from other calamities in the life to come.
which we lost in Adam. Our delivery from everlasting death or damnation is
most perfect, even in this life, both as touching the parts thereof, and also
in degree. Because Christ's satisfaction for our sins, which is imputed unto
us, is a most perfect conformity and correspondence with the law of God: Now
from other calamities we shall be fully delivered in the life to come, when as
the remnants of sin in us shall be utterly abolished. In the mean season, they
are mitigated unto the godly, even in this life, and turned into fatherly
chastisements.

Our delivery from sin in part here by regeneration, but perfect in the life
to come.
Our delivery from crime or sin by regeneration, is perfect, not at once in a
moment, but successively by degrees. For in this life it is perfect, as
concerning the parts thereof, but as by a beginning only, that is, all the
parts of obedience are begun in the redeemed, or believers: so that, as long
as we live here, it is daily augmented by new accessions and encreasings. But
after the departure of the soul out of the body this delivery is perfecter:
because then man does wholly cease from sin. After the resurrection and
glorification it shall be most perfect, both as touching the parts thereof,
and in degree. For then shall God be all in all, that is, he shall immediately
bless us with exceeding happiness, so that nothing shall remain in us
repugnaunt to God: but whatsoever shall be in us, that shall be of god. But now
there is somewhat in us, which is not of GOD, even sin it self.

5 By what means man's delivery may be wrought.
THe means whereby we may be delivered from the curse, and being reconciled
to God, may be accounted just before him, is only one, even a full and condign
or worthy satisfaction, that is, punishment for sins committed, or obedience
omitted. For the Law, The law being transgressed, no satisfaction but by
suffering due punishment.
when as we have not performed obedience, does justly exact punishment of
us: this being sufficiently paid, we are received of God into grace, and
being endued with the holy spirit are renewed to the image of God, that we may
hence-forward obey his Law, and enjoy everlasting blissefulnes. Being
therefore reconciled unto God by satisfaction most fully performed unto the
Law, we are delivered then from sin also, that is, from corruption it self,
by regeneration, that is, by the forcible working of the holy Ghost, abolishing
it in us, and restoring true holiness and righteousness, here, by beginning it,
and in the life to come also, by perfecting and absoluing it. This delivery is
necessarily knit with the former, as a necessary effect with his proper and
nearest cause. For God will of that condition accept of this satisfaction, and
for it pardon our sin, so that we leave off to offend him hereafter thorough
our sins, and be thankful unto him for our sins pardoned, and other his
benefits. For to be willing to be received into Gods favor, and yet not to
be willing to cease from sinning, is to mock God. Wherefore they who are
received of God into favor, are withal regenerated: and satisfaction is the
cause, as of acceptance, so also of regeneration. Now that, if satisfaction or
sufficient punishment come not between, there is no delivery from the guilt,
or from sin it self: the cause hereof is gods great justice, and truth,
which his mercy does no way overthrow, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Cursed be he that
confirms not all the words of this Law, to do them. Matthew. 5.18. It is not
possible that one jot of the Law should fall, that is, be frustrate, till al
things be fulfilled. Psalm. 5.4. Evil shall not dwell with thee. Seeing then the
Law is not an empty sound, and does exact satisfaction for sin committed,
equal unto the fault, it is wholly necessary, that we perform it, if we will be
received of god into favor.

Here are we met with an Objection: But we never satisfy the Law,
therefore this manner of escaping punishment, is vain and imaginary. We
Answer. We are not able to satisfy by obedience; we are, by paying the
penalty which the Law in most full manner exacteth for our obedience omitted.
Reply. But the Law requires obedience, that is, the love of God and our
neighbor. Therefore it is necessary, that the Law be satisfied by obedience.
Answer. The Antecedent or former proposition is to be distinguished. The Law
requires obedience, that is, which was after to be performed: this being
performed, the Law was satisfied. But if it be not performed, then the Law
exacteth punishment, as a satisfaction for obedience omitted. For neither can
satisfaction be made by obedience, for the breach of the Law, or for omitting
of obedience. Because the obedience or Godliness which follows the breach of
the Law, when as it is due for that present, when it is performed, cannot at
all satisfy for the debt or offense or trespass which is past. Wherefore
sufficient punishment, is that satisfaction, which the Law and Gods justice
exacteth at our hands for the not perfourming of obedience, that we may be
accepted and beloved of God.

This being set down and resolved of, further demand is made, by whom
that satisfaction or punishment is to be performed? The Law will have it
performed by us, and that justly: but it yields not ability to perform it,
neither any where makes declaration thereof. But the Gospel declares and
shows us Christ, by whom we may satisfy. By our selves we cannot.

First, because the Law requires perfect satisfaction: it is not perfect, Our
satisfaction can not be by our selves, because then it would be infinite,
and so never accomplished.
except it be either eternal (for all sin is an offense against the
infinite good: If then this infinite good must be satisfied, satisfaction must
needs be made by eternal punishment, which answers in equality to that
infinite good) or else temporal, yet equal to eternal, and worthy to be
accepted by the justice of GOD for satisfaction. If it be eternal, then never
shall we be delivered or recovered out of punishment, death and sin being
fully conquered: because it can never be said, that we have satisfied
(which implies the end) but only that we are satisfieng (which shows the
perpetuation and continuing of punishment) which satisfaction is such as the
punishment of the Devils and reprobate men, which never shall have an end. Now
for a Temporal punishment which should be aunswerable and equal to
eternal, there is no man, by reason of manifold imperfection who can
perform it.

Secondly, because daily we heap up offenses and debtes, yea even in our
punishments themselves, while we do not in them acknowledge God to be just,
and justly to punish us for our sins, but murmur and fret against him.
Wherefore our pains and punishments must needs be also heaped up and
increased. For he, who goes on afterward in offending him, whom he has
heretofore offended, can never have him favorable unto him. Thirdly, because
we cannot deserve of God, that he should pardon us our present sins,
muchlesse our sins past. Neither can we pay the debt past, with that, which
we owe presently. Since then we are not able by our selves, we must needs
make satisfaction by another.

Objection. The Law requires OUR punishment, because we have sinned.
Answer. The Law requires ours, but not exclusiuely, so that it does not
admit it to be performed by another, for us. For, albeit the Law knows not
this satisfaction for our sins made by another, and to be imputed unto us, but
the Gospel only reuealeth it: yet nowhere does the Law either exclude or
disalowe it. Wherefore it is not contrary to the Law, that another should
satisfy for us. Reply. But that another should be punished for offenders, is
unjust. Answer. That another should be punished for offenders, is not
disagreeing with Gods justice, The conditions to be in him respected, who may
be punished for another.
if these conditions co^cur withal. 1 If he who is punished, be innocent. 2
If he be of the same nature with the offenders. 3 If of his own accord he offer
himself to punishment. 4 If himself be able to recover out of punishment, and
not enforced to perish therein. And this is the cause that men can not justly
punish ones offenses in another, because they cannot bring to pass, that the
party punished should not perish in the punishment. 5 If he wish and attain
unto that end which Christ respected, even the glory of GOD, and salvation of
men.

A mere man is not able to suffer and satisfy for man.
Furthermore, that other, by whom we must satisfy, either must be a creature
only, or God to. But no mere creature, be he man, or not man, can satisfy for
man, which is a sinner. First, because the justice of God does not punish in
other creatures that, which man has committed. But man has sinned. Therefore
all humane nature which has sinned, ought to be punished, Romans 5.12. As by
one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death went
over all men, for as much as all men have sinned. Secondly because no creature
at al can sustain temporal punishment equivalent to eternal. By reason
therefore of the infirmity and weakness of the creature, there would not be
proportion between the punishment and the sin, and so not sufficient
punishment. Psalm. 130.3. If thou Lord straightly markest iniquities, O Lord,
who shall stand? Romans 8.3. Because the Law was not able to justify, God sent
his son. Deuteronomy. 4.24. God is a consuming fire. Thirdly, He who is himself
defiled with sin, cannot satisfy for others. Fourthly, Because the
punishment of a mere creature would not be a price of sufficient worthiness
and valewe for our delivery. Wherefore our Mediator must be a man: yet so,
that he be god also. Fifthly. The same is also showed by this, that the
delivery of man is wrought after a sort also by regeneration. But to purge out
sin, and to make fleshie hearts of stony, is the work, not of any creature,
but of God alone. For his it is to restore the image of God in us, who first
created it in us. Seeing therefore we have need of a Mediator for our
delivery, we must now speak of him.

OF THE MEDIATOR.
THE doctrine concerning the Mediator is to be held, The causes why this
doctrine concerning the mediator is diligently to be observed.
and diligently to be considered. 1 Because it is the foundation and short sum
of Christian Doctrine. 2. In respect of the glory of God, that we may know,
God does not of any leuity pardon sins, but is so grievously offended
therewith, that he grants no pardon to them, except the satisfaction of his
son mediate and come between. 3 In respect of our salvation; that we
enjoying such a mediator may be assured of eternal life: because this our
Mediator is both willing and able to grant it us. 4 That we may acknowledge
and magnify the mercy and goodness of God toward us, in that he has given
us his son to be our Mediator. 5 Because this doctrine is at all times most
grieuouslie oppugned by the enemies of the Church, both foreign and
domestical, which are heretics. But here it may seem to some man that the
doctrine concerning the Mediator belongs to the place of Justification,
because in this also the office of the Mediator is declared. But it is one
thing to teach, What and what manner a benefit the benefit of justification
is, and how it is received: an other thing to show, whose that benefit is,
and by whom it is bestowed. And these are different and diverse propositions:
Justification belongs to the Mediator, or is wrought by the Mediator; and,
remission of sins is our justification. In the former proposition
justification is the subject, that is, it is that whereof an other thing is
affirmed; in the later it is the attribute or predicate, that is, justification
it self is affirmed of another thing, even of remission of sins.

The principal questions are these.
1 What in general a Mediator is 2 For what cause he is necessary. 3 What his
office is. 4 What manner of one is necessary. 5 Who, or what person, is and
may be Mediator. 6 Whether there may be more Mediators.
1 What a Mediator is.
A Mediator in general.
A Mediatuor in general signifies him, who interposeth or puts himself
between parties which are at variance, and reconcileth the one to the other.
Now to reconcile is 1. To make intercession or entreaty for him, who
offends, unto him who is offended. 2. To make satisfaction for the injury
offered. 3. To promise and to bring to pass that the party who has offended,
offend no more. For except this be brought to pass and effectuated, the fruit
and commodity of the intercession is lost. 4. Lastly, to bring them to an
atonement and agreement, who were before at enmity. If one of these
conditions be wanting, there cannot be any true reconcilement.

A mediator in special.
But in special, and as here it is used and meant of Christ, a Mediator is a
pacifier or reconciler of God and men, as well by merit and desert, as also by
efficacy and forcible operation: that is, it is a middle person between God
who is offended and angry with sin, and mankind offending, and subject to
the anger of God; to reconcile men unto God, restoring them into favor,
causing men to love God, and God men; and that by making entreaty and
satisfaction to Gods justice for them, and applying forcibly and effectually
unto them his satisfaction or merit; regenerating them, that they may cease
from sinning; and hearing their groans and petitions, when they call upon him.
For when Christ does these things, he causes god to love us, and us to love
god, that is, he makes a peace and agreement to be between God and us.

How Christ is a middle person, and how a mediator.
A middle person, and a Mediator are different, because that is the name of the
person, this of the office. Both which Christ is between God the father and
us. He is a Middle person, because in him both natures, divine and humane, are
united personally. And a Mediator, because he reconcileth us to his father,
albeit in some sort he is also in the same respect the Middle person, in which
he is Mediator, because in him two extremes are joined, God and man.

It is demanded whether Adam had need of a Mediator before his fall?
Answer is to be made by distinguishing of the diverse meaninges and
significations of Mediator If a mediator be meant to be such a one, through
whose mediation or by whom God does bestow his benefits, and communicate
himself unto us, Adam verily even before his fall had need of a Mediator,
because Christ ever was that person, by whom god the father creates and
quickneth all things. For in him was life, to wit all, both corporal and
spiritual life, and the life was the light of men. But if the Mediator be
understood to be him who perfourmeth both these and all other parts of a
Mediators office: Adam did not stand in need of a Mediator before his fall.
We must observe notwithstanding that in the Scriptures this Phrase of speech
is not found, whereby CHRIST is said to have been the Mediator also before
the fall of man.

2 For what cause a Mediator is necessary.
A Mediator is necessary: Because first, No reconciliation without a
mediator.
GOD will not be favorable and do good unto us, without reconcilement be
made, that is, except first we are brought again into favor with him. But the
justice of God admits not any return into favor, without satisfaction,
and a restoring of Gods Image in us. We now are not able to perform this, to
wit, to appease God being offended with us, and to make our selves
acceptable unto God. We have need therefore of another Mediator, who may
perform this for us. Secondly, God required a Mediator of the party
offending. For God, as God, would not receive satisfaction of him self, and
would for his justice sake that the party offending would obtain favor by
him, who was able to make perfect satisfaction. Wherefore such a truce-man is
required who both should not be auerse from man, but should desire to help
him, and also should be most acceptable unto GOD, least he should suffer a
repulse; and further might easily by his favor, whereby he should prevail
with GOD, reconcile us unto him through satisfieng and making entreatie and
intercession for us. Now were not we able to bear this person, because we
were Gods enemies, neither were we of power to make our stony hearts
fleshie. Therefore we stood in need of a third, even a Mediator, who both was
able and willing to do that for us, and in us, that is, who should make
intercession unto God for us, satisfy perfectly gods justice for our sins,
and restore unto us the image of God which we had lost, so that hereafter we
should cease to sin, or offend God thorough our sins, and should begin by
little and little to live more and more according to the rule of Gods law.
Thirdly, They who necessarily must satisfy the Law either by themselves or by
another, and are not able by themselves, have need of a Mediator. But we must
satisfy the Law either by our selves or by another: and by our selves we are
not able: The means of satisfieng by another, as it is not set dowen, so it is
not shut out by the law.
Therefore we have need of a Mediator. But exception is made against the
distinction of the Mayor proposition, in appointing either our selves or
another. Where only one means of satisfieng is put down, there must not be
sought for or set down another. But the Law acknowledges and puts down
only one means and way of satisfieng, to wit, by our selves: Therefore we
must not set down also another, neither must we say, either by our selves, or
by another. Answer. We grant the whole reason, being understood of the Law,
or according to the declaration of the Law. For in the Law in vain is sought
the way of satisfieng by another. Again, the Law teaches only one way or
means of satisfieng, yet so that it no where excludes, or denies the other
means which is by another. For no where does the Law say, ONLY by our selves
satisfaction must be made to the Law. And albeit God did not express that
other means in the Law, yet in his secret counsel he understood it, and left
it to be revealed by the Gospel. The law requires our selves to satisfy: The
gospel shows and Gods mercy admits another to satisfy.
In this therefore we must seek it. This double means of satisfieng is to be
observed; the former means of satisfaction the Law and justice of God
requires, to wit, that satisfaction be made by us: the other does the Gospel
declare, and the mercy of god admit. Reply. The doctrine of the Gospel then is
disagreeing from the Law. Answer. It is not disagreeing. Because the Law
puts it not exclusive, as shutting out al other: neither what the Law
teaches not, does it therefore deny or take away. Lastly, that a Mediator is
necessary to make satisfaction to the justice of God for us, many other
things declare. 1. The tremblings and torments of conscience in every one.
2. The pains of the wicked. 3. The sacrifices ordained by God, whereby was
desciphered Christ's only and perfect Sacrifice. 4. The Sacrifices of the
Heathen. For when as they were pressed with the pricks of conscience, they
sought for a means without themselves, whereby they might pacify God. 5. The
Sacrifices of hypocrites. 6. The sacrifices of Papists.

3 What is the office of a Mediator.
THe office of a Mediator is, To deal with both parties, What the mediator
does with God.
both the offended and the offender. First, with GOD who was offended, our
Mediator had necessarily to do these things. 1. To make intercession for us
unto him, and to crave pardon for our fault. 2. To offer himself for to
satisfy. 3. To satisfy indeed the justice of GOD, by suffering for our
sins punishment sufficient, though temporal. 4. To crave of God and also to
obtain, that he would accept of this satisfaction, as a price of sufficient
worthiness, for which he would account us for Children, pardoning our
offenses. 5. To be our surety and to promise in our behalf, that at length we
will leave off to offend him by our sins. Without this suretiship or promise,
intercession finds no place, no not with men, much less with God.

Secondly, with the party offending, that is, with us, What he does with man.
our Mediator must do these things. 1. He must be the messenger or ambassador
of God the father unto us, that is, to show and open this decree of the father,
that he does present himself to make satisfaction for us, and that God will
for this satisfaction pardon us, and receive us into favor. This unless he
should perform, we should be ever ignorant of this will of God, and so should
not be desirous of so great a benefit, nor ever attain unto it. For there is no
desire after that which is unknown. 2. He must perform this satisfaction, by
the pouring out of his own blood: because otherwise the justice of God should
be violated. 3. He must impute and apply that satisfaction unto us. 4. He must
cause us, by giving his holy spirit unto us, to agnise this so great a
benefit, and to embrace, and not reject it. For neither can any reconcilement
be, or any amity be knit between parties, who are at variaunce, except both
parts accord. 5. He must by the same spirit cause us to leave off to sin,
and begin to be conformable to Gods Law, that is, he must regenerate us,
and restore the lost Image of god in us. 6. He must preserve, maintain, and
shield us in this reconcilement and obedience begun in us, against the Devils
and all enemies, yea against our own selves, least we revolt again. 7. He
must glorify us being raised again from the dead, that is, perfect and finish
our salvation which is begun, or all the gifts both which we have lost in
Adam, and those which himself has merited for us.

In merit and efficacy does the Mediatourship consist.
The office therefore of the Mediator consists in merit, and in efficacy or
forcible operation. For in these two, are all those things which we have
mentioned, comprehended and absolved. Ioh. 10. I lay down my life for my
sheep, and, I give unto them eternal life. God gives us eternal life, and
this life is in his Son. John. 1. In him was life. John. 5.26. As the Father
has life in himself, so likewise has he given to the Son to have life in
himself; As the Father raises up the dead, and quickens them, even so
the Son quickens whom he will.

The benefits of the Mediator.
Now when question is made of the office of the Mediator, question is made
withal concerning his benefits. For the office enjoined of God unto the
Mediator, is, to bestow benefits, which Paul, 1. Cor. 1.30. compriseth in
four general heads as it were, when he says: Christ is made of God unto
us, wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.

I. Wisdom.
1 He is called wisdom, first, because he is the matter or subject of our
wisdom, 1. Cor. 22. I esteemed not to know any thing among you but Jesus
christ, and him crucified. This is our chiefest wisdom to know and believe,
that Christ is appointed our savior, by whom we being reconciled to GOD,
have given unto us the holy spirit, righteousness and everlasting life.
Secondly, Because he is the cause or author of our wisdom; and that three
ways. 1 Because he has brought forth out of the bosom of the eternal
father wisdom, that is, the Doctrine of our redemption. 2 Because he has
ordained, and does preserve the ministry of his word, by which he informs
us of the fathers will and his office. 3 Because he is forcible and effectual
in the hearts of the chosen, and makes them to yield their assent unto the
word or Doctrine, and to be reformed by it according to his Image. For
these three causes, he is called the word, and the image of GOD, as it is
said; No man knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will
reveal him. Shorter thus, Christ is called our wisdom, because he is, 1 The
subject. 2 The author. 3 The means of our wisdom.

2 He is called our Righteousness, that is, our Iustifier. 2. Righteousness.
For in him our righteousness is, as in the subject, and is made ours by his
merit, and forcible operation. For 1. he suffered the punishment of our
sins, which is justice and righteousness, and the merit for-which we are
reputed just and righteous. Furthermore, he by his power makes us righteous in
the sight of god, by imputing unto us that his righteousness, and by giving us
faith, whereby our selves also receiving it may apply it unto us.

3 He is called our Sanctification, 3 Sanctification. 4. Redemption.
because he does regenerate us by his holy spirit. 4 Redemption: because he
finally delivers us. For the word (...), (which we interpret Redemption)
does not only signify the price, but also the effect thereof. For abstractes
are put for their concretes, according to the usual manner of the Hebrews.

4 What manner of Mediator ours ought to be.
IT is manifest by those things which are gone before, that there is given us
a recovery out of eternal pains, (whereunto we were adjudged by reason of our
sin) by a sufficient satisfaction, performed by some Mediator in our behalf.
Now therefore it may be well demanded, what manner of Mediator is required
to perform and pay a recompense and ransom equivalent to our sins, and of
sufficient worthiness to redeem us: To this answer is made in the 15.
question of the Catechism. That such a one is required, who must be True man,
that is, Our Mediator must be true man and true God.
who must have man's nature, coming of mankind, and sprung from Adam (and still
retaining it) not as that it should be created of nothing, or made any way,
than of our blood. 2. A man perfectly just. 3. True God. Now the
Demonstrations and proofs concerning the person of the Mediator are drawn
from his office. For because such is his office, himself also ought to be
such a one.

He must be true man, subject unto all our infirmities, except sin.
1 He ought to be true man, and that a servant, that is, subject to al
infirmities, Phil. 2.7. Isa. 53.3. First, because it was man that sinned: As by
one man sin entered into the woorlde. Secondly, That he might suffer death.
For he ought to make satisfaction for us, by shedding his blood. He could not
have suffered death, except he had bin true man. Thirdly, That he might help
and relieve our infirmities. Fourthly, That he might be our brother, and our
head, and we his members. Heb. 2.14. For as much as the children were
partakers of the flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part with
them. It was requisite therefore that our Mediator should be true man, and
that borne of the same mankind, which sinned; not created of nothing. 1.
Because of Gods justice, which required that the selfsame nature, which had
sinned, should pay for those sins: because the same was to be delivered. But
our nature which sprang from Adam, sinned. Wherefore true man of the same
nature with us ought to pay for men that, which was required at their hands.
Genesis 2.17. In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the death.
Ezech. 18.20. The same soul that sins shall die. 1. Cor. 15.21. By man came
death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. Hereof the Apostle also
says, Coloss. 2.12. That we are buried with him thorough Baptism, in whom
we are also raised up together. Augu. Lib. de vera relig.
And Augustine in his book Of true Religion says, The same nature was to be
taken, which was to be delivered. 2. For our comfort: which consists in
this, that we may know, our Mediator to be very man, sprung of the same
blood, of which our selves were, and to be our brother. For except he were
such a one, we should never be able to resolve, that he is the Messiah, and
promised Savior unto us, and that the benefit of redemption does certainly
belong to our flesh, and to us men, neither should we freely fly and betake
us unto him in our temptations. For of the seed of the woman it is said, Genesis
3.15. Genesis 12. and 22.26.
that he shall break the head of the Serpent the Devil: and, In Abraham's seed
are all nations to be blessed. It was requisite therefore that our Mediator
should be borne of mankind very man. And furthermore I add, that it was
requisite that he should be subject to al our infirmities, sin only
excepted. And that, 1. For the truth of God, who often by the Prophets
describes our Mediator to be such a man, as is poor, weak, contemptible.
And of Esaias especially is he described to be such a one. 2. Isai. 53.3.
Heb. 2.11.
For our comfort. He that sanctifies, and they which are sanctified, are al
of one (that is of the same humane nature) Wherefore he is not ashamed to call
them brethren.

2 It is requisite that he be a man perfectly just, Why our mediator was to
be void of sin.
that he might worthily be our Savior, that is, that his passion might be a
ransom for the sins of others, For, had he bin a sinner or unjust, he should
not have been able to have satisfied so much as for his own sins, and to
have avoided the wrath of God, much less to merit gods favor for others. 2. Corinthians. 5.21. God has made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin,
that we should be the righteousness of God in him. Hebru. 7.26. Such an
High Priest it became us to have, which is holy, harmless, undefiled,
separate from sinners. 1. Pet. 2.22. Who did no sin, neither was there guile
found in his mouth. 1. Pet. 3.18. Christ has once suffered for sins, the
just for the unjust, that he might bring us to god.

Now four manner of ways is Christ perfectly just, Christ said to be
perfectly just four ways.
or has perfectly fulfilled the Law. 1. By his own righteousness. For
Christ alone performed perfect obedience, such as the Law required. For he
was conceived by the holy ghost, neither was there guile in him. 2. By paying
sufficient punishment for our sins. It was necessary that this double
fulfilling of the Law should be in Christ. For except he were just for
himself, that is, had perfect conformity with the Law, he could not have
fulfilled the Law for us, by making satisfaction for our sins, or by
suffering the punishment which the Law exacted of us, not of him. And except
his suffering of punishment had been sufficient, we should as yet remain in
our sins and death. Furthermore, that righteousness of Christ, whereby
himself did perfectly keep the Law, is called the fulfilling of the Law by
obedience: and his suffering of punishment due for our sins, is termed the
fulfilling of the Law by punishment; likewise obedience perfected and absolved
in suffering punishment. And the punishment verily unto which we were bound, he
of his own accord paid for us, and imputes it unto us, that it may no more
be necessary for us to be subject unto everlasting damnation. But his
obedience or purity of life, that is, perfect love of God and our neighbor,
he performed for himself, not for us, neither does he impute it unto us.
1. Because himself is bound by nature to perform it; in that he is man: For
every reasonable creature, in that he is a creature, owes perfect conformity
and correspondence to the Law and his creator. 2. If Christ had performed
his obedience unto the Law for us, we surely should be no longer bound unto
it: as neither is it necessary that we should sustain everlasting punishment
for our sins, because they were once punished in Christ. 3. The Law and
justice of God does not exact both together, that is both obedience, and
punishment; but the one of them only, that is, either obedience, or punishment.

The third way, that Christ does fulfill the Law, is by fulfilling of it in
us, by his spirit, when as he regenerateth us by it, and makes us able, that
even in this life we may begin both inward and outward obedience, which the
Law requires of them who are reconciled to GOD, and may perform that wholly
and fully in the life to come. Fourthly, he fulfilleth the Law by teaching
it, and by purging it of errors and corruptions, and by restoring the true
understanding of the Scripture or sacred doctrine. For, as it appears by the
Evangelist S. Matthew, the Scribes and Pharisees had so corrupted the
spiritual meaning of the Law, wholly restraining it to bodily actions, that
Christ was enforced thereby to give the right sense of many places thereof,
and so by the light of the truth to scatter the mist of their corruptions.

Our Mediator was to be true God.
3 It was requisite, that he should be God, not an imaginary GOD, and only
adorned with excellent gifts above all the Angels and Saints, but very god
by nature, and that chiefly for these causes which here follow.

The first is, that he might be able to sustain the infinite wrath of GOD,
or greeuousnesse of punishment, which should be temporal, and yet equivalent
to eternal pains. Now a mere creature by reason of his infirmity would have
been brought to nothing, or being oppressed by the weight of so great a
punishment, would have remained for ever subject unto the wrath of GOD. That
there might therefore be a proportion betwixt the punishment of our Mediator,
and all the sins of all men, which was altogether required by the infinite
justice of God: it was behoouefull that that person should be of infinite
strength, and so to be GOD, who should suffer (without falling into despair,
or being brought unto nothing) a punishment, finite in time, but in
greatness, and worthiness or valewe infinite. Now necessarily was that
punishment finite in respect of time: Because, that our Mediator might
accomplish the benefit of our Redemption, and now, when it was perfectly
merited, apply it or bestow it upon us, by his forcible working, that is,
might effectually save us: it was necessary, that he should by his power
overcome death, and first depell it and shake it off from himself. These
things could not have been done by a mere man, who, of what strength
soever he be, cannot by his own force or power wrestle out of the hands of
Death. Wherefore it was requisite that the Mediator should be God.

Objection. No mere man able to perform the punishment due for sin.
But a mere man was able by his obedience perfectly to fulfill the Law.
Answer. If we grant this: yet that obedience could not have been a price
for another debt, because himself should have been bound to perform it,
as being man. It was required therefore, that our Mediator should pay a
sufficient punishment for us, which he should not have been able to bear and
overcome, Wicked men and Devils satisfy in never satisfiing.
except he had been withal true GOD. For not the Devils themselves are able
to sustain the weight of Gods wrath, much less should we men be able to
do it. Reply. But all the Devils and wicked men, are constrained to bear and
sustain the wrath of God. Therefore creatures do bear and sustain it.
Answer. They indeed bear the immeasurable wrath of God, and sustain
sufficient punishment: but so, that the wrath of God is never satisfied by
them, and so they never recover out of punishment. For their punishment is
extended to all eternity. The wicked die, never dying. But the Son of God
did so bear the burden of Gods wrath, that after he had satisfied for our
sins, he did shake off that burden and drove it away both from himself and
from us. Why Christ's punishment being but temporal, was yet equivalent to
eternal.
For his temporary punishment was equivalent to eternal. 1 In respect of the
worthiness of the person: for the Son of God did suffer. Acts. 20.28. God
has purchased the Church with his own blood. Romans 8.3. God has sent his
Son. 2. For the grieuousnesse of the punishment; because he sustained the
torments and the feeling or sense of the wrath of God, and the horrors of death
for the whole world. He descended into hell. Psalm. 18.5. The sorrows of hell
have compassed me about. Deutr. 4.24. God is a consuming fire. Isay. 53.10. He
has laid the iniquity of al of us upon him, he would break him etc. And
hence is it also understood, why christ did so greatly tremble at death,
whereas many Martyrs have without fear or trembling offered their throat to
the persecutors. But it was necessary that it should be a finite punishment,
because otherwise there had been no satisfaction, if it had been intended for
ever.

The second cause is, that his punishment might be a sufficient and full
worthy merit and ransom for the purging of the sins even of the whole
world, and for the repairing of that righteousness and glory which they had
lost. The worthiness of this price must be infinite, and therefore so must the
person also be himself, which paieth such a price. For, that the creator
suffered for the sins of the woorlde, is by infinite more, than the death of
all the creatures, and the conformity or correspondence of all the Angels and
holy men with God. Wherefore the Apostles when they speak of Christ's passion,
ever almost make mention of his Godhead. Acts. 20.28. God has purchased the
Church with his blood. 1. John. 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us
from all sin. Ioh. 1.29. Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins
of the world. Yea God himself in Paradise joins these two. Genesis 3.15. The
seed of the woman shall break thine head, and thou shall bruise his heel.
Wherefore not only the worthiness of the person himself does declare the
worthiness of this price, but also the multitude and greatness of sins
which are committed from the beginning of the world unto the end, among which
none is so little, that deserves not everlasting death, and all of them are so
evil and grievous, that they cannot be expiated or done away, no not by the
eternal punishment of any creature.

The third is, That he may restore, by his forcible operation and power, the
Image of God in us.

The fourth is, That he should make known unto us the secret will of God,
concerning the receiving of mankind again into favor. For of this except he
were God, himself should be ignorant, and so should not be able to reveal it
unto others. Ioh. 1.18. No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten
Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him.

The fifth is, That he might give the holy ghost, by whom he might bestow on
us, mantaine and perfect in us the benefits purchased by his death, to wit,
remission of sins, righteousness, new obedience, and life everlasting. For
it is not sufficient for our Mediator to make intercession for us, to be made
a sacrifice, to open and manifest the decree of God, but it is necessary also,
that he promise in our behalf, that we shall embrace the decree concerning
our redemption by our mediator, and cease at length to offend God through our
sins: which is the other part of the covenant, made between God and us, and
is performed by us, that the covenant may remain firm and ratified. But this
by-reason of our corruption, could be promised of no man in our behalf,
except he have the power also of giving the holy ghost, by whom he might
work in us to assent, and to be more and more conformed to the Law of God.
But to give the holy ghost, and by him to work forcibly, in the hearts of men,
faith, conversion and salvation, belongs to god alone, whose also is the
spirit. Ioh. 15.26. Whom I will send you from the father. Objection. The party
offended cannot be Mediator, Christ as he is God, is the party offended.
Therefore, as he is God, he cannot be Mediator. Answer. The Mayor
proposition is true, if the party offended be such a one, in whom there are
not more persons.

But a most clear Testimony, whereby are taught in few words those three, to
wit, That the Mediator is both true man, and perfectly just, and true God, is
extant, Act. 20.28. when it is said: God has purchased the Church with his
blood. For he is true man, who sheddeth his own blood. He is perfectly just,
who sheddeth it for the redemption of others. He is true God, to whom both the
name and properties of true god are given, which is, to be a redeemer both by
his merit, and also by his efficacy and power, and that, of the church, that
is, of the elect and chosen.

5 Who is and may be that Mediator.
OF the person, who should be that Mediator, mention has been made by the
way, in the former question: but the handling of it does chiefly appertain
unto this. The Mediator was to be God yet not the father, nor the Holy Ghost.
That Mediator who must be both very god and very man, is not neither can be
any other, than the natural son of god, who also is the son of Mary, that
is, Jesus Christ. 1. Our Mediator must be true god. But god the father could
not be Mediator, because he works not by himself, or immediately, but
mediately by the Son and the holy Ghost, though yet he does all things of
himself: neither is he the messenger, or is sent, but he sends the
Mediator. Neither yet could god the holy ghost be Mediator, because he was to
be sent of the Mediator into the hearts of the elect. Therefore necessarily the
son was to be our Mediator. 2. That which a man imparteth to others he must
needs have himself first. But it belongs unto the Mediator to confer and
bestow grace and the name of the children of God upon us, that is, to woork,
that through him we might be adopted of God to be his sons, (now this the
holy Ghost does not give, for he is not the Son: neither had the father it,
because he was to adopt us by his Son to be his Sons) Therefore the
Mediator himself was to have the right and name of a Son, and that not by
grace only, but by nature, that is, he was to be a Son by nature, that
he might make us the Sons of adoption. John. 8.36. If the Son shall make
you free, ye shall be free indeed. John 1.12. As many as received him, to
them he gave power to be the Sons of GOD. Ephesians. 1.5. Who has predestinate
us to be adopted thorough Jesus Christ unto himself: and verse. 6. With his
grace he has made us accepted in his beloved. 3. The Son alone is that
person, by which the father opens his will concerning our redemption, gives
his holy spirit, and makes us new creatures. Therefore is the son called
(...), that is, the price and ransom of our redemption, and the scripture
ioineth the first creation with the second, and shows that we are again to be
created by him, by whom we were created of God, 2 Cor. 5.17. Gal. 6.15. Ephesians
2.10. Ioh. 13. But this was proper unto the Mediator, to be a messenger and
truceman between God us, and to remake or regenerat us by his spirit.
Therefore the son must be this Mediator. 4. It belongs to the Mediator,
to send the holy Ghost. But the son sends the holy Ghost. Therefore the son
is Mediator. The father also indeed sends the holy Ghost; but mediately by
the Son: the Son immediately. 5. It belongs to the Mediator, to suffer
and die for us. But the son is he, who taking our flesh upon him has suffered
in it, and died. Therefore he is the Mediator. 6. That the son is the
Mediator, is proved by conference of revelations and prophecies in the old
testament, and by the fulfilling of the same in the new. 7. The same is proved
by the works and miracles which Christ wrought. Ioh. 5.36. The works that I do
bear witness of me, that the father sent me. Ioh. 1.38. Believe my works. 8.
This is also apparent by the office of the son. His office is to declare the
counsel of his father: whence, he is called the word. Ioh. 1.18. The only
begotten son, which is in the bosom of the father, he has declared him. He
has also opened unto us the true knowledge of god, and his secret will
concerning our redemption. 9 By testimonies of Scriptures, both others and this
of the Apostle. 1. Cor. 1.30. Christ is made of god, unto us wisdom and
righteousness, or justice, and sanctification and redemption. Here are put the
That is, wisdom is put for the maker of us wise, Justice, for our Iustifier,
sanctification for our sanctifier, redemption for our redeemer.
abstracts, for their concrets. Justification, and Sanctification in us before
the fall were one and the same thing, as in the holy Angels: but now they are
different and diverse in us. For Justification now is the imputatio^ of Christ's
righteousness, whereby we are accounted righteous before God. Sanctification is
the working of a conformity with god in us: which conformity is here
imperfect, but shall be perfected in the life to come: where holiness and
righteousness shall be again one and the same, even in us. The su^me is, In the
person of the mediator three things are to be considered: which all the
scripture ascribes to Christ alone. First, that he is God, which many places
of the scripture do confirm. As Ioh. 1.2.3. The word was God. All things were
made by him. Act. 20.28. God purchased the Church with his blood. Romans 1.4. Who
was declared mightily to be the Son of God, touching the spirit of
Sanctification. Romans 10.11. Whosoever believes in him, shall not be ashamed.
1. John. 5.7. There are three, which bear record in heaven, the father, the
word, and the holy Ghost: and these three are one. To these also are to be
added those places, in which is attributed to Christ, divine worship,
invocation, hearing of our prayers, works proper to God alone. In like manner
those which attribute unto Christ the name, Iehoua. Hierem. 23. Zach. 2. Math.
3. Likewise those, in which those things which are spoken of Iehoua, are
applied to Christ, as Isai. 6.9. and Ioh. 12.40. etc. Secondly, that he is true
man. Hither belong those places, which call Christ man, and the son of man: as
when Math. 1.1. he is called the son of David, the son of Abraham, and Luc.
1.31. The fruit of the womb. And when Romans. 1.3. and 9.5. he is said, to be
made of the seed of David according to the flesh: As also, to have a body of
flesh, not to be an imaginary, but a true body. 1. John. 4.2. Every spirit
that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God. Hither
belong also those places, which attribute unto Christ things proper unto man,
as to grow, to eat, to drink, to be ignorant of some thing, to rest, to be
weary, to be baptized, to be circumcised, to lament, rejoice etc. Thirdly,
that two natures in Christ make one person. Hither are referred the places
which by communicating of the properties of each nature, attribute those to his
divine nature, which are proper to his humane nature, and so contrariwise. As
Ioh. 1.14. The word was made flesh. Heb. 2.14. He was made partaker of flesh
and blood. Act. 20.28. God purchased the Church with his blood. Ioh. 8.58.
Before Abraham was, I am. Mat. 28.20. I am with you always until the end of the
world. Heb. 12. He spoke unto us by his son, by whom he made the world. 1.
Ioh. 4.3. Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. Roman. 9.5. Christ is God over
all blessed for ever. Amen.

6 That there is but one Mediator.
There can be but one mediator, because there is but one natural Son of God.
THere is but one mediator, 1. Tim. 2.6. The reason is, because the Son
only is mediator, and can perform the office of the mediator. And there is
but one only natural Son of God. 1 Object. The Saints also make
intercession for us. Therefore they also are mediators. Answ. There is a
difference between the intercession of Christ, and of the Saints, who live in
the world, and pray for others, yea for their persecutours and for unbelievers.
For the Saints depend upon the merit of Christ, Christ offered himself a
suertie, and a satisfier; he sanctifies himself for us, that is, presents
himself in our steed. 2 Object. Where are many means, there is not one
mediator. But there are many means of our salvation; Therefore there is not
one only mediator. Answ. The Mayor proposition we deny. For it is one thing
to be a means, another thing to be the mediator of our salvation.

OF THE COVENAVNT.
IT was said, The covenant is that reconciliation, which Christ the mediator
has wrought between God and man.
that the mediator is a person reconciling parties which are at variance. Now
this reconciliation in the scriptures is termed the Covenant, and Testament,
which is the correlatiue, that is, has a mutual respect to the mediator.
Wherefore the Doctrine which treats of the Covenant is linked with the place
concerning the mediator, because every mediator is the mediator of some
Covenant, and a reconciler of parties who are at enmity.

The chief questions are, 1 What a Covenant is. 2 Whether it can be made
without a mediator. 3 Whether there be but one and the same Covenant, or
more. 4 In what the old and new Covenant agree, and in what they differ.


1 WHAT A COVENAVNT IS.
A Covenant in general signifies a mutual promise or agreement between the
parties who are joined in that Covenant, whereby is made a bond or obligation
for the performance of certain things on both parts, solemn ceremonies and
tokens being added thereto, to testify and confirm that promise and
agreement. For the making therefore, declaring, and confirming of a Covenant
serve mutual promises and outward signs and tokens of the Covenant. A
Testament is called the last will of a Testator, whereby he at his death
disposes of his things, what he would have done concerning them: this is
ratified by the death of the Testator.

In special, the Covenant between God and men is a mutual promise and
agreement, made by our Mediator, confirmed by oaths and solemn tokens (which
we call Sacraments) whereby God binds himself to remit their sins unto them
that believe, and to give them everlasting life, for and by his son, our
Mediator: and men bind themselves to receive this so great a benefit with
faith, and to yield true obedience unto God; which is, to live according to his
will, that so they may declare their thankefulnes unto god. The sum is: This
Covenant is gods bond to yield us his grace and favor: and of the otherside
our bond, to receive this grace by faith; and to yield new obedience.

Why the reconciliation between God and us is called a covenant.
Furthermore the name of Covenant and Testament show the same thing, to wit,
our reconcilement with God, or the mutual agreement between God and men. This
reconcilement is called a Covenant, because, as it has been said, both God
unto us, and we unto god have promised certain things to be performed of both
parts, adding certain signs and pledges of this our mutual agreement. Why
also it is called a Testament.
It is called a Testament, because this reconciliation was made, by the death
of the Testator, Christ coming between, that so it might be firm and
ratified. It could not have bin a Testament, except Christ the Testator had
died.
For while the Testator lives, he retains a right to change, detract, or
add any thing. This reason is alleged in the epistle to the Hebrews, cap.
9.16.17. The Testament, says the Apostle, is confirmed when men are dead. For
it is yet of no force as long as he that made it is alive. Christ has
purchased our reconcilement with God for us with his blood, and has left it
unto us, even as Parents at their decease deliver their goods unto their
children. Objection. The Testament is ratified by the death of the Testator,
which is good, who cannot die. Therefore this reconcilement is not ratified, or
at least wise it may not be called a Testament. Answer. The Minor is to be
denied. Because, God is said to have redeemed the church with his blood:
Therefore he died; but he died according to his humanity. Or, which comes
to the same; Christ is the Testator, as he is both God, and man: but died
according to his humanity only. Wherefore this reconciliation or Covenant may
be called a Testament. Reply. But Christ is the intercessor, The same is
called an intercession in respect of Christ, who by intercession works it:
and a reconciliation in respect of us, who are reconciled.
and god the Testator: Therefore the reconciliation is not of force. Answer.
They differ in persons and offices. The person of Christ differs from the
person of the father and the holy Ghost in office, not in efficacy and power;
and in respect of him it is an intercession, in respect of us a reconciliation
or receiving into favor.

2 How a Covenant may be made between god and men.
THat Covenant could not be made without a Mediator. For without
Satisfaction, and the death of the Mediator, there could not be wrought a
reconcilement, or any receiving into favor. For we were the enemies of God:
neither was there an entrance open for us to god, before he was pacified by the
merit of our Mediator. Again, Without the Mediator regenerating us, we
should not have been able to stand to the conditions, and so had the Covenant
been made of no force: as it has been showed more at large before in the
place of the Mediator, in the second question.

3 Whether there be but one Covenant.
THere is but one Covenant in substance, and matter: There is but one
covenant in substance, two in circumstances.
two in circumstaunces, or administration. There is but one in substance. 1.
Because there is but one god, one Mediator of those parties, god and men, one
mean of reconcilement; one faith: one way of the salvation of all who are
saved and have been saved even from the beginning of the world unto the end.
Hebr. 13.8. Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, the same is also for ever.
Roman. 9.5. Who is over all. Col. 1.18. And he is the head of the body of the
church. Ephesians. 2.21. In whom all the building coupled together grows unto an
holy temple in the Lord. Acts. 4.12. Among men there is given none other name
under heaven whereby we must be saved. Mat. 11.27. No man knows the father
but the son, and he to whom the son will reueal him. No man comes to the
father but by me. John. 14.6. I am the way, the truth, and the life. Luc.
10.24. Many Kings and Prophets have desired to see, that which ye see. John.
8.56. Abraham reioiced to see my day and he saw it, and was glad. All therefore
as well under the law, as under the Gospel, who were to be saved, had respect to
the only mediator Christ, by whom alone they were reconciled to God and
saved: and therefore there is but one Covenant. 2. Because the principal
conditions whereby we are bound unto God, and God to us, and which are called
the substance of the Covenant, are both before and after Christ all the same.
For in both, both in the old and new Covenant or Testament God promises
remission of sins to believers and repentant sinners. In both, men are bound to
believe and repent; that is, the ground and foundation of doctrine in both is
the same, to wit, the law and the promise of grace proposed in Christ.

Now the Covenant is also of two sorts, or there are two Covenants, as
concerning the circumstances, and those conditions which are less principal,
which are the forms of administration, serving for the principal conditions,
that the faithful may attain unto them by the help of these. A rule here may
be observed: The diversity of Couenaunts is known by the diversity of their
conditions.
In all Couenaunts their conditions are ever to be considered: which if they be
the same, then are the Couenaunts also the same: if diverse, then the Couenaunts
also diverse: if partly the same, and partly diverse, then the Couenaunts also
are in part the same, and in part diverse: as in this Covenant.

1 In what the old and new Covenant agree, and in what they differ.
1. The same author of both couenaunts.

2. The same parties in both reconciled.

3. The same mediator of both.


THe new Covenant agrees with the old, in respect of God, in these. 1. The
same is the Author of both Couenaunts. 2. The same parties are joined in both
Couenaunts, to wit God and man. 3. The same is the mediator of both. Moses in
deed is called also the Mediator of the old Testament, but as a type: For
Christ was also in the old Testament the Mediator but had adioined unto him
Moses as a type, but now he is Mediator without that typical Mediator. For
he is manifested in the flesh, and is no more covered with types. 4 The promise
of grace is in both the same, to wit, remission of sins, the giving of the
holy Ghost or regeneration, 4. The same promise of grace in both.
and life or glory everlasting, to be given freely by and for Christ the
Mediator to those only who believe. For God promises grace and mercy to all
who believe in the Mediator. Genesis 22. In thy seed shall all nations be
blessed. Genesis 3. He shall break the serpents head. Genesis 17. I will be thy
god, and the god of thy seed. This is the same with the promise, which is made
to the faithful of the new Covenant: He that believes in the Son has
everlasting life. Now here we speak not in particular, of the circumstances
of grace, but in general, of grace it self which was promised. Both
Couenaunts have the same corporal promises also, but that only in general.

Now, in respect of men, the new agrees with the old: that in both men are
bound to faith and new obedience. Genesis 17. Walk before me, and be thou
upright. I will be thy god, and the god of thy seed. But the Lord cannot be
our god, except by a true faith we apply the merit of Christ unto us, for
which alone he will receive us into favor; and except we bring forth the
fruits of true repentance. The new and old Covenant therefore agree as
concerning the principal conditions of the Covenant, both in respect of god,
and in respect of man.

But they differ, in respect of god, in these. 1. How the old and new Covenant
differ in respect of God.
In the promises of corporal benefits. For these in the old Testament were
special, certain, and definite, as the promises of the Land of Canaan, of the
Church, of the government and Mosaical ceremonies to be observed in that
region and nation until the coming of the Messiah: and lastly of the Messiah
to be borne out of that people. In the new Testament there are no special
promises of certain corporal benefits, but only general; as that god will
always in this life give his Church some abiding and resting places, although
it be dispersed and scattered throughout all Nations. 2. They differ in a
circumstaunce of the promise of grace. For in the old Covenant they were
reconciled unto god, and saved for the Messiah sake who should come, or be
exhibited: we in the new Covenant are saved for him being come and
exhibited. 3. In the signs or symboles of the promises. In the old were many
and diverse signs and Sacraments, as the Circumcision, the Passover, the
Sacrifices: in the new few, and plain, even Baptism, and the supper of the
Lord. 4. In the old Covenant were types and figures of good things to come,
and so all things were the more obscure and dark; in the new is an
accomplishment and exhibiting of those things, and so all things more clear.
The doctrine and knowledge of the Gospel, especially now Christ being come
and manifested, is more bright and plentiful, for that a declaration of
things done uses to be more perspicuous than the foretelling of things
which shall be done. 5. In the old the pouring out and effusion of the gifts
of the holy Ghost is more narrow and sparing, in the new more large and
plentiful. Hierem. 31. verse 31. I will make a new Covenant. 2. Cor. 3.6. The
old was but for a time, during until the coming of the Messiah. The new is
for ever: According to that, I will make an everlasting Covenant with them.
How they differ in respect of men.
They differ in respect of men. First, For that in the old testament the
Church stood bound to the obedience of the whole Mosaicall law, Moral,
Ceremonial, and Civil. In the new testament we are bound only to the
spiritual or moral worship, and the use of the Sacraments. The Ceremonial
and Civil laws of Moses bind not us. Secondly, The old was made to one
certain Nation. The Prophets therefore were sent unto the people of Israel,
and to them they applied their speeches. The new belongs to all Nations. For
God will that all be saved, of what Nation, language or condition so ever they
be. The Apostles therefore were sent to the whole world to gather the Church
of Christ out of all Nations: or, which is the same, in the old testament the
Church was tied unto a certain Nation; In the new it is Catholic and
universal, that is, spread through all Nations.

Why the old covenant was taken for the law, and the New for the Gospel.
Here is to be observed, that the old Covenant is taken by a figure of speech
called Synecdoche (which we use when we take the whole for a part, or a part,
for the whole) for the law, in respect of that part, which was especially
handled there. For in the old testament the law was more urged, and there were
many parts thereof. Contrariwise the gospel was then more obscure. The new
also is taken for the Gospel, because in the new testament a great part of
Moses law is abrogated; and the manifestation and knowledge of the gospel is
to us more clear and ample.

OF THE GOSPEL.
THis 19. question of the Catechism, which is, concerning the gospel, is like
to the third. For as that, so this also shows, that our deliverance by the
Mediator is known and learned out of the gospel. Seeing then it has been
already spoken of the Mediator, we are necessarily also to speak of the
doctrine in which the Mediator is declared, described, and offered unto us.
That doctrine is the gospel. Afterward we are also to speak of the mean,
whereby we are made partakers of the Mediator: that mean is Faith. First,
therefore the common place concerning the Gospel comes to be handled, which
is fitly annexed to the former doctrine concerning the Mediator and Covenant
between god and men. 1. Because Christ the Mediator is the subject or matter
of the Gospel, which teaches, who, and what manner of Mediator this is. 2.
Because he is the Author and publisher of the same: For it is part of the
Mediators office to publish the gospel, as it is said Ioh. 1.18. No man has
seen god at any time: the only begotten son, which is in the bosom of the
father, he has showed him. 3. Because the gospel is part of the covenant, and
the new covenant is often taken for the gospel.

The principal questions are, 1 What the gospel is. 2 Whether it has bin
always known. 3 How it differs from the Law. 4 What are the proper effects
of the gospel. 5 Whence the truth and certainty of the gospel may appear.


1 WHAT THE GOSPEL IS.
THe greek word (...), for which we use Gospel, signifies 1. A ioiful message
or news: 2. The sacrifice which is offered to god for this ioiful news. 3. The
reward which is given to him who brings these glad tidings. Here it is taken
for the doctrine which entreats of Christ: because it declares ioiful things,
eue^ our delivery from sin and death, or remission, and life everlasting. There
is a difference also to be observed between the word (...), and (...). This
word (...) signifies the doctrine concerning Christ now manifested: and is a
clear declaration of things done, or of the promises now fulfilled, by the
Messiah being manifested. But (...) is the promise and as it were a certain
shadowing out or a dark expressing of things to be fufilled by the Messiah,
who was after to be manifested, and so is it more obscure. The Gospel (for so
we interpret (...)) is of the new Testament, and the fulfilling of the
promises of the old Testament. Nevertheless this difference of these words is
not perpetual, neither consisting in the thing it self. For both of them
declare the same benefits of the Messiah: but the difference is only in the
circumstance of time, and in the manner of his manifestation and exhibiting.
Ioh. 8. Abraham saw my day and was glad. Ioh. 14.5. No man comes to the
father but by me.

Now the Gospel is the doctrine made manifest of God by his Son the
mediator presently after the fall of mankind into sin and death, The
definition of the Gospel.
promising all believing and repentant sinners remission of sins, and their
receiving into favor, and life everlasting, freely to be granted through and
for his son the Mediator: By which doctrine the holy ghost does forcibly
kindle and work in the hearts of the chosen, faith, repentance, and the
beginning of everlasting life. Out of the 18. 19 and 20. questions of the
Catechism, such a definition of the Gospel is framed: The gospel is the
doctrine concerning Christ, delivering and teaching that he is made of god (unto
all those who are ingraffed into him by a true faith, and do embrace his
benefits) wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption: which
doctrine was revealed of god, first in Paradise by his son, and afterward
propagated by the Prophets, shadowed by the sacrifices and ceremonies of the
law: and lastly fulfilled and accomplished by Christ. Both which definitions,
all the sums which are in scripture delivered of the Gospel do confirm: as
Ioh. 6.40. This is the will of him that sent me, that every man that sees the
son and believes in him should have everlasting life: And I will raise him
up at the last day. Act. 13.38. Through his name was repentance and remission
of sins to be preached to all nations. Luc. 24 47. He commands his
disciples to preach faith and repentance. Ioh. 1.17. The law was given by
Moses, but grace came by Christ. By these and the like testimonies of the
scriptures it is manifest that both the law and the gospel preaches
repentance: and that the instrument, whereby god does work in us repentance
or true conversion, is properly the gospel. But this order in proceeding must
be observed. First the law is to be proposed, that thence we may know our
misery. Then, What order is to be observed in teaching the law and the Gospel.
that we may not despair after our misery is known unto us, the Gospel is
to be taught which both gives us a certain hope of returning into Gods
promised favor by Christ our Mediator, and shows unto us the manner how we
are to repent. Thirdly, that after we attain unto our delivery, we be not
careless and wanton. Again, the law is to be taught, that it may be the
leuil, squire and rule of our life and actions.

2 Whether the gospel has been always known.
THe gospel, that is, the doctrine concerning the promise of grace through
Christ our Mediator, is not new, but has always been extant in the Church.
The Gospel published in Paradise.
For presently after man's fall it was manifested in Paradise: but consummated
and absolved by Christ; both in the fulfilling or full performance, as also in a
more clear declaration of those things which had before time been promised in
the old Testament. This is confirmed by the records of the Apostles: as of
Peter, Act. 10.43. To him also give all the Prophets witness, that through his
name all that believe in him shall receive remission of sins. 1. Pet. 1.10.
Of the which salvation the Prophets have inquired and searched. Likewise of
Paul, Romans 1.2. Which (gospel) he had promised before by his Prophets in the
holy scriptures. Of Christ himself also, saying, Ioh. 5.46. Had ye believed
Moses, ye would have believed me; for he wrote of me. The same is manifest by
all the promises and prophecies, which speak of the Messiah. This is therefore
diligently to be marked, because God will have us know that there was, and is,
from the beginning of the world unto the end, one only way of salvation. Ioh.
1. In him was life, and the life was the light of men. Ioh. 10.28. I give unto
them eternal life. Ioh. 8.56. Abraham saw my day, and was glad. Genesis 12.3. In
thy seed shall all Nations be blessed. John. 10.7. I am the door. John. 14.6.
I am the way, the truth and the life. No man comes to the father but by me.
Ephesians. 1.22. God has appointed him over al things to be the head to the
Church. Hebrews. 13.8. Christ is yesterdaie, and to day. John. 5.46. Moses
writ of me. Now Moses writ of Christ. Why Moses is said to write of Christ.
First, Because he recounteth the promises concerning the Messiah. Genesis 12.3.
In thy seed shall al nations be blessed. Deutronom. 18.11. God shall raise you
up a Prophet. Numb. 24.17. A star shall rise out of Jacob. Secondly, he
restrains the promise concerning the Messiah unto certain persons, of whom
he was to be borne: By which afterward the promise of the Messiah was more
and more renewed and revealed. Thirdly, The whole Leuitical Priesthood, and
ceremonial worship had a respect and were referred unto Christ, as the
Sacrifices, the immolations, the altars, the temple. Yea the kingdom also, and
the kings were a type of the kingdom of Christ. Wherefore Moses writ many
things of Christ.

1 Objection. But Paul says, that the Gospel was promised by the Prophets: and
Peter says, that the Prophets did foreshew the grace which should come unto
us: wherefore the Gospel has not been always. Answer. The Antecedent of
this reason is to be distinguished. The Gospel was promised, and the grace and
favor to come was foreshewed: it is true. First, as concerning the fulfilling
of those things, which in the old testament were promised to come. Secondly,
In respect of the more manifest knowledge of the promise of grace. Thirdly, In
respect of a more large pouring out of the gifts of the holy Ghost. Wherefore
the whole reason we accept of, as true, if by the Gospel they understand the
doctrine of Christ already exhibited and raised from the dead, sitting at the
right hand of his Father, and giving abundantly gifts unto men. But we deny
it, as the word Gospel is taken for the very promise it self of grace,
remission of sins, regeneration, glorification, freely to be bestowed for the
Mediators desert, and merit. For this grace was also promised and truly
proffered in the old testament to all believers, for Christ's sake, but who was
hereafter to come and to be exhibited; as the same grace is yielded unto us for
the same Christ, but who is already come and exhibited. John. 8.56. Abraham
saw my day, and was glad. Act. 10.43. To him give all the Prophets witness.
Romans 10.4. Christ is the end of the Law.

Objection. 2. Paul Ephesians. 3.5. says, That in other ages the gospel was not
opened unto the Sons of men. Answer. This reason is a fallacy of division
(as the Logicians call it) in dismembring or dividing those things which are
to be joined: or otherwise, it is a fallacy, in affirming that simply to be
said so, which was so said but in some respect. For the Apostle in the same
place presently adds, as it is now. For now, that is, the Messiah being
manifested, the gospel is much more clearly discovered, and derived and
spread to many more, than it was in the old Testament. It was therefore known
unto them who lived of old: though not, in so simple sort as unto us.

3 Objection. The Law was given by Moses, grace and truth came by Christ, John
1.17. Therefore the gospel was not from the beginning. Answer. Grace and
truth did appear by Christ exhibited and manifested, to wit, in respect of
the fulfilling, and full and plentiful perfourmance of those things which
were promised in the old Testament. But hereof it follows not, that they in
the old Testament were destitute of this grace. For unto them also was the same
grace effectually applied by Christ and for Christ, but being as yet to be
manifested in the flesh, and therefore more sparingly. Whatsoever grace and
true knowledge of God was ever in any men, they had it by Christ. John 1.18. No
man has seen God at any time, the only begotten son, which is in the bosom of
the father, he has declared him. Reply. But he says, The Law by Moses:
therefore not the gospel. Answer. The consequence is of no force which is
inferred from the manner of handling a thing to the thing it self. As, Moses
does comprise and deliver the gospel in dark and sparing manner: Therefore he
does not at al meddle with it: This consequence is not of force. For the Law is
said to be given by Moses: because this was chiefly belonging to his office,
that he should publish the law: though withal he taught the gospel, albeit
more obscurely and sparingly. For the promises of grace are intermingled with
the law: and all the rites of the old testament have a signification and a
testificatio^ of the grace of the gospel, which grace was bestowed on
believers for christ, who shall hereafter be manifested. But it was christ's
chief function to publish the Gospel, albeit he also taught the law. For he
purged the moral Law from corruptions, by rightly interpreting it, and did
write it by the woorking of his holy spirit in the hearts of men, abrogating the
Law ceremonial and judicial.

3 How the Gospel differs from the Law.
ALthough in the doctrine both of the Law and of the Gospel is entreated of
the nature of God, and of his will and works: yet is there very great
difference between both. The law known by the light of nature.
They differ, 1. In their reuealings, or in the manner of their reueiling. The
Law is known by nature, that is, knowledge of the Law was graffed and
ingendered in the minds of men in the very creation, and therefore known to
al, although there were no other reueiling of it. Romans 2.15. They have the
effect of the Law written in their hearts. The Gospel known by the light of
grace only.
The gospel is not known by nature, but is peculiarly revealed to the Church
alone, by the Son our Mediator. For no creature could have seen or hoped
for that mitigation of the Law, and the way how to recover out of punishment,
except the son had reueiled it. Matthew. 11.27. No man knows the father but
the Son, and he to whom the Son will reueile him. Matthew. 16.17. Flesh and
blood has not reueiled it unto thee. John 1.18. The son which is in the
bosom of the father, he has declared him. Secondly, they differ in the very
kind of doctrine, or in the subjects or matters which they deliver. For the
Law teaches what we ought to be, to wit, perfectly conformed unto God: The
law teaches what we ought to be, but not how we may be, as we ought.
but yet it does not make us to be such. But the gospel shows the means,
whereby we may be such, even by the imputation of another righteousness,
and the inchoation or beginning of new obedience, whereby we are conformed to
God in Christ. The Law says, Restore that thou owe: do this and live: The
Gospel says, The Gospel teaches how we may be.
believe CHRIST, thy debt is paid: the grace of the holy Ghost is purchased,
whereby he that is regenerated may perform the Law. 3. They differ in the
promises. The Law promises everlasting life, but with a condition of perfect
righteousness or obedience to be performed of us. He that does them shall
live in them. If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments etc. The
gospel promises everlasting life, with a condition also of perfect
righteousness, but which is performed by another, though yet imputed unto us
by faith. The Law promises life to those who yield obedience, or are
righteous in themselves. The gospel promises unto sinners remission of sins
and life everlasting freely to be given for the satisfaction of Christ,
apprehended of them by a true faith, that they be penitent or begin new
obedience. The gospel therefore requires of us only a true faith, whereby we
may embrace Christ's perfect righteousness freely imputed to believers, yea
Christ himself together with all his benefits bestowed of mere grace upon us.
Neither for these respects are the Law and the gospel at ods one with the
other. For albeit the Law will, that thou keep the commandments, if thou will enter into life: yet does it not shut thee from everlasting life, if
another fulfill the Law for thee. For by setting down the one way of
satisfieng for sins, it does not exclude the other, to wit, of satisfieng by
another, which way the gospel declares unto us. Now we cannot make
satisfaction by another, that is, by Christ, except by faith we cloth our
selves with his perfect righteousness. The gospel therefore commands us to
have faith, and with-all to repent from our heart: for faith cannot stand
without true repentance.

4 They differ in effects. The Law is the ministry of death, The law, the
ministry of death.
and kills. Because by it self without the Gospel, it is only the letter,
that is, the outward preaching, and bare knowledge of those things which we
ought to do. For it teaches indeed our duty, and that righteousness, which
God requires at our hands: but it does not make us able to perform that
righteousness, neither does it show us any hope to attain thereunto by
another; but rather accuses and condemns our unrighteousness. Flesh
hardely bearing this, is angry and rages against GOD himself, and is in
despair. The Gospel, the ministry of life.
The gospel is the ministry of life and of the spirit, that is, it has the
forcible operation of the holy Ghost adioined, and does quicken. For this is
the instrument of the holy Ghost, which he properly uses, to kindle faith in
us, whereby we, who before were dead, are again quickened and receive strength
to perform the Law. For thorough faith in Christ our Mediator, the Law
cease to be unto us the ministry of Death, and is become spiritual, that
is, the instrument of the holy GHOST, whereby he forcibly moves our hearts
to serve God.

The Gospel is the preaching of repentance.
It was said, in the definition of the Gospel, and in the third difference
between the Law and the Gospel, that the Gospel requires both faith and
repentance or new obedience, and so is the preaching both of remission of
sins and of repentance. Against this Flacius Sectaries keep a stir, and
reason after this sort: There is no precept or commandment belonging to the
Gospel. The preaching of repentance is a precept or commandment. Therefore
the preaching of repentance belongs not to the Gospel, but to the Law.
Answer. We deny the Mayor, if it be generally meant. The recalling of
sinners unto God is proper unto the Gospel.
For this precept is proper unto the Gospel, That it commands us to believe
it, to embrace the benefit of Christ, and now being justified to begin that
righteousness which the Law requires of us. Wherefore the Gospel is the
preaching of repentance: because it wills sinners, yielding them hope to
obtain pardon thorough and for CHRIST, to return unto GOD. It shows them
the way how to exercise true repentance, and begins it in their hearts by
the force of the holy Ghost. These things are not done by the Law, but by
the Gospel only. They reply. Yea but the Law also wills us to believe, and
commands conversion. Therefore it is not proper to the Gospel: or else the
Gospel is not diverse from the Law. Answer. Both the Law and the Gospel
commands faith and conversion to God; but diversely. The Law does it only
in general, because it commands us to believe every word of God, Both the
law and the Gospel require faith.
that is, all the promises, commandments, and threatninges of God, delivered
either in the Law, or in the Gospel, and that with a denouncing of
punishment, except we do it. The Law says, Believe every word of God: it
wills therefore, that we believe and obey this commandment also, by which
God in the Gospel commands us to return unto him, and to believe in
Christ. But the Gospel in special, and expressly wills us to embrace by
faith the grace promised us in Christ, and to return unto God: that is, it
says not in general, Believe all the promises and denouncinges of God, etc.
For this it leaves unto the Law: but it says plainly and expressly, Believe
this promise, to wit, that thy sins are pardoned thee, and that thou art
received of God into favor, by and for Christ, and return unto GOD. Further,
it exhorts us both inwardely and outwardely, by the word and Sacraments,
that we walk worthy of him, that is, do such works, as are pleasing to
GOD: but this it does only in general, and therefore sends us back unto
the Law, which in particular and distinctly declares, what that righteousness,
or obedience, or works are, which God requires of us.

4 What are the proper effects of the Gospel.
THe proper effects of the gospel are 1. Faith. Roman. 10.17. Faith comes
by hearing. 2. Corint. 3.8. The gospel is the ministry of the spirit. Romans
1.16. The gospel is the power of God unto salvation to every one that
believes. 2. Our whole conversion unto God, justification, regeneration, and
salvation, which are the effects of Faith. For by Faith as by the instrument
whole Christ together with all his benefits is received.

5 Whence the truth and certainty of the gospel may appear.
THe truth and certainty of the gospel, that is, of the promise of grace
appears, 1. By the testimony of the holy ghost. 2. By the prophecies which
have bin uttered by the Prophets and other holy men. 3. By the fulfilling of
those Prophecies, which was accomplished in the new Testament. 4. By the
miracles, whereby the doctrine of the gospel was confirmed. 5. By the end or
property of the doctrine of the gospel: Because that alone shows the way how
to escape death and sin.

Question, 20. and 21. of Faith.
The necessity of the true doctrine of Faith.
THese two questions are necessarily annexed to the former concerning the
Mediator Christ, and the gospel. For without this Doctrine of faith, neither
the Mediator, neither the preaching of the gospel are profitable to any, but
rather increase and aggrauate their condemnation. For albeit the satisfaction
of our Mediator Christ for our sins be most perfect, and God does testify
in his gospel, that he will accept it for righteousness, and for it receive
men into favor: yet notwithstanding all are not freed from misery, but they
only who believe the gospel, and also do apply the merit of Christ unto
themselves by a true faith. For of that condition is Christ's righteousness
made ours, if we receive it: now that receiving is the act and work of faith
alone, that is, faith only is the mean, whereby we are made partakers both of
Christ himself, and of all his benefits. Wherefore we are diligently to
learn out of Gods word, what is the nature, and what the property of faith.

Grace is greater than sin in respect of the sufficiency of Christ's
satisfaction, not in respect of the application thereof.
1 Objection. Grace exceeds the sin of Adam. If therefore for the sin of
Adam al men are cast away: much more by the grace of Christ, all and not
believers only are saved. Answer to the Antecedent: Grace exceeds and is
above sin, in respect of the sufficiency of the satisfaction; not in respect
of the application thereof. Wherefore, that al are not saved through the
satisfaction or obedience of Christ, the fault thereof sticks in men
themselves, and is to be ascribed unto the unbelievers, who embrace not the
grace of Christ offered, but like ungrateful men reject it. But in the
believers only does god obtain his end and purpose, when as they be
thankful unto God, receive the benefits of god by a true faith, and
celebrate and magnify them in their whole life.

2 Objection. Whomsoever Christ has fully satisfied for, they are to be
received of god into favor: For so does the Justice of god require. But Christ
has fully satisfied for all the sins of all men. Therefore al men are to be
received of god into favor: or, if this be not done, god shall be unjust, or
somewhat is derogated from christ's merit. Answer. The Mayor proposition being
understood simply and without any limitation, is false. All are received into
favor, for whom Christ has satisfied, to wit, if they apply the satisfaction
of Christ unto themselves by believing and resolving, that they are for that
his satisfaction accepted of god, Ioh. 3.16. So god loved the world, that he
gave his Son, that whosoever believes in him, might have everlasting life.
And hereof it appears, wherefore all are not saved, even because all do not
apply by faith Christ's satisfaction unto them; and god will have examples to
remain not only of his mercy in his chosen, but of his Justice also in the
reprobate. This would not be, if al, without making of difference, were saved.

Objection. Adam by one sin made al subject to condemnation, but Christ does
justify only some. The force of Christ's satisfaction is seen not in the
multitude of them who are saved, but in the greatness of the benifit.
The force therefore is greater of sin to condemn, than of the satisfaction of
Christ to save. Auns. We deny the consequence of this argument: because the
efficacy and excellency of the satisfaction of Christ, is not to be esteemed,
by the multitude of them who are thereby saved, but by the greatness of the
benefit it self. For it is a greater work to deliver and save even one from
everlasting death, than to make all men by one sin guilty of everlasting
death. For be it that Christ should save even but one man. 1. It was necessary
that he should pay in a finit time, a punishment in greatness and valewe
infinite, not only for that one sin of Adam, but for other infinite sins
which followed it, of which every one also deserve infinite punishment. 2. It
was required also, that he should purge and take away not only that original
and birth-sinne, but also infinite others. 3. and should restore in us a
perfect conformity with god. Wherefore the grace of Christ in saving even one
man does in infinite manner exceed the sin of Adam. Again, that al are not
saved by Christ, the cause lies not in the force and excellency of his
satisfaction, or in the merit of Christ: for this in it self is a sufficient
and full worthy ransom, for the expiating of all the sins of al men: but the
fault rather is in men, who do not as much as apply unto themselves by a true
faith Christ's merit, as they do apply unto themselves the sin of Adam, both
by being borne in it, and consenting unto it, and in fostering it. For the
grace of God is not narrower, or of a straiter compass than sin, in respect
of the sufficiency of Christ's satisfaction, but in respect of the sufficiency
of the application thereof, which is required of men. For God will not so show
his mercy, as that he will not also exercise his justice.

Now the reason, why God does impute for perfect righteousness the merit of
Christ to believers only, and restores salvation unto them, is, for that in
them alone he obtains the end both of his creation, and also of his delivery
and justification, even his praise and glory. For they only agnise this
benefit of GOD, and yield thanks unto him for it: the rest despise it.

OF FAITH.
HAVING declared the Doctrine concerning the Mediator, which is the gospel;
it remains that we speak of the mean, whereby we are made partakers of the
Mediator, that is, of faith, without which also the preaching of the Gospel
profits and avails nothing.

The principal questions concerning Faith, are seven.
1 What faith is in general. 2 How many kinds of faith there are. 3 How those
kinds differ. 4 How faith and hope differ, and agree. 5 What are the causes of
faith. 6 What the effects. 7 To whom it is given.
1 WHAT FAITH IS.
FAith in general, is a knowledge of certain propositions, and a firm
assent, caused by the authority of a true witness, who is not thought to
deceive, whether it be God, or Angel, or Man, or Experience: or, it is to
assent firmly to a thing known, for the asseueration sake, and word of true
witnesses. This faith reaches to things both divine and humane. Wherefore we
must give a more restrained faith, which may agree to divine things: which
notwithstanding must be also general. Theological faith therefore is a
certain knowledge, firmly yielding assent to all things, The definition of
Theological faith in general.
which are delivered in the sacred Scriptures, of God, his will and works,
and of sin: even because God himself does affirm it: or, it is, to yield
assent to every word of God, delivered to the Church, either in the Law, or
in the Gospel, for that it is the asseueration or auouching of God himself.
Oftentimes it is taken for the very doctrine of the Church, or those things
whereby we are out of Gods word enfourmed and instructed unto faith or
assent and belief.

Furthermore, albeit there be also other certain notices whereunto we firmly
give assent, as understanding or apprehension of principles, Science, Sapience,
Art, How faith differs from all other kinds of knowledge.
Prudence (for the assent coming unto the notice does confirm and perfect it,
so that what knowledge of a thing is had without assent, it is imperfect and
unprofitable) yet none of these are that faith, especially the Theological,
such as a little before it is described. For to those notices or apprehensions
we do assent, either because they are naturally engraffed in our minds, or,
for that they bring demonstrance or some other true and certain proofs. But
the Theological assent or faith is not, neither arises it out of the instinct
of nature, neither out of sense, or experience, neither out of demonstrations,
or reasons borrowed from Philosophy, but comes and depends of a peculiar
and supernatural revelation or divine Testimony. That therefore which is
added in the former description, for the asseueration of God himself,
distinguishes Theological faith from al other knowledges, even the most
certain. And this general definition of Theological faith is necessary,
that we may not think that out of Philosophy or such principles as are
naturally known to all, are to be drawn reasons or arguments sound and
sufficient, to confirm the articles of our faith, but may know, that the word
of God, and those good and necessary consequences and arguments which are
framed out of it, are a supernatural light, and more certain then all, though
most exact, and exquisite, demonstrances either natural or Mathematical of
Philosophers.

2 What are the kinds of faith.
1 Historical. 2 Temporary. 3 Working miracles. 4 Justifying.
What historical faith is.
THe difference of these kinds one from the other appears out of their
definitions. Historical faith, is to know and think al those things to be
true, which are manifested from above, either by voice, or by visions, or by
any other manner of revelation, and are taught in the books of the Prophets
and Apostles, and thus to be persuaded of them for the asseueration and
testimony of god himself. It is called historical, because it is a bare
knowledge, of such things, as God says he does, or has done, or hereafter
will do. Of this faith these Testimonies of holy Scripture make mention. James
2.19. The Devils believe, and tremble. For the Devil knows exactly, both what
things are written in the word, and also what are not written. Because he is
a spirit, witty, quick, and learned: he is present and sees whatsoever things
are done in the church, and also through long experience has known and does
know the doctrine of the church to be true, etc. 1. Cor. 13.2. If I have al
faith, so that I move mou^tains etc. Which saying may be constred of all the
sorts of faith, Iustifing faith only excepted. Act. 13. Simon Magus is said to
have believed, to wit, that the doctrine was true, which the Apostles did
propound. Historical faith good in it self, but made ill by them, who can not
apply it unto themselves.
Wherefore historical faith, may be without justifying faith, although
justifying faith is not without it: for the historical is a part of the
justifying: and therefore this is good and profitable, and necessary in it
self, but is made in Devils and men sin by an accident, for that they apply
not those things to themselves, which they know out of the word of God.

What temporary faith is.
Temporary faith, is to assent unto the heavenly doctrine which is delivered
by the Prophets and Apostles, to profess it, and to rejoice in the knowledge
thereof, and to glory therein for a time, yet not for any feeling of gods grace
toward them, but for other causes whatsoever, Temporary faith is lead in a
string with the commodities of this world, and with them does live and die.
and therefore without any true conversion, and final perseverance in the
profession of that doctrine. This faith or approbation of Gods truth, and joy
therein, is not true, sound and perpetual, but only dureth for a season,
because it arises and depends of temporary causes, which may be changed and
taken away; as the desire and pleasure of knowledge, glory, honors, and other
worldly commodities, whether public or private, true, or apparent and in show.
These commodities being gone once, and persecution or some other temptation
arising, it must needs be also that this faith must fail. This definition is
drawn from the words of Christ: Matthew. 13.20. He that receives seed in the
stony ground, is he which hears the word, and incontinently with joy
receives it, that is, embraces and professes it, and reioiceth in it: yet
has he no root in himself, that is, he wants applying of the merit of
Christ and confidence therein, and the regeneration of the holy ghost.
Wherefore it is only a resemblance and show of godliness, not true godliness and
faith. It differs from historical faith, 1. For that this temporary does
fore put historical. Further, it adds something unto knowledge, as
profession of doctrine and a certain godliness, gladness and glorying or
reioicing, because of the knowledge of the truth, but at length it saileth.
Historical faith is only aknowledge. This difference is thereby confirmed, in
that the Devils have historical faith: for they believe and tremble: but they
have not this Temporary faith. First, because that knowledge and faith, which
they have, never fails or is extinguished, but remains in them perpetually.
Again, neither joy they in their knowledge, neither do they profess it: but
though they know it to be true, yet do they horribly persecute it, and would
have it wholly rooted out. Now if any man had rather comprehend this temporary
faith under historical, I am not against it. But then must degrees be made of
historical faith, to wit, that in some it is joined with a certain ieioicing
and profession, as in those who reuoult from the doctrine of the Church and
godliness: in others not so, as in the Devils and damned persons: and so the
matter comes all to one. Objection. But the Devil has often professed
Christ; therefore he does not oppugn his doctrine. The Devil Professed Christ,
that for his testimonies sake, he might the less be believed.
Answer. He did this, not for any desire of promoting and aduanncing Christ's
doctrine, but for the hatred he bore unto it, that by his testimony he might
cause it to be suspected, and might mingle therewith his own errors and lies.
Therefore does Christ command him silence. Matthew. 1.25. As also does Paul:
Act. 16.18. Wherefore it is but an accident unto historical faith, for the
Devil to profess those things which he knows to be true, although he
greatly detesteth them: as also men for some commodity, or upon some other
cause sometimes profess those things which they hate, and the memory whereof
they would have abolished both out of their own minds, and out of the minds
of al men

What the faith of working miracles is.
The faith of Miracles is an especial gift of working miracles, that is, it is
a certain persuasion, springing from an especial revelation and promise of
god, whereby a man firmly resolves, that some extraordinary or miraculous
work, and contrary to nature, shall come to pass by gods power, which he
has foretold or would have to be done in the name of God and Jesus Christ.
This kind of faith is proved out of the Apostle. 1. Corinthians. 13.2. If I had
all faith, so that I could remove mountains etc. For although this speech be
understood of all the kinds of faith, excepting justifying faith, yet is it
especially referred to the faith of Miracles: as Christ also says, Faith of
miracles, comes by special revelation.
Mat. 17.20. If ye have faith as much as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say
unto this mountain, Remove etc. That this faith is diverse from the other
kinds, neither to be drawn simply out of the word of god, but by an especial
revelation of god coming thereto, without which miracles cannot be wrought, we
prove by these reasons. 1. By that saying of Christ, If ye have faith as much
as a grain of mustard seed: But many holy men, who both knew the history
of Gods word, and rejoiced therein, and applied it unto themselves, had
faith: yet did they not remove mountains. Therefore this is a diverse kind of
faith, from that which they had. 2 Many endeavored to cast out Devils without
any revelation from above, as the Sons of Sceua. Act. 19.14. With whom it
fell out ill; the spirit of the possessed man inuading, disarming and wounding
them. 3 Simon Magus Acts. 8.13. is said to have believed, and yet could he
not work miracles: and therefore he would have bought and gotten this power
with money. 4 The Devil knows the story of the Scripture, neither yet does
he work miracles: because none besides the Creator is able to change the
nature of things. 5 Judas did work miracles, and yet, Ioh. 6.70. he is
said of the Lord to be a Devil, that is, not to have a justifying faith. He
had therefore some other faith, to wit, the faith of Miracles, Historical,
and perhaps also Temporary faith. So, Matthewe. 7.22. Many shall say unto
Christ: Have we not by thy name cast out Devils? But CHRIST will answer
them, I never knew you.

Wherefore this gift of woorcking miracles is given to hypocrites also. For
albeit they have always Historical faith joined therewith: yet have they not
always Justifying faith. The other kinds of faith extend to all things that
are written in the word: but this of Miracles, is appropriated and restrained
to some certain works or effects to come.

Justifying or saving faith, What Justifying faith is.
as it is described out of the word of God in the 21. question of the
Catechism, is, not only steedfastlie to assent to every word of GOD, and
in this also to the promise of grace for Christ's merit, but also a confidence,
and full persuasion, applieng to every one that promise; that is, whereby
every man in his mind is fully and certainly persuaded, that not only
others, but himself also has God favorable unto him, according to the promise
of grace, and therefore reioiceth in God, and overcomes all pensiveness and
fear. The differences of Justifying faith from the rest.
This differs from the other kinds of faith, in that this only is the
certain confidence, whereby we apply Christ's merit unto our selves. And we
apply it unto our selves, when every one of us do certainly resolve, that
the righteousness or merit of Christ is also given and imputed to us, that
we may be esteemed for just and righteous of God, and also may be regenerated,
and glorified. Confidence or trust, is a motion of the heart or will following
and pursuing some good thing, and reioicing and resting therein. It is a motion
of the heart, because it is a following and pursuing of a good thing, and a
desire of retaining that good, which a man already does enjoy. It is reioicing,
because it is glad of the present grace of God toward every of us, of full
deliverance from the gilt of sin, and from sin it self in part; and because
by that which every one enjoys in present, he conceiueth everlasting hope of
blessings to come, as of everlasting life, and of full delivery from al evil
both of crime and pain, and therefore is free from the fear of future evil.
To him that has shall be given. The holy spirit given unto us, is the
earnest and pledge of our full redemption. 2. Corinthians. 1.22. and 5.5. Ephesians.
1.13.

Again, justifying faith differs from the rest, in this also, that this
justifying faith is concerning all spiritual gifts, and whatsoever belong to
our salvation, and is properly and simply or absolutely called faith in the
Scripture: and is proper also and peculiar to the elect and chosen. The faith
of miracles is of a certain gift, whereby we are not bettered, which we may
want without any hinderaunce to our salvation: neither is it given to all the
faithful; nor at al times. Historical faith is a part of the Justifying, and
befalls to al both the godly, and hypocrites, but is not sufficient alone to
salvation, because it applies not to it self those benefits which are known
unto it out of the word. Temporary faith hypocrites have. Justifying faith
therefore comprehends historical, but this is not sufficient to make a
justifying faith, as neither are the other two. For, If the inheritance be of
faith, that faith then shall be one of these four: But it is not of historical
faith: otherwise the Devils also should be heirs. Neither of temporary, for
that is rejected by Christ: Nor of the faith of miracles; if so, Judas also
should be heir. The inheritance therefore is of justifying faith, which is
properly called faith. The more general or material cause of faith, is a
knowledge and assent. For, if we speak properly, we are not said to assent unto
a doctrine which we know not. The difference or formal cause is, to apply the
promise of grace once known, and as it were to claim it for him that knows
it. For this causes faith to be, and to be called justifying. The subject or
part of man wherein it remains, is the heart or will. The peculiar affection,
or property of it, is to rest and joy in God, whereby it is distinguished from
all the other sorts of faith. The holy spirit is the principal efficient cause
thereof. Isntrumental causes, are the word and Sacraments. Furthermore, what
justifying faith is, No man knows what justifying faith is, but he that has
it.
no man understands, but he who has it, for he that believes knows that
he does believe. As he who never has tasted honny, does not verily know that
it is sweet, though you te l him much of the sweetness of honny. But
whosoever truly believes, that is, has a saving faith, he both has
experience in himself of these things, and also is able to declare them to
others. First, he being convicted thereof in his conscience, knows that
whatsoever things are spoken in the Scriptures, are t ue and divine. For faith
is builded upon a certain, or assured and divine Testimony; otherwise were it
not a full persuasion. 2. He finds himself bound to believe them. For if I
confess them to be true, therefore is it meet and just that I should assent
unto them. 3. He is certain that thorough Christ's satisfaction he is
received of God into favor, and is endewed with the holy Ghost, and is by him
regenerated and directed. 4. He applies unto himself all these things, and
does thus gather and conclude of the former: I know that those things which
are promised, belong unto me: that is, with a certain confidence he thus
concludes, By the present love of God toward me, and the beginninges or
first fruits of the holy Ghost, I certainly resolve and am persuaded, that God
will never change this his good will toward me, and therefore I hope also
for a consummation and accomplishment of these blessings, that is, for plenary
and full redemption. 5. He reioiceth in the present blessings which he has,
but most of all in the certain and perfect salvation to come: and this is that
peace of conscience, which passes all man's understanding. 6. He has a will
to obey the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles without ani^ exception in
doing or suffering whatsoever is therein commanded. If I will believe God, I
must obey his will, and think that this his will is not revealed unto us from
men, but from him. Wherefore a man endued with justifying faith does that duty,
which is imposed upon him, strive the world and the Devil never so much
against him: and undergoes, bears and suffers whatsoever adversities for
the glory of God cheerfully and boldly, having God his most benign and good
father. 7. He is certain, that his faith, though it be in this life
imperfect and languishing, and often very much eclypsed, yet being builded upon
the promise of god, which is unchangeable, does never altogether failor die,
but the purpose which it has of believing and obeying God, continues, it
strives with doubts and temptations, and at length vanquisheth, and in the
celestial life which is to come, shall he changed into a full and most
certain knowledge of God and his will, where we shall see God face to face.
1. Cor. 13.12.

4 How faith and hope differ and agree.
ALbeit faith and hope agree, in that they both respect the same benefits, and
therefore. Heb. 11.1. faith is said to be of things which are hoped for; as
also in that they are mutuallie joined in an inseparable bond: For he that is
certain of the present will of God toward him, Faith apprehends things
present: hope respects things to come.
is also certain of his will to come, because god does not change: Yet
notwithstanding, they must not be confounded, but distinguished. For faith
takes hold of the present good, as remission of sins, or reconciliation, and
regeneration, or the beginning of obedience and life everlasting in us. Hope
eyeth the good to come, as the continuance of our reconciliation, and the
perfecting or accomplishment of everlasting life or our conformity with God,
that is, full delivery from all evil. For these are the effects to come of
that present and perpetual will of God toward us, which we apprehend by
faith. Romans 8.24. We are saved by hope: but hope that is seen is not hope: But
if we hope for that we see not, we do with patience abide for it.

1 Objection. Life everlasting is a thing to come. We believe life everlasting:
We believe therefore that which is to come, that is, faith is also of things
to come, and so faith is hope it self.

Ans. The Mayor must be distinguished. Life everlasting is to come; true, as
concerning the consummation or accomplishment thereof: But it is present unto
us, as concerning the will and unchangeable purpose of God, who has decreed
from everlasting that which he has begun in us, and will also in due time
accomplish it. Again it is present unto us as concerning the beginning thereof.
For everlasting life is begun here in the elect by the holy ghost. Wherefore
faith apprehends it, as it is present, both in respect of the purpose of God,
and in respect of the beginning thereof in us. For he that believes feels
and knows that he is quickened: and resolves, this to be the will of God,
that that quickening and reviving which is here begun, shall be absolved in
another life. John. 5.24. He that believes in the son, has passed from
death to life. John. 17.3. This is life eternal, that they know thee to be the
only very God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ. Gal. 4.6. God has sent
forth the spirit of his son into your hearts, which cries Abba, father. Romans
8.24. We are saved by hope. 1. Ioh. 3.2. Now are we the sons of God, but it
does not yet appear what we shall be. By faith the^ we are certain that those
blessings also, which as yet we have not, are notwithstanding ours, for Gods
promise, and for the unchangeable will in God to give them us: but in certain
hope we look for them, as concerning their accomplishment. Faith apprehends
the promises of things to come; hope relieth on the things promised.
The sum is, There is one and the same act, and operation of faith and of
hope, but they differ in consideration. It is called faith as it does apprehend
things to come, as if they were present in regard of the unchangeableness of
Gods will. It is called hope, as it does certainly look for the bestowing of
those things. Therefore, Heb. 11 1. it is showed, that faith is, the ground and
substance of things which are hoped for, that is, it is that, which makes
things which are hoped for to be extant and present, in that manner as has bin
showed. Shorter thus, Faith apprehends the promises concerning things to
come, as they are to come: Hope, the things themselves which are promised.

2 Objection Faith is the evidence of things which are not seen: therefore
not of things present. Answer. It is the evidence of things which are not
seen, to wit, by the outward senses: but they are seen by the eyes of the
mind, even as if they did lie open to the eyes of the body. Again they are
not seen, in respect of their accomplishment or consummation.

5 What are the causes of Faith.
THE first and principal efficient cause of faith, is the holy ghost,
illightening the mind, that it may understand the word, and moving the will,
that it may assent unto the word once understood. Ye are freely saved by
faith, and that not of your selves: it is the gift of God. Ephesians. 2.8.
Objection. The Devil has faith: It is wrought therefore in him by the holy
ghost. Answer. What faith is in the Devil, is wrought by the spirit of God,
but that by a general woorking only, whereby he works in all, even in
Devils and hypocrites, what-soeuer knowledge or understanding is in them. 1.
Cor. 12. etc. not by a special and proper action or working, whereby to
regenerat or sanctify them, that they might truly acknowledge him to be the
author of this gift, and magnify him therefore; after which manner he woorketh
faith in the elect alone. The Devils therefore and hypocrites have faith from
the spirit of God: but the elect from the spirit of God sanctifieng them.

The isntrumental cause of faith in general is the whole word of God, the
Law and the Gospel, written, spoken, readde, heard, The chief instrumental
causes of ingendering justifying faith are the preaching of the word, and the
use of the sacraments.
meditated: likewise many works and miracles of God in the world. But the
chief and proper instrument of justifying faith is the preaching of the
Gospel, and the use of the sacraments. For these does the holy ghost use as
instruments (yet not necessary but arbitrarie and at his own good pleasure)
both to stir up faith in us, and to nourish, strengthen and increase the same.
Romans 10.17. Faith comes by hearing. Romans 1.16. The gospel is the power of
God unto salvation to every one that believes. 1. Cor. 4.15. I have begotten
you through the gospel. Mar. 16.16. He that shall believe and be Baptized,
shall be saved. Act. 22.16. Wash away thy sins. 1. Cor. 10.16. The bread which
we break, is the communion of the body of Christ. Wherefore ordinarily
justifying faith is never engendered in those who are of years to receive it,
without the preaching of the gospel. The cause of that faith which works
miracles, is not simply the word of God, but there must necessarily come
thereto an especial and immediate revelation from God.

The formal causes of faith, a sure and full confidence in Christ.

The object of faith, Christ and his benefits promised.

The final causes of faith, Gods glory, our salvation.


The formal cause of justifying faith, is a certain knowledge and confidence
in Christ.

The object of it is, Whole Christ, and his benefits promised in the word:
Likewise, God favorable to us through Christ.

The subject, wherein it remains, is the understanding and will of man.

The end or final cause. 1 The glory of God, to wit, the celebration of his
truth, justice, bounty, mercy, which he has showed in the sending of his
Son, and in the giving of faith in him. 2 Our Salvation, that we may receive
the blessings which are promised in the word.

6 What are the effects of faith.
The effects of faith, justification, and regeneration.
THe effects of justifying faith are, 1 The justifying of us before God. 2 Peace
of conscience, or joy resting on God. Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith, we
have peace with god. 3 Our whole conversion, which follows faith, and
begins at the same time with faith. For by faith are our hats purified. 4
The fruits of conversion and repentance, even good works. For whatsouer is
not of faith is sin. Hither may be referred also the consequences of faith,
that is, increase of spiritual and corporal gifts. The first then and
immediate effect of iustifieng-faith is Justification: from this afterward
flow al other benefits purchased by the blood of Christ, which all we believe
to be given us by faith. If therefore faith be the next cause of our
Justification, in respect of us, it is also the cause of those things which
necessarily follow Justification. Luke 8.48. Thy faith has saved thee. In a
word: The effects of faith are Justification and Regeneration, which is
begun here, and is to be perfected in the life to come. Romans 3.28. and
10.10. Acts. 13.39.

7 Unto whom faith is given.
IVstifieng faith is only proper to the elect, Justifying faith given to all
the Elect, and to them only.
and that to all of them. For it is given to the elect alone, and to all the
elect, even to infants, as concerning some inclnation Ioh. 6.44. No man ca^
come to me, except, the father, which has sent me, draw him. Ioh. 20.16. Ye
believe not: for ye are not of my sheep. Mat. 13.11. It is given to you to
know the secrets of heaven: but unto them it is not given. Act. 13.48. And
they believed as many as were ordained to everlasting life. Romans 8.30. Whom
he predestined, them also he called; and whom he called, them also he
justified. Ephesians. 2.8. Faith is the gift of God. Romans 10.16. All have not
harkened to the gospel. 2. These. 3.2. For all men have not faith.

Temporary faith, and the faith of miracles, is given to those who are members
of the visible Church only, that is hypocrites. But now nevertheless this
faith of miracles cease which flourished in the Primative Church; for that
now the Doctrine is sufficiently confirmed. Historical faith all they have,
who are by profession of the Church, whether they be of the godly, or
reprobates: yea and they also, who are not members of the Church, but enemies,
as Devils and Tyrants. Historical is a part of Justifying faith: because there
can be no assent or persuasion of a thing, which is not first known.

Objection. Historical faith is a good work. Historical faith which is good
in it self, made ill
The Devils have Historical faith. Therefore they have good works. Answer.
Historical faith is a good work, if it be joined with an application of those
things, whereto it assenteth, that is, with confidence. Reply. Historical
faith is a good woork, though it be not joined with confidence, because it is
an effect of the spirit of God: Therefore the Devils have good works.
Answer Historical faith is a good work in it self, but is made ill by an
accident, for that the reprobate do not apply those things to themselves
which they know and believe to be true. Wherefore the Devils are said to
tremble: for that they do not think that God is toward them also such, as is
described in his word, good, merciful, etc. The sum is: As the substance
it self of the Devils, and other things which they retain still of their
first creation; so also both the knowledge and faith which they have concerning
divine matters, are in themselves very good, because they are the effects and
gifts of god: but they are made evil by an accident, even by reason of their
abusing of them, for that they refer them, not to this end as to show
themselves grateful unto God the author of these good things, and to magnify
him for them.

A believing inclination in infant, though not an actual belief.
Objection. Against this, that all the Elect are said to have faith, some thus
reason: Many infantes are of the Elect, and yet have not faith: Therefore all the Elect have not faith. Answer. They have not indeed actual faith, but
they have a power or inclination to believe, which the holy Ghost, as is
fittest for their capacity and condition, woorketh in them. Wherefore that
remains still, which before was confirmed: That all the Elect have faith. And
further, this I add, that not only faith, but the confession also of faith is
necessary for all the Elect which are grown to years and understanding. 1.
Because of the commandments of God. Exodus 20. Thou shall not take the name of
the Lord thy God in vain. Therefore thou shall take it aright. He that shall
confess me etc. Mat. 10.32. 2. Because of the glory of god. Let your light shine
before the woorlde. Mat. 5.16. 3. Because faith is not idle: for it is as a
fruitful tree. 4. That we may bring others to Christ. And thou being
converted, confirm thy brethren. Luc. 22.32.

How to know that we have faith.
Now we know that we have faith. 1. By the testimony of the holy ghost, and by a
feeling of true faith in our selves, or by the thing it self, that is, by a
true and unfeigned desire of receiving the benefits offered by Christ. For he
that believes, knows that he does believe. 2. By the strife and conflict
within us of the faith of doubtfulnes. 3. By the effects; that is, by an
earnest purpose of obeying God according to all his commandments.

Against the certainty of faith, The certainty of faith.
whereof we spoke in the definition of faith, some dispute on this wise.
Object. 1. They, who may fall before the end of their life into sin and
damnation, cannot be certain of their salvation and everlasting life: This is
proved, because, to be certain, and to be in possibility to fall, are contrary
one to the other: It is false therefore, which is taught in the definition of
Justifying faith, to wit, that everlasting life is given us, and so our faith
to be certain and assured of it. Ans. To be in possibility of falling, or
failing, that is finally, True faith may faint for a time, but cannot fail
finally.
is contrary to the certainty of our salvation. But they who are once enriched
by god with true faith, do not fail finally. Reply. 1. All that are weak may
fail finally. We are al weak. Therefore we may fail finally. Auns. The Mayor
is to be distinguished. All that are weak may fail finally; true, if they
stood by their own strength. But we, who are believers, stand, preserved and
vphelde by the grace and power of God. Therefore can we not finally fail. For
whom God has once embraced with his favor, them he will not, nor suffers to
fall utterly from his grace. Reply. 2. But god has no where promised that he
will keep and preserve us in his grace. Answer. Yes, he has promised, and
expressed it, Ioh. 1.28. I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never
perish, neither shall any pluck them out of mine hand. My father which gave
them me is greater than all, and none is able to take them out of my fathers
hand. I and my father are one. Romans 8.38. I am persuaded that neither death,
nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor
things to come etc. shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which
is in Christ Jesus. Reply. 3. But it is said, 1. Corint. 10.12. Let him that
thinks he stands, take heed least he fall. Therefore perseverance
depends not of God promising, but of our selves, and therefore is doubtful,
standing upon a doubtful ground. Answer. This is a fallacy reasoning from
that which is no cause, as if it were a cause. For by this very exhortation
he goes about to nourish, make perfect, and preserve the safety of the
faithful. For God uses such threatninges, thereby to retain the godly in
their duty, that they may not wax proud, and please themselves. But hereof
it does not follow that he permits the perseverance of the godly in faith
and grace to their own strength and arbiterment. Moreover Paul in that place
speaks not to particular men, but to the body of the Church of Corinth, in
which many were hypocrites. Wherefore they who truly b^leeue, must certainly
resolve, that God will save them. For if he will have us assured of his present
favor and grace toward us, he will also have us assured of that which is to
come: because God is unchangeable. Reply. 4. Solomon says, Man knows not,
whether he be worthy of love or hatred. Therefore we cannot be assured of the
election of God, neither resolve any thing of Gods present favor, ands, by
consequent, neither of that which is to come. Answer. To the Antecedent. 1.
Man knows not; true, as concerning second causes, or by events of things,
be they good or evil. For external and outward fortune, is no certain token
whereby to judge of Gods favor. 2. Again man knows it not; of himself, but
he knows it God revealing it, and certifiyng us abundantly of his love
toward us by his word and spirit. Reply. 5. But no man has known the mind
of the Lord. Romans 11.34. Answer. No man has known it, that is, before G^d
has revealed it, neither after he has reueiled it does any man perfectly
know it: for so much know we of god, as himself has revealed unto us: It is
the spirit, which reuealeth and witnesses unto us, that we are the sons of
God. 2. Cor. 1.22. Romans 8.16.

2 Objection. Ezech. 18.24. The just man is said to perish, if he turn
himself out of the right way. I herefore believers also may defect from
godliness, and fall from everlasting salvation Answer. He in that place is
called just, not who is truly just: but who seems unto men just. For the
sons and heirs only are indewed with true conversion and godliness. Romans
8.14. As many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God. And
if sons, then also heirs. 1. Cor. 2.12. We have received the spirit which
is of God, that we might know the things, which are given unto us of God. verse.
16. We have the mind of Christ. Ephesians. 1.13. 2. Cor. 1.22 and 5.5. The spirit
is called the earnest of our delivery which is to come.

3 Objection. Paul 2. Cor 6.1. exhorts the Corinthians, that they receive not
the grace of God in vain; so Christ likewise bids us, watch and pray.
Answer. Thereby carnal security is forbidden and certainety of salvation, as
also faith, tranquillity, watchfulnes, and prayer is commanded. For these are
the necessary and proper effects of our election, and an infallible Argument of
salvation. For all believers are elected: and Ephesians. 1. Paul teaches, that by
faith we are made partakers of Gods adoption.

4 Objection. Saul failed and fell away finally. Saull was one of the godly.
Therefore the godly also fall away. Answer. We deny the Minor, that Saul was
one of the godly. Reply. But he had the gifts of the holy ghost, Answer.
He had such gifts of the holy Ghost, as are common to the godly with the
reprobate; he had not the gifts of regeneration, and therefore neither shall
he the holy Ghost sanctifiyng him, which is proper to the elect.

5 Objection. The doctrine of the certainty of our salvation breeds
security. Answer. It breeds indeed a spiritual security, by it self, in
the elect alone: and a carnal, by an accident, and that only in the wicked and
reprobate: but not at all in the godly.

Conclusions comprising the sum of the doctrine of Faith.
1 FAith, if we take the word amply and largely, signifies a certain
knowledge rising from the asseueration of witnesses, who are thought not to
deceive.

2 In the doctrine of the Church, mention is made of four sort^ of faith.
Historical, Temporary, working miracles, and Justifying.

3 Historical faith is a knowledge, resolving, those things to be true which
are delivered in the books of the Prophets and Apostles.

4 Te^porary faith is the knowledge of the doctrine of the church joined with a
joy, for the knowledge of the truth, or for other either true, or apparent good
things, without any applying of the promise of grace to the believer, and
therefore without either true conversion or final perseverance.

5 Faith which works miracles, is a certain knowledge by especial
revelation of the will of God, of working some certain miracle according to the
petition or foretelling of him, by whom it is to be wrought.

6 Justifying faith is a knowledge, whereby a man does firmly assent to every
word of God revealed unto him, and resolves, that the promise of gods grace
through christ belongs to him: and further it is a full persuasion and
confidence in this favor of god toward him, ouercomming al fear and pensiuenes.

7 For the confidence of justifying faith is a motion of the will and heart,
consisting of a joy conceived for the certainty of the present grace of God
toward us, and of a hope of our future delivery from al evils.

8 There is no faith therefore; but which rests on the will of God revealed in
his word.

9 All faith is wrought in men by the holy Ghost, either by the voice of Gods
heavenly doctrine, or by immediate revelation.

10 Seeing God will kindle, frame, and confirm ordinary faith in us by the
doctrine of the Church, al are bound to hear it and meditate thereon.

11 Temporary faith befalls to many hypocrites which are in the Church.
Historical, and the faith of miracles is common to the godly and ungodly.
Justifying faith is given in this life to all those only who are chosen unto
everlasting life.

12 Justifying faith does not always comprise Historical; neither is always
joined with the faith of miracles: As also the faith of miracles has always
either historical or temporary faith joined therewith, but Justifying it has
not always.

13 Faith also in the Saints is imperfect in this life and languishing: but
yet whosoever feels in his heart an earnest desire of believing, and a strife
against doubts arising in his mind, he may and ought certainly to resolve
that he is endewed with true faith.

14 True faith being once kindled in our hearts, albeit often it languisheth
and is darkened for a time, yet is it never wholly extinguished.

15 But after this life it shall attain unto a more certain and full knowledge
of God and divine matters, even to a feeling and experience, with all the
blessed, of Gods presence: which knoweledge the Scripture calls knowledge by
the spirit, and face to face.

16 Faith which is only historical, breeds, though by an accident, despair,
and the grieuousnes of Gods judgment.

17 Temporary faith breeds a certain joy, but not a quiet conscience,
(because it arises not from the true cause:) as also it makes show of
confession and some show of good works, but that only for a season.

18 Faith of miracles, does obtain of God those miracles, whereof it is
conceived.

19 By faith only applying to every one the promise of grace we obtain and
receive righteousness before God, and the participation or communion of Christ
with all his benefits.

20 As before this faith cannot go true conversion, and the beginning of true
obedience, according to all the commandments of God, so can they not but
needs accompany the same.

OF THE CREED, OR, SYMBOL OF THE APOSTLES.
AFter we have entreated of FAITH, Why the creed is called a symbol.
it directly follows now that we speak of the sum of those things which are
to be believed, which we call the Symbol of the Apostles, or the Apostolic
Symbol.

The especial Questions here are, 1 What a Symbol is. 2 What are the parts of
the Apostolic Symbol.


1 WHAT A SYMBOL IS.
THis word Symbol, is derived from a greek word, which signifies either
a common collation of diverse men to the making of a banquet, or, a sign,
token, and marcke, whereby a man is discerned from others: Such as is the
military sign, whereby fellows are desciphered from enemies. The Symbol, so
termed in the Church, is a brief and summarie form of christian doctrine: or
a brief sum, or confession of the points of Christian religion, or
Euangelical doctrine. Now it is called by the name of Symbol, because it is
as a token, or profession, whereby the Church with her members is discerned
from all her enemies, and from al other sects. Some say, that this brief sum
of Euangelical doctrine was called a Symbol, for that this doctrine was
collated as it were, and imparted by the Apostles, and every one of them did
bestow some part thereof: but that cannot be proved. But if you will derive it
thence, this reason also nothing absurd may be rendered thereof: for that the
Articles of faith are the squire and rule, whereunto the faith and doctrine of
al Orthodox or right believing Christians ought to agree and be conferred.

This Symbol is called Apostolic, 1. Because it contains the sum of the
Apostolic doctrine, which the Catechumens were enforced to hold and profess.
2. Because the Apostles delivered that sum of doctrine to their Scholars and
Disciples: which the Church afterward held as received from them. This
selfsame Symbol is called also Catholic, because there is but one faith of
al Christians. Question. Were there not new Symboles made, as Athanasius
Symbol, the Symbol of Nice, of Ephesus, of Chalcedon. Answer. These are not
other from this Apostolic Symbol: but certain words are added as an
explication of this, by reason of heretics, by whom because of the shortness
thereof, this was depraved. There is no change either of the matter or of the
Doctrine, but only of the form of declaring it, as easily appears by
comparing them together.

2 What are the parts of the Apostolic Symbol or Creed.
THe principal parts thereof are three.

1 Of the Father and our creation. 2 Of the Son and our redemption. 3 Of the
holy ghost and our sanctification: that is, of the works of our Creation,
Redemption and Sanctification.
How our Cre^tio^, Redemption, Sanctification, are each appropriated to some one
person of the Trinity, and yet all three persons have their joint working in
them.
Objection. Unto the father is ascribed the creation of heaven and earth: unto
the Son, the redemption of mankind: unto the holy ghost, sanctification.
Therefore the Son, and the holy ghost did not create heaven and earth;
neither did the Father and the holy ghost redeem mankind; neither do the
Father and the Son sanctify the faithful. Answer. It is a fallacy
grounding upon that which is affirmed, but in respect, as if it were simply
affirmed. For the creation is given to the Father, redemption to the Son,
sanctification to the holy ghost, not as they are simply an operation or woork,
(for so should other persons be excluded from it) but in respect, for the order
and manner of woorking, which is peculiar and proper to every of them in
producing and bringing forth the same external work. A more open declaration
hereof may be this. The works of our creation, redemption, and
sanctification, are the operations of the Godhead outwardly, that is, external
operations, which God works on his creatures: and they are undivided, that
is, common to the three persons, which they by common will and power woork in
the creatures, by reason of that one and the same essence and nature of the
Godhead, which they have. For the Scripture attributes the Creation not only
to the father, but to the Son also, and the holy ghost. Ioh. 1.3. Al things
were made by it. Genesis 1. The spirit of the Lord moved upon the waters. Mat.
1.20. That which is conceived in her, is of the holy Ghost. Likewise our
redemption is attributed to the father, and the holy Ghost. John. 3. God sent
his Son into the woorlde, that the world might be saved by him. Tit. 3. He
saved us by the renewing of the holy ghost, which he shed on us abundantly.
And sanctification both to the father, and to the son. Gal. 4.6. God has
sent the spirit of his son into your hearts, crying Abba, Father. 1 Thessalonians.
5.23. The very god of peace sanctify you throughout. 1. Cor. 1.30. Christ is
made sanctification unto us. Ephesians. 5.26. Christ sanctifies the Church. All the
persons therefore create, redeem, sanctify. Nevertheless yet in respect of
that order of woorking which is between them, Creation is ascribed unto the
father: Because he is the fountain, as of the Divinity of the Son and the
holy Ghost, so also of those divine operations which he woorketh and
perfourmeth by the Son and the holy Ghost. Redemption is ascribed unto the
Son; because he is that person which executes the fathers will concerning
the redeeming of mankind, and does immediately perform the work of our
redemption. For the Son only was sent into flesh, and has paid the ransom
or price for our sins, not the father, nor the spirit. To the holy ghost is
ascribed sanctification: because he does immediately sanctify us. For the
father creates, but mediatly, by the Son and the holy Ghost: The Son from
the father: and the holy Ghost from the father and the son. The father and
the holy ghost redeem us, but mediatly, by the son: But the son immediately
from the father by the holy ghost. The father and the son sanctify us, but
mediatly, by the holy ghost; but the holy Ghost immediately, from the father and
the son.

The works of the trinity external or internal: external common to al three;
internal appropriated unto the person.
Here is to be observed, that the works of the persons are of two sorts:
namely, Their works inward, and their works outward. The inward or
internal works of the persons, are those, which the persons have and exercise
one toward another. By these actions or properties are the divine persons
distinguished, and described. For the father is the first person, which has
not his essence and being from any other, neither begotten nor proceeding; but
being of himself, he begot from everlasting the son, and from him proceeded
the holy Ghost. The son is the second person of the Godhead, begotten from
everlasting of the father. This generating or begetting of the Son is the
participating of the whole divine essence, whereby the son receives from the
father the same essence wholely and entirely, which the father has and
reteineth. For the divine essence being infinite and indivisible, there cannot
some part thereof be severed, and imparted to another, as it comes to pass
in creatures; but it must needs be wholly imparted unto him, unto whomsoever it
is imparted. The holy ghost is the third person of the deity, proceeding, from
everlasting, from the father and the son. But begetting and proceeding
differ. For to be begotten, or to be born, is for another man or another person
to be produced out of the substance of him that begets, by way of birth,
as the son is borne of the father. Proceeding is a communication of the
divine essence, whereby the third person only of the Godhead receives from
the father and the son, as the spirit from him, whose spirit it is, the same
whole essence, which the father and the son have and retain. As therefore he
that begets is one person, and he another that is begotten: In like manner
the holy ghost also is another person from the father and the son, from whom he
from everlasting ineffably is produced, or has his being, by proceeding or
issuing: yet for all this there is but one and the same divine essence of these
three persons, albeit the father, as the fountain of the deity, has his
being from no other, but from himself: the son begotten of the father: the
holy ghost proceeding from the father and the Son.

2 The outward or external works of the persons are those, which are done
toward the creatures, and on them, and by them, through the will and power or
efficacy of the father, the son, and the holy ghost: but yet that order still
of the persons being kept, as that the father is the fountain of the
operations of the son, and the holy Ghost, and does al things, not of any
other, but of himself: The Son and the holy Ghost do not work of
themselves, but by themselves, that is, the Son works, the fathers will going
befo e, the holy Ghost woorketh, the will going before both of the Father and
the Son. Object. Whose works are diverse, their essence also is diverse. The
external works of the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost are diverse:
Therefore their essence also is diverse. Answer unto the Mayor we make by
inuerting it thus; Nay rather because the persons are infinite, there must
needs be but one essence of all. Because the inward operation is the
communication of the essence: and therefore the diversity of external woorks
does not import diversity of essence.

THE FIRST PART OF THE CREED, OF GOD THE FATHER, CREATOR.
I BELIEVE in God the father Almighty, Creator of heaven and earth.

To believe in God, is, to believe 1. That there is a God, and he such a one,
as he has manifested himself in his word and works. 2. That he is such a
one to me, and that whatsoever he has manifested of his nature, he will apply
and refer to my safety.

Object. In the Creed the father only is said to be God. The word, God, in the
creed, is meant essentially to all three persons, not personally to one.
Therefore the son and the holy ghost are not god. Ans. We deny the antecedent.
Because the name of god in the creed is put essentially, and co^priseth al 3.
persons, that is, it is put for God the father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.
These 3. therefore, The Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, are one subject by
appositio^ of the word, God, as if it should be said: I believe in one God,
who is the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. The rest, which comes
between each of these in the Creed, appertain to the description of each
person: and this is easily proved. First, these words, I believe, and the
particle, in, are referred after the same manner and sense to al three persons.
For it is as well said, I believe in the Son, and, I believe in the holy ghost,
as, I believe in the father. But we may believe but in one god. Wherefore as we
believe in the father, in that he is God: so believe we also in the Son and
the holy ghost, because they are God. When then it is said, I believe in the
son, and, I believe in the holy ghost, in both places is necessarily
understood the word, God. Furthermore, if of these words of the first
article, it follow, that the father only is God, then of the same words by
the like reason it should follow, that the Father only is omnipotent, and
creator of heaven and earth: which the whole Scripture cries to be most
false. But of especial consideration is this name of God, but only once
mentioned in the Creed, thereby to signify, that the true God is but only one.

One thing to believe God, an other thing, to believe in God.
We are moreover to observe in this place, that it is one thing to believe God,
another thing, to believe in god, For that shows a faith of knowledge, or
historical, this declares true faith or confidence. To believe god, if we
speak properly, is to believe there is a GOD, and he such a one, according to
whatsoever is ascribed unto him, as he has manifested himself in his word.
To believe in god, is, to be persuaded, that whatsoever God is, and is said to
be, he is all that, and refers it all to my safety, for his sons sake; that
is to resolve that he is such a one toward me.

What is to believe in the father, and why God is called a father.
To believe in the Father, is, to believe, 1 That he is the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ. 2 That he is also my father for Christ's sake, that is, that
he bears a fatherly good will toward me, as having adopted us, by Christ and
in Christ, to be his sons. God is called a Father. First, In respect of
christ his only begotten and natural Son. Secondly, In respect of all
creatures, as he is Creator, and preserver of them all. Thirdly, In respect of
the elect, whom being adopted in his beloved Son, he regenerateth. Wherefore
GOD is our Father in respect both of our Creation, adoption, and regeneration.

When the name of the Father is opposed to the Son, it signifies the first
person of the Godhead: but when it is referred to the creatures, it signifies
the whole divine nature, which is the Father, the Son, and the holy ghost:
Or, the name of Father as it is opposite to the Son, is understood
personally, as here in the Creed: but as it is compared with the creatures,
it is taken essentially: as, Our father which art in heaven.

To believe in God almighty, is to believe in such a one, What is to believe
in God Almighty.
1 Who is able to do whatsoever he will, yea also those things which he will
not, if they be not contrary to his nature: as he could have kept Christ from
death, but he would not. 2 Who does all things even with his beck and word
only, without any difficulty. 3 Who alone has power to work al things,
and is author of that power which is in all his creatures. 4 Who is also unto
me Almighty and omnipotent, and both can and will direct all things, to my
safety, that is, who will use his omnipotency to the preserving and saving of
me, not only for that he has nothing wanting unto him for performance hereof
to my behoof, but also for that no creature is able to stop or hinder it.
There is no good then so hard or full of difficulty, but he is able to give
me: no evil so great, but he can auert it from me. And this is properly to
believe in god almighty and omnipotent. Nevertheless those things which go
before are necessarily linked with the latter. For except we believe God to be
such, that is omnipotent, we shall not be able to believe that God is such to
us in christ: that is, we shall not be able to apply his almightinesse and
omnipotency unto us: so also in the rest which our faith apprehends
concerning God, these two are to be joined, to wit, that God is such, both in
himself and toward us.

Objection. God is not able to make that which is once done, undone.
Therefore he is not omnipotent. Answer. To have the power to ly, or to be
changed and the like, is no part of omnipotency, but of infirmity. Now a
passive power, as to suffer change, and defects, are in creatures, not in God.
Further it is Gods omnipotency, to be able to do whatsoever he will. By
inuerting it therefore I conclude thus: Because GOD is not able to will and do
that which is against his nature, and which would destroy it, he is omnipotent.

To believe in the creator, is, 1 To believe in him, What is to believe in God
the Maker or Creator.
who is creator of al things. 2 Who sustaineth and governs by his providence
those things which he has created. 3 Who has created all things, and so my
self also, to his own glory, and to the obtaining at length of my salvation:
and that I may be a vessel of mercy, he brings me to that salvation by his
especial providence, wherewith he embraces his chosen. 4 Who has created
all other things to his glory, and for us, even to serve for the safety of
his Church. More briefly thus: I believe in God the Creator, that is, I
believe that God, who has created all things, and governs them by his
providence, has created me and the faithful in the world, to celebrate and
serve him: and all other things, to serve for our safety. All things are
yours: and you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods: as if he should say, All
things are created for us, even as we are created for God.

To this first part of the Creed belong three Common places, very necessary
to be known.

1 Of GOD. 2 Of the Creation. 3 Of Gods providence.
OF GOD.
THE principal questions are, 1 Whether there be a God. 2 What he is, or what
manner of God he is whom we woorship, and in what he differs from Idols. 3
Whence it may appear that there is but one God. 4 What the names of Essence,
Person, and Trinity, signify. 5 In what the Essence differs from the
person. 6 Whether these names are to be used in the Church, and whether they
are had in the Scripture. 7 How many persons there be of the godheade. 8
How these differ one from another. 9 For what cause this doctrine is to be
held in the Church.


1 WHETHER THERE BE A GOD.
THE great misery of man's nature cannot be sufficiently thought upon, that,
whereas it was created to the bright knowledge and even the very image of god,
it is fallen so far, as not only it is ignorant who, and what God is, but
also makes dispute, whether there be any GOD in heaven or no. The causes of
this evil, The causes which have made men to doubt whether there be a God.
the Church alone does understand: the first whereof is the blindness and
corruption of man's nature after his fall: the next the instigation of the
Devil, who would have the whole opinion of God rased out of the minds of men:
unto which comes the horrible confusion of man's life and humane affairs, in
that oftentimes the wicked flourish, and the godly either are oppressed by
them, or while they perceive not the causes of these evils, and the secret
government of God, they fall to doubting whether there be any God, who has
care over the world and humane affairs.

But that there is a God, is proved by diverse reasons.

1 From the beutifull and goodly order of nature, The reasons which prove there
is a God.

1. The order of all things in the world.

2. The nature of man's mind.


beheld in the world. Now order is instituted, but of a wise and understanding
nature. In nature there is order. Therefore there is a superior mind or
intelligent power which instituteth and maintains the same.

2 From the nature and excellency of man's mind. For it cannot possibly be,
that he should bestow any thing upon an other, which himself has not, who
should give it: and that our reasonable nature must needs have his original
from an intelligent and understanding nature, is manifest enough, for that the
cause is not woorser or baser than the effect it brings. But the mind of man
is reasonable or endued with reason, and has some cause. Therefore it has an
understanding cause, which is God. The Minor is proved Whatsoever has a
beginning is from another: because it must needs be from some thing. And of it
self it cannot have being or beginning, because nothing is cause of it self.
But man's mind has a beginning. Therefore from another; which other must needs
be God.

3 From the notions of general rules or principles in the mind; 3. The general
rules and principles naturally ingendered in the mind of man.
as are the difference between honest things and dishonest, numbering,
understanding of consequences in discourse and reasoning, and other notions
borne together with us. For these notions of principles being borne in us, and
with us, could not come by chance or from a sensible nature common to us with
brute beasts. Whereupon we frame this Syllogism: Notions are not engendered nor
have their being, but from a cause intelligent (for no man makes another wise,
who himself is not wise) but in men there are notions, not coming by use, nor
received from men: Therefore they are from God. Romans 1. God is said to have
manifested his righteousness to men. Likewise, Man is the image of god. Seeing
then these effects are attributed unto God as proper: there must needs be a God.

4. This principle it self; That God is.
4 From the natural notion of this principle, whereby we affirm, that god is.
Principles are true: Because they are divine wisdom; and because, the
contrary or opposite thereto being granted, nature is thereby destroyed. But,
That God is, is a principle. 1. Because every one has experience hereof in
himself. 2. All wise men confess it. 3. All nations consent in it: because
they have some religion, and about that they contend and strive. 4. Romans 1.19.
That which may be known of god is manifest in them, that is, in the minds of
men, for god has showed it unto them. Therefore god is.

5 The terors of conscience.
5 The terrors of conscience which are stricken into the minds of the wicked
after they have sinned. The torment of mind, which ensues upon sins
committed, is inflicted of a judge which knows both honest and dishonest
things, detesteth those things which are dishonest, beholds the minds and
hearts, exercises judgment upon the minds: But in all the wicked is this
torment. Romans 2.15. They show the effect of the law written in their hearts,
their conscience also bearing witness. Isa. 57.20.21. The wicked are like the
raging sea, that cannot rest. There is no peace, says my god, to the wicked.
Isa. 66.24. Their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched,
Therefore there is some such judge. But he cannot be, except he be God: because
this punishment cannot come but from God. Deutr. 4. God is a consuming fire.

Against the beasts of the world, who think this doctrine of God to be but a
cunning devise of the wiser sort to keep the simple people in order.
And hence is apparent the impudency of Epicures and Academicks, who deem al
religion to be devises of subtle men, coined to this end and purpose, that the
rest of the common people might, through fear of a superior power, be kept in
good order. For first, if through deceiueablenes other men believe that God is,
and dread him; why then are these men themselves, who will seem by their sharp
insight to espy the guile most of al tormented with the conscience and privy
acknowledgement both of this their blasphemy, as also of other their misdeeds?
Moreover the sole and bare asseueration and word of a few could not have bin
sufficient neither to persuade al mankind, nether to maintain the persuasion,
once brought in, to al succeeding ages. Neither does that lighte^ the force of
those arguments, which are deducted from this notion, that there is a God; and
from the conscience, in that they say, there are many found, who neither believe
there is a god, nether are moved with the conscience of their sins. For
although they covet never so much to persuade themselves, that there is no God,
yet is their conscience always against them. And therefore it is most false
that these men imagine that any one of the wicked is free from the gnawing of
his conscience. For how much the more every one despises God and al religion,
and endeuoreth to repress the pricks of conscience: so much the more is he
tormented, and at every mentioning and signifieng of God he trembles and
shakes with horror; and how much the slowlier, with so much the more severe
dolor and pain is his security shaken from him. Whereupon we see, those,
whose whole life was profane and secure, for the most part, when they are
oppressed with the terror of gods judgment, to perish in despair. Now that
which is said Psa. 10. The ungodly is so proud, that he cares not for god:
neither is god in all his thoughts: and Ps. 14. and 53. The fool has said in
his heart, there is no god: that this has not this meaning, as if the wicked
were void of al knowedge and fear of god, or do not confess that there is a god:
but that framing unto themselves another, than he indeed is who has manifested
himself, to wit, one that cares not for men's affairs, defe^deth not, nor
delivers the good, and punishes the wicked; they place an idol in the roum
of the true God: David himself does sufficiciently declare, when as he
describes the same profaneness of the wicked, Ps. 10. in these words: For he
has said in his heart, tush, god has forgotten, he hides away his face, and
he will never see it.

6 From the punishments of the wicked, 6. The punishments of the wicked.
which they suffer besides the torments of conscience. For the events of al
times co^strain men to confess that their sins are punished with grievous
punishments in this life; and contrariwise the lot and end of the good to be
more pleasant. Wherefore there is a mind or understanding power, which
discerns honest things from dishonest, judge of mankind, punishing the
wicked, and defe^ding the good. And that this may not be ascribed to the
wisdom or severity of magistrates or other men, this first withsta^deth and
hinders, for that it must needs be that this natural instinct, whereby men
judge that offender* are justly punished, must proceed from some mind which is
enemy to wickedness. Again, for that oftentimes by marvelous and inexpected and
unlooked for means they are drawn to the justice and punishment of the
Magistrates, whose sins before had been privy, or who seemed to have bin
able by their own power or subtilty easily to escape their hands; and that
especially, for that many, who through either the negligence or whiteliuerdnes
of Magistrates are not punished by them, yet run into calamities and have
allotted unto them ruthful ends. And when transgressions and sins increase too
much, and their impunity, whole nations and commonwealths with horrible and
manifest examples of gods wrath perish: as the world in the deluge: Sodom by
fire cast from heaven: Pharao in the red sea: the Jews, and many flourishing
kingdoms by most lamentable overthrows. That these things cannot come to
pass by chance, neither any other way than by the judgment and power of him
who is Lord of mankind and nature, both Gods comminations and threatenings, and
the conscience of every one, and the order of justice, whereby these follow and
ensue upon impiety, and the very hugenes, weight and greatness of things does
convince. Wherefore it is said, Ps. 58. The righteous shall rejoice when he
sees the vengeance: he shall wash his footsteps in the blood of the ungodly. So
that a man shall say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous: doubtless
there is a god that judges the earth. And Psa. 9.16. The Lord is known to
execute judgment: now albeit the wicked flourish often for a while, and the
godly are oppressed, yet nevertheless examples which are fewer in number, do not
weaken the general rule, unto which most eue^ts agree. But if it were so that
fewer of the wicked did suffer punishment, yet those selfsame examples, though
but a few, would testify that god is, and that he is displeased with the
offenses of others also, who seem to be less punished. But this is not true,
no not of any of them, that they are not punished in this life. For all those
who are not before the end of this life converted to god, if punishment do not
sooner overtake them, yet at length they die in despair, which punishment is
more grievous than all the evils either corporal or external, and is the
beginning and testimony of everlasting punishment. Now in that this punishment
is not sufficient, it does therein agree with all even the most tragical cases
of the wicked: and therefore we are taught by the doctrine of the Church, that
Gods lenity, which he does not seldom use in this life toward the wicked:
and his severity, which he seems to show toward the godly, does not at
all weaken his divine providence and justice, but rather declares his goodness,
whiles by differring of punishment he inuiteth the wicked to repentance, and
by exercising the godly with chastisementes and crosses, he perfecteth their
salvation; and also it confirms the certainty of judgment after this life,
wherein perfect satisfaction shall be made by the wicked to Gods justice.

7 From a body politic, which is wisely ordered by laws. 7 Commonweals
wisely ordered.
This could not have been showed unto men, but from a mind, understanding
and approouing this order, which mind is God himself. Moreover, that which is
not preserved by humane wisdom, or by force, or natural causes, neither yet
can be ouerthrown by Devils and the multitude of wickedmen, has a defender
more potent and mighty than these. Commonweals are not preserved by humane
strength or wisdom, and are oppugned by the wicked and Devils. Therefore they
have a superior and mightier defender than all these. And this defender is God
alone.

8 From the order and nature of efficient causes. 8. The order and nature of
efficient causes.
For it can not be, that the process and race of efficient causes should be
of an endless and infinite extent: wherefore there must be some first and
principal cause, which may either mediately or immediately produce and move
the rest, on which also all other causes may depend. Now that the progress
of causes, which have their moving and being each of other, is not infinite,
they show by this reason. If the causes of any effect were infinite, whereof
some should move or produce other some, one of these absurdities should
follow; that either within the compass of a finite time should be effected
infinite motions and mutations, or else at no time those infinite causes ever
to attain unto their end, that is, unto their purposed effect. Both which
being manifestly false, and impossible, it must needs be that the original of
mutations depends of some cause immutable, eternal and omnipotent.

9. The ends of all things.
9 From the final causes of al things. To appoint the ends of all things
belongs to a nature which is wise, and administreth al things. Now al things
are ordained to their ends, and those also certain. (But these ends and uses
of things have not their being by chance, or from a nature only endewed
with sense) Therefore from some nature which is wise and omnipotent, which is
God alone.

For, that nature works for some end, this is so far from remoouing the
framer and artificer from it, as rather it most of all confirms, that there
is a mind maker and framer of the woorlde, which appointed the actions of
nature to these ends, and nature deed intends to an end thtough the
ordination and appointment of another, but neither understands it, nor is
moved thereby to work.

And further, that there are many things in the world which not only seem
unprofitable to all, but are also troublesome and pernicious: this also does
not infringe the general rule, That all things were made to a good use. For
by reason of sin those things now hurt, which would have profited men if
they had not sinned. And therefore to the godly al things turn to their
safety, yea that punishment it self, which God inflicteth by other creatures
upon me^, serves for an use agreeable to the wisdom and justice of God. Many
things also, whereby men feel discommodities, have withal some uses
acceptable, and preservative to man's life. And farther there is no one thing
among all things which yields not matter of agnizing and celebrating the
wisdom, bounty, power, and justice of the author.

10. Certain and evident foretellings of events.
10 From certain and clear significations of future euentes, which neither by
humane sight or perceiueablenes, neither by natural causes or signs could
have been foreknowen: but only being revealed by him, who has both mankind
and the nature of all things so in his own power, that nothing can be done
but through his motion. Such are the prophecies of the deluge, of the posterity
of Abraham, of the coming of the Messiah. Which first is thereby manifest, for
that the decrees and counsels of that mind, which is the first cause of his
own works, no man can know before himself: and therefore they cannot be
foreknowen of others, but being disclosed by him. Furthermore, many Prophecies
have been uttered in such sort, that God has not only foretold things
should so come to pass, but also that those things should be done and
brought so to pass by him, Ezech. 12. Of all things foretold by him he
says, I will speak the word, and I will do it. Lasty, it must needs be
that he knows all things who promises that he will give answer concerning
all purposes and euentes necessary to be known, which shall be demanded of
him, and does indeed perform this; even as God did among the people of
Israel. And therefore God himself alleges this as his work alone, for
proof of his divinity against all forged and fained Gods. Isa. 41.23. Show the
things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that you are Gods.

11 From heroical instinctes, that is, wisdom, 11. Heroical and noble
instincts of mind.
and excellent virtue, in undertaking and atchiuing those works, which
surpass the common capacity of man's nature. Such is the felicity and
happiness of noble artificers or governors, in searching or polishing arts,
and in finding out devises and counsels: Likewise the couragiousnesse of mind
in performing the actions of virtue, and in menaging matters: such as was in
Achilles, Alexander, Archimedes, Plato, and others.

2 Who and what God is.
WHen it is demanded, who is the true god, We must acknowledge God to be such,
as himself has manifested himself to be.
we are to hold most firmly and surely, that he alone is the true god, who even
from the beginning of mankind did not only manifest himself in the nature of
things by the steps and prints of his divinity shining therein, but
especially in the Church, by his word delivered, and other famous testimonies
of miracles, deliueries, and consolations, whereby he plainly teaches whom and
what he will be acknowleged and published by us to be, and that he is not
acknowleged or woorshiped of any, but of them, who think according to this
word both of him and his will, neither is the true knowledge of him found
elsewhere than in this word. The certainty of this position, is hereof most
manifest, for that all those who imagine GOD to be other in essence, or
nature, or will, than he has testified himself to be in his own
manifestations and reueilings, do not embrace and woorship at all the true
GOD, but an other thing of their own framing, in steed of the true GOD,
according to these sayings, John. 4.22. Ye woorship that which ye know not: we
woorship that which we know: for salvation is of the Jews. And cap. 5. verse.
23. He that honoreth not the son, the same honoreth not the father which has
sent him. Gal. 4.8. But then when ye knew not GOD, ye did service unto them
which by nature are not Gods. Ephesians. 2.12. Ye were at that time without Christ,
and were aliants from the commonwealth of Israel, and were strangers from
the Covenant of promise, and had no hope, and were without GOD in the world.
Act. 17.23. Whom ye then ignorantly worship, him show I unto you. 1. John.
2.23. Whosoever denies the son, the same has not the father.

But against these things seems that to be, which Paul says to the Romans
1.19. That that which may be known of GOD is manifest also in men estranged
from christian Religion: for that GOD has showed it unto them. For the
invisible things of him, The glimse of nature not sufficient to show who is
the true God.
that is, his eternal power and Godhead, are seen by the creation of the
world being considered in his works; to the intent that they should be
without excuse. And Act. 17. That GOD in former ages did not leave himself
without witness: and that out of the whole nature of things, but chiefly by
the mind of man, and the difference of things honest and dishonest, and by
the punishments the of wicked, it may in some measure be gathered, not only
that there is a GOD, but also what he is: and therefore many things are
found to have been spoken truly by the heathen and others concerning the
unity and nature of GOD. But to these objections we answer: that there are
indeed some true things, concerning GOD manifested otherwise also than by the
word delivered to the Church: but by them notwithstanding, who is the true
GOD, cannot be showed; and that for two causes. For first, those things by
themselves are not sufficient: For, to the knowing of the true God, it is
requisite that we know and profess, not some things only, but all things
which he opens of himself, and would have known. Moreover, these self
same true testimonies of God also, which remain in men's minds and in nature,
all they by reason of a natural blindness in them and prauitie do many
ways corrupt, who in weighing of them follow not the light and interpretation
thereof drawn from the word of God delivered to the Church, when as even of
these things which might be known by the help of nature, many things they
do not know, many they feign of their own, which have nothing agreeing with
the nature and will of God: and those things which they do retain, and in
show of words profess, they far otherwise understand than they are
proposed of God, and declared in his word, and in the Church understood: and
so beholding and sounding in their mouth true sentences and sayings concerning
God, conceive nevertheless and foster false opinions of him in their mind.
This answer S. Paul himself expresses Romans 1. when he adds; That they are
inexcusable; because that when they knew god, they glorified him not as god.

Now albeit Philosophical wisdom cannot therefore show, who is the true god,
for that concerning the essence, nature, will, and works of god, The voice of
nature concerning god, neither to be rejected nor contemned, either in respect
of insufficiency, or of men's misconstring it.
so much as is necessary to be known it does not teach, and is diversely
depraved by men, so that out of the Church remains no true knowledge of god,
yet nevertheless that voice of the nature of things concerning god ought not for
these causes to be rejected as false, or contemned as fruitles. For neither is
that straight ways false in it self, which is peruerslie constred of men;
neither fruitles for all things, nor to al men, which avails the reprobate
nothing at all to everlasting salvation. For god will also out of the Church
bridle the lewd and dissolute, by the testimonies which their conscience and
punishments give of his will, anger, and judgment, and according to them will
he have the life and manners of men ruled. He will have man's corruption and
his justice made more conspicuous and clear in punishing them, who stubburnely
withstand the known truth. He will by natural testimonies, men's conscience
showing the imperfection thereof, have men stirred up to seek the true God in
the Church, as it is said, Act. 17. That men were therefore placed in the
theater of the world, that they should seek the Lord, if so be they might
have groaped after him, and found him. He will also have them, who are
converted to him, to be more confirmed by the consent of nature and the word,
as the often alleging of natural testimonies in the Scriptures declares.
Lastly he will, the imperfection of natural knowledge being considered, have
men's ignorance concerning God acknowledged, and his mercy magnified, who
discovers and opens himself in his word.

God cannot be defined, 1. Because he is immense. 2. Because his essence is
unknown unto us: Yet some way he may be described: which description
comprehends his attributes or properties, the persons and principal woorks
and by these three is the true God discerned from all false Gods.

The description of God according to the rules of Divinity.
After this sort then is God Theologically described, God is a spiritual
essence, intelligent, eternal, infinite, other from all the creatures,
incomprehensible, most perfect in it self, vnmutable, and of an immense power,
wisdom and goodness, true, just, chaste, merciful, bountiful, most free,
angry and wrath with sin: which essence is the eternal father who from
everlasting begot the Son according to his Image, and the Son, who is the
coeternall Image of the father: and the holy ghost, proceeding from the Father
and the Son: Even as it has bin manifested from above, certain word thereof
being delivered by the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, and by divine
testimonies, that the eternal Father together with the Son, and the holy
ghost, has created heaven and earth, and all creatures, and works all good
things in all: and that in mankind he has chosen unto himself and gathered a
Church, by, and for the Son, that by his Church this one and true Deity may
be according to the word delivered from above, acknowledged, celebrated, and
adored in this life, and in the life to come: and lastly that he is the judge
of the just and unjust.

The description of God according to philosophy.
Philosophically he is described on this wise: God is an eternal mind or
intelligence sufficient in himself to all felicity, most good, and the cause
of good in nature. So is he defined by Plato in his book of Definitions;
likewise in his Timaeus. And by Aristotle Lib. 12. Metaph. Cap. 7. and Lib. de
Mundo, etc.

The Theological description of god, In what the former descriptions differ.
which the church delivers, differs from this Philosophical description,
because that is pefecter than this. 1 In the number of parts, whereof it adds
many by nature unknown unto men; as of the Trinity, of the Redemption of man,
etc. 2. In the understanding and declaration of those parts, which are common
to both* for the Theological description declares them more certainly and
fully. 3. In the effect or fruit. By Philosophy or the light of nature men
are not able to be brought to the true knowledge of God, both because it is
maimed, and false by men's corruption: as also because it does not stir up in
us Godliness, that is, the love and fear of God: seeing it teaches not those
things, whereby this is effectuated and brought to pass.

An explication of the description of God delivered by the Church.
GOD is an essence] That is, a thing, which 1. has his being from none, but
from himself. 2. is preserved or sustained of none but subsisteth by himself.
3. is necessarily. 4. is the only cause unto all other things of their being.
Wherefore he is called Iehoua, as if you would say, being by himself and
causing other things to be, to wit, according to his nature and promises.

Spirituall] 1. Because he is incorporeal: as being infinite, and indivisible,
and most excellent. 2. Insensible. For first, experience teaches this.
Secondly, God is without sensible qualities, which are the objects of the
senses: and Thirdly, he is immense. The eyes perceive only things finite,
and which are within a certain compass. 3. He is spiritual, because both
himself lives, and is the author of all life both corporal and spiritual.

Objection. Against this opinion many places of scripture have been
heretofore by some alleged, How God and Angels appeared unto men.
in which it is written, that God and Angels did appear and were seen, thereby
to prove, that their nature is corporeal and visible. But we are to know, that
not the very substances of God and Angels, but created shapes and bodies were
beheld of men, made, carried, and moved, by the will and virtue of God or
Angels, that by them they might make known their presence, and use their
ministry and service in instructing men of those things which seemed good
unto them. And these were sometimes by imagination represented to the interior
senses of men: which also somewhere may, and somewhere cannot be gathered out
of the circumstances of the histories: As the Angels appearing to Abraham and
Lot, were invested with true bodies, as which might be touched and handled.
Whether Micha before Achab saw with the eyes of his body, or of his mind, the
Lord and his Angels, is a matter of doubt. But that those visible shapes were
not the very substance of God, is hereby manifest, for that the scripture with
great consent teaches, that God is seen of no man, neither can be seen, and
incomprehensible, and unchangeable. But those visible shapes were not always
the same.

How God is said to be seen face to face.
2 Objection. To these they add that which is said, that God was seen of
Jacob face to face. Genesis 32. And of Moses. Exodus 33. and Deuteronomy 34. And of all
the people, Deuteronomy. 5. And that all of us shall see God face to face, in the life
to come. 1. Cor. 13. By which metaphor or borrowed speech, is signified a
clear and conspicuous manifestation and knowledge of God, which is perceived,
not with the eyes of the body, but of the mind, either by means, as by the
word, by his works and outward tokens, and such as run into the the
senses, whence the mind may gather somewhat of God: Or without means, by
inward revelation. And albeit in the life to come shall be a far more
bright knowledge of god than now: yet to know god most perfectly is proper to
god only, as it is said, John. 6.46. Not that any man has seen the father,
save he which is of God, he has seen the father: So far is it, that the
invisible, infinite and everlasting Deity may ever be conceived by bodily
eyes, whose nature is not to perceive any obiectes, but such as are finite and
limited.

How the parts of man's body are attributed unto God.
3 Objection. They have alleged also those sayings, wherein the parts of man's
body are attributed to God. But these also are not properly, but by a
Metaphor, spoken of god, whereby is signified to us a power in god working
after an incomprehensible manner his works, a certain shadow whereof are
those actions, which men do by the ministry and help of their bodily
parts: as the eyes, and ears signify the wisdom of god, whereby he
understands all things: the mouth, the publishing of his word: the face,
the declaration, tokens, and feeling of his divine goodness and grace, or
severity and anger: The heart, his love: the hands and arms, his power: the
feet, his presence.

4 Objection. They have affirmed also, The image of God in man does not argue
a bodily shape in God.
because man was made according to the image of god, that therefore god has a
humane shape; not marking, that the image of god consists not in the shape
and figure of the body, but in the mind, and integrity of nature, in
wisdom, righteousness, and true holiness. Ephesians. 4. As for Tertullian, whereas he
reasons, that god is a body; that he speaks improperly therein, and
abuses the word body, in steed of substance, not only Austine witnesses in
his Epistle to Quoduultdeus: but this is also an argument, and proof thereof,
because he terms also the souls and Angels oftentimes bodies.

Wherefore let us know that therefore we are taught the nature of god to be
spiritual, Why we must know God to be spiritual.
that we may not conceive of god any thing which is gross, terrene, carnal,
and unworthy his divine Majesty: neither should deem that he can be
perceived by our bodily senses or in thought imagined, but should consider
his nature by his word and works: that we should not dare to represent him
by any bodily shape: and in a word, that we should remember that he is to
be worshipped, not with the gestures or other things of the body, but with
the mind and spiritual motion of the heart. Lastly, Seeing he alone
inspireth into us temporal and everlasting life, we should acknowledge the
gift of both to come from him: Out of this fountain only we should seek it,
and endeavor to refer it wholly to his glory.

Intelligent] 1. Why God is said to be intilligent, and against whom we are
to hold it.
Because he is the cause both of the mind of man, and of the notions shining
in it, and also of that order which it in the nature of things and commonweals. 2. Because all intelligence or understanding of the creature comes
from him, both in respect of the faculty, as also in respect of the operation.
For neither can the efficient and preserving cause of intelligent natures, and
of the understanding it self and order in nature, be but intelligent and
understanding. And therefore the holy Scripture also reasons on this wise,
Psalm. 94.9. He that planted the ear, shall he not hear: or he that made
the eye, shall he not see? Now this we are to hold, first, against those,
who setting nature in the place of God, imagine the world and the variety and
order of things in it, to arise from the matter and the inclination thereof to
this form: when as notwithstanding these things could not have their being
from a cause not intelligent. We are to hold it also, thereby to acknowledge
not only true knowledge it self, but also all ability of understanding, and
the sagacitie and perceueraunce of the senses and mind to be the gift of God.

Eternall] That such an eternity, which can have neither beginning nor any end
of being, agrees to God alone, both nature shows, The eternity of god
without beginning or end.
for so much as he is the first cause of all things, and of infinite
perfection and power; and the scripture also recounteth, as Psalm. 90.2. Before
the mountains were brought forth, or ever the earth and world were made; thou
art God from everlasting, and world without end. But we are to observe, that
not therefore only the eternity of God is so often inculcated in the
scriptures, that in regard hereof he may be discerned from things created:
but also because he will impart eternity unto us, that is, he has purposed
and promised that he will give us of his eternal goodness, and providence,
eternal blessings, and will have continual care of us through al eternity,
and will have a kingdom in Angels and men, whereof shall be no end.

Therefore are we given to understand that God is eternal to us, God eternal
unto us.
that we may oppose the certain hope of eternal blessedness grounded upon his
eternity against the shortness of mortal life, and against the frailty of
man's condition. For seeing he is eternal, he can, and seeing he promises, he
will for ever preserve us with his protection. Psalm. 48.13. For this God is our
GOD for ever and ever. And Psalm. 111.9. He has commanded his Covenant for
ever. Wherefore being vphelde by this consolation, let us neither refuse to
suffer the short misery of this life, neither prefer the short felicity
thereof before eternal blessings: and seeing God will be not only bountiful
toward the godly, but judge also of the ungodly eternally, let the cogitation
of the eternal wrath of god keep and hold us in the fear of god, that we may
not desire to buie the fading show of whatsoever good with eternal misery.

That god is other from all his creatures, we must hold: first, against
Philosophers, God, other and diverse from all creatures.
who will have the world or nature it self to be god, that is either a
general matter, or a power, or a mind and intelligence, or some form to be
infused, mingled, and tied to the bodies of the world, and them to inform,
quicken, sustein, and move, as the soul susteineth and moves man's body.
Which Virgil calls, the spirit of the world: others the soul of the world.
Secondly, against those who imagine the creatures, either all, as Seruetus; or
some, according to the doctrine of the Manichees, to spring from the very
essence or nature of god, deriuing it self, as they speak, into others by
propagation. Thirdly, that al profane, unworthy, and idolatrous cogitation of
god, whereby god may be made like to any creature, may be excluded. For, that
the essence of god is far other than the essence of all the creatures, both
nature and the word of god shows, when as it teaches that god is wise and
Creator of the world: now the world has many parts unreasonable; and it self
cannot be Creator to it self, it shows also that things are not derived out
of the substance of god, that being unchangeable and indivisible. And lastly,
that the Deity is most unlike and different from all things created, because
there can neither be, nor be imagined any similitude of a finite nature and an
infinite.

First therefore, whereas the scripture says, How all things are said to be
of God.
that al things are of god: Romans 11.1. Cor. 8. it does not mean that al things
are god, or the essence of god, or propagated from it. For all other things are
of god, not as begotten of him or proceeding from him, as the word, and eternal
spirit of god, but as created, that is, made of nothing. Romans 4.17. Who
calls those things that are not, as if they were. Secondly, when as the soul
of man is called celestial and divine. Likewise, when it is said, we are the
generation of god. Act. 17.29. This is not meant of the communicating of the
divine substance, as if the soul were derived from the essence of god, but of
the similitude of properties, and of the creation. The soul therefore is said
to be celestial and divine, that is, adorned with celestial and divine
powers and gifts, which although they be a certain shadow of the divine
nature, yet are they created qualities. Thirdly whereas the elect and saints
are said to be of god, to be borne of god and his spirit, and the sons of
god, and spiritual; John. 1.13. and 8.47. and 3.6. Neither is this understood
of the propagation of the essence, but of the similitude of the properties, or
of the image of God, to the which they are refashioned by Gods spirit. And
fourthly when Paul also says, 1. Cor. 6.17. That he which is joined unto the
Lord, is one spirit; and Peter. 2. Pet. 1.4. That we are made partakers of the
divine nature: we are taught, both that the spirit of God dwells in us by
grace, and is joined unto us, as also that there is begun in us even now a
conformity with God, which shall be perfected in the life to come. And
lastly, when Christ himself is said to be God, and to have a divine body:
There is not thereby signified a mutation of the divine nature into the humane,
or of the humane into the divine: but an inseperable conioyning of two natures,
reteining their properties distinct, into one person, and a glorifiyng of the
humane nature which indeed agrees to a nature ruler and gouernes of all
things, but yet notwithstanding made and created.

What we are to learn by the immensitie and incomprehensibilitie of God.
Inco^prehensible, or immense] 1. He will have us to know, that he cannot be
comprehended in the cogitation of any creature, so that what things he
ascribes to himself in his word, how great soever they be thought of us, yet
are they always far greater. For the power of understanding which reaches but
to finite things, cannot conceive the form or perfect pattern of an infinite
nature. 2. The Deity cannot be comprehended or circumscribed in place or
space, or any limits; that is, the essence of God, is immense or unmeasurable,
neither to be extended, nor divided, nor multiplied. Therefore it is al every
where, one and the same. The 1. reason hereof is: Because an infinite power
cannot be contained in an essence or nature which is finit and limited.
Reasons, to show that the power and essence of God is every where, whole one,
and the same.
2. Because the power of god is always every where; and therefore his
substance also. For that cannot be without this; yea it is the divine essence
it self. And that the power or virtue of the divinity which has been spread
perpetually in infinite manner both before and after the creation of the world,
cannot be any where, either in no substance at al, or in any substance, but
only in the very substance it self of god, the Philosophers also, who conceived
god to be infinite, have confessed. Neither yet is it to be thought, that the
substance of the divinity is so extended, that one part thereof is one where,
or so multiplied, that an other part is another where; but that it being
infinite is every where: and seeing it cannot be divided into parts, as being
immense and most perfect, to be all every where: and seeing it is but one,
that it is every where the same, so that none can pierce into or comprehend
it, but it pierces into and co^prehendeth all things. Iere. 23. Do not I fill
the heaven and the earth, says the Lord? 3 Not only the power, but the
essence also of the Divinity to be infinite, does even hereby most certainly
appear, Because there is one, the same, and whole substance of the three
persons. For the eternal father, as he is always, so at that time, when
Christ lived on earth, was he in heaven. And the word or coeternall Son of
the Father was in his body on earth: and yet because there is but one and the
same essence of the father and the son, both the father was with the Son on
earth, and the son with the father in heaven; as himself says, Ioh. 16. The
father is with me: and Ioh. 3. The son of man which is in heaven: and John.
14. I am in the father, and the father is in me. So the holy ghost was truly
present in the likeness of a Dove and a flame, at the Baptism of Christ, and
at Pentecost, and now dwells in us as in his Temple: And yet is always with
the father and the Son in heaven, as the father and the Son are with him in
all the Saints, which are dispersed through out heaven and earth: And hence
appears the third difference between an infinite nature, and a finit nature,
or the third reason, which is only opened in the word of God, whereby the
divine essence is incomprehensible, to wit, by communication, whereas the
whole is in such sort common to the three persons of the Divinity, as not only
it is in them as in the creatures, but also is their very substance, and yet
nevertheless remains in number one and the same.

Now, that it is proper to the Deity alone, Infinity or immensitie proper to
God, not imparted to any creature.
nor imparted or communicated to any creature to be infinite or immense, or to
be every where at the same time, or to be the same in diverse places, is
apparent by these reasons. First, Because it is impossible that any creature
should be, or be made equal to the creator, as it has been often said: Lord,
who is like unto thee? 2. Because god himself by this mark distinguishes and
discerns himself from the creatures: for in saying, that he is, he, who
fills heaven and earth, he signifies that there is no other such besides
him. 3. Because christ shows his divinity by this argument, in that when he
was in body on earth, yet he affirms himself to be in heaven, John 3.13.
The fourth reason is, that the godly Doctors of the ancient Church defended
the Divinity of the holy Ghost by this selfsame argument: as Dydimus in his
Treatise of the holy Ghost lib. 1. cap. 1. The holy Ghost himself, if he were
one of the creatures, should have at leastwise a substance limited, as all
things which were made. For although invisible creatures are not limited and
circumscribed by place; yet are they limited by the property of their
substance. But the Holy GHOST being in many, has not a limited and finite
substance.

God most perfect in himself.
God is moreover most perfect in himself. 1. Because he only has al things
which may be desired unto perfect felicity and glory: so that no way any thing
may be added unto him to make him more glorious or happy: And all the
creatures have but only some parts and degrees of blessings distributed unto
them, convenient for their nature and place, which the Creator assigns and
gives to every one. 2. Because he receives no part of this most absolute
felicity from any other, but has al things in himself, and of himself,
and is alone sufficient to himself for all things: and therefore needs no
man's labor, or aid, or presence, but was alike blessed from everlasting,
before any creature was, as he is now, after the creation of the woorlde. But
contrariwise all the creatures stand so in need of the goodness and presence
of God, that without it they cannot only not any way be well and in good
state, but not so much as be at all the space of one moment. 3. Because he is
not for himself only, but for the creating also, preserving, guiding, and
furnishing of all and every creature so sufficient, that he alone does give to
al of them all good things necessary and meet for them, as well eternal and
heavenly, as terrene and temporal, neither yet for all that does the least
jot depart either from his power, or from his happiness. Now all the creatures
not only cannot at all profit one another, more than God woorketh by them as
the instruments of his goodness, but neither they themselves, which are as it
were cundites, can have the least good in themselves, but what they have drawn
from God alone, as the only fountain and wellspring of goodness and
felicity. Now he alone is sufficient for all, and bestows al things, because
there must needs be some one first cause in nature of all good things: and
he has all things in his power, because, except he had them, he could not
give them others. And except he had them of himself, he could not be the
first head and fountain of al good things.

1 Objection. Proverb. 16. How God is said to have made al things for himself.
He is said to have made al things for himself. Answer. Not for the aiding
or increasing of himself, as if he needed any thing, but rather for to
communicate and show himself unto his creatures he made the^; because this
is the nature of that which is good, not only to preserve it self, but also
to communicate it self to others. 2. It is objected that he uses the
creatures in accomplishing his works. But this he does not as constrained
thereto by any necessity or impotency, but of his most free will and goodness,
to show that he is able both ways, both without them, and with them, to do
whatsoever he will: that he is Lord of all things, both by right, and by his
power, and can use al things at his pleasure: and that he also does worthy
his creatures this great and free honor, as to make them the instruments of
his bountifulness, and fellows and disposers (as Saint Paul speaks 1. Cor.
4.) of his divine works. 3. Furdermore, that we are willed to perform,
exhibit, and offer, obedience, worship, honor, sacrifices, to God, and to give
him that which is his: thereby is taught, not what good comes more to god, but
what good ought to be in us. For as disobedience and despite against god makes
not God but the creature more miserable, so obedience toward God, which is a
conformity and agreement with Gods Law and mind, is the good and blessedness,
not of God, but of the reasonable creature. And this is said to be given or
taken from God, not that God needs it, or is profited thereby, but because
men ought, by order of justice, to perform and yield it unto God. As Psalm.
50.9. I will take no bullock out of thy house: nor he-goates out of thy
foldes. And Luke 17.10. When ye have done all those things which are
commanded you, say, we are unprofitable servants. The glory which we give
unto God is available for our happiness, but neither does nor can make God
more happy:
And if any man reply, That glory nevertheless tends to his happiness and
perfection, unto whom it is given: we must know, that the glory of god
signifies sometimes the foundation of glory, to wit, the attributes or virtues
which are in god himself, and his divine work, and the beholding and
approbation of them in god. And in this sense can no man give him glory, nether
can it be diminished or augmented, but it was and remains the same in him
for ever: according as it is said, John. 17.5. Glorify me O Father, with the
glory which I had with thee, before the woorlde was. Sometimes it signifies
the agnizing and magnifieng of the goodness and woorckes of God, which is not
in GOD, but in creatures endewed with reason: and therefore may be made lesser
or greater; and being amplified or diminished, it increases or diminishes
the goodness, happiness, and perfection, not of GOD, but of the creature. But
if any man will further reply, that this very worship and obedience
profits him unto whom it is done: to grant this concerning the Creatures,
as who may be furthered and enriched by the mutual duties of each other; yet
will it by no means agree to GOD, seeing no man can help or harm him, and the
true agnising and magnifyeng of GOD, as also the whole conformity and agreement
with him, is not his happiness and perfection, but the creatures.

Our obedience, though due to God, yet brings no increase to him.
4 Objection. To whom is given that which is due unto him, to him something
comes thereby more than he had before. Unto GOD is yielded our obedience
and woorshippe, which is due unto him. Therefore somewhat comes to him from
us. Answer. The Mayor is true of that which is due of need or want, or which
he needs, and is furthered thereby, to whom it is given. But our obedience
is no such due, but that which GOD, by order of his justice, requires of us:
and that not for his, but our perfection and felicity.

Gods reioicing in our obedience and salvation is the cause thereof: but not
our obedience and salvation, the cause of his reioicing.
Lastly, if any man urge, that he who reioiceth does receive some good of those
things, wherein he reioiceth: and therefore some fruit certainly to redound
unto God out of our obedience and salvation, seeing he pronounces that he
roioiceth therein, we grant verily that in men, reioicing and the like
affections are stirred up by outward obiectes: But we must not deem that our
virtues are the cause of that reioicing which is in God. For therefore is a
thing thought right and honest, because it is agreeing to the will and nature of
God: and because God from everlasting is delighted with his own goodness and
uprightness, and with things agreeing therewith: therefore does he create
and woorcke such in men: and that everlasting approbation or liking, which was
the cause why GOD created good things, is the cause also why he now cherishes
and preserves them being created. Wherefore the everlasting reioicing in God
for our obedience and salvation, is the efficient cause of our obedience and
salvation: but not contrariwise, our obedience the efficient cause of that
reioicing in God: as it comes to pass in men, who are affected by outward
obiectes. Or thus: God reioiceth at our good, as being an object, but not a
cause: because objects are not the cause, but effects of gods approbation and
reioicing.

Moreover when GOD pronounces himself to be unchangeable, he shows that
he will be always such, What is meant by Gods unchangeableness.
as he has been from all eternity: so that first, neither his essence, and
whatsoever is proper thereto, can be augmented or diminished: neither
secondly, his nature and will be changed: neither lastly, himself has need
to transport himself from place to place. This do Philosophers, induced
thereto by reasons, confess. For first, whatsoever is changed, that must
needs have, either some outward cause, or some original or beginning in it
self of moving and changing, or both. But GOD cannot be moved or changed
by any thing which is without him: for so himself should not be the the first
moouer and maker of all that is good in nature. Neither can he suffer change
from any inward original or beginning of change. For whatsoever is so moved
or changed, that must needs have parts, whereof some must move and some be
moved. Now that god should be divided into parts, neither does his immensity
suffer, nor his great perfection. For seeing every part is imperfecter tha^ the
whole, and in god is nothing which is not most perfect: it is impious to imagine
any parts in him. Wherefore neither by any outward, nor inward cause is he
moved or changed. Secondly, whatsoever is changed, that must needs be changed
either to the worse, or to the better, or into a state equal to the former. It
is impossible that God should be made worser: for he should so become of
perfect imperfect. And to be made better is also impossible. For so he should
have bin before more imperfect. But neither can he be translated into an equal
condition and state, as thereby to leave some good which before he had, and to
receive some good which before he had not: for thus should he be neither
before nor after his change most perfect, as wanting some part of those good
things which belonged unto him. Thirdly, That which is infinite, neither can
be made greater; for so it should not have been infinite before; nor lesser,
for so it should be made finite. Seeing then both the essence, and power, and
wisdom, and all the virtues of God are incomprehensible, and all things in
God immense; therefore cannot any of them be either diminished or increased.
Fourthly. For the same cause, God does not transport and remove himself from
place to place as creatures, seeing by reason of his immensitie, whereby he
fills heaven and earth, he can neither depart nor be absent from any place.
Fifthly, Seeing he is most wise, and therefore from everlasting has most well
purposed, decreed, and foreseen all things; change of purpose and will cannot
fall into him. And therefore God would have this in many places of holy
scripture inculcated unto us, that his nature and will is subject to no
mutations, as being a thing most respecting his glory. As Number. 23.19. God is
not as man, that he should lie; nor as the Son of man, that he should repent.
Has he said it then, and shall he not do it? Has he spoken, and shall he not
accomplish it? Psalm. 33.11. The counsel of the Lord shall endure for ever.
And the thoughts of his heart from generation to generation. Iam. 1.17. With
whom is no variableness, neither shadow of change.

Why God is said to repent, when yet he does nothing which he decreed not
from everlasting.
1 Objection. But God is said to repent. Answer. He is said to repent, not that
he changes his will: but, 1 because he earnestly detesteth sins, and is not
delighted with the destruction of men. 2 Because by reason of this hatred
against sin, and this mercy toward repentant sinners, he makes change of
things and events, which from everlasting he decreed, as men are wont to do,
who repent them of their purpose. For among men every change is an amending of
that, which disliketh the^. Amending rises upon repentance. Wherefore the name
of repentance, as also the names of other human affections are said to be
attributed to god by an anthropopathie. Because the Scripture speaks of God
after the manner of men, for our infirmity, that we understanding those
things, which are in us, to be shadows of those which are in god, may in some
sort conceive something of the nature of god and his will toward mankind.
Wherefore these forms of speaking do not signify any perturbation in God, or
change, or passion like unto our affections, but are used to signify these two
things of God. First, that that is not a fained or dissembled, but an earnest,
eternal, unchangeable nature and will in god, a shadow and image whereof he
would have the affections and motions created in men to be: yet is it without
al trouble, or hinderance, or diminishing of his blessedness and joy.
Secondly, that he does those things which me^ are wont to do, being stirred up
by those affections, which are attributed to God, not that he, as men being
moved by a present or sudden affection of the mind, does now first take
counsel, but does now at the length execute and do those things, which he
decreed and appointed from all eternity.

2 Objection. Gods promises and threatninges conditional, and with an exception.
The promises and threatenings of God oftentimes are not fulfilled. Answer.
The promises of God are always to be understood with an exception of the
cross of the Godly, and of the punishments, and chastisments of such as depart
from God and sin, or with a condition of perseverance in faith and Godliness:
and also contrarily his threatninges, with an exception of conversion and
prayer, or with a condition of perseverance in sin. And these conditions are
sometimes expressed, as Ier. 18. and 28. where plainly is set down this rule
of understanding Gods promises and threatninges: as that God will punish them
who depart from him, unto whom he had promised blessings: and will spare those
who repent, to whom he had threatened punishment. And sometimes they are
closely understood, especially in the threatninges and comminations, thereby
even to wrest repentance and more timely and earnest prayers from us, by which
as means interposed and coming between, he has decreed to save and deliver
us. Reply. But these conditions are uncertain and chaungeable. Therefore the
will of god is also changeable. Answer. In respect of the nature, will, and
judgment of man, they are chaungeable: but in respect of the counsel and
providence of God, unchangeable and most certain. For God has decreed from
everlasting the means and ends of things: as also he has decreed in whom he
will, and in whom he will not work conversion.

3 Objection. He changes many his precepts, obseruances and woorks, as the
Mosaicall Laws and government. Answer. He changes them indeed; but so as
he would also from everlasting that change: neither are al things appointed
of God for perpetuity. But he decreed, from everlasting, some things to last
only for a time.

Gods unchangeableness one of his special differences, whereby he is
distinguished from all creatures.
Wherefore be it to us out of all controversy, that God is unchangeable. For
first, this is amongst those especial differences, whereby the Creator will
be discerned from all creatures, that he only can by no means be changed,
whereas all other things both are diversely changed, and may at the only
pleasure of God be changed infinitely, howsoever for a while, so long as it is
his pleasure, they are and seem firm and immutable; according as it is said,
Mat. 24. Heaven and earth shall pass, but my word shall not pass. Secondly,
Hence we understand and are assured, that al things in the world are governed
by the everlasting providence of god. For seeing no mutation happens to god,
it must needs be that all his counsels were purposed from everlasting. And
seeing god both foreseeth all things unchangeable, and his counsels
concerning the event and end of things are certain and unchangeable: it must
needs be also that the second causes and means or Antecedents, without which
those events were not to follow, must be certain and unchangeable. And
because in things created, especially in humane affairs, there is great
uncertainty and mutabilitie, neither is there any cause of unchangeableness
but the will of god; God could not have appointed any thing certain or
unchangeable concerning the event and end, except he had also made all the
means, (by which the end is attained unto, and which as concerning their own
nature are most uncertain and chaungeable) by his everlasting counsel and
decree certain and unchangeable.

Wherefore it is said, Isay 14.27. The Lord of hosts has determined it, and
who shall disanull it? Thirdly, the whole use and force, and declaration of the
promises, threatenings, and examples of Gods goodness, power, justice, mercy,
and wrath, both old and new, to teach us, and to erect us with comfort, or by
fear to hold and keep us in our duty and the fear of God: depends of
Gods unchangeable nature. For all those do then affect us, when we think
that the same nature and will of God, which was in times past, is now also,
and is and will be such to us repenting, or persisting in our sins, as we
see it was in times past, and now is toward others. And then do we truly
rely upon the promises of God, when we know, that his counsel shall never
be changed. Fourthlie, This doctrine inclines men's minds to obedience and
subjection, which is necessary in asking things at Gods hands: that we
desire not GOD to do those things for us, or others, which he has before
time assuredly toulde us, that he will not do: and further that we submit
and leave with reverence those things to his pleasure, whereof he would not
as yet have known unto us, what he has decreede. Fiftlie, The
vnchaungeablenesse of Gods will is the ground and foundation of the hope and
comfort of the godly in this life. For it is most absurd to conceive of GOD,
that now he loves, and now he hates us, now he will assuredly give
unto us everlasting life, and a little after again he will not: And therefore
when once true faith and conversion unto GOD is begun in our hearts, and the
spirit of God has begun to witness to our spirit, that we are the sons
of GOD, and heirs of everlasting life; God will have us certainly to resolve,
that as he had this his will toward us from everlasting, so to everlasting
he will not change it, but will assuredly bring us, at his pleasure, out of
this wicked and miserable life through al tentations and dangers what-soeuer,
to eternal and everlasting life, according to that article of our Faith, I
believe life everlasting.

When as Omnipotency is attributed to GOD, What is signified by gods
omnipotency.
thereby is first understood, That whatsoever he will, or whatsoever, not
impairing his nature and majesty, he is able to will, he is also able to
perform. Secondie, That he is able to perform all those things without any
difficulty and labor, even with his only beck and will. Thirdly, That all the
force and power of working and effecting any thing, is so in god only, that
there is not the least ability or efficacy of any creature, but what he
continually imparteth, and preserves at his pleasure. And therefore the power
of God is to be considered of us, not as being idle, but as creating,
sustaining, moving, and ruling al things. The reasons are, 1 God is the first
cause of all things: Therefore he has all things in his power, and their
ability is so much, as he gives unto them. 2 He does such things as can
be done by no created and finit power: as are the creation and governing of
all things, the preservation of commonweals, the deluge, the delivery out
of Egypt, and all his miracles. 3 He is unchangeable. Therefore in him to be
able to do, and to do, is the same which to will, and so of the contrary.

But although al men affirm God to be omnipotent, yet there is a double
difference between the sacred Doctrine of the Church, How the doctrine of the
church and philosophy differ in conceiving of Gods omnipotency.
and Philosophy, concerning gods omnipotency. For first, without the doctrine
of the Church, men only know the universal and general power of god, whereby
he creates, preserves, and governs the whole world: but they know not that
power, whereby he saves men, and restores the world by his son, gathering
and preserving an everlasting Church, and delivering it from sin and death, and
endowing it with life and glory everlasting: by which works God especially
shows forth his power, as it is said, Hag. 2.7. Yet a little while, and I will
shake the heavens and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land. Secondly,
neither do they profess of the general power of god so much as is
sufficient. For albeit they are enforced to confess that God is the author and
preserver of the woorld: yet are they not able to say that al things were
created of nothing by the word of God alone: and for as much as they are
ignorant fo the cause of sin and confusion, they cannot affirm al things so to
be administered and governed by gods omnipotency, as that al which is good is
done by the powerful working of Gods will: but they attribute many things to
chance, fortune, and humane wisdom, or virtue, and so imagine the power of god
to be idle in these and doing nothing.

Furthermore, that god cannot either sin, or will, and allow of sin, or be
changed, or diminished, or suffer any thing, or make things done undone, or
will things flat repugnant and contradictorie, or create another god or some
nature equal to himself, or be perceived by bodily senses, or do other
things proper to a create or finite nature, or admit the same into himself
this does not diminish or weaken, but rather augment and strengthen his power.
For that is the greatest and most perfect power, which can neither be
destroyed, nor weakened, nor diminished: and that, none susteining it, but only
by it self. But contrariwise, to be able to be corrupted and impaired, is a
token of imbecility and imperfection of exceeding and immense wisdom. Gods
exceeding wisdom: whereby both he knows all things perfectly, and is the
fountain of all knoweledge and understanding.
That we may rightly and with profit and commodity know the power of God, it
is necessary not to consider it, but as it is joined with his immense wisdom
and goodness, which moderateth it. Further, of his divine wisdom first we
learn, That God does of himself in one act or view understand and behold
perpetually and most perfectly, in marvelous manner, and that unknown to us,
himself and the whole order of his mind declared in the nature of things and
in his word, and what agrees therewith and disagreeth, and all his works,
and the works of all creatures, past, present, and to come, and all the causes
and circumstances of all things. And moreover, That al Angels and men have no
more knowledge of divine and humane matters; than God does woork and maintain
in their minds. For among other things, the most beutiful and sightly order
which is in the nature of things, the ends and uses of all things, the
signification of future events, arts and sciences, the euerting and ouerturning
of those devises, which the Devil and wicked men have most craftily contrived
against God and all the godly, do enforce all men to confess, that these
things could not proceed but from a most wise artificer and author. Wherefore
also the scripture it self wills us to consider the wisdom of God, shining
in these his woorks. Eccle. 3.11. God has made every thing beutiful in his
time. Isai. 44.7. Who is like me that shall call, and shall declare it, and set it
in order before me, since I appointed the ancient people? Ioh. 5.13. He takes
the wise in their craftiness. And of these he concludes, that the wisdom
of God is immense and inconceivable. As, Ps. 145 7. His wisdom is infinite.
Romans 11.32. O the deepenesse of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge
of God! But here again is to be observed a difference between Philosophy and
the word of God. First, that even in the creation, the known or legal
wisdom was darkened and maimed in men through sin, and therefore needs a
renewing by the word delivered to the Church. And then, that men without this
heavenly doctrine are altogether ignorant of that especial wisdom of God
revealed in the gospel, whereby he saves the Church gathered from amongst
mankind by the son. As it is said, Mat. 11. I give thee thanks, O father,
because thou have hid these things from the wise and men of understanding, and
have opened them unto babes.

The Goodness of God diversely taken in scriptures.
The goodness of God signifies sometimes his bountifulnes, as Psa. 106.1.
Praise the Lord because he is good: sometimes all the virtues, and whatsoever
is spoken of the nature of God. As Psalm. 14. Let thy spirit lead me
thorough the right way. That which also is meant by the name of holiness or
sanctity and light. 1. John 1. So in this place, first by the name of goodness
are understood al those things which are attributed to god in his word, and
are represented and resembled in his image, as those things which are termed
good in Angels and men, as life, power, wisdom, joy, righteousness etc. For
such is the nature of God, as it has manifested it self in the Law and
Gospel, and the goodness of the reasonable creature, is an image of the divine
goodness. And therefore here also differ philosophy and the Scripture; in that
Philosophy attributes only to God that his goodness which was opened in the
Law, and yet neither that wholly: but of his goodness revealed in the Gospel
it is altogether ignorant. Secondly, by reason of the great and huge
difference between the creator, and the creature, we understand those good
things to be in GOD, which are agreeing to his divine nature and majesty.
For those which are proper unto created natures, would not be good in GOD,
but rather a diminishing of his goodness. Thirdly, By reason of the immensitie
of his divine nature, those things which are finite in creatures are in GOD
infinite. And therefore against sundry and diverse disputes of Philosophers
concerning the chiefest good, we learn in the Church, that GOD is the chiefest
good. Fourthly, because nothing is imperfect or not subsisting by it self in
GOD: whatsoever is attributed unto him, is not in him, as forms or accidents
in creatures: but such is his essence and nature, in a manner not able to be
comprehended by our knoweledge and understanding. Fifthly, His nature and will
is a rule of that goodness and uprightness which is in creatures. For so
far forth things are, and are called good, as they agree with the will of
God. Sixthly, GOD is the only fountain of goodness, and the first cause of
all good things: So that all things have so much goodness, as God does
create and maintain in them. And in this sense is it said, Luke 18. There is
none good but God only, even so, as he is most perfectly good, and the
fountain of goodness.

The righteousness of God sometimes in Scripture signifies that which is
accounted righteousness before him, The righteousness of God both general and
particular.
and whereby he makes us righteous: and that elsewhere legal: which is
holiness of life, or conformity with the law of God, which God works in us by
his spirit, begun in this life, and to be perfected in the life to come; as
Iam. 1.20. The wrath of man does not accomplish the righteousness of God. Or
sometimes Evangelical, which is the righteousness of Christ imputed to
believers of the free mercy of God. As Roman. 3.21. But now is the righteousness
of God made manifest without the Law, having witness of the Law and of the
Prophets, to wit, the righteousness of God by the faith of Jesus Christ
unto all, and upon all that believe. Sometimes is meant that righteousness,
whereby himself is righteous: and then also in many places it signifies the
faithfulness or mercy and benignity of GOD, who according to his promises
preserves, defends, and delivers the faithful, as Psalm 31.1. Deliver me
in thy righteousness. But when it is properly spoken of the righteousness of
GOD, whereby himself is righteous, as in this place: First, he is called
just, in respect of his general justice and righteousness, which is the order
or nature of this divine understanding and will, whereby GOD will, and
approoueth, does himself, and woorketh in others vnchaungeablie and
vnspeakeablie such things, as he has commanded in his Law: and neither
will, nor approoueth, nor woorketh, nor causes, nor furdereth any thing
whatsoever disagreeth from this order, but horribly hates and detesteth them,
as it is said Psalm. 11.17. The righteous Lord loves righteousness. Secondly,
In respect of his particular justice and rightiousnesse, which is the
unchangeable will of God, whereby God gives to himself, and will have given
him by others that glory, which is due unto the chief good: as he says: I will
not give my glory to another: and punishes al sin with such punishment as is
equal to the offense, that is, with eternal, as in them who perish; or with
equivalent, as in his Son Christ, susteining the punishment for all those who
are saved by him, according as it is said, Thou shall not depart thence,
until thou host paid the utmost farding: and cannot injury any creature,
whatsoever he determines of him, or does unto him, because he owes no man any
thing; as it is said, Psa. 45. God is just in all his ways. And Act. 10. God is
no accepter of persons. Thirdly, Gods divine will is the chief and perfectest
rule, and only squire of uprightness: And therefore God alone, because he is
exceeding good, cannot of his own nature will or work any unjust thing, but
the wills and actions of all creatures, are so far just, as they are made by god
conformable to his divine will.

Men not able without the doctrine of the church to conceive aright of Gods
justice and righteousness.
Now although al confess god to be righteous and just, because God has
imprinted this notion and knowledge of himself among other in the reasonable
nature: because he is perfectly good, and therefore is the rule of perfect
righteousness: because he witnesses by examples of punishments and rewards
that he hates and punishes unjust things, and likes the just: because he
is the judge of the woorlde, to whom it belongs to compose or set and
administer all things in a just order: because lastly he owes not any thing
to any nature, but by the right of a creator, it is laweful for him to dispose
of all things at his will, and therefore cannot be to any injurious, as it is
said Luc. 17. When ye have done all, say, we are unprofitable servants. Romans
11.35. Who has given unto him first, and he shall be recompensed? Matthew.
20.15. Is it not lawful for me to do as I will with mine own? Yet
notwithstanding it is far off, that men should judge aright of the
righteousness and justice of God, without the doctrine of the Church, because
they have not the whole knowledge, not so much as of the Law, wherein God made
known his justice, and can affirm nothing certain concerning the everlasting
punishments of sins; and are altogether ignorant of the punishment which
the Son of God sustained for sins.

Moreover men's minds are troubled, The causes which make men to conceive
amiss of Gods justice.
so that they doubt, whether all things be governed of God in a just and
upright order. First, when they see it go well with the bad, and ill with the
good. And to this objection the doctrine of the Church only is able to make
answer, which shows that God differreth the punishments of the wicked, and
the rewards of the good to another life: inuiteth the vn-Godly by his
mildness and lenity to repentance: proves and confirms the Godly by
exercises and calamities: punishes and chastises many for their sins, who
seem in men's judgments to be g^ltles. It goes therefore evil with the good,
but not finally. Now as he differs the punishment of the wicked, thereby to
inuit them to repentance: so he afflicts the Godly, First, Because they yet
retain many sins, Secondly, To prove and try them, Thirdly, To confirm
their says in them

Objection. But justice requires, that never any good should be done to the
wicked; they were presently to be punished. Answer. Except there be a
reasonable and just cause why to differ their punishment. Reply. But yet no
harm should ever be done to the good. Answer. Not to those which are
perfectly good. But we in this life are not p^^fectlie good. Reply. We are
perfect in Christ. Answer. And therefore we are not punished of God, but
only chastised, proved, and exercised, that so at length we may be also
perfect in our selves.

Secondly when men consider, that God does not cause and bring to pass that
no sin be committed, when yet he might most easily do it: but farther that
he punishes sins which went before, with after-sinnes; and passes at his
pleasure things from one to another, as the Egyptians goods to the
Israelites, Exodus 12. And yet these things to be forbidden us by his Law: it
seems unto them, that God will, and does some things contrary to his Law.
But these things are contrary to his Law and justice, if they be done by
men: but if God do them, they are most just, and are most agreeable to his
Law. For creatures are bound one to another, one to provide for another
safety whenever he can: But God is bound to none. Thirdly, some, when they
hear that god does not give alike and equally to men, who all are by nature
equal, that is, the Sons of wrath, when as he conuerteth and saves some,
hardens and condemns others, they deem that by this reason accepting of
persons is laid upon God. But these men mark not, that then it is unjust to
give unequally to those who are equal, when a due and deserved reward is
paid, and that GOD does give his blessings unto men not of due, but of his
free bountifulness.

Reply. Those things which are done according to justice, are done as due.
But that good should be done to those who are good, the order of justice
requires: Therefore good is done unto the good as due. Answer. All this is
true, if we talk of creatures. But if of God, not so: because the creator is
bound to none, as the creatures are: neither can the creatures deserve any
thing of God, as they may one of another. Wherefore God punishes of justice;
but does good of grace and mercy; according as it is said, When ye have
done all, say, we are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our
duty to do. And if any man reply, that not men only, but God also is bound
by order of justice, to spare, and do well to the good, out of those words of
Abraham. Genesis 8.23. Will thou also destroy the righteous with the wicked? It
is to be observed, that this bond is not of any desert or right, that may make
the Creator to stand answerable to the Creature, but of gods promise and
truth. For God did most freely and of his exceeding goodness, when he ought
nothing to any, bind himself by promises endented, to do good unto the
godly. And this goodness of God and faithfulness in keeping his promises, is
often called justice. And therefore it is well said, that it agrees not with
God, to afflict any undeservedly, not because he should injury any, though
he destroyed him not offending, but because his mercy, and bountifulness and
truth do not admit this.

These things are necessarily to be ascribed of us unto the justice of God,
that the cogitation thereof may ascertaine us of the punishment of the wicked,
and of the deliverance of the Godly from their injuries after this life: that
so we may patiently bear, whatsoever he will lay upon us, as Dan. 9. it is
said, O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us open shame.

GOD teaches us in the Scripture to know his truth after this manner: First,
How we are taught the truth of God in scripture.
that his infinite Wisdom suffers none but most true and certain
knoweledge of all things to be in him. Hebrews 4.13. There is no creature
which is not manifest in his sight: but all things are naked unto his eyes,
with whom we have to do. Secondly, that he neither appoints, nor will, nor
speaks, things repugnaunt and contradictorie, 2. Corinthians. 1.19. The Son of
GOD Jesus CHRIST, who was preached among you by us, was not Yea, and Naie, but
in him it was Yea. Thirdly, that he faineth nothing, nor deceives any man,
but this is in truth and indeed his will, which he opens unto us. Roman.
3.4. Let GOD be true, and every man a liar. Fourthly, that he never changes
his mind. Psalm. 89.34. My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that
is gone out of my lips. Fifthly that it certainly comes to pass, whatsoever
god avouches shall come to pass: which experience also witnesses, and many
sayings of holy Scripture, as Matthew. 24. Heaven and earth shall pass, but my
word shall not pass. Sixthly, that he is the lover, author, and preserver of the
truth in the reasonable creatures, and an enemy to all lies, dissembling, and
hypocrisy. Therefore John 14.15. and 16. The holy Ghost is called the spirit
of truth, who should teach us all truth. Proverb. 12.12.

The lying lips are an abomination unto the Lord: but they that deal truly
are his delight. Mat. 24.51. He will give him his portion with hypocrites.

Seeing then the truth of God is to be considered out of his word and
works, albeit men by nature confess that GOD is true: yet are they ignorant
wherein his truth consists. For it is said, John. 17. Thy word is truth.
and Psalm. 89.5. Thy truth in the congregation of the SAINTS. Neither does
the conscience or the privy knowledge of any man's sins suffer him who
knows not CHRIST the Mediator, to put any confidence in Gods promises. For
as 2. Corinthians. 1. it is said, All the promises of God in him are Yea, and in him
Amen unto the glory of God. God disse^bleth not when he says he will do
that which yet he does not.


But if sometimes god foretold that he would do those things, which he never
decreed to do, he did not therein dissemble. For what he threatened, that he
meant with this condition should so come to pass, except the conversion of men
and prayers came between: and what he promised he meant with this condition,
if they repented, and either persisted in godliness, or needed not affliction
and chastisement. Wherefore he would indeed have punished the Niniuits if they
had persisted in their sins. And Christ, Luke. 24. was indeed departing,
except his disciples had desired him to stay in the Inn at Emaus.

How God is said to deceive a deceived Prophet.
As for that which God says, Ezech 14 9. And if a Prophet be deceived, and has
spoken a thing, that he has deceived him: he signifies not thereby that he
deceives by instilling lies into false Prophets, but that they are by him in
just judgment delivered and given to be seduced by the Devil, as 1. Kings.
22. GOD is said to have given a lieng spirit in the mouths of all the
prophets of Achab. Reply. But yet GOD would that the false Prophets should
tell a false tale. Answer. He would; but in diverse respects, and to a
diverse end. God foretold victory to Achab by an ironie, and that a sharp
and bitter one, thereby to recall him from making his expedition to war, and
to punish him for not obeying, by delivering him to be seduced by the Devil.
The false Prophets foretold victory to flatter him, the Devil to destroy him
and to die.

Why chastity is one of Gods properties.
There is made also mention of Chastity in the former description of God,
because amongst his especial and most notable differences, whereby he may be
discerned from Devils, he will have truth to be and chastity. For as God will
be acknowledged to be true, and will have truth loved of us, that it may
certainly appear, that he is, and what he is, and that men may think and
speak the truth of him, and through his knowledge be partakers of everlasting
life; so the Devil atte^pteth to fill the world with lies; that he may both
darken the glory of God, and by forging lies of God, destroy mankind.
Whereupon the holy Ghost is called the spirit of truth; But the Devil a liar
and murderer from the beginning, and the father of lies. Ioh. 8. And as God
both by reason of the exceeding purity of his nature, as also because he will
have the spousal love and conjunction of marriage to be the image of the
unspeakable love and spiritual conjunction between him and the Church, as
we may see Ephesians. 5. Ezech. 16. Osee 2. and therefore will have it accounted
sacred and holy amongst men; As God then in these respects is the lover and
author of chastity, and does most severely detest and punish al uncleanness,
both internal and external, which is repugnaunt to this order, as the examples
of the Sodomites, of the tribe of Benjamin, and others of all other ages and
nations testify: So the Devil, both for his impurity, as also because
whatsoever God would have held most holy and venerable that for the hatred
he bears to God he studieth most to deprave and most foulie to defourme;
endeavors with obscenitie and filthiness horribly to pollute al mankind,
and to withdraw them from GOD. Therefore it is said, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. This is
the will of god, even your sanctification, and that ye should abstein from
fornication, that every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in
holiness and honor.

The mercy or favorable and inclinable will of GOD to preserve his creatures
and especially mankind, The mercy of God in preserving his creatures.
the Scripture proposes unto us opened by these degrees. First, that he
takes delight in the salvation of all, but in the destruction of none. Ezech.
33.11. As I live, says the Lord god, I desire not the death of the wicked, but
that the wicked turn from his way, and live. Secondly, that he differreth,
mitigateth, and takes away punishments, inuiting all men by his long
suffering to repentance, if not one way, yet by the testimony of their
conscience. Hereof Exodus 34. and often elsewhere he is said to be slow to
anger. Thirdly, that he debaseth himself to relieve our infirmity both by
inward and outward supplies, as by his spirit, word, oaths, Sacraments,
and miracles. Fourthly, that he embraces with singular love his chosen, so
that he saves, and delivers them for ever from sin and all evils, and
comfort them also in afflictions, Reuelat. 7. and 21. God shall wipe away
all tears from their eyes. Isaie 49.15. Though a woman should forgette her
Child, yet will I not forgette thee. Fiftlie, that he chose rather to bring
to pass this our delivery even by the incarnation and death of his only
begotten Son, than that all mankind should perish. John 3. So god loved the
woorlde, that he gave his only begotten Son. Sixtlie, that he promises
and perfourmeth all these things of his own free goodness. Exodus 34.19. I
will show mercy, to whom I will show mercy: and will have compassion on
whom I will have compassion. Isay, 43.25. I, even I, am he that puts away
thine iniquities for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins.

Seventhly, That he does these things toward sinners, who not only were
unworthy of them, but also who were his deadly enemies. Romans 5.10. When
we were enemies, we were reconciled to GOD by the death of his son. They
also of the wiser sort, which are out of the Church, are all compelled to
attribute mercy unto God, because they see him so mercifully to spare
sinners: whereupon Jeremy, Lamentations chap. 3.22. says, It is the Lords
mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not. But
because the perfectness of Gods justice, and the priuitie of their own
sins does not permit them to conceive any firm persuasion of Gods mercy
toward them, neither know they ought concerning the salvation of men by the
death of his son: therefore are they not able either constantly or wholly to
agnise Gods mercy.

1 Objection. Mercy is a kind of grief or sorrow: therefore there is sorrow
and grief in God. Answer. The names of affections, when they are attributed
unto God by an Anthropopathie, they do not signify any passion or change in
God, but an inspeakeable either dislike, or liking of the objects. God
therefore is said to be merciful. 1. Because he is against the destruction of
his creature. 2. Because he does those things, which merciful men are wont
to do. 2 Objection. God seems sometimes to rejoice in reuengement. Isai. 1.
Proverb. 1. Answer. He reioiceth not in reuengement or punishment, but in the
executing of his own justice. 3 Objection. It seems in some places of
scripture, that Gods mercy does not extend it self unto the wicked; Isai. 27.
Answer. This is to be understood of that degree of mercy, wherewith he
imbraceth his chosen. And yet he spares also the wicked, neither reioiceth at
their destruction. 4 Objection. But yet he saves not all, whereas he is able
to do it. Therefore he is not exceeding merciful, neither merciful toward
all. Answer. He does not save all, for most just cause. For his mercy is so
to be exercised that it hinder not the execution of his justice.

5 Objection. He does not take mercy on any, or receive any into favor
without the satisfaction of his son. Therefore he does it not freely.
Answer. That which is concluded does not follow; because God of his free
grace gives this satisfaction it self, and applies it unto us. Now he
gives a thing freely, who gives the price of a thing, for which the thing it
self is given.

God is also called Bountiful, 1. In what the bountifulnes of God is seen.
Because he creates and governs all things. 2. He is the only fountain of
al good things. 3. Which befall to all creatures. 4. Yea to the wicked. 5. Of
his goodness, love, and free mercy toward all creatures. 6. But especially
toward mankind, which he has made according to his image, and for whose
sake he has created all other things. 7. But in them also chiefly toward his
Church, to whom he has opened himself and his will. 8. And in this his
Church, toward his chosen Angels and men, to whom by his son he gives life
and glory everlasting. And further, whom he is angry with, and on whom he
inflicteth punishment, he is not angry with their substance or nature which
himself created, but with that corruption, which came by other means to his
divine work. Romans 1.18. The wrath of god is reueiled from heaven against all
ungodliness. Objection. No creature visible is subject to so many evils, as
man. Therefore he is not bountiful toward men. Answer. He is subject to
these evils by an accident, that is, because of sin: but withal he is
enriced abooue other creatures, with great blessings even when he is out of
the Church; but is most happy and blessed, if he repent.

God also alone is most free, For what causes God is said to be most free.
because he alone by nature is such, that no fault or misery can fall upon
him. 2. Neither can he be constrained of any. 3. Neither is he bound to
any. 4. Neither is he subject or tied to the rule or lore of an other.
Wherefore whatsoever he will and does, that he will and does of himself most
freely, when, as much, and in what manner he will; and what he will, that is most
good and just. But here chiefly is considered the freedom of will, or
liberty from constraint, which is the power and ability, whereby god without
any necessity has from everlasting decreed, the whole order of the creation,
preservation, and rule of al things, and does accomplish the same, not being
constrained or tied to other causes; yet so, that he never swarueth from his
rightnes. To this bear witness his miracles, and many examples of deliueries
and punishments, and many places of scripture, as Psalm. 135.6. Whatsoever
pleased the Lord, that did he in heaven and in earth, in the sea, and in all
the depths. 1. Sam. 14.6. It is not hard to the Lord to save with many or with
few.

1 Objection. That, without which second causes, which work necessarily, can
not work; does it self also work necessarily. Without the first cause,
which is God, Second causes, which necessarily work, cannot work: therefore
the first cause also, which is God, works together with them necessarily.
Answer. The Mayor is true of such causes as work with absolute necessity:
but it is false of such as work only of a conditional necessity, that is
because it so pleases God (who notwithstanding could move them otherwise, or
else at all not move them, or not so much as make them) that they should work,
and should work after that manner, which they do work. Therefore all second
causes depend on the first, but not the first any way on the second.

2 Objection. God is vnchangeablie good; therefore not freely good. Answer.
This unchangeableness, does not diminish, but establish the liberty of Gods
will. For it is not the unchangeableness of a nature, but constraint and
coaction, which is contrary to liberty: and so much the more freely the will
chooses, with how much the greater and surer force and motion it is carried
unto her object.

3 Objection It is said also of particular events, that God can only will
those things which are best: but only those things which he has decreed
are best; therefore he cannot will other things. But answer is made to the
Minor: What things God has decreed, those are best, not before, but after his
decree. For Gods will being the rule and squire of rightnes, therefore are
things good, because he will them: wherefore if he would have from
everlasting had any other thing: that then should have been best. As that
Joseph should be sold, and made Lord of Egypt, and give sustenance to his
fathers family, was best, because God would so Now if God would have any other
way exercised Joseph and taken vengeance on his brethren, that should then
have been the best. It follows therefore, that God will no other thing, after
he has once decreed, what he will have done; but that he was able from
everlasting to have decreed some other thing: For whatsoever he would, that
from everlasting he would most freely. 4 Objection. Moreover, some places of
scripture seem to intimate that the will of God may be sometimes hindered by
his creatures. As Ezech. 33.11. I desire not the death of the wicked. Math. 23.
How often would I have gathered thee, and thou would not? Ans. These and the
like places only show, with what God is delighted, and to what he inuiteth and
calls al: but not what by his mercy and spirit he has purposed to work in
every one.

Wherefore this doctrine of the liberty and free will of God let us diligently
maintain, that both the glory of god may be vindicated from stoicall
blasphemies: and in us faith, hope, inuocating on god, and sedulitie and
earnestnes in performing our duty, may be established, if acknowledging god
most freely to govern all her creatures, we be neither secure in prosperity,
nor in adversity do cast away hope and good endeavors.

Lastly in the description of gods nature is put, The anger of God against
sin.
that he is angry and wrath with offenses and sins. Which horrible anger and
wrath of god, whereby he detesteth and punishes all sins, although all the
wicked at length too late perceive and have experience of, when they rush into
eternal despair; yet such his displeasure and indignation as god will have to
be known, they cannot so much as conceive, who are without the Church, seeing
they neither judge all those evils to be sins, which god in his law
threatens he will punish with everlasting torments; neither know the death
and punishment of the son of god, than which god could not show a greater
token and Argument of his anger against sin. The elect and chosen alone, are
thoroughly moved by a right and saving knowledge thereof gathered out of gods
punishments and threatninges to conversion, and the fear of god. But the
greatness of it no man can fully conceive, according as it is said Psalm. 90.
Who knows the power of thy wrath?

How the conceiving of the whole nature of God, he, that is instructed by the
spirit, goes beyond him whom nature informs.
Out of the description therefore of God before delivered, we may understand,
how the true God is discerned from false Gods. Likewise, what the knowledge of
God reueiled in his word differs from that, which the heathen have being
derived from the light of nature. The difference consists, first In the
attributes or properties of God, now expounded. Secondly, In the persons.
Thirdly, In the works: of these two is to be spoken afterward. These things
are fully and rightly understood in the Church only: Because they are made
known by revelation from GOD only, wherefore they who are not of the Church,
do not know and worship of the true GOD, but an idol in steed of the true
GOD. For they err, First, in the attributes or properties of GOD, who either
know not and profess all, or do not rightly and fully expound them; as they
are declared in the word; or else corrupt them. The Heathen therefore know not
the omnipotency, wisdom, goodness, justice, truth, mercy, bountifulness of
GOD showed in the saving and restoring of men, by the sending of the Son, and
the holy Ghost: They know not the death and punishment of the Son of GOD;
therefore they know not the grieuousnesse of GODS anger against sin, even
that he will punish all sin, yea the least, with eternal punishment.
Wherefore also they know not the justice of GOD punishing all sin with
eternal pains in the wicked, or with that which is equivalent to eternal in
his Son. They know not the Wisdom, Mercy, Truth of god, freeing us
sinners from death, and receiving us, without breach of his justice, into
favor; Iustifiyng us, sanctifiyng, and glorifiyng us in his Son by the holy
ghost, according to his promises. Neither further do they ascribe unto god
fully and wholly his Omnipotency, Wisdom, goodness, which shines in the
creation of things, and in the continual preserving of the same. For of many
things they have either none, or but a dark knowledge: many things they
subtract, and withdraw from the providence and government of god, and
attribute it to their own wisdom, industry, virtue, and strengh, or ascribe
it to fortune, and chance. The like we are to conceive of other attributes of
god, in which they are alike blind.

Secondly, The Church acknowledges three persons of one and the same Divine
Essence, that is, that the true god is an Essence, so in number one eternal
and infinite, that notwithstanding it is the same and whole substance of the
three persons: to wit, the eternal Father, and his Coeternall Son, and the
Coeternall holy ghost: But the Heathen, and Pagans, and other sects do not
acknowledge three persons, but as the Essence, so also the person of the
Godhead they profess to be only one.

Thirdly, They which are not of the Church, are altogether ignorant of the
works of the Churches salvation, namely, the reconciliation of men with god,
justification, sanctification, and full delivery from all sin and misery by
the Son and the holy ghost. Neither do they wholly acknowledge or profess
the works of Creation. For they do not think all things to have been
created of nothing, by the word of god only: they deny all generally and
each in particular, even the least, to be administered power-fullie by the
Omnipotency of God: but ascribe very many to Chance, Fortune, and humane
Wisdom.

Wherefore, seeing out of the works of god, as his proper affectes, are made
known both the properties or nature of the true god, as also the Trinity of
persons in one godhead, and therefore god and each of the persons take their
names from them; and seeing those works are both all and chiefly extant in
the Church, and are by the Church rightly, and sufficiently understood: hereof
is necessarily concluded, that he alone who is made known in the word, and
the Church, is the true and natural god, and that he is to be known and
discerned from Idols by the word only, and by his benefits and revelations
exhibited to the Church; as the sending of the holy ghost, the redemption of
mankind, regeneration, sanctification and glorification; concerning the which
Pagans and many other sects know nothing at all.

3 Whence it may appear, that there is but one god.
Whence first sprang the multitude of Gods.
ALbeit god in the beginning did as certainly declare unto mankind that he is
but one only, as what he is: yet the world by the guile and deceit of the
Devil (going about to spoil god of his honor, and to bear and vaunt himself
for god, and to destroy mankind for the hatred he bears unto god) and
through their own blindness and malice reuolting from gods divine
manifestations, and from the doctrine of our first fathers, has in horrible
madness forged a multitude of gods, yielding divine honors partly to
creatures, partly to imaginary gods, and forgetting the true god, or desiring
to join and couple other gods with him. And whereas there is no greater bond,
than whereby the creature is bound to honor his Creator, and therefore no more
griuous sin, than to obscure the glory due unto god, or to convey it over to
any other: god, that he might meet with this sacrilege, has often testified
and witnessed in his word, that there is but one god, not many, That is, that
there is but one divine essence eternal, of infinite power, wisdom, and
goodness, Creator, preserver, and ruler of all things. As Deuteronomy. 6.4. Hear O
Israel, the Lord our god is Lord only. And cap. 32.39. Behold now, for I, I am
he, and there is no gods with me. Isai. 44.6. I am the first, and I am the
last, and without me is there no god. And cap. 45.5. I am the Lord, and there
is none other: there is no god besides me. 1. Cor. 8.4. We know that an Idol
is nothing in the world, and that there is no other god but one. Ephesians. 4.5. One
Lord, one faith, one baptism, one god and father of all, which is above all,
and in us all. See also Deuteronomy. 4.35. 2. Kings. 22.32. Psalm. 18.32. Isai. 36.5.
Reasons to show that there is but one God. 1. But one only manifested by
sufficient testimonies of miracles and prophecies, and other works.
and 45.21. and 47.8.10. Hose. 13.4. Mat. 2.10. Marc. 12.32. Romans 3.30. Galat.
3.20. 1. Tim. 2.10. etc.

There are not wanting reasons and arguments also, unto which the judgment of
reason assenteth and yields, that there are no more true gods but one.

1 We are to hold so many for gods, as have manifested their divinity by
certain and undoubted testimonies. But there is but one only manifested by
miracles, prophecies, and other works, which cannot be done but by an
omnipotent nature. Isai. 44. Psalm. 86. Therefore but one is to be held for god,
even he who^ the Church adoreth. Object. Other gods have wrought miracles, and
uttered prophecies. Ans. 1. Those miracles were no other tha^ might be done by
creatures, not proper to an omnipotent nature. 2. They confirmed some manifest
impiety or turpitude, and therefore were not true miracles.

2 His authority and Majesty is greater, 2 The majesty of God admits no
fellows,
who alone reigns over all, and alone governs all things, than his, who
has a fellow partaker of the rule and government with him, that is, it is a
point of the greatest majesty, to reign alone: but the Majesty of god is so
great, that no greater can either be, or be imagined: Therefore there is but
one God. The Mayor is proved. Because he who is not Lord alone, unto him
greater Majesty may be added: but the greatest and highest Majesty, is that,
whereunto nothing can be added. And the Minor is proved by the perfectnes,
omnipotency, blessedness, and surpassing goodness of god, and by natural
judgment. Exodus 34.14. Thou shall bow down to none other god. Isai. 42.8. I
am the Lord, this is my name, and my glory will I not give to another. 1. Tim.
1.17. Unto god only wise, be honor. Apoc. 4.11. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to
receive glory, and honor, and power: for thou have created all things.

3 That which has greatest perfection, can be but one, 3. That which is most
perfect, is but one.
for the whole is greater and perfecter than any part thereof. Therefore he is
perfect, who has the whole alone: and they imperfect, who have any thing
divided and distributed amongst them. Furthermore, the very evidence of the
thing it self does so enforce us to confess the greatest perfection of
goodness, wisdom and power to be in god, seeing he is the cause of al, that
good is in nature; that nothing is more absurd, than to imagine any thing to
be god which is not most great, and most perfect. Wherefore there is but one
only divine essence, for that the divinity being dispersed into more gods,
would be al and whole in none: and so none of them would be perfect, and
therefore none the true god. And herehence appears the vanity of that devise
and imagination, whereby it fained that there is but one supreme god: but to
this are added, other minor and demi gods, Whatsoever i^ God, is Sovereign,
and Supreme.
as subject and vnder-powers to the highest. For seeing it is impious to
conceive of the divinity, otherwise than as being most great and most perfect,
and such whereto nothing may be added, and which is subject to none; therefore
neither that which is distributed into more gods, neither any thing, which
comes short never so little of the greatest perfection and surpassing al man's
cogitation, can be the true god, as it is often said: Lord, who is like unto
thee? Whether therefore the others be equal, or inferior, yet would there be
in none the whole divinity. For in him that is supreme or sovereign, and the
rest jointly together is more of the divinity, than in that one supreme only.
Therefore neither in the supreme and soueraign god, should the whole deity be.
And further those inferior powers can not be gods, because they are not most
perfect, nor supreme.

4 But one chief good.
4 God is of infinite goodness, and the very chief good. But there ought to be
one only chief good For if besides that there were another chief good also,
that should be either greater, or lesser, or equal. If greater, then should it
also be god: which were contumelious against god: if lesser, it should not be
god: if equal, then neither the one nor the other should be god.

5 But one Omnipotent.
5 There is but one Omnipotent. God is Omnipotent. Therefore he is but one. The
Mayor is proved thus. He against whose will any thing may be done, or whom
another can hinder from doing that he would, cannot be truly omnipotent: but
if there be more, at one and the same time put to be omnipotent, then shall
they be able to do any thing, though the others be against it; and one shall
necessarily have the power to hinder another, and to let his action, and to
do any thing contrary to the others will; for otherwise he should not be able
to do all things (for it is proper to him that is omnipotent, that no man be
able to resist him) but should have his power bounded and limited within a
certain compass. None of them therefore would be indeed omnipotent, but in
word only and by entreaty each of other: and therefore there cannot be
imagined more gods, except omnipotency be withal taken from them. Objection.
But they may agree all. Wherefore omnipotency hinders not, why there should
not be more omnipotent. Answer. Omnipotency is, not only not to be
hindered, but, not to be able to be hindered.

6 More Gods would be either imperfect, or superfluous.
6 It is not lawful to imagine god to be such a one, as suffices not for the
wielding and menaging of all things, neither such a one as is superfluous or
idle, without manifest impiety and absurdity; seeing there is nothing
superfluous or idle in god. But if there be put more gods, either each of them
will be too weak to rule all, and so imperfect, and not worthy of the title
and name of divinity: or one will suffice for the guiding of the whole world,
and so the rest shall be idle, superfluous and needelesse. Wherefore there
must needs be but one god, that he alone may suffice for all.

7 There can be but one infinite: 7 There can be but one infinite.
for if there were more infinites; none should be present every where, and
rule all. Wherefore there cannot be more, but one only god which is infinite.

8 There is but one first cause of al things. God is that first cause. 8 But
one first cause.

How many are called Gods in scripture.


Therefore he is but one. Object. Many are called Gods. Psalm. 82.6. I have
said, ye are gods. 1. Cor. 8.5. Many are, and are called gods in heaven and
in earth. Exodus 7.1. Moses is called Pharaos god. Likewise the gods of the
heathen. Therefore there is not one god only. Ans. There is an ambiguity and
double signification of this word, God, which sometimes signifies him, who is
by nature god, and has his being not from any thing but from himself and by
himself, and all other things are from him. Such a God is but one only.
Sometimes it betokens not the very Divine, Eternal, and immense Essence,
but a god either so entitled, for some similitude of the Divine properties,
dignity, and divine office, and function: Or an imaginary, and feigned god.
Such Gods are many. First, Judges, and Magistrates are entitled and called
gods, not that they have the Divine Essence communicated unto them, and are by
nature GOD; but because they bear a Divine office and function, that is,
because they are the Deputies and Vicegerents of GOD, by whom, as by his
instruments and servant, he exercises his power and judgments here on
earth: and therefore does furnish and arm them with Wisdom, Fortitude,
Power, Authority, and Majesty, as much as is necessary and sufficient to
bridle the minds of the multitude, being desirous of licenciousnes, and to
hold and keep them in fear and obedience: he does also vouchsafe them the
honor of his name, that the Subjects may thereby know, that they have to
deal not with men, but with GOD himself, (whose Vicegerents they are) whether
they obeie their Magistrate, or repine against him. Romans 13.2 Whosoever
resists the power, resists the ordinance of God. Secondly, The Angels also
are called Gods, both for the excellency of their nature and gifts, power and
wisdom, as also for the divine office and function, which God exercises by
them in this world, in defending the godly and punishing the wicked. Thirdly,
The Devil is called the God of the world, for his great potencie and power,
which he has over men and other creatures by the just judgment of God. 2.
Cor. Ephesians. 6. Now Idols are called Gods by a figurative sp^^che of imitation,
imitating and following therein the opinion of men who saigne a divinity in
creatures, fear them, trust in them, and rest on them. Exodus 20.3. Thou shall
have none other Gods before me. Philip. 3.9. whose God is their belly.

4 What these words, Essence, Person, and Trinity, betoken and signify.
The explication of these words serve much for the understanding of the
inconceivable mystery of the Trinity: and therefore is it not to be read
with a running eye.
ESsence, as it is used in this doctrine, for substance, is a thing subsisting
by it self (that, is a thing having a proper being, not sustained in another)
although it be communicated to more. That is said to be communicable or
communicated, which is common, or may be made common to more. That is said to
be incommunicable, which is not in more, neither can be affirmed of more. Man's
essence is communicable and common to many men, but this essence is in
general common, not in particular, and in number: that is, the nature and
essence of all men is in general one, but not one in number: for every man
has his Essence distinct from others, neither are all one man, but many men.
But the Essence of God is communicable in particular; because the selfsame
Deity in number, and that whole and entire is common to the three persons, and
is the substance of the three persons: and therefore the three persons are that
one God, who created all things; not three gods.

A person, is a thing subsisting, individual, living, understanding,
incommunicable, not sustained in another, neither part of another.

Subsisting] By which word is signified, that it is not an accident,
cogitation, decree, vanishing sound, or any created quality, or motion.

Indiuiduall] Not any general; but a particular one in number, and therefore
vndiuidable, and called individual. Liuing] No inanimat thing, which has no
life, as a stone.

Vnderstanding] A thing which has sense only, as are brute beasts, who are
things living and sensible, but not understanding, and therefore are no
persons.

Incommunicable] Not the divine Essence, which is common to three: not the
substance of man's nature or any other thing created: which is communicated to
the thing begotten thereof or thence derived.

Not sustained in another] Not the human nature of Christ: because this is
personally sustained of the word, that is, so, that it together with the word
is the substance of one Christ, and except it were subsisting in the word,
should not at al be.

Neither part of another] Not the soul of man, which as long as it is
contained in the body, is part of man.

5 What difference between Essence and Person.
IN the Church, Essence is the very being of God; Person, is the manner of his
being, which manner of being is threefold, and so makes three Persons.
by the name of Essence is understood that which God, the etern^^ ^^ther, and
Son, and holy Ghost, each of them a^^^n themselves absolutely, and is common
to them three, even the very eternal and one only Deity, or the very being
of God. By the name of Person is signified the manner, after which that being
or Essence of God is in each of these three, or the proper and several
manners of each of their beeings. That is, Person, is that, which each of
these three are respectively or being compared one to the other: or, is that
very being of god considered respectively to one and another, and distinct by a
proper and peculiar manner of being and subsisting from the others. Wherefore
in number there is one and the same Being or Essence in God, that is, in each
of these three, who are god, but it is after a diverse manner in god. As when we
speak of god the father; that being is of it self, not from another. The
son is the father: The Son is the same being or Essence, but from the
Father: The holy ghost likewise is the self same divine being, which the
father is and the son, but from the father and the son. So the wisdom,
power, justice, goodness, bountifulnes, mercy, etc. of these three are the
very divine being or essence, which is in number one and the same in these
three. But to be of himself, or from another; likewise to be from one, or from
two: (that is, to have that one Essence of himself, or to have it communicated
from an other, either from one or from two) is the manners of being which are
three, to wit, The eternal father, and the son, and the spirit of them both.
And this is it, that Iustine Martyr says: There is one existence or essence of
the three, which is from none but of it self: because it is but one: but the
manners of the existence are three. Wherefore as concerning existence, Being,
or essence it self, the three persons are of themselves: as concerning the
manner of existing or being, the father is none but of himself: The son of
the father; the holy Ghost, from both: The son begotten, the holy Ghost
proceeding.

The sum of the difference between the Essence and person is: the essence is
absolute and communicable; the person respective and incommunicable. This may
be made more manifest by exemplifiyng in a man. It is one thing, to be a man,
an other thing to be a Father, or a Son; and yet one and the same, is both a
man and a Father: but he is a man absolutely, or in himself, or according to
his own nature; he is a father to another, or in respect of another, namely of
his son. Semblably, it is one thing, to be God, another thing to be the
father, or son, or holy ghost, and yet one and the same is both God, and
father; god in respect of himself, or his own nature; father in respect of the
son. Again, the essence of a man who begets another is communicated to him
who is begot: but the person, or indiuidual, is not communicated. For the
begetter brings forth not himself, but another distinct from himself, the
same essence notwithstanding being communicated unto him. And no relative is
his correlatiue, or any part thereof. Therefore the son is not the father,
nor the father the son, although both be true man. So in like sort, the
eternal Father has by eternal generating communicated to the Son his
Essence, but not his Person, that is, he begot not the Father, but the Son,
neither is the Father the Son, or the Son the Father; albeit each is true
God. God, and man communicate both their Essence to another; but their manner of
communicating is most different, and is much to be observed.


Now although this be like in God and man, that both do communicate to an
other not his Person, but his Essence: yet is there an exceeding dissimilitude
in the manner, whereby the divine Essence being infinite, and the humane being
created and finite is communicated to another: Which dissimilitude is
diligently to be observed. For first, in men, in the father and the Son, the
Essence is as distinct as the Persons themselves. The father and the Son are
not only two persons, but also two men distinct in essences: So that the
father is not that man, which is the son. But in God the persons are so
distinct, that yet the essence remains common, one and the same, and
therefore there are not three Gods, but the Son is the same God in number,
which is the Father and the Son. Secondly, In persons created, he that
begets and generateth does not communicate his whole essence to him that is
begotten: (For then he should cease to be a man,) but only a part, which being
allotted and severed out of the essence of him that begets, is conveyed or
derived into him that is begotten, and is made the essence of another
individual or person, distinct from the essence of the individual who
begets. But in uncreated persons he that begets or inspireth,
communicates his whole essence to him that is begotten or proceeds, or is
inspired: yet so, that he who communicates does retain the same, and that
whole. The reason of both differences is, that the essence of man, as also of
other creatures, is finite and diuisible, the essence of God infinite and
indivisible: and therefore the Deity may, being the same and whole or entire,
be together both communicated and retained. Wherefore the eternal Father, and
Son, and holy Ghost are that one true GOD: and yet the Father is not the
Son, or the holy Ghost, neither is the holy Ghost the Son; that is, they
are one God, not three Gods, but three persons, subsisting in one God.

By the name of Trinity, are understood the three manners of being in God,
that is, three not essences, but persons of the same divine Essence. Now
Trinity and triplicitie, as also Trinal and triple differ. That is said to be
Triple, which is compounded of three essences, or is distinct by three
essences. Trinall is that, which in essence is but one and most simple, but
has three manners of being. God therefore is not Triple; because there are
not mo essences: but Trinall, because he being one according to his essence,
is three according to his persons.

This difference of essence and person is to be observed and held. 1 Least the
unity of the true God be distracted. 2 Least the distinction of the persons be
taken away. 3. Least another thing be understood by the name of person, than
the truth of gods word declares. For person in this place does not signify
only a relation or office, as the Latins are wont to speak, Principis personam
tueri, to defend the person of the Prince, as of old, Sabellius falsely
taught: muchlesse does it signify the countenance, or visible shape (as in
these days Seruetus sported and trifled with the word, person) representing
the form, or gesture of another; such as is the person of a stage plaier: but
it signifies a thing subsistent, truly distinct from others, unto whom it
has a relation and respect, by an incommunicable property: that is, it
signifies that which begets, or which is begotten, or which proceeds; not
the office, or dignity, or degree of him that begets, or is begotten, or
proceeds. Furthermore, the persons are not any thing separated from the
essence, but each of them are the very selfsame whole essence of the
Divinity. But the difference is in this, that the persons are each distinct
from the other, but the essence is common to them three. And, that the person
is no other thing subsisting, or other substance, than the essence, may be
understood in some sort, by the example of a man. One and the same man, or one
and the same substance, is a father and a man, or a son and a man: and yet
the manhood, or, to be a man, is one thing; the fatherhoode, or, to be a
father, another: but there is not one subsistent which is the father, and
another subsistent which is a man, but one and the same subsistent is both,
because both manhood and fatherhoode is in him: manhood absolutely, fatherhood
respectively as in regard of his Son.

Of the word essence also it is further to be noted, that God or the Deity or
divine essence is not in respect of the persons, the same which the matter in
respect of the effect: because God is unchangeable, neither is compounded of
matter and form. Therefore we cannot say well: Three persons are, or, consist
of one essence: Neither is it as the whole in respect of the parts: because God
is indivisible. Wherefore it is not well said, that the person is a part of
the essence, or the essence consists of three persons: for every person is
the whole divine essence, one and the same. Neither is it as the general to the
special, because the persons are not specials, but indiuiduals. Neither is it
simply as the special to the indiuiduals, because the divine essence it self
is individual, or one in number: and the persons are not another, or a
diverse, or a separated thing from the essence, but every person is that
essence. Therefore it is well said, God or the Divine essence, is the father,
is the son is the holy ghost: Likewise, The three persons are one God, or in
one God: Again, they are one and the same essence, nature, divinity, wisdom,
etc. They are of one or the same essence, nature, divinity, etc. Yet it cannot
be said well, they are of one God. Wherefore the divine essence is in respect
of the persons, as a thing after a rare and singular manner communicated, in
respect of those things, unto which it is common. For neither is there the like
example of community in any created things. For a general is a certain thing
common to many specials, and a general and special to many indiuiduals: but
yet so, that they are affirmed of those many plurallie, not singularly: as,
that the father, and the son, or this father and son are two living
creatures, two men. But we may not speak after this sort of God and the
divine persons, as to say, the father and the son are two Gods, two
spirits, two omnipotentes, etc. Because there is but one GOD, one spirit, one
omnipotent, etc. Wherefore that affirmation, the father is God, the Son is God,
the holy Ghost is God, is a true affirmation affirming that which is more
common of a thing which is more restrict: that is, affirming the essence of the
indiuidual; which has in some sort an analogy and proportion only with the
special affirmed of his individual, but is not at all the same, nor of the
same kind.

6 Whether these names are to be used in the Church.
THese names are to be used and retained in the church. Objection. But these
names, namely Essence, person, and Trinity, are not in the Scripture;
therefore they ought not to be used and retained in the Church. Answer. These
names which are not in the Scripture, neither the words themselves, nor the
sense of them, are not to be used: but both the names them selves of essence
and person are found in the Scripture, and the thing also or the doctrine it
self concerning them. The name Essence is expressed by the name of Iehoua,
which is frequent in the Scripture. Likewise by the name of Being, which often
also offers it self in the Scripture. Exodus 3.14. I am that I am. Revel.
1.8. Which is, and which was, and which is to come. The word Person, is
expressed by the greek word (...), Heb. 13. which word is there interpreted,
Person: The ingraued form of his person. The name of Trinity, is signified,
1. John. 5.7. There are three which bear record in heaven, the father, the
word, and the holy ghost, and these three are one. And this for the names
themselves. Now for the thing. As often as is mentioned one Iehoua, so often is
mentioned one essence. As often as the Father, the Son, and the holy ghost
is called Iehoua, so often the three persons of the Divinity are expressed;
that is, three subsisting, three understanding, etc. And this answer yields
the first cause, why these words ought to be retained in the Church: because
namely they are extant in the holy Scripture, either in words or in sense
and meaning.

The Second cause is, because they are fit to expound the phrase and speech of
the Scripture unto the unlearned. And further if no words were to be used,
but such as are extant in the Scriptures, all interpretation should be taken
away. For interpretation requires, that the words of Scripture be expounded
to the unlearned by such words, as being more usual in other languages or
matters and doctrines, are more easy for them to understand, and paueth and
makes plain away unto them for the understanding of the speech and phrase of
Scripture.

The third cause is, that the sleights and sophismes of heretics, which for
the most part they go about to cloak and cover with the words of holy
Scripture, are more easily espied and taken heed of, if the same things be
expounded in diverse words, and those especially short, perspicuous, and
significant. So the sectaries and followers of Seruetus do confess, that the
Father, the Son, and the holy ghost, are one God, but not one in essence, but
by propagation, that is, that they are not (...), the same in substance, but
(...), like in substance. Likewise they grant the Son to be true God, but
they deny him to be the same in substance with his father. But therefore is it
that heretics will none of the Churches phrase and speech, because they
dislike the thing it self. For if there were a consent and an according in the
things, we should easily come to an agreement about the words.

7 How many persons there be of the Divinity or Godhead.
IN one divine essence are subsisting three persons, Three persons are one God,
and one God is three persons.
and those truly distinct one from another by their properties; namely the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost; each of which three persons
notwithstanding are one and the same God, eternal, infinite, and most perfect in
himself. And these persons are consubstantiall and coeternal, without any
confounding of their properties and respects, as also without any
disparagement, or inequality between them.

And that there are three persons, each of which are that one true God,
creator of all things, is proved, first, by testimonies of Scripture, which
are taken partly out of the old Testament, and partly out of the new. The old
Testament yields us many testimonies. Genesis 1.2. The spirit of God moved
upon the waters: Then God said, let there be light. Exodus 3.2. The Lord is
said to have appeared unto Moses in a flame of fire, out of the midst of a
bushe. Steven, Acts. 7.30. calls him the Angel of the Lord, which is Christ
the Son of God, even that Angel of the great counsel. Isay. 61.1. The
spirit of the Lord God is upon me: therefore has he anointed me, he that
sent me to preach good tidinges unto the poor, to bind up the broken hearted.
Here the spirit is discerned both from him that annointeth, and from him that
is anointed. He is discerned also by his gifts, because he says, Upon me,
that is, dwelling in me, sanctifieng me. Therefore these be three diverse
persons subsisting. But yet there are both mo, and more clear testimonies in
the new Testament. Mat. 28.19. Teach all nations, baptising them in the name
of the father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost. John. 14.26. The comforter
which is the holy Ghost, whom the father will send in my name. Ioh. 15.26. When
the Comforter shall come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the
spirit of truth, which proceeds of the Father. 2. Cor. 13.13. The grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the holy
Ghost be with you al. In this saying of the Apostle invocation is joined with
an application and distinction of the 3 persons. By grace he means the
benefits of Christ: by Love, the acceptance, whereby GOD, for his Sons
sake, does receive us into favor: by the communion of the holy ghost, his
gifts which are common unto the godly. 1. John. 5.7. There are three in heaven
which bear record Tit. 3 5 God saved us by the washing of the new birth, and
the renewing of the holy ghost, which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus
Christ our Savior. Here he makes three authors of our salvation. Ephesians.
2.18. Through him we have an entrance unto the father by one spirit. Gal. 4.6.
God has sent forth the spirit of his son into your hearts. Therefore it is
one spirit, which the father and the Son sends. Secondly, The same is
proved by those places of Scripture, which give unto these three, the Father,
the Son and the holy Ghost, the name of Iehoua and true God. In like manner
those places wherein those things which are spoken of Iehoua in the old
Testament, are in the new referred expressly and most plainly to the Son
and the holy Ghost. Thirdly, those places which attribute the same whole
divine essence to the three; and show that the Son is the proper Son of the
father, most truly begotten of him: and that the holy ghost is the spirit of
the father and the Son, and that so proper and peculiar as that he is, and
proceeds of God, which is the father and the son. The son therefore and
the holy Ghost have the same, and that whole essence of the Deity, which the
Father has: The Son has it communicated of the father by being borne of
him, and the holy Ghost of the father and the son, by proceeding from them.
Fourthly, those places, which give unto the three the same attributes or
properties and perfections of the divine nature: namely, eternity, immensity,
omnipotency, etc. Fifthly, those places, which attribute to the three the same
effects or works proper unto the Deity, namely, creation, preservation, and
government of the world, as also miracles, and the salvation of the Church.
Sixtlie, those places, which yield to the three equal honor and worship,
and such as agrees to the true god alone. By this consent therefore of the
old and new Testament it is confirmed, that one GOD is three persons truly
distinct, and those three persons are one God.

By this also we understand, that it is truly said, that the father is other
from the son and the holy ghost, and the holy Ghost other from both: but
not truly, that the father is another thing from the son, the son another
thing, and the holy ghost another thing. For to be another thing, betokens a
diversity of essence; to be other, a diverse manner of existing, or a
distinction of person. Now the three distinct persons have not a diverse
Deity, but one and the same in number.

8 How the three persons of the godhead are distinguished.
THese persons are distinguished two ways: The three persons distinguished by
their inward works mutuallie directed toward one another.
by their inward works: and by their outward works. Their inward works are
those which the persons have and exercise one toward another. By these then
they are distinguished, in that the father is and existeth of himself, not
from another. He begot the Son, and inspired the holy Ghost, by
communicating his essence unto them after an unspeakable manner. The son has
his being from the father, beggotten of him from everlasting, that is, he has
the same essence with the father, but communicated unto him from the father.
The holy ghost proceeds from everlasting from the father and the Son, that
is, has the same essence, but communicated unto him from the father and the
Son. Objection. That which is not understood cannot be discerned or
distinguished: the manner of the begetting and generating of the Son, and of
the proceeding of the holy ghost is not understood. Therefore they cannot be
discerned or distinguished. Answer. Those things cannot be discerned, which
are not at all understood, neither in respect of the proper causes thereof,
nor in respect of the effects. But that the son is begotten of the father, and
the holy ghost proceeds from the father and the son, we know out of the
holy Scriptures. We understand also in some sort, what this is, namely, the
son to be begotten of the father: For to be borne or to be begotten, is to
be produced out of his essence who begets to have his essence communicated
unto him of him who begets. Albeit the manner, whereby the eternal father
communicated his essence, the same whole and entire unto his son, we conceive
not. The like also is to be understood concerning the proceeding of the holy
ghost.

Here is to be observed also, that it is truly said, The son is begotten: The
holy ghost proceeds. Likewise, The divine person is produced, begotten,
proceeds of the essence of the father, or of the father and the son. But not
truly: The divine essence is produred, or begotten, or proceeds. Yet truly it
is said, The divine essence is given, communicated to another, received of
another. The reason hereof is, for that to be given, communicated, received,
The person, not the essence, of the Son is begotten.
stretches further than to be produced, begotten, or to proceed. For not
whatsoever is given, communicated, received, is also begotten. Further, that is
said to be begotten, not which is communicated to the thing begotten, but
that, unto which the substance of him that begets is communicated: So the
essence of GOD the father, is not begotten, or produced from another, and yet
the self same essence of it self subsisting, is given and communicated to the
Son and the holy Ghost, and received of the Son and the holy GHOST. John
5.26. The father likewise has given to the Son to have life in himself.
Neither does it follow: The person is begotten: therefore the Essence is
begotten. For that which is affirmed truly of a thing respective, is not
necessarily to be affirmed of a thing absolute in his own nature. For
although every father has a Son: yet not every thing, of which it may be
truly affirmed, that it is a father, may be said to have a Son. Albeit
then the person of the Son is begotten: yet whatsoever is the Son is not
begotten.

The persons distinguished by their outward works extended unto the creatures.
Another difference of the persons is, in the order of their outward actions,
which they exercise toward the creatures, in them, and by them. The Father
woorcketh, creates, sanctifies of himself, by the Son and the holy Ghost.
He sends them, and is not sent. The Son woorketh from the Father by the
holy Ghost: he is sent of the Father: he sends the holy Ghost: The holy
Ghost woorketh and is sent from both. His working is said to be from another,
who woorketh another will and pleasure going before, his own accompanieng and
following it, not in time, but in the order of woorking. The persons therefore
differ not in the works themselves, but in the manner only and order of
working. The work is not distinct: the manner of working is distinct. The
father is called the first person, because the Deity is communicated unto him
from none. The Son, the second person: because the Deity is communicated unto
him from the Father. The holy Ghost, the third: because the essence of the
father and the son is communicated unto him from the father and the son. Now
the first and last are here said, not as in degree, or dignity, or time, but
only in order of existing and working.

This eight question together with the former shall be more at large explicated
in the Articles of the son and the holy Ghost.

9 Wherefore this doctrine is to be held and maintained in the Church.
THis doctrine of the Trinity is to be learned and held in the Church. 1. In
respect of the glory of God, The doctrine of the Trinity to be tuaght in the
Church.

1 In respect of Gods glory.

2 In regard of our salvation.


that God may be discerned and distinguished from Idols. For God will not be
matched with Idols: but will have himself to be woorshipped, and celebrated,
and therefore known and agnised for such a one, as he has declared himself
to be. 2. In regard of our own salvation and comfort. No man is saved, who
knows not the father; and the father is not known without the son. 1.
John. 2.23. Whosoever denies the son, the same has not the father. Again,
no man is freed and saved from sin and death, without believing the Mediator
Christ. But no man reposeth trust and confidence in the son, when as yet he
is not known unto him. Therefore we must first know the son, and then for
the son we must know the father, that we may believe in him. Likewise no man is
sanctified and saved by the holy Ghost who knows not the holy Ghost. For he
who receives not the holy Ghost is not saved. But no man receives him, whom
he knows not. Therefore who knows him not is not saved. That no man
receives him, whom he knows not, is proved by those words of Christ. John
14.17. The spirit of truth the world cannot receive, because it sees him not,
neither knows him. Ioh. 3.5. Except a man be borne again of water and the
spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Hence it manifestly appears, that they which will be saved must necessarily
know the father, the son, and the holy ghost. And they must know, that the
son and the holy ghost are distinct from the father, but yet co^substantial
with the father, and equal in perfections, honor, worship, and therefore the
same true God which is the father. For except God be known of us to be such, as
he has declared himself to be; he does not communicate himself to us,
neither may we look or hope for everlasting life from him. And what he has
showed himself to be, we have heard, namely, that he is the eternal Father,
coeternall Son, and coeternall holy Ghost.

But among al points there is none more sharply oppugned by the adversaries of
the truth, than this doctrine of the three persons in one godhead, especially
since the son of god was manifested in the flesh. It is not hard to epsy the
causes of this strife, for that indeed no part of Doctrine is more unknown
and unsearchable to man's reason: as also for that the devil in hatred of God
and men attempteth with horrible fury to darken and extinguish the glory of the
Son of God incarnate.

Certain objections against the Trinity answered.
1 Objection. One Essence is not three persons: Iehoua is one essence. Therefore
he is not three persons. Answer. One finite essence, is not three persons: But
God is infinite. Objection 2. That which has a beginning is not eternal. But
the son and the holy Ghost have a beginning: Therefore they are not eternal.
Answer. That which has a beginning of essence and time is not eternal: But
the son and the holy ghost have only a beginning of person, or order, or
manner of being: and so the Scripture teaches, Christ both to be Iehoua, and
to have a beginning, namely as touching his manner of being. He gave unto the
son to have life in himself. Objection. 3. Our unity with God is a consent.
But the unity of the son with the father is like to ours. Therefore it is the
unity, not of essence, but of consent, which the son has with the father.
Answer. The conclusion of this reason has more in it, than was in the former
propositions. For the conclusion is general of al kind of unity, whereas the
Minor was particular of the unity of consent. For there is another unity of
the Son with the Father, namely of essence. Object. 4. In whom the whole
Deity is, besides him there it no other, in whom the whole Deity is. But the
whole Deity is in the father. Therefore not in another. Answer. The Mayor is
false: because the same Deity which is in the Father is whole also in the
Son, and whole in the holy Ghost. Objection. 5. The divine essence is not
begotten: But the Son is begotten. Therefore he is not the divine Essence.
Answer. Where al be particulars nothing can be concluded. And the first
proposition or Mayor cannot be expounded universally: For it is false, That
whatsoever is the divine Essence is not begotten. Objection. 6. Where are
distinct operations, at leastwise internal, there also are distinct essences.
But the internal operations of the father, and the son, and the holy Ghost
are distinct. Therefore also their essences are distinct. Answer. The Mayor is
true of finit persons, but not of infinite. Object. 7. The divine Essence is
incarnate. The three persons are the divine Essence. Therefore the three
persons are incarnate. Answer. Here also are mere particulars, whereof
nothing can be concluded. For the Mayor speaks not of the Divine Essence
generally, but particularly as it is the Son. Objection. 8. The Son is
Mediator unto Iehoua. But the Son is Iehoua. Therefore he is Mediator to
himself. Answer. Here also are mere particulars, and therefore nothing
concluded. For not all that is Iehoua, is Mediator. Object. 9. Christ has a
head above him: Therefore he is inferior to GOD, and by a consequent he is
not of one and the same essence with GOD. Answer. He has indeed a Head,
but that first, in respect of his Mediatourshippe, secondly in respect of his
manhood. Objection. 10. This is (says Christ) life everlasting, that they do
know thee to be the only very God. Therefore the Son and the holy Ghost
are not true God. Answer. In this place is opposed, not the father to the son
and the holy ghost, but God to Idols and creatures. Moreover the particle,
only, does not belong to the subject, thee, but to the predicate God, which
the greek Article shows. Objection. 11. Iehoua is the Trinity. The father is
Iehoua. Therefore he is the trinity. Answer. Iehoua is not taken for the
same, but varieth in this Syllogism. For Iehoua in the Mayor is meant of all
three persons, in the Minor of one only. Reply. The father is Iehoua, one in
number: Therefore the father is the Trinity. Here those diverse manners of
being are of no force. Answer. He is one in number of essence, not of
persons. Objection. 12. Where are three and one, there are four. But in god are
three and one, namely three persons, and one essence. Therefore there are four
in God. Answer. Where there are three and one reallie distinct, there are
four. But in God the persons are not really distinct from the essence: for the
three persons of the Divinity are one and the same essence: Objection 13. The
same works are atributed to the Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost, in
the Scripture. Answer. This hinders not the distinction of persons. For mo
persons may concur to one action, the distinct order of woorking being
observed. Objection. 14. Christ says, John. 14. He that sees me, sees the
father. Answer. Christ means not hereby, that he is the father, but that he
shows and resembles the person, wisdom, omnipotency, goodness and will of
the father in his doctrine and works: as it is said: The Son, which is in
the bosom of the father, he has showed. Again, Who is the invisible image
of GOD. And as himself adds here, The father in me, and I in the father.
Objection 15. The wisdom and power of the father are not distinct persons
from the father, but are the father himself, as also mercy, goodness,
chastity, truth and other properties of God. But the Son and the holy
Ghost are the wisdom and power of GOD: Therefore they are not persons
distinct from the father, but the father himself wise and powerful. Answer.
There is an ambiguity in the words, wisdom and power, which in the Mayor
signify the wisdom and power, whereby not only the father, but the Son
also and holy Ghost is wise and forcible or effectual, that is, the common
nature or essence of the father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost. But in the
Minor they signify the persons of the Son and the holy Ghost, the Son being
called the wisdom, and the holy Ghost the power of GOD, because by them the
Deity shows forth, and declares the wisdom and power thereof.

OF CREATION.
NEXT unto the Doctrine concerning God, the Doctrine of the works of GOD is
most fitly placed: as we see to be done also in the Creed. The woorks of God
are of two sorts. General and Special. The general are divided into the
works 1. Of creation, (the works whereof are read in Genesis to have bin
accomplished in 6. days, and are by daily increase furthered and multiplied in
the world) 2. Of preservation, (whereby God still susteineth the heavens and
earth, and the things, that in them are, that they fall not to ruin and decay)
3. Of administration, whereby through his immense and great wisdom he
administreth and governs all things. These two latter are comprehended under
the name of his providence. And therefore next unto creation is annexed the
place concerning Gods providence. The Special works of GOD, are those which
are wrought in the Church and company of his elect and chosen, to justify,
sanctify, and glorify them, and are either works of Reparation or restoring
(whereby he repaireth al things which for the sin of man are subject to
corruption) or of perfection and accomplishment, whereby he brings all
things to their certain appointed end.

The principal questions of creation are these, 1 Whether the world were
created of God. 2 How it was created. 3 For what cause it was created.


1 WHETHER THE WORLD WERE CREATED OF GOD.
THE name of the world is diversely used in the Scripture. 1. It signifies the
universal frame of all things, namely, Heaven and Earth, and al things which
are them, visible and invisible, besides God himself. 2. Woorldlie
concupiscences. 3. All mankind. 4. The wicked or those that are not regenerate
in the world. 5. The elect. Here we consider it in the first sense.

To create signifies, 1 to ordain or constitute; as the latins used it,
creare Consulem, to create a Consul. 2 To make something of nothing, without
any motion, with a beck or word only. So is it taken in this place. 3 The
continuating of creation: or creation continued: Which is the providence of God.

That the world has not been from everlasting, but had, when it seemed best
to the creator, according to his eternal counsel and will, a beginning once,
and was created of that only true God, who has manifested himself in the
Church, that he is the eternal Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost, we know:
First by testimonies of holy scripture, as by the whole history of the
creation set down by Moses. Likewise out of other testimonies of Scripture
very many. Psalm, 33 6.9. By the word of the Lord were the heavens made,
and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth. Ps. 104.113.124.136.146.
and Isay. 44. Act. 4. and 17.
He spoke and it was done, he commanded and it stood, or was created. There
are other places also in the Psalms, where more largely and amply the
wonderful works of God, and the principal parts of the woorlde created by
God are proposed to be considered of us, that through the consideration thereof
we may learn to put our trust and confidence in God. For to this purpose did
the Lord himself propose unto Job his marvelous and incomprehensible works
conspicuous in heaven, Job. 38. and 39.
and earth; and other things also created by him, to declare his justice,
power, and providence.

The creation of the world proved by reason: not only by testimonies of the
sacred word
Furdermore, besides testimonies of Scripture almost innumerable, it is
confirmed also by firm and true reasons, that the world was created of God.
First, The authority of God himself auouching the same in his word. Secondly,
The originals and beginnings of nations and peoples show it, which could not be
feigned of Moses, whenas some remembrance and memorial of them was then extant
amongst many: which yet in process of time perished. Thirdly, The novelty
and latenesse of all other histories compared with the antiquity and
ancientnesse of the sacred story. Fourthly, The age of men decreasing; which
shows that there was greater strength in nature at the first, and that not
without some first cause it has decreased hitherto. Fifthly, The certain
course and race af times, eue^ from the beginning of the world, unto the
exhibiting of the Messiah. Unto Testimonies of scripture come also arguments
drawn out of nature it self. First, The order of things instituted in nature,
which must needs have been produced and framed by some intelligent mind,
far superior to all things. Secondly, The excellency of the mind of men,
and Angels. These intelligent minds have a beginning: therefore they have it
from some intelligent cause. Thirdly, The principles or general rules, and
natural notions ingenerated in our minds. Fourthly, The tremblings of
conscience in the wicked. Fifthly, The constitution and founding of commonweals. Sixthly, The ends of all things profitablie and wisely ordained.
Therefore by some cause understanding and ordaining them. Seventhly, The very
order of causes and effects, which cannot be carried backward or forward
infinitely: for then never should the end be come unto, or the effect produced.
Lastly those other arguments and reasons also, which prove that there is a God,
prove in like manner that the world was created of God.

And although out of Philosophy, or those general principles, which are
naturally known, it cannot be known or showed, Whether the woorlde was
created from everlasting, or in time: and also, Whether it was to have been
created, or no: Likewise Whether it shall endure for ever or no: and whether it
shall remain the same, or is to be changed: (for these things depend only
upon the will of God, which is only declared to the Church in his word:) yet
notwithstanding it may be known by the light of nature; sithence the woorlde
was, that it was by God alone produced out of nothing. For even the sounder
philosophers are enforced to acknowledge, that GOD is the cause efficient, or
maker of all other things which are: Therefore he was the maker both of the
first matter of all things, and of those celestial and heavenly spirits,
and of the soul of man. But these things are not produced by GOD out of any
matter; Therefore out of nothing. Wherefore, whatsoever arguments are brought
of Philosophers against the creation of the woorlde, it is easy to perceive
that those were not framed out of true philosophy, but by the imaginations of
men; if the order of the generation and mutation of things instituted in
nature, which was created of God, be discerned from creation.

God not idle before the world, but contemplating from everlasting his own
wisdom.
1 Objection. God, say the Philosophers, could not be from everlasting idle.
But the world not being created, he should have been idle. Therefore the
world is eternal. Answer. First, the Mayor is false; If it be all one with
them, to be idle, and not to administer and rule the world. For GOD created
the world most freely, which being not created, he should nevertheless have
been no less perfect, than he is, now when it is created: as who for ever is
most perfect of himself and in himself. Secondly, the Minor is also false, If
they mean by idle, him who does nothing at all. For God before the creation of
the woorlde did contemplate and behold from everlasting his own wisdom; he
begot the Son; from him flowed the holy Ghost: he chose us to everlasting life;
he decreed to produce and create the world in time. Thirdly, It is impiety
to rush and break in into the secrets of god, who has provided and prepared
hell for curious seekers or searchers, what God did before the creation of
things.

Motion goes before any moveable thing which is generated: but not before
that which is created.
2 Ob. They collect arguments also, whereby to prove, that this motion or
mutation of things which now is, has been from everlasting. Whatsoever can
any way be moved or changed, say they, that either having bin such from
everlasting, has admitted no change or motion, which were absurd, and is also
denied of us: or has been made such by some generation and motion. But there
is no motion or change, except there be some thing before, which can be moved
and changed. Wherefore no motion of any thing can be brought, which some other
motion has not gone before; and so there shall be no beginning of changes and
mutations. But there is an untruth, and an insufficient enumeration in the
Mayor, for that they imagining that things could never be produced out of
other but by generation, take away from god the power of creating what he will,
even out of no matter preexistent or being before. Wherefore our answer is,
that Motion goes before a mooueable thing which is generated, but not which is
created.

There went not any motion before the first beginning of motions in nature, but
only the creating will of God.
3 Object. All motion, before which was quietness or a ceasing of mutation,
has another motion going before it, whereby is removed the cause of that
quietness, or let of mutation. But they say that according to our assertion
there is put a quietness before the first motion that ever was in the nature of
things. Therefore there must be some motion or mutation, whereby the cause of
that quietness was taken away: and so there shall be no mutation which may be
said to be the first. Auns. The mayor is true of the mutation and intercourse
of things now begun after the creation, but not of the first orignal of these
mutations, and changes, which we now see in the world. For the let and stay of
them was then the will of God only; which is not taken away, but being the
same, and standing immovable from everlasting to everlasting, begins and
effects the beginnings and ends, and mutations, or motions of things, and
also quietness or cessation, and a continuance in the same state, most freely,
and without any mutation or change of himself. Seeing then this his divine will
alone begins the motion and mutation of things without second causes, as he
did in the creation of the world; it was not only not necessary, but not so
much as possible, by reason of the eternity and immutability of the divine
will, that there should be any other mutatio^ before that original and beginning
of the motions and mutations of nature. For god will from everlasting to
everlasting, that al should then begin, have their moueing, mutation, and
being, when this beginning was made. There is therefore an ambiguity in the
word, quietness. For we grant the Mayor, as concerning that quietness, which
signifies a privation in the subject; that is taken away by motion: But the
mayor is false if it mean such a quietness as is an absolute denial of the
being of motion. This is taken away, not by motion, but by the will of god,
which alone, without second causes and any motion, begins motion.

4 Ob. If time be eternal, then motion also is eternal: for time is the measure
of motion, Time, as it is taken for the measure of motion, is not eternal.
whereby we judge how long or short al motion is. But time is eternal; because
every instant or point of time is the end of that time which went before, and
the beginning of that which follows. Therefore also motion is from
everlasting. Auns. The appellation of time here is ambiguous or doubtful, and
therefore causes a double answer. For if time be taken only for the
measure of some motion, the Mayor is true, but if it be taken for the during of
any thing, the Mayor is false: as it is manifest in the during of quietness,
which during also is time. So also eternity is time without any mutation of the
thing which is eternal. So the Minor also is true as concerning duration; but
as concerning the measuring of motion, it is false. Neither is it furthered by
the argument which is adioined concerning an instant. For the first instant or
moment wherein any motion begins, may be also without any precedent motion
(for otherwise we should be feign to say that all, even the shortest motions
of all things, were from everlasting.) And that instant is only the
beginning, or first point, or indivisible moment, wherein time, by the will of
God, began to flow or multiply; but it is not the end of any time forepast.
So the first point in a line has only line after it, not also before it: that
is, it is the beginning of the line, not also the end.

Heaven is not corrupted naturally, but by the power of God.
5 Objection. Whatsoever has a beginning has also an ending. The celestial
bodies have no ending. Therefore they had no beginning. Answer. The Mayor is
to be distinguished. Whatsoever has a beginning naturally, by motion or
alteration of a preexistent subject, has an ending also and is corrupted, to
wit, naturally, by motion. The celestial bodies are not corrupted, that is,
naturally; for they have not a matter which is capeable of another form.
Therefore they had no beginning, that is by natural motion. For, by order of
nature, corruption follows the generation of one thing out of another. Now
although heaven is not corrupted naturally; yet is it corruptible by the
absolute power of GOD woorking without any motion. For the omnipotency of the
Creator is able most freely either to preserve in the same state, or to
change, or to bring to nothing as well those things which he forms out of
other things, as which he produces out of nothing.

6 Objection. God is eternal. Heaven is the palace and seat of god. Therefore
heaven is eternal. Answer. It does not follow. For first there are four
terms in this Syllogism. For God is one thing, and the palace and seat of
god another thing, which is not god. In like manner the body is the seat of the
soul. But it follows not hereof, that the body is a spiritual, intelligent,
immortal essence, because the soul is. Secondly, heaven is the seat of God,
not properly, nor necessarily: because God, as being an infinite essence, is in all things, and without althings. Lib. 1. de Coelo cap. 9.
And Aristotle himself witnesses that he is without heaven. Therefore he
can be, though heaven be not; neither needs he this Tabernacle. But he is
said to dwell in heaven, though he fill all things with his essence and
power. 1. Because he is above all things, and the Lord and ruler of all. 2.
Because he exhibiteth there his glory, majesty, and grace more clearly and
fully to be beheld and enioied of the blessed Angels and men, than here on
earth.

Against the first answer the Vbiquetaries reply in Aristotle's behalf, on
this manner: Heaven is the place of the blessedness of the elect; but not god
himself, or blessedness.
The blessedness of GOD is not without GOD, but is GOD himself. Heaven is the
blessedness of GOD, not any place: Therefore heaven is GOD himself. Answer.
1. Not only Aristotle, but the sacred scripture also does eueriewhere
distinguish heaven from god, as, the thing made, from the maker thereof: and
also, opposes heaven to earth, so that it affirms earth to be below, and
heaven above us, where GOD communicates himself and his blessedness unto the
elect more clearelie and fully, than on earth: Heaven, says GOD himself, is
my seat: and earth my footestoole. Wherefore although heaven were somewhere
taken for heavenly blessedness, yet might it not be hereof inferred, that
heaven properly is not a place, wherein the elect enioie and shall for ever
enioie that blessedness: For also hell sometimes signifies hellish pains, yet
so, that it excludes not the place, where the wicked, being truly severed
from the Godly, shall suffer those pains and torments. 2. The Minor is
false, if heaven be taken for that blessedness, which is GOD himself, being
sufficient unto himself in all things. For heaven is a thing created and
finite: that blessedness is increate, and immense. And if it be understood
of a created blessedness, which is in us communicated from GOD, there are
four terms in the Syllogism. For the Mayor proposition speaks of an
increated blessedness, which is the very essence of GOD, neither is
communicated at any time to any creature.

The external respects and relations of God, are not the mutation or perfection
of God, but of the creature.
7 Objection. He that is Lord in possession, is happier than he which is Lord
only in possibility. But GOD before the creation was only in possibility
Lord. Therefore he is made happier by the creation. But this is absurd.
Therefore the woorlde was from everlasting. Answer. He is happier, that is
Lord in possession; true, if by the actual dominion and government there arise
any more good unto him than he had before. But unto GOD by reason of his
exceeding great perfection, simpleness, and immutabilitie, there could or can
nothing at all come by his creation and dominion over his creatures. For the
respects and appellations of Creator, Lord, Savior, Redeemer, Father of
mankind, and the like, which GOD in time assumeth unto him, do not appertain
to Gods essence, but signify the beginninges and mutations of creatures; that
is, GOD is termed creator, not of any new action or form, that is in him,
but of the creatures, which once began to be from him, when they were not at
all before. Wherefore these respects, creation, dominion, and the rest, are in
the creatures real relations, but in GOD respects only of our
consideration. And therefore the creator and the creature are relatiues, not
mutual, as the Schoolmen well speak and judge: because not both of them, but
one only depends of the other, and is referred thereto reallie and
formallie, that is, the creature. For in the creator is nothing at all
depending of the creature. For if the creator and the creature were relatiues
mutual, then these absurdities necessarily follow; 1. That god is not most
perfect in himself. 2. That from everlasting both the creator was as he is
creator, and the creature. 3. Or some real thing to have come in time to the
divine essence: 4. and therefore the divine essence to be mutable and compound.
Wherefore relations in god do not make mutation, but are attributed to god in
respect of the creatures.

2 How God made the world.
The world created.

1 By the Son and the holy Ghost.


1 THe woorlde was created of God the father by the son, and the holy ghost.
Of the son it is said, Ioh. 1.3. All things were made by this word of the
holy Ghost. Genesis 1.2. And the spirit of GOD moved upon the waters. And Job.
33.4. The spirit of GOD has made me. 2. God created the world most freely,
without any constraint, not by any absolute necessity, but by necessity of
consequence, 2 It was created most freely, without constraint.
that is by the decree of his will, which decree though it were eternal and
unchangeable, yet was it most free. For neither was God tied to the creating
and susteining of things, neither if he had not at all created the world, or
did annihilate it being created and bring it to nothing, were he therefore
less good, or less happy. 3. God made the world with his beck only or will,
without labor, wearisomnes, 3 Without motion.
motion or any change of himself, that is, not by any new action of his, but
by his forcible will only, which from everlasting would that things should
on a sudden exist and be, at such a time as he had freely appointed and
decreed. Isai. 40.28. The Lord has created the ends of the earth; he neither
faints nor is weary. Now to work any thing with his beck and word only,
is the highest and chiefest manner of working. Five sorts of Agents.
For there are five kinds of operations, and agents. 1. A natural agent. 2.
That which woorketh with an appetite. 3. Men and Devils. 4. Angels. 5. God;
which three latter sorts are voluntary agents. 1 Natural.


The first therefore is of those things which work according to the quality,
and force of their own nature, not being guided by any proper understanding
or will of their own: Such is the operation of fire, water, medicinable
herbs, precious stones. The actions and operations of these are subject to the
rule of those which are voluntary agents, and are by them moved and directed to
certain uses, 2 Agents with an appetite; as are brute beasts.
and to the performing of certain works. The second, is of those which follow
also the lore of nature in woorking, but not without some proper appetite or
desire of their own, though the rule of reason be wanting: But nevertheless
their action and working is so ordered, that sometimes it is forced from them
against their will. Of this sort are the operatio^s and actions of brute
beasts. But these also are subject to the rule and direction of god, Angels,
and men; yet so, that no violence is offered unto them, but what they do moved
by these superior agents, that they do of their own accord, according to their
own nature and force given the^ of god. The third is, of men and Devils, 3 Men
and Devils, working with reason, but corruptly.
who also work according to the quality of their nature, namely by reason, and
by deliberatio^, and freely, but corruptly. The fourth is of good spirits,
which we call Angels, who likewise as me^ work by reason and will, but not
corruptly: yet notwithstanding, both of the^, both men and Angels, though they
work according to their nature freely, 4 The blessed Angels, working with
reason also, but not corruptly, and yet directed by a higher power.

5 God working most perfectly, and directed by none but by himself.


are not exempted from the decree and direction of God. The fifth is, the
highest and supreme kind of working, which according to the nature of the
first agent flows from an understanding and will, and that most pure, most
perfect, and most right, neither is it subject to the pleasure and disposition
of any higher cause. Therefore this agent, which is God himself, is most
wise, most good, most free, and immense, which has no need of any
deliberation to go before, and does without motion, at his beck and
commandment only, work and guide al things, which he will, and as he will.
Wherefore all things depend of his will, but he of none. Psalm. 33.6.9. He
spoke, and it was done: he commanded, and it was created. Romans 4.17. Who
quickens the dead, and calls those things which be not as though they were.

4 God created all things of nothing, not of a preexistent or forebeing
matter: 4 The world was created of nothing.
not of the Essence of god, nor of any matter coeternall with god. For if God
created all things, nothing then is excepted besides the creator himself, no
not the matter, whereof all the rest were framed. 1 Objection. That which is
produced with some preexistent thing is not created: All things created of
nothing, either immediately or mediatly.
Man was produced out of a preexistent thing, the earth, and the rib. Therefore
he was not created. But this is false; for the scripture says that god
created man. Therefore creation is not a production of a thing out of nothing.
Answer. The Mayor is not simply true. Because those things also are said to
be created, whose matter, whereof they came, is of nothing. Man therefore was
made of nothing, not immediately, but mediately by reason of his matter, not
the last, but the first matter: for this at the beginning, had a beginning from
nothing, and out of it afterward diverse kinds of things were formed. To this
reason also, that may be added, namely, that that production also is called
creation, whereby a thing, which was not before, is made suddenly, without any
motion by the commandment of God only out of a matter indeed, but yet such,
as has no definite power in it self of producing any thing.

Such a production, being no natural generation, and being after a sort not
out of any matter, is rightly called in the scripture creation. Wherefore it
follows not: Some creation is not of nothing immediately, neither of that
which is simply no matter: therefore no creation is of nothing. For creation
properly so called is a production of a thing out of nothing.

2 Objection. Of nothing is made nothing. Answer. This principle and rule is
true as concerning that order which was appointed by God in nature now created.
Further by such an agent, as is created it self, nothing is made of nothing:
but that which is impossible to a creature is possible to God the creator. And
it appertains to our comfort, that God has created all things of nothing.
For if he has created all things of nothing, he is able also to preserve us,
and to hinder the attempts of the wicked, yea to bring them to nothing.

5 God created the world at a certain and definite time, 5 The world created
at a certain time.
and even in the beginning of times, not from everlasting. For first, all
things were created of nothing, and therefore have a beginning. Secondly, it
is to be known out of the sacred story, how long the world has lasted. For
according to the verity of the scripture, by Luthers account, they are from
the creation of the world to the Nativity of Christ, years, 3960. and so to
our time, namely to the year of Christ, 1579. there shall be years 5539.
According to Melancthons supputation, the years from the beginning of the
world are 5541. For from the beginning of the world unto Christ he numbreth
3962. years. According to their supputation of Geneua, from the creation of
the world unto Christ, are 3942. years and six months. There shall be then
to the year of Christ, 1579. from the Creation of the world, 5521. years, and
six months. According to the supputation of Beroaldus, from the creation of
the world unto Christ, are 3928. years, and so then shall be to the year of
Christ 1579. from the creation of the world, 5507. years. These supputations
accord very well one with another, as concerning the graunde number, though
in the lesser number some years are either wanting or abounding. By these
four supputations then, of the most learned of our time, compared together,
this at the least shall be apparent, that God created not the world before these
5541. years past, and therefore it was not from everlasting.

6 The world created in a certain time.
6 God created not the world in one moment, but in the space of six days. In
the seventh day god ended all his works. Object. He that lives for ever (says
the son of Sirach, Eccle. 18.1.) made all things together. Therefore he
made all in one moment. Ans. He speaks not of a moment of time, but of the
whole number of things: as if he should say, whatsoever are, they are all from
god by creation. But the causes why god created not al in one moment, are
these. 1. Because he would have the creation of the matter it self distinct
and manifest from the forming, and fashioning of the bodies of the woorlde,
which consist of it. 2. Because he would show his power and liberty in
producing and bringing forth whatsoever effects he could, and that without
natural causes, while he yields light to the woorld, makes the earth
fruiteful, brings plants out of it, even before the Sun and Moon were made.
3. He would this way show his goodness and providence, whereby he cherishes
his creatures, and provides for them not yet borne, bringing beasts into the
earth full of plants and food, and men into the world most stored and fraught
with all things apperteining to the necessity and delight of life. 4. He would
by that order and course of creation hold us not in an idle, but diligent
consideration of his works: which also by the consecration of a sabbath he
has consecrated to all mankind.

7 All things of the world created good.
7 God created all things most wisely, very good; that is, every thing in
their kind and degree perfect. Gen 1.31. All things were very good. Wherefore
god was not the cause of sin or deformity; but sin came into the world by man.
Object. Death is evil. Likewise it is said, There is no evil which the Lord
has not done. Amos. 3.6. Ans. 1. God at the first creation made all things
good; the evil both of crime or essence, and of pain or punishment, ensued upon
man's disobedience. 2. Death and calamities are evil, in respect of the creature
which suffers them, and in the judgment of flesh: but they are good, in
respect of god, who justly inflicteth them for sin, and does purge out that sin
in the godly by chastisements. Wherefore after the fall of man, god was the
author of pains and punishments: because they are in a respect and
consideration good: but sin he does not cause, but only permit.

3 For what cause god created the world.
THe ends of the creation of al things are some general, The ends of the
creation of the world.

1 The glory of God.


some special and subordinate. 1. The first and chief end is the glory of
god. For he would have his goodness, wisdom, omnipotency, justice (which his
properties he shows in the creation of al things) be known and magnified of
us. Prou. 16.4. The Lord made al things for himself. Psalm. 103.22. Praise the
Lord al ye his works. Romans 11.36. Of him, and through him, and for him are al
things. 2. The manifesting, knowledge, 2 The knowledge of God.
and contemplation of his divine wisdom and goodness shining in the very
creation of things. For that he might be celebrated and magnified for his
works, he was to create those things which should know him, and should praise
and magnify him, being known and manifested unto them in his works. And to
this purpose created he natures both endewed with reason and without reason,
that there might be both those which should praise him, and the matter of his
praise. Psalm. 19.1. The heavens declare the glory of god, and the firmament
shows the work of his hands. 3. The administration and governing of the
world. 3 His providence.
For therefore he created the world, that he might by his providence ever
govern, rule, preserve it, and so might perpetually show forth his marvelous
works, which he has done from the beginning of the world, and now does, and
will do: but chiefly that he might administer the Church and congregation of
elect Angels and men. Isai. 40.26. Lift up your eyes on high, and behold who
has created these things. This third end is subordinat and serves for the
second end. 4. 4 That he might gather a church. 5 That all things might serve
for man.
To gather a church of Angels and men, who should agnise and magnify this
creator. 5. That al other things might serve for the safety both of the soul,
and body of man: as also for the life, necessity, and delight of men: but
especially that they might profit the elect, each thing in their due place,
and might be to them as ministers and instruments, whereby god blessing and
increasing them, might be lauded and praised of them. Genesis 1.28. Subdue the
earth, and rule over the fish of the sea, and over the foul of the heaven, and
over every beast that moves upon the earth. Psalm. 8.6. Thou have made him to
have dominion in the works of thine hands: thou have put al things under his
feet. Only man he created for himself: the rest for man, that by man they
might serve god. Wherefore when we place creatures in the room of god, we cast
our selves out of that degree, in which we were placed by god.

Why god would have this doctrine of the creation to be delivered and held in
the Church.
This doctrine of the creation of the world god would for these causes
especially have remain extant in the Church. 1. That the glory of the
creation might be given wholly to god, and his wisdom, power, and goodness
therein acknowledged. 2. That neither the Son, nor the holy ghost should be
excluded, but each should have their own parts yielded them therein, according
as it is said, that all might honor the son, as they honor the father. 3.
That as the world was created by the son and the holy ghost, so also we
might know that by them mankind is restored. Colossians. 1. For by him were
all things made: And he is the head of the body of the Church; for it
pleased the father that in him should al fulness dwell. 4. That seeing god
created all things of nothing, we may think that he is able to restore them
being corrupted and ruinated, into their first state again. 2. Cor. 4.6. For
god that commanded the light to shine out of darkness, is he which has shined
in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of god in the
face of Jesus Christ. 5. That we may not refer the original of corruption to
god, but know, that it was purchased by the fault of Devils and men. John. 8.
The Devil is a liar and a murderer from the beginning; and when he speaks a
lie, he speaks of his own. Romans 5.12. By one man sin entered into the world,
and death by sin. 6. That knowing god, as in the creating, so also in the
maintaining and governing of all things, not to be tied to second causes and to
the order by him settled in nature, but that he may either keep or alter it,
we should with confidence and full persuasion look for and crave those
things which he has promised, yea those things, which in respect of second
causes seem impossible. Romans 4. He calls those things which are not, as if
they were. 7. That we should celebrate for ever the known goodness of god,
whereby he has created all things, not for his own profit or happiness (for he
wants nothing) but for ours: and seeing all other things were created for
man's use, we above other creatures, especially being restored from sin and
death to righteousness and life, should acknowledge that we owe thankfulness
unto god therefore. Psalm. 8.4. What is man, that thou art mindful of him: and
the son of man, that thou visitest him? Thou have made him to have dominion
in the works of thine hands. 8. That we knowing god (in as much as of nothing
and through his mere goodness he created all things) to owe nothing to any;
but all his creatures to owe themselves and all that they have to him their
creator; should confess that to be most just, whatsoever he shall do
concerning us and all his creatures; Ierem. 45.4. Behold, that which I have
built, will I destroy, and that which I have planted, will I pluck up, even
this whole land. And seek thou great things for thy self? seek them not. 9
That we should refer the use of all things to the glory of God, since that we
have received al good things from him. Romans 11. Of him, and through him, and
for him are al things. 10 That seeing the works of god were therefore created
and placed before our eyes, even for us to behold them; we do not idly, but
earnestly, and as much as every man's ability, occasion, and vocation
permits him, contemplate and consider them, and learning out of them the
wisdom, power, and goodness of the Artificer, celebrate it both in this life
and in the world to come. Acts. 17.26. He has made of one blood all mankind
to dwell on all the face of the earth, and has assigned the times which were
ordained before and the bounds of their habitation, that they should seek the
Lord, if so be they might have groaped after him and found him, though doubtless
he be not far off from every one of us.

OF ANGELS.
AMongst things created by GOD the chief and principal, are those natures
which are endued with reason, Angels and men. For in these he imprinted the
marks and image of his Divinity, and would have all other things to be the
matter of his praise: but of these he would be known and praised, and unto
them was his will to impart and communicate his blessedness and joy. The
questions concerning Angels are two: the first whereof is, what description is
set down in the Scripture, of good Angels: the other, what description is
delivered of bad Angels.

1 WHAT GOOD ANGELS ARE.
ANgels, both good and bad, as holy Scripture records, 1 Angels, spirits or
incorporeal substances.
are spirits, by which name here a spiritual person is understood, that is, a
substance incorporeall, invisible, individual, living, understanding,
incommunicable, not sustained in another, neither the part of an other, as Luc.
24. it is taken. A spirit has not flesh and bones. Colos. 1.16. All which
are in heaven, and in earth, things visible and invisible. Heb. 1.14. They are
all ministering spirits. 1. King. 22.21. There came forth a spirit and stood
before the Lord.

The Angels themselves are not seen, but the bodies or shapes which they take.
That therefore both in times past there appeared oftentimes good Angels, when
as the gathering and establishing of the Church, the doctrine of god being not
as yet plainly delivered, and the prophecies not fulfilled, needed more
extraordinary and miraculous revelations than now; and now a days also not
seldom appear bad Angels: this first does not prove their nature to be
visible or corporal. For those visible shapes or bodies, which may be seen or
felt, are diverse substances from the incorporeall Essence of spirits, being
formed either of nothing, or of some matter, and carried and moved by a spirit
for a time for the woorking and performing of certain actions. For both they
put them off and lay them away again, and also they take forms of diverse
sorts and kinds; as the Serpent by whom the Devil communed with Eve: Men's
bodies, whose feet Abraham washed. Genesis 17. A flame in the bush appearing to
Moses. Exodus 3. A pillar of cloud and fire in the desert: Horses and Chariots
of fire. 2. King. 2. and 6.

The error of the Sadduces.
And further this very thing refuteth the opinion of the Sadduces, Who, Acts.
23. said there was neither Angel nor spirit; but that good Angels are
cogitations and motions raised by GOD in men, or happy events proceeding from
GOD: and bad Angels, evil and wandering affections, or lusts, or purposes and
devises, which come of the corruption of nature. For except they were living
substaunces and forcible in working, they would not assume, carry, and move
bodies and visible shapes. Moreover the Scripture attributes many things to
them every where, which agree not but to natures subsisting by themselves,
living, and understanding.

For the good Angels were those ministers, by whom the law was delivered in
mount Sina. Acts 7. Galat. 3. They shall come with Christ when he shall judge
the quick and the dead. Mat 25. They know not the day of judgment. Mat. 24.
They always behold the face of the father which is in heaven. Math. 18.10.
They rejoice for the salvation of men. Luke. 2. and 15.1. Pet. 1. The elect
shall be like unto them. Math. 22. Christ is made more excellent than the
Angels. Hebrews. 1. They defend the elect. Psalm. 34. But the evil Angels did
not abide in the truth. John 8.44. They appear amongst the children of god.
Job. 1.6. They invade and possess the bodies of men and beasts. Math. 8. They
shall be punished with everlasting torments. Math. 25.

Angels are also finite, that is of a limited essence or nature, 2 Angels,
finite both in nature, and in properties.
and endewed with a certain measure of strength and wisdom. For although
spirits are not circumscribed in a certain compass of place, as bodies: yet
their substance is neither infinitely extended, neither in more places than
one at the same time, neither is able in wisdom or power, or other properties
to match and equal the immensnes of the Creator. For they are said to go
from one place to another, and to be absent from one place, when they are in
another; as Luke 1. Act. 10. and 12. and Dan. 10.

They were created by god of nothing, 3 They were created.
in the very beginning of the world. Psalm. 148. Praise ye him, al ye his
Angels; praise him al his army. For he commanded, and they were created.
Col. 1.16. By him were all things created which are in heaven, and which are
in earth, things visible and invisible: whether they be thrones, or dominions
or principalities, or powers etc. Wherefore albeit in Moses there is no mention
made, Moses made mention of the Angels in general, though not in particular.
in the story of the creation, severally of Angels, as who applying himself
to the common capacity of men especially recounteth the visible works of god:
yet, whenas he says that heaven, earth and all the host of them was created, he
implies also Angels, which both are these very heavenly hosts and ministers
of god, and are often mentioned among them by Moses himself. And whereas they
are called, Job. 1. and 38. The children of god; it is not to be understood of
any coeternity and propagation of their substance out of god, but of their
creation and conformity with god, and of the mutual love between god and
them, as in like sort also may be said of men.

They were created al good and holy, that is, in their creation, 4 They were
created in holiness.
they were enriched with strength, wisdom, liberty of will, holiness and
righteousness, whereby they might be conformed and like to god, as it is said:
He saw all that he had made, and lo, it was very good. And of the good
Angels it is said, Psalm. 103.20. Ye his Angels, that excel in strength, that
do his commandment, in obeying the voice of his word. Mat. 18.10. Their
Angels always behold the face of my father which is in heaven. Mat. 22. The
elect shall be in the resurrection as the Angels of god in heaven. Luc. 9. they
are called holy. Likewise, Isai. 9. Seraphin, that is, flaming or shining,
namely with purity and divine wisdom, and with the love of god. But of the
bad Angels it is said, John. 8. He abode not in the truth. And in the epistle
of Judah, The Angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own
habitation.

5 And confirmed therein.
Now as these former, to be spirits, finite, created by God of nothing, and
created good and holy, are in the Scripture delivered as common both to good
and bad Angels: So also the Scripture delivers those things, whereby a huge
and exceeding difference appears between them. For the good Angels by the
especial grace of their Creator were so confirmed and established in that
sanctity and blessedness, wherein they were created, that albeit they serve
their Creator with an exceeding and most free will, yet can they never revolt
from him, or fall from that state of righteousness and felicity, wherein they
stand. Wherefore 1. Tim. 5. They are called elect Angels. Mat. 18. They are
said always to behold the face of the father: Of those who are elected to
everlasting life, it is said, Math. 22. That they shall be like the Angels. And
this perseueraunce in their state they have, not by the peculiar excellency
and virtue of their nature; as it is said, Job. 4.18. He found no stedfastnes
in his servant, and laid folly upon his Angels: But of the mere and free
bountifulnes of God toward them, by the son of God keeping and guiding them,
that they may be joined to him as to their head, and remain together with
elect men the everlasting Church and Temple of God, magnifiyng and praising God
for ever. Colos. 1. All things consist in him. Likewise, Ephesians. 1. It has
pleased the father to gather together in one all things both which are in
heaven, and which are in earth in Christ.

6 To worship and magnify God.
The good Angels were both created and confirmed 1 Everlastingly to know and
magnify God for his goodness, and bounty toward them and mankind. Psalm.
103. Praise the Lord al ye his hosts. Isa. 6.5. They cry: Holy, holy, holy
the Lord of hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory. And Luc. 2. They laud
and praise God for the manifestation of the Messiah. 7 To be the ministers of
God for the saving of his chosen.
2 To be the ministers of god for the accomplishing and maintaining of the
safety and salvation of the chosen, when as God by them declares his will,
delivers the godly out of dangers, defends them against the Devils and
wicked men: Or also to punish the wicked, who oppugn the Church. Psalm. 34.7.
The Angel of the Lord pitcheth round about them that fear him, and delivers
them. Psalm. 91.11. He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in
all thy ways. They serve also for the wicked.
Now although the wicked also and reprobate are defended by the Angels, and
receive other benefits not seldom at the hands of God: as John. 5. When
after the waters of Bethesda had been troubled by an Angel, whosoever then
first stepped in was made whole of his disease: Yet these benefits stretch no
further than the commodities of this life, and as other things which befall
unto the wicked in this life, whether good or bad, are turned to their
destruction, but serve for the defense and delivery of the chosen, for whose
sakes, God oftentimes, like as he punishes the wicked, so also enricheth them
with his benefits. They are the ministers of the Elect, by Christ.
The ministry then and guard of Angels properly belongs to the Saints and
chosen, unto whom that being lost by sin, is restored by the merit and
benefit of Christ. For he is the head of the Church which consists of
Angels and men, restoring that good will and conjunction (which is between the
members of the same body) between men and Angels, and using at his good
pleasure the ministry of Angels to safeguard and defend his. Ephesians. 1. That he
might gather together in one all things which are in heaven and in earth, in
Christ. Psalm. 97. and Hebrews. 1. Let all the Angels of god worship him.
Math. 13. He shall send his Angels. Heb. 12.22. Ye are come unto the mount
Syon, and to the City of the living god, the celestial Jerusalem, and to the
company of innumerable Angels. And Genesis 28.12. Jacob saw a ladder which
reached from earth to heaven, on which the Lord stood, and the Angels went up
and down by it: which signified Christ, God and man, the Mediator. John. 1.51.
Ye shall see heaven open, and the Angels of god ascending and descending upon
the son of man.

Now god does many things by Angels, and sometimes by many together, which he
could as well do either without them, Why God uses the ministry of Angels,
being able to bring what he will to pass whithout them.
or by any one of them: Partly in favor and regard of our infirmity; which
unless it see it self environed with many succors, defenses and instruments
of his divine power and bountifulnes, falls presently to doubting of the
providence, safeguard, and presence of god: as it is manifest by the example of
Elisaeus servant. 2. Kings. 6. and by those consolations and incouragementes
which promise unto the Church the aid of Angels: Partly to show his power also
over his Angels, who uses their labor and ministry as his pleasure. Hereof,
2. These. 1. The Angels are called the powers of the lord Jesus when he shall
show himself from heaven, that is, by who^ he exercises his power. Likewise,
Ep. 1. and Colos. 1. They are called principalities, might, powers, dominions
created by the son of God, subject unto him being exalted at the right hand
of God: Because by them he shows and exercises his principality or rule,
might, power, and dominion. Likewise, Psalm. 103. and 148.1. King. 22. Apoc.
19. The host of the Lord, and the host of heaven: Because both the number of
them is huge and great, and God rules over all of them, as a Captain over his
soldiers, and does by them whatsoever he will. Hereof also are they called
Cherubins, that is, flying or winged, because they perform and execute, with
all readiness and celeritie the hosts and commandments of god, and do each
their own parts and duties. Whereupon we pray, Let thy will be done in
earth as it is in heaven. They are also called gods. Psalm. 8. and Heb. 2.
Because the nature, and Majesty of god shines in their strength, virtues,
functions, and marvelous works. Which is also signified both by the name of
Gabriel, that is, the strength of god; and by the name of Raphael, that is, the
medicine of god. For the same cause also the name of Michael, that is, who is
like god, Dan. 10. and 12. in the Epistle of Jude, and in the Revelation, cap.
12. Is given to the son of God and an Angel, who is called the Archangel,
either because the son of god is head of the Angels, or because god does
according to that measure, which seems best to him, distribute his gifts to
the Angels, and show forth his powerful operation by them.

Of evil spirits or Angels.
THEY which now are evil spirits or Angels, although they also were at their
creation good, and adorned by God with the same holiness, and righteousness,
and blessedness, wherewith the rest were: yet notwithstanding by their own
will, and that free, and therefore by their own fault, they auerted themselves
from GOD, and reuoulted from his love and from obedience due unto him, so that
they left the habitation of God, and no longer continued their conformity with
God, but ever burn with a horrible hatred of GOD and men, and, that they may
despite GOD, force men to sin, and by force and sleightes attempt to cast all
down headlong into destruction. 2. Pet. 2.4. God spared not the Angels that
had sinned, but cast them down into hell, and delivered them into chains of
darkness, to be kept unto damnation. And Jude. The Angels which kept not
their first estate, but left their own habitation, he has reserved in
everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day. Ioh
8.44. Ye are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your father ye will
do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth. When
he speaks a lie, then speaks he of his own: for he is a liar, and the
father thereof. 1. John 3.8. He that commits sin, is of the Devil: for
the Devil sins from the beginning. John 13. Satan entered into Judas. Acts
5. Satan filled Ananias heart, that he should lie unto the holy Ghost, and
keep away part of the price of the possession. Ephesians. 2. According to the
course of this woorlde, and after the Prince that rules in the air, the
spirit, that now woorketh in the children of disobedience. 2. Thessal. 2. it
is said of Antichrist: Whose coming is by the woorcking of Satan with all
power and signs, and lying woonders, and in all deceiueablenesse of
unrighteousness among them that perish, because they received not the love of
the truth, that they might be saved. And therefore he is called the wicked,
1. John 3.12. Caine, which was of the wicked. Ephesians. 6.16. That ye may quench
all the fiery darts of the wicked. And every where in the Scripture he is
called Satanas, that is, the adversary of god and men. 1. Chronic. 21.1. And
Satan stood up against Israel, and provoked David to number Israel. And he is
in like manner called, Diabolus, Devil) because he depraueth the word of God,
and is a slanderer of men, as in Paradise, and Job. 1. and 2. And the Dragon or
old Serpent. Revel. 12. and 20. because speaking by a Serpent in Paradise he
seduced mankind through his subtilty, neither cease he to seduce them still:
Genesis 3.2. Cor. 11. Apoc. 12. The great Dragon, that old Serpent, called the
devil and satan, was cast out, which deceives all the world. Again, The
accuser of our brethren which accused them before our GOD day and night. And
Cap. 9. he is called Abaddon and Apollyon, that is, destroieng. He is also
called the God of this woorld, blinding the eyes of unbelievers. 2. Cor. 4. and
the Prince of the woorlde. John 12.14.16. both for his power and forcible
woorking, which he shows on the wicked, and for that tyrrannie which he
exercises against the godly also by gods permission; as withal for that
obsequie, homage and obedience, which is done him by the wicked, even those who
profess the woorshippe of the true God. Ephesians. 6. 1. Pet. 5. 1. King 22. 1.
Cor. 10. Ioh. 8.

The refutation of the Manichees, who held two first causes.
By these places is made manifest the impiety of the Manichees, who fained two
causes, or two Gods coeternall, the one good, whom they called the light and
mind; the other evil, whom they termed the darkness and matter, the former
whereof had created good natures, the latter bad: abusing those testimonies of
Scripture, where the Devil is called the god and prince of the world, the
father of the wicked, author of sin and death, the power of darkness. And
standing most of al on this argument, that a good God should not make the cause
of evil. For neither has the Devil any more power either over the godly or
over the wicked, or over other creatures, for which he is called the prince and
god of the world, than is granted him of God, as appears by the first and
second chapter of the story of Job, and by the invasion of the swine, Mat. 8.
Neither is the creation of the wicked, but the corrupting and enforcing of them
to evil, attributed to the Devil. Neither is there any need, least God
should be made author of sin, to make another God of the Devil, seeing the
Scripture teaches of Devils and men, that both were created good and holy by
God; but the Devil reuoulting from god and seducing men, corrupted both
himself and men.

And although of their own proper and free will they rush and bend themselves
against God: The evil spirits are vnchangeablely evil and damned.
yet by the just iudegement of God they are so for saken and abiected of him,
that they are without all change, or alteration vnrecalabite evil, and
subject to everlasting torments. Wherefore Jude says, that they are reserved
by GOD in everlasting chains under darekenesse. And Christ, Matthew. 25. Go ye
cursed from me into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. For though doubtless these evil spirits, were even from their fall
dispoiled of the celestial habitation and blessedness: yet notwithstanding
both they and reprobate men shall be at the last judgment adjudged to more
grievous punishment: as contrariwise the felicity and glory of the Godly shall
then at length, after the resurrection of their bodies, be in all respects
consummated and made perfect. Therefore 2. Pet. 2. and in Jude, these spirits
are said to be reserved unto damnation and the judgment of the great day.
And Mat. 8. They complain that Christ came to trouble them before their time.

Furthermore GOD permitted them to fall into this wickedness, The causes why
God permitted them to fall.
not only thereby to show his wrath against sin in their everlasting
pains: but also to punish by them in this life the wicked, and also to
chastise or try and exercise with temptations the elect. For fire is said to
be prepared for them from everlasting. Matthew. 25. And 1. Sam. 16. verse. 18.
The evil spirit of GOD came upon Saul, and vexed him. Psalm. 78.49. He cast
upon the Egyptians the fierceness of his anger, indignation and wrath, and
vexation by the sending out of evil Angels. But Job, cap. 1. verse. 2. is
delivered to be afflicted of Satan, for the trial of his constancy. Luc.
22.31. Satan has desired you to winnowe you as wheat. 1. Thessal. 2. We
would have come unto you, but Satan hindered us. 2. Corint. 12.7. Least I
should be exalted above measure thorough the abundance of revelations,
there was given unto me a prick in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to
buffet me, because I should not be exalted out of measure. 1. Thessal. 3.
Least the tempter had tempted you in any sort, and that our labor had been
in vain. And Matthew. 4. Christ himself is tempted of Satan: and therefore
verily is he called the tempter, for that he solliciteth and inicteth men to
sin and to reuoult from God, both by offering outward occasions of sins,
as also by stirring up the cogitations and inward motions of the will and heart.

OF GODS PROVIDENCE.
The creation and preservation of things are the same in the thing itself, but
diverse in consideration.
THE Doctrine which entreats of gods providence, is joined with the place
which entreats of the creation: Because the providence, that is, the
preservation and government of things, does not differ from creation in the
thing it self: for that there is but one and the same will or power, or action
of God, whereby things both begin to be, and continue: but they differ in
consideration only. For the omnipotent will of GOD is called creation, in
respect of the beginning, when things by the force and power of his will took
their being: it is called providence, as by the selfsame power things are
preserved. Wherefore providence is the continuance and accomplishment of
creation, or creation it self continued and perpetuated. For as no things
would ever have bin except GOD had created them: so neither would they
retain and keep their being, neither their force of woorking, neither the
very operation it self or motion, if GOD did not preserve and move them
effectually. And therefore the Scripture it self often joins the
preservation and continual administration of things with their creation, and
from hence reasons for Gods providence. And GOD is called Iehoua, not only
because he once gave to every thing both small and great, their being, but
also, because he maintains it in all, rules and moves them so, as that
he not only sees, what is done in all things, but also causes and
inclines them, to do this, which he from everlasting would every of them to
do. And by this his providence he governs, administreth, rules and
preserves all things, that they be not brought to confusion.

But albeit there be more in number, and more evident arguments in nature of
Gods providence than of the creation of all things out of nothing, and
therefore the Philosophers do more acknowledge that, than this: yet by reason
of the pride of man's heart, which hardly suffers all good to be ascribed unto
God; by reason of the judgment of our sense, unto which most things seem to
go by fortune, especially the wills of men: by reason of the knowledge of Gods
providence, darkened by the fall of man; by reas^n of our desire of avoiding
and declining by any means gods fight and Judgment; by reason of the small
compass of man's mind, and understanding; whereby when men measure God, they
cannot easily imagine in him, the government of al things in the woorlde, as
being partly hard or impossible, and partly as unworthy of God: and lastly by
reason of confusions and sins, al which evils would seem to have God their
author, if it should be granted that God governed all things; we find
experience every one both in our selves and others, how hardly the true
Doctrine concerning Gods providence gets place in the mind; and that
natural light suffices not to the right understanding thereof, so great
variety of opinions and errors concerning this point of doctrine does
sufficiently declare. Now there are of these, three sorts especially.

1 The Epicures will have either no providence at all, Errors concerning Gods
providence.
or only of those things which are, and are done in the lower parts of the
world.

2 The Stoickes have devised in steed of providence an absolute necessity and
order of all things, being in the very nature of things, whereunto not only
al other things, but god himself also is subject.

3 The Peripatetiques did imagine, that God indeed does behold and
understand all things: but yet does not order and rule all things, but
moves the celestial motions, and does by them send down by way of
influence some power and virtue unto the lower parts of nature: but the
operations themselves or motions depend of the matter and of the wills of men:
that is, they will have the providence of GOD to be a prescience or
foreknowlege in god of al things, but not a will decreeing, causing, and ruling
al things.

Contrarily, The Church teaches out of the word of God, that nothing is
extant and comes to pass in the whole world, but by the certain and
definite, though yet most free and most good counsel and purpose of God. Which
that it may the better be understood, these three questions are to be
considered.

1 Whether there be any providence of God. 2 What the providence of God is. 3
Why the knowledge thereof is necessary.
1 WHETHER THERE BE ANY PROVIDENCE OF GOD.
The providence of God certain and not to be doubted of.
It is manifest that they who deny Providence, take away religion and the whole
woorshippe of God. For if God does not respect and rule humane affairs, then
neither were good things to be desired of him, neither were he to be praised
for them received, who does not give them: neither his anger to be feared, who
does not punish: neither were we to live according to his will, who requires
not obedience, nor makes or keeps any difference between the good, and
bad. These therefore are the first and most known, and most certain grounds
and principles of al religion: That there is a God, and that there is
providence: that is, that God knows and rules those things which are, and
are done in the world, and especially mankind, as being the chief and
principal part of the world. Neither yet does the whole Scripture therefore so
many ways inculcate Gods government of all things, as if their own conscience
did not convince every man of it: but that it might the more confirm in us
the belief and persuasion of a thing most certain, and most necessary to be
known, and teach us that which men know not of it, and correct that which they
understand amiss.

Testimonies of scripture, for Gods providence.
There are two sorts of arguments and proofs whereby is confirmed that there is
a providence of God. First it is proved by testimonies of Scripture. Act.
17.21. He gives to al life and breath, and all things: and a little after, In
him we live and move and have our being. Matthew. 10.29. Are not two Sparrowes
sold for a farthing, and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your
father? Yea and all the hairs of your head are numbered: Like to these are
found infinite testimonies in the Scripture, not only as concerning the
general rule, but also as concerning particular examples. For there is almost
no point of heavenly Doctrine, which is more diligently inculcated and urged in
the old Testament, than the Doctrine of Gods providence. So in Ier. 27. God
reasons from the general to the particular, that is, from the rule it self
to the example. The general is, I have made the earth, the man, and the beast
that are upon the ground, and have given it unto whom it pleased me. And
presently he adioyneth the particular: Now have I given all these lands into
the hands of Nabuchadnezzar the king of Babel my servant.

Moreover the providence is confirmed by reasons: Reasons of philosophy for
proof of the same.
which are in such sort Philosophical, as that also the Scripture often uses
the same. Of these there are two sorts, whereof one demonstrateth the thing
that is in question, from the works or effects of GOD: the other from the
attributes or properties or nature of God, whereon as their proper cause those
effects depend. Yet more known proofs and more common and object are those
which are drawn from the works or effects of god. For by these, as being
more known unto us, we learn and know the cause it self, even the nature
and properties of God: then after we know the cause, we return back again
from it to the effects, and demonstrate them by this, and have distinct and
perfect knowledge thereof. And both these proofs, and reasons are
demonstratiue, necessarily and irrefragably proouing that which is in question,
and common to Philosophy with Divinity. But the properties and works of God
are better known of them which are in the Church, than of them which are
without. And further the providence of God is proved almost by the same
arguments, whereby it is showed that there is a God.

The reasons drawn from the works or effects of God, for proof of his
providence.
1 THE order which is in the nature of things, that is, 1 Order.
the most apt disposing of all the parts, and the succession of motions and
actions continuing by certain and perpetual Laws and courses, and serving for
the preservation of the whole, and for those ends, whereunto things were
ordained. This order proceeds not from a mere sensible nature, neither
comes it by chance or fortune: but contrary, he must needs be most wise,
who appointed and settled this order in the nature of things, and so he also,
who by his providence governs and rules nature. Psalm. 8 19.135.147.148.

2 The mind.
2 The mind and understanding which is in Angels and men. Man, which is as it
were a little world, is ruled by a mind and understanding: much more then is
the great woorlde governed by divine providence, as in the administering whereof
more wisdom is required. Whence it is said, Psalm. 94.9. He that planted
the ear, shall he not hear? Or he that formed the eye, shall he not see?

3 The natural knowledge of the law.
3 The natural notions of principles engraffed in our minds, o the Law of
nature, or the difference between things honest and dishonest. He that has
engraued in the minds of men the rule of directing their life, he will have
men to live according to that rule, and therefore respects and governs
their life, actions, and euentes. But God has engraued in the minds of men
such a rule, whereby to discern that which is honest from things dishonest.
Therefore he is both the beholder and judge of man's life. Romans 2.12.13.14.15.
As many as have sinned without the Law, shall perish also without the Law:
and as many as have sinned in the Law, shall be judged by the Law. (For the
hearers of the Law are not righteous before God, but the doers of the Law
shall be justified etc. And PLAVTVS says, There is verily a God, who both
hears and sees what we do.

4 The terrors of conscience.
4 The terrors and torments of conscience in the wicked, which generally
ensues upon sin committed by them. These fears cannot be stricken into any
without some intelligent and understanding nature, which beholds and
respects all humane affairs, especially seeing the wicked cannot escape.
Therefore there is some revenger of sins and wickedness, who is God, and who
inflicteth those horrors, and also who knows and regards all things, even
the secrets of men. Romans 1.18. The wrath of God is reueiled from heaven against
all ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men. And Iuuenall writing unto a
friend of his some way to comfort him for the loss which he had suffered by
trusting too much a cousoning and perjured Merchant: Why, says he, do
thou think such fellows to have escaped, whose mind being conscious and
guilty of the deed possesses them with astonishment, etc.

5 Rewards and punishments. 5 Rewards and punishments.
He that at all times and in all places adorneth virtue with rewards, and
draws the wicked to punishment, he must needs rule all mankind by his
providence. But God yields more pleasant successes and events to the good,
which live with moderation, and soberly, even to those that are without the
Church, and punishes heinous offenses with grievous punishments in this life:
yea when men wink at them: Therefore GOD rules and judges the whole world
by his providence. Psalm. 58.10. The righteous shall rejoice, when he sees the
vengeance: he shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked; And men shall
say, verily, there is fruit for the righteous, doubtless there is a God that
judges in the earth.

6 The order and preservation in commonweals. 6 The maintenance and
preservation of commonweales.
He that orders and setleth the Empiers and states of the whole woorlde,
preserves and mantaineth them against the power, hatred, sleights, furies of
Devils, tyraunts, and wicked men, and at his pleasure alters and translateth
them; it must needs be that he takes care of, and guides the affairs,
counsels, and actions of men. But it is God, who alone is able to perform,
and does perform these things: for none besides him is mightier than the
Devil; and the order of common-weals and kingdoms does always continue.
Therefore god governs all things by his providence. Proverb. 8.15. By me
kings reign, and Princes decree justice. Dan. 4.14. That living men may know,
that the most High has power over the kingdom of men, and gives to
whomesoeuer he will, and appoints over it the most abject among men. And Tully
says in a certain Oration, Common-weals are governed far more by the aid
and assistance of God, than by men's reason and counsel.

7 The virtues, and singular gifts, or heroical instinctes, 7 Heroical
instincts.
and the excellency of artificers, which God bestows for the good and
preservation of man's society. And these things are far greater than that they
can proceed from a thing mere sensible without understanding, and more
excellent than that they should be given of nothing or gotten by men; Nay
rather, when GOD will do things for the preserving of man's society, he gives
us men endewed with heroical and noble virtues, inuentours of arts and
sciences, princes valiant, good, and wise, and other the like fit and able
instruments: and contrary, when he will punish us for our deserts, he takes
away again such profitable and preserving instruments from us. Therefore
there is some disposer of these good things, and so the governor of humane
affairs. Es^r. 1. The Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus. Isai. 3.2. The Lord
takes away the strong man, and the man of war, the Judge, and the Prophet.

8 Fore-tellings of things to come.
8 The prediction and signification of euentes, or of things to come, and the
execution or accomplishment thereof. He that of himself does fore-shewe
certainly unto men things to come, does not only foresee those things, but
also causes them, and has the whole nature of things so in his power, that
nothing can be done without his will and pleasure. But God alone does of
himself certainly fore-shewe things to come. Therefore he does not only
foresee them, but also causes them, and therefore governs humane affairs.
Numb. 23.19. Has he said, and shall he not do it? And Tullie says: De
Dioin.
Are there gods, and do they not signify or foretell things?

9 The Ends or fin^^ causes of all things.
9 All things in the whole world, both great and small, are not only ordained,
but are also done and tend to their certain and appointed end. Therefore it is
God, who by his wisdom, and power as he destineth al things to their ends, so
also does bring them thereunto.

Reasons drawn from the properties or nature of God.
^^ere is a God.
1 THere is a god. Therefore there is providence. For that God should not rule
and govern the world created by him, has flat repugnancy with the nature of
God, (for the world can no more consist without God, than be created without
him) and they who deny providence, deny God to be God, and take away al
religion.

2 He is omnipotent, 2 His omnipotency.
who has al things so in his own power, that with every thing he may do what
he will, and without his will nothing can be done. But God is omnipotent.
Therefore he has the whole nature of things in his power, and effectually
moves and governs al things at his own pleasure.

3 It is the property of a wise governor, 3 His infinite wisdom.
to let nothing of that, which he has in his power, to be done without his
will and counsel. God is most wise, and has al things in his power, and is
present with them. Nothing therefore is done in the world without Gods
providence.

4 God is most just, and judge of the world. 4 His exceeding justice.
Therefore he, in ruling the woorld, gives rewards unto the good, and
inflicteth punishments upon the wicked.

5 God is most good. But that which is most good, 5 His perfect goodness.
is most communicable: Therefore as GOD of his infinite goodness created the
woorlde, so by the same his goodness does he preserve, administer, and rule
the woorlde created.

6 Every positive thing, and all good is from God, 6 Author of all good.
as the first cause and chief good. But not only substaunces, but all their
motions and actions are a certain positive thing and good. Therefore all
motions also have God their first cause, and are done by his will.

7 He that will the end or consequent of any event, 7 God maker and disposer
of the means which bring to every end.
will also the mean or event which goes before. But GOD will the ends of all
things which are done. Therefore he will also all precedent euentes, either
simply and absolutely, or in some sort and respect.

8 God is the first cause of al things. 8 He the first cause.
Therefore all things depend on him.

9 An unchangeable prescience or foreknowledge depends of an unchangeable
cause. 9 His unchangeable foreknowledge of all things.
God foreknoweth all things vnchangeablie from everlasting. Therefore this his
foreknowledge must depend of an unchangeable cause. But there is no
unchangeable cause beside the will of God. Therefore al things depend and are
governed of the will of God.

2 WHAT THE PROVIDENCE OF GOD IS.
THe providence of god is the eternal, most free, unchangeable, The definition
of Gods providence.
most just, wise, and good counsel of god, whereby he works al good things,
and permits also evil things to be done, and directs al things both
evil and good to his glory, and the safety of his chosen.

The explication of the parts of the definition severally. 1 Counsel.
1 By the name of counsel is comprehended, An understanding, or prescience and
foreknowledge of things to come or to be done, and of the causes for which they
are, or are not to be done: Likewise a will effecting or woorking a thing for
certain causes, and that in due time and order. Providence therefore is the
prescience, and forcible will of God. Psalm. 33.11. The counsel of the Lord
stands for ever. Isaie 46.10. My counsel shall stand. Prescience is a
knowledge, whereby God knew from everlasting not so much what himself was or
is to do, as what not himself, but others, would and will do, as sins. And
this prescience belongs to understanding. Providence and Predestination,
though they agree in this, that both are of those things only, which god
himself purposed to do, yet they differ: because providence extends to al
things and to all the works of god: but predestination is extended properly to
those creatures only which are endued with reason. Predestination is the most
wise, eternal and unchangeable decree of God, whereby he deputed and destined
every man, before he was created, to his certain use and end. God
predestined no man to commit sin, though he foreknew sin before.

2 Eternal.
2 That this counsel is eternal cannot be denied: because seeing neither the
ignorance of any thing, nor increase of knowledge, nor change of will falls
into God, it is certain that he knew and decreed al things from everlasting.
Pro. 8.22. The Lord has possessed me in the beginning of his way. Isa. 46.10.
Which declare the last things from the beginning, and from old the things that
were not done. Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us in Christ before the foundation
of the woorlde. 1. Corint. 2.7. We speak the wisdom of God, which he had
determined before the world.

3 Most free.
3 Most free; that is, a decree which was made from everlasting of all things
and euentes, as it pleased him of his great wisdom and goodness, when he
had perfect power otherwise to have directed his counsel, or else to have
omitted it, or to have done things otherwise, than he decreed to do them by
his counsel. Psalm. 115.3. He does whatsoever he will. Ier. 18.6. As the clay is
in the potters hand, so are you in mine hand.

4 Unchangeable) Because neither error of counsel, 4 Unchangeable.
nor any change or mutation falls into god: but what he has once decreed
from everlasting, that as being most good and right does he bring to pass. 1.
Sam. 15.29. The strength of Israel will not lie nor repent. Mal. 3.6. I am the
Lord, I change not.

5 Most wise) This is showed both by the wonderful course of things and
events in the world, 5 Most wise.
and by the scripture it self. Job. 12.13. With him is wisdom and strength, he
has counsel and understanding.

6 Most Just) Because the will of God is the only fountain and the chief rule
of all justice manifested and declared in the Law. Whatsoever therefore GOD
will, 6 Most Just.
or has decreed, or does woork, it is simply and in it self just, whether we
know or not know the manner, how it is just. 2. Chro. 19.7. There is no
iniquity with the Lord our God, neither respect of persons. Dan. 9.14.

7 Whereby god works) This is added, that we may know the counsel of God
not to be idle, 7 Effectual in working.
but effectual and forcible in working. For god not only once created things
and bestowed on them a virtue and force whereby to work, but also does preserve
and move, by his presence and continual working, al things at his pleasure. No
creature, whether great or small, can either be, or move, or do or suffer any
thing, except God effectually preserve, move and govern it. Act. 17. In him we
live, and move, and have our being. And God works al things by his sole and
eternal will, without any labor or motion. For to will, in him, is both to be
able, and to do: and contrary, his power and action is his very eternal and
unchangeable will. For in god the will is not disioined from his efficacy and
woorking, as it comes to pass in creatures.

The working or operation of God is twofold. General, The general and special
working of God.
whereby he susteineth and governs al things especially mankind: special,
whereby he begins the salvation of his chose^ in this life, and perfecteth it
in the life to come. 1. Tim. 4.14. God is the savior of al men, specially of
those that believe. To. 8.14. As many as are led by the spirit of god, they are
the sons of god. An other division there is of gods working, whereby it is
divided into immediate, The Immediate working of God.
and mediate working. Immediate working is, when beside, or contrary to the
means and order settled by him in nature he woorketh what he will; as in all
miracles which are described and declared to this end, that we might learn
that God does work most freely, either by means or without them. For that
all those miracles are not wrought without divine power, both experience
teaches us (in as much as they cannot be wrought by the power of any creature)
and the Scripture witnesses, as Psalm. 136.4. Which only does great
woonders. Exodus 8.19. This is the finger of God.

Gods Mediate working.
Mediate woorking is, when God by creatures or second causes produces those
effects, to which those creatures, or causes, are by the accustomed and common
order of nature fit, and so made of God, as when he susteineth us by
nourishments: Deutr. 8 3. and drives away diseases by medicines. Isay. 38.21.
Take a lump of dry figs and lay it upon the boil, and he shall recover. So
likewise God by his word written, read, heard, shows unto us both his will
and himself. Luke 16.29. They have Moses and the Prophets: let them hear them.

His mediate working, sometimes by good means; sometimes by bad.
Moreover the mediate woorking or action of God is done sometimes by good,
sometimes by vicious and sinful instruments, as well natural as voluntary: Yet
in such wise, that the work of God in them and by them, is always most good,
most just, and most holy. For the goodness of gods works depend not upon the
goodness, wisdom, and rightnesse of the instrument, but of god. As touching
good instruments, that by the^ God works very well, there is no controversy
among the Godly: but of evil instruments, all think not the same.
Nevertheless yet, except we will deny 1 the trials and chastisementes of the
Godly, or 2 the punishments of the wicked, which are done by the wicked,
both to be just, and to proceed from the will, power, and efficacy of God;
as also 3 the virtues and such actions and deeds of the wicked as have been
for the safety of mankind, to be the gifts and blessings of God; that is,
except we will deny that God is a just judge of the world, and power-full in
operation, and the efficient of all good things; we must needs doubtless
confess that God does also execute and accomplish his just and holy works and
judgments by evil and sinful instruments. So God, Numb. 23.8. blesses
Israel by Balaam. Deutr 13.3. tempts the people by false Prophets. 1. Sam.
16.14. vexes Saul by Satan. 2. Sam. 15 12. punishes David by Absalon.

8 He works al good things] Even in all creatures, 8 All good things done by
the will of God.
both great and small, he woorketh good things, so that not only he does
engender and preserve in them a general power and force of woorking, but does
also effectually move them, so that, without his will being effectual and
woorking, that power and force never in any thing shows forth it self, or is
brought into act, that is, not only all force of working, but also the act and
operation it self is in all creatures from GOD as the efficient thereof and
directer.

For by the name of good are understood, What things are said to be good.
1 The substances and natures of things. 2 Their quantities and qualities,
forces or powers, or inclinations. 3 Habits and faculties of the mind
conformed to the will of God. 4 Motions, actions, and events, as they are
motions, and agree with the Law of God. 5 Punishments, as they are the
execution of gods justice, and are inflicted by god the most just and righteous
judge of the world. All these, since they are either things created of God, or
some thing ordained by him and agreeing with his divine Law and justice, they
must needs both partake of the nature of good, and proceed from god their
efficient, and by his providence continue and be directed.

Further, 5 All things present, past, and to come, done by God.
whereas al things are said to be done by the providence of God, we
understand both things past even from the beginning of the woorlde, and things
present and things to come even to all eternity. Isay. 46.9. Remember the
former things of old, for I am god, and there is no other god, and there is
nothing like me, etc.

9 He permits also evil things to be done. 9 God permits evil things.
] Evil is twofolde, the one of crime or offense, which is sin; the other of
pain or punishment, which is every destruction or affliction, or forsaking of
the reasonable creature inflicted by God for sin. Example of each
signification and meaning is. Ier. 18. The evil of punishment is a Moral good,
and is done by God.
If this nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their wickedness, I
will repent of the plague that I thought to bring upon them. But now because
the evil of pain or punishment, being the exequution of the Law, and
declaration of Gods justice, is indeed a natural evil, as it is a destruction
of the creature, but is in a consideration a moral good, as it is agreeing with
the order of gods justice: this sort of evils also not only as it is an action
or motion, but also as it is a destruction or affliction of sinners, is to be
ascribed to God as author and efficient thereof: 1 Because he is the first
cause and efficient of al good things (now all evil of punishment or pain, as
it is a punishment, does partake of the nature of moral good, because the law
and order of Gods justice requires the punishment of sin) 2 Because it is
the part of a just judge to punish sin: But God is judge of the world, and
will be acknowledged the maintainer of his justice and glory. 2. Chron. 19.6.
Ye execute not the judgments of man, but of the Lord. 3 Because the whole
Scripture with great consent refers both the punishments of the wicked, and
the chastisements and exercises, and Martyrdomes of the godly, as also the
passion and death of the Son of God himself, which is a sacrifice for the
sins of men, to the effectual and forcible working of the will of God. As
Amos. 3. There is no evil in the City which the Lord has not done. Isay.
47.5. I the Lord make peace and create evil. Wherefore we account in the
number of good things the punishments of the wicked, and gods judgments: which
God not only by his unchangeable decree will have done, but also does them by
his effectual power and will. For although destruction be evil in respect of
the creature who suffers it: yet is it good in respect of the Law and order
of divine justice exacting it, and in respect of God most justly inflicting it,
and executing as it were the proper and peculiar work of the judge of the
world.

1 Objection. Wised. 1.13. God made not death. Answer. True, not before sin,
when he created all things. 2 Object. Hose. 13.9. Thy destruction is of thy
self Israel. Answer. True, as concerning the desert: but as concerning the
effecting or inflicting of their punishments, it is from God. 3 Object. He will
not death. Ezech. 18.23. and 33.11. Answer. He will not death with a desire of
destroying, God will, and will not death.
or that he delights in the destruction, vexation, or perdition of his
creature: neither would he it, or would effect or cause it, if it were nothing
else, but a destruction and perdition. But he will it, and woorketh it, and
delights in it, as it is the punishment of sin, and the execution of his
justice, or the delivery of his Church, or a chastisement, or trial, or
Martyrdom, or ransom, Isay. 1.24. Psalm. 2.4. Proverb. 1.26. 4 Objection. He
will that all men shall be saved. 1. Tim. 2.4. 2. Pet. 3.9. Answer. All men,
that is, all sorts of men. For out of all sorts of men he chooses his chosen.

Now of evil of crime or offense, Evil of crime, as it is such, God does only
permit and not will.
there is another consideration. For these, as they are sins, or evils of
crime, are not considered as good, and S. James says of them, let no man when
he is tempted (that is, when he is solicited to evil) say that he is tempted
of God. Therefore God neither intends them in his counsel and purpose,
neither allows, nor works, nor furdereth them: but only suffers or
permits them to be done of devils and men; that is, does not hinder the^
from not being done, when yet he could hinder them: partly to show in
punishing them his justice, and partly to show in pardoning them his mercy.
Gal. 3.22. The scripture has concluded all under sin, etc. And Romans 9.17. For
the same purpose have I stirred thee up, etc. But in the mean season the
forsaking of his creature, or depriving him of divine light and rightnesse, and
the action it self, which devils and me^ sinning, do against the Law and will
of God, he notwithstanding by his general providence and efficacy will and
moves, but to such an end, as does best agree with his nature, law, justice,
and goodness, whether it be known or unknown to us. Therefore sins are
truly said to be done, not by the will or working, but by the permission of
God.

The word permission, in this place is to be retained, because both it and
others of the same force, are sometimes found in the Scripture. As Genesis 26. and
31.7. Psalm. 105.14. But yet we must expound it aright out of the scriptures;
For God neither will, nor will not sins simply, but in some respect he will,
and in some respect he will not, but only permits them. Which that it may
the better be understood, we must know, that in every sin or evil of crime are
two things: namely, the material, or subject, and the formal, Sin is always
both in a good subject, and to a good end directed by God.
that is the corruption it self, or defect of rightnes, sticking and inhere^t
in the subject. The subject, is a thing positive, or a thing of nature, as an
inclination, motion, action; and therefore does it partake of the nature of
good, and is wrought and moved by god, but corruption is not wrought by God,
but came unto the subject by the will of devils and men forsaking God. Wherefore
no sin can be, or be imagined, which is not in some good thing, and has
adioined unto it some consideration, and respect of good. Otherwise God for his
infinite goodness would not suffer it to be done, neither should it be
desired of any, neither should at al be: so that it is truly said, that there
cannot be put any thing which is the chief and extreme evil, that is, such,
as does take away good wholly: for it should not be desired under some show
and apparancie that it had of good, neither should it have a subject wherein
in to be, Sin always is to be discerned from good.
and so should destroy it self. But albeit evil is always joined with
good, and does concur with it in the same actions or inclinations: yet these
two things are diligently to be severed and discerned, neither is the work
of the Creator to be confounded with the work of the creature sinning least
either God thereby be made the cause of sin, or the greatest part of the
government of the woorlde and humane affairs be taken from him.

Hereby we may understand, how far forth god will sin, In sin God
effectually will, 1 The subject or matter.
how he will not, but permits it. He will therefore sins, 1 As concerning
their matter, that is, the actions themselves of men sinning, motions and
inclinations to obiectes, as they are only such, God will, woorketh and
directs. For both they partake of the nature of good: and if God simply
would them not, they should not at all be done. 2. ^ The ends.
As concerning the ends whereunto God destineth those actions, which are
sins: that is, he will the actions of sinners, as they are the punishments
of the wicked, or chastisementes, or trials, or martyrdomes of the godly, or
the Sacrifice of the Son of GOD for the sins of men. But these ends are
most good, and most agreeing with the nature, justice, and goodness of GOD.
Therefore GOD, the first cause of al good, will, intends, and woorketh these
in the sins or actions of the wicked: and by a consequent, also the actions
themselves, which the wicked do in sinning, and by which as means GOD
attaineth to those ends. 3. 3 The forsaking of his creatures.
As concerning the withdrawing of his grace, that is, his divine light and
rightnesse. This withdrawing is an action, proper to god, namely his eternal
and forcible woorking will, destining whom it will, to be forsaken. It is also
just and holy, because GOD is bound to none: and because it is either the
exploration and trial of the creature, or the punishment of sin. And this
withdrawing once being put, the inclinations, motions, actions of the creature
cannot but err and swerve from the Law of GOD, and be sins.

Now as the inclinations, motions, and actions of sinners, The corruption of
the action or inclination God will not, but permits.
are sins, that is, are repugnant to order and nature; and swerve from the
Law of GOD, because they are done without the knowledge of Gods will, and
purpose of obeying him: So God neither will, nor ordains, nor allows, nor
commands, nor woorketh, nor furthereth them: but forbids, condemns,
punishes and suffers them to be committed of his creatures, and to concur
with his most just decrees, judgments, and works: thereby to show, how
necessary and needful for the creature is the grace of the holy ghost to
fly sin, and to manifest his justice and power in punishing sin.

Wherefore the permission of sin, is no idle permission, or a cessation and
ceasing of Gods providence and woorking in the actions of the wicked, as if
they did depend only upon the will of the creature: but this permission is of
efficacy, and woorketh. It is permission, as concerning the formal cause of
sin, that is, corruption it self, which the creature has of it self, not
by any effection or woorking of GOD: but it is of efficacy, and woorketh, as
concerning the motions and actions of the creature sinning, which god
effectually will, and moves, as also concerning the withdrawing of his grace,
and the ends, whereunto he destineth, directs, and brings the actions of
them that sin.

GOD then is said to permit sin. 1. Because his will, Why God is said to
permit sin.
where-by he will have some one work done by a reasonable creature, he
does not make known unto him. 2. Because he does not correct and incline
the will of the creature to obeie in that work his divine will, that is, to
do it to that end which GOD will, by either general or special commandment.
These two are signified, when GOD is said, to withdraw from his creature his
grace, or special woorking: to forsake him: to deprive him of light and
rightnesse, or of conformity with the Law: to leave him in natural
blindness and corruption: to will and permit, that together with the action,
which God woorcketh by his creatures, and is in respect of GOD most just, the
sin of the creatures may concur, by the coming whereof that action, in
respect of the creatures is made evil, and highly displeasing god. 3. Because
notwithstanding god so moves, inclines, and rules by his secret and general
providence the will and all the actions of the creature so forsaken, as that by
the creatures sinning, himself does execute the most just decrees of his own
will. For such is the liberty, wisdom, goodness, and power of God, that no
less by vicious than by good instruments, he most well, justly, and holily
woorketh what he will. Neither is Gods work, by reason of either the goodness
or badnesse of the instrument, more or less good: as neither the woork of
wicked men, is made good, for that God does well use it. For God doing in all
things what he will, will always and does that which is right. Now that
together with him woorking well the creature may also work well, it is necessary
that the special working of God therein concur with his general working, that
is, that he correct the creature by his spirit. Whenas therefore God does
move the creature only by a general working and not by a special, The
creature works well together with god working well, if God correct him.
the creature does necessarily, though yet freely, swerve and defect from
rightnes, god himself notwithstanding working holily and accomplishing by his
creature the just and good work of his will and providence.

God corrects whom he will.
If any man demand, why then God does not correct vicious instruments, that god
using the^ well, themselves also may work well? God himself answers him,
Exodus 33.19. and Romans 9 15. I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy: And
To. 9.20. O man, who art thou which pleadest against God? Has not the potter
power of the claie? Romans 11.35. Who has given unto him first, and it shall be
recompensed? God perfourmeth nothing of duty, but al of mercy unto his
creatures. It is free therefore to him, to do what, and in what sort, and how
far forth, and to whom he will, according as it is said, Mat. 20.15. Is it not
lawful for me to do as I will with mine own?

Permission therefore is the withdrawing of the grace of God, What permission
is.
whereby god 1. when he executes the decrees of his will by reasonable
creatures, 2. either does not open his will, whereby he would have that work
done, to the creature; 3. or does not incline the will of the creature, to obey
his will in that action. Or, permission, is the secret providence or will and
power of god, 1. whereby he effectually will, moves, and moderateth the motions
and actions even of men sinning, as they are actions, and punishments both of
them and others: 2. but sin it self he neither will nor works: neither yet
hinders it, but in his just judgment suffers it to concur with their
actions. 3. and this also he uses to the illustrating of his glory. This
description of Gods permission of sins is confirmed by many places of
Scripture. Permission of sin confirmed by sundry places of scripture,
according as it was before described.
For first that God neither will nor woorketh sins, as they are sins, is
confessed by all the godly, and all such as are of sound judgment: seeing both
the infinite goodness of god cannot be the cause of evil, which has in it no
respect and quality of good, and god himself does often avouch this of
himself. As Psalm. 5. Not a god that loves wickedness.

Neither are there fewer places of Scripture, which teach most clearly that the
actions of the wicked, which they do when they sin, are done and ruled,
though by the secret, yet by the good and just will of god: As Gen 45.8. Joseph
says that he was sent of god into Egypt. Exodus 7. and 10. and 11. Deuteronomy. 2.
Ios. 11. Iud. 3. and 4. we learn, that the indurating and hardening of Pharao
and other enemies of the Israelites, was wrought by the lord, and that to this
end, as thereby to punish his enemies, and to show forth his glory. 2. Sam.
12.11. and 16.10. and 24. 1. Job 12 25. Psalm. 119.10. Isaie. 10.6. and 63.17.
Lament. 3.37. Ier. 48.10. Acts 2.23. and. 4.28. Romans 11.8. and 14.23. These and
the like places of holy writ do show by two reasons or arguments, That god
did not permit without some woorking also of his own, but did effectually
will that working of Pharaos will and others, whereby they opposed themselves
against Israel: First, because these Scriptures refer the cause of their
indurating wrought by themselves to an indurating wrought by GOD, that is, that
therefore they would not the dimissing of the people, or the entering of a
peace or league with them, because GOD did incline their wills to this, that
they should not will. Secondly, because these scriptures add further the
final causes of this counsel and purpose of god; even that his enemies might be
punished, and the glory of god magnified. For seeing God would the ends, he
would also most justly the means, by which he would come unto them: the
kings notwithstanding and people themselves neither respecting, nor knowing
it, neither being enforced or constrained thereto, and therefore sinning, and
perishing through their own fault and demerite. Moreover by these few and
other infinite places of scripture, it is apparent, that God, though by his
secret, yet effectual consent, motion, and instinct, does most justly work
those actions or works by his creatures, which they with sin perform: for
because that they being destitute of the grace of the holy Ghost, either are
ignorant of the will of God concerning those works: Or, when they do them,
they respect not this, to execute the known will or commandments of God, but
to fulfill their own lusts, against the law of God: Therefore they working
together with God, work ill, when God works well by them. For neither do the
creatures therefore sin, for that God does by their will and actions execute
his judgments: for then also should the good Angels sin, by whom God
sometimes punishes the wickedness of men: but because in their action they have
no respect of gods commandment, neither do it to that end, as thereby to obey
god.

Permission is the withdrawing of Gods grace.
Further, that God does in such sort permit sin, as that he does not illighten
their minds with the knowledge of his will, or does not bend their hearts and
wills, which by his arcane and secret efficacy he inclines whither himself
lists, unto this, as for the obeying of God to pursue or fly these or those
obiectes, that is, does not conform the wills of sinning creatures to his will;
these sayings of scripture witness. Romans 14. Whatsoever is not of faith, is
sin. Deuteronomy. 13. If there arise among you a Prophet, or a dreamer of dreams,
saying, let us go after other gods, thou shall not hearken unto the words of
the Prophet; for the Lord your god proves you. Deuteronomy. 29.2. Ye have seen all
that the Lord did before your eyes in the land of Egypt etc. Yet the Lord
has not given you an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear,
unto this day. 1. Sam. 24.14. Wickedness proceeds from the wicked; but mine
hand be not upon thee.

Lastly, in the description of providence it was said, God directs all both
good and evil unto his glory, and his chosens salvation.
that it directs all things both good and evil to gods glory, that is, to
the manifesting and magnifiyng of his divine justice, power, wisdom, truth,
mercy, and goodness: And to the safety of his chosen, that is, to the life,
joy, wisdom, righteousness, glory and felicity everlasting of his Church.
And that to these ends, even to the glory of god, and safety of his chose^,
all the counsels and works of God, and in them also the punishments of sin are
referred of God, ought to be out of controversy: seeing in all of them is
beheld the glory of god, and his fatherly care toward his Church. Psalm 19.1.
The heavens declare the glory of god, and the firmament shows the work of
his hands, Isai. 48.9. For my names sake will I differ my wrath. Rom 8.28. We
know that all things work together for the best, unto them that love god.
John. 9 3. Neither has this man sinned nor his parents, but that the works of
god should be showed on him. God uses also sin or corruption it self (which
yet himself works not, but suffers to concur with his own action in the
wicked) 1. To show forth both his justice in punishing it, and his mercy in
remitting it. 2. To work in us a hatred of sin, true humility, and an
imploring of gods grace, and thankefulnes of our delivery from sin and
death. Prou. 16.4. The Lord has made all things for his own sake: yea even
the wicked (but not wickedness) for the day of evil. Exodus 9.16. Romans
9.17.22.23. Ezech. 16.61.62.63. Gal. 3.

We are further to consider the degrees of gods providence. The degrees of Gods
providence, whereby he tendereth the whole world, mankind, his chosen.
For he respects indeed and governs all his creatures, but especially
mankind, as being the chief and principal amongst his works, and which
being created according to his image, he has adorned with very many
benefits above all other creatures: And in mankind especially those whom he
has elected and chosen to eternal life, whom with the blessed Angels, he
makes one everlasting Church, that in them he may dwell, as in his Temple and
habitation, and therefore does so guide and rule them in the whole race of
their life, as that all things must serve for their safety.

Now have we explicated and made plain the definition of gods providence: The
providence of God, is the governing and guiding of every particular thing.
whereout arises a Question greatly to be considered, which is, whether gods
providence extends it self to all things. Answer. Yea to every little
thing does the providence of GOD extend it self. And that all things, both
the greatest, and the smallest of them are ruled by the providence of GOD, and
that his providence is extended to all actions and motions of all creatures,
even of those that sin, so that all things, whatsoever are done, come not to
pass but by the eternal counsel and purpose of GOD, either woorking them, as
they have a respect and quality of good in them, or permitting them, as they
are sins, but moderating, and governing all things, even sin it self, and
directing them to his glory, and the safety of his chosen; is confirmed both
by very many testimonies of Scripture, and also by reasons drawn from the
nature of God.

Testimonies.
Of the testimonies which may be alleged for confirmation hereof, there are
certain orders and ranks. For, some are universal and general, which teach,
that all events universally are subject to Gods providence. Some are
particular, which speak both of some particular, and certain events, as also
of the whole specials and generals thereof. For the Scripture does often
transfer that to the whole specials and generals, which it speaks of
particular and singular examples. Wherefore it will have all the indiuiduals
and singulars of the whole specials and generals, to be subject to the divine
providence of God. Of particular testimonies some belong to reasonable
creatures, or such as have a will in working, be they good, or be they bad;
some to those which are without reason, whether they be things living, or not
living. Some likewise entreat of things contingent, fortuning, and casual,
which soothly are such in respect of us: Some speak of necessary things.
Now to all these heads as it were and principals, add we some such
testimonies, as are most clear and famous: for there are infinite.

Gods general providence confirmed.
The universal and general providence of God is witnessed by these, Ephesians. 1.11.
He woorketh all things after the counsel of his own will. Acts. 17.25. He
gives to all life and breath, and all things. Number. 23.19. Has he said, and
shall he not do it? And has he spoken? And shall be not accomplish it?
Nehem. 9.6. Thou have made heaven and earth, and all things that are therein,
the seas and all that are in them: And thou preseruest them all. Esai. 45.7. I
form the light, and create darkness: I make peace, and create evil; I the
Lord do all these things.

Of the providence of God over reasonable creatures, the history of Joseph
yields us notable testimonies. Gene. 45.18. Gods particular providence over
creatures endued with reason.
You sent not me hither but God. Gene. 50.20. When ye thought evil against me,
God disposed it to good. Likewise, the indurating and hardening of Pharao.
Exodus. 3.4.7.8.9.10.14. Exodus. 4.11. Who has given the mouth to man, or who
has made the dumme, or the deaf, or him that sees? Have not I the Lord?
Therefore go now, and I will be with thy mouth. John. 9.3. it is said, that
GOD would that he should be borne blind, to whom CHRIST restored his
sight. Ios. 11.6. The LORD said unto Joshua, be not afraid for them; for to
morrow about this time will I deliver them all slain before Israel. Joshua.
21.45. There failed nothing of all the good things which the LORD said unto
the house of Israel, but all came to pass. 2. Samuel. 16.10. The LORD has
bidden him curse David. 1. Kings 22.20. Who shall intise Ahab that he may go
and fall at Ramoth Gilead, and so forth. Thou shall entise and shall also
prevail. Proverbs. 21.1. The Kings heart is in the hand of the LORD: he
turns it whither soever it pleases him. Prou. 19.14. A prudent wife comes
of the LORD. Prou. 22.14. The mouth of strange women is as a deep pit. He
with whom the LORD is angry shall fall therein. Esd. 10.5. The LORD calls
the king of Assyrians the rod of his fury. Lament. 3.37. Who is he then that
says, and it comes to pass, and the LORD commands it not? Daniel. 4.32.
According to his will he woorketh in the army of heaven, and in the
inhabitauntes of the earth, and none can stay his hand nor say unto him, what
do thou? Acts. 4.27. Herod and Pontius Pilate with the gentiles and the
people of Israel gathered themselves together to do whatsoever thine hand and
thy counsel had determined before to be done.

Of his providence in creatures which are without reason whether they be
living or not living, His providence over creatures void of reason.
testimonies are extaunt every where in the sacred Scriptures. Job. 37.
Psalm. 34.20. The Lord keeps all the just man's bones. Psalm. 104. throughout
the whole Psalm. Likewise, Psalm. 134.7. He brings up the clouds from the
ends of the earth, and makeeth the lightnings with the rain, he draws forth
the wind out of his treasures. Genesis 8.1. God remembered Noah, and made a wind to
pass upon the earth. Psalm. 147.8.9. Which gives to beasts their food, and to
the young Ravens that cry. Mat. 6 26.30. Your heavenly father feeds the
fowls of the Air. And a little after, If god so clothe the grass of the
field, shall he not do much more unto you?

His providence over things casual and fortuning.
Of the providence of god governing things contingent, fortuning and casual,
these places of scriptures speak, Exodus 21.13. Jf a man has not laid wait,
but God has offered him into his hand, then I will appoint thee a place
whither he shall flee. Math. 10.29.30. Are not two sparrowes sold for a
farthing, and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your father?
Yea, and all the hairs of your head are numbered. Job. 1.21. The Lord has
given, and the Lord has taken it, blessed be the name of the Lord. Prou.
16.33. The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposition thereof is of
the Lord. Ios. 7. God opens the theft of Achan by lot.

His providence in necessary euentes.
Lastly, that necessary events (whether such come by a natural necessity, or
by the order so settled of God in nature, or whether they be by a conditional
necessity, as in respect of Gods decree or other causes coming between) are
wrought and ruled by the providence of God, these sayings do prove, Job.
37.5. God thundereth marvelously with his voice: he says to the snow, be
thou upon the earth, likewise the small rain and to the great rain of his
power. The whirle wind comes out of the south, and the cold from the
Northwind. At the breath of God the frost is given. Job. 38.27. He causes the
bud of the herb to spring forth by rain: he begets the dew, the frost,
the ice: he brings forth mazzareth in their time, he guides Arcturus, he
guides the motions of heaven, and effectually woorketh by them in these lower
regions. Psalm. 104.14. He causes the grass to grow for the cattle, and
herb for the use of man, that he may bring forth bread out of the earth,
etc. Prou. 20.12. The Lord has made both these, even the ear to hear, and
the eye to see, that is, God made not only the power, but the very act also of
hearing and seeing. So not one bone of Christ was broken, John. 19.36. Because
that was decreed and foretold by God, Exodus 12.46. So Christ according to the
determinate counsel of God was delivered up to be slain of the Jews. Act.
3.23. Isai. 46.10. My counsel shall stand, and I will do whatsoever I will:
I call a byrd from the East, and the man of my counsel from far. As I have
spoken it, so will I bring it to pass. J have purposed it, and I will do it.
To these and the like testimonies of scriptures those places also may be added,
which confirm the resurrection and raising again from the dead of those bodies
which we carry about with us in this life, as Philip. 3.21. Who shall change
our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body,
according to the woorking whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto
himself. 1. Cor. 15.53. This corruptible must put on incorruption, and this
mortal must put on immortality. For seeing we see the substance of our bodies
to be so many ways changed and scattered after death, when as they are mouldred
into dust, Genesis 3. Job. 10. it follows thereof necessarily that there is a
providence of god which takes a most strait and exact care even of the
smallest dust, whereby the substance of our bodies so often altered and
dissipated into infinite forms and parts is again in such wise to be
recollected, gathered together, and reduced to their first mass and form, as
that not other, but the self same bodies which we have in this life shall
rise again. Against these places of scripture alleged some make exception,
that the examples, whereof these places speak, are particular and prophetical
events administered by the special counsel of god, and that therefore there
may not be framed a general rule universally exte^ding to al events. But
against these we return a threefold answer. For first, The like causes are
found in all events, for which the scripture affirms those events before
recited to have been done or to be done by the counsel and decree of god;
namely the glory of god, and the safety of his chosen. The causes therefore of
al events being like, we are to judge alike of all. For all wise men confess
that a general is well gathered out of the enumeration or numbering of many
singulars or particulars, then, when as there cannot be alleged any different
or unlike example. Neither does any of the godly and such as conceive aright of
the immeasurable wisdom of god deny, that god has most good reasons for all
things which are done, albeit they are not known to us, whereby al things are
referred to those two last ends. Wherefore those things which god has not
foretold or has not by the special testimony of his word showed to be done
by his will, are no less to be thought to depend of his secret government
than those things which he has by plain words expressed, that himself
either would do hereafter, or before had done. Secondly, we see the scripture
it self not only to attribute the particular events of all both specials and
generals unto gods providence, but further to transfer and apply the same to
all the specials and generals, which it speaks of singular and particular
examples. Wherefore the scripture will have the same also to be understood of
all indiuiduals and singulars. For as god brought the wind upon the earth, Genesis
8. so does he bring the wind out of his treasures, Psalm. 135. As he would that
he, of whom it is spoken, Ioh. 9. should be borne blind, so does he make the
deaf and the dumb, him that sees, and the blind. Exodus 4. As he destroieth
the counsel of Achitophel. 2. Sam. 17. so he frustrateth the counsels of the
gentiles, Psalm. 53. As he commanded the Ravens to feed Elias, 1. Kings. 17.
so one sparrow falls not to the ground without him. As Christ could not be
taken before the time appointed by God: so can no evil happen to any of us, but
at such time and place, and in such manner, as pleases God. For therefore does
the scripture, to teach us how to collect and gather, recount so many examples
of Gods providence.

Thirdly, there are also places of Scripture, wherein the general referring of
all things to the providence of God is plainly expressed, or is signified by
a Synecdoche (which figure of speech we use when we signify the whole by a
part, or a part by the whole) or by the comparing of lesser things with
greater, or greater with lesser. Ezec. 12.25. The thing that I shall speak
shall come to pass. And God speaks, not only those things which he
reueileth unto us, but whatsoever also from everlasting he has decreed and
purposed with himself.

Infinite almost are the testimonies, which demonstrate that the providence of
God extends it self to all things: but these now shall easily suffice. For
by these verily it is apparent, that even every the least and smallest thing,
both good, and bad, is ruled by the providence of God: yet in such wise, as
that those things which partake of the nature of good, are not only done
according to the providence of god (that is, god not willing, neither
commanding, nor working them, but permitting by his providence, and directing
them unto the ends by him appointed) but also by the providence of God, as the
cause: but those things which are evil, are done according to the providence,
but not by the providence of God, that is, God willing, commanding, and
woorking them. For all good things are done, God willing them: evil, God
permitting them. And God will those things, by his will, which he likes, works
and commands. He permits those things which he neither likes, nor
commands, nor works nor furthereth: but which he condemns, forbids,
and punishes. That appears especially out of those testimonies, which were
alleged concerning reasonable creatures: For they show that all reasonable
creatures, both Angels, and men, and those both good, and bad, are ruled and
governed by Gods providence: but so, that whatsoever good is in them, that is
from god himself, who works this in reasonable creatures; but whatsoever ill
is in the^, is of themselves, being by nature evil, not of God who is most
good. Al good things god woorketh himself in reasonable creatures, but evil
things he permits in respect of other things that are good.

The reasons, whereby is demonstrated, The reasons and arguments to prove all
things to be done by the providence of God.

1 Gods omnipotency.

2 His wisdom.


that the providence of God extends it self to all things, are almost the
same with those, which prove that there is a providence of god.

1 That which is not done if God no way will it, must needs be done god some
way willing it. This is true by the rule of contradiction, where one of the two
contradictory propositions must always be true. But nothing can be done, god
no way willing it, that is, god simply not willing it because he is
omnipotent. And it is proper to omnipotency, for one to be able to do what he
will, and to forbid, what he will not have done. Therefore all things are done,
god some way willing them, to wit, either simply, as good things; or after a
sort, as evil things. For if he would and could not, he should not be
omnipotent. Now concerning those, which after a sort he will, after a sort he
will not, he decreeeth of that part, whereof he has waightier and better
reasons, whether known or unknown unto us.

2 It is proper to him that is most wise, not to suffer any thing which is in
his power, to be done without his will and counsel. And how much the wiser he
is, so much the more largely does his government extend it self. But god is a
governor infinitely wise, and has in his power al things. Therefore he
suffers nothing to come to pass without his certain and determined counsel.
And further, if the number of things were infinite, yet were god sufficient for
the administering of them: seeing he is of an exceeding and infinite wisdom.
And therefore he easily takes care of all things that are created; which
although they be many, yet in themselves, and most of all in respect of Gods
infinite wisdom, they are finite, and limited.

3 God will the ende^ of all things.
3 He that will the end or consequent of any thing or event; he will also the
means or antecedent, or that event, whereby the end is come unto. But God will
the ends of all things and events, whether good or bad. Therefore he will
universally all things which are, and are done, if not simply, yet in some
sort and respect. For whatsoever things are, or are done in the woorlde,
either they are the end and consequent, or the antecedent and mean whereby to
attain unto the end. The Mayor is manifest. The Minor is thus proved. God
will all that is good. But of all things there are some ends most good;
otherwise god by reason of his immense goodness would not permit them to be
done. Prou. 16 4. The Lord has made althings for his own sake, yea even the
wicked for the day of evil. Therefore the ends of al events are wrought by
the will of God.

4 God is the first cause.
4 The first cause is that which does not depend of any other, but whereof all
second causes, and their actions and motions depend and are governed. But God
is the first cause of al things. Therefore God and his counsels and works do
not depend or are governed of any other, but all other things of him, neither
according to others actions does he determine of his, but himself decrees
all things so to be done: that is, God has not therefore determined or
decreed any thing, for that he foresawe that second causes would so do; but
therefore all things shall be so, for that they are so determined or decreed
by him. Now to depend of another is, upon consideration first had of another
action, whether present, or past, or to come, to be moved thereby to determine
and do a thing.

5 The unchangeableness of Gods foreknowledge.
5 What God vnchangeablie foreknoweth he also vnchangeablie will from
everlasting. But God from everlasting foreknoweth vnchangeablie all things,
even those which are most mutable. Therefore he would from everlasting
vnchangeablie all things, either simply, or in some sort and respect. The
Minor is manifest. The Mayor is thus proved. All certain and unchangeable
prescience or foreknowledge, depends on an unchangeable cause: But there is
no unchangeable cause besides the will of God. For all second causes are in
themselves changeable, and might have not been. Therefore Gods will alone is
the cause of his unchangeable prescience, that is, GOD therefore foreknoweth
that a thing shall be so, because he will and decrees it to be done so,
either simply, or in some respect. For if he simply would it not, it could
never have been done and foreknowen of him. The sum is. Gods will and decree
is the cause both of the event and of the foreseeing or foreknowing of it: but
the foreseeing, is not the cause of the effect. Moreover prescience in GOD is
not severed from his will and woorking, as in creatures: but they are both but
one thing differing in consideration only. Number. 23.19. Has he said it, and
shall he not do it? And has he spoken, and shall he not accomplish it?

6 All natural good things are from GOD as the first cause. But all the
faculties, motions, actions of all things, 6 God the cause of all good, as it
is good.
as they are merely such, are natural good things, that is, things made and
ordained of GOD in nature. Therefore all are from GOD their author and
effectour, and are wrought by GODS providence. Acts. 17.28. In him we live,
and move, and have our being.

A Confutation of certain Sophismes or cauils, which are wont to be objected
against the providence of god moving and governing al and every particular,
whether good or bad, great or small, most justly.

The first, of confusions and things disordered in nature.
No confused or disordered things have their being, Confusions, as they are
such, are not from God as efficient of them, but directing them.
or are governed by the providence of god. 1. Cor. 14.33. But whatsoever
things are under the son, are confused, because all are vanity. Eccles. 1.14.
Therefore they are not ruled and governed by divine providence. Answer. The
Mayor proposition consisting of doubtful terms is to be distinguished. No
confuse things, true, if they be simply confuse, are governed by the
providence of god, that is, the providence of god working them, as they are
confuse. All things that are under the Son, that is, humane things, are
confuse and vain: true, but not simply, so that no order and good at all
lies hid and is found in that confusion. For if they were such, god for his
great goodness and justice, would not permit them to be done. Wherefore if by
the confusions of the would they collect and conclude that there is no
providence, there is more avouched in the conclusion, than was contained in the
premises; or they proceed from that which is in some respect so, to conclude
the same to be simply and absolutely so. For whereas many things in the world
are well ordered, as the celestial motions, the preservation of the kinds of
al things, commonweals, the punishments of wicked men, and many more: it may
not by this argument be concluded of al things, but of those only which are
done against the order by god appointed, that they are not governed by his
providence: but those things, in which a most manifest order does appear,
shall be an evident testimony of gods wisdom and effectual working But if then
they conclude that those disordered things are not ruled and governed of god;
so also shall there be more said in the conclusion, than was in the premises.
For it follows thereof, not that the things confuse and troubled, but that the
confusion or troubling of order, which is in the^, is not of god: As the wicked
were created of god: albeit their wickedness proceeded not from god but from
themselves. For every thing is not necessarily avouched of the concrete, or
subject so qualified, which is affirmed of the abstract or quality it self.
Wherefore if it be again replied, putting this Mayor, That disordered things
are not, or are not ruled of god, and therefore many things in the world not
done by his providence; eue^ thus too is the Mayor diversely faulty For first
that it be granted, that things disordered, if they be simply such, are not, or
are not ruled of god: yet cannot this be granted of them, if both confusion and
order in diverse respects be found in the^. There is order even in disordered
^hinges.
Now neither devils nor men commit any thing so repugnant to the order settled
by god, wherein, albeit in respect of their corrupt will it be most disordered,
there is not yet the most wise order of divine justice, power and goodness
lieng hid under that confusion, which themselves have caused: and for the
most part also the same does manifestly appear, the event, or god himself by
his word declaring it. Great confusion was there in the Jews detestable
murder, when they crucified the son of god: and yet notwithstanding the hand
and counsel of god has defined and determined nothing with more woonderful
order and wisdom than the death of the son for our sins. Al humane
things therefore are vain, not in respect of the will and decree, or
providence of god: for if we respect it, they are most well ordered, even such
as in men's judgments seem most disordered: but in respect of men, as
concerning both the fault, and the punishment. For first, all our things, GOD
not illightening, correcting, and directing us by his spirit, are evil, and
displeasing GOD. Secondly, they obtain not their expected and hoped euentes,
or those at leastwise not firm and stable, neither such, wherein sound and
solid felicity and blessedness does consist. Thirdly, That wisdom also,
which is the knoweledge of Gods will, and a true desire to be obedient
thereunto, in this life is joined with manifold errors, sins, and
calamities. Therefore humane matters are not ruled of GOD, that is, woorking
them, as they are confuse and sins: but are ruled of GOD permitting sins,
even as they are sins, and directing them to most good ends; but woorcking
all that is good, even those things which lie did in things disordered and
confuse. Moreover, the evils which just men suffer, and the good which the
unjust enioie, seem disordered to men's judgments, but according to the
judgment of GOD there is a most just order in them, for those causes which are
uttered in the word of GOD. And those things are to be removed from the will
and woorking of GOD, not which in our judgment, but which in the judgment of
God are disordered. The wicked are not ruled of God so manifestly as the godly;
and they withstand gods re^e^^ will but not his secret will.


2 Objection. They who are against God, are not ruled and guided by GOD. Devils
and wicked men are against GOD. Therefore they are not ruled and guided by his
divine providence. Answer. We grant the whole reason in some respect,
namely, that Devils and wicked men are not ruled of God by his special
providence, that is, by his holy spiritual lightning their minds with the
knowledge of Gods will, and inclining their hearts, not to respect and execute in
their actions their own lusts, but the known will of God, and so themselves
to woork well together with God, who by them woorketh well. But they are ruled
and governed of GOD by his general and secret providence or government, so
that they cannot do any thing, but what GOD has decreed to do by them, and
are the instruments of his punishments and benefits, though themselves think
and respect some other thing. Dan. 4.32. According to his will he woorketh in
the army of heaven, and in the inhabitants of the earth, and none can stay
his hard, nor say unto him, what do thou? Prouer. 21.1. The Kings heart is in
the hand of the Lord, us the rivers of waters: he turns it whithersoeuer
it pleases him. Genesis 45. God moves, enclineth, and rules the wicked will of
Joseph's brethren in such wise, as not to kill Joseph, but freely to sell him to
the Ismalites, that by this means he might transport the family of Jacob into
Egypt, nourish, and multiply them, and being oppressed by long servitude and
boundage, gloriously deliver them. Isai. 10. Assure, though a wicked and proud
King, yet is called the rod of the Lords wrath. Likewise, the Assyrians are
called, the sanctified of GOD, his hired soldiers, doing service to God:
whom yet their own ambition, cruelty, and covetousness carried, to take
weapons against the Jews. Likewise every where in Scripture God is said to
infatuate, and besot the wicked, to strike them with a giddines, to mad and
amase them, to effeminate them, to fill them full of fear, so that their spirits
fail them at the ^oice of the falling of a leaf: to rule the swords of the
wicked with his hand: to obdurate and harden their hearts. By those and the
like it is manifest, that even the deliberations, counsels, actions of the
wicked, are subject to his divine providence and government, and that it is
not an idle permission in them, but an effectual woorking of God, inclining
their wills, and guiding their actions at his good pleasure.

The second sophisme, of the cause of sin.
1 Objection. All the actions and motions of all creatures are done by the will
and working of God. Many actions (as the selling of Joseph, the Assyrians
warring against the Jews) are sins. Therefore sins are done by the will and
working of god. Actions are not sins in them selves, but by an accident.
Answer. There is a fallacy of the accident in the Minor proposition. Actions
are sins, not in themselves, and as they are actions, but by an accident, by
reason of the corruption of the instrument, in those actions, which God
woorketh most justly by him, he not respecting this, as to obey therein the
known will of God. This corruption or defect of the creature, and the action,
which god works by the creature concur together by an accident. For neither
is essential to other, neither the cause of other, but each is to other
accidentary. For both god could have wrought that selfsame punishment, which
he inflicted justly on the Jews by the Assyrian sinning, by an instrument not
sinning: and the Assyrian, if it had pleased god to correct his will, might have
been notwithstanding the instrument of gods wrath, and yet good, how great
soever severity he had exercised toward the Jews: As when GOD by his good
Angel slaieth the wicked host of the Assyrians. Sin therefore, which is in
the actions of the creature, is not done by the will and woorking of GOD, but
by an accident, to wit, as God will and woorketh those actions, which are
sins by the fault of the creature. The sum of all comes to this: The most
good action of GOD exercised by an evil and corrupt instrument, is no
otherwise the sin of the bad instrument, than water which comes pure out of
the fountain, is made impure, running thorough unclean places: or the best
wine coming out of a good vessel waxes sour and eger, being put in a
corrupt vessel, according to that of Horace, Lib. 1 Epist. 2. Unless the
vessel be pure, whatsoever thou powrest in, sowreth: or further than the good
work of a good judge is the evil work of an evil servant or minister: or
the riding of a good horse man is the haulting of a lame horse. In all these is
a Paralogisme or fallacy of the accident, that is, there is a proceeding from
the essence or thing it self, to that, which is but an accident to the thing,
and does but by an accident concur with it: after this manner. The going of
a lame horse is a plain haulting. The horseman will and woorketh the going of
the lame horse. Therefore he will and woorketh the haulting. In like sort, the
Devil is created and sustained by God. The Devil is wicked. Therefore the
wickedness of the Devil is from God as the author and effector thereof. Both
which reasons are a like sophistical and false.

Many things in respect of the creatures are sins in them selves.
1 Reply. Those things which are in their own kind sins, or unto which the
definition of sin agrees, they are in themselves sins. Many actions are in
their own kind sins, as theft, lying, adultery, murder. Therefore they are
sins in themselves. Answer. It is a fallacy, reasoning from that which is in
some respect so, to that which is simply so. For the whole argument is granted
concerning actions prohibited by God, in respect of the creature, as they are
committed by them against the will of God, known unto them either by general
or special commandment; or as they are not done to that end principally, as
thereby to do and execute the known will of God. The reason thereof is
certain, and express in the Scriptures; because the will of God, reueiled in
his word, is the only and surest rule of goodness and rightnesse in the
creatures. Wherefore whose motions and actions accord with the will of god, they
are in themselves good and pleasing to God; but those actions which disagree
from his will, are in themselves sins, which God abhors and punishes.
Romans 14.23. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin, that is, whatsoever rests
not upon the certain commandment of God, neither is done to that end, as
thereby to obey the known will of God. No action evil in it self, in respect
of God.
But the argument on the other side is false, if we respect the will of god
moving and woorking all the motions and actions of all creatures. The reason
is; for that God alone by his own nature can will, appoint or do nothing that
is unjust, whether he work by the good, or by the wicked: Because seeing he is
most good, his will only is the rule of justice: and seeing be owes nothing
to any man, he cannot to any man be injurious. Wherefore to spoil another,
against the law and commandment of God, is sin in it self and theft. But
god commanding, Exo. 11.2. by an especial commandment the Israelits, to spoil
the Egyptians, it was not theft, but a work good in it self, both in respect
of God, by this means punishing the injustice of the Egyptians: as also of
the Israelits doing to this end, that they might obey therein the special will
and commandment of god, which if they had done without this commandment, they
had committed their.

2 Reply. He that will and woorketh an action, which is in it self sin, will
and woorketh sins: God will those actions, God will those thing, which are
sins in themselves in respect of man's will, but not in respect of his will
which in themselves are horrible sins, as are the heinous offenses of Absalon,
2. Sam. 12. The lying of the Prophets, 1. Kings. 22.23. The cruelty of the
Assyrians making waste of Jury, Isay. 10. Therefore God will and works
sin. Answer. The Mayor is true of one who works an action, which is
sin, and disagreeth from the law of God in respect of his will who works
it, and not of others: But the actions of the Assyrians, and of others sinning,
which God effectually would, were sins not in respect of the will of god, but of
the will of the men themselves sinning: For though god would the same thing,
yet would he it not in the same sort that they. A rule to be observed of good
and evil causes of one and the same effect.
But that this answer, as also the former, may be the better understood, and
may be with greater certainty opposed against the like sophismes, which humane
reason in great number frowardly wresteth against gods providence, this
general rule is to be observed, the truth whereof is manifest, and the use
great in Philosophy both Natural, and Moral, as also in Divinity. One and
the same work, or action, or effect in subject or matter, is in
consideration, manner, and form made most diverse, good and bad, according to
the diversity of the causes both efficient, and final. For in consideration
and respect of a good cause, it is good: and in respect of a bad cause, bad:
and a good cause is in it self a cause of good, by an accident a cause of an
evil and bad effect or of vice, which is inherent and remaining in the effect,
by reason of a bad and vicious cause, concurring in the producing of that
effect: and contrary: a bad and evil cause is in it self a cause of evil but
by an accident, of good, which good is in the effect, by reason of a good cause
concurring therewith to the producing of that effect. Now then, whatsoever God
does, cannot be but most good, and most just: seeing both himself is most
good, and has no scope or ends of his counsels and works, but such as are most
good, always agreeing with his nature and law, namely his glory, and the
safety and salvation of his chosen. But the creatures action is then good, when
both themselves are good, and have a good end proposed unto them of their
action: which end they have, when as they execute the commandment of God
either general or special, being moved by the cogitation of this
commandment, whether they have or have not any knowledge of the counsel and
purpose of God, why he commands this or that thing to be done. And the
action of creatures is evil, when both themselves are evil, as also when being
forsaken and not corrected by God, they do a thing without his commandment, or
not to that end, as thereby to obey him. Wherefore that work, the working and
doing whereof is ascribed by the Scripture both to God and to a corrupt and
evil creature, must needs be good in respect of God, and evil in respect of
the creature: neither what is evil in that work, may be attributed to God,
neither what is good, unto the corrupt creature, but by an accident. So the
afflicting or wasting of the Jews was in subject and matter one and the same
work, which both God would, ordained, and wrought, and the Assyrians: yet in
consideration and respect it was not the same, but most diverse. For in respect
of God, purposing by this means to punish the sins of the Jews, it was the
proper and most holy work of God: in respect of the Assyrians, who were both
wicked, cruel, ravenous, and bent not upon the will of God, which they were
ignorant of, but on the fulfilling of their own rapacity and hatred, against
the Law of God, it was wicked robbery, the proper work of the Assyrians (as
it is expressly showed, Jsay. 10.7. etc.) which God neither would, nor
intended, nor wrought in the Assyrians. Wherefore neither the proper work of
the Assyrians can be attributed to God, nor the proper work of God unto the
Assyrians, but by an accident, because namely in one and the same loss and
waste, which God brought upon the Jews by the Assyrians, the unjust work of
the Assyrians did, by an accident, concur with the most just work of God. Even
as a judge is not therefore made a thief, nor a thief made a judge, because a
just judge puts to death a robber, by an evil executioner and a thief; but
one and the same slaughter is a just punishment, in respect of the judge, and
murder in respect of the executioner being a thief. So a Captain lawfully
waging war, and laying waste the country of his enemies, does well: but the
wicked soldiers, who fulfill therein and follow their own lusts, sin. So
God afflicting Job thereby to try him, does justly: Satan and the Chaldeans,
spoiling and vexing him for to fulfill their own lusts, and to destroy him, do
wickedly. Wherefore it is a most true rule: The end makes the kind of action
either the same or diverse.

3 Reply. That which is done, God simply not willing it, God does not will or
work sin it self, but only permits it.
is done, God willing it. But sin, is it is sin, can not be done, god
simply not willing it: Because God is omnipotent. Therefore sin must needs
be done, God willing it. And so it follows, that not only evils of pain and
punishment, but evils of crime and offense also are done by the providence of
God. Answer. The consequence of this argument is to be denied: because the
Mayor has not a sufficient enumeration: for this member is wanting, namely,
God permitting it. For that which is not done, God not willing it, may be
done, God either willing it, or permitting it. Or we may answer, that the
Mayor has an ambiguity and doubtful meaning in it. For, God to will a thing,
is taken sometimes, as for him to approve and work it: sometimes, for his
permitting, or not hindering a thing from being done. This, to permit, is in
some sort to will, as that he will not inhibit it, although he dislike and
punish it. Sin then is said to be done, GOD willing it, not as if he does
intend, like, and work sin, as it is sin, but because he does permit it:
that is, he by his just judgment suffers sin, which rises from the
corruption of his instruments, to concur in the action, which he exercises
by vicious and corrupt creatures, with his holy woork, while he indeed moves
and bends them by obiectes whither himself will, but does not correct them
by his spirit, that so with God working well, they also may work well, that
is, according to the knowledge of his divine will, and with purpose of being
obedient thereunto.

4 Reply The privation or bereauing of the knowledge of gods will, and of
rightnesse, is from god, Not to bereave but to be bereaved of Gods knowledge is
sin.
as worker and effect or thereof. This privation is sin. Therefore sin is
from god as efficient thereof. Answer. There are four terms in this
Syllogism. For privation in the Mayor is taken actiuely, to deprive, bereave,
forsake, to withdraw the grace of his spirit, not to keep the creature in
that goodness, wherein he was created, nor to restore him to it, being lost.
This work of GOD is most just, nothing repugnaunt to his nature and Law:
either because it is the most just punishment of sin, or because God owes
nothing to any creature, and therefore cannot be injurious to any or an
accepter of persons, whatsoever he does determine of his creatures. In the
Minor privation is taken passiuely, and signifies as much as to want, or the
want of rightnesse, which ought by the right of their creation to be in
reasonable creatures. This want, because it is received and is in the
creatures, they themselves willing and procuring it, against the law of god,
it is sin in them, and is not wrought by god, but, God not continually ruling
these reasonable creatures by his holy spirit, it is in them voluntarily
without god either furthering or enforcing it.

To rule sins, is not to work them.
2 Objection. When a creature is said to be ruled of God, it is meant that his
actions are from God, and are directed to the glory of God, and the safety of
his chosen. But the creatures, even when they sin, are ruled of God.
Therefore sins are wrought by god. Answer. The conclusion pulls in more,
than was in the premises. For this only follows of them: therefore the actions
also of sinners, as they are actions, that is, as they are not sins, but
motions wrought by god, are from god, and are ruled of him: for he will the
action, but the prauity and naughtines of the action, which is from men, he will
not. Moreover, God through his great goodness rules and guides sins also, as
they are sins, yet not by woorking them, but by permitting them, and destining
and directing them to certain ends, and those most good,

3 Objection. Of those things which are done by Gods providence, God himself
is author and efficient. But all evils, even of crim^^ded offense are done by
the providence of God. Therefore God (...) author of all that is evil.
Answer. The Mayor is to be distinguished: Those things which are done by
Gods providence, that is, Gods providence working them, or are done a^
proceeding from it, God works them. But al evil things are done by gods
providence; yet not all alike. Evils of punishment, because they have in them a
respect and consideration of good, are done as proceeding from the providence
of god: for god has from everlasting decreed them, and in time, order, and
manner determined by him, woorketh them. Evils of crime or sins, as they are
such, are not done as from or of the providence of God, but according unto the
providence of god, that is, they are done by the providence of god, not working
them, but permitting, determining and directing them to most good ends, and
most agreeable to his nature and Law. For god did not decree or will work
them, but he decreed to permit them, and not to hinder them from being done by
others, and from concurring in actions with the holy and sacred word of god.

The third sophisme, of contradictory wills.
HE that will that to be done, which he forbids, has in him
contradictorie and flat repugnant wills: But God will that to be done which he
forbids in his law, as robberies, spoils, rapes, murders. Therefore he
has contradictorie wills. Answer The Mayor is to be distinguished. He
contradicts, or is contrary to himself, who will and will not the same
work, that is, in the same manner and respect: GOD will and will not the
same, but in a diverse manner and respect. He will and woorketh it, as it is a
motion and action, and also a punishment of sin, or any thing agreeing with
his Law and justice, as a trial, or exercise, or martyrdom of the godly. He
will not, neither allows, nor commands, nor woorketh any thing, as, by
reason of the corruption of the instrument, by which he exercises his woork,
it swarueth from his divine justice and Law. Now in a diverse manner and
respect to will, and not to will the same, and yet to determine on that part,
whereof the reasons seem strongest, is not in us, much less in GOD absurd or
repugnaunt. The waste of Israel, which the Assyrians wrought, GOD will as a
punishment, which his justice of right did require: he will not, but
condemns, and afterward most grieuouslie reuengeth in the Assyrians, in as
much as it was not the execution of Gods wrath, God will the obedience of all,
as concerning his commanding it unto all, but not as concerning his secret
working of it in whom he will.
but a fulfilling of their own wrath and lusts against his Law. So God will,
that all should obeie his word and be saved. 1. In respect of his love
toward al. for he is delited with the death of no man. 2. In respect of his
commandment, and inuiting of al to repentance. But he will not that al be
converted and so be saved, in respect of his working or efficacy: that is, he
commands al men indeed to repent and believe, and promises life to all that
believe; but he does not any where promise that he will work by his spirit in all, that they should believe and be saved. For if he would this, it must needs
be that either all should obey Gods commandments and be saved, or that God
should not be omnipotent Reply. If god will one thing in signification or by his
commandment, and will effectually or by his efficacy and working another,
God no dissembler.
he shall be changeable and dissembler. Answer. This does not thereof follow.
For even when he will effectually those actions which are sins, he does
indeed detest them, as they are sins: and when he commands obedience, he
does in earnest exact it of al. But this will of signification, or commandment
of God, does not testify, or declare, what he will work in all: but what
agrees with his mind, what he allows, what he requires, and what every one
owes unto him. God therefore dissembleth not, neither is contrary to himself:
because he does not in all places nor at al times manifest his will unto his
creatures: and his will of punishing is not disagreeing from his Law.

The fourth Sophisme, of Contingency and liberty or freeness.
Gods government does not take away, but establish the liberty of the
creatures will.
THat which is done by the unchangeable decree of god, is not done
contingentlie and freely. But al things are done by the unchangeable decree,
or counsel, or providence of god. Therefore nothing is done contingently and
freely. Answer. The Mayor is either particular, and so concludes nothing: or
being generally understood is most false. For an effect which is the some in
subject and matter, is chaungeable and unchangeable, necessary and contingent,
in respect not of the same cause, but of diverse, of which together it is
produced and does depend, and whereof some are chaungeable, some unchangeable.
In respect therefore of second and nearest causes, some effects are necessary
and certain, which are produced out of causes always woorking after one sort,
some are changeable. which have a changeable cause, that is, such as is not
always woorking after one sort, and producing the same effects. In respect of
the first cause, namely the decree of god, which is unchangeable, all effects
are unchangeable and most certain, even those, which in respect of second
causes, are most uncertain. As, that the bones of Christ should not be broken,
it was a thing contingent in respect both of the bones, which in their own
nature might as well have been broken, as not broken, as also of the
soldiers, who as concerning the nature of their will, might have chosen to do
either; but in respect of the decree of god it was necessary: for by his decree
were the wills of the soldiers so ruled, that they could not then neither
would choose the contrary. Wherefore the unchangeableness of the decree of God,
which is a necessity by supposition, or conditional, does not take away either
the contingency of euentes, or the liberty and freeness of a created will,
but rather maintains and confirms it. For GOD accomplisheth his decrees by
reasonable creatures, according to the condition of their nature, when as by
obiectes represented and showed to their understanding he enclineth and
bends their will, that it should with free and inward motion choose or
refuse that, which seemed good from everlasting to GOD, and was decreed of him.
For if, when God works well by evil creatures, there is not taken away in
them, through the decree or providence of God, and his good woorking, that
which is accidental to them, that is, corruption: how much less shall that
be taken away which is essential unto them, even to work freely? So the
blessed Angels are chaungeably good, as concerning their nature: but they are
vnchaungeably and necessarily only good, according to Gods decree and
directing of them, and yet freely, so that how much the more effectually they
are moved by the spirit of God, so much the more freely, and with greater
alacrity and propension they will and do only that which is good. Judas,
the Jews, Herod, Pilate, the soldiers delivered and crucified Christ freely
and with great willingness and pleasure, and yet they did whatsoever the hand
and counsel of god had determined before to be done. Acts. 4 28.

2. Ob. That which is done by the unchangeable decree of god, is not don
co^tingently, but necessarily: Al things are don by the unchangeable decree of
god: nothing therefore is done contingently, neither by fortune or chance, but
al necessarily: which is the Stoics doctrine of fate or destiny. Here before we
answer to this objection, we must know the signification of the words, and the
difference between the opinion of the Stoics and Christians.

NECESSARY is that which cannot be otherwise, than it is. CONTINGENT is that,
The difference between necessary and contingent things.
which is indeed, or is done, but might notwithstanding not have bin, or have
bin done otherwise. Necessity therefore and contingency is the order which is
between the cause and the effect, unchangeable or changeable. And because the
effects follow of their causes vnchaungeably, either in respect of the nature
it self of the causes, or in respect of some external cause, which designeth
and appoints another cause to a certain effect: and because also the effects
themselves cannot be more unchangeable, than are their causes: therefore there
is said to be a double necessity; The difference between absolute necessity,
and necessity of consequence or supposition.
One absolute or simple, which is of them, whose opposites or contraries are
simply impossible, in respect of the nature of the cause or subject whereof it
is affirmed. As are the essential and personal properties of god, to wit, god
is, god lives, god is just wise, etc. God is the eternal father, son, and holy
ghost. The other is necessity of consequence or by supposition, which is the
immutability and unchangeableness of those effects which follow of causes: which
causes being supposed or put, the effect must necessarily follow, but the
causes notwithstanding themselves might either not have been, or might have
been changed. So are those things necessary which god has decreed that they
should be don, in respect of the unchangeableness of his decree, which decree yet
god most freely made, that is, he might from everlasting either not have
decreed it at al, or have decreed it otherwise, according to those words, Mat.
26.53. Think thou that I cannot now pray to my father, and he will give me mo
tha^ twelve legions of Angels? How then should the scriptures be fulfilled?
Likewse those things are said to be necessary, which are done indeed by such
second causes, as are so made of god, that by their own nature they cannot do
otherwise than they do, but yet they may be by God himself either taken
away, or hindered, or altered and changed. As the Sun and the shadow going
forward, in consequence or order of nature, with the Sun, and yet consisting
and standing still in that battle of Joshua, and returning backwards in the
days of Ezechias: the fire burning bodies within the reach thereof which are
capeable of burning, and yet not burning the three children in the furnace of
Babylon: or those things which are indeed in their own nature apt to produce a
contrary or diverse thing, or to forbear producing of their effect: and yet
notwithstanding cannot do otherwise, because they are so moved by god, or by
other causes, which although they be not changed, yet might have bin changed,
or when they work so, cannot withal not work, or work otherwise, because two
contradictories cannot be both at one time true.

FORTUNE and CHANCE are sometimes taken for the events themselves or effects
which follow causes that are causes but by an accident, by reason of such
causes, Fortune and chance.
as are causes by and in themselves, but not known to us: as when we say,
good or evil fortune, happy or unhappy chance: sometimes they signify the
causes of such events, either the manifest causes, which are causes but by an
accident (as when any thing is said to be don by fortune or by chance) or the
hidden and unknown causes, which are causes by and in themselves: As it is
said in the Poet: Omnipotent fortune and fate inevitable. And they are wont to
call that fortune which is a cause by an accident in voluntary agents, whose
actions have some event, that seldom happens, besides their appointment: As
he that digging with purpose to build, finds treasure. Chance they call an
accidental cause in natural agentes, whose motions have effects neither
proper to them, neither always happening, and that without any manifest cause
directing it, as if a tile falling from a house kill one that passes by.

By the name of FATE or destiny, Fate or destiny. The difference between the
stoickes and the churches doctrine concerning Gods providence.
sometimes is understood the decree and providence of God: As that of the Poet,
Leave off to hope that the fates of the gods are moved with entreaty. But the
Stoickes by this word understood the immutable connection and knitting of all
causes and effects, depending of the nature of the causes themselves, so that
neither the second causes are able to work otherwise than they work,
neither the first cause can work otherwise, than do the second, and
therefore all effects of all causes are absolutely necessary. This opinion
of the Stoickes, because it spoileth God of his liberty and omnipotency, and
abolisheth the order and manner of woorking in second causes disposed by Gods
divine wisdom, not only founder Philosophy, but the Church also rejects
and contemns, and does openly profess her dissenting from the Stoickes.
First, because the Stoics tie god to second causes, as if it should be
necessary for him so to work by them, as their nature does bear and suffer.
But the Church teaches, that God works not according to the rule or lore of
second causes, but second causes according to the prescript of GOD as being
the chief and most free gouerner and lord, and therefore are subject and tied
to his will and pleasure. Secondly, the Stoikes were of opinion, that neither
God nor second causes can do any thing of their own nature otherwise than
they do. The church affirms, that not only second causes are made and
ordained by god, some to bring forth certain and definit effects, some
variable and contrary; but God himself also could from everlasting either not
have decreed, or have decreed and wrought otherwise, either by second causes,
or without them, and by them either changeable in their own nature, or
unchangeable, al things whose contrary are not repugnant to his nature: and
that he has so decreed them, and does so work them, not because he could not
otherwise, but because it so pleased him, as it is said Ps. 115.3. Our god is
in heaven, he does whatsoever he will. And Luke 1.37. With god shall nothing be
impossible: that is, which is not against his nature, or whereby his nature is
not overthrown, as it is said 2. Tim. 2.

Out of this then which has been spoken we answer unto the argument which
was, That which is done by the unchangeable decree of God, is not done
contingently but necessarily. All things are done by the unchangeable decree
of God; nothing therefore is done contingently, neither by fortune, or
chance, but all necessarily. First we say, there is more in the conclusion
than in the premises, when the opinion of the Stoics is objected to the
Church. For albeit the church confesses al events, in respect of gods
providence, to be necessary; yet this necessity is not a Stoical fate and
destiny, because the church defends against the Stoikes both liberty in god
governing things at his pleasure, and a cha^geablenes in second causes, and
shows out of gods word that god could both now do, and from everlasting
have decreed many things, which neither he does, nor has decreed. And
therefore the church also has absteined from the name of fate, Necessity of
consequence or supposition does not take away contingency.
least any should suspect her to maintain with the Stoics an absolute
necessity of al things. Secondly if removing stoicisme, yet notwithstanding the
necessity of al things and the abolishing of co^tingency, fortune, and chance,
be objected: we make answer to the Mayor by distinguishing the words, For
those things that are done by the providence and decree of god, are done indeed
necessarily, but by that necessity which is by supposition, or of consequence,
not by simple necessity or absolute. Wherefore it follows that all things
come to pass, not by simple and absolute necessity, but by that of supposition
or consequence. And necessity of consequence does not at al take away
contingency. The reason hereof is this: Because the same effect may have causes
whereof some may produce it by an order changeable, some by unchangeable order,
and therefore in respect of some it is contingent, and in respect of some,
necessary. For as the originals or causes of contingency in things are that
liberty which is in the will of god, and Angels, and men, and the mutable
nature of the matter of the elements, together with the readiness or
inclination thereof to diverse motions and forms: so the cause of absolute
necessity in God is the very unchangeable nature of god; but the cause of that
necessity which is only by consequent, is the divine providence or decree
coming between those things which are in their own nature mutable, and also
the nature of things created, which is framed and ordained of god to certain
effects, and yet subject to the most free will and government of god, either
according, or besides, or contrary to this order which himself has made. In
respect therefore of second causes, some things are necessary, which are done
by causes woorking always after one sort, as the motion of the son, the
burning of any matter put unto the fire, if it be capeable of burning: some
things are contingent, which have causes working contingently, that is, apt
and fit to produce or to forbear producing diverse and contrary effects: as
the blasts of winds, the local motions of living creatures, the actions of
men's wills. But in respect of the first cause: that is, of the will of god, all
things which are, or are done in Gods external and outward woorks, are
partly necessary, partly co^tingent: necessary, as eue^ those things which have
second causes most chaungeable: as that the bones of Christ on the cross were
not broken by the soldiers, by reason of the unchangeableness of the decree and
providence of God: contingent, (by reason of the liberty of his eternal and
unchangeable decree, and the execution thereof) even those things which, as
concerning their own nature, have second causes most unchangeable, as the
motion of the sun and shadows.

What contingencie is denied.
If therefore by contingency they mean the changeableness of effects, which
they have by the nature of second causes, or by the power and liberty of God;
it does not follow that things are not contingent, because of that necessity
which they have by the providence of God. For this does not take away, but
preserves rather the nature, order, and manner of woorking in second causes
ordained by God. But if by contingency they mean the changeablenes of second
causes and effects, so floting and wavering, that they are not ruled and
governed by Gods providence, any such contingency the Scripture does not admit
or approve.

Whether the motions of a creature are contingent or necessary.
Hereby we also understand, when it is demanded concerning the motions and
effects of creatures, whether they are to be termed necessary or contingent,
that some verily are more rightly and properly called contingent than
necessary, though both contingent and necessary are wrought by divine
providence. For they are rather to be called such as they are of their own
nature and by the nature of their nearest causes, than as they are in respect
of Gods providence, which is a cause more removed, and farther off. And nothing
is more either certain or manifest, than that according to the nature of
second causes, some things should be changeable, some unchangeable: yet by
the power of God, though al things in the creatures may be changed, they are
made notwithstanding unchangeable, because of the certainty of his decree and
divine providence.

So likewise we answer. concerning fortune and chance. What fortune and
chance is denied.
For if by these names be understood such causes or events by accident, as have
no cause which is proper and by it self a cause, they ought to be far
abandoned from the church of Christ. But if we understand thereby a cause
which is by it self a cause and proper, though unknown to our senses and
reason, or such causes by accident which have notwithstanding some secret
proper cause adioined, nothing hinders (in respect of second causes, which
are causes by accide^t, and in respect of our judgment whereby we attain not
to the proper, and that which is by it self the cause of these events) that to
be, or to be a thing fortuning or don by chance, which in respect of gods
providence comes to pass by his most accurate and unchangeable counsel and
decree; according to those sayings, Matthew. 10.29. One sparowe shall not fall on
the ground without your father. And Pro. 16 33. The lot is cast into the lap,
etc.

The fifth Sophisme, of the mutility or unprofitableness of means.
THat which shall be vnchaungeably and necessarily, God is effectual in working
by means which himself has freely ordained.
by the will and providence of god; in vain to the furdering or hindering of
that are means applied, as the use of the ministry, the magistrate, laws,
exhortations, promises, threatenings, punishments, prayer, our study and
endeavors. But al things are done by the decree of god unchangeably, neither can
they which work by the providence of God, work otherwise than they do.
Therefore al those means are vain and fruitless. Ans. It is not necessary,
that, the first and principal cause being put, the second and instrume^tal
cause should be removed and taken away. In vain are second causes and means
applied, if god had determined to execute his decrees without means, neither
had commanded us to use them. But seeing god has decreed, by those means, in
some to work faith and conversion, some to bridle and keep under, and some to
leave excuselesse; and has for that cause commanded us in his word to use
the^; they are not in vain used and applied. Yea when there comes no profit
by these means, yet they profit to this that they leave the wicked without
excuse. As therefore the sun does not in vain daily rise and set, neither
are the fields in vain sowed, or watered with the rain, neither bodies in
vain with food refreshed, though God creates light and darcknesse, brings
forth the corn out of the earth, and is the life and length of our days: so
neither are men in vain taught, or study to conform their life unto doctrine,
though all available actions and euentes proceed not from any but from God.
For God from everlasting decreeed, as the ends, so the means also, and
prescribed them unto us, whereby it seemed good to him, to bring us unto them.
Wherefore we using those means do well, and obtain profitable and fruitful
euentes: but if we neglect them; either by our fault we deprive our selves or
others of those blessings offered by God; or if God even in this contempt of
his word have mercy of us or others, yet our conscience accuses us of open
and grievous sin. Wherefore we must use means, Why we must use means.
first, that we may obey God therein, who both has decreed ends, and ordained
means to those ends, and prescribed them unto us; neither tempt him, by
contemning these, to our own peril and danger. Secondly, that we may obtain
those blessings decreed for us, according to his promise, and that to our
salvation. Thirdly, that we may retain a good conscience in using the means,
although the expected event do not always follow, either in our selves, or
others.

The sixth Sophisme, of the merit of good and evil.
Whatsoever is necessary, does not merit rewards or punishments. But all
moral good and evil is done necessarily. Therefore neither the good
meriteth reward, nor the evil punishment. Answer. This argument is handled
by Aristotle in his Ethics, Lib. 3. Cap. 5. But the answer thereto is easy.
No good work of the creature meriteth reward.
First, the mayor is either particular, and so there is no consequence or
sequel; or being generally taken, is false, and that even in moral or civil
consideration, to wit, in respect of those things, which are necessary by
supposition, and yet are done freely, as, the actions of men. Secondly, we
grant the reason, in respect of the judgment of god, concerning good works.
For the creature cannot merit any thing, no not by his best works, of God:
Because both they are due; and are the effects of God in us. And therefore the
more good things God woorketh in us, so much the more he binds and endebteth
us to him. Wherefore in the godly, Eu^^ works merit punishment justly.
God crowns and rewards of his free bountifulness not their merits, but
his own gifts. But as touching evil works, we deny the reason: for they
merit punishment, and that most justly. For although men forsaken of God cannot
but sin: yet the necessity of sinning, both was purchased by their own
fault, as who freely and willingly departed from God, and remains in them
joined and accompanied with great desire and delight. Wherefore to this, that
they should merit punishment, their own will suffices, whereas especially the
punishment was before denounced. This solution or answer Aristotle himself
in the same fifth Chapter gives us, when as he shows that men are diseruedly
reprehended and punished for vices, either of mind or body, though they can
not avoid them or leave them: because themselves are the cause of their own
vices, and have purchased them unto themselves of their own accord and
voluntarily.

Lastly of all they wrest also certain places of Scripture, by false
interpretations, Certain places of scripture wrested against Gods providence.
against gods universal providence. As John 8.44. When the Devil speaks a
lie, then he speaks of his own: and Iam. 1. God tempts no man. Eccles.
15.20. He has commanded no man to do ungodly, as also other the like places,
which deny God to be the author of sin. But those places attribute unto the
wicked and remove from GOD the sins, as lies, and temptations to sin; but
the actions themselves of the wicked, as they are not sins, but operations
and motions serving for the exercising and manifesting of Gods goodness or
justice, the whole Scripture shows to be done by the will of God, and also,
as they are sins, by his just permission: As of satan deceiving the Prophets
of Achab: of the false Prophets by whom god tries and opens the hypocrisy
or constancy of men in true religion.

Acts 5. Satan filled the heart of Ananias. 2. Cor. 4. The god of this world
has blinded the hearts of unbelievers. In these and the like saiengs also is
discerned the work of the devil unjustly blinding men, to destroy them; and of
God, justly blinding them by the devil, to punish them. Act. 5.38. If this
counsel be of men, it will come to naught. And Isa. 30. Woe to the rebellious
children, that take counsel, but not of me. The counsels of men are said to be
not of God, but of themselves, in respect of the ends, which men, letting
pass the will of God revealed unto them, respect and attain not unto: but not
in respect of the ends which god does respect, and attaineth unto, as well by
the wicked, not knowing, or contemning his will, as by the godly: or, which is
in effect the same, the counsels of men are said to be of them, not of God, as
they are sins, that is, as they swerve from the known will of god, but not as
they are the execution of Gods either secret or known will.

1. Cor. 9. God does not take care for Oxen: Not principally, or not in such
sort as for men. For he gives also to beasts their meat. Those words the^,
Thou shall not mussel the mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn, was
therefore spoken especially, that God might thereby show, what he would have
by men unto men to be performed.

So the wicked are often said to be cast out of the sight of God. not that the
providence of God is not extended to them, but that he does not tender them
with his mercy and bounty, as he does the godly. For the godly also complain,
that they are neglected of god, when they are afflicted: not that god is not
present with them in affliction, but that humane sense and judgment suggesteth
this unto us. And God is said to set his face against the wicked, to cut them
off, Leu. 20.5.

3 Why the knowledge of this doctrine concerning Gods providence is necessary.
The causes why this doctrine is to be known. 1 The Glory of God.
THis doctrine is necessarily to be known, 1 For the glory of god. For he will
have us to ascribe unto him most great liberty, goodness, wisdom, power and
justice: and this he will have us to acknowledge and profes against the dreams
and dotings of Epicures, Manichees, and Stoics. But if the providence of god
in moving and guiding al things, even the least, both good and bad, be denied,
these also his properties are denied. And if these be denied, god is not
worshipped and magnified of us, but denied.

2 Our comfort and salvation.
2 For our own comfort and salvation, that by this means there may be stirred
up in us, First, patience in adversity: because all things come to pass by
the most wise, just, and most available counsel and will of our heavenly
father. And whatsoever either good or bad god sends us, in the^ we consider
the fatherly will of god toward us. Whatsoever comes unto us by the counsel
and will of god, and is profitable for us: that we ought to bear patiently:
but all evils come unto us by the counsel and will of god, and are profitable
for us: Therefore we ought to bear all evils patiently. Secondly, That we
may be thankful for benefits received of god. We ought to be thankeful,
because of whom we receive all good things both corporal and spiritual,
great and small, to him we ought to be thankful, and to serve and worship
him: But from god the author of all good things we have all things. Therefore
we ought to be thankful unto god, and to worship him. Now thankfulness
has two parts. 1. Truth, to acknowledge his benefit, and to be thankful
both in word and mind unto him. 2. Justice, to remunerate and make
recompense. Or, Thankfulness consists. 1. In acknowledging of the benefit.
2. Jn celebrating it. 3 In remunerating it. Thirdly, That we may conceive a
good hope and confidence of things to come, when as god by his providence
delivers us out of evils: He that has decreed vnchangeablie to save and is
able and will save believers, does never suffer the^ to perish. Hope here
signifies such a hope, as resolves al things so to be governed of god, as
that also they shall hence forward be profitable for our safety, and that he
will never suffer us to be pulled away or withdrawn from his love; nor will
ever so forsake us, that we perish: Because his will and power in preserving
and saving us is unchangeable and far above the forces of al his enemies.
Fourthly, the desire and study of godliness, prayer, and labor, because
although god indeed alone gives all good things, yet he gives them with this
rule and order, that they be desired, and expected from him, and sought by our
labor and study, which must be guided by his word.

By this it appears, All the grounds of religion shaken in pieces, if the
providence of God be denied.
that all the grounds and foundations of godliness or religion are pulled
asunder, if the providence of god be once denied, such as before it has been
described out of the scripture. For, 1. We shall never be patient in
adversity, except we know it to come from God our Father, unto us. 2 We shall
never be thankful for his benefits, except we acknowledge them to be
given unto us from above. 3 We shall never have certain hope of our future
delivery from all evil both of crime and pain to be perfected and
accomplished, except we resolve, that the will of God, of certainly saving
all the elect, is unchangeable. 4 We shall never with assured confidence crave
of God his blessings promised us, especially those which are necessary to
salvation, neither shall we strive thereto with right endeavors and agreeable
to Gods word, except we be assured that God both has from everlasting decreed
for us those blessings themselves, and has destined and appointed the means,
whereby they are received, and does also most certainly bestow those decreed
and promised blessings upon all to whom he gives those means and the
lawful use of them.

THE SECOND PART OF THE CREED, OF THE SON THE REDEEMER.
IN the Second part of the Apostolic Creed, is entreated of the Mediator.
The doctrine concerning the Mediator, consists of two parts: The first is,
The person of the Mediator: The second, Of his office. Of his person the two
former Articles speak. And in Jesus CHRIST his only son our Lord; which
was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Marie. His office is
summarily expounded in the same two articles: but particularly in those which
follow, even unto the third part of the Creed, wherein is entreated concerning
the holy Ghost.

There are two parts of his office: humiliation, or merit: and glorification,
or efficacy. Of his humiliation, whereby Christ has promerited and deserved
for us his benefices, namely, remission of sins, and reconciliation and
atonement with God, the holy Ghost, and life everlasting, these articles
speak; He suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, buried,
descended into hell. Of his glorification, in respect whereof Christ is
effectual and works forcibly in us, The great wisdom and order in
disposing the articles of our Creed.
in applying his merited blessings and benefits unto us by his spirit, these
articles speak; The third day he rose again from the dead; he ascended into
heaven; Sits on the right hand of God the father almighty; From thence
shall he come to judge the quick and the dead. Hence it appears with how
great wisdom the articles were written, and applied to the question of the
Mediator, For as it descends in order from the first to the last step and
degree of Christ's humiliation, which is signified by his descention into hell,
and is the feeling of the horrible judgment, and wrath of God against the
sins of mankind: so it ascends from the lesser glory, which began from
his resurrection, to the highest and greatest, which is betokened by his
sitting at the right hand of GOD the Father. The same order and the same
wisdom is seen in the first part of the Creed. It is also apparent in the
third part, which is as it were the fruit of the articles going before, wherein
are recited in most notable order the benefits which Christ promeriting by his
passion, applies to us by his spirit. For the benefits of Christ are
different from his office. His benefits are the things themselves, which
Christ has purchased for us and bestows on us, to wit, remission of sins,
or our reconciliation with God, the giving of his holy spirit, and life
everlasting. His office is, to promerit in those things for us by his
obedience, and to bestow them on us by his own power and efficacy.

Moreover the 29. 30. 31. Questions of the Catechism, which are concerning the
son, belong unto the common place of the office of the Mediator, in respect
of which office, the son of God our Mediator, bears the name both of Jesus,
and of Christ. And he is called Jesus, that is, Our Savior, 1. Why Christ i^
called Jesus.
Because he delivers and saves us from both evils, both of crime, and pain.
2. He does it alone. 3. He does it fully and perfectly. 4. He does it by his
merit and efficacy. What is to believe in Jesus.
Where fore to believe in Jesus, is certainly to think and be persuaded, 1.
That there is a Savior of mankind. 2 That the son of God borne of the
Virgin Marie is this Jesus the Savior, whom God will have us acknowledge,
hearken unto, and worship: Mat. 1.22. and 17.5. John. 5.23. and 37.3. 3. That
he alone does fully and perfectly deliver us from the evils of pain and
crime. 4. That he is not only the Savior of other the chosen of God, but
mine also. 5. And that he is not our Savior by his merit only, but by his
efficacy also and effectual working, while by the imputation of his
satisfaction he justifies us, and regenerateth us by his holy spirit, and
restores the righteousness or image of God in us, which restoring being here
begun, he finisheth and accomplisheth in the life to come.

OF THE NAME JESUS.
BUT, that it may the better be understood, that by the name, Jesus, the
office of the Son of GOD the Mediator is designed, these four questions are
to be considered.

1 What is signified by the word Jesus. 2 From what evils he says or
delivers. 3 How he saves. 4 Whom he saves.
1 WHAT THE NAME JESUS SIGNIFIES.
JESUS is an Hebrewe word, which signifies a Savior and author of safety.
This etymon or original signication of this word is assigned by the Angel,
Mat. 1.21. Luc. 1.31. The Son of God therefore is called JESUS in respect of
his office, by an excellency. For he alone saves from evils most perfectly,
whether we respect the number, or the degree. For he performs our delivery
from all evils, and that such as is not only begun, but also consummated.

1 The Son only is our ^^uiour.
1 Now that the Soon of GOD only is that Savior, is showed by the places of
Scripture following, John. 3.18. He that believes not in the Son is already
condemned. Acts, 4.12. There is not salvation in any other, for among men
there is given no other name under heaven, whereby we must be saved. Romans.
5.19. By the obedience of one shall many be made righteous. 1. Tim. 2.5.
There is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, which is the man
Christ Jesus. 1. John. 5.11. God has given unto us eternal life, and this life
is in his Son.

Objection. The Father and the holy GHOST also are Saviors: Therefore not the
Son alone. And so contrary; The Son alone is Savior: Therefore not the
Father, nor the holy GHOST. Answer, It is a fallacy affirming that to be
simply so, which is in some respect so. For first, The Son alone saves,
namely, as Mediator, by his merit and efficacy. The Father saves, as the
fountain of our delivery: Because he sends the Son into flesh, by him
to deliver us; but the Father himself is not sent. The holy Ghost saves; as
an immediate effectour or worker of regeneration sent from the Father by the
Son into the hearts of the chosen. Wherefore this e^^icacie or effectual
woorking it self, is common to all three persons: yet the order and manner of
woorking is different, and appropriate to each. But the Ransom, the Son
only has paid. Secondly, The Son is called the only Savior, in respect
of the creature, to whom he is opposed, and from whom he is discerned; that
is, from the work of salvation, not the Father and the holy Ghost, but the
creatures only are excluded. For no creature delivers from sin and death.
So 1. Corinthians. 2.16. it is said, The things of god knows no man, but the
Spirit of god: But it follows not hereof, that the Father and the Son
know not themselves. For the Spirit in that place is compared with the
creature, not with the Father and the Son. Reply. But there have been many
Saviors of the people, and some of them also called by the same name, as
Joshua. Therefore not CHRIST only is Savior. Answer. Other were termed
Saviors, but in a most diverse respect. First, Because they carried a type of
this JESUS as our true, only, and designed Savior by GOD. Now albeit the
Patents of Joshua when they gave him this name, could not so much as suspect,
that by him should come the delivery of the people of Israel: yet was it
decreed with GOD from everlasting that he, as also others, should be a type
of the only Mediator and Savior. Wherefore by his secret and unknown
providence he so moved and ruled his Parents wills, that they should call
him Joshua. Secondly, GOD by them bestowed only corporal, and temporal
benefits, upon the Israelites. But by this Jesus he saves all the chosen
dispersed through the whole world, from all evils both of body and soul, from
sin and death everlasting. Thirdly, Christ is the author of all good things
both temporal and eternal, and these he by his own efficacy bestows on
whom he will: They were only instruments and ministers, by whom Christ gave
safety and benefits temporal to the people.

2 Jesus is the perfect savior.
2 Moreover that this Jesus is the perfect Savior, and does most perfectly
deliver us from all evils, these places testify. Col. 2.9. In him dwells all
the fulness of the godhead bodily: And verse 10. Ye are complete in him: that
is, Christ is that one and perfect God, the fountain of all knowledge and
good: therefore he is sufficient for your salvation; he who has Christ, cannot
be ignorant or want any of those things which are necessary to eternal
blessedness, neither has any need to ask them elsewhere. 1. John. 1.7. The
blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. Hebr. 7.25. Christ is able
perfectly to save them that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to
make intercession for them.

Against the Papists merits, and intercessions of saints.
Hereof in the 3^. question of the Catechism, is inferred a notable consequence
against the Papists, who couple their own works and the intercessions of
Saints with Christ's merit and intercession: namely, that they indeed spoil
and rob Jesus of this glory, whereby he is the perfect and only Savior.
Which is also true of them, who seek for but the least jot of salvation or
felicity in themselves, or other things without Christ. The collection is
this. He is the perfect and only Savior, who bestows salvation neither
jointly with others, nor in part only, but full, entire, and whole. But this
Jesus, the son of Marie, is that Savior, which is the only and perfect
Savior, whereof demonstration has been made a little before. Wherefore he
bestows salvation neither jointly with others, neither part thereof only,
but he alone performs the whole: and by a consequent, they who join more
intercessours with Jesus, or crave and expect any part of salvation elsewhere,
do indeed deny the only Savior Jesus.

Objection. To pray for others is to make intercession. God will that one
should pray for another, as the Saints, for Saints; Therefore he will that
one make intercession for another. And by a consequent, the glory of Christ is
not impeached, if the intercessions of Saints be adioined unto his
intercession. Answer. There is an ambiguitie, both in the word Prayer, and
in the word Intercession. God will that one pray and make intercession for an
other: But this they must do, not standing on the worthiness of their own
intercession and merits: but on the worthiness of the intercession and merits
of the only Mediator Christ. Christ makes intercession for us, because he
prays, will, and obtains, and effectuateth it himself, that for his own
sacrifice and prayers we may be received of God the father into favor, and
be reformed according to his image. Christ therefore makes intercession for
us by the vigor and virtue of his own proper worthiness and merit; for his
own worthiness be is heard, and obtains what be desires. After this sort do
not the Saints make intercession one for another. Wherefore seeing the Papists
faigne that the Saints do by their own merits and prayers, obtain for
others grace and certain good things at Gods hands, they manifestly derogate
from the glory of Christ, and deny him to be the only Savior.

2 From what evils he saves us.
HE delivers us from all, evils of all both crime, Christ saves us from all
evils both of crime and pain.
and pain, most fully and perfectly. Math 1.21. He shall save his people from
their sins. 1. John. 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all
sin, that is, that it may not be imputed unto us, and that it may not reign
in us, but be abolished, and so we at length leave off to sin. Wherefore
also he delivers us from all pain, and punishment. For the cause being
taken away, which is sin, the effect is taken away, which is punishment. Romans
8.1. Now then there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. John.
10.28. I give unto them eternal life. The salvation then, which this our
Savior Jesus Christ brings us, is righteousness and life everlasting. Dan 9
24. Seventy weeks are determined to finish the wickedness, and to seal up the
sins. and to reconcile the iniquity, and to bring in everlasting
righteousness. 1. Cor. 1.30. He is made unto us wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption.

3 How he saves.
HE saves us after two sorts: First, by his merit, that is, yielding a
sufficient punishment or satisfaction for our sins, Christ saves us ^ By his
merit.
whereby he has merited for us remission of sins, reconciliation with God,
the holy Ghost, salvation and life everlasting. Unto this bear many places of
holy Scripture witness in plentiful sort. 1. John. 2.2. If any man sin,
we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ, the just. And he is the
reconciliation for our sins: and not for ours only, but also for the sins
of the whole woorld. Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation
through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness by the forgiveness
of sins. Rom 5 19. By the obedience of one many shall be made righteous.
Isay. 53.5. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our
iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes
we are healed. All we like sheep have gone astraie, we have turned every
one to his own way; and The Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all.
2. Cor. 5.21. He has made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin, that
we should be made the righteousness of God in him. Gal. 3.13. Christ has
redeemed us from the curse of the law; when he was made a curse for us; that
the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Christ Jesus, that
we might receive the promise of the spirit through faith. Gal. 4 4. God sent
forth his son made of a woman and made under the law, (that is, made an
execration or curse, Gal. 3.13. For we are delivered not from the obedience,
but from the curse of the law) that he might redeem them which were under
the law, that we might receive the adoption of the sons. Heb. 9.14. How much
more shall the blood of christ, which through the eternal spirit offered
himself without spot to god, purge your conscience from dead works to serve
the living god? Heb. 10.10. By the which will we are sanctified, even by the
offering of the body of Jesus christ once offered. By these and very many the
like places of Scripture, it is manifest, that for Christ's merit we are not
only freed from punishment, the remission of our sins being obtained: but
are also reputed righteous before GOD, adopted of him to be his sons,
blessed, endewed with the holy GHOST, sanctified, and made heirs of
everlasting life.

Now this so great force and power fully and perfectly to deliver us, Why
Christ's death was of such force, as fully and perfectly to save us.
and further to bestow most perfectly salvation on us, the death and
punishment of Christ (which is a most perfect merit) has, first by the
worthiness of the person: because he that suffered it, is God, Acts. 20.28.
God has purchased the church with his own blood. Hebrews 9.14 which through
the eternal spirit offered himself. Hereof therefore is it, that the
obedience of the Son in punishment, or satisfaction, surpasses the
righteousness and punishment or satisfaction of all the Angels, and is a
sufficient price, and merit for so many and so great blessings. Again, it
has this force by the greetiousnesse of the punishment: because he sustained
the torments and feeling of GODS wrath for all the sins of the whole woorlde.
He descended into hell. For he suffered so great torments, that even those
who are everlastingly damned, cannot sustain so great and so sufficient
afflictions, and torments, and therefore cannot satisfy the wrath and justice
of God.

Objection. The sufficient punishment for sin must needs be eternal. But
the punishment of CHRIST for our sins was not eternal. Therefore was it not
sufficient, neither does it merit. Answer. The Mayor has not a sufficient
enumeration: either it must be eternal, as the reprobates punishment; or
equivalent to eternal, as was the punishment of Christ, for the causes even
now specified.

Secondly, Christ saves us by his efficacy, power, 2 Christ saves us by his
efficacy, and powerful working.
and operation, whereby he effectually applies unto us his merited and
deserved benefits, that is, 1. He justifies us by imputing unto us that
satisfaction, which he performed unto the law for our sins. 2. He gives us by
the ministry of his word the holy ghost, by whom he works in us both faith,
whereby we appling Christ's merit unto our selves may be assured of our
justification in the sight of god through the force thereof; and also
conversion, or the desire and love of new obedience, and so by his word and
spirit he gathers his Church. 3. He confirms this his collected and
gathered Church, defends and preserves it in this life against the force of
Devils and the world, and against all the corporal and spiritual assaults of
all enemies, even to the end, so that not one of those, which are converted,
perishes. 4. And at length, their bodies being raised from the dead, he fully
delivers his church, advanced unto everlasting life and glory, from all
sin and evil. The efficacy therefore, whereby the son saves us,
compriseth the whole benefit of our redemption, which he bestowed on us by
faith through the virtue and woorking of his spirit. For what benefits he
merited by his death, he does not retain them unto himself, but beestoweth
them on us. For salvation and life everlasting (which him self had before) he
purchased, not for himself, but for us, as being our Mediator.

The gift of the holy Ghost is part of our salvation.
Hereby we may understand, that the giving of the holy Ghost is a part of our
salvation or delivery by Christ Jesus our Mediator. For the holy Ghost is
he, by whom Christ effectually performs this, which he, being our
intercessour with his Father, has promised his Father in our behalf, that is,
he teaches us, by illuminating our minds with the knowledge of GOD and his
divine will; and regenerateth, or sanctifies, and guides, and establishes
us, that we may begin the study of holiness, persist and profit therein, until
sin be fully abolished in us; and sin being abolished, death must also
needs be abolished; which that he might together with death destroy, Christ
was sent of his Father into the woorlde. Of this efficacy or effectual
operation speak these places, Colos. 1.14. In the Son we have redemption
through his blood, the forgiveness of sins. Isai. 53.11. By his knowledge
shall my righteous servant justify many. John. 1.9. That was the true light,
which lights every man that comes into the world; that is, he is the
author and fountain of all light, both natural in all Angels and men, and
spiritual in his elect and chosen. John. 5.21. As the Father raises up the
dead and quickens them, so the Son quickens whom he will. John. 15.26. I
will send unto you from the Father the spirit of truth. Matthew. 3.11. He
that comes after me, will baptize you with the holy Ghost, and with fire.
Ephesians. 4.8. When he ascended up on high, he gave gifts unto men. He
ascended that he might fill all things. Luc. 10.22. No man knows who the
Father is, save the Son, and he to whom the Son will reueile him. John.
1.18. No man has seen GOD at any time: the only begotten Son, which is
in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him. Matthew. 28 2. I am with
you always, until the end of the woorld. John. 14.18. I will not leave you
comfortles. John. 10.28. My sheep shall never perish, neither shall any
pluck them out of mine hand. 1. John. 3.8. For this purpose app^^^ed the Son
of God, that he might loose the works of the Devil. John. 16.54 I will raise
him up at the last day. Ephesians. 5.27. That he might make it unto himself a
glorious Church, not having spot or wrincle, or any such thing.

4 Whom he saves.
HE saves all and only the elect and believers, He saves the elect and
believers only.
which have been, are, or shall be, even from the beeginning to the end of
the woorlde; and that both by his merit, and by his efficacy. For in them
only, which embrace the benefit of Redemption with a true faith, has GOD his
end, even his worship and glory. Therefore unto them only it does befall.
John. 3.16. GOD so loved the woorld, that he has given his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting
life. John. 17.20. I pray not for these alone, but for them also which shall
believe in me through their word, that they all may be one etc. John.
6.51. I am the living bread which came down from heaven: if any man eat of
this bread, he shall live for ever. Ephesians. 1.4.12. He has chosen us in
CHRIST, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love; and
that we should be unto the praise of his glory.

I BELIEVE IN CHRIST.
THe name of Jesus does rather summarily than expressly note the office of the
Mediator: What is signified by the name of Christ.
and is as it were a proper name designing rather a certain person. But the
word, Messiah, or Christ, or Anointed, is properly an epitheton of the
office, which being adjoined to the former, does more significantly declare the
proper and certain office of the Mediator: For it expresses metonymicallie
the three parts thereof, namely, to be a Prophet, a Priest, and a King. For
these three were wont to be anointed, and so to be designed to these functions.

Objection, But it may be that CHRIST was anointed but to one of these
functions only. Answer. He is called in the Scripture a Prophet, a King,
and a Priest: And further CHRIST was signified by anointed persons, whereof
those three sorts were in the old Testament. And hence it comes to pass
that these two names JESUS CHRIST are often joined. For it is not enough to
believe, that there is a Savior, and that he is exhibited, but we must
further also certainly be persuaded, that this JESUS, borne of the Virgin
Marie, is that Savior and CHRIST, promised in the old Testament.
Furtherermore, concerning the office of the Mediator, as it is designed by
this name CHRIST, which signifies Anointed, four things especially offer
themselves to be considered.

1 What the unction or anointing of Christ is, or in what sense he is called
Anointed. 2 What is Christ's prophetical function. 3 What his Priesthood. 4
What his Kingdom.
1 WHAT CHRIST'S UNCTION OR ANOINTING IS.
What was betokened by anointing, in the old Testament.
Anointing in the old testament was a ceremony, whereby according to gods
ordinance Prophets, Priests, and Kings were anointed either with some
special, or with common oil: that it might stand for a testimony, to those
who were rightly anointed, that they were called of god to the administering
of one of these functions, and that they should be furnished from god with
gifts necessary for the performing of that whereunto they were called. For
Anointing signified, 1. The calling and ordaining of any to the office either
of a Prophet, or of a Priest, or of a King. 2. It signified the promise and
bestowing of gifts necessary thereto. For to whom GOD committed any office,
and whom he caused to be anointed, to these also he subministered the
gifts of the holy GHOST necessary for the discharging of it, as knowledge,
wisdom, strength, fo^titude, industry, authority, and such other. 3. It
signified the fragrantnesse or sweet savor of the labors employed in that
vocation, that is, it was a testimony that the labors were grateful and
acceptable to GOD, and that he would prosper such labors, as the Anointed
should with a true faith and cheerefullie undergo in exequuting the function
committed unto them of GOD. 2. Corinthians. 2.15. We are unto GOD the sweet favor
of Christ in them that are saved. 1. Corinthians. 15.58. Your labor is not vain
in the Lord.

Further, the outward anointing did as a sign represent the inward, that
is, the gifts of the holy GHOST, as the things signified, by reason of a
correspondent Analogy and proportion. For as oil makes the dry parts,
being anointed therewith, lively, agill, and able and fit to do their
duty, and besides to send forth a sweet favor: So the holy Ghost
furnishing them with necessary gifts, which are ordained to a function,
gives them strength and power, whereby they being of themselves unfit to do
any good, are made fit and able to work and accomplish things grateful unto
God: that is, the holy Ghost causes them to dispatch readily and with
dexterity the parts of that duty which is enioined them, and to do things
acceptable to GOD, and available for the preservation of the Church.

Now the anointing of Jesus Christ is, First the ordaining of the son of
God to the office of the chief Prophet, Priest, and King of the Church.
Secondly, The especial communicating of the gifts of the holy Ghost
necessary for this office. Thirdly, Gods approbation and prospering of this
office. Isaie 53.10. The LORD would break him, and make him subject to
infirmities: when he shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see
his seed, and shall prolong his days, and the will of the Lord shall prosper
in his hand: He shall see of the ^auell of his soul, and shall be satisfied, by
his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, for he sha^ bear their
iniquities. Therefore will I give him a portion with the great, and he shall
divide the spoil. Jesus then, the son of God and Mary, is called Messiah, or
Christ, or anointed: First, because he was appointed of his father from
everlasting the Mediator, that is, the chief Prophet, Priest, and King of the
Church. This is confirmed by this reason. He that is to be a Prophet, a Priest,
and a King, and is called anointed, he is in respect of those three called
anointed. But the Mediator which was called Messiah or anointed, was to be
the chief Prophet, Priest and King of the Church. Therefore he is in respect
of those three called anointed or Christ. Again the same is showed by many
places of Scripture. Ioh. 7.28. I came not of my self etc. John 6.38. I came
down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but his will, which has sent me.
Heb. 5.5. Christ took not unto himself this honor to be made the
High Priest, but he that said unto him, Thou art my son, this day begat I
thee. Psalm. 110.4. The Lord swore, thou art a Priest for ever, after the
order of Melchisedeck. Hebr. 13.8. Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, the
same is also for ever. Revel. 13.8. The Lamb slain from the beginning of the
world. 1. Corinthians. 130. CHRIST is made of God unto us wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption. So is he often called the
Angel of the covenant sent of old unto the Church. 2. He is called anointed
in respect of the gifts of the holy GHOST which were poured on him thick,
abundantly, and most perfectly; that is, all the gifts and graces
whatsoever are in all the blessed Angels and men, and those in the most
excellent and high degree, that he might be sufficient for the restoring,
ruling, preserving of his Church, and for administering the government of the
whole woorlde, and for the directing thereof to the safety and salvation of
his Church. John 3.34. God gives him not the spirit by measure. Hebr. 1.9.
Wherefore God, thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above
thy fellows. Isaie 61.1. The spirit of the Lord is upon me, therefore has
the Lord anointed me. The anointing therefore is of the whole person, yet
with this difference, that it is so applied to both natures, as it signifies
the ordaining of him to the Mediatourshippe. For he is Mediator according to
both natures, who was always present with his Church, even before his flesh
was borne: Christ anointed in respect of his humanity, not of his Godhead, in
respect whereof he is annointer.
But as his anointing designeth the communicating of the gifts of the holy
GHOST, so his humane nature only is meant to be anointed. For his Godhead,
because it is always in it self goodness most perfect, and passing measure,
is not anointed, but annointeth and fills with gifts and graces both his
own humanity, which his Godhead does personally inhabit, as also all the
elect and chosen. Wherefore one and the same Christ, in respect of his diverse
natures, is both anointed and annointer, as raiser and raised. For the father
annointeth with the holy Ghost, but by the Lord: so that Ireneus said
prettily, that by the name of anointing was comprised and understood the three
persons of the godhead, The annointer, the anointed, and the anointing.

Objection. But it is no where read, Christ anointed spirituallie.
that Christ was anointed. Answer. Christ was not anointed, typicallie,
ceremonially, or sacramentallie; but reallie, and spiritually, that is, he
received the thing it self, which was prefigured and signified by the
ceremonial anointing; which was the holy Ghost; as it is said, Psalm. 43.97.
and Heb. 1.9 Wherefore God, thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of
gladness above thy fellows. Isaie 61.1. The spirit of the Lord is upon me,
therefore has the Lord anointed me. As therefore it was meet that Christ
should be a Prophet, a Priest, and a King, not typical, but the very
signified and true, that is, the great and high Prophet, Priest, and King; so
it was necessary that he should be anointed not with typical oil, but with
the signified and true oil, which was the holy Ghost. For such as the office
was, such should the anointing be. But the office was not typical, but the
very thing it self. Therefore such also should the anointing be.

Hence we learn and understand these two things. The first is, That Christ
has this name, not from the ceremonial anointing, but from the thing it self
which was thereby signified: because he is that chief and high Prophet, Christ
has his name, not from the ceremonial anointing, but from the thing thereby
signified.
Priest and King, whom, as types, the Prophets, Priests, and Kings of the
old Testament, which were wont to be anointed with external oil, did
represent. The name therefore of the sign or type, that is, Anointed, is
transferred to the thing it self, even to the High Priest, Prophet and King,
Jesus. Another thing that we learn is, The difference between Christ
Anointed, and the Anointed of the old Testament.
That there is a great difference between this Jesus Anointed, and the
Anointed of the old testament. For 1. There were only certain types and
shadows of this only chief and true Christ, that is, of this King, Prophet,
and Priest. Wherefore necessary was it that they should yield and give place to
him being once exhibited. For the thing it self being come and exhibited, the
types cease. 2. The anointing, that is, the communicating of the gifts of the
Holy Ghost in the typical Anointed was imperfect and weak. But in Jesus
christ it is perfect and exceeding great. For in him dwells the fulness of the
Godhead personally, so that he is both the Anointed and the Annointer. 3. He
only has received all the gifts of the holy Ghost, and those many ways
more excellent than they are to be found in all the Angels and men: Because
he had them in the highest both number and degree. 1. John 1.16. Of his
fullness have all we received. But the Anointed of the old testament received
neither all the gifts, neither in the highest degree, but divided, and
according to the measure of the gift of christ, some more, some fewer, and some
greater gifts than some, 1. Cor. 12.11. Ep. 4.7. Much less were they able by
their own power and virtue to work the same in others.

Reply 1. GOD cannot be anointed: christ is GOD. Therefore he could not be
anointed, no not with the prefigured or signified oil. Answer. In some
respect we grant this whole reason. For Christ as touching his Godhead,
cannot be anointed with the gifts of the holy GHOST. First, because not one
jot of the gifts of the holy Ghost can be added to the Godhead, because of
the exceeding perfection thereof. And further, because the holy Ghost, by
whom the anointing is immediately administered, is the proper spirit of
christ, no less proceeding from him, than from the father. Wherefore he, as he
is God, has not any thing from the holy Ghost, neither does he receive him,
which is already his own from any other, but gives him unto others whom it
pleases him: As also no man can give thee thy spirit which is in thee,
because that which thou already have cannot be given unto thee.

Reply 2. According to which nature christ is anointed, according to the same
he is Mediator, that is, the Prophet, Priest, and King of the church. But
according to his humane nature only he is anointed: Therefore according to
that only he is Mediator. The Minor is thus proved. To be anointed, is, to
receive the gifts of the holy Ghost: But according to his humane nature only
he received these gifts: In what sense Christ may be said to be anointed
accoding to his Godhead.
therefore according to that only he is anointed. Answer. The Mayor of the
former reason is made of a bad and faulty definition: because the definition
is of too strait and narrow a compass. For to be anointed is not only to
receive the gifts: but also to be designed to some certain office. In the
former sense Christ is anointed according to his humanity only: in the later,
according to both natures. Or, we may answer that the whole reason is faulty,
because of an ambiguity in the word anointing. For in the Mayor, it is taken
either for the whole anointing, or for that part, which is an ordeining to an
office: but in the Minor it is taken for the other part only, which is the
participation of the gifts of the holy Ghost. Now then, according to which
nature christ is not anointed, that is, neither severally by a designement to
an office: neither by both a designement to an office and a receiving of the
gifts of the holy Ghost: according to that nature he is not Mediator. Christ
according to his Godheade is not anointed, both with a designement to an
office, and a receiving of gifts: yet is he according to his Godheade
anointed by an ordaining or designement to an office. Therefore he is
Mediator also according to his Godhead.

Christ therefore is Mediator, that is, the Prophet, Priest, Christ Mediator
according to both natures.
and King of the church in respect of both natures. For unto the office of a
Mediator do mo actions concur, whereof some he executes by his Godhead, some
by his flesh; yet so, that they are don and performed together, the properties
of both natures being as it were communicated. Wherefore that we er not here,
nor conceive amiss, these two rules ar to be observed. The first: the
properties of the one nature in the mediator, are attributed to the other in
the concrete, that is, to the person, yet still in respect of that nature whose
properties they are. This is called the communicating of the properties, and it
is a certain kind of Synecdoche. The second. The names of the mediatorship are
attributed to the whole person, in respect of both natures, yet reserving still
the properties of each nature, and the differences of actions. For to the
perfourming of the Mediatourship, the properties of faculties and operations
both of the divine and of the humane nature are required.

2 WHAT IS CHRIST'S PROPHETICAL FVNCTION.
The signification of the name Prophet.
THE word Prophet comes from the Grecke word (...), which signifies to
publish abroad things either present, or to come. A Prophet in general, is a
person called of god, who publishes and expounds unto men the will of God
concerning things either present or to come; which without some revelation from
God, remain unknown to us; as being such, to the knowledge whereof men were not
able by themselves to come. A Prophet is either a minister, or the head and
chief of the Prophets, which is Christ. Of Ministerial Prophets, some are of
the old, some of the new Testament. Of the new Testament, some are specially so
called, some only in general.

What the Prophets of the old Testament were.
The Prophets of the old Testament were persons immediately called and
instructed of God himself either by instinct, or by dreams, or by divine
visions, or by speeches had by God with them, that they should declare to men,
to whom they were sent, the true doctrine concerning God and his worship, and
cleanse and clear it from errors and corruption; that they should recount and
illustrate the promise of the Messiah to come, and his kingdom and benefits,
of remission of sins and eternal life, by and for him, to be given to all
believers; that they should foretell future events, good and bad, and rewards
and punishments; that they should guide and administer and order many counsels
and offices politic, or civil, having divine and certain testimonies to
warrant them, that they could not err in such Doctrine, precepts, and
counsels, as they propounded in the name of God. Those testimonies were
especially these. 1 The continual consent of the Prophets in Israel, of
Moses, and the Patriarcks, both one with another, and with those first divine
revelations, which were given at the creation in Paradise. 2 Miracles certainly
coming from God. 3 The events of things exa^tly aunswering to the sacred
oracles and predictions of the Prophets 4. The Testimony of the holy Ghost
thoroughlie persuading and conuincing men's minds concerning the truth of
Prophetical do^trine. Such Prophets were, Adam, Seth, Noa, Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, Joseph, and other, and afterward Moses, and they who succeeded him
among the people of Israel.

A Prophet of the new testament, specially so called, What a Prophet of the new
Testament is both in general and in special.
is a person, who by divine instinct, and through special revelation of the
holy ghost, does certainly foresee and foreshewe things to come; As were the
Apostles and Agabus, Acts. 11.28. and cap. 21.11. and the Disciples, telling
Paul through the spirit, that he should not go up to Jerusalem, Acts. 21.4.
etc. A Prophet of the new Testament, in general, is called any, whosoever
has the gift of understanding, expounding and applying the Prophecies and
writings of the Prophets, who are properly so called, to the present use of
the church. So is this word used. 1. Cor. 14.3.4.5.29. This function and gift
of prophesying, that is, of expounding and applying the Scriptures of the
Prophets and Apostles to the use of the Church, is at al times necessary: That
other, of foretelling things to come, not so: and therefore is it but temporary,
and for a time.

The great and chief Prophet, which is Christ, Christ a Prophet from the
beginning of the church to all eternity.
is a person immediately ordained of god even from the beginning and cradel of
the Church in paradise to al eternity, sent of the father to declare the will of
god toward mankind, to institute and appoint a ministry, to teach by the
word and Sacraments, the holy ghost working together with him: and lastly
in the flesh; to preach the gospel, and to make known that he is the Son
consubstantiall and of the same substance with the father, and author of the
Euangelique doctrine, kindling it in the hearts of men, and not only preaching
it; as a Minister: And therefore Christ is called the WORD, not only in
respect of the father, of whom in cogitation beholding himself, and
considering the image of himself not vanishing, but subsisting,
consubstantial, coequal, coeternall to the father himself, he was begotten:
but also in respect of us, because he is that person, which spoke to the
fathers, and brought forth the living and quickening word, or Gospel, out
of the bosom of the Father.

What Christ according to his prophetical fu^ction was to do.
Wherefore the prophetical function of Christ is, 1 To open and declare unto
men God and his secret will, of saving believers by and for him, showed unto
him immediately from God himself. 2 To refine and purify the Law and
woorshippe of God, from corruptions, Mat. 5.67. he interprets the Law. Ioh.
1.18. The son which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him.
John. 8.26. The things that I have heard of the Father, those speak I to the
woorld. 3 To open the promises of the gospel concerning himself to be borne,
to suffer, and to die concerning remission of sins, our reconciliation unto
God, and of salvation and everlasting life. 4 At length also assuming and
taking unto him humane nature, to teach as by his voice the will of god,
concerning us, and toward us, and to confirm this doctrine by Miracles. 5 Not
only to give oracles and prophecies, to open the will of god by prophets, and
to teach and expound it himself present in humane nature; but also to ordain
and institute the ministry of the word and sacraments, that is, to call and
send Prophets, Apostles, and other ministers of the Church, and to furnish them
with gifts necessary to this ministry. John. 20.21. As the Father has sent
me, so send I you. Ephesians. 4.11. He (Christ) has given some Apostles, and some
Prophets, some Doctors. Luke 21.15. I will give you a mouth, and wisdom,
where-against all your adversaries shall not be able to speak, nor resist. So
1. Pet. 1.10. The spirit of Christ is said to have spoken by the prophets. 6.
To give the holy Ghost. Mat. 3.11. He will baptize you with the holy Ghost,
and with fire. 7. To be through his own and others ministry effectual in
the hearts of the hearers, that is, by his spirit to lighten our minds, that
we may understand those things which he teaches us of God and his will,
either by his own voice, or by the voice of others: Luke 24 45. Then opened he
their understanding, that they might understand the scriptures. 8. To
effectuate also that which by the efficacy of his spirit he speaks in our
hearts, that, is to move our will, that we may yield our assent and obedience
to those things, which by his teaching we learn and know. Ephesians. 5.25. Christ
gave himself for the Church, that he might sanctify it and cleanse it, by the
washing of water through the word. And these things Christ did and does
perform even from the beginning of the church, to the end of the world, and
that by his own authority and power: and for this very cause is he called the
Word. Mat. 11.27. No man knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the
son will reueile him. Ioh. 5 21. As the Father, so the Son quickneth whom he
will.

By these things which have been now spoken, is also understood, what
difference there is between Christ, and other Prophets, both of the old and
new testament; and why he is the chief prophet and doctor. The difference and
eminency consists in his nature and office. 1 Christ is the very son of
God and god and lord of all, and does immediately utter the word of the Father,
and is the ambassador and mediator sent of the father. Other prophets are only
men and his servants, called and sent by him. 2 Christ is author and reueiler of
the doctrine, and therefore the Prince of all Prophets. Others are s gnifiers
of that which they have received from Christ. For whatsoever knoweledge and
Prophetical spirit is in them, all that they have from Christ reueiling and
giving it to them. Therefore is the spirit of christ said to have spoken in the
prophets. Neither has he opened only to the prophets the doctrine which he
teaches, but also to all the godly. Ioh. 1.16. Of his fulness have we all
received, that is, all the Elect, even from the beginning of the world unto the
end, Ioh. 1.18. No man has seen god at any time, the only begotten son,
which is in the bosom of the father, he has declared him. 3 His Prophetical
wisdom is infinite, and perfect, and therefore in all gifts he excels
others. 4 This Prophet christ, appoints the ministry, sends and ordains
Prophets, and Apostles: he gives the holy Ghost and gifts necessary for the
prophets, Apostles, and al ministers of the word, to the perfourming of their
duty. Ioh. 16.14. He shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you. He will
lead you into al truth. 5 Christ himself is not only author of the doctrine,
and erectour and maintainer of the external Ministry, but also by his own and
other Prophets voice and outward ministry he preaches effectually to men
inwardly through the virtue and working of the holy ghost. Others are only
the instruments of Christ and that arbitrarie, and at his disposition and
direction. 6 The Doctrine of christ, which being made man he uttered by his
own and his Apostles mouths, is much more clear and full than the doctrine of
Moses, and the Prophets of the old Testament. Christ therefore has authority
of himself; others from him: if Christ speak, we must believe him for
himself: others, because Christ speaks in them. These things are expressly
proved by these places of holy writ. Hebr. 1.1. At sundry times and in
diverse manners god spoke in the old time to our Fathers, by the Prophets: Jn
these last days he has spoken unto us by his Son. And, cap. 3.3. This man
is counted worthy of more glory than Moses; in as much as he which has
builded the house, has more honor than the house. Ioh. 16.14. The spirit of
truth, which I will send you, shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you.
Mat. 17.5. This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased: Hear him. Luc.
10.16. He that hears you, hears me; and he that despises you, despises
me, and him that sent me.

3 WHAT CHRIST'S PRIESTHOOD IS.
A priest in general.
A Priest, in general, is a person ordained by god to offer for himself and
others oblations and sacrifices: to pray for others, and to instruct. Under
prayer is comprehended blessing, which is to wish them good from God.

A typical priest.
There is one Priest which is signifieng or typical, another signified. The
typical Priest was a person appointed by God, 1. to offer typical Sacrifices,
2. to make intercession for himself and others, 3. to declare to the people
the doctrine of the Law, and the promise of the Messiah, and true Sacrifice
which was to come. Such were all the Priests of the old Testament. For these
three properties which we have reckned, were common to the High Priest with
other inferior Priests. The High priest.
But some things the High Priest had proper and peculiar to himself. 1. That
he alone entered into the Tabernacle, called the Holiest of al, or Sanctuary,
and that but once every ^eare, not without blood, which he offered for
himself and the people burning incense there, and making intercession for the
people. 2. That his raiment was more gorgious. 3. That he was set over the
rest. 4. That he only was consulted of questions or matters doubtful, weighty
and obscure, whether appertaining to religion or to the commonwealth, and did
return the aunsweres of God for the Princes and the people, 5. and therefore
did govern and order some counsels and offices of the state and kingdom, and
did see, that al things were lawfully administered. The inferiors were all the
other priests of the old Testament, whose office it was, to sacrifice, to
pray, to teach the doctrine of the Law, and the promise of the Messiah to
come, and to make intercession for themselves and others. Wherefore though all
the Leuitical priests were a type of Christ: yet the most notable type was the
High Priest, for that he in mo things represented Christ our very true,
celestial, and perpetual High Priest.

Objection. But it was the Prophets office to teach. The difference between the
Priests and prophets in the old Testament,
Therefore the Priests differed nothing from the Prophets. Answer. Both of
them, both the Prophets and the Priests did teach the people: and it might so
fall out also, that the same was both a Priest and a Prophet; as it is read of
Jeremy. But this was not perpetual, but accidentarie; Because 1. the Priests
were ordained out of one certain tribe, namely the Leuiticall; but God raised
up Prophets out of any tribe. 2. There is a great difference found betwixt
them, as touching their function of teaching. For the Prophets were called
extraordinarily and and immediately by God himself, and so received from him
the doctrine, which they were to declare unto men. 3. They were so guided by
the special motion of the holy ghost, that they could not er in that
doctrine, which they uttered unto men in the name of god. But the Priests, as
Priests, 1. were ordinary ministers of the oulde Church. 2. were appointed by
men. 3. were tied to the doctrine of Moses and the Prophets, which they
learned, not from GOD immediately, but mediatelie by men. 4. They might err
in doctrine and counsels, and did err often, when they departed from the rule
of the Prophets. Wherefore as touching their function of teaching, the
Prophets differed from the Priests of the oulde Testament, after the same
sort, as in the new Testament the Apostles from other ministers and teachers of
the Church.

The signified, and true, and only High Priest, Christ the true and
prefigured high priest. Christ's Intercession.
is the Son of GOD, immediately ordained by GOD the Father himself, and
anointed by the holy GHOST, to reueile unto us the secret will of GOD and his
counsel toward us, and by assuming humane nature to offer himself a
Sacrifice propitiatory for the sins of all mankind, to obtain for us by
his intercession unto the Father remission of sins and eternal life: and
lastly to apply effectually his Sacrifice unto us, both by imputing it, and
also by illightening and moving the elect by his word and spirit to receive
it with a true faith, having this testimony, that he is certainly heard of his
heavenly father, for all those for whom he makes intercession: and withal
having power to collect and gather his Church.

Wherefore there are four principal parts of Christ's Priesthood. First, To
teach men both outwardly by his voice, and the voice of his ministers, and
inwardly by the efficacy of his spirit. Secondly, To offer himself a
sacrifice and ransom, full-sufficient and acceptable unto GOD for the sins
of the woorlde. Christ's Intercession.
Thirdly, To make continually intercession for us unto the father. For this
intercession is proper unto the Son: First, not only because himself
living on earth in the time of his flesh was made a suppliant and a Sacrifice
for us unto his Father. Secondly, but also because he earnestly and desirously
will according to both natures, that the Father for his sacrifice once
accomplished on the Cross, remit unto us our sins, and restore unto us
righteousness and life. Thirdly, that the Father, looking upon the sacrifice
and will of his only beloved Son receives all believers into his grace and
favor.

Wherefore the Son in respect both of his merit and will to save us, and of
his fathers continual beholding and looking thereon, has from everlasting made
intercession, and also does now and for ever in heaven appearing before his
Father, make intercession for all the elect and chosen. To pray for the
people, is a thing common to all priests: but, to make intercession both in
heaven and earth unto the Father for us, that our sins may be pardoned us,
is only belonging to this high and only Priest. Fourthly, to apply his
sacrifice unto all those for whom he prays.

Christ's applying of his merit unto us.
And he applies it, First, when he procures by prayer, the Father to impute
it unto us, that is, to receive us for it into favor, and for it to love us:
Secondly, when himself also for the same his sacrifice sake, does receive us
into favor. John. 17.19. Father, for their sakes sanctify I my self: Thirdly,
he endueth us with true faith, whereby we also may apply his satisfaction
unto our selves, that is, may be assured and think that it is our
righteousness, whereby we may stand in the presence of the Lord.

Hereby also it is clear, in what other Priests differ from Christ. 1 These
te^ch only by their outward voice, ^n difference ^e^^een Christ and ^ther
Priests.
and not by the inward woorking also of the holy Ghost 2. They do not make
continual intercession, neither do they always obtain what they ask 3. These
apply their benefits unto no man. 4. They offer not themselves a Sacrifice
for the sins of others. For all these things, can be and are performed by
CHRIST alone.

WHAT IS CHRIST'S KINGDOM.
A King is a person ordained by God, A King in general.
to govern in a people and bear rule alone according to honest Laws, and to
have power to reward the good, and punish the bad, and to defend his subie^tes
against their enemies, having no superior gouernuor above him. The King of
Kings, CHRIST, Christ a King.
is a person immediately ordained of GOD, to gather and rule by his word and
spirit his church, purchased by his blood; and to defend her being subject
unto him and serving him, against all her enemies both corporal and
spiritual, and to reward her with eternal rewards, but to cast her enemies
into everlasting pains and torments.

Wherefore CHRIST'S royal office is, First, Christ's Kingdom.
to rule by his word and spirit his Church gathered out of all nations from
the beginning of the woorlde. For that it may go ^ell with us under this King,
it is not enough, if he outwardly teach us, what he would have us, his
subjects, to perform, unless also by his spirit he move our hearts, and
cause us to be obedient to his commandments.

Secondly, To defend and preserve this his Church in this life against al both
inward and outward, domestical and foreign foes, which also he does
perform, while not only by his power-ful hand he is ever present with us,
but furnishes us also with those weapons, wherewith our selves also may
constantly and happily enter the combat against our most mighty foes, and
utterly vanquish and discomfit them. This sacred ha^nesse and warlike
furniture is described, Ephese. 6.13. Thirdly, To make his church partaker of
the blessings of his kingdom, and to adorn her raised up from dead with
everlasting glory, and bliss. Fourthly, To overcome and rule his enemies by
his might and power, and at length to thrust them down being falselie
overcome and conquered into eternal torments.

We are in this place to observe the difference of the Prophetical, Priestlie,
and royal office, both of them who were in the old Testament, and of Christ,
and of our selves. In the old Testament, they were types, or typical
Prophets, Priests, and Kings. Christ is indeed the true Prophet, King, and
Priest which they prefigured: we are Prophets, Kings, and Priests, by
participation, as having Christ's dignities communicated with us. Now then, let
us see what is our prophetical, Priestly, and roial office.

OF THE COMMUNION OF THE FAITHFVL, OR CHRISTIANS, WITH CHRIST.
IN the 32. Question we are instructed, concerning the inunction or anointing
of the faithful, namely, when they are called Christians or anointed: and,
what is the duty of Christians, and what their comfort; whereof this name does
advertise the^. Here then is discoursed the common place, concerning the
communion of Christ the head with the faithful, his members: and of the
functions of these his members. Hereof four things come to be considered.

1 What is the anointing of Christians, or whence believers have the name of
Christians or Anointed. 2 What is the Prophetical function of Christians. 3
What their Priesthood. 4 What their kingdom.
1 WHAT IS THE ANOINTING OF CHRISTIANS.
LVKE Act. 11.26. testifies, that the name of Christians first began to be
used in Antioche, in the Apostles time, whenas before time they had bin termed
by the names of breethren and Disciples. Who is called a christian.
The name Christian is derived from Christ: and in general he is called a
Christian, who is a Disciple of Christ, and follows his doctrine or life:
and, who being inserted into Christ, has communion and fellowshippe with him,
whether he be such indeed, or only carries a face or show before him of
being such. For there are two sorts of Christians: some seeming or
counterfeit, Seeming and false hearted christians.
and outward, but not true, that is, hypocrites: others seeming and true. For
not every seeming christian, that is, who is in outward conversation, a
Christian, is an hypocrit: though every hypocrit is a seeming Christian. They
are called seeming, but not true Christians, who being baptized profess in
word and life or outward conversation the Doctrine and faith of christ, and are
in the company of those which are called, but are not partakers of Christ's
benefits, being destitute of true faith and conversion. Therefore they are
not the true and lively members of the Church. Mat. 20.16. Many are called, but
few chosen. Seeming and true hearted christians.
They are both seeming and true christians, who being received by baptism into
the Church, acknoweledge and profess Christ's doctrine; and being engraffed
into Christ by a true faith, are made partakers of all his benefits; and
being regenerated by the holy ghost, led a life worthy of true Christians.

Furthermore, of hypocrites we are not here to speak, but of those, who are
both without and within, that is, are truly Christians, and anointed of
Christ by the holy ghost. The anointing of these therefore, The anointing of
christians

1 Is an ordaining of them to an office.

2 A bestowing of gifts on them.


whereof they take the appellation of Christians and Anointed, is, that being
through a true faith engraffed by Baptism into christ as members into their
head, they are made true partakers of his anointing. For first he
communicates with them his Prophetical, Priestly, and roial function; that is,
he ordains and makes them Prophets, Priests, and Kings. Secondly he
annointeth them with the true oil, that is, he powers into them the gifts
of the holy ghost, wherewith they being furnished may easily and rightly
discharge that their function. For the holy Ghost is not idle in us, but
woorketh the same in us, which he does in Christ: albeit those graces and
gifts in Christ are far more excellent both in number and degree. These
things are expresselie showed by these places of Scripture. 1. Corin. 6 15.
Know ye not, that your bodies are the members of christ? 1. John 2.20. Ye
have an ointment from him that is Holy, and ye have known all things. Acts
2.33. This Jesus by the right hand of God has been exalted, and has
received of his Father the promise of the holy ghost, and has shed forth
this which ye now see and hear. 1 Pet 2.9. Ye are a chosen generation, a
royal Priesthood. Revel. 1.6. and 5.9. Thou wast killed, and have redeemed us
to God by thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation;
And have made us unto our God Kings, and Priests, and we shall reign on the
earth. By these places are these two things manifest: What is to be Christ's
member.
one is, that our anointing is bestowed of Christ: the other, that it is
bestowed only upon those, who are the members of Christ. And to be the member
of Christ is nothing else, than to be conjoined and united to Christ by the
same spirit dwelling both in him and us: and by this spirit to be enriched
with such righteousness and life, as is in CHRIST; to be conformed unto
CHRIST: and seeing this righteousness, so long as we remain in this mortal
body, is imperfect, to be acceptable unto GOD for the righteousness of
Christ which is imputed unto us. Romans 8 11. 1. Corinthians. 6.7 Ephesians. 4.15.16. 1.
Corint. 12.13. Rom 8.1. etc.

The similitude of man's body, to declare our union with Christ.
Now the similitude of the head and members of the same body, is most fit and
appliable to declare that most streit and indissoluble conjunction of us with
Christ. For first, As all the members of the body are knit to one and the same
head, and consequently to one another, by sinews and fleshly ligamentes, and
draw their life, sense, and all their motion, by the ministry of the
spirits from that one head, so long as they remain united to their head, and
among themselves: so Christ is that one and quickening head, to whom all the
elect who are the living members the church, being united by the holy Ghost,
received thorough faith, are quickened and are knit also among themselves by
the means of mutual charity. Which charity and dilection must needs be
there; if we be joined unto the head. For the connection of the members with the
head is the original and cause of the conjunction of the members among
themselves. For the quickening spirit of christ does not flow out of one member
into another, but out of one Christ as the head into all the members of the
Church. Ioh. 15.26. J will send unto you, from the father, the comforter, the
spirit of truth.

Secondly, As in man's body are diverse gifts and functions of the members,
and yet but one life and soul quickening and moving all the members: So in the
body of the church are diverse gifts and functions, and yet but one spirit,
by the benefit whereof each member may do this function. Thirdly, as the head
is placed in the highest place, and therefore is of more worthiness, and the
fountain of all life: So Christ has the highest room and degree in the
church, as in whom the spirit is without measure, and of whose fullness all
receive: but in the members, that is, in christians are certain measures of
gifts, which are derived into them from the only head and fountain christ.

Christ is our head in three respects. First, Christ is our Head in three
respects.
In respect of his perfection: because he is both God and man; and in gifts,
as touching his humane nature, excels all creatures. Coloss. 2.9. In him
dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, etc. He alone gives the
holy Ghost. Matthew. 3. This is he who baptizeth with the holy Ghost. Secondly.
In dignity, or order, glory, majesty, power, authority, which in his humane
nature glorified, he now openly shows forth and declares. For as GOD
created all things by him, so has he made him heir of all things. Hebr.
1.2. and the ruler of his house, Heb. 3.6. Thirdly, In respect of his office.
For he is over every member of the Church, he rules, governs, quickens,
nourishes, and confirms them, so as they continue joined in him with the
rest of the members.

We are also in three respects the members of christ. First, We are in three
respects Christ members
because by faith and the holy Ghost we are joined unto him, and also are
knit together amongst our selves, as the members to the head, and one with
another. And this coiunction of the members of this body, amongst themselves,
is no less requisite and behoouefull for the safety of the Church, than the
conjunction of the whole body with Christ the head. For if thou separate the
arm from the hand, thou shall separate it also from the head, and so it shall
no more have life. Secondly, Because we are quickened and guided of him, and
from him as the fountain we draw all good things: so that, except we
continue in him, we have not eternal life in us: as neither the members
sundered from the body retain life any longer. Thirdly, Because as in man's
body are diverse faculties and functions of the members: so are the gifts and
functions diverse of the members of CHRIST in the church: And as all the
actions of the parts of the body are employed and referred to the
preservation thereof; so all the members of Christ, whatsoever they purpose or
do, that ought they to employ and refer to the profit and utility of the
Church.

2 WHAT IS THE PROPHETICAL FVNCTION OF CHRISTIANS, that is, in what sense they
are, and are called Prophets.
Christians are prophets in knowledge. In confession.
CHRIST makes us partakers of his Prophetical honor or office, not only in
this, that himself Prophecieth unto us, that is, effectually instructs us by
his word and spirit, but also, because he will and brings to pass, that we
may also prophecy, by professing and celebrating God: According as it is said,
Act. 2.17. I will pour out of my spirit upon all flesh, and your Sons and
your Daughters shall prophecy. Mat. 10.32. whosoever shall confess me before
men, him will I confess also before my father, which is in heaven. Our
Prophetical office therefore is, 1. rightly to understand and embrace the
doctrine, perfect and necessary to salvation, concerning god and his will. 2.
That every one in his place and degree profess the same being understood
faithfully, boldly, constantly, in word and life, thereby both to
celebrate god, and to bring many scholars and disciples unto Christ.

The difference between Christ's Prophetical function and our is, 1. That
Christ has the spirit without measure, we by measure. For it is the proper
spirit of Christ, which flows from him, and is powered into the hearts of
men; we have him by gift. He being but one has all the gifts of the holy
Ghost, and those in the most excellent degree: all we have but only some, and
those far inferior. 2. That Christ effectually teaches, by moving the
hearts of men to accord and assent: the sound and voice of others without the
inward sound and voice of the holy ghost, does only strike the ears, neither
pearceth it unto the heart.

3 WHAT IS THE PRIESTHOOD OF CHRISTIANS.
Christians are pric^^es.
CHRIST makes us partakers of his Priesthood, not only, because he
sanctifies himself for us. John 17.19. and imputes, and gives his sacrifice
unto us, ^ ^y the imputation of Christ's merit.
that for it we may be received of him, and God the Father into favor, and
may be endowed with the holy Ghost and eternal life, even as if in our
selves that Sacrifice were accomplished: and satisfaction made for our sins:
but furthermore, because he makes us also Priests unto GOD. Which he does
after a double manner. 1. When by the efficacy of his spirit he works in us
those things, which we may offer unto god for a Sacrifice. 2. 2 By offering
the sacrifice of thanks giving.
When by his merit and intercession unto his father, he causes our
Sacrifices, albeit imperfect and stained with our sins, to be notwithstanding
pleasing and acceptable unto him.

Wherefore the Priesthood of Christians is to invoke on GOD known aright,
to offer unto GOD all our life certain Sacrifices, namely Eucharisticall,
even Sacrifices of thanksgiving, sanctified by the Sacrifice of CHRISTT. These
Sacrifices of praise, or thanksgiving are, 1. That we offer up our selves
wholly unto GOD to obeie him, that is, that we mortify the oulde man in us,
and begin new obedience, both inward and outward, according to all the
commandments of the Law. 2. Every one to do the duties of his own
vocation. 3. To instruct others. 4. To pray for themselves and others. 5. To
give alms to others. 6. To undergo and suffer cheerefullie, manfully, and
constantly the cross, that is, calamities, persequution, contempt,
banishmentes, and even death it self, for the confession of the truth, and the
glory of god. In sum: The Priesthood and Sacrifices of Christians are, the
worship of God, commanded in his Law, or all good works, done of those
who are reconciled to God, to this end, as thereby to obey God, and do him
honor.

Wherefore the Priests of the new Testament are all Christians, both teachers
and hearers, as they begin new obedience in the knowledge, and faith of the
son of GOD. Roman. 6.13. Give your members as instruments of righteousness
unto god. Again, 12.1. I beseech you, that ye give up your bodies a living
Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto god, which is your reasonable serving of GOD.
Again, 15.16. Grace is given me of god, that I should be the Minister of
Jesus christ toward the Gentiles, ministering the gospel of god, that the
offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable. Luke. 22.32. When thou art
converted strengthen thy brethren. Phil. 2.17. Though I be offered up upon
the Sacrifice and service of your faith, I am glad. 2. Timot. 4.6. I am now
ready to be offered Coloss. 1.24. Now rejoice I in my sufferinges for you,
and fulfill the rest of the afflictions of christ in my flesh, for his bodies
sake, which is the church.

Our sacrifices different from Christ's sacrifice.
Now our Sacrifices differ, as well as the Sacrifices of the old Priests from
Christ's Sacrifice. First, Christ offered up together a Sacrifice both of
thanksgiving and propitiatory: We offer up only Sacrifices of
thanksgiving. The oulde Priests also offered up Sacrifices of thanksgiving:
because these belong to the whole Church, even from the beginning to the end
of the woorlde. But those Sacrifices which they offered besides, were only
typical. But no Sacrifices of the new Testament are typical, but either
eucharisticall and of thankfulness, as are ours; or propitiatotie, as if the
obedience of CHRIST only, performed for us in suffering our punishment. For
he offered not a typical or figurative, but the real or figured and
signified Sacrifice; as being not a typical, but the signified Priest.
Secondly, The Sacrifices of Christ are both perfect: ours imperfect and
defiled with many sins. Thirdly, The Sacrifice of christ pleases God for it
self, and for the worthiness that is proper in it self, and meriteth
remission of sins and eternal life of God for us: because it is the death of
the very son of GOD. Our Sacrifices merit nothing of GOD, and please him,
not for themselves, but for Christ's Sacrifice, wherewith they are sanctified.

4 WHAT IS THE KINGDOM OF CHRISTIANS.
Christians are Kings.

1 By partaking of his victory and roialtie.

2 By having in themselves through him a power to overcome and ouerrule both
their enemies and all creatures.


WE are made partakers of Christ's of kingdom, First, Because he is our King
and does communicate his victory and glory against his enemies and ours,
with us, and makes us by faith citizens of his kingdom, the Sons of God,
his brethren and coheirs. Secondly, Because by the virtue and operation of his
spirit he also makes us Kings; that is, the Lords over all creatures,
conquerers of our enemies, and partakers of everlasting bliffe and glory.
John. 16 33. Be of good comfort, I have overcome the world. Revel. 3.21. To him
that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my throne. Luc. 22.30. That
ye may sit on seats and judge the twelve tribes of Israel. 1. Corinthians,
3.21. All are yours. Our royal office therefore is, 1. That we are Lords over
all creatures: 2. That by the virtue of christ's spirit (who has restored unto
us our lost ^oyal and heavenly dignity, over all our enemies) we fight
continually against sin, the woorlde, the Devil, and the flesh, and
overcome. Which we do, when as by a true faith we are resolved, that we
have remission of all our sins: and when by the same faith we receive the
holy Ghost to repress sin even in this life, as touching the beginning of
our conquest. 3. That at length all our enemies being by the grace of CHRIST
fully brought under, we enjoy eternal bliss and glory, that is, the
heavenly kingdom, which by the woorking of the holy GHOST is begun in us in
this life, and which we now possess in hope, but then shall in full
possession inherit. 1. Timothy, 1.18. Fight a good fight, having faith and a
good conscience. 2. Timothy. 2.12. If we suffer, we shall also reign with
him. Matthew, 25.34. Inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundations of the world.

There is notwithstanding a difference beetweene the kingdom of CHRIST, and
ours. For, 1. The difference between Christ's kingdom and ours.
The kingdom is hereditarie unto Christ. For he is the natural son, and
therefore by nature King: but ours is by right of adoption. Christ as the
natural son, is ruler over his house. Hebrews, 3.6. We are by and for him,
the adopted sons of God. 2 He alone by full right is King over all the
creatures simply, but especially over the whole Church of the holy Angels
and men. But we neither are, nor ever shall be the Kings and head of this
Church; but only over other creatures, which are comp^led to serve us, we
are LORDS. adorned with glory, majesty, and no common excellency of gifts:
and over all wicked men and Devils, whom we shall judge, subscribing, and
yielding our consentes to the judgment of CHRIST in condemning, and destroying
them. Matthew, 19 28. Ye shall sit upon twelve scates, judging the twelve
tribes of Israel. Wherefore the Pope of Rome lies, when he avouches
himself to be the head of the Church. 3. He conquereth his enemies by his own
power: we in him, and by him. Ioh. 16.33. Be of good comfort, I have overcome
the world. 4. He alone rules the Church, with the scepter of his spirit and
word, moving our hearts, and restoring in us the lost image of God: we are
ministers and administratours of the outward word and rites: we cannot give
the holy Ghost, as it is said, Mat. 3.11. I baptize you with water, but he
that comes after me, he will baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire.

The sum of all is: In the old Testament were Prophets, Priests, and Kings,
typical: Christ is those three in signification, and in truth; To believe in
Christ.
we by participation from him. Wherefore to believe in Christ, is not only
to know, that Jesus is the anointed, that is the chief Prophet, Priest, and
king; but to be persuaded, that he is such also unto me, and makes me also
partaker of his unction or anointing, that by the woorking of the holy Ghost
I may also be a Prophet, a Priest, and a King, that is, confess and celebrate
God known unto me; offer up unto him all my life long the sacrifice of praise
and thankefulnes; fight and war manfully against sin, the world, and the
Devil, and at length bear rule over all mine enemies and the creatures, being
adorned with everlasting bliss and glory.

I BELIEVE IN HIS ONLY SON.
TO believe in the only, or only begotten son of God, is to believe, 1.
That this Jesus is the natural and only son of the eternal Father,
begotten of his substance from everlasting, and therefore God by nature,
neither having as touching his godhead any brethren. 2. To believe that by and
for this his natural son I have also obtained the grace, right, and name of
the son of GOD, or am adopted by GOD to be his son. John. 1.12. As many as
received him, to them he gave power to be the sons of God. And Ephesians. 1.6.
God with the glory of his grace has made us accepted in his beloved. Because
Christ is the natural son of God, therefore he is able to make us the
adopted sons of God: yet so, that the assumption and taking of our nature was
to come between. Hither appertains the common place concerning the son of
GOD: wherein these four questions are to be considered.

1 How many ways men are called sons. 2 How Christ is, and is called the
son of God. 3 Why his only begotten, and first begotten. 4 Whether the
son be coeternal with god the father.
1 HOW MANY WAYS MEN ARE CALLED SONS.
EVery son is a son either by nature, or by grace. A natural son.
A son by nature or a natural and proper son is he, who is partaker of his
fathers nature and essence: or, who has the essence or nature of him, whose
son he is, communicated unto him; and that either wholly, as Christ in
respect of his Godhead: for unto him the father by begetting him communicated
his essence whole and the same: or in part, as men, unto whom is communicated
some little severed portion of their fathers essence. Wherefore a natural son
begins at one and the same time both to be, and to be a son.

A son by grace is he, who has the right and name of a son, A son by grace.
not by nature, that is, not that he was procreated out of his substance, whose
son he is called, but only by a free gift of his and by favor. So is he
said the son of God by grace, who not by nature, but by Gods gift, is called
his son. Now the sons of god by grace are of three sorts: some by grace of
creation: The sons of God by grace of creation
some by grace of adoption: some by grace of union. The sons of God by grace
of creation are Angels, and our first Parents before their fall. For that God
should create them, and conform them unto himself, that is, make them
righteous and blessed, and that now also he maintains those blessings in
them, it is his benefit and gift proceeding of his grace. And therefore God
created them, that he might account them for his sons, and they again
acknowledge and magnify him as their bountiful and benign father. And
although they were not borne of the substance of God: yet neither were these at
any time, not his sons, but at one and the same time began both to be, and
to be the sons of GOD. A son by grace of adoption, or an adopted son is
he, Sons by grace or adoption.
who not by birth, but only by the law and will of the adopter receives the
right and name of a son, so that he is in the same place with him, as if he
had been borne of him, whereas before he had been no son. Wherefore an
adopted son begins not at the same time to be, and to be a son, but he
sometime was, when yet he was not a son. After this sort, that is, by
adoption, are our first Parents, after their fall, and so also are all the
regenerat the sons of god. For these by nature are the children of wrath, but
are adopted to be the sons of god, and are made Christ's brethren, not by any
merit of their own, Our fraternity and brotherhood with Christ.
but freely by and for Christ. Ephesians. 2. Furdermore, our fraternity and
brotherhood with Christ consists in these four things. 1. In the likeness
and similitude of our humane nature. For he is true man, procreated of the
blood of Adam, the common father of us all. 2. In the fatherly love and
bountifulnes of god toward us, who for Christ's sake embraces us as his
sons, and heapeth upon us his benefits. 3 In our conformity and
correspondence with Christ, which is wrought by the holy Ghost, whom he
bestows on us. 4. In the consummation and accomplishment of his benefits,
that is, in perfect and eternal righteousness, blessedness, and glory. In
respect of the three latter we are the sons of God by adoption. The son of
God by grace of conception or union is Christ alone, The son of God by grace
of union.
in respect of his humane nature, which by the special working of the holy
ghost, being conceived, formed, and sanctified in the Virgins womb, was
personally united unto the word.

A TYPE OR FIGVRE OF THE SONS OF GOD.
Every Son of God is either By nature, and proper: as is the WORD only,
who has by birth his fathers nature and substance communicated unto him whole
and the same. By Grace, either of Creation, as Angels, and Adam before his
fall. Conception and union, as Christ according to his humanity. Adoption, as
Adam after his fall, and all the regenerate.



2 HOW CHRIST IS THE SON OF GOD.
CHrist is the son of God according to both natures, Christ is the son of
God by nature, according to his Godhead.
but in diverse respects. According to his Godhead he is the son by nature,
and his natural, or proper and only begotten son: because according to this
nature he alone was from everlasting begotten of the substance of his father,
after a manner altogether ineffable, being of the same nature and essence with
him. Ioh. 5.26. As the father has life in himself, so likewise has he given
to the son to have life in himself. The eternal father therefore has
communicated unto his son the life, whereby both himself by himself
necessarily is, and makes all other things to be: which life is that one and
eternal Deity creatresse and defendresse of all things. Christ is the son
of God by grace of union according to his manhood.
According to his humanity he is not the natural and proper son of god;
because his humanity as touching it self, is not the person, and it issued
from the substance of his mother, not from the substance of GOD: But he is the
son of god by grace, not of adoption, because he was at no time not his
son, as that he should be made of no son, or of the son of wrath, the
son of God; but by grace of conception by the holy ghost, and of union with
the word. For his humanity was from the very womb sanctified, and united to
the Godhead of the Word, which Godhead is the son by nature. That Christ
according to his flesh was a son by grace, not by merit of his humane nature.
And that a mass of flesh in so marvelous manner, by the power of the holy
Ghost, should be severed out of the flesh of the Virgin, and that thereof
being sanctified should be formed a true humane body, that is, quickened
with a humane soul, and the same to be united to the very son of god into
one person and subsistence, was not the merit of his humane nature, as which
had not as yet any being, and is in it self but a creature; but the special
and free gift or benefit of God, as Paul in plain words declares, Colos.
1.19. It pleased (says he) the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell.
And Phil. 2.9. God has given him a name above every name. Christ therefore as
touching his humane nature was as the Son of GOD by grace, even presently
from that very moment when he began to be borne man, and that therefore,
because by the virtue of the holy Ghost he was borne, of the substance of the
Virgin, pure from al stain or corruption, and so was personally united with the
Word.

Objection. Every son is either natural, or adopted: Christ according to his
humanity is not the natural son of god: he is therefore the son of god
by adoption. Answer. The Mayor of this reason, albeit it may be granted
according to civil constitutions, yet is it false in divinity; because it
compriseth not a perfect and sufficient enumeration of the sons of God. For
there are sons of God by grace, as the Angels, Job. 1.6. likewise Christ,
according to his humanity, which yet are not adopted sons. Reply. Grace is
adoption: Christ according to his humanity is the son of GOD by grace:
therefore he is the son of GOD by adoption. Answer. The Mayor of this
reason either is particular, and so nothing is inferred thereby: or if it be
generally taken, it is a fallacy. For grace is more large in signification
then is adoption, and is in respect of adoption, as a general in respect of a
special. For besides the grace of adoption, there is also the grace of
creation, in respect of God creating and conforming Angels and men unto
himself: the grace of conception and union, in respect of God the Father, the
son and the holy Ghost, forming and fashioning after a singular manner the
flesh of CHRIST in the womb of the Virgin, and uniting it unto the son.

3 Why Christ is called the only begotten and first begotten son of God.
Christ is the only begotten son of God according to his Godhead only.
CHrist is called the only begotten son of God according to his divine
nature: Because according to this he alone and only was from everlasting
begotten of the substance of his father, and therefore has no brethren of
this generation and nature. For of no other it is said, that the father gives
him to have life in himself: and again, that in him dwells all the fulness of
the godhead bodily. Object. He that has brethren, is not the only begotten.
Christ has brethren. Therefore he is not the only begotten son of god.
Aunsw. The Mayor is to be distinguisted. He that has brethren, to wit, of the
same generation and nature, he is not the only begotten. Christ has
brethren, but not of the same generation and nature: because not any have been
begotten from everlasting of the substance of God the father. Therefore he is
the only begotten son of God in respect of his Godhead. Reply. He that has a
generation or begetting unlike to the generation of other sons, is in respect
thereof said to be the only begotten: Christ according to his humanity has a
generation unlike to the generation of other sons of God. Therefore Christ is
called, not in respect of any eternal, but of this temporal and miraculous
generation, the only begotten. Answer. The Mayor is true of such a son, as
has a generation unlike in the whole kind, that is, both in nature, and in
the manner of the generation. But Christ according to his humanity has a
generation diverse from us, not as concerning his nature, the term or end of
his generation, but only in respect of the manner. For he is true man, Why
Christ according to his manhood cannot be called the only begotten.
having a humane nature the same altogether with ours in kind, but borne after
a singular manner of the virgin, by the operation of the holy Ghost. Wherefore
according to his humanity he cannot be called the only begotten son of
GOD. 1. Because according to this nature he has brethren of the same
generation and nature. Heb. 2.11.14. 2. Because neither the scripture, neither
the Church uses any such form of speech. 3. Because the word, only
begotten, does not design the peculiar manner of his conception and
generation, but the very nature or essence it self, which by generating, that
is, by begetting and by way of birth is produced.

The first begotten (not the first created) he is called according to both
natures. Christ called the first begotten according to both natures.
According to his godhead both in respect of time, and of worthiness: because
he, before all, was begotten from everlasting of the father; and is perfect
God; and all were made by him; and by, and for him are delivered, and receive
the right of sons. According to his humanity also he is called the first
begotten in respect of his worthiness only and right, 1. Because he was
begotten after a singular manner. 2 Because he has his subsistence in the
person of the Word, to the unity whereof the humanity was assumed. 3. Because
he has by his merit purchased the right of sons for others. 4. Because in
gifts, works, majesty, authority, he vnspeakablie excels all the sons
of God, even Angels themselves, and it Lord and head of the^ all. Unto Christ
therefore in respect of his humanity agrees this which of old was signified
by the type of the first born. For after the decease of the father, the
firstborn took two portio^s of his fathers goods, when as the rest had each
but one. Now the cause of that right was his office and function: For he
succeeded into the room of his father, so that he had authority over his
family and the rest of his brethren, and did bear rule over them. Genesis 27. and
29. and 37. So Christ the son of GOD has also right according to his
humanity, over the rest of his brethren, and all the sons of God, and he
but one has received more and more excellent gifts than have all the rest:
because he is the Lord of his fathers house, the rest are his ministers. Now
because we cannot believe, that Christ is the only begotten son of God, and
much less can believe in this only begotten son of God, unless withal we
believe that Christ is true God, even that everlasting Word of the same
substance, dignity, power, and nature with the father; it remains therefore
that herein briefly we deal against the heretics who impugn it.

4. WHETHER CHRIST BE THE SON COETERNAL WITH GOD THE FATHER: OR, OF CHRIST'S
DIVINITY.
WHen the question is made, whether Christ be the eternal son of god, or,
Whether he be that one true and eternal god; these sower things are
demanded. The first is, whether the son of god or the Word be a subsistent,
or hipostasis, or person, in the flesh, and before the flesh that is, whether
in christ, man, there be besides his soul and body a spiritual nature or
substance, which was also existing before Christ, borne of the Virgin, and
wrought and accomplished the works of god, and is the son of god, and is so
called in scripture. That he is a subsistent, the church believes and proves
against Samosatenus, Photinus, Seruetus, and others.

The second is, whether he be a person truly distinct from the father. We
are to hold that the Word is a person distinct from the father, against Noetus
and Sabellius, who would have the same to be the person of the father and the
son, and the holy ghost, which in respect of diverse functions and actions is
now called the Father, now the Son, and now the holy ghost: And therefore were
they called Patripassians: also against Seruetus, who co^foundeth the son and
the holy ghost.

The third is, whether he be equal unto the father.

The fourth is, whether he be consubstantiall, that is, of one and the same
substance and essence with the father.

Those two, namely equal and consubstantiall, are truly and justly maintained
against Arius, Eunomius, Macedonius, etc. and the Tritheits of our time, who
make either the father alone to be eternal, and the son to have been
created of the father before other things: or make the son also coeternall
with the father, but inferior unto the father. Wherefore by these men's opinion,
the father and the son are two essences, and two spirits, and by a consequent
two gods; according to Arius, neither eternal nor coequall; according to the
Tritheites, coeternal indeed, but unequal. A double way of gathering
Testimonies of scripture.
Moreover there is a double manner of gathering arguments out of the scriptures,
whereby the divinity of the son and the holy Ghost, as also other things
questioned in divinity are confirmed. One is, when the testimonies of
scripture are gathered according to the order of the books of the Bible. The
other, when as certain orders or sorts of arguments or proofs are set, unto
which the Testimonies of scripture thereto belonging are referred. Both ways
are good, and both very often necessary for a Divine, when he privately
considers and examineth or discusseth controversies and disputes of
Divinity, and searches what is true in them. The first way is more laborious,
and repeating of the same things: the latter is more short and compendious, and
more fit and appliable both for teaching, and also that the grounds of the
points and opinions of Christian religion may the more easily be conceived of
the mind, and more firmly stick and abide in the memory, for whatsoever
need or use thereof to come.

THE FIRST CONCLUSION. The son of God is a subsistent in the flesh borne of
the Virgin, and before the flesh.
THE orders or sorts of Arguments which confirm this Conclusion, are eight
in number. To the first belong those testimonies, which expressly teach and
distinguish two natures in Christ, as that the humane nature was taken by the
divine nature. The argument is framed thus: He that assumed the flesh, is other
from the flesh, and a subsistent, even before the flesh. The word took flesh.
Again; That which comes into the flesh, is other from the flesh into which
it comes: but the son of God, or the Word, is even the very same, who
assumed and took the flesh, and came in it, John 1.14 Heb. 2.14.16.1. John.
4.2. Therefore, the son of necessity is another nature from the flesh taken,
and a subsistent, even before the flesh borne of the Virgin. For that which is
the son, and puts on and carries flesh, it must needs be that the same
is a person, and was subsisting before the flesh was taken. Hither also beelong
all those testimonies, which oppose in Christ his divine nature to his humane
nature, or flesh, and distinguish that from this, as Romans 1.3. His son made
of the seed of David according to the flesh. Romans 9.5. Of the fathers,
concerning the flesh, Christ came. Therefore there is another thing in Christ
besides his flesh, according to which he is not of the fathers, nor of the
seed of David. Phil. 2.6. Who being in the form of God, took on him the
form of a servant. Wherefore the form of God in Christ is one thing, namely
his divinity most perfect; and the form of a servant another thing, even his
humanity weak, base, and servile. Mat. 22.44. Christ is called the son and
Lord of David. Therefore there be diverse natures in him. John. 2.19. Destroy
this temple, and in three days I will raise it up again. Wherefore there is
one thing in Christ which is destroyed, even his body; and another thing
likewise which raises up his destroyed body, which is the Word, who Ioh. 1.
is called the only begotten son.

1 Objection. The Word, in John, does not signify any person, which was
subsisting before the flesh borne of the Virgin, but only that visible
Preacher or teacher Jesus who was made flesh, That John means by the Word, a
person subsisting before the flesh.
that is, was a man weak, miserable, and abject. Ans. This is a notorious,
manifest, and impudent corrupting of this place. For it is easy for any man to
show out of the very narration of John that the Word signifies an hypostasis
or person, which was existing before Jesus borne of the Virgin. For the Word,
1. was in the beginning, that is, was now before existing, when things were
created. 2. And that Word was God. 3. By whom all things were made. 4. Who is
the author of all life and light. Therefore he is a person existing before all
things. 5. Which lights every man that comes into the world, that is,
all, if not with spiritual, yet with natural light therefore he is their
illuminatour, who were before the flesh which was born of the Virgin. 6. Who
being in the world and not known, 7. Yet came unto his own, 8. being made
flesh, that is, The word was made flesh by taking flesh, not by any conversion
into flesh.
assuming and taking humane nature of the Virgin Mary. For that these words,
the Word was made flesh, have this meaning namely, that he who now from the
beginning was in the woorlde, was made flesh, that is man (which before he
was not) not by any changing or mutation of himself, but by assuming and
taking humane nature; other places of Scripture do demonstrate, Heb. 2.14.16.
He was partaker of the flesh: he took the seed of Abraham. 1. Tim. 3.16. God
was manifested in the flesh. The Word therefore assumed and took flesh, but
was not converted into flesh: that is, the divine nature was distinct from the
flesh taken and assumpted.

Moreover, that Christ, man, was such a teacher, The word was a Teacher from
the beginning of the world.
who not only in the time of his flesh, but also before that was borne, even
from the beginning of the world preached the will of his father unto men and
quickened them: both this very narration of John, and other very many places
do plainly show. He was the life, and the true light which lights every
man. John. 1. No man has seen God at any time: the only begotten son,
which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him. John. 6.51. I am
the living bread which came down from heaven and gives life unto the woorld.
1. Pet. 3.19. Christ went by the spirit, in the days of Noe, and preached
unto the spirits that are in prison, which were in time passed disobedient.

2 Objection. Christ, man, is, and is called God in the new testament.
Therefore they corrupt the Scripture, who say that in this visible man Jesus,
is besides the flesh, an invisible nature, which was existing also in the old
peoples time without flesh. For to say this, is as if a man, in steed of this,
Thou art a Scholar, should say, In thee is a scholar. Answer. That Christ,
man, is true and by nature God, in respect of the nature or Essence of the
Godhead in him personally united to his manhood, is no corruption but the very
voice, mind, and meaning and interpretation of the scripture. Colos. 2.9. 1
Proved by testimonies.
Jn him, that is, in Christ Jesus, dwells all the fulness of the Godhead, that
is, the very full and perfect Godhead, which is but one, bodily, that is
personally or substantially, so that it is of the substance of the visible man
Christ. In Christ therefore there is one thing which dwells, namely the
godhead, another thing in which it dwells, even the manhood which is the
temple of the godhead, John. 2.19.21. and was shadowed and figured by the
Mosaicall tabernacle, Heb. 9.11. Again, Romans 1.3. Made of the seed of David
according to the flesh: and declared mightily to be the son of God,
touching the spirit of sanctification. Again, Phil 2.6. Being in the form
of GOD and equal with GOD, he took on him the form of a servant. By him
all things were made and do consist, both visible, and invisible: he gives
the holy Ghost, lights every man that comes into the world, he alone
kneweth the father, and he to whom he reueileth him etc. Isa. 7.14. Isa. 9.6.
Iere. 23.6. Isa. 25.6.7.8. etc.

2 By contrary properties.
Lastly, that there is a double nature or substance in Christ, both a finite,
and an infinite, is convinced and proved by the diversity and repugauncie of
those properties, which are attributed to the same Christ, but cannot possibly
be together in one and the same nature. Wherefore CHRIST, man, is GOD, not
created and made in time, by reason of the fullness and excellency of his
gifts, but eternal, subsisting before the flesh, borne of the Virgin, and
before all worlds, by reason of the eternal Godhead of the Word dwelling in
his Majesty personally.

Christ the proper son of God.
To the second class or order of Reasons are referred those testimonies, which
show CHRIST to be the proper or natural son of GOD. The Argument or proof
is this: The natural or proper son of GOD, is of necessity partaker of the
divine nature or essence, or substance. But Christ, man, is the proper son
of GOD. Therefore there is in CHRIST, besides his humane nature, which he
took of our kind, a nature or substance Divine, in respect whereof he is,
and is called the Son of GOD, that is, CHRIST is by nature the son of GOD,
and therefore subsisting, and that before the flesh from everlasting: because
he is the son of the eternal father, having the essence of the Father in
number the same and whole communicated unto him from the father. John. 5. The
place is necessarily to be understood, and so was taken of the Jew, of a
natural son.
The Mayor is manifest by the definition of a proper or natural son. For a
proper son is he, who is procreated out of his substance whose son he is,
or he, who is partaker of his Fathers nature or substance. The Minor is
proved by these testimonies of holy Scripture. John. 5.17.18. My Father
works hitherto, and I work. Therefore the Jews sought the more to kill
him; not only because he had broken the Sabbath; but said also that GOD was
his Father, and made himself equal with God. Because CHRIST called himself
the Son of GOD, not adopted, or by grace only, but natural, begotten of the
substance of the Father, and therefore equal with GOD, the Jews did thereof
gather: First, That he challenged unto himself the works of God the Father.
And therefore because they deemed him to be a mere man, they would have him
slain, as a blasphemer and robber of Gods glory, both in this place, and
John. 19 7. And if Christ had meant, that he was the Son of God by grace
only, as are the Angels and men elected, the Jews verily would not have
reprehended that as blasphemy and treason against the majesty of God: for
then they should have condemned themselves of the same crime: because John.
8.41. they say unto CHRIST, we have one father, which is GOD. Secondly, Christ
also does not reprehend this collection of the Jews, or repel it as a
slander, but defends it as being good and necessarily true, in his
answer presently following, wherein he avouches, that whatsoever things
the Father does, the same does he also together with him, as being his
Son: that by the same authority, liberty, power, he raises the dead, and
quickens them who believe in him, by which the Father does: that as the
father has life in himself, so also has he given unto him, as being his
Son to have life in himself, etc.

Wherefore the man Jesus affirms that, which of it self and demonstratiuely
does thereof follow, and the Jews called blasphemy, namely, that he is
the Son of God, not by grace only, but proper and equal with God, that is,
that there is in him besides his humane nature a divine also, which is the
Son, communicated unto him by an unspeakable generation or begetting from
the Father, and according to which he is equal with the Father, and the same
God which the Father is. For where the same power, operations, and works are,
there also is necessarily inferred the same nature, or substance to be, and
that equal. So Christ is called the proper Son of God. Romans 8.3. God sending
his own Son, that is, borne of his own substance. For we are otherwise also
of God, being renewed by his spirit. And in the same Chapter ver. 32. who
spared not his own Son.

Christ the natural and coeternal son of God; which is expressed in
scripture.
1 Objection. It is not found any where in Scriptures, that Christ is the
natural and coeternall Son of God. Therefore it is but an invention of men,
imagining in him besides his flesh another substance, according to which he
should be the eternal son of God. Answer Although these very words are not,
in the very same Syllables, extant in the Scripture: yet there are found the
like, and equivalent, or such as signify the same which these do. For, the
wisdom of God which is Christ and the Son, Prou. 8.22. is described to be
such, as was with GOD from everlasting before his works were made. And further,
John says, that the Word, whom he called the Son, was even then in the
beginning of the world, and was God, creating and preserving all things. But
God is eternal and before things were created, together with which also time
began, eternity only existeth, and may be imagined in mind. Moreover, he is
expressly called the proper son of God Therefore he is the natural son of
God: who has the nature and essence of his father, and that the same with his
father: because the Deity is but one in number, creatresse of al things; also
he has the same whole and entire, because it is indi^isible. Wherefore the man
christ is the same eternal god with the Father, Christ i^ the p^o^er son of
God by nature, not by grace.
by reason of the Deity, which he has simply al one, and the same with the
father: for there are not two eternals: he is also the natural and coeternal
Son of the father, because he is another from the father as touching his
person. Reply 1 Christ is called the proper Son of God, because he was made by
God: as also the church is called the proper people of god. Answer. This is a
corruption of a place of Paul. For Paul, Romans 8.3. and 32. opposes the proper
Son of God to us, and also to the Angels. For both the Angels and we are
made the Sons of God, in respect either of our creation, adoption, and
regeneration by the holy Ghost, or also in respect of both, as the regenerate.
Therefore we being compared with Christ, are not the proper Sons of God.
For so he could not be called the proper and only begotten Son. Wherefore
he is, and is called the proper Son of God, in that he alone was begotten
of the substance of God the Father. Reply 2. The word, says Seruetus, was
indeed always in god, but it was not the son, but in respect of the
filiation or Sonne-hoode which was to come in the womb of the Virgin, or in
respect of man to be borne of the Virgin: that is, The Word, in it self, was
not any invisible hypostasis and substance, which being begotten of the
substance of the Father and distinct from him, was truly subsisting before the
flesh borne of the Virgin, but was a certain relucencie or reflexed shining
in God, that is, that visible image or shape, which appeared unto the fathers
in the old Testament, and afterward passed into the flesh, or into that
visible man Jesus, who alone is the son, in respect of whom also The Word,
or that visible shape, which alone he will have to be the person, is called
the son. Answer. 1. By this is denied, that Christ is the proper Son of
God: Because his humanity issued not from the substance of god. 2. The word is
such a son, as unto whom the father gave to have life in himself, as he
himself has it in himself who when things were created, was even then god;
by whom all things were made; who was the life and the light of men etc. The
word therefore was, and that before Jesus borne of the Virgin, a living,
intelligent, working hypostasis or substance. 3. There should have been no
hypostatical or personal difference between the Father and the Son: because
the Word, according to Seruetus doctrine, had not his proper hypostasis,
whereby he should differ from the Father.

2 Obiect^on. He, who is not named in the Scripture, before the taking of
flesh, the son of god, was not the son of god before the flesh was borne.
But Christ is not called in the Scripture the son of god before his nativity
of the Virgin. Wherefore he was not the son of god before. To this our
answer is double: First, we deny the Mayor. For we know that Gods
revelation and manifesting in the new Testament is clearer than in the old.
And therefore albeit it were true, which these would, That the son of God is
not called the Son, but after the assumption of the flesh; yet
notwithstanding seeing in many places it is showed most clearly that the Son
who took flesh, was before he took flesh; as The word, who is the only
begotten of the Father, was in the beginning. By the Son all things were
made. My Father works hitherto, and I work: it may not be said that
therefore the Son was not before he took flesh, because he was not called
before by this name. And Secondly the Minor is not true. Christ named in the
scripture the son of God, before he took flesh.
For how ever the old Testament be more obscure and dark than the new: yet
is he called by Solomon the coeternall wisdom of God, begotten of God.
Likewise it was foretold that the Messiah should be God and the son of God,
and after an other manner than other sons. Isay. 7. His name shall be called
Immanuell. Isay. 9.6. He shall call his name wonderful, counselour, The mighty
God, The everlasting father, Iermie. 23.6. This is the name whereby they shall
call him, The LORD our righteousness. Psalm. 27. The Lord has said unto
me: Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. Again, Kiss the
Son. 2. Sam. 7. I will be his Father, and he shall be my Son. Wherefore
long before was he signified both to be, and to be the Son of GOD, who
afterward was to be man.

3 Objection. If the divine nature of Christ was without his humane nature the
Son of god, Christ but one son, though consisting of two natures.
there shall be made thereby three sons, namely his Divinity, his
humanity, and whole Christ consisting of both natures. Wherefore there was not
any Son before Jesus was borne. To this we answer, that the Antecedent is
most false. For seeing the Word did take, join, and unite personally unto
himself not another person or Son of God, but another nature, this assumption
or taking makes not more persons or sons: but it is one and the same person, or
one Son, having in him two natures.

4 Objection. If the godhead of oulde without the flesh was the Son, and
now two natures are one Son: there shall be nevertheless two Sons, one
incorporeall, the other corporeal. Wherefore there was not any son before the
flesh. Answer. Neither is this Antecedent true. For one and the self same
Son is, of old incorporeal, of one only nature, and only God; but now
corporeal of two natures, and existing both God and man.

5 Objection. The humanity by it self is not the Son. Therefore neither the
Divinity by it self is the Son. Answer. This reason does not follow:
because there is great dissimilitude of the natures, which are compared. The
Word existed and was a person and the Son, before the flesh was taken and
assumpted. But the humanity was neither before the assumption, neither being
assumpted did it make the person by it self. And therefore the humanity
severally is not the Son, but is in the Son, or is the other nature of the
Son: but the Word both separate and knitted to the flesh is the same Son:
as touching it self it is the Son of GOD by nature, but as touching the
assumpted nature or humanity the natural Son of of man, and the Son of
GOD by grace of personal union.

To the second class of arguments also belong those sayings, which teach, the
man Christ to be the only begotten Son of god. John 3.16. So god loved the
woorld, that he gave his only begotten Son. Ioh 1.14. We saw the glory
thereof, that is, of the word incarnate, as the glory of the only begotten
Son of the Father. For the only begotten is he, who has not any brethren of
the same generation and nature. But Christ as touching his humane nature has
brethren, Heb. 2.14. For as much as the children were partakers of the flesh and
blood, he also himself likewise took part with them. And a little after: He
in no sort took the Angels, but he took the seed of Abraham: Wherefore in all
things it became him to be made like unto his brethren. And a little before: He
that sanctifies, and they which are sanctified, are all of one, that is, of
the same nature humane. Wherefore he is not ashamed to call them brethren.
Wherefore there is in CHRIST another nature, according to which he is the
only begotten Son of the Father, besides his humanity, according to which
both he has many brethren, and is sprung not of God, but of the seed of
David.

Christ is called the only begotten, by nature, not in respect of the manner
of his generation.
Object. The man Jesus is called the only begotten, because he only was
begotten of the Virgin by the Holy Ghost. Answer. It is a misconstring and
corrupt interpretation of the word. 1. For he is so the only begotten, that
he is also the proper or natural son. Now such a one is said to be the
only begotten, not for the special manner only of begetting, but because he
only was begotten of his substance, whose son he is called, or because he
only has his essence issuing from the substance of the Father. 2 Because he
the very same, by whom all things were made and are preserved, who is in the
bosom of the Father, even from the beginning of the world reueiling God unto
the chosen: who being sent from heaven into the woorld took flesh, came in the
flesh etc. he is called the only begotten son of the father. Ioh. 1.18. 1.
Ioh. 4.9. John. 1.14. We saw the glory thereof, that is, of the Word, but not
of the man Jesus, as heretics would have it. For there is no other antecedent
in that place, but the Word. For these words go before; The Word was made
flesh, and dwelt among us: then it follows, and we saw the glory thereof.
If then the Word it self be called and is the only begotten: then Christ is
called the only begotten in this place not in respect of the manner of his
generation of the virgin, but in respect of his generation from everlasting of
the Father. 3 The Words generation, of the father, is often in scripture
discerned and distinguished from christ's generation of the virgin. The
Evangelist, as we see, calls the Word the only begotten of the Father. Of
wisdom it is said, Proverb. 8.25. that before the mountains, that is, from
the beginning, it was formed, or (as the Chaldee paraphrast interprets it)
begotten: but we read in Matthewe, that Jesus, who is called Christ, was borne
of Marie. 4 The only begotten is opposed to Angels and men. But Angels and men
are the Sons of God, either by creation, or by adoption, or by
sanctification, after what sort soever this be wrought by the holy ghost.
Therefore Christ must needs be called the only begotten for this cause, even
for that he is his Son by nature. For after this manner he is the Son of God
only, and truly and simply severed from other Sons. Wherefore to this
second rank or class those places also should be referred, which show, that
we are the Sons of God by adoption, by and for that only begotten Son. For
seeing grace is opposed to nature, and we are Sons by Grace: it must needs
be that Christ is the Son by nature.

To the third class belong those testimonies of Scripture, God is, and is
called the son.
which attribute the name of son manifestly to the other nature also in
christ, which subsisted by it self before and besides the flesh assumpted, and
did work all things. And seeing Seruetus and others are here^n an uproar as
it were and fight for this, that only the man Jesus borne of the Virgin, but
not God or the Godhead is called the Son in Scriptures, and that therefore
before Jesus was borne, there was not any Son of God subsisting: we are
diligently to gather and collect those testimonies, wherein the name of Son
is not attributed to the humane nature only, but also to the divine. The third
argument therefore is this: That which subsisting before the flesh borne of
Marie, created the woorld, and from the first beginning hitherto woorketh the
same things with the Father, the same is a person, and that without the flesh
and before it. But the son of god is called that, which subsisting before the
flesh, created the woorld, and from the first beginning hitherto works the
same things with the father. Therefore the son is a person, and subsisting,
even without the flesh, and before it: that is, Christ Jesus borne of Marie
has another nature besides his humane nature, in respect whereof Christ, even
before his humane nature was, truly existed, and is, and is called the Son of
God. The Mayor of this reason is manifest. For that which works all woorks,
and that with the same authority, liberty, and power, wherewith the Father
does, must needs be a living, and understanding substance, that is, a person.
Now the Minor is proved by testimonies of Scripture. For the very same, who
is before all things, for whom, and by whom, all things were created, and
do consist, who does all things likewise himself, which the Father does;
is called the beloved son of God, the first begotten of all creatures, by
whom god spoke unto us in the last days. Coloss. 1.16. Hebr. 1.1.2. Hebr.
2.10. John 5.19. etc. But the flesh or humanity of CHRST is not before all
things, is not creatresse, but created in the last times, does not uphold or
sustain all things with his word, beck, and effectual will, but is it self
sustained and vpheld by the Word, who did assume and take it. Therefore in
Christ besides his flesh is another nature, which also, before the flesh was
miraculouslie conceived in the Virgins womb, was subsisting, did work, and
is the Son of God. Again, John 3.17. God sent not his Son into the world
to condemn it: The Father sent the Son into the woorlde, but the humanity of
the Son was borne in the woorlde: Therefore he was his Son before he was
sent into the woorlde, Ioh. 5.21. The son quickneth whom he will. Matthew.
11.27. No man knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will
reueile him. But in the old Testament, before Jesus was borne of the Virgin,
some were raised from the dead, and quickened: for there were some from the
beginning of the woorlde who knew GOD aright. Therefore in Jesus the Son of
Marie, is another nature besides his flesh, which is the Son of GOD, and
subsisted from the beginning of the woorlde reueiling GOD unto men; not only
to those of the godly who lived since he took flesh, but to those also who
lived before it. Again, John 3.13.17.19.31. John 16.28. etc. He is called the
son, who came from heaven, who being in earth is in heaven, who came into
the woorlde, not as other men, from the earth, but from above out of heaven,
from the Father. So that then he was, before he came into the woorlde. But the
flesh of CHRIST is not of heaven, neither came it from heaven: Therefore there
must needs be another nature in him, in respect whereof he is the only
begotten Son of GOD, even before he took flesh of the Virgin. Again, He
that was manifested in the flesh, is GOD, 1. Timot. 3. and therefore another
nature from the flesh. For God is one thing, who is manifested, and the flesh
another thing, wherein he is manifested. The Son of God is he that was
manifested in the flesh. 1. John. 3.5. For this purpose appeared the Son of
GOD, that he might take away our sins, and that he might loose the works
of the Devil. Therefore the Son is God, and another nature from the flesh;
that is, the man Jesus is the son of God in respect not only of his humanity,
but also of his divinity, which besides and before the flesh, existed in him,
and by the assumption of the flesh was made as it were visible and conspicuous.
Wherefore it follows also, and that necessarily, that that was a subsistent
and a person. For that which is by nature a son, is also a person. But
Christ's divinity or nature which was also before his flesh, is the Son of
God by nature. Therefore it is a subsistent and a person in the flesh taken or
assumpted, and before it.

To the fourth class belong those places of Scripture, The Word is a person
before Jesus borne of the Virgin: and he is the son.
which affirm Christ, man, to be the word incarnate. The Argument is this: The
word is a person, which both existed before Jesus was borne, and now dwells
personally in the flesh taken of the Virgin. But that word is the Son.
Therefore the son is a person. The Mayor is proved; because those things are
attributed unto the Word, Ioh. 1.1. Ioh. 1 and 5. Reu. 19. which only agrees
to a thing subsistent, living, intelligent, woorking, that is, to a person. For
the Word was before al creatures; with the father; God; by him were al things
made, he was author of al life and light in men: he was in the world from the
beginning, and not known: he has his own country and nation: he came unto it:
in his name men believe: he gives power to be the sons of god to others, by
his own authority and power: he does assume and take flesh, and is therein
manifested, seen, handled, conuerseth and dwells amongst men. The Minor is
proved: Because the Word is called the only begotten Son of GOD, John
1.14.18.34. Reuelat. 2.18. etc. And because the same properties are attributed
to the Word and the Son. For the Son is in the bosom of the Father,
reueiling GOD unto men. By him the woorlde was created. In him is life: he was
sent and came from Heaven, into the woorlde. He took the seed of Abraham.
Likewise the life, which is the word, was with the Father before the
incarnation and manifestation of Christ. Therefore god was even then the father
of the Word, and the Word the son of god.

But, seeing the new Arrians do marvelously deprave by their new and
crafty devised Sophismes this notable place of John, concerning the Word,
subsisting before the flesh borne of the virgin, and creating and preserving
all things, that thereby they might rob and despoile the Son of GOD of his
true and eternal deity; it seemed good here to adioine those things, which
Zacharias Vrsinus some years since noted and drue out as to be opposed against
these corruptions and forgeries, briefly indeed and barely, after the manner
of Logicians, yet such as are learned and sound, whereby also the like
corruptions and wrestings of places of holy Scripture may easily be observed,
discerned, and refuted.

JOHN purposing to write the Gospel of Christ in the first entrance proposes
the sum of that Doctrine, which he purposed to deliver and confirm out of
the story and Sermons of Christ. And seeing the knowledge of Christ consists
in his person and office, The argument of John's gospel.
he describes both: and shows, that Christ is the eternal Son and Word
of God the Father, who taking flesh was made man, that he might be made a
sacrifice for our sins, and might make us through faith in him, the Sons of
God, and heirs of eternal life. This Word then, whom afterward he calls
the only begotten Son of the Father, he says now to have been in the
beginning: which shows his eternity.

These words of the holy Evangelist they corrupt and deprave, who raise
again Samosatenus blasphemies from the pit of hell, expounding this beginning
of the beginning of the gospels preaching, done by Christ. In the beginning,
was
But contrary, S. John and the Church, even from the Apostles and their
scholars time, do understand that beginning of the world, wherein all things
to have been first created by GOD, Moses in the first Chapter of Genesis
recounteth. For John says, that the World was made by him: and further, that
even then in that beginning he was God, and that the true God creator, which
is only one, and was in the beginning of the world. Reply 1. Beginning
does not signify eternity. Therefore we deprave it who so expound it.
Answer. We do not so expound it: but that even then in the beginning of the
world was the Word; and therefore was before the creation of the world: and
whatsoever was before this, was from everlasting: And so is the scripture wont
to speak. Ephesians. 1.4.1. Pet. 1.20. Pro. 8 22 23. etc. where we may see a large
place concerning wisdom; whose eternity is there signified in this, that it
is said to have been before the creation of the world. Reply 2. Beginning,
often signifies the beginning of the gospels preaching. Ye were with me from
the beginning. I said not to you from the beginning. Answer. This shows
that sometimes it so signifies, but not always. And we are still to conster it
of that beginning which the text shows. As also in other places, Revel. 1.8.
I am a and o, the beginning and the end, the first and the last. The woorde]
The corruptors say; The man Jesus Christ is called the Word: because he
speaks and teaches the will of the father. We say, that he is called
indeed the Word for this cause, because he declares God and his will; but
yet in respect of his divinity, not of his humanity. The reasons hereof, 1.
Because his humanity was not from the beginning of the world. 2 Because this
Word was made flesh; that is, took on humane nature. 3. Because this Word
did lighten al men from the beginning of the world, whosoever had the knowledge
of God, and how much soever they had. He was the life and the light of men:
lightning every man, which comes into the world. Again. NO MAN has known
the Father but the son, and he to whom the son will reueile him. Again, NO
MAN has seen God AT ANY TIME, The son which is in the bosom of the
Father, he has declared him. Reply. 1. Heb. 1. It is said, Now God has spoken
unto us by his son. Answer. That is, by his son made man. Reply. 2. He
is not said any where in the old Testament to have spoken. Aunsw. Yes, by the
Angel of the lord, who also himself is Lord. Likewise Isay. 6.9. The Lord
appeared speaking, whom S. Ioh chap. 12.40. affirms to have bin Christ.
Reply. 3. The Word is said 1. John. 1.1. to have been palpable, visible and
so forth. Answer. That is, by reason of the flesh which he took. Reply. 4.
But he is no where said invisible. Answer. John 1.5.10. he is said to
have been in the world unknown: and this John speaks of him as he was
before his incarnation. And then he was in the world invisible. Likewise
John. 14 23. I and the Father will come unto him. And in the same place: I will
not leave you comfortles. I will come unto you. Mat. 28 20. I am with you always
until the end of the world: that is, inuisibly, as is the Father. And if they
will deny him to be with us, because he is not seen, they shall also exclude
the father, Reply. 5. He is with us in power, and virtue: not in essence.
Answer. This objection were rather to be hissed our, than to be refuted:
because he has not an infinite power and virtue, who has a finite essence.
Iere. 10.11. The gods that have not made the heavens and the earth shall perish
from the earth, how much more then the makers of such Gods?

And the word was with God in the beginning] We interpret this: that the
son was coeternall with the Father, and so joined with him, that
notwithstanding he was distinct in person from him. 1. They say: That this
Doctor and teacher, the man Jesus, was known of GOD alone, and not of men,
but he was the Messiah. Unto whom we answer, 1. To be, or not to be with
one, when it is spoken of a person, is never read in this sense, as to
signify, to be known, or not known of one. It is therefore an impudent
forgery. 2. John himself expounds it: The Son which is in the bosom of the
Father: This does not only signify, to be known; but also to be indeed
in the Father, to be entirely loved of him, and to be fellow and compartner
of the secret and hidden counsels of the Father. 3. He says of himself that
he came down from Heaven: That he came from the Father, and came into the
woorlde: that he returns to the Father, with whom he was before. This does
not signify a knowing, or a not knowing, but an existence and being. 4. By
him all creatures were made of the Father: Therefore he was present with the
Father. 5. He was in the woorld, before he being made man came unto his own:
and yet not known. Therefore, to be in the woorlde, and to be known of the
woorlde, are not all one: And by a consequent, neither is it al one, to be
with God, and to be known of God. 6. Christ himself expounds it: J in the
Father, and the Father in me: This signifies not only a knowledge, but a
coexistence and joint being mutual.

And that Word was God] We interpret: That the Word is true god, eternal,
creator of heaven and earth: the same god with the Father, and therefore
diverse from him, as the Word from him that speaks by him, and the Son
from the Father; but having the same nature and essence of the godheade in him,
which the Father has: as CHRIST him self says: J in the Father; and the
Father in me: He is every wherein the Father; as the Father every where in
him.

But they say: that he is GOD in respect of his gifts, worthiness,
excellency, and office: but not by nature. Which they prove: because others
also are in this sense and respect called god: which have not any Divinity of
themselves. Therefore Christ also after the same manner; seeing he also has
his Divinity from the Father. Further they add, That we make two gods, and
deal contumeliouslie with the Father: We answer, That we make not two Gods,
because The Son is one with the Father, as god, that is, having the same
essence in him which the Father has: but is diverse and distinct from him, as
the Son, and having in him the same Deity, which the Father has,
communicated. But they are blasphemous and contumelious against the Father and
the Son; because they honor not the Son as they honor the Father. Ioh.
5.23.

Now that S. John understands a Son, not a made, created and inferior god
to the Father, and a diverse god from him, is proved and confirmed by many
reasons, but some few shall now suffice. 1. Simply and absolutely, without
restraint to any certain circumstaunce, none is called god in the Scripture,
besides the only true god, eternal, creator of the world. 2. That the Word
was god before things were created, and is the creator of all things, Saint
John does teach. 3. He shows, That he is the author and fountain of life
and knowledge in men, even from the beginning. For this signifies the true
light, that is, which is properly and by it self, light it self, and the
original of light in others. 4. This Word gives power to be the Sons of
God. This none can do but the true God alone. 5. We are to believe in his
name. But we must believe in none, but GOD only, as himself proves, that
therefore they must believe in him, because they believe in God, John 14.1.6.
And John 1.23. John Baptist says, that he baptizeth with the holy Ghost: And
CHRIST himself often says, that he will send the holy GHOST from the Father.
But no man can send the spirit of GOD, and woorcke by him in the hearts of
men, but only he, whose proper spirit this is, namely GOD. 7. John Baptist
is called the forerunner of CHRIST, who should prepare his way. But he
prepares the way of the LORD. Isaie 40.3. John 1. verse 23. and Chapter 3.
verse 28. Luke 3.4.8. Christ himself, John. 5.23. says, That the Father will,
that all should honor the Son, as they honor the Father. But no creature,
albeit excellent, can be equalled in honor with the creator 9. Every where,
he is called the true God, and the Lord. 1. John 5.20. This is the true God and
eternal life. Romans 9.5. Who is God over al, blessed for ever, Amen. Acts
20.28. God has purchased his Church with his own blood. Hebr. 1.8. The
Scepter of thy kingdom, is a Scepter of righteousness: and verse 10. Thou,
Lord, in the beginning have established the earth, and the heavens are the
works of thine hands: And cap. 3.3. Christ is counted worthy of more glory,
than Moses, in as much as he which has builded the house, has more honor than
the house: and he that has built all things is God. 10. He is said, to have
come down from heaven; yet so that he remains in heaven: to come unto his
together with his Father, to be with them unto the end of the world. Therefore
he is of an infinite essence, every where present, and working both in heaven
and earth. But his humane nature is finit: Therefore he is God in respect of
another nature.

The Godhead is after another sort communicated unto Christ, than unto
Creatures.
Now to that which has bin objected concerning the communicating of the Deity
unto others, whereby they are called gods, we answer by distinguishing the
diversity thereof. For unto others it is communicated by a created similitude
of the Deity, either of nature; that is, by divine properties created, which
are not equal with the creator (so are the Angels,) or of office: So Moses is
called God, and all Magistrates. But unto the Son Christ it is communicated
by the nature or essence it self, so that the very Deity is his substance.
Which we thus prove. 1. He is the only begotten, and proper Son of God:
the Son of the most High, who also is himself the most High, Luke 1.32. But
he is the proper Son, to whom the substance of the father is communicated.
2. John 5.26. As the father has life in himself, so likewise has he given to
the Son to have life in himself. Therefore the Son also is GOD of himself
living, and the fountain of life. Wherefore this communicating of the Deity
makes him equal with God, and THE SAME God with the Father: so far off is it
from proving the contrary. Reply. 1. Power was given to him being man, John
5.27. Therefore it was not given him by eternal generation. Answer. It was
given to the Word by generation: to man by union of the Word. Reply. 2. It
was given him after his resurrection. Answer. Then was given him the full
authority and liberty of using that power, which he had always.

All things were made by it, Al things made by the Word.
and without it was made nothing] We interpret: That all creatures were made
by him in the beginning: and that also by him is gathered out of mankind and
regenerated thorough the woorking of the holy Ghost an everlasting Church.
They conster it, That by ALL things, are meant those things which are wrought
in the new creation: that is, in the collection and regeneration of the Church
by the gospel, which is called the second creation. Unto which our answer is,
1. by granting this point, (by granting, I mean, not the whole
interpretation, but only this point of the creation.) And if this were the
sense, yet hereof would it also follow, that Christ were very God, and by
nature God. The second creation also, which is regeneration, proves Christ God.
The first reason, which we yield hereof is, Because to work the first and
second creation by his own virtue, power and operation, is the proper work of
one and the same very God. 1. Cor. 3.6. GOD gave the increase. So then is
neither he that planteth, any thing, neither he that waters, but god that
gives the increase. And in the same Chapter v. 9. Ye are Gods husbandry, and
gods building, Heb. 3.4. He that has built all things is god. And Christ
woorketh this new creation not as an instrument, but by his own proper virtue.
Heb. 3.6. Ephesians. 1.23. which is his body, even the fullness of him that fills
all in all things Ephesians. 4.8. He ascended up on high, he gave gifts unto men;
he ascended far above al heavens, that he might fill all things. He gave
some Apostles, and some Prophets: and verse. 16. By whom all the body receives
increase. John 10.28. I give unto them eternal life. Ephesians. 5.29. He
sanctifies the Church and cleanses it by the washing of water through the
word. The second reason is: Because no man can give the holy ghost, but he
that is very god, whose proper spirit it is. But the second creation is not
wrought, but by the holy ghost, who^ Christ the worker and effectour of this
creation sends. Therefore he is very god and Lord. The third reason:
Because the new creation, is the regeneration of the elect to eternal life.
This began even from Adam, albeit it was wrought in regard of the Mediator
which was to come. And it was wrought by the same Mediator the Son, in
regard of whom, or for whose sake it was wrought ever since the beginning.
For CHRIST, as by his merit, so by his efficacy and virtue, is Savior not
only of a part, but also of his whole Church and body, which consists of
all the elect and sanctified even from ADAMS time. Ephesians. 4.16. By whom all the
body receives increase. Isay. 9.6. The everlasting Father, author, preserver,
propagatour, and amplifier of his Church through all ages of the world. Mich.
5.2. The ruler that should come forth out of Bethelem was given from
everlasting to be the head and savior of the Church. He shall be peace,
even before he came out of Bethelem, and the savior of his Church against the
Assyrians, and all her enemies. Genesis 3.15. The seed of the woman shall bruise
the Serpents head. This victory and conquest over the Devil began even
from the beginning of the world. Psalm. 110. David acknowledges the Messiah
also to be his LORD, a Priest, and a King, not only that was to come in the
flesh, but even now present, to whom now long before GOD had said, Thou art
a Priest, that is, whom he had already ordained to this office, living,
woorcking, and preserving the elect. 1. Timoth. 2.5. There is one GOD, and one
Mediator between GOD and Man, which is the man Christ I s^s. Therefore this
man is the Mediator of all from the very beginning, he is the Mediator,
obteining, and giving the blessings, which he has obtained, unto all. I give
unto them eternal life. Ephesians. 1.22. He has appointed him over all things to
be the head to the church. 1. Pet. 1.11. The spirit of Christ in the Prophets.
1. Pet. 3.19. By the spirit he went and preached unto the spirits that now
are in prison, which were in time passed disobedient. Ephesians. 2.20. Ye are
built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, JESUS CHRIST himself
being the chief corner stone. Which place is diligently to be observed. For
then, either Christ is the head, foundation, sanctifier and Savior of a part
of the Church only, which is most absurd: or he was this from the beginning of
the world. Heb. 3. He is made the builder of the house, whereof Moses also
was a part. Hebr. 13. Jesus Christ yesterdaie, and to day, and the same for
ever.

Our Second answer is, by denying their interpretation. For Saint John there
speaks of the first creation. Which we show; First, Because he speaks of
the second afterward. As many as received him, to them he gave power to be
the Sennes of God: Likewise, Of his fullness have all we received: and again,
Grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. Now he therefore sets down the first
creation before, because both creations are the work of the same. That
therefore he might show, that the second creation was wrought by the word: it
was necessary for him to teach, that the first also was wrought by it: For the
same is the Creator and repairer of the world. Secondly. Because he says,
the world was made by him.

Reply. The woorlde here is taken for the Church. Answer. No: for he
adds; And the woorlde knew him not: The same woorlde which was made by him
knew him not. Therefore he means the wicked, whether elect, or reprobate.
Thirdly, other places demonstrate the same. John. 5.17. My Father woorketh
hitherto, and I work. Wherefore both of them from the beginning of the
woorlde, work the works of both creations.

In the same place, verse 19. Whatsoever things the Father does, the same
things does the Son also. And verse. 20. The Father shows him all things,
whatsoever he himself does. Therefore not only the works of the second
creation, but also of the first creation, preservation, and administration of
the world. In the same place it is said; As the Father quickens, so the Son
quickens whom he will. But the Father was from the very beginning the giver of
corporal and spiritual life. Col. 1.16.17. By him were all things created
which are in heaven, and which are on earth, things visible and invisible,
whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers, all
things were created by him and for him. And he is before al things, and in
him al things consist. Thus far of the first creation, that which follows,
speaks of the second creation. Reply 1. All these speak of the instauration
of the Church. Answer. No. Because that comprehends also the Angels. Reply 2.
The Angels also were restored by Christ, and joined to their head. Auns. But
the new creation, is called a restoring from sin and death to righteousness
and life: this agrees not to the Angels. Reply. Heb. 1.2. By whom also he made
the worlds; The worlds, that is, the new Church. Answer. 1 God made the old
also by him: because it is one Church having one head, and foundation. 2 The
Greek word (...) which is used in that place, signifies in Scripture the
world, not the Church. And fa^der when it is there added, Bearing up al things
by his mighty word those words speak of the preservation not only of the
Church, but of al things. And moreover he rendereth a cause, why he is the
heir not only of the Church, but of all Creatures, namely, because he is the
creator and preserver of all things. Heb. 1.10. Thou, Lord, in the beginning
have established the earth, and the heavens are the works of thine hands.
Reply. In these words he conuerteth his speech to the Father, to prove, that
he was able by his power to lift up the Son to divine majesty. Answer.
This is ^^^mpudent shift and elusion. 1 Because it is said before; But unto
the Son, which appertains to both places of the Psalm cited by the
Apostle. 2 Because the Psalm does entreat of Christ's kingdom: and therefore
those words which there are spoken of the Lord, are to be understood next and
immediately of his person, secondarily and mediately of the father.

Reply 1. If he made all things, then then father made them not by him.
Answer. Both he made them, and they were made by him. Ioh. 5. Whatsoever
things the Father does, the same does the Son also. And yet the father
does them by him. Reply 2. The creator cannot be compared with the creatures.
But Christ is there compared with the Angels. Therefore creation of thinge^ ^s
not attributed unto Christ. Answer. He is not compar^d with the creatures in
any proportion, but without proportion. This the place it self of the Psalm
proves. ^he heavens shall perish, but thou do remain. Reply. 3 I^ he
were creator and equal with the Father, he could not sitt^ at his right
hand. Answer. We may inuert this, and sa^ of the contrary rather; if he
were not equal, he could not sit at his right hand. Because none but the
omnipotent and true God is able to administer the kingdom of heaven and earth,
Phil. 2.6. who being in the form of god, thought it no robbery to be equal
with God. Isay. 45.23. Thus says the Lord that created heaven, Every knee
shall bow unto me. This is said of Christ, Romans 14.11. Phil. 2 10. Again,
Isay. 48.12. I am, I am the first, and I am the last. My hand has laid the
foundation of the earth, and my right hand has spanned the heavens: when I
call them they stand up together. These words Christ applies unto himself,
Reuelat. 1.18. and 22.23.

In it was life, In the word was life.
and the life was the light of men] We interpret: That the son of God is by
himself the life, as is the Father and the fountain, giver and maintainer of
al life as well corporal and temporal, as spiritual and eternal, in all,
from the very beginning of the world. John. 5. He has given to the Son to
have life in himself, as the father has life in himself. They conster it:
That the man Jesus is the quickener or giver of life, because in him is the
life of all, that no man without him, and all by him are saved. These are their
words. Unto which we reply: If he give eternal life to all, so that no man
has is without him. Therefore either no man was quickened before he was borne
of Mary (which were absurd) or he was the quickner and giver of life from the
beginning: Even as Ioh. affirms this of him, as being verified in him also
before he was made flesh. Neither can this be understood only of his merit,
whereby he deserved this life for men. For, that life is in him, signifies,
that he is by his efficacy and effectual woorking the quickner and reuiuer,
as himself expounds it, John 5. and 10. and the adversaries themselves
confess. So are we also to understand his illightening of men, that is the
knowledge of God, the author whereof he was in all, even from the beginning,
as himself says, No man knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom
the Son will reueile him. And John Baptist says, No man has seen God at
ANY TIME: the Son has declared him.

And the light shines in the darckenes, The light shines in darkness.
and the darcknes comprehends it not] We interpret it: That this word, eue^
from the beginning has both by natural light, and by the voice of heaue^lie
doctrine showed god unto men: but those who were not regenerated by his spirit
have not known this light. They say, That he shined not before he began to
preach. Unto which we answer, 1. That so he should not have been the true
light, that is, the author of light, and the knowledge of God, but only a
minister thereof, as was John Baptist: but the Evangelist in this respect
makes John Baptist diverse from CHRIST. 2. He should not have been the
illuminatour of all men: which yet themselves are faigne to confess. CHRIST
himself says of himself, and S. John here of him. He lights every man
that comes into the world: that is, either with natural light, or spiritual.

He was in the world.
He was in the woorlde, and the woorlde was made by him: And the woorlde knew
him not] We, as touching the time hereof, say it was from the beginning of
the woorlde unto his incarnation: al which time the Son of god has in the
woorlde, which was created by him, showed god unto men, but is not known of
men. They conster it of the time if his preaching, when he was not heard, but
despised and persecuted. Unto which we answer 1. that S. John teaches the
plain contrary: He was, says he, the life and the light of al men: And
again, He lights every man that comes into the woorld. Therefore, before
his preaching and his nativity of the Virgin. 2. John says, That he was in
the whole world, meaning thereby all mankind: because he opposes to this world
his own nation and country, to which he came. 3. He says, That Christ was not
known of that world, which before was made of him. Now the new world ar the
elect regenerated, who after they are created, that is, regenerated of him,
know him. 4. After that being in the world he was known of it, then lastly he
came unto his own, that is, unto the Jews, being borne of them, and
manifesting himself unto them in the flesh which he took: but he was no less
despised of these. Jf then he was first despised of the world, and afterward
of his own (for this the order of the Prophecy requires) he was despised
before his preaching and incarnation, because in his flesh he manifested
himself to none before the Jews. Other places also show, that he existed
before his incarnation. Pro. 8.30. I was daily his delight reioicing always
before him: And took my solace in the compass of his earth, and my delight is
with the children of men. 1. Pet. 3.18. He was quickened in the spirit, by the
which he also went and preached unto the spirits which were in time passed
disobedient, that now are in prison.

He came unto his own.
He came unto his own, and his own received him not] Here John begins to
speak of his coming into the flesh which he took of the Jews, unto whom he
was promised, and of his ministry among the Jews, and of their contempt
toward him. They confound this part with the former; as if it were spoken of
the same time. But the course of his speech shows that his meaning is, that
Christ was before in the woorlde not known, and afterward came unto his
own, and was not received. Because, although he was now already in the
woorlde, yet then he came unto his own. Therefore here is understood a new
coming, a new manifestation, whereby after a singular and new manner he began
to be in his own country and people, which was then done, when he was borne of
Mary, and from thence forward.

But as many as received him, to them he gave power to be the sons of god,
The Godhead of the son.
even to them that believe in his name] Here is a triple Argument or proof of
his Divinity. First, None can give the power to be the sons of god by his
own power, and authority, but god himself. But Christ not only as a
minister and messenger, but in his own name and of his own authority gives
this power and right. Therefore he is god himself. Secondly, He that makes
other the sons of god, must needs regenerate them by the spirit of god, and
make them partakers of the fathers nature. This none can do but god himself.
Therefore Christ is by nature god, who is able to work by the proper spirit of
god. Thirdly, He gave this power to them that believe in his name. But faith
ought not to rest or depend on any creature, but on god only. Therefore christ
is not a made or created, but the true and eternal god.

And the Word was made flesh] S. John declares the manner how that Word came
unto his own; namely, The Word was made flesh.
that he was made man, and that weak, mortal, like unto us in all things,
except sin. Therefore he says, he was made Flesh, and conuersed among men
for a season. Now he was made man, not by any mutatio^ or change. but by
taking the humane nature unto his godhead.

They conster it, That this Doctor or teacher was (not was made) a man weak,
and base. Which they will prove: because, say they, the (...),
greek word signifies oftentimes not to be made, but to be, as John was a
man, where the same greek word is used. Ans. 1. The word signifies more
commonly to be made, as, All things were made by him; The world was made by
him. In both which places, as in others also, the same greek word is used.
2. It signifies in this place also that he was made. The proofs that it
does so signify, are, 1. Because it was showed before, that the Word
signifies a subsistence or person, which was from the beginning of the world.
2. Because he began to be flesh when he came unto his own. Now he teaches
that Christ did before time lighten all men that came into the world, and was
in the world not known when he came unto his own. Therefore he not only was,
but was made flesh, which before he was not. 3. Other places of Scripture which
teach the same in other words, do not admit any other sentence or meaning.
Hebrews. 2.16. He took the seed of Abraham. Again, verse. 14. He took part
of their flesh and blood. Phil. 2.6. He took on him the form of a servant,
when as he was before in the form of God. Likewise, 2. Cor. 8.9. He being
rich, for your sakes became poor. 1. Tim. 3.16. God is manifested in the
flesh. 1. John. 4.2.3. Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. There is one thing
therefore in Christ which came in the flesh; and another thing, which was the
flesh it self wherein that came.

Reply. The place, Heb. 2. means his delivering of us. Answer. First, the
words which go before. Secondly, the sense shows, that he speaks not
there of any qualities, but of the very humane nature; when as he shows that
therefore Christ was necessarily to have been true man, because men were to
be delivered by him through his sacrifice.

The word full of grace and truth.
And the word dwelt among us full of grace and truth] Christ fulfilled all the
promises, and types, and figures of the law, and did truly perform the office
of a redeemer and Mediator, not only by his merit, but also by his power and
efficacy, as afterward is added out of John Baptists sermon: That this truth
and grace befell unto us through Christ, and of his fulness all, who ever are
saved, have received. Which S. Paul says, even that we are consummated and
made perfect in him: which would not be, except the fulness of the Godhead did
dwell in him personally.

And we saw the glory thereof, as the glory of the only begotten son of
the father] This glory is the divine power, which he showed in his miracles,
in his transfiguration upon the mount, in his resurrection from death, his
ascension into heaven, his sending of the holy Ghost, his power and efficacy
by his ministry.

Now thus far they also agree and confess the same. But when we say further:
The glory of the only begotten.
This glory testifies him to be the only begotten son of God, that is,
the son of God by nature, begotten of the substance of the father, who is
also himself the true eternal God, maker of all things; here they shake
hands with us, and dissent. For they say, that he is called the only
begotten, not because he is the son of God by nature, but because he was
borne after a singular manner, namely of a Virgin, conceived by the holy
Ghost. But this reason is not sufficient. First, because if he be not a son
of the substance of the father, but either by creation, or by adoption, or by
conformation with God, either from the womb, as in Christ conceived by the
holy Ghost, or afterward as in other men; he shall not be the only
begotten: For so are others also the sons of God, both Angels and men, though
not in that degree of gifts, yet in the manner of generation. Wherefore it
remains, that he be the only begotten son by nature, after which manner
no other is the son of God. Secondly, because for that which he is here said,
the only begotten, he is otherwhere said to be the proper son of God. John.
5.18. Rom 8.32. And he is the proper son, who is of the substance of his
father: he that is of an other substance, is no proper son. Thirdly, he is said
to be such a son of the Lord, who is also himself the Lord: which as it is
manifest by other places of both Testaments, so namely by Mat. 4. and Luke. 1.
where of John Baptist it is said, that he shall go before Christ who is
called of the Angel Gabriel the son of the most high, and the Lord God of the
children of Israel, whose hearts John Baptist should turn unto him, and
should go before his face: And of Zachary, he is called the most high,
whose Prophet and forerunner John Baptist should be, whose ways he should
prepare, and unto whose people he should give knowledge of salvation.

NOw let us return unto those orders and classes of arguments and reasons
whereby we prove the eternal subsiste^ce of christ. The wisdom of God is a
subsistent, or person; And Christ is that wisdom.
Unto the fifth class whereof are referred those testimonies, which testify
Christ to be the wisdom of God. The argument is this, The wisdom of god
Prou. 8.22. is eternal, and subsisting before Jesus was borne. But the son
is that wisdom of god. Therefore the son is eternal and subsisting before
Jesus borne of the Virgin. The Mayor of this reason Solomon confirms in the
place before signified, where he ascribes those things to wisdom, which fall
not into any, but which is subsisting, living, and working; as, that it
subsisted in God before things were created, that it was begotten, and so
forth. The Minor we prove. 1. because Solomon says, that that wisdom was
begotten of God. And to be begotten, when it is spoken of such a nature as is
intelligent and understanding, is nothing else, than to be a son. For
although it be true that there is made an exhortation there to the study of
heavenly Doctrine: yet notwithstanding, the name of wisdom to be doubly
there used, and a transition to be made from the doctrine which is the wisdom
or light created in the minds of men (that thereby authority might be gotten
to this wisdom with them) to the uncreated wisdom, that is to God himself,
the author and fountain of the other, those things which are there attributed
unto it, do manifestly convince. 2. Christ the son of god is called Wisdom
and the person which teaches us wisdom. Luke. 11.49. Therefore said the
wisdom of god, J will send them Prophets and Apostles. 1. Cor. 1.24. But unto
them which are called we preach Christ, the power of god, and the wisdom of
god. 3. The same proper functions are attributed by Solomon to wisdom, which
elsewhere are attributed to the Word, and are more at large declared in the
book of Wisdom, cap. 7.8.9.10.

To the sixth class, beelong those places of Scripture, which speak of the of
the of the Mediator. The Argument is this. The Mediator, without whose merit
and present efficacy, there could be no friendship or amity joined between
God and sinfullmen, The Mediator has always been.
must needs have been always in the Church from the very beginning of the
woorlde. This proposition those things confirm which have been before spoken
of the Mediator and his office. But the son of God only (not the Father,
nor the holy ghost) is that Mediator, by and for whom the faithful also of
the old Church were reconciled unto god. Therefore the son of god was
subsisting from the very beginning of the world. The old Church might have
been received into favor for Christ to come, but by him it could not, except
he was then being: for there can be no efficacy or force of him that is
not. Whence it is necessarily proved that Christ was before his incarnation:
for there cannot be friendship between God and men without a Mediator now
existing or being. But in the old Testament there was friendship between God
and men, that is, believers. Therefore either he, or some other was Mediator of
that Church: there was no other, but he only, because there is but one Mediator
between God and man, the man Christ Jesus. 1. Tim. 2.5. But that there cannot
be any amity between God and men without a Mediator now already being,
shall also appear by that which follows. For it is the office and function of
the Mediator, not only by deprecation or entreaty, and sacrifice to appease
and pacify the father, but also to confer and bestow all the benefits, which
he obtains, by his power and efficacy, upon believers, to make the will of
god known unto me^, to institute a ministry, to collect, gather, and preserve
the church, and that wholly. Mat. 11.27. No man has known the father, but the
son, and he to who^ the son will reueil him. Therefore neither did Adam know god
but by the son, and by a conseque^t the son existed at that time. Hither are
referred the testimonies, not only which speak of Christ's merit to come, but
of his efficacy also and power. Ephesians. 1.22. He has made all things subject
under his feet, and has appointed him over al things to be the head to the
Church. Ephesians. 2.20 Ye are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief cornerstone. Christ therefore
is the the foundation, head, vpholder, and governor of the Church: and
therefore also he was before the Church was. John. 14.6. J am the way, the
truth and the life. Ioh. 10.28. J give unto them eternal life. Ioh. 1.4. Jn it
was life, and the life was the light of men. And a little after. That was the
true light which lights every man that comes into the world. Ephesians. 2.18.
Through him we both have an entrance unto the father by one spirit. Ephesians. 4.11.
He gave some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors, and teachers. 1. Pet. 1.11. The spirit of Christ is said to have been
in the Prophets, foretelling the sufferings that should come unto Christ. Hebr.
3.5.6. Moses verily was faithful in all his house, as a servant, for a witness
of the things which should be spoken after. But christ is as the son over
his own house. John. 17.2. As thou have given him power over all flesh, that
he should give eternal life to all them that thou have given him. Therefore
it is Christ, who from the beginning of the woorlde did reueile the will of God
unto men, appoint and ordain a ministry, collect, govern and save his
Church, whereof he is the builder: which seeing it is apparent that he has
done from the beginning of the Churches birth, it is not to be doubted of, that
he has always been subsisting. Ioh. 6.39. This is the fathers will, that of
all which he has given me, I should loose nothing. Wherefore he saves his
Church, and therefore has always been, because the Church has always been
saved and preserved.

To the seventh class are those places referred, in which both the name and
property of Iehoua are attributed unto the Angel, who appeared in the old
Testament unto the Fathers, and was the leader of the people: whom to have bin
the Son of God Christ, both the Church has always confessed, and the
scripture does witness it. The Prophet Malachie has a notable testimony,
cap. 3.1. Behold I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before
me, and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall speedily come to his Temple: even the
messenger of the covenant whom ye desire. This speaks Christ himself by the
Prophet, which is also confirmed by this Argument: Whose way is prepared, he is
Christ: but he that promises, is he whose way is prepared. Therefore he that
promises is Christ. The Mayor is manifest: for not the Father, but Christ was
looked for, and he followed John Baptist. The Minor is proved out of the text
it self. Behold I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way
before me. Wherefore Christ was before he took flesh, because he sent his
messenger, and was also before he took flesh, very God. For he calls it his
Temple, to which he says he will come. But none has a Temple builded in
worship of him but god: therefore it is blasphemous to say, that Christ was not
before he took flesh. Neither does that hinder, because he speaks in the
third person. The Lord will come to his Temple. For he sufficiently shows who
that Lord is, namely not the Father, but the son. I the Lord who send John
before me, and who am the messenger of the covenant. And further it may be
that the prophet does not continue in making Christ speak, but represents
the Father himself, speaking of sending the son. Psalm. 45.6. and Heb. 1.8.
Unto the son he says, O God, thy throne is for ever and ever. Heb. 3.
Christ Jesus is the Apostle, and high Priest, the builder, heir and Lord of
his Church. Heb. 13.8. Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, the same is also for
ever. The Argument therefore is this. The messenger or Angel sent of old unto
the Church, was a subsistent, or person. That messenger is the son of God
Christ. Therefore the son of God was, before Jesus was borne of the Virgin,
truly existing, did work, and was ruler over his church. The Minor is proved;
First, because to be God, and to be sent of God, for to teach, collect,
govern and save the church, that is, to be the Mediator, are things proper
unto the son of God Christ, not to the Father, or the holy Ghost. But these
properties of the son are attributed to this messenger or Angel, as author
and effectour, Exo. 3. and 4. Genesis 32.28.30. Genesis 48.15.16. Secondly, the
Apostle Paul, 1. Cor. 10. teaches Christ to have been present with the people
of Israel in the desert, and to have been tempted and provoked by them.
Therefore the Messenger or Angel, GOD, and CHRIST, are one and the same person.

In the eight Class, The divine Nature in Christ both was before the flesh,
and is the son of God.
are contained those testimonies of Scripture, which affirm Christ Jesus to be
by nature god, and the son of god. The Argument is this: Christ's Divinity
existed before Jesus borne of the Virgin. Christ's Divinity is the son of
god. Therefore the son of god existed before Jesus was borne. The Mayor of
this Argument is confirmed by the reasons already alleged. For first, God is
manifested in the flesh which he took. Secondly, Christ is the proper or
natural son of god, and not man only. Thirdly, Christ is the word.
Fourthly, Christ is that wisdom subsisting. Fifthly, CHRIST is the Mediator.
Sixthly, CHRIST is that Messenger or Angel sent of old to his Church. And to
these reasons comes the seventh: That in Christ is not any created godhead,
but that eternal Deity, which alone is true god. For unto Christ not only
the name, but all the properties also and perfections of the true god are
every where ascribed in scripture: as omnipotency, infinite wisdom,
omniscience, or all knowledge, immensitie, the creation and governance of
things, the salvation of the Church, the woorking of miracles, Romans, 9.5.1.
Timothy. 3.16. Isai. 9.6. Jeremy, 23.6. and elsewhere. And the attributing
and giving unto him of the properties of the true God yields us a more firm
proof of his Divinity, than does the attributing of the name of the true
God, or of the Lord. For the names of God may after a sort be expounded
metaphoricallie: but the Divine property attributed unto Christ can not be
wrested to any other meaning. If therefore we fence and guard our selves with
such testimonies; the adversaries of this Doctrine cannot consist, or stand;
but, will they, nill they, they shall be forced to confess that Christ was
before he took flesh. And if he were before he took flesh; he was
either the Creator, or a creature. But he was no creature: both because he
created all things: and because also he is called creator. Wherefore seeing
the true GOD has been from everlasting, his Godhead also, which is true God,
must needs be subsisting from everlasting.

The Minor is likewise confirmed by the former Argument. 1. The nature which
took flesh is GOD, and the Son of GOD. For neither the Father nor the Holy
Ghost took flesh: Therefore the Son; otherwise the Son of God is not by
nature GOD. 2. The humane nature in Christ is not the natural son of GOD.
Therefore the Divine nature must be that son. 3. The Divine nature in Christ
is the Word. 4. It is Wisdom. 5. According to it Christ is Mediator. 6. The
Deity of Christ is the Angel and messenger of the Lord, sent of old unto the
Church. Therefore the Deity of Christ, is the son of God.

THE SECOND CONCLUSION. The son of God Christ, is a person reallie distinct
from the Father and the holy Ghost.
THat the Word or son of GOD is diverse and distinct from the Father and the
Holy Ghost, not in office only, but also in subsistence and Person, is
proved by four Arguments.

No one person can be both Father and son in respect of him self.
1 None is the same person with him whose son he is, or with him who
proceeds or flows from him. Otherwise, the same thing, in one respect,
should be relative and correlatiue. But the Word is the son of the Father,
and from the Word the Holy Ghost proceeds and is given: therefore the Word is
neither the Father nor the Holy Ghost.

2 Christ himself expresselie calls himself another from the Father and the
Holy Ghost. John. 5.32. Christ another from his Father.
There is another that bears witness of me, namely, the Father, in the same
Chapter, verse. 37. And John. 7.16. My Doctrine is not mine, but his that sent
me. John. 14.16. J will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
comforter.

3 The scripture does plainly affirm that the Father, Three persons
expressed in scripture.
the son and the holy Ghost are three, 1. John. 5.7. There are three, which
bear witness in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, and these
three are one, Genesis 1.26. Let us make man in our image. Job. 10.30. I and my
father are one: he does not say am, but are. John. 14.26. The comforter which
is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you
all things. Ioh. 15.26. When the comforter shall come, whom I will send unto
you from the father, even the spirit of truth, which proceeds of the Father,
he shall testify of me. Matthew. 28.19. Teach all Nations, baptizing them in
the name of the Father, the son, and the Holy Ghost.

4 The attributes or properties of the Persons, namely, The properties of the
persons are distinct and diverse.
sending, reueiling, and their offices are diverse. The Argument is this. Whose
properties are distinct, they are in themselves distinct. But the properties
of the Father, the son, and the Holy Ghost are distinct: therefore the son
is neither the father nor the Holy Ghost. The Minor is proved: because the
son only, and not the father or the Holy Ghost, was begotten of the Father,
conceived by the Holy Ghost, made flesh; sent into flesh: manifested in the
flesh; made Mediator; baptized; did suffer, and died. The Father of himself
woorketh by the Son: The Son not of himself, but of the Father by the
Holy Ghost; the Holy Ghost of the father and of the son. Matthew, 11.27. No
man knows the son, but the father, neither knows any man the father but
the son. These words cannot be expounded after this sort. No man knows me,
but I; and no man knows me, but I. John. 10.15. As the father knows me, so
know I the Father. The sense of these words cannot be this, As I know me, so
I know me: The son of GOD therefore, Christ, is another from the father and
the holy Ghost.

THE THIRD CONCLUSION. The Word is equal with the Father.
THat the Word or the son of God Christ, is no made god; or inferior to the
father, but by nature, true and eternal God, and equal unto the father in
Godhead and in all essential perfections of the Godhead, is confirmed, first,
by testimonies of scripture. 1. John. 5.20. We are in him that is true, that
is, in his son Jesus Christ: This same is very God and eternal life. John.
16.15. All things that the father has are mine. Colos. 2.9. In him dwells
all the fulness of the godhead bodily. John. 5.26. As the father has life in
himself, so has he also given unto the son to have life in himself. Phil.
2.6. Who being in the form of god, thought it no robbery to be equal with
god. John. 5.19. Whatsoever things the Father does, the same things does the
son also, that all men should honor the son as they honor the father.
But the father is to be honored as God. Therefore Christ is God equal in
honor with the father.

Christ has the whole Godhead entirely communicated.
2 He that has the whole Essence of the godhead, is necessarily equal with
the father. But the son of god has the whole Essence of the godhead
communicated unto him. For this, because it is infinite, is indivisible.
Therefore the whole must needs be communicated, unto whomsoever it is
communicated. Therefore the Word or the son of god is equal in all things
with the eternal father in the godhead. The minor is proved. Generation or
begetting is a communicating of the Essence: the Word was generated or begotten
of the Essence of the eternal father; because he is his son, proper,
natural, and only begotten. Therefore the whole Deity was communicated unto
the Word.

3 The Scripture gives the same proprieties and perfections of Divine nature
unto the Son, which it does unto the Father, He has the same properties of
the godhead.
as namely eternity, omnipotency, immensitie, omniscience, the searching of
the hearts and reins.

4 The same works are attributed to the father, He works the same divine
works.
and to the son, as that he is creator, preserver, governor of all things:
that he susteineth all things by his powerful word. Heb. 1.3. that he is
the author and woorker of miracles: Lastly, that he is the giver of the holy
ghost, and that he saves his Church, that is, he ordains and maintains
his ministry, and by it through the virtue of the holy ghost is effectual
and forcible in moving the hearts of men. These divine works attributed
unto the son differ so from the divine properties which are attributed unto
him, as the effects from their causes; so that then his properties work them.

5 The equality of honor and woorshippe, He has equal honor given him.
depends of the equality of Essence, properties, and works. Isai. 42.8. I
will not give my glory to any other. But the Scripture gives equal honor
and woorshippe to the Father and the Son: therefore they are truly equal
in Godhead and in all the perfections thereof. The Minor is confirmed: first,
by Testimonies. Psalm. 97. and Heb. 16. Let all the Angels of god woorshippe
him. John. 5.23. That all should honor the son, as they honor the father.
Reave. 5.13. etc. Secondly, He is called God absolutely and simply: as is the
Father, Psalm. 45.7. and Hebrews, 1.8. Acts. 20.28. 1. Timothy, 3.16. Thirdly,
the Epithets or titles of Divine honor, which are every where in the
scriptures attributed unto the son: As, God blessed for ever: The great god
and Savior: The Lord himself from heaven: The Lord of glory: The Lord of
Lords, and King of Kings: Power and eternal kingdom: Sitting at the right
hand of the Father: The Bridegroom, husband, head of the Church: god of the
temple, which are all the elect: Trust, and Belief in him: Invocation: for he
is woorshipped of the Church as GOD and Bride groom of the Church, at all
times, and in all places: Thanksgiving for his Divine benefits. Furthermore,
albeit the name of GOD especially being put absolutely and without restraint,
does evidently prove the sons equality with the Father as it has been
said: yet seeing that signifies more things, and is also applied to others,
who are not by nature God: we are diligently to collect and have in a readiness
those Testimonies, in which things proper to the true God only, are attributed
to the son, which agree to none else, who are called Gods, and whereby God
himself discerns himself and will have him self discerned from other
creatures and forged Gods. For unto whom the essential properties of any nature
or essence do truly and reallie agree, unto him the essence it self must
needs be given.

The son has all things from the Father, not by grace, but by nature.
1. Objection. He that has all things of another, is inferior to him, of whom
he has them: The son has all things of the Father. Therefore he is
inferior unto the Father. Answer. The Mayor holds and is true of such a
one as has any thing by the grace and favor of the giver: for he might not
have it, and therefore is by nature inferior: but it is false, of him, who
has al those things by his own nature, which he himself has, of whom he
receives them. For seeing he can not not have them, it can not be, that he
should be inferior or should have less than he of whom he receives them.
But the son has all things of the Father, which the Father has, and that
by nature and absolute necessity, that is, in such sort, as that the Father
can not but communicate unto him all things which him self has belonging to
his divine nature and majesty. Therefore he is equal unto the Father in all
things.

The son does all things with the consent of the Father, in like manner as
the Father does.
1. Objection. He that does whatsoever he does by the will of another,
interposed and going before, is inferior unto him. The son will and does all
things by the will of his Father going before. Therefore he is not equal unto
the Father in virtue, dignity and essence. Answer. The son does all
things, his Fathers will going before, not in time and nature, but in order of
persons, so that he will or does nothing, which the Father also will not and
does; and whatsoever the Father will and does, the same also the son will and
does likewise, that is, with equal authority and power. Wherefore the
society and order of the divine operations does not take away, but does most
of al settle and establish the equality of the Father and the son, as also
of the holy Ghost.

THE FOVRTH CONCLUSION. The word is con-substantial with the Father.
THE words con-substantiall, and like-substantiall differ. For (...)
like-substantiall signifies mo persons and like essences, as three men are
like-substantial. For they are both three persons, and three essences of like
nature, that is, agree in humane nature. But (...)
con-substantial signifies one essence and mo persons. In the godhead is not
like-substantial, because there are not three gods; but con-substantial;
because there are three persons of one and the same divine essence. For there
is but one Iehoua, that is, one divine essence, which is the same, and is wholly
in every of the three persons, and therefore every of the^ are that one God:
besides which essence whatsoever is, it is a creature, not God. The Latin
church turns the Greek word, (...), con-substantial, taking substance for
essence. It is therefore the same, that coessentiall, that is, of one and the
same essence.

Furthermore, these three things being declared and set down, namely, that
the Son is subsisting, or a person, that he is distinct from the Father; that
he is equal with the Father; the fourth is easily gotten and obtained against
the new Arrians, to wit, that he is con-substantial with the Father, which is
also in like manner to be understood concerning the holy Ghost For either this
must be granted, or of necessity there are made three gods, which they, though
in words they deny it, yet in very deed affirm, when they frame and feign
three essences and spirits.

The Arguments which show, The Father and the Son to be of one and the same
essence, are these. 1. Iehoua is but one essence, The English translations
retain not the word it self, IEHOVA, but use (the Lord) in steed thereof,
which is the signification of IEHOVA; and therefore in effectual one.
or one god, Deuteronomy. 6.4. But the eternal Father and the Son coeternal with the
father are that Iehoua. Therefore these two are one essence and one God.

The Minor is proved, first, by those places of Scripture which call the son
Iehoua. Ier. 23.6. This is the name whereby they shall call him Iehoua, (or, the
Lord) our righteousness. Isai. 25.6. The expected God and Savior is called
Iehoua. But Messiah is the expected god and Savior: Therefore Messiah is that
Iehoua, whereof the Prophet speaks. Za. 2.8. The deliverer of the Church sent
from Iehoua, which is the Messiah only, is called Iehoua. Mal. 3.1. He is
called Jehoua, whose forerunner was John Baptist. But John Baptist was the
forerunner of the Messiah or the Son of God, Christ. He therefore is called
Iehoua. Hither belong all the places, in which are given to the Angel or
messenger of Iehoua, both the name of Iehoua, and the divine properties and
honors. But that Angel was the Son of God, not the Father. Therefore the
Son is Iehoua. Again, the Minor is also hereof manifest, for that what
things in the oulde Testament are spoken of Iehoua, those in the New are
referred unto Christ, as Psalm. 68.18. and Ephesians. 4.8. He that ascended on high
and gave gifts, is Iehoua: and the same is Christ. As Psalm. 95.9. and 1. Cor.
10.9. Iehoua was tempted in the desert, and the same is Christ. Psalm 97.7. Heb.
1.6. Likewise, Psalm. 102 and Heb. 1.10. He that is to be woorshipped and is
creator of things, is Iehoua: and the same is Christ, Isai. 8.14. and 28.16.
Luke 2.34. The stone of offense. Isa. 41.4. and Reu. 1.17. and 21.6. The first
and the last is Iehoua, and the same is Christ. Lastly the same is proved by
those testimonies which attribute things, that are proper unto Iehoua, unto
Christ also as author and effectour or worker of them.

2 The true God is but one. The Son is the true God, equal with the eternal
Father in Godhead, properties, woorks, and honor, as has bin before declared.
Therefore the Son is that one and the same god, or that self-same divine
essence which is God.

3 Whose essence is distinct, their spirit is not one in essence, which
proceeds of both, and is proper unto both; but is either of a diverse
essence, or compound: whether he be of a part or of the whole essence of them
of whom he proceeds. But one and the same is the spirit of the Father and
the son, proceeding of both, proper unto both, and by him both work
effectually. Gal. 4.6. God has sent the spirit of his Son into our hearts.
Therefore the father and the son are one essence, and the same god: Otherwise
each essence should have his proper spirit and diverse.

4 Unto whom the eternal Father communicates the same essence which himself
has, and that whole, he is of the same essence with him. Unto the eternal
son, the eternal father communicates his essence the same and whole.
Therefore the Son is of the same essence with the father. The Minor is
proved because Christ is the only begotten and proper Son of the Father:
begotten therefore of the essence of the Father. But the divine essence, or
Godhead, by reason of the immensitie and great simpleness thereof, can
neither be multiplied nor divided: Therefore the Father communicates the
same, and that whole unto the Son. Wherefore as in respect that it is the
whole essence of the Godhead, which is communicated unto him of the Father,
he is coequal with the Father; so in respect that it is the same, which the
father has and reteineth, he is coessential and consubstantial with the father.

Now it shall be expedient to set down the general heads of those reasons,
wherewith the heretics both oulde and new oppugn this opinion and doctrine,
that there is both an equal, and one and the same Godhead of the Father and
the Son, and also of the holy Ghost, and to adioine those rules, whereby
answer may be easily and soundly made unto their objections.

1 The heriticks build on most false principles and grounds: such as is this:
If the father begot one Son of his substance, he could also have begotten
more. For answer, this rule is to be held. We are to judge of God
according to his own word, not according to heretical brains: and he is
to be acknowledged such, as he reueileth himself in his word, as being
the eternal Father with the only begotten Son, and the holy GHOST. For
GOD has so reueiled himself, that he begotte the Son, and that one Son
only. Therefore we ought to rest here, and not to imagine false conceits of
our own.

2 They reason out of natural principles or grounds: which are such, as are
true in things created and finite, but false in GOD, who is an essence
infinite: as, Three cannot be one. Three persons reallie distinct cannot be
one essence. That which begets, and that which is begotten, are not one and
the same essence: Likewise, He that communicates his whole essence to
another, does not himself remain the same which he was. To this we answer
by another rule. Those principles which are true of a finite nature, are
foolishlie and impiouslie translated to the infinite essence of GOD. And
arguments of this sort are refuted not by a simple denial of them, but by
distinguishing between natures capeable and incapable of those principles
whereon they ground.

3 Of the properties of the humane nature in Christ, they infer the
inequality and diversity of his godhead. As, Christ suffered, died, and so
forth; Therefore he is not God. The rule whereby we answer to this, is: Those
things which are proper to the humane nature, are not to be drawn to the
divine nature. For Christ died not as God, but as man.

4 They confound the office of the Mediator with the nature or person, that
is, they go from the office to the nature. As, Christ is sent of the Father:
therefore he is inferior to the Father. The rule to answer this, is: The
inequality of office does not infer inequality of nature or persons. Or, as
Cyrill says; The sending and obedience, take not away the equality of power
or essence. So the father is said to be greater than the Son, not in nature
or godhead, but in manifestation. For not the Father but the Son was made
base and miserable in the humane nature assumpted. Where therefore Christ says
that his Father is greater than he, it is meant in respect of his humane
nature, and in respect of his office of the Mediatourshippe.

5 They exclude and shut out the Son and the Holy Ghost from those things
which are attributed unto the Father, as the fountain of all divine
operations: As, The Son says that his works are the works of the Father.
Therefore he is not author of them, neither does he those works by his own
power, but only is the instrument whereby God the Father does them. The rule
and answer hereto is, those things which are ascribed unto the Father as
fountain, are not removed from the Son or the holy Ghost, to whom they are
communicated, that they may have them their own, and proper. For the Son
works (...)
likewise, and in like manner: Unto whom the father likewise did give to have
life in himself. Ioh. 5.26.

6 They detract those things from the Son and the Holy Ghost, whereby the
Divinity in the person of the Father is discerned from creatures or false
Gods. To which this rule answers. As often as in Scripture one person of the
Godhead is opposed to creatures or false Gods, and is discerned from them; the
other persons are not excluded from the Godhead, but only those things are
excluded against which the comparison is made. Or, the Divine properties,
operations, and honor are so attributed to one of the persons, as that
notwithstanding they are not taken away from the other persons of the godhead,
but only from creatures. Again, A superlatiue or exclusive speech used of one
person, does not exclude the other person of the godhead, but creatures and
feigned gods, unto whom the true god, either in one or in mo persons is
opposed. The Father is greater than all, that is, than all creatures, not than
the Son, or the holy Ghost. I give eternal life unto them; that is, no
creature does give it. For both the Father also and the holy Ghost do quicken
and give life. The father only knows the day of judgment, that is, no
creature, and so forth.

7 They wrest the phrase of Scripture to another sense: as, The Son shall
deliver up the kingdom unto the Father. 1. Cor. 15.24. The rule for answer
to this, is: Of the phrase of Scripture we must judge according to the whole
Scripture, that is, by marking circumstances of the text alleged, and by
conference of other places with it. The Son shall deliver the kingdom unto
the Father, not by laying it down, but by manifesting it, or changing the
form thereof. For the Father also reigns now: neither shall the Son ever
cease to reign. Likewise, he shall deliver it, by subiecting all things under
him. So the Father also delivers the kingdom unto the Son, neither yet
does he forgo it.

Other Rules, whereby the objections of the Arrians are dissolved.
1 NOthing hinders, why they, who are equal in nature, may not be in degree
of office unequal.

2 That which the father has given unto the Son, that he should ever have
it, he will never demand of him again: but that which was but for a certain
time given and committed unto him, the same he must needs depart from and
resign.

3 That consequence does not hold in reason, which is brought from a thing
that is respective, to a thing that is absolute.

4 that is said of the person in the concrete, which is proper only to one
nature, but no otherwise than in respect of that nature, unto which it is
proper.

6 There is a double wisdom: one existing in the creatures, which is the
order of things in nature wisely disposed, and the doctrine or knowledge
as well of nature and the Law, as also of the Gospel. Another wisdom is
subsisting in God, which, when it is opposed unto the creatures, is the very
divine mind, or eternal decree as touching this order of things, in the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, that is, it signifies the three
persons: but when it is distinguished from God, then is it taken for the Son
of God the second person only. The former wisdom existing in the creatures
is created: the other subsisting in god is uncreate.

7 God absolutely named in the scripture is never meant but of very God
himself.

8 Whereas the son and the holy ghost are of the Father; and the Father
works by the son and the holy ghost, neither was humbled as the son: the
scripture does oftentimes, especially in Christ's speeches, understand by the
name of the father, the son also and the holy ghost.

9 When god is considered absolutely or by himself, or is opposed to the
creatures, the three persons are comprehended: but when he is opposed to his
son, the first person of the godhead, is understood, which is the Father.

10 The name of God being put simply or absolutely, is essentially taken, that
is, for the godhead it self, and compriseth all three persons: but when the
property of any person is joined therewith, it is taken personally.

11 The Scripture distinguishes the persons, when it opposes or compares
them among themselves, or expresses their personal properties, whereby it
restrains the name of God, common to them all, to one certain person: and it
means them al together, when it opposes the true God to creatures or false
gods, or considers him absolutely according to his own nature.

12 That which began at some certain time to be manifested, may not thence be
concluded never to have been before.

13 The son is wont to refer that to the Father, which yet he has common
with the Father, not making any mention of himself, when he speaks in the
Mediators person.

14 The son is said to see, learn, hear, and work, as from the Father, in
respect of both natures, yet not without a difference still remaining. For unto
his humane understanding the will of God is made known by revelation: But his
godhead does by it self and of his own nature know and behold from
everlasting most perfectly the Fathers will.

15 The external operations of the three persons, if they were distinct, they
should make verily distinct essences: because, one woorking, and another
ceasing, there would be diverse essences: but the internal operations, because
they are the communicating of one and the same whole essence, make not a
diversity, but an unity of essence.

16 When God is called the Father of Christ and the faithful, it does not
hereof follow, that he is after the same manner their father and his.

17 The Father was never without the son, nor the father and the son
without their spirit, in as much as the godhead can neither be augmented, nor
lessened, nor changed.

The principal arguments against the Divinity of the Son and the holy Ghost,
together with the Answer unto them.
1 ONE essence is not three persons, for, one to be three, does imply a
contradiction. God is one essence. Therefore there cannot be three persons of
the godhead. Answer. The Mayor is true of an essence created and finite; that
can not, being one, be the same and whole substance of three, or be three:
but it is false, of the infinite, most simple, and individual essence of the
Godhead. For this as it existeth one and whole together in many, nay in infinite
places and things, so may it be, remaining one, the same and whole essence of
more: yea and moreover it is necessary so to be: seeing the generation of the
Son, and the proceeding of the holy ghost, is the communicating of the
essence of the Father.

2 Whose operations are distinct, their essences also must needs be distinct.
The internal operations of the father, the son, and holy ghost are distinct.
Therefore they have also distinct essences. Answer. The Mayor of this reason
is true of persons having a finite essence: but being understood of the divine
persons it is false, if it be meant of those internal operatio^s, whereof the
Minor speaks. Wherefore inuerting the Mayor, we return it back upon the
adversaries themselves. For whereas the internal operations, namely the
generation of the son, and the proceeding of the holy ghost, are the
communicating of the fathers essence whole and the same in number: it must
needs be that there is not a diverse or distinct, but one divine essence of al
three persons.

3 That which has a beginning is not eternal: But the son and the holy ghost
have their beginning or original from the father, therefore they are not
eternal. Answer. That is not eternal which has a beginning of essence or
nature and time. But the son and the holy ghost have a beginning or original of
person or order, or of the manner of existing, but not of essence. For this they
have one and the same in number with the father from everlasting: and that is
void of al beginning and original, and existeth necessarily from no other but
of it self. Reply. But he who has his original of person from another, is
not Iehoua. But the son and the holy ghost have their original of person from
the father. Therefore they are not Iehoua. Answer. The Mayor is a false
ground. For the scripture does plainly teach both of the^, namely, both the
son and the holy ghost to be Iehoua. Ioh. 5.26. As the father has life in
himself, so has he given likewise to the son to have life in himself: and yet
the scripture withal affirms, that both have their original of person from
the Father. For the Father begot not the essence, but the person by
communicating unto him his own essence the same and whole.

4 The faithful are one with God, not in essence, but in consent of wills. But
the Father and the Son are in such sort one, as the faithful are one with
god, John 17.11.21. Therefore the Son is one with the Father in conjunction
of wills only, and not in unity of essence. Answer. There is more in the
conclusion than in the premises. For the particle ONLY, which is stitched to
the conclusion, is not in the Minor proposition. Wherefore of a Minor which is
but particular, an universal conclusion is ill inferred, after this manner.
There is a certain unity between the father and the son, such, as is between
god and the faithful. Therefore al unity which is betwixt them is such.
Wherefore we say, That the faithful are one with God and among themselves, in
will only, or conformity, or conjunction of minds. The Father and the Son
are one both in will, and furdermore in unity of essence. Wherefore if a wider
and more ample conjunction be put, a streiter conjunction is not thereby
excluded.

5 He that is the whole Godhead, is not any one person of the Godhead, or
there is not any one besides him, in whom likewise the whole God-heade is. But
the Father is the whole God-heade. Therefore the Father is not any one, but
even all the person that is of the godhead, neither are there mo persons,
wherein that godhead is. Answer. We deny the Mayor: Because the same
godhead which is in the father, is whole also in the son and the holy ghost.
For by reason of the immensity and vndiuidablenes thereof, that is communicated
of the father even the same entire and whole both to the son and to the holy
ghost, so that there is neither more nor less of the godheade in every person,
than either in two or in all three.

6 The divine essence is neither begotten nor proceeding of another. But the
Son is begotten and the Holy ghost proceeds. Therefore they are not the
same divine essence, which the Father is. Answer. Of mere particulars nothing
can follow or be concluded. The Mayor cannot be expounded generally. For it
is false, that whatsoever is the divine essence, he is not begotten or
proceeding.

7 The Divine essence is incarnate. The three persons are the Divine essence,
therefore the three persons are incarnate. Answer. Of mere particulars there
follows nothing. The Mayor speaks only of the son: For it is false being
taken generally, as, Whatsoever is the divine essence, is incarnat: This
general proposition is false. For the divine essence is incarnate only in one
of the persons, which is the son: not in all three.

8 The son is Mediator with Iehoua. But the son is Iehoua. Therefore Iehoua
is Mediator with himself. Answer. Nothing follows of mere particulars. For
the Son is not Mediator with all that is Iehoua, but the father. Reply.
Therefore the Father only is pacified toward us: and by a consequent, he
alone is true GOD, not the Son or the Holy Ghost. For he is the true GOD,
who is pacified by the Mediator. Aunwere. We deny this Sequel: For there is
but one will of the three persons, and that agreeing in all things. Wherefore
the father being pleased and pacified for the sons satisfaction in our behalf,
the son also and the holy ghost are pacified, and receive us into favor,
for the same satisfaction.

9 Christ does every where discern and sever himself from the father: he
has a Head, he has a God: he is less than the Father. Therefore he is not
the same God which the Father: or, he is not equal and consubstantial with the
Father. Answer. He discerns and distinguishes himself from the Father, 1.
in person. 2. in office, as he is Mediator: but not in Godhead. So he has a
Head, and a God, and is less than the Father: First as touching his humanity,
in nature and office; then as touching his Godhead, not in nature, but in
office only, and in the manifestation of his godhead. For they which are in
nature equal, may be unequal in degree of office.

10 This is (says Christ. Ioh. 17.3.) life eternal, that they know thee to
be the only very god. Therefore the son and the holy ghost, are not very
god. Answer. First in this place are opposed, not the Father, and the Son
or the holy Ghost, but God and Idols and creatures. Therefore these are
excluded, not the Son or the holy Ghost. And Secondly, there is a fallacy in
transferring the particle ONLY unto the subject THEE, unto which it does not
belong, but unto the predicate God, (...).
which the Greek Article in the original does show. For the sense is, that
they know thee the Father, to be that God, who only is very God. Reply. But
this Argument follows: Maximilian is Emperor: therefore Rodulph is not. Why
the^ does not this follow, The father is God. Therefore the Son is not god?
Ans. These persons are finite, and their essence cannot belong to more: but the
Father and the Son are persons infinite, and their essence may be of more,
namely of three persons.

11 Jehoua or the true God is the Trinity. The Father is Jehoua: Therefore the
Father is the trinity, that is, all three persons. Answer. Mere particular
propositions conclude nothing. And, if the Mayor be expounded generally,
after this manner, Whatsoever is Iehoua, is the Trinity, it is false: For
that, which is Iehoua, may be some one person of the trinity. The whole
Syllogism therefore is faulty, because Iehoua is not taken in the same
signification in both the premises. For the name Iehoua in the Mayor is taken
absolutely and essentially, for the three persons: For one and the same Iehoua
or true God is The Father, and son, and holy Ghost jointly: But in the minor
it is taken personally, for one person of the Godhead, that is, the Father,
who is Iehoua of himself. Reply: Iehoua is one in number. Therefore it is
always taken in scripture after the same manner. Answer. Iehoua is one in
number of essence, not of persons.

12 Where are three and one, there are four. But in God are three and one, to
wit, three persons, and one essence. Therefore there are four in God. Answer.
The Mayor is to be distinguished. Where are three and one reallie distinct,
there are four. But these three in God are not another thing distinct in the
thing it self from the essence, but each is that one essence, the same and
whole, and they differ from their essence only in their manner of subsisting
or being. The manner of existing is not a diverse substance from the existence,
being, or essence.

13 Christ according to that nature, according to which in scripture he is
called Son, is the Son of god. But according to his humane nature only he is
called Son. Therefore according to that only, and not according to his
divine also, he is the son of god: and so by a consequent, the son is not
very god. Answer. The minor is false. For Christ is called the only
begotten and proper son of the Father, and equal with the Father, John. 3.16.
John. 5.18. Romans 8.32. The father has created all things by the son. The
son from the very beginning works all things likewise, which the Father
does, John. 5.17.19. The son reueiled the Fathers will, of receiving mankind
into favor, unto the Church, before his flesh was borne, John. 1.18. The son
was sent into the world, descended from heaven, and took flesh, Heb. 2.16.
John. 3.13.17. But the Word, which is God, is the only begotten and proper
son of God, and took flesh, John. 1.14. And not the humane but the divine
nature of Christ is creatres and works with equal authority and power with
the Father, and descended from heaven. Therefore God, or the Godhead, or divine
nature of Christ is both called in the scripture, and is the son: and by a
consequent, the son is that one true and very God.

I BELIEVE IN CHRIST OUR LORD.
THree diverse speeches are here to be observed. 1. To believe that Christ is
Lord. To believe this is not sufficient: for we believe also that the devil is
Lord, but not of al, nor ours, as we do believe Christ to be Lord of us
all. 2. To believe that Christ is Lord, and that of al, and also ours. Neither
is it enough to believe this. For the Devils believe also that Christ is their
Lord, as he has full right and authority not only over all other things, but
over them also, to determine of them whatsoever pleases him. 3. To believe in
Christ our Lord, that is, so to believe Christ to be our Lord, that in him
we place our trust and confidence, and be thoroughly persuaded, that by him
we are wholly freed and delivered from all evil, and are defended and
safegarded against all our enemies: and this is it, which we especially ought
to believe. Whenas therefore we say, that we believe in our Lord, we
believe, 1. That the Son of GOD Christ is Lord of all creatures: 2. But
especially of his Church, which being purchased with his own blood he
guides, defends, and preserves by his spirit. 3. And that I am also one of
his subjects, whom being redeemed from the power of the Devil he mightily
preserves, rules, makes obedient unto him, and at length enricheth with
eternal glory: that is, I believe that hitherto I have bin by and for Christ
preserved, and shall hereafter be preserved of him thorough al eternity; and
lastly that he uses and will use his dominion and power, which he has as over
all other creatures, so over me, unto my salvation and his own glory. But for
the better understanding of this that has bin spoken, we are to observe these
two things.

1 In what sense Christ is called Lord. 2 For what causes he is our Lord.
1 IN WHAT SENSE HE IS CALLED LORD.
TO be a Lord, is, to have right and power granted by Law, either divine or
humane, over some thing or person, as to use and enioie it, and to dispose
thereof at thy own will and pleasure. Christ therefore is our Lord: First,
because he has care of us, that is, rules, preserves, and keeps us as his
own to eternal life and glory, as being bought with his precious blood.
John 17.12. None of them is lost, whom thou gave me. Ioh. 10.28. None shall
pluck them out of my hand. Secondly, because we are bound to serve him both
in body and soul, that he may be glorified by us. 1. Cor. 6 20. Ye are
bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your body and in your spirit:
for they are Gods. Hereof also we may understand, that the word, Lord, in
the Creed, is not a name of the divine essence, but of his office, and is
referred to both natures of Christ, like as the names of Priest, King, and
Prophet. Christ then is our Lord, not only in respect of his Divinity which
created us, but also in respect of his humanity which redeemed us. For the
humane nature of Christ is the price of our redemption: his divine nature does
give and offer that price unto the Father, and does by the virtue of his
spirit effectually apply it unto us, sanctify, rule, save, and defend us
against our enemies, and does al these things, the humane nature being
privy thereunto, and most earnestly willing it. Yea further, as he is man
also, he has power not only over men, but also over all creatures, and
therefore over the Angels themselves. For the names of the office, benefits, and
dignity of christ are affirmed of his whole person, to speak simply and
properly, by communicating, but not by confounding the properties of both
natures.

2 For what causes he is our Lord.
CHRIST is Lord. 1. By right of creation and government. Christ our Lord 1 By
right of creation.
Of this rule and dominion it is said, Al things that the father has, are
mine. Ioh. 16.15. For by him, and in him are al things created, and by his
mighty word, that is, by his forcible pleasure and will, or providence they are
sustained and governed, and whatsoever good is in all the creatures, that wholly
proceeds from him. And this is a most general dominion which extends it
self unto al creatures, even unto devils and wicked men, albeit not altogether
after the same manner to us, and to all the wicked, and devils. For. 1. he
created us to eternal life: but them to destruction. 2. The dominion which
christ has over the wicked and devils, consists in the right of requiring
and commanding of exercising his power, and bridling his enemies: that is, he
has right and power over the devils and the wicked, to do with them what him
lists, so that without his will and pleasure they cannot so much as move
themselves: And he permits them, by bereauing and destituting them of the
grace of his spirit, to run headlong into sin and eternal destruction. He has
also over us right and power to do with us what him lists: but he
furthermore keeps and gardeth us as his own flock and proper people, whom
he has purchased with his blood; he governs us also and guides us by his
spirit: he woorcketh in our hearts faith and obedience that we may do
things acceptable unto him, and so fenceth us against all the temptations of
the Devil and the flesh, that we may never fall from him. Therefore he is our
Lord after a far other sort, than the Devils and the reprobates.

2 By right of redemption.
2 He is our Lord by right of redemption. For he alone, paying the ransom
for us, delivers us from the power of the Devil: by his spirit regenerateth
us, and causes us to begin to serve him: and in this liberty, whereunto he
has brought us by his merit and power, he also preserves us, against al
both outward and inward enemies, even to the end: and being raised from the
dead he fully enfreeeth and delivers us from all sin and misery, and
endoweth us with eternal bliss and glory. And seeing he has delivered and
freed us, it is manifest that we were Servants; and truly so we were, and are
by nature Servants and bound-slaues of the Devil, from whose tyranny Christ
has delivered us, and hereupon now are we the Servants of Christ: because
us, who were by nature his enemies and deserved to be destroyed of him, he
notwithstanding preserved and delivered. For The reason of this deriuation of
the name Servant could not be expressed in English as it is in latin, from
whence our English word comes.

Serui (which signifies, servants) comes from Seruando, that is, saved or
preserved.


serui, or servants, were first so named by the Romans from seruando, which is
in signification preserved, because, when in the wars they might have bin slain
of their enemies, they were preserved. But this dominion of Christ over us is
special, that is, extends it self only to the Church. Objection. Jf we be
redeemed from the power of the Devil: therefore a ransom has bin paid him for
our redemption: For from whose power we are redeemed, unto him is the price
and ransom due: But God gave not him the ransom: Therefore we are not
redeemed from the power of the Devil. Answer. From whose power we are redeemed
as having bin supreme Lord over us, and holding rightly his dominion over us:
unto him the price and ransom is due. But the devil is no supreme Lord, but
the executioner of the supreme lord, We are said to be redeemed in respect
of god; we are delivered, in respect of the Devil.
which is God, who alone has and holds by right dominion over us. Wherefore
in respect of God Christ redeemed us; for unto him he has paid the price: But
he has delivered us or set us at liberty in respect of the Devil. For we are
given unto Christ our redeemer to be his own, neither has the Devil now
any more right or power over us. And this christ's dominion and power over us
cost him enough, who therefore also has care of it, and preserves it. Of that
Dominion we dispute especially in this place. For the Devil does not
acknowledge Christ to be such a Lord unto him, as we confess him to be
unto us, because he has redeemed us, and because he guides us with his
spirit.

3 In respect of our preservation Christ is our Lord, 3 By right of
preservation.
because he defends us unto the end, and keeps and safegardeth us to
eternal life: not only by defending our bodies from enemies, but our souls
also from sins. Of this Dominion himself speaks: None of them are lost,
which thou gave me. No man shall pluck my sheep out of my hands. He keeps
the wicked to destruction, and defends their bodies only.

4 In respect of Gods ordinance: 4 In respect of Gods ordinance.
because the Father ordained the word and this person Christ, unto this, that
by him he might work all things in heaven and in earth: The Father gave us
unto him, manifested him unto us, to be our Prince, King, and Head, and has
made him heir of al. Now whereas he is our Lord after a far more excellent
manner than others; we also are far more bound to his allegiance and obedience.
For he is so our lord, that he does indeed with us what he will, and has full
right and power over us: but yet he uses that his power to our salvation only.
For we receive daily of this Lord more, and by infinite parts more excellent
benefits, than do any other thoroughout the whole world. And therefore we
ought always to acknowledge the dominion and power, which Christ has over us.
Which acknowledging of his dominion is, 1. A profession of so great a benefit
of christ, as, that he has vouchsafed to be our lord, and to set free us his
enemies into this so fruitful and glorious a liberty: 2. A confession of our
bond and duty. For christ being so merciful a Lord unto us, we ought both in
word and life to profess our selves as his servants to be bound to faithful
subjection and obedience unto him in all things, that he may be magnified of
us for ever.

WHICH WAS CONCEIVED BY THE HOLY GHOST, BORNE OF THE virgin Mary.
In the conception three things to be observed. 1 The forming of Christ's
flesh.
First christ is said here to have bin conceived by the holy ghost.

Whereby three things are signified. 1. That the mass of his humane nature
was created or formed, in the womb of the Virgin, miraculouslie, and beside
the order of things disposed of God in nature, by the immediate working and
operation of the holy Ghost; without the seed and substance of man. Objection.
But we are also formed and made of God. Answer. We mediately, Christ
immediately. 2 The sanctifieng of his flesh.
2. That the Holy Ghost did in the same moment and by the same operation
cleanse this mass, and from the very point of the conception sanctify it;
that is, he caused, that original sin should not issue into it: and that for
these causes. First, that he might be a pure sacrifice and a sufficient
ransom for our redemption, 2. Cor. 5.12. He has made him to be sin for us,
which knew no sin, that we should be made the righteousness of god in him.
Secondly, That he might also sanctify us by his sanctity and holiness. For if
Christ had been a sinner, he could not have satisfied for us, but himself
should have remained in death. Therefore could he not have bin our sanctifier,
neither by merit, nor by his power and efficacy. Heb. 2.11. For he that
sanstifieth, and they that are sanctified, are all of one. Heb. 7.26. Such an
high Priest it became us to have, which is holy, harmless, undefiled,
separate from sinners. Thirdly, John was not agreeable unto the Word the
eternal son of god, to unite personally unto him humane nature being
stained and defiled, where in he dwells as in his own temple. For God is a
consuming fire. Fourthly. That we might know, that whatsoever this son
speaks, it is the will of God, and the truth. For whatsouer is borne of
flesh, which is sinful, and not sanctified, is flesh, falsehood and vanity.
Objection. But he was borne of a Mother which was a sinner. Why then should not
Christ have sin? Answer. The Holy Ghost does best know how to sever sin
from man's nature, for sin is not of the nature of man, but came else-whence,
even from the Devil. Mary therefore was a sinner, but that mass of flesh which
was taken out of her substance, was by the operation of the Holy Ghost at the
same instant sanctified when it was taken.

The third thing which is signified, 3 The uniting of his flesh unto his
Godhead.
in that Christ is said to be conceived by the holy Ghost, is the union of
the humane nature with the Word. For the flesh of Christ was together both
created or formed, and also sanctified and united to the Son, of the holy
Ghost immediately, but of the Father and the Son by the spirit.

It is added further in the Creed, Born of the Virgin.
that he was borne of the Virgin Mary, that is, of the Virgins substance: and
that cheifely for these causes.

1 That we might know, 1 The seed of David.
Christ our Mediator to be the true seed of David, that is, to be true man,
and our brother, who has humane flesh, made not of nothing, neither
elsewhence, but issued from the seed of David, Isaac, and Abraham, of whom
also the virgin Mary her self came, yea of the self same mass of Adam,
whereof both they and we are.

2 That it may certainly appear unto us, 2 Messiah.
That this Jesus borne of the Virgin, is that Messiah promised unto the
Fathers. For it was foretold by the Prophets, that the Messiah, the redeemer
of mankind, should be born of the stock of David, and that by a miraculous
conception and birth, having a Virgin for his Mother. Wherefore seeing both,
that is, both the prophecies and the miracles are in this Jesus fulfilled,
there can be no doubt but that this is the Messiah, true Man, and true God,
the reconciler of GOD and man.

3 That this Christ's birth of a Virgin might be a testimony that he is pure
and without sin, 3 Without sin.
sanctified in the womb of the Virgin, by the virtue of the holy Ghost.

4 That it might be a figure of our regeneration, 4 A figure of our new birth.
which is not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man,
but of God, John. 1.13. Wherefore to believe in Christ which was conceived by
the Holy Ghost, ^^d borne of the Virgin Mary, is to believe, That this natural
Son of God, conceived and borne after this manner, is made true man after a
marvelous order, and the same to be one Christ having two natures united by
personal union one to another; which are his divinity and his humanity; and
to believe farther, that he was holy from his mothers womb, to redeem and
sanctify me, and that I for this Sons sake so conceived and born have the
right of the adoption of the Sons of God. For he cannot be Mediator between
God and men, who is not himself man, who is not righteous, who is not united
with the Word, that is, true, and by nature God and man, and of sufficiency
and ability to bestow his purchased salvation for us, on us. Next after this
article of the conception and Nativity of Christ, for the better understanding
thereof, follows not unfitly the common place, Of the incarnation of the
Son of God, or, Of the two natures in Christ.

THE COMMON PLACE OF THE TWO NATVRES IN CHRIST.
The Questions here to be observed.

1 Whether there be two natures in the Mediator. 2 Whether they be one, or two
persons. 3 If they be one person, what manner of union that is of them, and how
made. 4 Why this personal union was necessary to be made.
1 WHETHER THERE BE TWO NATVRES IN CHRIST OUR MEDIATOVR.
Two natures in Christ.
WHAT there are two natures in Christ, this one reason does show by good
demonstrance: Essential properties, which are opposite, cannot be in the same,
nor be affirmed of the same thing, in respect of the same nature or cause.
Vigilius, lib. 4. One nature does not receive in it self a thing contrary
and diverse. But in one and the same Christ are, and are affirmed of him,
properties diverse and contrary, divine and humane, finite infinite, passible
impassible, and such like: Therefore there must needs be diverse natures in
him, humane and divine. And that the very divine nature, creatresse of all
things, is in Christ, Christ true man and of our kind and nature.
has bin already proved. It remains that we show, a true humane nature to
be in him, and that such as ours is, and perfect, consisting of a body, and a
reasonable soul, of which as of essential parts is made a third substance, to
wit, this particular humanity, which the Word having taken once into the unity
of person, does never lay away again. Which we are to hold against
heretics both oulde and new, whereof some deny Christ's flesh to have bin
formed of the Virgins substance, but will have it brought down from Heaven into
the Virgin, or begotten in her of the substance of the holy Ghost. Others
fancy, Christ to have, in steed of true flesh the likeness, semblance, and
appearancie of a man's body. Others acknowledge indeed, that he has a true
body, but not a humane soul, the room whereof is supplied by the Word
united unto the body.

Against these and the like errors, the sentence and doctrine of the church is
confirmed. First, by plain places of scripture, which testify, christ Mary's
son, to have bin made like unto us in all things, that is, in essence, in
properties, in infirmities, sin only excepted. Lu. 1.31. Lo, thou shall
conceive in thy womb and bear a son. Seeing then the Virgin conceived this her
son in her womb, bare it until the usual time of delivery, and was delivered
of it, as other weomen use to be of their children: it follows, that his
flesh was not brought from heaven, or elsewhere taken, which should but pass
only through the womb of the Virgin: but was formed in the Virgins womb, of her
seed and substance. Heb. 2.11. He that sanctifies, and they which are
sanctified, are al of one: wherefore he is not ashamed to call the^ Brethren.
And a little after: For as much as the children were partakers of the flesh and
blood, he also himself likewise took part with them: Again, In all things it
became him to be like to his brethren. Therefore he has a humane nature of the
same kind wholly with ours. Hereof he is called the fruit of Mary's womb.
Luke 1.42. the first begotten son of Mary, Luke 2.7. made of a woman, Gal. 4.4.
The seed of Abraham, Gal. 3.16. Heb. 2.16. made of the seed of David, Romans
1.3. Borne of the Jews, concerning the flesh, Romans 9.5. and every where, the
son of Abraham, of David, and the son of man: And also Luke 3. his petigree and
stock, concerning the flesh, is deduced unto Adam. Therefore he was begotten
of the substance of his mother Mary, and issued from the same seed of Adam,
from which we did. Luke 24.39. Christ proves himself to be a true man, and
not a spirit, by this, that a spirit has not flesh and bones, as he has
and reteineth, even after his resurrection. Apollinaris the heretic said,
that Christ's body indeed was a true body; but insteede of a soul he had
the Word only. But this man is easily refuted, because Christ should not
then have bin like unto his brethren in all things, except sin. And Christ
himself does plainly confess, My soul is very heavy even unto the death,
Mat. 26.38. And, Luk 2.52. he is said to have increased in wisdom, and
stature, and in favor with God and men. And John 10.18. To lay down his
soul, and to take it again. But to increase in wisdom, and to be heavy and
sad do neither agree unto a body, which is reasonlesse: neither unto the
godhead which is not obnoxious to changes and passions. Hither belongs also
that, Luke 23.46. Father, into thine hands I commend my spirit. And when he
thus had said, He gave up the Ghost. This cannot be said of christ's godhead.
For that being immense and infinite is every where, nether does a removing from
one place to another agree unto it; it is not laid down, and taken up again,
that is, it never departed or was severed from the body, but remains always
united unto it. Wherefore there must needs be in Christ, besides his body and
his Godhead, a true humane soul, which did truly suffer and abide in Christ
these chaunges and the like.

Secondly, it is confirmed by divine promises and prophecies. For the Messiah
in the old Testament was promised to be such a one, as should be the seed of
the woman, of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, etc. But this Jesus, the Son of the
Virgin Mary, is that promised Messiah. Therefore he must needs be true man,
issuing of the blood and posterity of the woman and the Fathers, and therefore
to have been indeed begotten of the substance of Marie, and to have taken true
flesh.

Thirdly, The office of the Mediator confirms the same. The sin of men in
respect of gods truth and justice, could not be punished in any other nature,
than in a humane nature, which should be of the same kind with ours. But in
the Mediator which is Jesus Christ alone, our sins were to be punished.
Therefore he must needs be true man, who has humane flesh, not created of
nothing, or borne else-whence, but sprung from the blood of Adam, as well as
ours. Moreover, It was necessary for Christ not only to take, but also to
retain our nature for ever: Because GOD has decreed to bestow, and does
bestow the benefits, which Christ by his death has purchased for us, by this
man CHRIST upon them only, who are and remain engraffed into his mass and
flesh, as members into their head, or branches into their vine. 1. Cor. 15.21.
For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead.
John. 15.6. Jf a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch and
withers Lastly, It behooved Christ to be made and to continue our brother for
ever, that as he is flesh of our flesh, so we also of the otherside might be
flesh and bones of his flesh and bones, by the same spirit dwelling in us.
Ephesians. 5.30. We are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. John.
5.56. Ephesians. 4.12.16. Romans 8.11. etc. Wherefore except Christ had indeed taken
our nature, without which he cannot be our brother, we should loose that
comfort ever needful and necessary for us, which consists in the
Brotherhood only of Christ with us: I am of his flesh and of his bones.

1 Objection. The flesh of Adam (that is, humane flesh issuing from Adam by
generation unto his posterity) is sinful. The flesh of Christ is not
sinful, therefore the flesh of Christ, is not the flesh of Adam. Answer.
The Mayor proposition has a fallacy of the accident. For it is not
necessary, that of whatsoever the accident of a thing is denied, of the same
the thing also or subject of the accident should be denied: because an
accident does so cleave to the thing wherein it is, as it may be separated
from it. Sin is not of the essence and nature of humane flesh: for that was
created pure of God: but sin came otherwise, by the defection and falling of
our first parents from god. Seeing then the flesh of Adam is sinful only by an
accident, it follows that the flesh of Christ is only in respect of that
accident not the flesh of Adam, but is as touching the substance the same
flesh with the flesh of Adam. Wherefore they deal like Sophisters, who deny
the flesh of CHRIST, for that it is void of sin, to be the same in
substance, or Essence, or kind, with the flesh of Adam. For he that could
in the beginning create humane flesh pure of nothing, is able also by his
omnipotent power, and special working so to form it of the substance of the
Virgin being a sinner, as withal to let and stop any issuing of sin
thereunto, that is, to make it pure and holy. There is no new or strange thing
therefore, if the omnipotent Lord has took humane substance, without the
accident, sin, into the unity of his person. Wherefore this their Argument
shall be rather thus inuerted: The flesh of Adam is true flesh. Christ's flesh is
the flesh of Adam: therefore Christ's flesh is true flesh: and by a consequent,
Christ is true man: as also the office of the Mediator did require, that he
should both be and continue true man. For seeing true men had sinned, he was
to be true man that should make satisfaction. Because it must be one and the
same Mediator, who must always make intercession unto the father for us, and
he must ever continue such, that is, true and very man.

2 Objection. That which is conceived and begotten of another, is of the same
substance with him. The flesh of Christ was conceived of the holy Ghost.
Therefore the flesh of Christ is no creature, but came down from heaven,
issuing from the substance of God. Answer. There is a fallacy in the diverse
understanding of the particle OF. For that in the Mayor signifies the matter
or material cause, in the Minor the efficient cause only, that is: That which
is conceived or begotten of another, transfusing or passing his substance, or
part of his substance into the thing begotten: this is of the same essence
with him who begot it: CHRIST'S flesh was conceived by the Holy GHOST, not that
he transfused or passed his substance into the flesh begotten, but because in
miraculous sort, he formed in the Virgins womb of her substance the body of
Christ, so that it should not be contaminated or polluted with original sin.
For neither could Christ be in that sort conceived by the holy Ghost, as that
his flesh should issue from the spirits substance: and that for these causes.
1. Because if this were granted, then were he not borne man of the Virgin, or
propagated of the Virgins substance. 2. Because God is not changed into flesh.
3. Because the Word took the flesh, but was not changed into it.

3 Objection. Jn God are not two natures. Christ is God. Therefore there are
not two natures in him. Answer. Mere particulars do enforce nothing. For if
the Mayor be taken universally, it is false: whosoever is God, in him are not
two natures: this general proposition is false. The Mayor therefore is true,
as touching God the father, and God the holy Ghost, but not as touching God the
son incarnate. Reply 1. But nothing can be added unto God, by reason of the
great perfection and simplicity of his nature. Christ is God; therefore the
humanity could not be added unto his divine nature. Answer. Nothing can be
added to God, whereby his essence may be changed and perfected. But in that
God the Word, joined the humane nature unto him personally, there came no
change or great perfection thereby to the Word which took it, but to the
nature which was taken. Reply 2. Humane nature cannot come unto him who
dwells in the light that none can come unto. 1. Tim. 6.16. Answer. This is
true, if so God does not assume and take it unto him. Reply 3. But it is
ignominious for God to be a creature. Christ, man, is God. Answer. The
changing of the Godhead into a creature, would have been ignominious and
reprochful unto the Word: but that the godhead should be united unto a
creature is is most glorious unto god, as who by that means has demonstrated
and made known his infinite both goodness, and wisdom, and justice, and
power, to the whole world.

2 Whether Christ be one person, or mo.
IN Christ are two perfect natures, whole, and distinct: and double properties
also and operations natural: but one person, which subsisting in both these
natures, divine and humane, is truly designed by the concrete terms or voices
of both natures. For it was requisite that one and the same should be Mediator
both by merit, and by power. But they who make two persons, make also two
Christ's with Nestorius, the one a man passive and crucified; the other God, not
crucified, and only assisting the man Christ by his grace.

1 Objection. Jn whom are two things which in themselves make two whole
persons, in him also are two persons. But in Christ are two things which make
two whole persons; namely the Word, which is by it self a person, subsisting
from all eternity, and the body and soul, which being united make likewise
a person. Therefore in Christ are two persons. Answer. We deny that part of
the Mayor, to wit, That the body and humane soul do, as in other men, so
also in Christ concur to make a created person of the humane nature, and
diverse from the person increate and eternal of the Woordc. For albeit the
humane nature in Christ compounded of a body and a reasonable soul, is an
indiuidual and particular or singular substance, as being from other
indiuiduals of the same nature distinguished by certain properties and
accidents: yet neither was it or is it a person or subsistence.

For first, A person is that which is not only a particular or singular
thing, but also it self consists and subsisteth in it self, and by it
self, not sustained in or of any other. But CHRIST'S humane nature, now from
the very first beginning thereof depends and is sustained by the person of
the Word. For it was at once both formed and assumed of the Word into unity of
person, and made proper unto the Word: before and without which assumption or
personal Union, it neither was, nor had been, nor should be, so that this
Union being dissolved and loosed, it must needs follow that that this flesh
and this soul should be brought to nothing. Therefore Christ's humane nature
has not any subsistence or person proper unto it self. Secondly, It belongs
to the nature or definition of a person, that it be an indiuidual
incommunicable, and also no part of another. But the nature which the Word took
and assumed belongs to the substance of one Christ, a part also of whom it is
after a sort. Therefore in it self and by it self it is no person. Reply.
That which appertains to the substance of a person, and is a part thereof,
cannot be a person. The word appertains and belongs to the substance of
Christ, and is after a sort a part of him, as well as the humanity. Therefore
neither shall the word be by this reason a person.

Ans. The Mayor proposition, if it be understood simply or universally, is
false. For a reasonable soul, existing in the body, is not a person, but a
part of an humane person, which the soul together with the body does make:
yet notwithstanding the same soul, being loosed from the body, is a person by
it self, not that compound and mortal person, whereof it was a part, that is,
an humane person, but a person most simple and immortal, such as are the
Angels: because it subsisteth out of the body by it self, neither is part of
another. So may it be said of the Word, if it be constred aright and with
indifferency, that the Word in it self, and by it self is not the whole
person of Christ or the Mediator, as he is Christ and Mediator; that is, is
not that whole thing, which is Christ, who is not only God, but also man; and
yet is in it self and by it self the perfect and whole person of the Godhead,
truly subsisting before the flesh was, that is, the only begotten son of
God. For this self same person existing in it self from everlasting, and
remaining for ever most simple and vncompound, is, by the assuming of humane
nature, made in time after a sort compound, that is, the Word incarnate.
Wherefore in respect of the person considered in Union, or incarnate, the Word
is rather considered as a nature, and both it self, and the humane nature may
be called as it were the parts of whole Christ, and are so called also of many
of the ancient Fathers which were sound in faith, not that the flesh assumpted
did add any part to the subsistence of the Word: or as if of the Persons of
the Word, and the humane nature, as being imperfect parts, was made another
perfect person of a certain third Essence, consubstantiall with neither of
those natures of which it is compounded: but because the person of the Word
altogether one and the same, which before the flesh was taken consisted in the
divine nature only, does now after the taking of the flesh, subsist in two
perfect natures, divine and humane, suffering no commixtion, confusion, or
mutation: that is, The person of the Mediator is said to be constituted of
two natures, divine and humane, as it were of parts, because those two are
necessarily required, and do concur to the absoluing and accomplishing of
the work of our redemption. In this sense therefore both by ancient, and
latter Divines, and also by Schoolmen are used well and without danger these
Phrases and speeches: Christ's person is compounded: The two nature are, as it
were the parts of Christ: The person of Christ is, consists, is constituted,
is made of or in the two natures of God and man: the two natures concur, come
together into one person and subsistence: they make one hypostasis or
subsistence: Both natures belong, and concur to the substance of one Christ:
Both are of the substance of Christ: the humanity with the Word, or
contrary, the divine person or subsistence with the humane nature does
constitute or make the substance of one Christ. Of the word and the flesh
assumpted, as of substantial parts does one Christ consist. By these and the
like phrases of speech, used of this mystery singular, and surpassing all
capacity of man's wit, the Orthodoxal, that is, men of a right and sound
judgment in points of faith will signify and some way express this only:
that the two natures are so united and linked in that one person of Christ, as
that they exist wholly in the same person or subsistence, which is, perfect and
whole, proper unto the word from everlasting by nature, and is, whole, made in
time the person of the humanity also now assumpted and destitute of the proper
personalitie thereof: and this it is made by grace of union, so that the divine
subsistence or person of the Word, being in it self most simple and most
perfect, does notwithstanding subsist truly and indiuiduallie in the two
natures. Wherefore seeing the thing it self is clear and agreed upon among
them who are of right judgment and sound in faith, we are not odiously to iar
about words, especially since that concerning these supernatural things, no
words of humane speech can be found, which way at all suffice for the
expressing of them. But as it is not well said, the person took the person, or
the nature took the person: So these speeches are true and agreeable to faith,
The person took the nature: Likewise, the Nature took the Nature. For the
divine Nature is not here considered absolutely or essentially, but in the
person of the word, or personally.

2 Objection. That which subsisteth not by it self is more imperfect than that
which subsisteth by it self. Christ's Humanity does not subsist by it self:
and ours does subsist by it self: therefore Christ's humanity is more
imperfect than ours. Answer. First, if, that which subsisteth by it self, be
opposed to an accident, which existeth by being in another: this part of the
Minor Proposition is false, that Christ's humanity does not subsist by it self:
because that also is a substance. But in this disputation, Subsisting by it
self, is opposed to that, which is indeed substance, but yet depends of
another, and consists in another. So we say that mankind, and the universal
or general kinds of all things do not subsist in themselves, but in their
singulars, as the common nature of all men consists not by it self, but in
particular men. Wherefore for further answer we say, that the Mayor
proposition, being simply, and generally taken, is false. For the soul of
man being loosed from the body, does subsist by it self; the same, while it
remains in the body, consists not by it self, but united with the body:
Neither yet is it therefore to be thought more imperfect, when this rather
does most make to the perfection thereof. For it is created of GOD to this
purpose, that it should together with the body constistute and absolve the
Essence of man, and should be a part thereof. So the soul and body of
CHRIST were created to that end, as to be the proper soul and body of the
son of GOD, and to depend personally of him. That therefore CHRIST'S
humanity has his subsistence not in a created person proper unto it by
nature, but in the eternal hypostasis and person of the Word: it is so far
from bringing any imperfection thereunto (for the subsistence or manner of
subsisting does not change the nature or essence of a thing) that rather the
greatest ornament, glory, and eminency comes thereby unto it: and this is
the chief and principal difference, whereby it differs and is discerned
from all men, and also from the blessed Angels.

3 Objection. A dead and an everliving thing are not the same subsistent or
person. Christ was dead, and yet everliving. Therefore he is not one person.
Answer. The Mayor is either particular, or being taken generally it is
false. For one and the same subsistent, truly and indiuidually subsisting in
diverse natures, even as Christ is, may be said dead and everliving: as one
and the same man is both mortal and immortal in respect of diverse natures
whereof he is made and does consist.

3 What manner of Union this is of the two natures in Christ: and how made.
THE Union of the flesh with the Word was not made in the Essence or nature,
or in any essential property, but in the person of the Word. That this may be
the better understood we must observe:

1 What is to be united in nature, or into nature. 2 What likewise to be
united in person, or into, or unto one person, or according to subsistence.
1. WHAT IS, TO BE UNITED IN NATVRE.
FIRST, Those things are said to be united in nature or Essence, which as
essential parts are coupled to the full perfection or constitution of one
nature or essence, or kind, that is, which make a perfect and whole essence or
kind, and are one essence or substance. So the soul and body are united to
constitute or make the kind or essence, or nature of man: that is, are some
one and perfect man. Whatsoever things then are essential parts of a perfect
thing, they are said to be united in nature, and unto or into one nature.
Secondly, those things also are said to be united in nature or essence, which
are one in nature, essence, or kind, or which are one essence, or of one
essence and nature, or have one common-essence, or unity of nature, or are
joined and agree in one essence. So two men are said to be united in nature,
that is, are one in kind, or of the same humane nature. The three persons of
the Godhead are united in essence, that is, are one in Essence, or are of one
and the same divine essence, in number, or have the same Godhead in common.

So likewise, To be united in properties or perfections natural or
essential, is to get or have the same, or like equal properties essential.
Which is indeed nothing else than to be made, and be one nature, or more
substaunces of the same nature and essence. So two men are united in natural
properties and perfections, because they have the same in kind, or the like,
and therefore are of the same humane nature. The Air in the Chimney, which
gets the perfections or qualities of the fire, as being now become a
flame; and the fire of the burning coals which fiereth and inflameth the Air
next unto it, are two substaunces of the same properties and fiery nature, and
therefore are said to be united in nature and essential properties, that is,
they are two fires in number, but in kind and nature they are one. Likewise
the three divine persons are united in essential properties, that is, have the
same essential properties: which is nothing else, but that they are one
essence, one and the same God.

2 WHAT IS TO BE UNITED IN PERSON.
THOSE things are said to be united in person, which are one person, that is,
which although they differ in natural properties, yet exist in one and the
same individual subsistence: or have altogether the same subsistence. So the
soul and body of man are united and concur unto one person, because they
being united do make one person, or one subsistent, incommunicable, not
sustained in another, or of another. The Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost
are not united in person, or personal properties: because they have these not
the same, but distinct.

By this which has been said, it is manifest, That the Union in nature and
natural perfections, is an equality of properties and nature: but the
personal Union is, when two unlike natures are coupled, so that each reteineth
his natural properties and operations whole and distinct, but yet have both
one and the same subsistence wholly: or, it is the ioining of two natures
different in properties, to constitute the substance of one individual, or
person, that is, such a connection and knitting of them together, as that they
are one individual subsisting by it self, or the substance of one
individual.

But that in Christ the Union of the flesh with the Word is not essential,
made in the nature, or any essential property of the Godhead, is showed by
these reasons. First, Of the Godhead and the flesh assumpted, there arises
not any third Essence: but each is and abides an Essence so perfect and
whole, as neither (especially the Divine, as being in it self a person and
simply void of all change) comes into the composition or compounding (as
we properly take this Word) of the other, Secondly, Jf the Union of the
flesh with the Word were essential; it would follow, that the humanity once
assumpted and taken was equalled with the Godhead, in essential properties,
and so by a consequent, to be made of the same nature and essence with the
Word. So Vigilius in his fourth book shows, that the Eutychians held two
substances to be in Christ of the same nature. Wherefore they who will have the
essential properties of the Godhead to be reallie communicated and common with
the flesh, so that the flesh should truly and reallie be, and be called
omnipotent, omniscient, and whatsoever else the Godhead is: they indeed,
howsoever in words they mightily stand against it, hold this Union to be
made in essential properties and in nature, and both with Eutyches and
Schwenckfield, they confound both natures, and take away the difference
between the creature and the Creator; and also with Nestorius they frame and
make two persons, and so bring in a quaternitie. For albeit they say, that they
in that their confusion, or as themselves call it with their Master
Schwenkfield, Deifiyng and Maiesticall exaltation of the flesh, do retain
the substance of the flesh: yet two substaunces having reallie the same and
like perfections are two Subsistents or persons of one nature, as are two men,
and whatsoever other indiuiduals of the same kind or nature. Lastly with
Sabellius and the Patripassians they incarnate the whole Trinity. For there is
one and the same Essence in number of the divine persons, and the same
essential properties. Wherefore that which is united, and equalled with one of
these three according to essence, must needs be also united and equalled with
the rest.

Wherefore the Union of both natures in Christ is personal, or according to
the subsistence proper unto the Word, both natures keeping and retaining, in
that union, their properties whole and unconfounded. For the Word did not, by
uniting humane nature unto it, make the same the Godhead, or GOD, and
omnipotent, immense, and infinite: but it took the manhood which reteineth
still the properties belonging unto it, and so did join and knitte it unto it
self, as to be one person with it, and the substance of one Christ. Neither
is it absurd, that a thing which neither is made or is one with another in
kind, neither any Homogeneal part thereof, should yet exist in the same
subsistence with it, or should subsist in it self, wherewith it is united.
For a graffe has his subsisting in a tree of another nature or kind. The same
is the subsistence both of the sprig, engraffed, and of the tree susteining the
sprig: that is, they are one and the same individual tree, yet have they and
so do retain natures in properties most diverse. The like reason is there in
the two natures of Christ both subsisting in or of the same person of the son.

Objection. The humane nature is united with the Word in person, but not in
nature. Therefore the person is divorced and sundered from the nature. Again,
The person only of the son is united with the humane nature: therefore not
the divine nature it self of the Word. Answer. In both these Arguments is a
fallacy from that which is no cause, as if it were a cause, and both offend in
this: for that they who so reason against the maintainers of true doctrine, and
men sound in faith, either know not, or are not willing to distinguish
between these two Phrases of speech, To be united in nature, and, to be
united too or with a nature: when notwithstanding the difference is very great,
and most familiar, and known unto the schoolmen. For to be united in nature,
is to be equalled, that is, to be made one essence or nature with another: To
be united too or with a nature, is to be coupled and joined therewith to one
subsistence or personalitie. Wherefore the flesh is united to or with the the
Word, not in nature, or in Essential property, that is, it is not made with
the Word one essence, neither made equal unto it in omnipotency, wisdom,
and nature: for so should the whole Trinity be incarnate: Yet is it united
to the omnipotency, wisdom, nature and essence of God, not simply, but of
god the Word. Now this is nothing else, than the flesh to be united to the
person of the son, or to the Word in person, which person is the very
divine nature or essence, omnipotent, wise, and whatsoever else is proper to
the Godhead.

But albeit the flesh taken or assumpted is truly united both to the person
and to the nature of the Word: For the person is not any several thing, or
reallie differing from the essence, but is the essence it self: yet is it well
said, that the flesh is united to the Word in person only: and Likewise, that
the person only of the Word is incarnate. The reasons hereof are, 1. Because
not the Father nor the Holy Ghost were incarnate but the son only. 2.
Because the first and nearest term of this union is the person only of the
Word assuming and taking the flesh, but not the Godhead. For the person only
is proper unto the Word: the essence of the Godhead is common to him and the
same with the Father and the Holy Ghost. This is plainly taught by the 6.
Toletan Council, Cap. 1. in these words: The son only took the humanity in
singularity of person, not in unity of divine nature, that is, in that, which
is proper unto the son, not which is common to the Trinity. And Rusticus in
his dialog against the Acephalists: Not god the Word by the divine nature, but
the divine nature by the person of god the Word is said to be united to the
flesh. And a little after: Wherefore both God the Word and his nature is
incarnate: he by him self, and in that he is himself: his nature not so, but
by the person. God the Word then as touching himself is united to the flesh,
for he is made one person and one subsistence with the flesh; but as touching
his nature he is conjoined rather than united: because there remain still two
natures.

Wherefore either foul and shameful is the folly, or notorious the malice
and slander of certain smatterers, that of this very orthodoxall and sound
position not of the schoolmen only, but of Councels also and ancient Fathers,
The flesh is united to the Word, in person only, or according to subsistence;
and this only makes the proper difference of personal union: they inffer,
that by this means the divine nature of the Word is drawn away from the
personal union. But let them again and again look unto it, least by that
their real communicating of the essential properties of the Godhead (which
are the very divine essence common to the son with the Father and the holy
Ghost) which communication they will have to be the personal union which they
define by it, they overthrow as well the eternal Godhead of Christ man, as
also the manhood it self; and withal plainly incarnate the whole Trinity.

That then one and the same Christ is, and is called truly and reallie the
very eternal God, immense, omnipotent* creator; and true natural man,
finite, weak, subject to passions and sufferinges, and a creature: the only
cause is the unity of person subsisting in two natures perfect, whole, and
reallie distinct, divine and humane. For every individual and person is
denominated or named of the natures or forms, and their properties and
operations, co^curring or subsisting in it. Wherefore seeing in the same
individual person of the Word do truly subsist, and belong to the substance
of one Christ, these two most diverse natures: unto one and the same Christ, of
which soever nature he be called, do agree, and are affirmed of him all the
attributes and properties both divine and humane, but after a diverse manner.
For the attributes which agree to Christ in respect of the personal union, are
of two sorts: some are attributes or properties of the natures: others, of his
office.

The natural attributes are those which are proper to each nature: whether the
same be essential, belonging to the essence of the thing, or which
necessarily follow and accompany it, without which the nature can not
consist: or accidental, which may be away and wanting, without the
destruction of the nature. The essential properties and perfections of the
Godhead are, to be eternal, uncreate, immense, every where present, not to be
circumscribed in place, omnipotent, omniscient, and the like, which are the
very essence of the Godhead, as also to create, to give the Holy Ghost, to
regenerate.

The essential attributes of the humanity are, to have a soul understanding,
immortal; and a body compounded of elements, consisting of skin, blood,
flesh, bones, veins and sinowes, having a certain and definite greatenesse,
figure, proportion and collocation or localnes of parts: and therefore to be
circumscried in one place, to be solid, visible, palpable and such like. These
Christ reteineth for ever, because without these nothing can be a humane
nature. The accidental properties of the humanity are those infirmities which
ensued upon sin, which infirmities Christ together with the humane nature it
self assumed and took without sin. For he took the form of a servant,
which by his resurrection and ascension he laid down again.

The attributes of his office are called those, which agree not to one nature
only, but to both together, that is, it agrees to the whole person, according
to both natures, as being the compound of both.

A rule to be observed as touching the attributes or properties of both natures
in Christ.
BOTH natures, and their properties are truly and reallie affirmed of the
person and of themselves interchangeably, in concrete terms or voices: yet so,
that the proper predicate which is proper unto one nature is attributed to the
person, not according to both natures, but according to that only, to which it
is proper. The reason is, for that one and the same person subsisting in two
natures, has and reteineth for ever reallie the properties of both natures:
and also because one and the same person is signified by the concrete voices of
both natures. As therefore one and the same man is living and corporeal
according to diverse natures: and the corporeal is living by the soul only,
and contrarily, the living is corporeal by the body only: For both soul and
body are of the substance and essence of the same man: So likewise one and the
same Christ, is God, eternal, immense, omnipotent, according to the Godhead
only: is man, the Virgins son, created, finite infirm, and did suffer,
according to his humanity only: So likewise God is man, borne of a Virgin,
anointed with the holy Ghost, and suffered, according to the flesh; And man is
God, eternal, creator, omnipotent, gives the holy Ghost, not according to
the humane nature, but according to the divine. For the sense and meaning of
these speeches is: The person which is God, creator of things omnipotent by
reason of the Godhead, the selfsame person is man, a creature, infirm, by
reason of the flesh subsisting in it.

But notwithstanding one nature, and the properties thereof, whether they be
uttered in abstract or in concrete voices, cannot be affirmed of the other
nature or form truly and really. The reason is: Because the union is not made
in the nature, that is, two natures are not made one nature: and because in
neither nature the properties of the other do reallie exist, neither can
exist. For the natures do not communicate each to other their essential
properties, as neither do these impart their essence, that is, one nature does
not receive the properties of both natures.

Wherefore these kinds of speeches are false: The Godhead is the manhood or
man; was conceived, borne, did suffer, was dead: and again these: The
Man-hoode is the Godhead or God; is eternal, immense, uncircumcised in
place, omnipotent, gives the holy Ghost, does regenerate. For all these are
no more true and to be admitted, than those: A soul is a body, or corporeal,
mortal, visible; and, a body is a soul, or a spirit, invisible, immortal.

1 Objection. The whole person of Christ is really omnipotent, every where,
eternal etc. The humanity and the Godhead are the whole person of Christ.
Therefore both are reallie omnipotent, every where, eternal etc. Answer.
This argument the Vbiquetaries who most of all ground upon it, and often use
it, have borrowed from Schwenkefieldeans, who commonly in their books reason
thus. Whole Christ is the natural and only begotten Son of God, is the true
and the same GOD, of the same infinite power and majesty, with the eternal
Father, conceived, borne of the Virgin, suffered, was dead, rose again,
ascended into heaven, sends the Holy Ghost: But both natures belong to the
whole person of Christ. Therefore Christ according to his humanity also is the
natural Son of god, begotten of the substance of the Father from everlasting,
and con-substantiall with the Father, and the same GOD with the Father, who is
Creator of all. If then the Vbiquetaries collection be lawful and sound:
this doubtless of the Swenkefieldeans is lawful also and sound: but if the
Swenkefieldeans collection be corrupt and smelling of Eutyches heresy, then
that of the Vbiquetaries cannot be at all good and sound. But indeed both
collections are Eutychian and Sophistical; they are Eutychian, because two
natures, which are made equal in properties essential, or which get and have
the same or equal essential properties, are indeed made one nature and
substance, or are two substaunces of one nature. Both opinions take clean away
the nature of the humanity and transform it into the Godhead: but the latter
does further make two persons in Christ of the same nature. It is also
Sophistical: because whether the person of Christ be considered in it self,
as it was a person being but one and perfect, and that before the incarnation,
subsisting in one nature only: or whether it be considered, as it is
incarnate, and now subsisting in two natures: yet still the transition and
passing from the person to the natures is faulty and Sophistical. For neither
is it necessary that, what is truly in, and attributed unto a person, the same
also should be reallie in all things concurring in that person, and be
affirmed of all. The reason is, because the parts or natures, though united in
the same person, yet retain their properties and operations unconfounded.
Wherefore that which is proper unto the godhead cannot agree unto the person,
in respect of the flesh also, but only in respect of the godhead. Whole man
understands, discourses and has motion of will, ye^ he does not this by his
finger or body, but by his mind only: whole man is mortal, and does go, eat,
and drink: yet none, but a mad man or an epicure will therefore say, that the
soul also is mortal, or does go, eat, and drink. So not half, but the whole
person of Christ was before Abraham, and from everlasting did create and does
preserve all things, and took flesh: But the flesh neither was from
everlasting, neither did create, nor does preserve all things; nor took
flesh, but was created, and being assumpted and taken is sustained of the Word,
and in it. So whole christ was wounded, and dead, yet not his Godhead nor his
soul. This is well and learnedly declared and explicated by Damascene lib. 3.
ca. 7. in these words. Whole christ is perfect GOD, but not THE WHOLE of
Christ, that is, not both natures, are God. For he is not god only, but also
man. And WHOLE christ is perfect man, but not THE WHOLE of christ is man. For
he is not man only, but god too. For THE WHOLE, signifies the nature; WHOLE,
the person.

Wherefore if the Vbiquetaries will at al have the illation and enforcing of
their conclusion on these premises to be necessary: The Mayor proposition must
be expounded after this sort. The person is god, creator, omnipotent,
eueriwhere whole, that is, as concerning all that, which it is, or in which it
does subsist, or which does belong unto it. But the Mayor taken in this sense
is false and most absurd, as was showed a little before. For the true sense
thereof is this: The person is every where whole, that is, without division or
sundering of natures, or subsisting vndiuidably in two natures. But the
humanity is not that whole subsisting in two natures. Not every thing then that
agrees really to the person, agrees also really to the flesh. And albeit the
person does subsist in the humanity and the Godhead mutually united one to
the other, yet, as it has been said, it is not hereof enforced, that because
the person is every where, therefore the humanity should be in proper substance
present every where. For this is proper to the godhead, neither is it really
communicated to any creature or is in any. Reply. The divinity is one present
in all pleces, but especially with the church. The divinity is but half christ.
Therefore only half christ is present with the church. Answer. 1. there is an
ambiguity and doubtfulnes in the words, half christ. For if by half christ,
they understand one nature which is united to the other in the same person, the
whole reason may be granted: namely, that not both, but one nature only of
christ, though united to the other, that is, his godhead is present with us and
al things in his proper substance, in all places and at al times. But they by,
half christ, understand craftily and sophistically the one nature, separated
from the other: as if the godhead were made to be with us bare and naked, and
not incarnat. But in this sense the Minor is false, and the Vbiquetaries own
inue^tio^. For the same Word, by reason of the imme^snes and infinity of his
essence is whole euerywhere, without his manhood: yet so that he withal is and
abides whole in his manhood personally united thereu^to. Wherefore the Word
nether is nor works any where not united to the flesh: albeit the flesh,
because it has not an infinite essence, but reteineth it circu^scribed in
place, is not made to be present substa^tially in all those places, in which the
word incarnat, or the word, man is. 2. There is an ambiguity also and double
signification in the word present. For the presence, whereby christ is present
with his church, is not of one kind. Wherefore if the Mayor be understood of
the presence of his substance in all places, and of his being amongst us and al
other things, it is true. For the substance or essence of the Godhead only,
and not of the manhood to, is immense and exceeding all measure, always
existing and being the same and whole in all things. But it is false, if it
be understood of the presence of his virtue or efficacy. For according to
this, not only whole Christ, but also the whole of Christ is present with his
Church only, that is, not only his divinity but his humanity also, but so, as
the difference notwithstanding is kept of both natures and operations. The
humanity therefore of Christ is present with all the elect, in whatsoever
places they be dispersed through the whole world, not by any presence
substantial of the flesh in the bread, and within their bodies, but 1 By the
efficacy and perpetual valewe of his merit. For God the Father does even
now behold the Sacrifice of his Son, once accomplished on the Cross, and
receives us for that, as a sufficient ransom and merit, into his favor. 1.
Joh. 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ his Son purges us from all sin* that
is, both by his merit, and the efficacy or virtue of his merit. 2 By the
efficacy also of his humane will; because Christ according to his humanity
also earnestly both would and will, that we be of god received into favor,
quickened, and glorified through that his one only Sacrifice. Psalm. 110.4. Heb.
5.6. Thou art a Priest for ever: and also whatsoever he will, yea with his
humane will, that he powerfully effects and works, not by the power of his
flesh, but of his Godhead or spirit omnipotent, whom not the flesh, but the
Godhead of Christ only sends into the hearts of the elect and chosen. Joh.
6.63. It is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing. Romans 8.11.
God shall quicken your mortal bodies by his spirit dwelling in you. 3 He is
present with us by conjunction and union: Because all those that are to be
saved must needs be engraffed and knit together even into christ's humane
nature, that being engraffed into his humane mass, they may be quickened, as
branches live fastened to the vine, and members coupled and joined to the head:
which joining yet of us with the flesh of Christ is not made by any natural
connection of Christ and our flesh, or by any existence of Christ's flesh
within our substance, or of ours within his, but by faith and the holy ghost,
in Christ our head, and dwelling in us his members. Ephesians. 3.17. That Christ
may dwell in your hearts by faith. Rom 8.9. If any man has not the spirit of
Christ, the same is not his. Ephesians. 5.30. We are members of his body, of his
flesh, and of his bones; and they twain shall be one flesh; This is a great
secret, and so forth.

2 Objection Whatsoever is to be worshipped and adored is omniscient,
omnipotent, and every where present, that is, has the essential properties of
the Godhead reallie communicated with it. Christ's flesh is to be adored or is
adorable: because whole Christ is adored. Therefore Christ's flesh is reallie
omniscient and omnipotent, and present eueriewhere. Answer. This very same
reason is among the principal arguments, whereby the Schwenfieldeans endeavor
to frame after Eutyches manner a Majesty and Deifying of the flesh of Christ:
But both these and the Vbiquetaries are deceived and deceive by the ambiguitie
and diverse taking of the word, adored. That is omnipotent and omniscient which
is adored, that is which is adored in respect of it self, or for it self. The
humane nature is adored, not for it self, or according to the proper nature of
it self: for that were idolatrous: but it is adored for the Godhead united
therewith personally. Wherefore of the adoration of whole Christ, is but ill
inferred the omnipotence also of his flesh. For the reason does not follow,
from the honor of the person, to the properties of the natures Reply. That
which is adored by reason of another, is also really omnipotent, and omniscient
by reason of another. Christ's flesh is adored by reason of the God-heade, in
whose person his flesh subsisteth. Therefore Christ's flesh is also really
ommniscient, and omnipotent, by reason of the Godhead. Answer. The Mayor is
false, as is this: That which is made base and humiliated by reason of another
thing, is also by reason of another thing obnoxious and subject to alteration.
For the Word was made base or humiliated by reason of the flesh and in the
flesh, neither yet the Word it self or the Godhead felt any change or
alteration: but is humiliated and so said to be after another manner, because
the Word does not show his Godhead in the flesh, which we took in the form
of a servant. So then albeit the adoration of Christ God and man does
presuppose in him omnipotency, omnisciencie, presence every where, and the
searching of hearts and ^eines: yet is it not of necessity, that the humane
nature also, which by reason of the Godhead united to it in the same person is
adored, should be really omnipotent, omniscient, and euerie-where. For the
adoration of christ is the honor and worship which agrees and is yielded one
and the same to whole christma^ and god, keeping notwithstanding the
differences in natures, of the properties and operations, whereon Christ's
office and honor does depend. For to adore, and worship christ, is, by the
agnising and knowledge of his person and office, to crave of him with a true
trust and confidence, that those blessings which he has promerited and
promised, he will, as our mediator, perform and give to us, according to the
proper will and operation of each nature. This adoration consists of diverse
parts: compriseth both natures; and keeps their properties and operations,
though united, yet still distinct, and craves, that whole Christ in performing
his promised benefits, will work those things by his Godhead, which are proper
to his Godhead, and by his flesh those things, which are proper to his flesh.
For his benefits are no otherwise to be craved and asked of him, than as
himself will and does perform the^ to us: and he performs the^, still keeping
the difference of both natures. Wherefore they who crave of christ the Mediator
the benefits promised in the Word, do necessarily acknowledge him omniscie^t,
the searcher of hearts, omnipote^t, present every where, of himself beholding
and hearing our necessities and complaints. This agnising, and this honor is
proper to God, and agrees and is yielded to Christ, man, in respect of his
Godhead only, and not of his humanity. For in one act, or view unchangeable,
to behold, know, and understand, from everlasting, of himself, al things
past, present and to come, but chiefly the needs, wants, necessities and
desires of his whole church; again, to send the holy ghost into the hearts of all the elect and chosen, who have bin eue^ since the beginning of the world, and
by this spirit to teach the^ with in, to justify, regenerate, comfort the^,
and to give to the^ eternal life: these, I say, are not proper to flesh created
and finit, but to a nature infinite, omnipote^t, and existing from everlasting.
Therefore christ promises the holy ghost to his disciples, which is the spirit
of truth, wisdom, fear, prayer, grace, etc.

But although after that manner which has bin spoken of, the godhead only, and
christ by reason of his godhead, does behold and do al things, and is adored
of us: yet his humanity also does behold, understand and hear our necessities,
desires complaints and prayers; yet after another sort, that is, not of it
self, but by the godhead reueiling and showing our desires to the humane
understanding which is united to it* And fu^der it performs those things
which we crave, both by the efficacy of his merit, and by intercession made
incessa^tly to the father for us, whereby he will and obteineth of his father
all blessings for us: and by the force and omnipotency, not of his flesh, but
of his godhead united thereunto, by which christ, man, does effectually apply
to us those benefits which he has obtained for us of his father. Now to
acknowledge, when we worship Christ the Mediator, these things in him, and to
profes the same both in words, gestures, and actions, is the honor which is du
and is exhibited by us to his humanity by reason of the godhead united
thereto, yet so, that this veneratio^ of the humanity is not separated from the
honor, which agrees to Christ according to his Godhead. For with one and the
same particular and individual invocation and worship we speak to and honor
whole christ, god and man, according to the properties of both natures, which
he reteineth, and will have also now in his glory and for ever to be attributed
to him, vnitely, but yet distinctly, that is, As the person and office of the
mediator, so the adoration or worship is co^pound, having parts, whereof some
agree to the godhead, some to the flesh: and as in the office, so also in the
honor of the person, the properties and operations of the natures are not
separated, nether yet confounded, but being united, are distinguished.
Wherefore as it does not follow, The godhead in Christ is rede^ptres by reason
of the flesh assu^pted: Therefore it is also subject to sufferings, and mortal,
did suffer, and was dead: So is there no necessity in this Vbiquitary argument:
Christ's humanity is adored by reason of his godhead: Therefore the same is
also really omniscie^t, omnipote^t, and after the same manner to be adored, as
is the godhead. The reason is, because of the fellowship or conjunction of
office and honor in the person, the same properties and operations in natures
are wrongly and heretically inferred. The sum of al is: That christ's humanity
is adored by reason of his godhead, comes not thereof, as if his humanity
also were really omniscient and omnipotent, as is the Godhead: For by reason
of these and other like properties, is the godhead only inuocated: but because
it does truly know, understand, hear, our necessities, cogitations, desires,
and prayers, the divine intelligence and understanding which is united to it
re^^iling and opening them unto it: And also because what we crave a^ christ's
hands, the same it effectually performs, not by the bones, sinowes, hands,
fingers, feet, but by the force and power of the same Godhead.

Furdermore that manner and form of speaking, whereby the properties of one
nature are really attributed to the person denominated of the other nature, or
of both natures, is usually called the communicating of the properties;
Likewise, the communicating of names; because the names and attributes of both
natures are affirmed of the same person, and of themselves enterchaungeably, by
reason of the unity of person consisting of both natures. The communicating of
properties has some resemblance of the figure in speech called Synecdoche, and
is termed by many Synecdoche, because that is affirmed of the whole person,
which agrees unto it only in respect of one of the natures as a part. It is
also called a mutual and enterchaungeable attribution: because as humane
properties are attributed unto god, in respect of the humanity, so divine are
attributed unto man, in respect of the Divinity. As, God suffered, man is
omnipotent. So likewise, the communicating of names. For Man is God; and God is
Man, by reason of the personal union of both natures.

A rule to be observed concerning the attributes or properties of the office of
Christ Mediator.
THE names of office and honor agree unto the whole person, in respect of both
natures; keeping still the differences in natures of properties and operations.
These attributes are rightly affirmed of subjects both concrete, and
abstract, that is, both of the person, and of the natures. For it is well said,
The Godhead quickens, the Manhood quickens; And God or man quickneth.

The attributes of office are, to be Mediator, to make intercession, to
redeem, to save, to justify, sanctify, purge from sins, to be Lord and
Head of the Church, to be woorshipped, to hear, and such like. These offices
require the properties and operations of both natures, not separated, neither
yet confounded, but conioined and distinct. For even for this very cause was
it necessary that the two natures should be united in Christ Mediator, that
what neither nature could do being set a part, in the work of our redemption,
that Christ subsisting in both joined together might do and accomplish by
both. As therefore the natures themselves, so their properties also or
faculties of woorking and operations are proper and remain diverse and
distinct, yet so, that they concur to the effectuating and working of one
effect or work, and benefit: as parts and communicated labors. For albeit the
natures do always labor and work together in the office and benefits of the
Mediator, and nether without other: yet does not therefore one work the same
which the other does: But each woorketh, according to his property and force of
woorking, only that which is proper to each nature, and not that also which
belongs unto the other. As neither the soul does that which is proper unto
the body, neither the body that which is proper unto the soul, but the same
man does work some one work by his body and soul, each doing their proper
function: So likewise the humanity does never accomplish that which is proper
unto the Godhead, nor the Godhead that which is proper unto the manhood, but
the same Christ executes and perfourmeth one and the same office and benefit,
by both natures, which he has in him as parts of his person, the Word
woorking according to the property thereof, what belongs to the Word, and
the flesh in like manner executing according to the peculiar and proper
faculties thereof, and not according to others, that which belongs to the
flesh. For the properties and operations proper to each nature, are not common
to both natures, but to the same person consisting of both natures.

Wherefore in such like phrases of speech concerning Christ's office, which are
called of the ancient (...) (that is, communicatings, or such as make things
common) the properties and operations of natures are to be distinguished from
the office of the person, and from the honor which in respect of the office is
due unto the person: Likewise one effect, or act theandricall, (that is, both
of god and man) or work, or benefit, from one operation or action, as the
whole from a part. The office is common to both natures: but the natures proper
faculties of woorking, and actions in exequuting that office, are not common to
both natures. For that the same should be both proper and common, does implie
a manifest contradiction. So the work and benefit of whole Christ, is a
certain whole thing, and is as it were compound, and common to both natures:
but there are two parts hereof, and diverse operations, proper to each
nature, which are wrought yet jointly, and belong to the same person, which is
Christ, God and man, that is, both are wrought of one person according to
diverse causes and originals of woorking, or according to diverse natures, but
not by one and the same nature.

By these grounds it is easy to dissolve and assoile most of the Sophismes
and cauils, with which at this time both the Schwenkefildians, and Vbiquetaries
are wont to gloss and blanch that their real communicating of essential
properties in natures, and their Eutychian deifieng of Christ's flesh, and to
thrust the same upon the simple for the true glory and majesty of Christ
himself. For thus they reason. The offices and benefits of the Mediator, his
redemption, intercession, purging from sins, quickening, sitting at the right
hand of the Father, his dominion and Lordly power over al creatures, his
presence with the church, beholding, ruling al things, raising the dead,
judging both quick and dead, al these agree to Christ according to both
natures. Therefore the humanity, as well as the divinity, is also it self
reallie omniscient, searcher of hearts, omnipotent, present in the substance of
his body, at the same moment, in all places, does of it self know al things,
hear our co^plaintes and prayers, give the holy ghost, and work by him in the
hearts of the chosen faith and conversion, and to conclude, in respect of these
things the humanity it self also is for it self adorable and to be adored as
well as the godhead. To these and the like there is one and a ready answer,
namely: That it is ill going from the person, and from the office and honor of
the person to the properties and operations of the natures: Or, The society
and conjunction of the office and honor, does not cause or infer the same
properties or operations of both natures: Or, In the affirmation of the office
and honor are not signified the same properties of both natures, nor the
working of the same operations, but the conjunction or concurrence of distinct
operatio^s proceeding from distinct properties, to the same effect or action
theandrical, that is, of god and man. The reason is, because of redemption,
quickening, adoration and the like, which are the functions, benefits and
worship of the whole person, there are more and diverse manners and parts, which
all agree reallie to one and the same person, but not to one and the same
nature, but some to the godhead only, some only to the manhood. Wherefore
this Mayor of the reason is false: Whatsoever things agree unto Christ, god
and man, according to both natures, the same also do agree after the same
manner, and as touching all parts, to both natures. For it does not follow,
because the godhead is redemptresse, therefore also it suffered and was dead.

Now that those things which in the person and office of the Mediator are and
abide proper unto one nature, neither are made, nor are, by reason of the
union, common to both natures; ma^^ be showed at large, but now let these few
suffice.

First: Such as is the union of the natures, such is the communicating of the
properties. But the union of the natures was not made in the natures, or into
one nature, but in the person, or unto one person. Therefore the communicating
of the properties was made in the person, not in the natures; that is, the
union makes the properties of both natures common, not to one nature but to
one person. For not one nature, but one person, has truly, as two natures, so
also double properties and operations, and those infinitely differing, created
and increate, finite and infinite. Wherefore as by union the man-hoode was not
made the Godhead or God, so neither is it immense, infinite, and omnipotent.
But contrariwise, man nevertheless is truly and reallie as God eternal, so
omnipotent also, and eueriewhere, and giver of the Holy Ghost. The reason is,
Because not the manhood, but the Man Christ has indeed in his substance the
eternal and immense Godhead.

Secondly, That which is proper to one can not be common to more, that is, can
not exist or be found together in other subjects also of diverse nature. For to
be proper and to be common, are contradictory and therefore in fardest
repugnancie.

Thirdly, There can not be made, one omnipotency, and one omnipotent
operation to be of both natures, whereby as well the manhood, as the Godhead,
should be reallie omnipotent and work divine things: but there must needs be
also one essence of both, whereby the manhood also must be reallie God. For
the omnipotency, which they will have one and the same to be communicated unto
the flesh, is the Godhead it self.

Fourthly, If Christ's humanity, in the office of the Mediator, does it self
reallie and effectually perform not only that which belongs unto the
flesh, but also those things which are proper unto the Godhead, then either
his Godhead shall be idle and do nothing in the work of our redemption, or
surely the flesh assumpted shall do more, and more shall be due and yielded
unto, it, than to the Word which assumed and took it.

Fifthly, Jf the flesh, because it is said to be quickening, is also
omnipotent, and does by proper virtue regenerate men's hearts: after the same
sort also may it be said, that the Godhead also, because it is redemptresse,
is subject to suffering and did suffer. For both quickening and redeeming, are
properties of the office, common to both natures, but not after one and the
same manner.

Sixthly, The whole majesty of the Godhead is, that it is an essence, existing,
not of another, but of it self, and subsisting by it self, spiritual or
incorporeal, eternal, immense, unchangeable, of infinite power, wisdom,
goodness etc. That is, the whole Majesty compriseth all the perfections and
operations proper unto the Godhead. But omnipotency is the whole majesty of
the Godhead, according to the supposition of the Vbiquetaries: For so
Schmideline writes in the 142. conclusion of his disputation, of the Lords
Supper, and of the communicating of the properties, had at Tubinge in the year
M.D.LXXXII. In the word omnipotency I comprise the whole majesty of the
godhead: And in his 143. conclusion, Omnipotency is the very essence it self
of the Godhead. etc. Therefore if Gods omnipotency be really communicated to
Christ's humanity, so that this also is by reason of the omnipotency
communicated unto it, reallie omnipotent* of necessity then by reason of the
same omnipotency really communicated Christ's humanity shall be indeed an
essence, subsisting of it self and by it self, incorporeall, eternal,
immense, creatres of all things, that is, God himself blessed for ever, and
so by consequent, the divine person. For an essence intelligent, subsisting by
it self, and which also is God, must needs be the person. And these are the
fruits of real communicating of properties in natures.

The participation of the Godhead, exaltation and majesty of the flesh and
such like, is not a real communicating of the essential properties of the
God-heade made into the humane nature, or an omnipresence, omniscience,
omnipotency, that is, a Godhead of the manhood: For such a communicating
should not perfect but destroy the man-hoode, and convert it into the Godhead,
and dissolve the personal union of distinct natures: but it is, First, the
very union of the humanity with the Word in such sort, as it being created
and finite, does together with all the essential properties thereof subsist, not
in a created person of the same humane nature, but in the increate and eternal
person of God the Word: by reason of which union, God the Word (but not the
Godhead) is and is called truly man* and contrary, man (but not the manhood)
is and is called truly eternal God.

No dignity and eminence can be imagined greater than this, neither does it
agree to any but to the flesh of Christ only. Secondly, It is the excellency
of gifts. For these christ's humanity received without measure, that is, all
whatsoever, and most great, and most perfect, that may fall into a created and
finite nature. Thirdly, The office of the mediator, to the perfourming whereof
the united but yet distinct properties and operations of both natures do
necessarily concur. Fourthly, The honor and worship, which by reason of the
Mediatorship, agrees and is given to whole christ according to b^th natures,
keeping still, as was before said, the difference of properties and operations
in natures.

Now whatsoever testimonies some bring either out of the Scriptures, or out of
the Fathers which were sound in faith, thereby to prove that their Eutychian
transmutation, and a third kind of communicating forged by themselves, that is,
exequation or equalling of natures, all those testimonies indeed belong either
to the grace of union of the natures, which is signified by the communicating
of properties; or to the grace of Christ's Headship, which compriseth the
office and honor of the Mediator, which are affirmed of whole Christ by way
of communicating: or to the habitual grace, that is, the created gifts, which
Christ received without measure, which are properly affirmed of the flesh or
humanity. These gifts which are also called graces, are not properly
effects of the personal union, as are the attributes or properties of the
natures and office. First, because they are communicated to the manhood as
well of the Father and the Holy Ghost, as of the Word or Son. For he is said
to have received of the Father the spirit without measure, that is,
abundantly: likewise to be anointed with the Holy Ghost. And, if the gifts
were effects of the union, it would follow of necessity, that the flesh was
united not to the Son only, but to the Father also and the holy Ghost.
Secondly, The union of the flesh with the Word, was from the very moment of
the conception always most perfect: But the consummation and perfection of
gifts was not until the accomplished time of his resurrection and ascension.
For he was indeed humble, weak, and contemned: he was indeed ignorant of
some things: he did indeed increase in wisdom, stature, and in favor not
with men only, but also with God himself. Thirdly, The flesh, when it was in
the state of humility, had not immortality or a nature not subject to
sufferings or the like, and yet remained it always united with the Word.
Wherefore the habitual gifts or graces of the humanity, for which it is also
in it self reallie wise, mighty, just, holy, follow not the personal union in
respect of dependency, as the effect follows and depends of this cause, but
only in respect of order: Because namely, the humane nature was first to
subsist and be, before it were enriched with gifts: and it subsisteth united
to the Word in the very first moment of the conception.

But after what manner the humanity is united unto the Son of God, has been
said before. For by the special and miraculous working of the holy Ghost, in
the womb of the virgin, of her blood was the flesh of christ formed,
sanctified, and united according to subsistence, or personally unto the W^ord.

4 Why it was necessary, that the two natures should be united in the person
or subsistence of the son of God.
FOR what cause Christ our Mediator was to be together both a true and
perfect just man, and true, that is, by nature GOD, has been declared of us
before in the common place of the Mediator, in the 4 question page 237. For
the work of our redemption could not have bin compassed and finished by the
Mediator without the concurrence of diverse natures and operations in the same
person. For albeit he suffered and died in the flesh, yet his passion and
suffering would not have that force and efficacy to redeem, justify, and
sanctify us, neither could christ have applied those benefits unto us except
he had bin withal true and natural God.

Of the Incarnation of the Word, the confession made by the Fathers of Antioch
against Paulus Samosatenus, TAKEN OVT OF THE ACTS OF THE FIRST EPHESINE
COUNCEL.
WE confess our Lord Jesus Christ begotten before all worlds of his Father,
but in the last times borne according to the flesh of the Virgin by the holy
Ghost, subsisting in one person only, made of the celestial Godhead and
humane flesh. Whole God, and whole man. Whole God also with his body but not
according to his body, god. Whole man also with his God head, but not according
to his God head, man. Again, whole adorable also with his body, but not
according to his body, adorable. Whole adoring also with his Godhead, but not
according to his godhead, adoring. Whole increat also with his body, but not
according to his body, increated. Whole formed also with his Godhead, but not
according to his godhead, formed. Whole consubstantial with god also with his
body, but not according to his body, consubstantiall: as neither also,
according to his Godhead he is coessentiall with men: but he is according to
the flesh consubstantiall unto us existing also in his Godhead. For when we
say he is according to the spirit consubstantiall with God, we do not say
he is according to the spirit coessentiall with men. And contrarily, when we
affirm him to be according to the flesh c^nsubstantiall with men, we do not
affirm him to be according to the flesh consubstantial with God. For as
according to the spirit he is not consubstantial with us* (For according to
this he is consubstantial with God:) So of the other side he is not according
to the flesh coessentiall with god: but according to this he is consubstantiall
with us. And as we pronounce these to be distinct and diverse one from the
other, not to bring in a division of one undivided person, but to note the
distinction and vnconfoundablenes of the natures and properties of the Word and
the flesh; so we affirm and worship those as united, which make to the manner
of the undivided union or composition.

Vigilius Lib. 4. against Eutyches.
IF there be one nature of the Word and the flesh, how then, seeing the Word is
every where, is not the flesh also found every where? For when it was in the
earth, it was not verily in heaven: and now because it is in heaven, it is not
verily in the earth: and in so much it is not, as that as touching it we look
for Christ to come from heaven, whom as touching the Word we believe to be in
the earth with us. Wherefore according to your opinion, either the Word is
contained in place with the flesh, or the flesh is every where with the Word,
where as one nature does not receive any contrary or diverse thing in it self,
and it is a thing diverse and far unlike, to be circumscribed in place, and to
be every where: and seeing the Word is every where, and the flesh is not
every where; it is apparent, that one and the same Christ is of both natures,
and is every where as touching the nature of his Godhead, but is not
eueriewhere as touching the nature of his manhood: is created, and has no
beginning: is subject to death, and cannot die: the one he has by the nature
of the Word, whereby he is god* the other by the nature of his flesh, whereby
the same God is man. Wherefore that one son of God, and the same made the son
of man, has a beginning by the nature of his flesh, and has no beginning by
the nature of his Godhead: was created by the nature of his flesh, and was not
created by the nature of his godhead: circumscribed in place by the nature of
his flesh, and not contained in any place by the nature of his Godhead: is
lower also than the Angels by the nature of his flesh, and is equal with the
father according to the nature of his Godhead: died by the nature of his
flesh, and never died by the nature of his Godhead. This is the Catholic
faith and confession, which the Apostles delivered, the martyrs established,
and the faithful hitherto hold and mainetaine.

Now have we in few words expounded those articles of the Apostolic creed,
which entreat of the person of Christ; and have withal declared in the
exposition thereof; those things which are necessary for us to know, both of
the divinity of Christ, and of his humane nature, which was taken by the Word
of the seed of David, united personally with the Word by the virtue of the
holy ghost, and begotten in marvelous nanner of the Virgins substance. And it
was requisite not to suffer that any sin should pass or be derived into his
substance, 1. Because he was to satisfy for sin. 2. Because it was not
convenient or meet that the Word the son of God, should take a nature
defiled with sin.

To believe then in the son of God conceived by the holy ghost, is to believe
1. That he was made man after a marvelous manner, and that he was made one
Christ of a divine and an humane nature. 2. That he being so holily conceived
and borne does purchase for us the right and power to be the sons of God.
Because this person is sufficient and able to recover for us our lost
righteousness, and to bestow it on us. For he is united with the Word, that
is, he is true and natural God and man, such as the Mediator ought to be.
He will also perform this, because he was borne to this end, even to
sanctify us. Of al these every one of us may certainly collect and conclude,
That this Christ is our Mediator. And the reason of this collection and
consequence is: Because by this, that he is the only begotten Son of God, it
is manifest that Christ is true God, consubstantial, coeternal, and equal with
the Father. By his holy conception and nativity, it is also manifest that he
is true man, and that perfectly just, and united with the God-heade or Word:
and such a one was it requisite our Mediator should be.

OF CHRIST'S HVMILIATION.
THE course of order requires, that now consequently we expound and declare
those Articles, which treat of the office of Christ: and first of al, of his
humiliation or humbling, which is the former part of Christ's office, whereunto
belong these Articles, He suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead,
buried, descended into hell. After we have expounded these, we will come unto the
rest of the Articles which speak of his glorification; which is the other part
of Christ's office.

HE SVFFERED UNDER PONTIVS PILATE.
I Believe in Christ which suffered, that is, I believe, 1. That Christ from
the very moment of his conception sustained calamities and mes^ries of al
sorts for my sake. 2. That at that his last time he suffered all the most
bitter torments both of body and soul for my sake. 3. That he felt the
horrible and dreadful wrath of God, thereby to make recompense for mine and
others sins, and to appease his ire and wrath against mankind.

These two are different, To believe that christ suffered, and to believe in
Christ which suffered. For that is to have only an historical faith of
Christ's passion, neither to repose any confidence in him: but this is to
believe, not only that Christ suffered, but also to repose and place our trust
and confidence in Christ's suffering and Passion.

OF CHRIST'S PASSION.
THE Passion of Christ only does follow next his conception and nativity.
1. Because in his Passion consists our salvation. 2. Because his whole life
was a Passion, suffering, and calamity. Yet notwithstanding many things may
and ought to be observed out of the story of the whole race of his life on
earth. For that 1. does show This person to be the promised Messiah, seeing in
him concur and are fulfilled all the Prophecies. 2. That story is a
consideration or meditation of that humility or obedience, which he performed
unto his Father.

The chief questions of Christ's Passion are these.

1 What Christ suffered. 2 Whether he suffered according to both natures. 3
What was the impellent cause of Christ's Passion. 4 What the final cause or end
thereof.
1 WHAT CHRIST SVFFERED.
BY the name of Passion is understood the whole humiliation, or the obedience
of his whole humiliation, all the miseries, torments, ignominies, pains and
grifes, unto all which Christ was subject, and obnoxious, as well in soul as in
body, from the point of his nativity, until the hour of his death and
resurrection. Mat. 26.38. My soul is very heavy even unto the death. Mat.
27.46. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Isa. 53.4. Surely he has
carried our sorrows. But principally by the name of Passion is signified the
last act of the humiliation, and pains of Christ: the chief part of which his
pains and dolours was in his soul, wherein he felt the ire and wrath of God
against sin: which also was the cause why he so trembled and shook at death,
and was so faint-harted in his death, whereas other Martyrs of Christ have
sustained stoutly and courageously extreme torments. For the torments and
punishments of others have no proportion with the torments and punishments of
Christ. For others, as Stephen, Laurence, and the like, sustained only
corporal pains and torments: but were vpheld within by the holy ghost. But
Christ suffered the pains both of body and soul. For he suffered first our
infirmity, that is, the infirmities of humane nature: he hungered, thirsted,
was weary, was stricken with sadness and grief. 2 He suffered poverty. Luk
9.58. The son of man has not whereon to lay his head. 3 He suffered infinite
injuries, contumelies, slanders, layings in wait for him, backbitings,
reproaches, blasphemies, annihilating, and contempt. Psalm. 22.7. I am a worm,
and not a man. Isay. 53.2. He has neither form nor beutie: when we shall see
him, there shall be no form that we should desire him. 4 He suffered the
Tentations of the devil, Mat. 4.1. and He. 4.15. He was in all things tempted
in like sort. 5 He suffered the death of the body, and that reprochefull and
contumelious, even the death of the Cross. 6 He suffered the most grievous
torments of soul, that is, he found the sense and feeling of the wrath of God
against sin to be laid on him. Hereof it was that he cried with a loud
voice, My God, why have thou forsaken me? as if he should say, why do thou
not drive and put away from me so great torments? For he signifies by those
words not a diuulsion or separation of his Godhead from his manhood, but the
differring and delaying of help and succor. We see then what and how great
things Christ has suffered for us, which are therefore proposed unto us and
set before our eyes, to give us to consider 1. The history it self of
Christ's passion agreeing with Gods sacred oracles, and prophecies. 2. The cause
or fruits of Christ's Passion. 3. His example, that we are also to enter into
eternal life, and heavenly glory, by death, as did Christ: and these three
things are especially to be considered in Christ's Passion.

Objection There is no proportion between temporal punishment and eternal.
Christ suffered only temporal pains and punishments. Therefore he could not
satisfy gods justice. Answer. There is no proportion between temporal, and
eternal punishment, if they be considered as being both in the same degree
and in the same subject. Question. But how may the ransom of one person
answer for the sins of an infinite number of men? Answer. It may, and that
for these two causes. 1. Because he is true God which suffered. Objection. But
god cannot die and suffer. Answer. God cannot suffer, in that he is God; Or
further, we grant, that Christ was not God, in that he suffered, and died.
Object. Christ is not God in that he suffered, Therefore it is false which is
said, Acts 20.28. That God has purchased the Church with his own blood.
Ans. This was spoken by a communicating of the properties, but this was in the
person, not in the nature: that is, That person which is God and man, purchased
the Church. The communicating of properties is, to attribute that to the whole
person, which is proper unto one nature; and this is attributed in a concrete
voice, not in an abstract: because the concrete voice signifies the person, in
which are both natures, and the property of that nature, whereof some thing is
affirmed. But the abstract name signifies the nature which is in the person,
but not the person. And therefore it is, that nothing hinders, why that which
is proper to one nature, may not be affirmed of the whole person, so that
property it self be in the person. But contrary, of the abstract name only
the properties of that nature are affirmed, unto which they properly belong. As
of the God-heade, (which is the abstract name) no property of the man-hoode
may be affirmed, but only the properties of the God-heade; because the
God-heade signifies not the person which has both natures, but only the
divine nature it self. But of God (which is the concrete name) the properties
not of the Godhead only, but of the manhood also may be affirmed, because God
signifies not the divine nature, but the person which has both the divine
nature, and humane.

The second cause, why the ransom of one person may answer for the sins
of an infinite number, is the grieuousnesse of his punishment, because he
suffered that which we should have suffered for ever. His Passion therefore is
equivalent to everlasting punishment; yea it surpasses it; For, that God
should suffer, is more, than, that all the creatures should perish
everlastingly.

2 According to which nature Christ suffered.
CHRIST suffered not according to both natures, neither according to his
Godhead, but according to his humane nature only, both in body and soul. For
his divine nature is immortal. Now he so suffered according to his humanity,
that by his death and Passion he made satisfaction for infinite sins of men.

Question. But why could not his Godhead suffer? Answer. Because it is not
changeable: neither can that, which is life it self, die. This sustained and
vpheld the humane nature in pains, and after death restored it to life.
Objection. God purchased the Church with his own blood. Acts 20.28.
Therefore the godhead suffered. Answer. It does not follow, because an
argument from the concrete (which is, God) to the abstract (which is, the
God-heade) is if no consequence. Again, the kind of affirmation is altered.
God is said to have died, by a figure of speech, which is Synecdoche (used when
we signify the whole by a part, as whole Christ, by, God,) and by a
communicating of the properties. But when it is said, The godhead died, that
admits no figure, as being a mere abstract. The concrete signifies the
subject or person having the nature or form: But the abstract signifies the
bare nature and form only. Wherefore the argument does not follow. A man is
compounded of the elements, and is corporeal: Therefore his soul also is
corporeal. This cannot follow; Because al things agree not to the form, which
agree to the subject; the soul is the form of man, man is the essential
subject of the soul. Wherefore neither does it follow. Christ, God, died:
Therefore Christ's God-heade died. For, from the concrete to the abstract the
reason does not follow.

Christ therefore suffered according to his humane nature only, making a
sufficicnt and most perfect satisfaction thereby for our sins. Which his
satisfaction is made ours by application, which is double. The one from god,
who justifies us for christ's merit, and makes us to cease from sin. The other
from our selves who by faith apprehend and apply unto us Christ's merit by
being fully persuaded that God for the ransom of his Son does pardon us our
sin. Now that there was another nature in christ, which nether suffered nor
died, is proved by these testimonies, Ioh. 2.19. Destroy this Temple, and in
three days I will raise it up again. 1. Pe. 3.18, was put to death concerning
the flesh, but was quickened in the spirit. Reu. 1.18. I was dead: and behold J
am alive. Ioh. 18. I have power to lay down my soul, and power to take it up
again.

3 The causes impellent, or motives of Christ's Passion.
1 THE love of God toward mankind. Ioh. 3.16. So God loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten Son. 2. The mercy of God toward men fallen into sin.
3. The will of God to revenge the injury of the Devil, who in reproach and
despite of God auerted us from him, and maimed the image of God in us in
despite of the creator.

But here it may be demanded whether Christ fulfilled the Law or no; and
secondly if he did, why then he should suffer so bitter a Passion? Whereunto
we answer first, that he fulfilled the Law. 1. By his righteousness in
observing it. 2. By satisfaction in suffering punishment for our sins, who
had transgressed it. Both which are most perfect. Now to the second demand
then, why if Christ fulfilled the law, was he so grievously punished of God,
seeing punishment is the wages of sin, and sin was not in him, who never
committed any? We answer, that it was not for himself, but for us that he
was punished. Reply. A righteous man ought not to be punished for the
unrighteous. Answer. True, except first he voluntarily offer himself for
them. Secondly, except he willingly do suffer in such sort for them, as that
he yield a sufficient ransom and payment. Thirdly, except he have the power
of recovering himself out of the punishment once suffered. Fourthly, except he
be able to bring to pass that they also, for whom he offers himself to
satisfy, leave off to transgress and sin hereafter. Fifthly, except he be
of the same nature with them for whom he satisfies.

If such a satisfier be substituted, there is nothing committed against the
justice of God: for in so suffering, both are saved, both he that suffers,
and they for whom he suffers. Now such a surety, and satisfier was Christ,
who is not only man, or of the same nature with us; but we are also his
members, and when the whole suffers punishment, the members also and parts
are punished. And for this conjunction of ours with Christ our head, the
Apostles commonly say that he suffered in Christ.

4 The final causes or ends of his Passion.
THE first final cause or end of his passion is, That his passion might be a
sufficient ransom for our sins, or the redeeming of us. 2. The m^nifesting of
the love, goodness, mercy, righteousness of God, while he punnisheth his son
for us. The chief final causes then are, Our salvation, and the glory of
God. To the former belongs the knowledge of the greatness of sin, that we
may know how great an evil sin is, and what it deserves: and further to
know that death is not now pernicious and hurtful to the Godly, and therefore
not to be feared. To the latter belongs our Justification, wherein all the
benefits are comprehended, which Christ merited, by dying, and even our
delivery from death, which he bestows upon us. Objection. If he have
satisfied for all, then al should be saved. Answer. He satisfied for all, as
touching his satisfaction, but not as touching the application thereof, al not
applying it unto them. Wherefore he has satisfied for all, but does not
deliver all, but only those who by faith apply it. And those he delivers, 1.
Because the Father ordained him to this, or because the Father will. 2. Because
the Son willingly offers himself. 3 Because this ransom is sufficient.

SVFFERED UNDER PONTIVS PILATE.
MEntion is made of Pilate in Christ's passion, 1. Because Christ would receive
from him a testimony of his innocence, that thereby we might know that he was
pronounced innocent by the voice of the judge himself. 2. Because it was
requisite that he should be solemnly condemned, that we might know that he,
though innocent, was notwithstanding condemned, that we might not be condemned,
as also he sustained death, that we might be freed from it. 3. That we might
be advertised of the fulfilling of the Prophecy. Genesis 49.10. The scepter shall
not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, until Shilo
come. For then was the Scepter taken from Judah, when Christ was a little after
condemned of Pilate a Roman governor, of whom before he was absolved. This
circumstance therefore is diligently to be considered in Christ's passion, that
we may know him to be the Messiah: because al conditions are fulfilled in him,
which are required in the Messiah. Whereof this Prophecy, of the taking away
of the Scepter from Judah, was one. 4. That we might know that Christ was
condemned of God himself also, and therefore that he satisfied God for us.
For the head and governor of ordinary judgment is God himself. Wherefore
Christ was not to have been privily taken away by the Jews, neither to be
drawn to death by tumult, and disorderly, but by lawefull order, and
judgment, and by inquisition made concerning all the accusations of Christ,
God would have him, first to be examined, that his innocence might appear;
Secondly to be condemned, that it might appear that he being before
pronounced innocent, was now condemned not for his own fault, but for ours:
and that so his unjust condemnation might be instead of our most just
condemnation. Thirdly, to be put to death, both that the prophecies might be
fulfilled, and also that it might appear, that both Jews and Gentiles did put
Christ to death.

CRVCIFIED.
I Believe in Christ Crucified, that is, I believe Christ did undergo this
punishment, and this curse of the Cross for my sake, and that he was made
obnoxious for my sake to Gods curse, which I, and we all deserved, a type also
of which curse, was the death of the Cross cursed by God himself.

Now for three causes would God have his Son suffer the punishment of so
ignominious a death. 1 That we might know, The curse due for our sins to
have lain upon him, and so should be stirred up to greater thankfulness,
considering how detestable a thing sin is, so that it could not be expiated
or satisfied for, but with the most bitter and most opprobrious and shameful
death of the only begotten Son of God. 2 That it might be an exasperating of
the punishment, and so we so much the more confirmed in a true faith, when we
consider Christ by this kind of punishment to have taken upon him our gilt,
and even our punishment also and curse, according to that, Cursed is every one
that hangs on tree, Deuteronomy. 21.23. Gal. 3.13. 3 That the truth might answer
according to the types and figures, and so we might know the types to be
fulfilled in Christ. For, 1 The sacrifices which shadowed the sacrifice of
Christ were hung upon trees, thereby to signify, that Christ should be fastened
on a tree, and accomplishing his sacrifice, offer a holy sacrifice unto his
Father. 2 The sacrifices being lifted up on high before they were burned, did
signify the exalting and listing up of Christ on the Altar of the Cross. 3
The same was shadowed in Isaac. who being laid on wood, was to have been
sacrificed of his Father. 4 The brazen Serpent, which Moses set up upon a pole
in the wilderness, depainteth this kind of punishment. Christ himself
interpreted of himself this type of the brazen Serpent. Joh. 3.14.

DEAD.
I Believe in Christ dead, that is, I believe Christ, not only to have
suffered extreme torments for my sake, but also death it self, and has by
his death obtained for me remission of sins, and reconciliation with God, and
consequently also the holy Ghost, who begins in me a new life, that I may
again be made the Temple of God, and at length attain unto everlasting life,
wherein I shall woorship and magnify God for ever.

OF CHRIST'S DEATH.
THE chief Questions hereof are.

1 How Christ is said to have bin dead. 2 Whether it was requisite and
necessary that Christ should die. 3 What are the fruits of Christ's death.
1 HOW CHRIST IS SAID TO HAVE BEEN DEAD.
IT is needful to move this question, because of the heretics, who have
depraved the sense of this article. Marcion denied that he died indeed; as
also he affirmed the whole ordinary dispensation and ministry of the humane
nature in Christ, and all those things which he did undergo for us, to have
bin but imaginary, and that he only seemed to be as a man. Nestorius
separated the two natures in Christ, neither would have the son of God, but
man only to have died. Do not boast thou Jewe (says Nestorius) thou have
not crucified God. The Vbiquitaries believe that the humanity of Christ from
the moment of his incarnation was so endowed with all the properties of the
Godhead, as that only in this the humanity differs from the Godhead, that
the humanity has by an accident, whatsoever the Godhead has by and of it
self. Hereof it comes, that they imagine that Christ was in the time of his
death, yea when he was enclosed in the Virgins womb, in heaven and
eueriewhere, not only as touching his Godhead, but with his body too. This is
it which they call the form of God.

Wherefore against all these we affirm that Christ died truly and
corporally, even by a true diuulsion and separation of his soul from his
body, so that not only his soul and body were not together every where, but
were not together in one place. Mat. 27.50. The^ Jesus cried again with a loud
voice and yielded up the Ghost. Mar. 15.37. Jesus cried with a loud voice, and
gave up the Ghost. Luk 23.46. Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit. And
when he had said these words, he gave up the Ghost. John. 19.30. He bowed
his head and gave up the Ghost. But yet this is further to be added, that
although his soul was separated from his body, yet the Word notwithstanding
did not forsake neither body nor soul, but remained nevertheless joined both
to body and soul, and therefore the two natures in Christ were not diuelled
or sundered by that diuulsion of the soul and body. Objection. Why then cried
he, Mat. 27.46. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Answer. Because
of his delay and differring of help and succor. For the two natures in Christ
ought not to have been diuelled or sundered; because it is written, God has
purchased the Church with his own blood. And he was to be the son of God,
who should die for our sins, that he might be a sufficient price for them.
Hereby also it does clearly appear, that The union of both natures in Christ
is no Vbiquitie. For the soul being separated from the body, was not in the
grave with the body, and by a consequent, not eueriewhere, because that which
is every where can never be separated. Objection. But, as virtue, that is his
divinity is said to have gone out of him: so also he gave up the Ghost.
Answer. There is a dissimilitude in these: Because the divinity remaining
united with the humane nature, yet did work abroad without it. The soul did
depart from the body. The reason of this dissimilitude is; because the act of
his divinity is increate and infinite, but the act and power of his soul
finite and created.

2 Whether it was requisite and necessary that Christ should die.
IT was requisite and necessary that Christ should die, 1. In respect of the
justice of God, that so his justice might be satisfied which required the death
of men, by whom it was violated. For the hurting and offending of the greatest
good is to be expiated with the greatest punishment, or with the utmost
destruction of nature, that is, with the death of the guilty condemned for
sin, according to that, Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death. Now it was
requisite that the son of God should die, that he might be a sufficient
ransom for our sins. For no creature could have sustained such a
punishment, as should have been equivalent to eternal punishment, and yet
withal should have been temporal. Objection. They have deserved eternal
punishment, whosoever are not reconciled to God by Christ. Therefore the souls
ought not to be separated from their bodies, that they might suffer eternal
damnation. Answer. It does not follow* but this rather, That therefore both
body and soul must be together, that they may suffer it, which at length
shall so come to pass.

2 Jn respect of gods truth, that the truth of GOD may be satisfied. For GOD
threatened and denounced death, when ever we sinned: which denouncing was to
be fulfilled, after sin was once committed. And this is that commination or
threatening pronounced by God himself, Genesis 2.17. In the day that thou eatest
thereof, thou shall die the death. Objection. But Adam did not presently die.
Answer. Truly he died spirituallie eternal death, and now was dead: I hard
(says he, Genesis 3.10.) thy voice. There was a terror in him, and a feeling of
Gods wrath, a strife with death, the loss of all the gifts both of body and
mind. But there followed the equity, moderation, and lenity of the Gospel.
For God had not expressly said, that he should certainly die wholly, and
that presently. For so had he perished for ever. Wherefore the Son offered a
mitigation and lenifieng, raised him up to a new life, that still
notwithstanding he should remain subject to the corporal death, which yet
should not be deadly and pernicious unto him.

3 In respect of the promise made to the fathers, both by words, as in Isa.
53.7. He is brought as a sheep to the slaughter, and as a sheep before the
shearer is dum, so opens he not his mouth: and by sacrifices, whereby god
promised that christ should die, and die such a death, as should be an equiuale^t
price for the sins of the whole world. This could not be the work of any mere
creature: but of the son of god only, and therefore it was requisite and
necessary that the Son of God should suffer so grievous a death for us.
Objection. Then they do not satisfy gods justice, who are punished, because
their punishment is endless and eternal. Answer. They satisfy by eternal
punishment. Reply. So then might we also be delivered from the curse by our
selves. Answer. So then shall we never be delivered, but shall sustain
punishment eternal, which is without end.

Out of this which has been said we may draw this doctrine. 1 That sin is
most of all to be eschued of us, which could not be expiated but by the death
of the son of god. 2. That we ought to be thankful to the son of god,
for this his so great a benefit of unspeakable grace and favor bestowed upon
us. 3. That all our sins, how many, how great, and how-greeuous soever they
be, are expiated and done away by the death alone of Christ.

3 The fruit of Christ's death.
THE fruit and commodity of Christ's death is the whole work of our
redemption. 1. Justification or remission of sins, because the justice of God
requires that God should not punish a sinner twice: but he has punished our
sins in Christ: Therefore he will not punish again the same in us. 1. John.
1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ purges us from all sin, as well original, as
actual, as well of fact or doing what we should not, as of omission, or not
doing what we should. The cause of this effect is the death of Christ. 2. The
gift of the Holy ghost, and through his working, regeneration, and a new life:
because Christ by his death has not only obtained for us pardon for our
sin, and reconciliation with god; but also the gift of the holy Ghost, that
by his working and virtue the old man might be crucified with Christ, that is,
that by the Holy Ghost through the efficacy of Christ's merit and our
engraffing into him, our corrupt and as yet not regenerated nature might be
abolished in us: and that of the contrary, righteousness might be begun in
us, the image of God, destroyed by the Devil in us, might be restored, and we
by the same spirit moved to show and yield all thankefulnes for so great a
benefit. 1. Cor. 1.30. Christ is made unto us righteousness, wisdom,
sanctification, and redemption. Col. 2.10. Ye are complete in him.

The death of christ is the impelle^t or motive cause in effectuating our
regeneration, in two respects. 1. In respect of god: because for the death of
christ god pardons us our sin, and gives us the holy ghost. Galat 4.6.
Because ye are Sons, god has sent forth the spirit of his Son into your
hearts, which cries Abba Father. 2. In respect of us also it is an impellent
cause: because they who apprehend Christ's merit by a true faith, and apply his
death unto themselves, for them it is impossible to be unthankful. For all
after they are once justified prepare and address themselves to do those
things which are grateful unto God: for regeneration, or the desire and
endeavor of obeying God cannot be separated from the applying of his death
unto us, nor the benefit of regeneration from the benefit of justification:
All who are justified are also regenerated and sanctified; And all who are
regenerated, are also justified. Objection. 1. Pet. 1.3. The Apostle
attributes our regeneration to Christ's resurrection: why then is regeneration
here attributed to his death? Answer. It is attributed unto Christ's death as
touching his merit: for he merited regeneration for us by dieng. And it is
attributed to Christ's resurrection in respect of the applieng of it; for by
rising from the dead he applies unto us regeneration, and gives us the Holy
Ghost. 3. Eternal life is also the fruit of Christ's death. Ioh. 3.16. God so
loved the woorld, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish but have everlasting life. 1. John 5.11. GOD
has given unto us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.

Objection. Jf Christ died for us; why then die we too? For he should not die,
for whom another has already died: otherwise the satisfaction would seem
double. Answer. He, for whom another has died should not die, as thereby to
satisfy, that is, so that his death should be any merit or satisfaction: but
there are other causes why we must die. For we die, not to satisfy the
justice of God, but by death, as a mean, to receive those gifts, which Christ
by his death has merited for us. For this our temporal death is, 1. An
admonition of the greatness of sin. 2. A purging and cleansing of us. For by
death are purged out the relics and remains of sins in us. 3. A
translating into eternal life. For by corporal death is the passage of the
faithful made into eternal life. Reply. If the cause be taken away, the
effect is taken away, but the cause of death in us, which is sin, is taken
away by Christ: therefore the effect also, which is death it self, ought to
be taken away. Ans. Where al cause is taken away, the effect also is taken
away: but in us all cause of death is not taken away, as concerning the
purging out of sin: albeit it be taken away, as touching the remission of
sin. Or we may answer unto the Minor proposition, That sin is indeed
taken away, as touching the guilt, but it is not taken away as touching the
matter of sin, which as yet remains.

AND BVRIED.
THE causes of Christ's burial are, 1 That we might know that he was dead
indeed. For the living are not buried, but the dead only. And hither belong
some parts of the story penned by the Evangelists, as, that christ was pierced
with a lance, that he was taken down from the Cross, that he was anointed
and wrapped in linen clothes. For as by the touching and feeling of him, by his
eating and appearing after his resurrection we gather that he did indeed rise
again: so of the other we collect that he was indeed dead. 2 That the last
part of his humiliation, whereby he did debase himself for our sakes, might
be accomplished. That was his burial, in which his body was as well cast into
the earth, as any other dead corpse. A dead body is indeed void of sense and
feeling: but yet notwithstanding ignominious is it for the body to be
committed unto the earth, as it is said: To dust shall thou return. And as
Christ's resurrection from the dead and death, is a part of his glore: so his
burial, that is, the debasing of his body to be in the same state with other
dead carcases is a part of his humiliation. 3 A certain type was to be
fulfilled. It was foretold by the type of Jonas remaining 3. days in the
Whale, That the Messiah should be buried. Therefore for the fulfilling of this
type he ought also to be buried, and to remain until the third day in the
grave. 4 He would be buried, that he might not be afraid of the grave, but
might know that our head Christ Jesus had laid open the way unto us by the
grave and death to celestial glory: and therefore shall we be raised out of
the grave, albeit we die and give up the Ghost. 5 That we might know how we
are indeed delivered from death. For in his death, a testimony and record
whereof is his burial, consists our salvation. 6 That it might be apparent
and manifest, as concerning his resurrection, even that he was able indeed to
rise again, and to show that he has overcome death, and that his
resurrection was not imaginary, but the resurrection of a reviving corpse. 7
That we being spirituallie dead, that is, to sin, might rest from sin. Romans
6.4. We are buried with Christ by Baptism into his death, that like as Christ
was raised up from the dead by the glory of the father, so we also should walk
in newness of life.

HE DESCENDED INTO HELL.
I Believe in Christ who descended into Hell, that is, I believe that Christ for
me sustained in his soul infernal and hellish pains and torments, and that
exceeding ignominy which is due unto the wicked in Hell: that thereby I might
not descend into hell, and that I might never be forced to suffer them, all
which otherwise I should suffer in hell eternally: but that of the contrary
rather I might ascend with Christ into heaven, and there enioie with him
exceeding happiness and glory for ever and ever. This is the use and profit
of this Article of Christ's descension into hell. Now we are a little more at
large to declare, what is the meaning of that Article, or what is properly
that Descension of Christ into hell.

Hell in Scripture is taken three ways. For it signifies, 1. The grave.
Genesis. 42.38. Then ye shall bring my graie head with sorrow unto hell.
Psalm. 16.10. Thou will not leave my soul in Hell: neither will thou suffer
thy holy one to see corruption. 2. The place of the damned. As in the story of
the rich man and Lazarus. 3. The pains of hell, that is, the terrors, and
torments of the soul and conscience. Psalm. 116.3. The griefs of hell caught
me. 1. Sam. 2.6. The Lord brings down to hell and raises up, that is, into
exceeding pains and torments, out of which afterward he again delivers. In
this third sense is it taken in this Article: for it cannot be understood of
the grave, because there goes before, He was buried. If any say that this
latter Article is an exposition of the former, he says nothing. For as often
as two speeches expressing the same thing are joined together, so that the one
is an exposition of the other, it is meet that the latter be more clear and
open than the former: again, it is not likely in this so brief and succinct a
confession, that the same thing should be twice spoken in other words. Neither
ca^ this place be understood of the place of the damned; For Christ said, Into
thy hands I commend my spirit; and to the Thief, This day shall thou be with me
in Paradise: as if he should say, This day shall thou be with me, as touching
my soul, in Paradise, that is, in the place of everlasting salvation or
happiness, where thou shall, being delivered from al torments, enioie most
pleasant quiet and repose. This is not to be understood of the Godheade of
Christ, as if that should be the same day together with the soul of the
Thief, in Paradise. For the Godhead is and shall be every where. But thou
shall be in Paradise with me, even whom thou see hanging on the cross.

The descension of Christ therefore into Hell signifies, 1 those extreme
torments and griefs, which christ suffered in his soul: namely the wrath of
God against sins, and that such, as the damned feel, partly in this life,
and partly in the life to come. 2. The Exceeding and extreme ignomine and
reproach, which christ suffered. That Christ suffered these things, is proved
by the Testimony of David before alleged, The griefs of Hell caught me:
which is said of Christ in the person of David. There are other the like
sayings, whereby the same is proved. Isa. 53.10. The Lord would break him and
make him subject to infirmities. Mat. 26.38. My soul is very heavy, even
unto the death. The same do those his vexations also show in the garden, when
he swet blood. Isai. 53.6. The Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all.
Therefore he cries out, Mat. 27.49. My God, my god, why have thou forsaken
me? The same is proved also by this reason, even because he ought to suffer
not only in body, but in soul to, for us, that he might also redeem our
souls.

Objection. 1. The articles of faith ought to be understood properly.
Answer. True; except an article, being taken according to the proper
signification, be disagreeing from other places of scripture. But this Article
of Christ's descension into Hell, being taken properly, is much repugnant to
that saying of Christ, John. 19.30. It is finished. For if Christ fulfilled and
finished all the parts of our redemption on the Cross, there was no cause why
he should descend into Hell, that is, unto the place of the damned.

Objection. 2. He descended into Hell, and that by a local descension (as the
papists affirm) to deliver the Fathers thence. Answer. 1. We deny that
christ descended locallie into Hell: and that for this reason. Jf christ did
locallie descend into Hell, he descended either as touching his Godhead, or as
touching his soul, or as touching his body: Not as touching his Godhead: For
that is every where: Not as touching his soul, because he says, Father, into
thy hands I commend my spirit. Reply. But he might also be in the hand of
his Father, that is, in his Fathers protection, even in Hell: According to that
Psalm. 139.8. If I lie down in Hell, thou art there: that is, there also will
god have care over me, and there also will he keep me, that I perish not.
Answer. One place enterpreteth another: for he had said before unto the
Thief: This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, that is, in the place and
state of the blessed, where both are free from these pains; that is, he
speaks of felicity and liberty, which is not in Hell. Whereupon also it is
clear, that Christ spoke this to the Thief, not of his Godhead, but of that,
which suffered, which was his soul. For the godhead was with the Thief,
neither did Christ suffer or was delivered as touching his God-heade, but as
touching his soul. Lastly, Christ descended not into Hell locally as touching
his body, because his body was in the grave, neither rose from any other
place, but from the grave. It follows therefore that this article cannot be
understood of a local descension into Hell. Answer 2 Albeit it were true
that Christ descended locally into Hell: yet he should not have descended for
this cause which they imagine, as namely to deliver the Fathers. Which also is
proved by this reason: If Christ descended locally into Hell, he descended
either to suffer or to deliver: Not to suffer; because now all things were
finished on the Cross: as christ himself also hanging on the Cross said, It
is finished. He descended not to deliver the Fathers; 1 Because he did this
before, in suffering for them on earth. 2 He did the same by the power and
efficacy of his God-heade, from the very beginning of the world, not by the
descension of his soul or body into Hell. 3 The Fathers were not in Limbo;
Therefore they could not be delivered thence. As it is said, Luke 16.46.
Between you and us there is a great gulf set, so that they which would go
from hence to you cannot; neither can they come from thence to us. And in the
same place, Lazarus is said to be in Abraham's bosom, not in Limbo. The souls
of the just are in the hand of God.

3 Objection. Christ indeed did not descend into Hell, either to suffer or to
deliver, but (as some will) to show the Devil and Death his victory, and so
to strike a terror into them. Which, they say, is confirmed by that place of
Peter. 1. Pet. 3.19. By the which he also went and preached unto the spirits
that are in prison, which were in time passed disobedient. Answer. That for
this cause Christ descended into Hell, is not found in scripture: and that
place of Peter is thus to be understood, Christ went, that is, being sent from
the beginning of the Father unto the Church, by his spirit, that is, by his
Godhead, and unto the spirits that are now in prison, that is, in Hell, he
preached in time passed, when as yet they lived and were disobedient, namely
before the flud, and in the time of Noah, inuiting them to repentance. So is
also another saying of Peter to be understood, 1. Pet. 4.6. The Gospel was also
preached unto the dead. That is, unto those which are now dead, or were then
dead, when Peter wrote this, and who then lived when the Gospel was preached
unto them. Reply. Christ descended into the lowest parts of the earth, Ephesians.
4.9. Therefore to Hell. Answer. Into the lowest parts of the earth, that is,
into the earth, which is the lowest part of the world. This interpretation is
proved by the scope and drift of the Apostle, who makes in that place an
opposition of christ's great glory, and his great humiliation. But were it so,
that these places, which some allege for to establish this opinion, were to be
understood of a local descension of Christ into Hell, yet would they not make
for them, but rather for the papists, who teach, That christ preached unto the
Fathers in Hell, and thence delivered them. Now if these testimonies help not
the Papists, muchlesse will they help them. For it is certain, that it cannot
be thence proved that Christ descended into Hell to strike a terror into
Death and the Devil. This opinion indeed is not impious or ungodly, and is
approved by many of the Fathers: but yet I leave it, because it is not
grounded on any firm reasons: and contrary reasons are at hand, easy to be
had. For 1. Christ himself said (which testimonies have now often been
recited) This day shall thou be with me in Paradise: Father, into thy hands
I commend my spirit: Again, It is finished. 2. Jf he descended to triumph,
this Article should be the beginning of his glorification: But it is not
likely that Christ took the beginning of his glorification in hell. For it is
apparent by the opposition of the Article following, That christ's Descension
was the lowest degree of his humiliation: And yet I confess withal that
christ stroke a great terror into the Devils: but that was by his death,
whereby he disarmed and vanquished the Devil, sin, and death.

THE THIRD DAY HE ROSE AGAIN FROM THE DEAD.
I Believe that Christ shook off death from himself, quickened his dead
body, reunited his body unto his soul, restored unto himself a blessed,
celestial, and glorious life, and that by his own proper power.

The chief Questions of christ's resurrection are, 1 Whether Christ rose
again. 2 How he rose. 3 For what cause he rose. 4 The fruit of his
resurrection.


1 WHETHER CHRIST ROSE AGAIN.
THat Christ rose again, is proved by the testimonies of Angels, weomen,
Evangelists, Apostles, and other Saints, who after his resurrection saw him,
felt him, and talked with him. And we were to believe the Apostles in respect
of the authority which they had from heaven, although they had not seen him.

2 HOW CHRIST ROSE.
CHRIST rose, first by his own power, even by his Godheade. John 2.19.
Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up again. Ioh. 10.18.
I have power to lay down my soul, and have power to take it up again. Ioh.
5.21. As the Father raises up the dead and quickens them, so the Son
quickens whom he will. Objection. But the Father raised him, Romans 4.24.
Therefore he raised not himself. Answer. The Father raised the Son by the
Son himself, not as by an instrument, but as by another person of the same
essence and power with the Father. The Son is raised of the Father by
himself: Himself has raised up himself by his spirit. Secondly, Jesus
Christ true God and man rose according to that nature according to which he
suffered, namely according to his humane nature, even the true humane nature,
and the same in essence and properties, and that not deified, but glorified, al
infirmities thereof being done away. Luke 24.39. Behold my hands and my
feet: for it is I my self: handle me, and see me: for a spirit has not flesh
and bones as ye see me have. And truly nothing else could rise again, but
that which had fallen. The same body therefore which fell did rise again:
which is the greatest comfort unto us. For he must have been one and the same
Mediator, who should merit for us a communicating and participation of those
benefits, which we had lost by sin, and who should restore the same unto us,
and apply them to every one. Again, except Christ's flesh had risen,
neither should ours rise. Thirdly, Christ did rise truly and indeed, so that
his soul did truly and indeed return unto his body, and he did truly
come forth, even out of the grave also, in despite of the watchmen, they
being withal amassed and stricken therewith. Fourthly, he rose the third day,
as it was foreshadowed in Jonas: and because that type of Jonas was so
fulfilled; thence it certainly follows, that this Jesus is the Messiah
promised unto the Fathers.

3 FOR WHAT CAUSE HE ROSE.
CHrist rose 1. In respect of the prophecies which were uttered of his
resurrection. Thou shall not leave my soul in the grave: neither shall thou
suffer thy holy one to see corruption; Psa. 16.10. And Isai. 53.10. When he
shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, and shall
prolong his days. He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be
satisfied. Matthew. 12.39. No sign shall be given unto it, save the sign of
the Prophet Jonas: For as Jonas was three days, and three nights in the
Whales belly: so shall the son of man be three days and three nights in
the heart of the earth. Matthew. 17.23. They shall kill the son of man, but the
third day shall he rise again. Ioh. 20.9. As yet they knew not the Scripture,
that he must rise again from the dead. 2. He rose, for his Fathers and his
own glory. Romans 1.4. Declared to be the son of God by the resurrection from
the dead. Ioh. 17.1. Father, glorify thy Son, that thy son may also
glorify thee. 3 For the worthiness and power of the person that rose. For
first, Christ is the beloved and only begotten Son of God. Ioh. 3.35. The
father loves the son, and has given al things into his hand. Secondly,
Christ is true God and author of life. Ioh. 10.28. I give unto them eternal
life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand.
It had been absurd then that he should not be raised, who gives life to
others. Thirdly, Christ is righteous in himself, and satisfied for our sins
which were imputed to him. Now where sin is not, there does not death reign
any more. 4 In respect of the office of the person who rose. For first, the
Mediator, who was true God and man, should reign for ever. 2. Sam. 7.13.14. I
will stablish the throne of his kingdom for ever: J will be his father and he
shall be my son. Psa. 45.6. Thy throne O God is for ever and ever: the scepter
of thy kingdom is a scepter of righteousness. Psalm. 89.3. I have made a
covenant with my chosen: I have sworn to David my servant: Thy seed will I
stablish for ever, and set up thy throne from generation to generation. And
again, I have sworn once by my holiness, that I will not fail David, saying,
His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne shall be as the sun before
me. He shall be established for evermore as the Moon. Ezech. 37.23 24. They
shall be my people, and I will be their god: And David my servant shall be
king over them, and they all shall have one sheephearde. Dan. 7.27. The
kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven,
shall be given to the holy people of the most high, whose kingdom is an
everlasting kingdom, and al powers shall serve and obey him. Luke 1.33. Of his
kingdom shall be none end. Secondly, The Mediator, who was to be our
brother and true man, should ever make intercession for us, and as an
everlasting Priest appear for us before God. Psa. 110. Thou art a Priest for
ever, according to the order of Melchisedech. Romans 8.34. It is Christ which is
dead, yea or rather which is risen again, who is also at the right hand of
God: and makes request for us. Thirdly, The Mediator, which is to be true
man, should be Mediator both by his merit and by his efficacy or power. For
it sufficed not, that he died for us: but he was further to bestow through his
power his benefits upon the Church and us all, who by dying or by his death,
had obtained for us righteousness, that is, the Holy Ghost, life and glory
eternal. For both belong unto the Mediator, who therefore obtains them for
us by his intercession and death, and in whom also the same benefits are
therefore placed by the Godhead, that he should make us partakers of them.
Ioh. 1.16. Of his fullness have al we received. Neither ought it to seem any
marvel, that Christ does bestow the same benefits on us, which he obtained
of the Godhead by his death for us. For a man may both obtain a thing of one
for another, and also bestow the same on him for whom he obtained it. As be it
that one makes request for thee unto the Prince for a gift of a thousand
crounes: the prince does this for his sake that requested it, and bestows
also that gift on him, that he may bestow it on thee: he then shall obtain
this gift for thee of the Prince, and withal shall bestow the same on thee.
Now albeit Christ could have bestowed the benefits of his death upon us by his
Godhead, by the means whereof we are justified and regenerated, and begin
faith, and new life by the holy Ghost: yet notwithstanding, as God decreed, by
man to raise the dead (for by man came the resurrection. 1. Cor. 15.21.) and by
man to judge the world; so also has he decreed to bestow these gifts by
Jesus, man, that the same might be and continue mediator, who is true God and
man. Therefore also it was requisite, that Christ should remain for ever our
brother and our head; and that we of the other side being engraffed into him by
a true faith, should always remain his members. Which thing all the
testimonies do confirm, which attribute an eternal kingdom unto the seed
of David. For on that kingdom is our salvation grounded: and the kingdom of
Christ the Son of David could by no means have been eternal, if his humane
nature had continued in death. Objection. But in the old testament, before his
incarnation, or humiliation, Christ without his humanity, did bestow the same
benefits on the Fathers, which he bestows on us in the new Testament, and
was no less before the taking of flesh Mediator, than since: also he did the
same things before his coming, which he does after his coming in the flesh.
Ans. But neither had he then done those things, except he should have been
afterward man, and have continued always man: so neither now should he do
the same, if he did not retain the nature which he took for ever. John 5.27.
The father has given the son also power to execute judgment, in that he is
the son of man.

5 He rose for us, and that in three respects. 1. For our Justification. Romans
4.25. our Lord Jesus christ was delivered to death for our sins, and is risen
again for our justification. Now the resurrection of our Mediator was
requisite, for our justification, first because, except his punishment had
been finite, we could not have recovered out of everlasting death, from
which the Mediator was so to deliver us, as that he should utterly overcome
it in us. If then our Mediator was utterly to vanquish and overcome death in
us, he ought then so to die, as to overcome death first in himself, and so to
fulfill indeed that which was foretold. Ose 13.14. 1. Cor. 15.54. Death is
swallowed up into victory. O Death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy
victory? Again, Except Christ had overcome death, he could not have bestowed
his benefits on us, which by his death he had merited for us; neither should
we know that he had satisfied for us; because, if he had continued in death,
it had been a certain argument that he had not satisfied, but was overcome of
death, and of the burden of sin. For where death is, there is sin: or if he
had satisfied, and yet had remained in death, this had been contrary to the
justice of God. Wherefore Christ was to rise, both that we might know, that
he had promerited benefits for us, and also that himself might apply the
same unto us: that is, that by his merit and efficacy we might be perfectly
saved and justified. 2. Christ rose for our regeneration. For justification, or
remission of sins suffices not, without the inchoation and beginning of a
new life. 3. For our salvation and glorification. God will by this means
everlastingly quicken and glorify us, that being inserted and engraffed into
the mass of his Son, that is, his humane nature, we may for ever be carried
of it, and out of it draw life. For these causes it was necessary, that
Christ should rise again, that is, that his soul, which was laid down from
the body, should be again joined with the same body. For resurrection is
nothing else, than a conjunction or reuniting of the same body with the same
soul.

4 What are the fruits of Christ's Resurrection.
ALL the causes of Christ's Resurrection are not fruits of his Resurrection.
And after a diverse manner are the causes, and the fruits of his resurrection
considered: and moreover the benefits of Christ bestowed by his resurrection,
are one way considered as causes of Christ's resurrection, and otherwise as
fruits of the same. For the Questions are diverse, Wherefore christ rose: And,
What fruits Christ's resurrection brings unto us.

Furdermore the fruit of Christ's resurrection of two sorts: the one respecting
christ, the other, us. For first (as the Apostle says Romans 1.4.) He is
declared by the resurrection to be the Son of God: even the only begotten
and beloved Son of God, who is also God himself. Again, Christ's humane
nature also was by his resurrection adorned with that glory, which becomes
the nature of the Son of God. The fruit of Christ's resurrection which
respects us, is of many sorts. But, to speak in general, all the benefits
of christ's death are the fruits, which we receive by his resurrection: For
Christ's resurrection makes, that his death has his effect. Christ by his
resurrection does apply unto us those benefits, which he merited for us by
his death, and by this means the same are the benefits both of his death and
resurrection, which are otherwise merited for us, tha^ they are bestowed on us.
For it was not necessary that the very act of meriting and deserving should
dure all the time both of the old and the new Church: but only the act of
bestowing or applieng the same, and therefore it was necessary also that the
Mediator should be continually, that he might bestow those benefits on the
Church, which he was once to merit, for this can not be done without a
Mediator, and therefore neither can the Church be for one moment without a
Mediator. In the old church Christ the Mediator did bestow on the Fathers the
benefits of his death to come by the force and efficacy of his resurrection to
come: now he bestows them on us by the efficacy of his resurrection
already past.

It remains now that we in special reckon the chief fruits, which the
resurrection of Christ brings unto us. First then by the resurrection of
Christ we know him to be the Messiah, as in whom the prophecies were fulfilled.

Secondly, We are confirmed and warranted by Christ's resurrection, 1. Of his
merit: That he has fully and perfectly satisfied for our sins. For one
only sin, not being satisfied for, had withheld christ still in death. He
was cast into such a prison, as that, except he had paid the utmost farthing,
he had not been let go: But he was let go and dimissed: Therefore he paid
the utmost farthing. 2. We are confirmed, of the application of Christ's
benefits, which could not have been bestowed, if he had not risen: For, as was
said before, it was necessary that the selfsame Mediator, being man, should
rise again. Ioh 7.39. The holy Ghost was not yet given, Jesus was not yet
glorified. Wherefore well says Saint Paul, Romans 4.25. That Christ is risen
again for our righteousness, that is, to confer and apply righteousness unto us.

Thirdly, A fruit of christ's resurrection is the gift of the holy Ghost, by
whom christ regenerateth us and gives us eternal life. Before time the Godly
were also endued with the holy Ghost, and regenerated, but more sparingly than
now in the new Testament, and yet both by the force and virtue of his
resurrection. For the holy Ghost, by whose virtue and operation only we are
regenerated, cannot be given but by the resurrection and ascension of christ.

Fourthly, We must also ascribe and attribute it unto christ's resurrection,
that he preserves us by his perpetual and applied righteousness, that he
begins in us eternal life, and so does also ascertaine and assure us of the
consummation and accomplishment of eternal life, whereof we cannot be
certain except we have the beginning thereof: and the beginning we should not
have, except we had the holy Ghost.

Fiftlie, The resurrection of our bodies is the fruit of christ's
resurrection, 1. Because christ is our Head, and we his members. Now it is
expedient for the Heads glorify, that the members be glorious. Christ
indeed should be by himself, though he had no members, or if his members
continued in death: but he should not be Head: because he is not head but in
respect of his members: Neither should he be a king without a kingdom,
according to the nature of correlatiues, whose very being depends upon
necessary relation which one has to the other: and according to the nature of
correlatiues a glorious head does require glorious members, and such as are
correspondent unto it. 2. Because if Christ be risen, he has also abolished
sin: If he has abolished sin, either he has abolished his own sin, or
ours: but not his own, therefore ours. If he has abolished our sin, he has
abolished death also: For, if the cause be taken away, the effect likewise is
taken away. The wages of sin is death. Further, if he has abolished death,
and that by a sufficient satisfaction for our sins, which satisfaction he
has showed and declared by his resurrection to be sufficient: it is certain
that his resurrection is a most certain testimony of our resurrection: for he
having performed a sufficient satisfaction for the sins of his members, the
members cannot remain in death. But the resurrection of Christ the Head is an
argument of the perfect satisfaction for the sins of his members. Therefore
Christ's resurrection is also an argument of the perfect resurrection of his
members. 3. As the first Adam received blessinge^ for himself, and all his
posterity, and lost the same from all: So Christ the second Adam received life
and al other gifts for himself and others, and therefore also will
communicate eternal life with us. 4. Seeing the same spirit dwells in us
which did in Christ, he shall work also the same in us, which in our Head he
did. For the spirit is always like, neither does he work in the Head, and
sleep in the members. Therefore seeing Christ has raised himself up by his
spirit for the dead, he will verily also raise us up. For if he raised
himself up being dead, much more shall he be able being alive to raise us
up. 5. Because Christ is man: for execept he were man, we should have no hope
of the resurretion of our flesh. For by man came resurrection. 1. Cor. 15.21.
Objection. 1. Then the wicked shall not rise again: because christ's
resurrection is neither an argument, nor the cause of the resurrection of the
wicked, but of the godly only. Answer. There be other causes for which the
wicked shall rise again: eue^ for the just judgment of God, whereby he has
appointed them to eternal pains. For the same thing may have more effects,
and diverse causes. Objection. 2 These are the benefits of his death:
therefore not of his resurrection. Answer. They are of his death: as by it he
deserved them; of his resurrection, in respect of the application of his
benefits. He being rich was made poor, and being poor was made rich
again, that he might enrich us. Objection 3. The effect is not before the
cause. The cause of these benefits which is his resurrection, was not before
the first resurrection: therefore neither the effect, that is, the benefits
themselves. Answer. The resurrection was not, as touching the accomplishment
thereof, but in the counsel of God and in efficacy and virtue, it was in the
old Testament. For then also were men received into favor, they were endued
with the holy Ghost, and received the other benefits: but for and by the
Mediator which was in time appointed to be humbled and glorified.

The last, though not the least fruit of christ's resurrection is, The
consummation and perfecting of all his benefits, and the glorifieng of his
church. For christ did therefore die, and is therefore risen, and has
therefore perfectly delivered us from sin: that we may be ioint-heires
with him of his kingdom. Coloss. 1.18. He is the first borne of the dead.
Romans 8.17. We are the heirs of God, and heirs annexed with Christ. He shall
conform us and make us like unto himself, because we live by the same spirit,
whereby he does. And this spirit is not unlike himself. Romans 8.11. Jf the
spirit of him, that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you: he that
raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies,
because that his spirit dwells in you. Ioh. 14.3. I will come again, and
receive you unto my self, that where I am, there may ye be also.

Now in this we observe, That the whole humiliation of the Mediator does not
dure for ever. For it was enough that he suffered once: but the efficacy and
power thereof in preserving and maintaining the blessings thereby coming,
endures for ever. Christ therefore rose, that is, by his own proper virtue
and power brought again and returned his soul unto his body, that both soul
and body might be delivered from al ignominy and infirmity; and be adorned
with immortality and perfect glory; That is, 1. He recalled his soul unto
his body. 2. But both yet being now glorified and freed from infirmities. 3.
By his own proper power he received his soul. I believe then that Christ is
raised from the dead, that is, that he therefore rose again from the dead,
that he might make us partakers of his righteousness, sanctification,
glorification, which he purchased for us by his merit. Seeing therefore
Christ is risen, it is manifest that he is declared to be the Son of God,
and as touching his humanity, is endowed with that glory, which becomes the
nature of the Son of God: and further that he endueth us also with his
spirit, regenerateth us by the virtue of his spirit, and will at length
consummate and perfect the new life begun in us, and make us compartners of the
same his glory, felicity, and everlasting life.

HE ASCENDED INTO HEAVEN.
CHRIST'S Ascension into heaven, is a local, true and visible translation and
remoouing of Christ's body into that heaven, which is about all visible
heavens, to that light which is not to be come unto, to the right hand of God,
where he now is and remains, and whence he shall return to judgment.

The chief Questions of Christ's Ascension into heaven.

1 Whither, or to what place, christ ascended. 2 How he ascended. 3 Wherefore
he ascended. 4 What is the difference between christ's Ascension and ours. 5
What are the fruits of christ's Ascension.
1 WHITHER CHRIST ASCENDED.
JESUS Christ, man, when he was together with his Disciples in Bethania forty
days after his resurrection; after he had often proved and confirmed his
resurrection, his true flesh, and humanity unto his Apostles, ascended, in
their sight, into heaven. Heaven in Scripture signifies, 1 The air. 2 The
Skieye region, and celestial Spheres. 3 The place of the blessed, which is
that space immense, most lightsome, glorious, without and above the whole world
and the visible heaven: where God shows himself to the blessed Angels and
men, where is prepared the seat of our bliss with Christ and the Angels. God
is said to dwell there, because there does his glory especially appear unto
the blessed Angels and men. It is called the new world, paradise, the bosom of
Abraham. This heaven is not every where. Luke 16.26. Between you and us there
is a great gulf set, so that they which would go from hence to you, can not;
neither can they come from thence to us. In this third signification is heaven
here taken. Christ then ascended into Heaven, that is, was carried up into the
place of the blessed. Act. 2.2. The Holy Ghost came from Heaven in the day of
Pentecost, 2. King. 2.11. Elias was taken up into Heaven. 2. Cor. 12.2. Paul
makes mention of the third Heaven. Coloss. 3.1. Seek those things which are
above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God. Now, that Heaven is so
to be taken in this place, is proved both by the former testimonies, and also
by that saying of christ. Ioh. 14.2. In my fathers house are many dwelling
places, that is, many mansions, in which we may dwell and remain. Likewise,
this of the Apostle, Phil. 3.20. Our conversation is in Heaven. Object. But we
converse on earth: Therefore Heaven is in the earth. Auns. Our conversation is
in Heaven, first, in respect of the hope, and certainty we have thereof.
Secondly, in respect of the inchoation or beginning which we have here of that
heavenly life, which is to be consummated in the world to come. Into this
heaven, that is, into the house of God and all the Blessed christ ascended,
because he ascended far above all Heavens. Ephesians. 4.10. He was made higher than
the heavens. And Steephen witnesses Act. 7.56. Behold I see the heavens open,
and the son of man standing at the right hand of God. He saw with his bodily
eyes, endewed from above with a new seeing force and sharpness, beyond and
through all the visible Heavens, Christ in the same humane nature, in which he
had bin annihilated and humbled. Act. 1.11. He was taken up into Heaven. God
would therefore have us know the place whereinto Christ ascended, 1 That it
might be apparent that Christ is true man, and that he vanished not away, but
did continue, and shall continue for ever true man. 2 That we might know
whither our cogitations were to be converted, and where we ought to invoke
and call upon him, and that so Idolatry might be avoided. That we might know
our dwelling place into which christ will bring us, and in which we shall
converse and dwell with Christ.

Wherefore Christ's ascension is a local, true and visible translation or
remoouing of Christ's body from earth into heaven, which is above all visible
heavens, to the light that none can attain unto, to Gods right hand, where
he now is, and whence he shall come to judgment. Act. 1.11. He shall so
come, as ye have seen him go into heaven.

2 How Christ ascended into Heaven.
CHrist ascended into Heaven, first, not simply, but in respect of his humane
nature only, and that the very same, which was borne of the virgin, dead,
buried, and which rose again. Object. 1 He that ever is in heaven, did not
ascend into heaven, for then he should have been some time out of heaven. But
the Son of man ever was in heaven; Therefore he did not ascend. Auns. He
that ever was in heaven, as touching that whereby he was ever there, that is,
his Divinity, did not ascend; and so we grant Christ according to his Divinity
not to have ascended: for that was before in Heaven: and as when Christ was on
earth, the same did not therefore leave heaven: So when he is now in Heaven,
his Divinity does not therefore depart from us. Objection. 2 That which
descended, did also ascend. His Divinity did descend. Therefore it did also
ascend. Answer. The signification of descending is not here proper. His
divinity is said to have descended, that is, to have opened and manifested it
self in a place where before it had not. 2 He ascended locally or bodily, that
is, truly going from one place to another. He translated his human nature from
a lower place, by a real and most proper translation or remoouing: which could
not have bin don, if he had bin in body every where. 3 He took or lifted up
his humane nature into heaven, and by his proper power and virtue entered into
the possession of heavenly glory. Object. 3. That which is not in any place is
euerie-where. Christ is not in any place, because he is ascended above and
beyond the visible heaven, beyond which there is not any place: Therefore
Christ is every where. Ans. First we deny, the same to be euerywhere, which
is not in any p^ace. For the highest or fardest heaven i^ not in any place,
neither yet is it euery-where. But this is spoken of a natural place, which is
defined to be the superficial extremity of a body, compassing and containing
so any thing within it, as it self also is compassed and contained within
another. Secondly, then we say, that Christ is not in any natural place, but
in a place supernatural, which does contein, but is not it self contained:
and such a supernatural place is beyond the visible heaven: but what manner a
thing that supernatural place is, is not learned by the discourse of man's wit
and reason, but only by a celestial view and beholding, which the Angels
enjoy in heaven. But that Christ did ascend locally, these places of the
Scripture convince, Matthew. 16.11. Ye shall not have me always. Ioh. 16.7. If J
go not away, the comforter will not come unto you. Ioh. 6.62. What then, if ye
should see the Son of man ascend up, where he was before? Act. 1.9. While
they beheld he was taken up. Likewise, He was taken up into heaven. Coloss.
3.1. Seek those things which are above, where Christ sits at the right
hand of God. Of these it follows, that Christ's humane nature is finite, and
does change place, and therefore is not eueriewhere. For to be every where, and
to change place, are contradictorie. And therefore also his Godhead, which
alone is infinite, eternal, and euerie-where, is not said to change place.
But here the Vbiquetaries seek a shift, that they may not be hurt by this
weapon; That which changes place is not euerie-where; Christ's body changes
place. Therefore that is not euery-where. They grant the Mayor of this
Syllogism to be true taking the words after one manner: but here they contend
that the words are taken after a diverse manner: As that Christ's body is
euery-where, that is, after the manner of majesty, or in manner as it is a
maiesticall body; it changes place, in manner of a natural body, or as it
is a natural body. But they escape not a contradiction by this cauil. For the
diverse manner which takes away a contradiction must not fall into the same and
be all one with the words themselves, for the clearing of which they are
brought. For so i^ it made a mere tautologie, or speaking of the same thing,
and a begging of that which is in question, as if I imitating them should say,
This air is light, according to the manner of light, and it is darcke, as
touching the manner of darcknesse: Again, This man is poor as touching the
manner of poverty, and is rich as touching the manner of riches. Thus is the
same affirmed of the same. For the manner of poverty is nothing else but
poverty, and the manner of riches nothing but riches. So likewise these
manners which they faign and imagine in the Mayor proposition are altogether the
same with the things which are affirmed. That is, the same in them is affirmed
of the same, and so these manners are that in which lies the co^tradiction. For
they say, Christ's body is every where, according to the manner of majesty,
Being demanded what they mean by majesty, they answer, omnipotency, and
immensitie. To say then, Christ's body is every where as touching the manner
of majesty, not as touching the manner of a natural body, is no thing else,
even by their own judgment, than, Christ's body to be every where
according to the manner of immensitie, or infinity, and not to be every where
according to the manner of finitenesse. Now they trimly take away the
contradiction by thus distinguishing. For the manner of immensitie, is nothing
else but immensitie: and immensity, and to be immense, are both affirmed of
the same. Wherefore as these are contradictorie, to be every where, and to
change place, or, not to be every where; so are these also contradictorie:
The same body to be immense and to be finite, immensitie and finitenesse to
agree unto the same; or, the same body to be every where, or immense
according to the manner of immensity or majesty, and not to be every where but
to change place, and to be finite according to the manner of finitenesse or a
natural body. Wherefore it is manifest, which was before also confirmed, That
Christ ascended locallie, and that therefore this Article is to be understood
of Christ's local ascension.

4 Objection. Contraries or opposites ought to be expounded after the same
manner, that the contrariety and opposition may be kept: But these Articles,
He ascended into heaven, He descended into hell, are opposed one to the other:
Therefore as the Article of Christ's descension is taken in a figurative
meaning, that is of his great humiliation, so ought also the Article of his
Ascension to be taken of his great majesty, not of any local motion.
Answer. We Answer first unto the Mayor. Opposites are to be expounded
after the same manner, except it be disagreeing from the articles of faith, and
from other places of scripture. But this article the scripture it self
understands of a local Ascension. Act. 1.11. He shall so come, as ye have
seen him go into heaven. 2 We deny the Minor. For these two articles are not
opposed. For his ascension into Heaven is not the furdest degree of his glory,
as his descension into hell is the furdest degree of his Humiliation. But the
furdest and highest degree of his glory is his sitting at the right hand of
the Father. Therefore as touching this article, of his sitting at the right
hand of his Father, we grant the Mayor. For unto this article is the descension
into Hell opposed, whereupon also the Scripture does not interpret properly but
figuratively, these two articles of Christ's descension into Hell, and of his
sitting at the right hand of his Father. 3 If christ's ascension be constered of
any equalling of his manhood with his Godhead, all the other articles
concerning the true humanity of christ shall be utterly ouerthrown. Fourthly,
Christ ascended visiblie into Heaven. For his assumption and taking away from
his Apostles was conspicuous and apparent to the sight. Act. 1.9. While they
beheld he was taken up. And they beheld him ascending up so long, until a cloud
took him up out of their sight. Fifthly, He ascended by the power and virtue
of his Godhead, as also, by the same he rose. Acts. 2.32. This Jesus has god
made being exalted by his right hand, (by his divine power) Lord and Savior.
Sixthly, He ascended, when he had conuersed on earth forty days after his
resurrection, and that therefore, 1 That he might assure men of his
resurrection, and of the truth of his flesh. Act. 1.3. To whom also he
presented himself alive after that he had suffered by many infallible tokens.
2 That he might instruct his Disciples, and recall into their minds that which
he had spoken before, and farther ad some other things: and so might make not
them only, but us also certain of his resurrection, and of the truth of his
flesh, or humane nature. Seventhly, He so ascended, that he returns not
before the day of judgment. Act. 1.11. He shall so come as ye have seen
him go into Heaven. Act. 3.21. Whom the Heavens must contain until the time
that all things be restored. Objection. But christ promised that he would be
with us unto the end of the woorlde. Answer. He is with us in that
spiritual union whereby we his members are joined to him our head. And further
he speaks of his whole person, to which he attributes that which is proper
unto the Godhead. In like manner he says before his passion, when as yet he
conuersed on earth with his Disciples, John. 14.23. J and my Father will come
unto him, and will dwell with him: this he speaks as touching his Godhead,
which was and is in heaven, and as the Father is with us, so is he: otherwise
we might reason also thus, J go away, says Christ: Therefore he is not at
all with us. But it is attributed improperly to his other nature, namely to his
humanity, that he abides with us, in respect of that personal union, which
is the secret and wonderful indissoluble uniting and knitting of the two most
diverse natures of Christ, divine and humane, into one person, so that these
two natures, being in such wise linked and conioined, absolve the essence of
Christ's person, and one nature should be destroyed, if it were sundered from
the other; both notwithstanding reteining their peculiar and several
properties, whereby one is distinguished from another. Therefore of no force is
this Objection. In Christ's person the two natures are joined in inseperable
vnio^. Therefore wheresoever Christ's Godhead is: there also must his humanity
needs be. For these two natures remain in such sort joined and united, that
their property remains distinct, and neither is turned into other. Reply.
Those two natures, whereof one is not, where is the other, are sundered,
neither remain united, but are separated. In christ are two natures, whereof
one, which is his humanity, is not where is the other, which is his godhead.
Therefore the two natures in christ are not united but separated. Answer. The
Mayor is true being understood of two finite natures, but not of those whereof
one is finite, and another infinite For the finite nature can not be at once in
more places: but the infinite nature may be at once both whole in the finite
nature, and whole without it: and this may we indeed consider and observe in
christ. For his humane nature which is finite, is but in one place; but his
divine nature, which is infinite, is both in christ's humane nature, and without
it, and even every where. Reply. There must notwithstanding be made a
separation in another part, where the humane nature is not, though there be no
separation where it is. Answer. Not at all; Because the Godhead is whole and
the same in the humane nature and without it. Gregory Nazianzene says, The
Word is in his temple, and is every where, but after a special manner in his
temple. Reply. If christ's humane nature be not adorned with divine properties,
it follows that there is no difference between christ and other saints. For
no other difference can be found, but the equalling of his manhood with his
godhead. For the difference between christ and the Saints, either is in
substance and essence, or in properties: But not in substance: Therefore in
properties. Answer. We deny that there is any difference between Christ and the
Saints either in substance, or in properties, or gifts: for this enumeration
or reckoning is not perfect and complete. There is wanting a third difference,
whereby Christ is distinguished from all the Saints, namely the secret
personal union of both natures. Reply. Phil. 2.9. It is said, God has given
him a name above every name. Answer. 1 God has given him such a name, that
is, together with his godhead: For as the godhead, so the properties of the
godhead were given him of the Father. 2. God gave such a name to him, that is,
to christ, man, by personal union, not by any exequation or equalling of both
natures. By these three objections it appears, that the Vbiquetaries (of
whom these things are brought) fall into foul errors. First, into the error
of Nestorius, because they sunder the united natures in christ. Secondly, into
the error of Eutyches, because they confound the same natures. Thirdly, They
disarme us of those weapons, wherewith we should fight against Arrians and
Sabellians. For they do foully eneruate and weaken all those places, which
prove Christ's divinity, by drawing them to the equalling of his humane nature
with his divine.

But we are to observe in how many respects Christ is said to be present with
us. First, he is present with us by his spirit and Godhead. Secondly, he is
present as touching our faith and confidence wherewith we behold him. Thirdly,
he is present in mutual dilection and love, because he loves us, and we him,
so that he does not forget us. Fourthly, he is present with us in respect of
his union with humane nature, that is, in the conjunction of the soul with the
body. For the same spirit is in us and in him, who joins and knitteth us unto
him. Fiftlie, he is said to be present with us in respect of that hope, which
we have of our consummatio^, that is, that certain hope which we have of
coming unto him.

3 Wherefore christ ascended into Heaven.
CHRIST ascended, first, for his own and his Fathers glory. For, 1. He was to
have a celestial kingdom: therefore he might not abide in earth. Ephesians. 4.10.
He that descended, is even the same that ascended, far above al heavens, that
he might fill all things. 2. It was meet that the Head should be glorified
with excellency of gifts above all the blessed, as being the members of that
Head: which could not have bin done in earth.

Secondly, He ascended in respect of us, and that for four causes. 1. That
he might gloriously make intercession for us, namely by his virtue, efficacy
and will. For it is the will of the Father and the Son, that his oblation and
sacrifice should be for ever of force for us, and so by making intercession
for us, he should apply his benefits and the merits of his death unto us:
unto which application was required his whole glorification, the parts whereof
are his Resurrection, Ascension, and Session at the right hand of the Father.
Objection. He made intercession for us also on earth. Answer. This
intercession was made, in respect of the intercession to come. For of that
condition he made intercession before, that, having accomplished his sacrifice
on earth, he should present himself for ever a Mediator in the celestial
Sanctuary. 2. That we might also ascend, and might be assured of our
ascension. Ioh. 14.2. I will prepare you a place. In my fathers house are many
dwelling places; that is, places to abide for ever: for he speaks of
continuing. 3. That he might send the holy Ghost, and by him gather, comfort,
and defend his church from the Devil unto the worlds end. John 16.7. If I go
not away, the comforter will not come unto you. Objection. He gave the holy
Ghost both before, and after his resurrection. Wherefore he went not for that
cause away, as to send the holy ghost. Answer. He had given him indeed
before, but not in such plentiful manner as in the day of Pentecost. Again,
that sending of the holy ghost, which was from the beginning of the world in
the church, was done in respect of christ to come, who should at length reign
in humane nature, and give largely and in aboundaunt manner the holy Ghost.
Before his Ascension he gave him not in such plenty, because of the decree of
God, who purposed to do both by man glorified: And the sending of the holy
Ghost was the chief part of Christ's glory. Therefore it is said, As yet was
not the holy ghost, that is, the wonderful and plentiful sending of the
holy Ghost, because Christ was not as yet glorified. 4. That he might promise
for us in the sight of God, that he would bring to pass, that we should no
more offend.

4 What is the difference between christ's Ascension and ours.
Christ's ascension and ours agree, Both in that it is to the same place, and in
that also it is to be glorified. But they differ. 1. Because christ ascended by
his own power and virtue: we not by our own, but by his. Ioh. 3.13. No man
has ascended into heaven (that is, by his own proper virtue) but the Son of
man. We shall ascend by and for him. John 14.2. J go to prepare you a place.
And John 17.24. I will that they which thou have given me, be with me even
where I am. 2. He ascended to be Head: We to be his members: He to glory
agreeable for the Head: and we shall ascend to glory fit for members. He
ascended to sit at the right hand of the Father; we, to sit indeed in his, and
his Fathers throne, but that only by participation; not in the same degree and
dignity with him. Reuelat. 3.21. To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit
with me in my throne, even as J overcame, and sit with my Father in his throne.
Christ therefore ascended as Head of the Church: we shall ascend as members of
this Head, that we may be partakers of his glory. 3. Christ's ascension was the
cause of our asce^sion, but it is not so of the contrary. 4. Whole christ
ascended, but not the whole of christ. Because he ascended as touching his
humane nature only, and not as touching his divine, which also is on earth:
But the whole of us shall ascend, because we have only a finite nature: and
that but one.

5 What are the fruits of christ's ascension.
THE chief fruits of christ's ascension are: First, His Intercession, which
signifies, 1. The perpetual virtue and strength of christ's Sacrifice. 2. Both
wills in christ, both humane and divine, propitious and favorable unto us,
whereby he will that for his Sacrifice we be received of his Father. 3. The
Assent of his Father approving this his Sons will, and accepting of the value
of his sacrifice as a ransom for our sins: and as the Father receives us, so
does he also. Objection. But before christ's ascension, yea before his coming,
there was intercession. Answ. That depended of this, that is, it was made in
respect of this intercession to come, as also the whole receiving into favor
from the beginning of the woorlde. For he, our Mediator, made intercession
before with this condition, that he accomplishing his sacrifice should appear
for ever in the heavenly Sanctuary. Heb. 6.57. Thou art a Priest for ever
according to the order of Melchisedech. And further, that intercession in the
old Testament was not such, as it is now in Heaven. For now he will have us
received for his ransom already paid, which then was afterward to be paid.

The second fruit is, our glorification or ascension: For seeing Christ our
head is ascended, we are certain that we also shall ascend into heaven, as
being his members. John 14.2. I go to prepare a place for you. And though I
go to prepare a place for you, J will come again and receive you unto my
self, that where I am, there may ye be also. Objection. But Elias and Enoch
ascended before christ. Therefore christ is not by his ascension the cause of
our ascension. Answer. They ascended in respect of Christ's ascension, which
was to come. Christ's ascension and glorification is the cause and example of
our ascension and glorification, because except he were glorified, we should
not be glorified. For the Father has decreed to give us all things by the
Messiah, and has put all things in his hands. And how should Christ have
given us a kingdom, except himself first, as being the first borne, had
taken possession thereof? But for this cause also he ascended into heaven, that
he might there reign. Therefore he will translate his citizens thither. And
seeing we are his members, and he, our head, is already ascended, and
glorified: Therefore shall we also ascend, and be glorified. John 12.26.
Where J am, there shall also my servant be. And John 14.3. J will receive you
unto my self, that where J am, there may ye be also.

The third fruit is, The sending of the holy ghost, by whom he gathers,
comfort, and defends his church to the worlds end. He was given also to
the godly which were under the Law, before Christ's ascension and coming. But
that was. 1. Jn respect of this ascension and glorification of christ, which
was then to come, and whereof that sending and pouring out of the holy Ghost
is not a fruit only, but also a part: and so in respect also of this sending,
which was no^e after Christ's ascension accomplished, the holy Ghost was given
unto the godly in the old Testament. 2. Now after christ's glorification it
was given more abundantly, as in the day of Pentecost. That which also was
foretold. Act. 2.17. And it shall be in the last days, says god, I will power
out of my spirit upon al flesh. Now, that christ did not power out the holy
Ghost in such plenty before his ascension, that befell only, as before was
said, in respect of the decree of God. For God would that the holy Ghost
should be given by the Messiah, as well man as God: wherefore man also was to
be glorified, who should do this. John 16.7. It is expedient for you that J
go away: for if J go not away the comforter will not come unto you.

There are other fruits also of Christ's ascension. For 1. it is a testimony,
that our sins are fully pardoned us who do believe. For except he had
suffered the punishment for sins, he could not have entered into the throne
of God: For where sin is, there is death also. John 16.10. He shall reprove
the world of righteousness, because J go to my father. 2. It is a testimony
that christ is indeed conqueror of death, sin, and the Devil. 3. It is a
testimony, that we shall never be left destitute of comfort: because he
therefore ascended, to send the holy Ghost, John 16.7 Jf J go not away, the
comforter will not come. Ephesians. 4.8. When he ascended up on high, he led
captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men 4. It is a testimony that christ
will for ever defend us, because we know that our head is a glorious head, and
placed above al principalities.

HE SITS AT THE RIGHT HAND OF GOD THE FATHER ALMIGHTY.
THIS Article differs from the former. 1. Because in this Article is declared
the end of his ascension. For Christ did therefore ascend into heaven, that he
might sit at the right hand of the father. 2. Because christ sits always at
the right hand of the Father: but into heaven he ascended but once. 3. We
shall also ascend into heaven, but yet we shall not sit at the right hand of
God.

The Questions of christ's sitting at the right hand of the Father.

1 What the right hand of God signifies. 2 What it is, to sit at Gods right
hand. 3 Whether christ did always sit at Gods right hand. 4 What are the
fruits of christ's sitting at the right hand of the Father.
1 WHAT THE RIGHT HAND OF GOD SIGNIFIES.
THE right hand of God signifies, 1 The omnipotency, or exceeding virtue of
God. Act. 5.31. Him has God lift up with his right hand to be a Prince and a
Savior. 2 It signifies perfect glory, perfect dignity, and full divine
majesty.

2 What it is to sit at Gods right hand.
TO sit at Gods right hand, is to be a person equal to God in power and
glory, by whom the Father woorketh immediately. They commonly define it to
be, to reign in equal power and glory with the Father. That is true indeed
of Christ: For he does al things likewise as does the Father, and is endued
with the same power with the Father, which also he exercises. But the Son
has always so reigned: and the same agrees also to the holy Ghost, who yet
is not said in the Scripture, to sit, neither does sit at the right hand of
the Father: because the Father does not govern al things, especially his
church, immediately by the Holy Ghost, but by the Son. Wherefore this
definition, which is commonly received, is not sufficient and perfect. Some
confound his sitting, with his Ascension, and say it is all one. But first it
is absurd that in so short a confession should be an idle speaking of the same
thing twice. 2 This phrase of speech is taken from the custom of kings, who
have their assistants assessours, (...) whom they commit the power of
government: So christ also is said to sit at the right hand of the Father,
because the Father will rule and govern by him immediately all things both in
heaven and in earth. 3 We also shall ascend, neither yet shall we sit at the
right hand of God the Father. Heb. 1.13. For unto which of the angels said he
at any time, sit at my right till I make thine enemies thy footstool?
Muchlesse will God speak this unto man. Objection. But it is said, Revel.
3.21. To him that overcomes will J grant to sit with me in my throne. Auns.
We shall sit there by participation: where this must be also granted, that the
same is the throne of the Father and the Son. In the same throne many may
sit: but not in the same dignity. And so christ will not give that chief
dignity and glory given him of his Father, unto any other. Reply. But to sit
at Gods right hand, is also to live gloriously and blessedlie: But this
agrees to us. Therefore we shall sit there. Answer. This is not a full and
sufficient definition, because a blessed life agrees both to us and Angels,
but the sitting at gods right hand does not. Whereupon these two articles are
well adioined together, He Ascended into Heaven, he sits at the right hand
of God the Father.

Now let us in few words expound the definition which we brought of Christ's
sitting at the right hand of the Father. Christ sits then at the right
hand of God the Father, that is, he is that person omnipotent, by which the
Father governs al things immediately: But especially, by which he defends
the church against her enemies. That this definition may be more full and clear,
let us briefly sift every part thereof.

The Session therefore of Christ at the right hand of the Father, is, 1. The
perfection of Christ's divine nature, that is, the equality of the Word with
the Father, which he did not receive, but ever had.

2 The perfection of christ's humane nature. This perfection or excellency of
Christ's humane nature compriseth, First, The personal union of the humane
nature with the Word; Coloss. 2.9. In him dwells all the fullness of the
godhead bodily. Secondly, The collation or bestowing of gifts far greater
and more in number, than are bestowed on al men or Angels, and therefore in
which he far excels both men and Angels. Ioh. 1.16. Of his fullness have al
we received. And cap. 3.34. God gives him not the spirit by measure.

3 The perfection or excellency of the office of the Mediator, that is, the
Prophetical, Priestly, and Royal function, which christ now, as the glorified
Head of his church, does in his humane nature gloriously exercise in heaven.
This excellency of christ's office is the very exalting of Christ in his
Prophetical, Priestly, and Princely function: that is, the laying down of the
infirmity of Christ's humane nature, and the perfection of glory, which was due
unto Christ, both in respect of his office, as being a Prophet, King, and
Priest; and in respect of his person, as being God.

4 The perfection of christ's honor, that is, the adoration, worship, and
reverence, which is yielded unto Christ both of men and Angels. Heb. 1.6. Let
all the Angels of God worship him. Phil. 2.9. He has given him a name above
every name. By these and the like speeches are signified the parts of Christ's
sitting at Gods right hand. But the name whereof is spoken in the words of the
Apostle before aleaged, is the excellency of the person and office of Christ,
and a declaration of both by his visible majesty, that all may be forced to
confess that this is the King, by whom God rules all things. So also did
Stephen see him adorned with visible majesty and glory. Christ had some
parts also before of his excellency both of his office, and of his person, but
he then came to the full perfection of all, when being taken up into heaven, he
was placed at the right hand of the Father.

By these parts now of christ's sitting at the right hand of the Father, the
definition of his sitting may be made more full in this wise: when christ is
said to sit at the right hand of the Father, he is said to have the same and
equal power with the Father; to excel all men and Angels in his humane nature,
both in gifts bestowed on him more and greater than on them, as also in
visible glory and majesty; to show himself Lord of men and Angels, and of
all things that are created; In the name of the Father, to rule and administer
immediately his kingdom in heaven and the whole world, and chiefly to govern
by his power immediately the church: lastly to be acknowleged and magnified of
all as chief Lord and Head.

Many Objections are by this definition refuted, As 1. The Holy Ghost also is
equal with God: Therefore we may truly say, that he also sits at the
right hand of God. Answer. It does not follow: because the reason is grounded
of an ill definition. For although the Holy Ghost be as well as the Father and
the son, Head and Lord and ruler of the Church, yet does it not agree to the
Holy Ghost, but to christ alone, to sit at the right hand of the Father:
Because he alone took humane nature, was humbled, dead, buried, rose again,
ascended, and is Mediator. And further the Father woorketh immediately by the
Son only: but by the holy Ghost the Father does not work immediately, but
through the son. For the same order is to be kept in their operation and
working which is in the persons. The Father works by him self, but of
himself, because he is of none: The Son works by himself, not of
himself, because he is begotten of the Father: The holy ghost works by
himself, but from the Father and the Son, from whom he does proceed.
Therefore the father woorketh immediately by the Son: because the Son is
before the holy ghost, yet not in time but in order: but mediately the Father
woorketh by the holy Ghost: and therefore the Son is rightly said to sit
at the right hand of the Father, but not the holy Ghost. 2. Objection. Christ
before his Ascension was always the glorious Head and King of the Church.
Therefore he cannot now be first, after his ascension, said to sit at gods
right hand. Answer. Again, this reason also is grounded upon a bad
definition. Christ was always glorious; but he was not always advanced and
exalted in the office of his Mediatorshippe, to wit, in his kingdom and
priesthood. Now first he began to have the consummation and perfection of
glory, which before he had not: that is, gloriously to rule and administer his
kingdom and Priesthood in the Heavens.

Christ is called our Head, 1 In respect of his perfection and excellency,
both as God and man. And as concerning his godhead, there is no doubt of it.
And as concerning his humane nature, it is true, because Christ's humanity is
adorned with far greater gifts, than is any creature; especially by reason of
the union thereof with the Word. 2 Jn respect of his office; and that 1 in
regard of his merit, then by reason of his power and efficacy. For as the
Head is the seat of all the exterior and interior senses, wherein are seated
the understanding and will, and whence the vital spirits flow: So from Christ
as the Head flow down into us the gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost.

3 Whether Christ did always sit at the right hand of God.
THIS Question should not be needful, except men's curiosity had made it
such. To the explication thereof is required the distinction first of natures,
then of time.

Now as concerning Christ's Divinity, 1 That always sits at the right hand
of the Father, as sitting signifies an equal power and honor, which Christ
has, even the same with the Father. For Christ's divine nature was from
everlasting equal with the Father in honor and power. Likewise, as To sit at
the right hand of the Father, signifies to be the Head of the Church. For by
the Word the Father did from the beginning always preserve the Church, as
also by him he created all things. In this sense Christ was placed by his
eternal generation at the right hand of the Father.

2 Christ according to his divinity also does so sit at the right hand of
the Father, as he was ordained to this his office from everlasting.

3 He does always sit, according to his divinity, at the right hand of God,
in that he begun from the very beginning of the world, to execute and has
executed this his office. And christ, according to his divinity, was in this
respect, after his asce^sion into heaven, placed at the fathers right hand, in
that his divinity then began to show it self glorious in the body: which in
the time of his humiliation had hid it self from being openly manifested and
declared. For in the time of his humiliatio^, which was when christ lived on
earth, his Godhead also had humbled it self, not by making it self weaker,
but by hiding it self only, and not showing it self abroad. Therefore thus
Christ also according to his divine nature was placed at his Fathers right
hand, namely by laieng down that humility, which he took on him for our
sake, and by showing forth that glory, which he had with his Father before
the foundations of the woorlde were laid (but had hid the same in the time of
his humiliation) not by adding any thing unto it, which it had not before,
neither by making it more bright and powerful, neither by manifesting and
declaring it before God, but unto men, and by using fully and freely his right
and authority, which right and authority Christ's divinity had as it were
laid down in the taking up and assumption of humane nature. Therefore he
says, John 17.5. Now glorify me thou Father with thy own self, with the
glory, which J had with thee before the world was. This glory he had not with
men. Therefore he prays, that as he had it always with the Father, so he
might manifest it unto men. Wherefore this is not to be taken, as if the Word
received any change or alteration of his Godhead: but in that sense only which
has been said.

Now as concerning christ's humane nature: according to it he was then first
placed at the right hand of the Father, when he ascended into heaven: then he
attained to his glorification, when he received that, which before he had not.
Objection. He that sits at Gods right hand, is every where. Christ
sits at Gods right hand. Therefore he is every where. Answer. This reason
we grant in respect of the communicating of the properties to the person. But
if it be further concluded, that according to the flesh he is every where,
there will be more in the conclusion, than was in the premises. Again, we
deny the consequence of the whole reason: because, the right hand of God, and
to sit at the right hand of God, is not all one. Neither yet is it simply
true, that he which sits at Gods right hand, sits every where. For a
part of the sitting at gods right hand is also that visible glory and majesty,
wherewith Christ's humane nature was endowed, and wherewith Stephen beheld him
endued in heaven. This is not every where, but only in that placc where his
body is seated and remains.

Objection. He ascended into heaven, to fill al things, that is, with the
presence of his flesh. Answer. It is a fallacy in misconstring the word. He
ascended to fill all things, that is, with his gifts and graces, not with his
flesh, bones and skin. These are the monsters and dotinges whereby the Devil
carries Gods glory into derision. Reply. That nature which has received
omnipotency is every where: christ's humanity has received omnipotency.
Therefore it is every where. Answer. That nature which has received
omnipotency by a real transfusion and communication of the properties, is
every where, but not that which has received it by personal union only, as
the humane nature of Christ. But yet notwithstanding many things have been
bestowed by real transfusion on Christ's humanity: to wit, other qualities,
than which he had on the cross and in his humiliation. Likewise far more and
greater gifts, than those which are bestowed either on Angels or on men, and
in respect of those gifts bestowed on him, Christ is placed, according to his
humane nature, at the right hand of his father; but according to his divinity
he is placed at the right hand of the Father, as he being glorified and taken
up into heaven has showed forth the same; and has attained unto the
perfection of glory, or to the highest degree of glorification as touching his
humanity.

4 What are the fruits of Christ's sitting at the right hand of the Father.
THE fruits of Christ's sitting at the Fathers right hand are all the
benefits of the kingdom and Priest-hoode of christ glorified. As 1. His
intercession for us. 2. The gathering, governing, and garding of his church by
the Word and spirit. 3. His defending of the church against her enemies. 4.
The abiection and destruction of the churches enemies. 5. The glorification of
the church. The fruits or benefits of the kingdom of christ glorified, ^^e,
that he rules us by the ministry of the Word, and the holy Ghost, that he
preserves his ministry, that he gives his Church resting places, and is
forcible by doctrine in converting the chosen; that he will at length raise up
from the dead his chosen and elect, abolish all their infirmities, glorify
them, wipe away all tears from them, enthronize them in his throne, and make
them Priests and Kings unto his Father. The fruit of the Priesthood of Christ
glorified is, that he appears, presents himself, and makes request and
intercession for us in heaven, and that forcibly, so that the father denies us
nothing through the virtue and force of his intercession. Hence arises that
consolation and comfort: Because our Head, our flesh, and our brother sits
at the right hand of the father; he shall at length glorify and quicken us,
and that both in respect of his brotherly love, as also in regard of his
office, who is our Head. Because also we have such a High Priest, which is set
down at the right hand of the father, there is no cause why we should doubt
at all of our salvation: he shall keep it safe for us, and at length most
assuredly and certainly bestow it upon us. Ioh 10.28. No man shall pluck my
sheep out of my hand. And cap. 17.24. I will that they which thou have given me
be with me even where I am.

FROM THENCE SHALL HE COME TO IVDGE THE QVICKE AND THE DEAD.
IN this Article three common places fall in one and meet together, which are
diverse in themselves, namely of Christ's second coming, of the end of the
woorlde, and of the last judgment. Of these places we will speak jointly, as
which are linked between themselves: yet so, that the chief of them is that
of the l^st judgment. For to little purpose were it for us to think of christ's
second coming, except we did further consider to what end he should come. I
believe in christ who shall come to judge the quick and the dead: that is, I
believe 1. That at the second coming of Christ shall follow the renewing of
heaven and earth. 2. That the selfsame Christ shall come who for us was borne,
suffered, and rose again. 3. That he shall come gloriously to deliver his
church, whereof J am a member. 4. That he shall come to abject and cast away
the wicked. By these we receive great and sound comfort also and consolation.
For seeing there shall be a renouation or renewing of heaven and earth, we have a
confidence and trust that our state also shall be at length other, and better
than it now is: seeing christ shall come; we shall have a favorable judge:
for he shall come to judge, who has merited righteousness for us, who is our
Brother, Redeemer, Patron and Defender: seeing he shall come glorious^^e, he
shall also give a just sentence and judgment, and shall be mighty enough to
deliver us: seeing he shall come to deliver his church, great cause, why we
should cheerfully expect him: seeing he shall abject and cast away the wicked
into everlasting torments, let us suffer patiently their tyranny. To
conclude, seeing he shall deliver the godly, and cast away the wicked, he
will also either deliver or cast away us: and therefore it is necessary that
we repent, and be thankful in this life, and fly fleshely security, that
we may be in the number of them whom he shall deliver.

The chief Questions of the last judgment.

1 Whether there shall be any judgment. 2 What that judgment is. 3 Who shall
be judge. 4 Whence and whither he shall come to judge. 5 How he shall come. 6
Whom he shall judge. 7 What shall be the sentence and execution of this
judgment. 8 For what causes this judgment shall be. 9 When it shall be. 10 Why
god will have us certain of the last judgment. 11 Why he would not have us
certain of the time. 12 Wherefore God differreth that judgment. 13 Whether it
is to be wished for.
1 WHETHER THERE SHALL BE ANY IVDGEMENT.
THIS Question is necessary. For the Scripture also has foretold that there
shall come in the later times ^ockers, who shall account this Article for a
fable. The last judgment cannot indeed be demonstrated out of Philosophy: but
neither is there any thing in Philosophy against it. But the whole certainty
thereof is grounded on divine Prophecies, or of the doctrine of the church. For
although the Philosopher perhaps would say somewhat, as seeing a little through
a mist: as, That it is not likely that man was born to this misery: yet by
reason that man has lost the knoweledge of the righteousness, goodness, and
truth of God, we cannot know out of philosophy, that any judgment shall be:
muchlesse with what circumstances it shall be. The arguments, which Philosophy
yields, are forcible indeed in themselves, but are not made known but in
divinity: and therefore the arguments themselves are only made forcible and
of strength in divinity. Wherefore we will draw reasons and proofs out of
divinity or the doctrine of the gospel, by which it may appear that there is a
last judgment.

The first proof is drawn from express and plain testimonies of sacred
Scripture: As out of the prophecy of Dan. Likewise out of the prophecy of
Enoch, alleged by the Apostle Jude, verse. 14. and 15. Behold the Lord comes
with thousands of his saints, To give judgment against all men. Moreover, out
of the sermons of Christ, especially in Mat. 24. verse. 25. Likewise out of the
sermons of the Apostles. Acts. 17.31. He has appointed a day in the which he
will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he has appointed. 1.
These. 4.16. The lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, and with
the voice of the Archangel, and with the trumpet of god. Neither is the
certainty of the last judgment apparent only by these and the like plain
testimonies of Scripture, but is deduced also out of other places by good
consequence: and hence are made those forcible arguments, which the
Philosophers saw but by a glims.

The second proof is drawn from the end whereunto mankind was created. God
necessarily obtains his end; but to this end did he create mankind, that man
should be the image of God, and the everlasting temple of God, wherein he
should be worshipped; to whom he would communicate himself, perfect wisdom,
righteousness, and goodness, and would impart his blessedness. This
blessedness is a part of Gods Image: but this the Devil has destroyed:
Therefore God shall restore it, who is mightier than the Devil. And although
the end, for which man was created, is hindered diverse ways in this life: yet
god will at some time obtain it. Wherefore it is not only (as the
Philosophers reason) likely and probable, that man was not made for th^se
miseries: but it is also most certain, that the most excellent of all
creatures was made to a better end. Wherefore there must needs be at length a
change. By this argument is confirmed also the happiness of our bodies:
According to that of Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 6.19. Know you not that your body is
the temple of the holy ghost which is in you?

The third proof is taken from the justice, goodness, and truth of God,
which requires, that it may go full well with the good, and with the evil full
il. Philosophy knows not that god is so just, good and true, that he will
have the righteous to enjoy full and perfect blessedness. But this comes not
to pass in this life; nay rather it goes well with the evil and wicked in
this life. Therefore there must remain an other life, wherein this shall be.
The holy Scripture uses this argument, as in Saint Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6. It is
a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you.
And Luke 16.25. Remember that thou in thy lifetime receiuedst thy pleasures,
and likewise Lazarus pains: now therefore is he comforted, and thou art
tormented. All other proofs and arguments may be referred unto these.

2 What is the last judgment.
IN every judgment are, the Accused, the Accuser, the judge, the cause,
examination and hearing of the cause, the Law according to which judgment is
given, the sentence of absolution and condemnation, and the execution thereof
according to the Laws. Judgment then in general is an inquisition or
examination of a cause by an ordinary and lawful judge, according to just
Laws, and a pronouncing of sentence, and the exequution thereof according to
just Laws. Now is it easy to define this judgment of God. This judge has
no need of inquisition or examination of the cause, or of witnesses and
accusers, seeing he is himself the searcher of hearts. Therefore there shall be
only the judge, and men, of whom sentence shall be given, the law according to
which sentence shall be given, and execution.

The definition of it is this: 1 The last judgment is a judgment which God
shall exercise in the end of the world by christ, who should then visiblie
descend from heaven in a cloud, in the glory and majesty of his Father and
Angels, by whom also then shall be raised from the dead all men, which have
died since the beginning of the world unto the end thereof: but the rest, who
are then living shall be suddenly changed, and all presented before the
tribunal seat of Christ, who shall give sentence of al, and shall cast the
wicked with the devils into everlasting torments, but shall receive up the
godly unto himself, that they may with him and blessed Angels enioie eternal
happiness and glory in heaven. It may be defined more briefly on this wise:
The last judgment shall be a manifestation, or declaration, and separation of
the just and unjust, who ever have lived or shall live from the beginning of
the wo^ld unto the end, proceeding from God by christ; and a pronouncing of
sentence on these men, and an execution thereof, according to the doctrine of
the Law and Gospel.

The parts of this definition we will now in few words confirm. 1. That
judgment shall be a manifestation of the just and unjust. For Revel. 20.12.
The books shall be opened, that the secrets of hearts may be laid open. 2.
There shall be a separation of the just and unjust. For Mat. 25.32. Christ
shall place the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on his left hand. 3.
This manifestation and separation shall be wrought of God by Christ. If of God,
then shall it be a most divine and just judgment. Romans 3.6 Jf God be
unrighteous, how shall he judge the world? It shall be made and wrought by
christ; because John. 5.22. The Father has committed all judgment unto the
Son. And Act. 17.31. God has appointed to judge the world by a man. 4. J^
shall be a pronouncing of sentence: Mat. 25.34. Come ye Blessed of my Father.
We are Blessed of God, not in Adam, but in his seed, and therefore the sentence
shall be given according to the gospel. For by nature we are subject unto the
wrath of God. Therefore also shall the godly say: When saw we thee hungering
or thirsting? They shall confess that the retribution of rewards comes not
by their merit, but by his grace. Further after this manner the wicked and the
godly shall be judged according to the Law and Gospel: Absolution shall be
principally according to the Gospel; but shall be confirmed by the Law:
Condemnation shall be principally by the Law; but shall be confirmed of the
Gospel. Sentence shall be given on the wicked, according to their own merit:
Sentence shall be given on the godly, according to Christ's merit applied
unto them by faith: a testimony and witness of which faith shall be their
works. Now to be judged, is, to be declared just before the tribunal of
Christ, and to enter into everlasting life, and that with a respect and
condition of faith, which is required in the Gospel.

Objection. But unto every man shall be given according to his works.
Therefore judgment shall be given on al, according to the doctrine of the Law.
Answer. In this sense, shall be given also unto the elect according to their
works: not that their works are merits, but in that they are the effects of
faith. Wherefore unto the elect shall be given according to their works, that
is, they shall be judged according to faith: and to be judged according to
faith, is, to be judged according to the Gospel. But the judge makes mention
of our woorks, and not of faith. First, because he will have it known to others
why he so judges: least the ungodly and condemned persons might object that
he gives us eternal life unjustly. Wherefore he will show them our works, and
will bring them forth as testimonies to refute them, that we have in this life
applied unto us Christ's merit. Secondly, That we may have comfort in this
life, that we shall hereafter according to our works stand at his right hand.

3 Who shall be judge.
CHrist shall be the judge. John 5.22. He has committed all judgment unto
the Son. Neither yet are the Father and the holy Ghost removed from this
judgment: But Christ immediately shall speak, and give sentence, and that in
his humane nature. And when he speaks, God shall speak; not only because he
himself is God, but because the Father shall speak by him. The judgment then
shall belong unto all three persons of the Godhead, as concerning their
consent and authority: but unto Christ, as touching the publishing and
exequuting of the judgment. For Christ shall visibly give sentence of all,
which sentence he shall also together execute. The church also shall judge, as
touching the approbation and allowing of this judgment: as Christ says, Luke
22.30. That the Apostles shall sit on twelve seats, and shall judge the twelve
tribes of Israel, that is, they shall subscribe unto Christ's judgment, and
approve his sentence.

The causes, why Christ, man, shall be judge, are these. 1. Because the church
is to be glorified by the same Mediator, by whom, and for whom it was
justified. Act. 17.31. God will judge the woorld in righteousness by that man,
whom he has appointed. Matthew. 24.30. They shall see the son of man come in
the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory. Ioh. 5.27. The Father has
given power to the Son to execute judgment, in that he is the Son of man.
2. That we may have comfort, knowing him to be our judge, who has purchased
us with his blood, and who makes us his brethren, yea his parts and members.

For he is, 1 Our brother and our flesh. 2 He has promised, and said, Ioh.
3.36. He that believes in the Son has eternal life; and cap. 6.24.
Verily, verily I say unto you, he that hears my word, and believes in him
that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but
has passed from death unto life. The third cause why he comes, is, to
deliver his Church, and to cast away the wicked. A threefould consolation
therefore have we by the second coming and judgment of Christ. 1 From the
person. 2 From his promise. 3 From the final cause and end. The fourth cause
why he comes judge, is, the justice of God: because they have dealt
contumeliously with the son of man. Zach. 12.10. They shall look upon him
whom they have pierced. Objection. Christ says, Ioh. 12.47. That he came not
to judge. In his first coming he came not to judge the woorlde, but in his
second coming he comes to that end. For a man must be judge, 1 Because he
must judge men; Therefore he must be beheld of all. But God is invisible. 2
That he may the more confound the wicked his enemies, who shall be forced to
behold him their judge, whom they have so much withstood.

4 Whence and whither Christ shall come.
WE look for our judge Christ from heaven. For whither the Apostles saw him
ascend, from thence shall he come. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. The Lord Jesus shall show
himself from heaven with his mighty Angels. Mat. 26.64. Hereafter shall ye
see the Son of man sitting at the right hand of the power of God, and come in
the clouds of the Heaven. From heaven then, where he sits at Gods right
hand (not out of the air, or the sea, or the earth: For as ye have seen him
go into heaven, so shall he come, Acts. 1.11.) shall he descend into the
clouds: that is, he shall descend from heaven visiblie into this region of the
air, as he did indeed visibly ascend. These things are necessarily proposed,
that the Church may know whence to expect their judge. For as he will have
known whither he is ascended, so also will he have it known whence he shall
come again: that he might thereby signify, that he has not laid away that
humane nature which he took.

5 How Christ shall come to judgment.
1 THE dead shall be raised, and the living changed. 2. The woorlde shall be
dissolved by fire. 3. He shall come suddenly, to comfort his. And he shall
come, 1 Truly, visibly, and locallie, not imaginarilie. Matthew. 24.30. They
shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of the heaven: and so shall
know him to be God by his visible majesty. Zach. 12.10. They shall look upon
him whom they have pierced. 2. He shall come furnished and prepared with
glory and divine majesty, with all the Angels, with the voice and trump of
the Archangel, with divine power, to raise the dead, and to separate the godly
from the wicked, and to cast these into everlasting torments, but to glorify
them for ever. Matthew. 16.27. The son of man shall come in the glory of the
Father, that is, he shall come furnished with a heavenly multitude of Angels and
full of majesty: and that not by necessity, but by his power and authority,
showing himself to be lord over al creatures; and that with such glory, as
only agrees and is proper unto the Father. Whereupon withal is gathered,
that christ is not a secondarie god, but the second person of the Godhead,
equal with the Father. For God will not give his glory to any other.

6 Whom Christ shall judge.
HE shall judge all men both quick and dead, and also the wicked Angels. Now
men are called quick or dead in respect of the state which goes before the
judgment: As, they which shall remain alive until the day of judgment, are
called the quick and living: All the rest except these are called the dead:
and these at the day of judgment shall rise, the other which remain then
alive shall be changed. Which change shall be unto them insteede of death:
and so we shall al appear before the judgment seat of Christ. Objection. But
he that believes in the Son, shall not come into judgment, and so it
follows, that al shall not be judged. Answer. He that believes, shall
not come into the judgment of condemnation, but shall come into the judgment
of absolution. Wherefore we shall be judged, as the word Judgment is more
largely taken for both condemnation, and absolution. The Devils shall not then
be judged, that is, condemned: but they shall be judged, in respect of the
publishing of the judgment already passed on them, as also in respect of the
aggravating of the judgment. The Prince of this world (says Christ, John
16.11.) is already judged and condemned. Therefore he shall not then be judged.
Answer. The Devil is already judged, but that only 1. By the decree of God.
2. Jn the word of God. 3. Jn his own conscience. 4. As touching the beginning
of his condemnation. But then he shall be so judged, having the sentence
proclaimed publicly on him, that he shall not be able to attempt any thing
more against God and the Church.

7 What shall be the Sentence and exequution of judgment.
SENTENCE shall be given (which also we did touch before in the second Question)
on the wicked principally according to the Law; yet so, as it shall be with the
approbation of the Gospel. Sentence shall be given on the godly, principally
according to the Gospel; yet so, that the Law shall allow and like of it. The
Elect shall hear their sentence out of the Gospel according to the merit of
Christ apprehended of them by faith, the testimonies of which faith shall be
good works.

The execution of the Sentence given shall be, 1. By the virtue and divine
power of Christ. For the dead shall be raised at the hearing of Christ's
voice: the living shall be changed, and their mortal bodies shall be made
immortal, and shall be gathered from the four costs of the world. 2. By
the ministry of Angels. For by them Christ shall gather the godly and the
wicked, as by those reapers, by whom also he shall separate the godly from the
wicked: and this, not, as if he had need of the Angels ministry, but thereby
to show himself to be Lord of the Angels. But this is no impotency or want of
power, but a part of Christ's glory, before whose tribunal al we being so
gathered by the Angels and severed ^hal stand. 1. The world, heaven and earth
shall be dissolved by fire at the execution of this judgment: there shall be a
change of this present state, and a purifieng of the creatures; but not any
consuming of them. 4. This change (as also the coming and judgment of the
Lord) shall come suddenly, the wicked standing still, where they shall say,
Peace, Peace. 5. There shall be a casting of the wicked into everlasting
pains, and an aduauncing of the godly to everlasting happiness and glory.
For then shall Christ perfectly glorify us, and shall take us unto himself.
John 14.3. J will come again and receive you unto my self. 1. Thessal. 4.17.
We shall be caught up with them also in the clouds to meet the Lord in the
air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord. The wicked shall be cast apart
from the Godly, with the Devils, and shall be adjudged to eternal pains:
Not as if the wicked were not already condemned: For, as we said, the Devils
were already judged; so also are the wicked already judged and condemned,
namely, 1. Jn the decree of God. 2 J^ his word 3. In their own consciences. 4.
As concerning the beginning of their judgment. But then the wicked together
(...) the Devils shall be judged by proclaiming and publi^hi^g of that
judgment. For then shall be, 1 a manifestation of Go^s judgment, that they
perish justly, who perish. 2. The wicked shall further suffer also punishment
and torments of body, which now is buried. 3. The wicked and the Devils shall
be so sharply looked unto, and kept under, that they shall not be able any more
to hurt the godly, or to despite God and his church. A great gulf placed
between us and them shall shut up all passage from them, so that they shall
cease to harm us.

8 For what causes that judgment shall be.
THE chief and principal cause is the decree of God. For therefore shall the
last judgment be, because god has said and decreed that it shall be. Wherefore
it must needs be so, that so God may have his end, that is, that he may show
and declare perfectly and wholly his goodness and love toward us, that he
may be worshipped in his Temple, which is in his chosen, that the Son of
God may have his kingdom, and his citizens glorious, and such as beseem him.
2. A less principal and subordinate cause is, both the salvation of the Elect,
who are here vexed, and the damnation of the wicked, who here do flourish. For
therefore also shall the last judgment be, that it may go well with the
good, and ill with the bad. And of this shall the Godly take matter to magnify
and praise God. 3. The last judgment shall be, because of Gods justice. Here
is not a full and perfect execution of Gods justice. For the wicked must be in
perfect and full ill state, both in body and soul.

9 When this judgment shall be.
THIS judgment shall be in the end of the world, in the end of days. For there
are three parts of the during and continuance of the world. 1 Before the Law. 2
Under the Law. 3 Under Christ. That part of the during of the world, which is
under christ, is called the end of the world, the end of days, the last
time. Wherefore there shall not be so long space between christ's first coming
and his second, as was from the beginning of the world unto his first coming.
But the year, the day, the month of this judgment is not known of Christ
himself. 1 As touching his humane nature. 2 As touching his office and
Mediatorship. Mar. 13.32. Of that day and hour knows no man, no not the
Angels which are in heaven, neither the Son himself, save the Father.

10 Wherefore God would have us certain of the last judgment.
THE time of the judgment to come is unknown to us: but as it is most
certain, that that judgment shall come, so God also would have us know the
same. First, in respect of his glory: That we might be able to refute
Epicures, who account this heavenly doctrine of the divine judgment to come,
for a fable. It should go well, say they, with the righteous. But it does
not so. Therefore God either can not perform it, or stands not to his
promises, or there is no providence. Unto which their cavil we answer. That
because in this life it goes not well with the Godly, it shall go well with
them at length after this life. Secondly, God will have us know it for our
comfort: That we may comfort our selves amidst our evils and miseries with
this, that at length shall come a time when we shall be delivered from this
corruption and rottenness. Thirdly, that we may retain and keep our selves
in the fear of God, and our duty, and that others also may be reclaimed from
evil. This judgment shall be: let us endeavor therefore that we may be able to
stand in this judgment. The scripture uses this argument both ways, both to
comfort us, and to hold and keep us in our duty. Christ shall at length judge
the wicked and our enemies: suffer we therefore patiently persecutions. Romans
14.10. We shall al appear before the judgment seat of Christ: therefore live
we Godly. Fourthly, That the wicked may be left excuselesse: For they are
warned sufficiently that they should be ready at every season, least they
should say, they were oppressed unawares.

11 For what cause God would not have us certain of the time of judgment.
ALbeit it be most certain, that the last judgment shall at length be: yet the
day of that judgment is altogether uncertain. Mar. 13.32. Of that day, and
hour, no man knows, no not the Angels which are in heaven; nor the Son
himself; save the Father. Wherefore the year, month, day, hour of the last
judgment, Christ himself also knows not, not only as concerning his humane
nature, but also in respect of his present office. The present office of
Christ, to wit, in that he is our Mediator, does not require, that he should
declare that unto us. Now the causes why God would have it hid from us, are
these. 1 That he might exercise our faith and patience, and so we should show
that we would believe God, albeit we know not the time of our delivery. 2
That he might bridle our curiosity. 3 That he might keep us in his fear, in
godliness, and in executing of our duty: and so we should be ready every
moment. Mat. 24.43. Jf the good man of the house knew. Luke 12.40. Occupy til
I come.

12 For what cause God differreth that judgment.
HE differreth it, 1 To exercise faith, patience, hope, and prayer in the
Godly. 2 That all the elect may be gathered unto the Church. For in respect
of them, and not in respect of the wicked, does the world continue. For the
creatures were made for the children of the house: The wicked use them as
thieves and robbers. Now God will have the elect gathered by ordinary means:
he will have them in this life to hear the word, and by it to be renewed and
converted; unto which is required some tract of time. 3 He differs it, that
he might grant unto all a time and space of repentance, as at this time: and
that his differring might leave the wicked and obstinate without excuse. Romans
2.4. Despisest thou the riches of his bountifulness, and patience, and long
sufferance, not knowing that the bountifulness of God leads thee to
repentance?

13 Whether the last judgment be to be wished for.
WE are doubtless to wish for the day of judgment, because it is an undoubted
sign and token of that difference, whereby the Elect are discerned from the
reprobate: which declaration the Godly do earnestly desire. Moreover it shall
be a delivery out of those miseries in which we are. Romans 7.24. O wretched
man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Reu. 22.17.
The spirit and the Bride say, Come Lord Jesu: which they say not, who are not
ready to receive the Lord. For the wicked tremble and shake at the mention of
that judgment.

THE THIRD PART OF THE CREED, Of the holy Ghost the sanctifier.
IN this last part of the Apostolic confession are contained six articles:
whereof the first speaks of the person of the holy Ghost; the next of the
Church, which is gathered, confirmed, and preserved by the holy Ghost: the
four articles following are of the benefits bestowed by the Holy Ghost on the
Church; and first, of the communion of Saints; Secondly, of remission of
sins; Thirdly, of the resurrection of the flesh; Lastly, of everlasting life.

The chief Questions of the holy Ghost, or holy spirit.

1 What the name, spirit, signifies. 2 Who, and what the Holy Ghost, or
spirit is. 3 What is the holy Ghosts office. 4 Of whom the holy Ghost is
given, and wherefore. 5 To whom he is given. 6 How he is given, and received. 7
How he is retained and kept. 8 Whether he may be lost, and how. 9 Wherefore he
is necessary. 10 How we may know that he dwells in us.
1 It is here to be noted, that this Question serves more properly for the
latin, which uses this name, Spiritus, only, when as we in English use as
much, or more rather, the word Ghost, than Spirit, when we speak of the third
Person.
WHAT THE NAME SPIRIT, SIGNIFIES.
THE name, spirit, is taken sometimes for the cause, sometimes for the effect.
When it is taken for the cause, it signifies a nature incorporeall, and living
of a spiritual essence, wielding, moving, and stirring some thing.

So, first, God essentiallie and personally is a spirit, that is, incorporeal,
without any bodily dimensions or quantity, invisible: Secondly, The Angels
also, whether good or bad, are in this sense spirits. Thirdly, after the same
manner the souls of men are called spirits. Genesis 2.7. He breathed in his face
breath of life, that is, he sent in a spirit or soul into him.

When the word, spirit, is taken for an effect, it signifies, 1. The air
moved. 2. The moving it self, and motion of the air. 3. The wind and moving
vapors. 4. Spiritual effects or motions, good or bad. So is it said, The
spirit of fear. And contrary, The spirit of Princes, that is, courage:
likewise, The spirit of fornication. 5. New spirit signifies the gifts of the
holy spirit.

In this doctrine, which we have in hand, Spirit signifies the cause stirring
and moving: namely the third person of the Godhead, which is forcible in the
minds and wills of men. And this third person of the God-heade is called a
spirit. 1. Because he is a spiritual essence, or substance incorporeall and
invisible. 2. Because he is inspired of the Father and the son: that is,
because is the immediate stirrer and moouer of divine works. The Father and the
Son move, but by this spirit. 3. Because himself inspireth and immediately
works motions in the hearts of the Elect, whence he is called, Luke 1.35. The
power of the most high. 4. Because he is God equal and the same with the
Father and the Son. And god is a spirit.

This third person of the Godhead is called Holy, 1. Because he in himself,
by himself, and of his own nature is Holy. 1. Because he is the hallower or
sanctifier, that is, he immediately halloweth or sanctifies and makes holy
others. The father and the son sanctify by him, and therefore mediatelie.

2 Who and what the holy ghost is.
THE holy ghost is the third person of the true and only godhead,
proceeding from the Father and the Son, and coeternall, coequal, and
consubstantial with the Father and the Son: and is sent from both into the
hearts of the Elect, to sanctify them unto eternal life. Here are we to say the
same things of the Godhead of the holy Ghost, which have bin spoken before of
the Godhead of the son. For this definition is also to be proved, and
confirmed by the proofs of the same four parts.

1 That the holy Ghost is a person. 2 That he is the third person, or that he
is other and distinct from the father and the Son. 3 That he is true God with
the Father and the Son, or that he is equal to the Father and the Son. 4
That he is of the same Godhead with the Father and the Son, or that he is
consubstantiall unto both.
FIrst therefore, that the holy ghost is a person; is proved, 1 By his
apparitions. Because he has appeared visible. Luke 3.22. The holy ghost came
down in a bodily shape like a Dove. Act. 2.3. And there appeared unto them
cloven toungs like fire, and it (that is, the fire, or the holy ghost) sat
upon each of them. Seeing then the holy Ghost descended in bodily shape upon
Christ, and sat upon the Apostles, it follows that he is subsisting. For no
quality or created motion of minds or hearts is able to do in like manner.
For an accident does not only not take upon it any shape but stands in need
of some thing else in which it self should consist and be. Neither is the
air the place or subject of holiness, godliness, love of God, and other
spiritual motions, but the minds of men. 2. He is proved to be a person,
because he is called god. 1. Cor. 3.16. Know ye not that ye are the temple of
god, and that the spirit of god dwells in you? Acts 5.3. Why has satan
filled thine heart, that thou should lie unto the holy Ghost? And in the
next verse, he says; Thou have not lied unto men, but unto god. See also Isai
40.7.13. Acts 28.25. Ephesians. 4.4.30. Howesoeuer then the adversaries of this
doctrine gtaunt the holy Ghost to be God, yet this cannot be, but he must be a
subsistent or person, seeing God is a being; but our godliness, goodness,
Godly motions, and other divine affections cannot be called God. 3. He is a
person, because he is the author of our Baptism, and we are baptized in his
name, that is, by his commandment and will. But we are not baptized by the
commandment and will of a dead thing, or of a thing not existing, neither are
we baptized in the name of the graces or gifts of God. 4. Because the
properties of a person are attributed unto him, as that he teaches, that he
distributeth gifts even as he will, that he comfort, confirms, rules,
reigns; likewise, that he sends Apostles, that he speaks in the
Apostles. Luke 12.12. The holy Ghost shall teach you in the same hour what
ye ought to say. So also he declares the things to come. Ioh. 16.13. The
spirit of truth will show you the things to come. He gives prophecies: he
commands and wills that the Apostles be separated; and lastly he
appoints teachers in the church. All these are things proper unto a person,
existing, intelligent, endued with a will, working, and living. 5. Because he
is plainly distinguished from the gifts and graces of God. 1. Corinthians. 12.11.
All these things works the selfsame spirit, distributing to every man
severally as he will: And again. 1. Corint. 12.4. There are diversities of
gifts, but the same spirit. Wherefore the gifts differ much from the spirit
it self. Objection. The gift of God is not a person. The holy Ghost is called
the gift of God, Acts. 2.38. Therefore he is not a person. Answer. The Mayor
is false. For the son being given, is the gift of God, and yet is a person.
The holy Ghost is called the gift of god, because he is sent from the Father
and the son. John 15.26. J will send the comforter unto you from the Father.
Or we may answer: He is called a gift in respect that he was sent and
dwells in the hearts of the saints, to whom he is given, and is such a gift
as woorketh by his virtue and power the rest of the gifts and graces. Now,
that, to proceed, signifies to exist or be from both, I prove: Because Paul
calls him the spirit of god, which is of god, and in god. Of god; Because
the spirit flows from the Father and the Son; In God: therefore he is
somewhat of God himself. Other spirits are not in God, that is, in the
substance of God. And what is in God, that is the very essence of God.

Secondly, That the holy ghost is other, that is, distinct from the Father and
the Son, we prove against those, who say he is the subsistent of the
Father. Which we prove, 1. From his very appellation, in that he is called
the spirit. For none is his own spirit: As none is his own Father; and none
his own Son: Therefore he is other from both. Objection. That which is
common to all the persons, ought not to be distinguished and severed. The name
spirit is common to all three persons: Therefore it ought not to be
distinguished. Answer. This whole reason we grant. If it be understood of
the essence of the persons, and not of their order of being and woorcking. For
as he that breaths, and the breath it self differ; so he that enspireth,
and the spirit are different: He that proceeds is one, and he another,
from whom he proceeds. The third person of the godheade is one: and the
first or second another. But the Holy ghost is said to be the third person
of the Godhead: and this not in that respect, as if there were in God any first
or last in time, but in respect of the order or manner of being: Because the
Holy Ghost has his essence from the Father and the Son, from both which he
proceeded from everlasting, as also he is the spirit of both. In like manner
the Son is called the second person, because he is of the Father. The Father
the first person, because he is of none. 2. The holy ghost is in express
words called another. John 14.16. J will pray the Father and he shall give
you another comforter. 1. John 5.7. There are three which bear record in
heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these three are one. 3.
He is sent of the Father and the Son. Therefore he is another from both. For
none is sent of himself. One may come of his own will, or of himself. But
none can be sent of himself. John 15.26. I will send him unto you from the
Father. John 14.26. The Father sends him in my name. 4. The holy Ghost has
distinct attributes or properties personal from them. The holy Ghost only
proceeded from the Father and the Son. He alone appeared in the shape of a
Dove, in the likeness of fire; not the Father or the son. Christ also is said
to have been conceived not by the Father or the Son, but by the holy Ghost,
that is, by the immediate virtue and efficacy of the holy Ghost. Wherefore he
is another from the Father and the Son; which is diligently to be observed.
For the adversaries hereof, being convicted of the person of the holy Ghost,
grant that he is a subsistent, but of the Father. Objection. The virtue and
power of the Father is the Father himself: the holy ghost is called the
virtue and power of the Father: therefore the holy ghost is the Father
himself. Answer. This reason is Sophistical, because virtue is not taken for
the same in the Mayor, for which it is taken in the Minor. For in the Mayor it
is taken for the power of the Father: in the Minor for the person by whom the
Father shows forth his power.

Thirdly, That the holy Ghost is equal with the Father and the Son, these
arguments do prove. 1. The essence of the Father and the Son is
communicated unto him: because he proceeds from both, and is the spirit of
both. But there is nothing in God which is not his essence. Seeing then that is
indivisible, it must needs be whole and the same communicated unto him: which
is in the Father and the Son. As the spirit of man, which is in man, is of
the essence of man* so the spirit of God, which is in God, is of the essence of
God. By this it appears, What is the proceeding of the holy ghost, namely,
the communicating of the divine essence whereby the third person of the
god-heade alone receives the same and whole or entire essence from the Father
and the Son, as from him whose spirit he is. And that the holy ghost
proceeds from the Son also: is proved by certain reasons. First, Because
he is called the Sons spirit. Roman. 8.9. If any man has not the spirit
of Christ, the same is not his. Galat. 4.6. He has sent forth the spirit of
his Son into your hearts. The spirit of his Son, that is, not given unto
the Son of the Father, but existing and proceeding, as of the Fathers, so of
the Sons substance, seeing the Son is equal and consubstantiall with the
Father. Secondly, because the Son together with the Father gives him. John
15.26. And John 20.22. Receive the holy ghost. Thirdly, Because the holy ghost
receives the wisdom of the son, which he reueileth unto us. John. 16.14.
He shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you. But seeing the holy Ghost
is true God, consubstantiall with the Father and the Son, he cannot receive
any thing but of him, of whose substance he is. Wherefore he proceeds of the
substance of the Son, because he receives that of him which is the sons.

2 The holy ghostes equality with the Father and the Son is proved by those
divine attributes and properties which are attributed and communicated unto the
holy ghost: as eternity; because he created heaven and earth, and because God
was never without his spirit. Likewise, omnipotency, and omnisciencie, that is,
the knowing of al things. 1. Corin. 2.10. The spirit searches al things,
yea, the deep things of god. Likewise immensitie or unmeasurableness, as who
dwells whole and entirely in all the Elect.

3 The same divine works, which are attributed to the Father and the Son,
are also attributed to the holy ghost, and in those both the general and
universal works, and also those miraculous works, which consist in
instituting and informing the Church. So in Job. 33.4. creation is attributed
unto him. The spirit of god has made me, and the breath of the Almighty has
given me life. Other works are attributed to him also in other places;
especially, that he quickneth, regenerateth, illuminateth, and works miracles.

4 Equal and the same honor is given to the holy ghost, which is given both
to the Father and the Son. To no creature, but to God alone is to be given
divine honor, that is honor proper to God only; But this is given to the
holy Ghost: Therefore he is god, equal with the Father and the Son. 1. John.
5.7. There are three, which bear witness in Heaven; The Father, the Word,
and the holy Ghost, and these three are one. The holy Ghost therefore is the
same true God with the father and the Son. Mat. 28.19. Go and teach all
nations, baptising them in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the holy
ghost. By this testimony we are taught, First, That we are baptized also into
the name, faith, woorship, and religion of the holy ghost. Secondly, That the
holy Ghost is author also of baptism and the ministry. In like sott also we
believe in him. That sin which is committed against him is not remitted. We
are his temple.

5 Those things which are spoken in the old testament of God or Jehouah, are
applied in the new testament to the holy ghost. Objection. He that is sent
is not equal with him that sends; The holy Ghost is sent, and the Father and
the Son send him: Therefore the holy Ghost is not equal with the Father and
the Son. Answer. We deny the mayor: For he that is sent may be equal with
him that sends. For Christ also being sent of the Father, yet is he equal
with the Father. This sending does not betoken any servile subjection.
Objection 2. He that receives of another is not equal with him who gives:
The holy ghost receives of the Father and the Son: Therefore he is not
equal with both. Answer. The Mayor is true of one that receives of another
but a part and not the whole, but the holy Ghost receives the same and whole
essence of the father and the Son: Again, it is true of him that receives
in time or successively but the holy Ghost received before all time. Thirdly,
to the Minor we say, That he received, as touching the ordeining and sending of
him to us, to teach us immediately: But this sending establishes and confirms
his equality; because it is a divine woork: and the ordeining of him to teach
us immediately does not lessen but strengthen his equality.

Fourthly and lastly, That the holy ghost is one and the same true god with the
Father and the Son, is proved by these reasons. 1 Because he is the Fathers
and the Sons spirit. But the divine essence cannot be multiplied, as neither
can an other be created: nor the same divided. Therefore the selfsame and
that whole must needs be communicated to the holy Ghost, which is the essence
of the Father and the Son. From both which the holy ghost proceeds, as the
spirit of God in God, and of God. 2 There is but one true God. The holy ghost
is true God: Therefore the holy ghost is that one and the same true God with
the Father and the Son, consubstantiall with both. 3 There is but one
Jehovah, that is, one divine Essence or Being, one essentially, who alone is of
none, but himself communicates his being to al things, and preserves it in
them. The holy Ghost is Jehovah: Therefore he is the same with the Father and
the Son, God consubstantial with both. Object. He that is of another, is not
consubstantiall with him, or is not the same with him of or from whom he is:
The holy Ghost is of the Father and the Son. Therefore he is not the same
with them or consubstantiall. Answer. 1 The Mayor is true in creatures, but
not in God. 2 There is an ambiguity in this term, To be of another. He that
is of another, and has not the same or whole essence, is not consubstantiall.
But the holy ghost has the same and whole essence, and therefore it follows
only that he is not the same person. Therefore by inuerting the argument we
answer; That he who is of the Father, and from the Father, is consubstantial
with him, as likewise with the Son, of and from whom he also is.

3 What is the office of the holy Ghost.
THE office of the holy ghost is sanctification. Jn this one name of
sanctification are comprehended all his benefits. Whereof we may put these as
the general heads. 1 To teach and illuminate. Hereof he is called the teacher
of truth. Likewise, the spirit of wisdom, gladness, faith, fear, boldness.
Ioh. 14.26. The holy ghost whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach
you al things, and bring al things to your remembrance which I have told you.
Ioh. 16.13. The spirit of truth will lead you into all truth. And he taught
the Apostles at Whitsontide, when they were raw before, of Christ's death and
his kingdom. He powered into them the miraculous knowledge of tongues, and
fulfilled the testimony and record of Joel. 2 To regenerate, that is, to work
faith and conversion in the hearts of the chosen. Ioh. 3.5. Except a man be
borne of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.
Matthew. 3.11. J baptize you with water to amendment of life, but he that comes
after me, he will baptize you with the holy ghost, and with fire. This Baptism,
which is wrought of Christ by the holy Ghost, is the very regeneration or
renewing it self, the same which was signified by the outward baptism of
John, and of other ministers. 3 To conioin us with Christ and God, and to make
us partakers of all Christ's benefits. 1. Cor. 6.11. But ye are washed, but ye
are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
spirit of our God. 1. Cor. 12.3.4. No man can say, that Jesus is the Lord, but
by the Holy Ghost. There are diversities of gifts, but the same spirit. And
verse. 13. By one spirit are we all baptized into one spirit. 1. Cor. 6.19.
Know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you,
whom ye have of god? So then the spirit of Christ is in us. Therefore we are
united to him by his spirit. 4. To rule and govern. Romans 8.14. As many as are
led by the spirit of god, they are the sons of god. Act. 2.4. And they began
to speak with other tongs, as the spirit gave them utterance. To be ruled and
guided by the Holy ghost, is, to be instructed with wisdom and counsel in
the actions of our life, and vocation, and to be inclined to follow those
things which are right and good, and to perform the duties of love and
charity toward god and our neighbor. 5. To comfort. He comfort the
Apostles amidst their afflictions. The Apostles who were first flying away for
fear of the Jews, now being erected by the comfort and solace of the holy
ghost, come forth into open place, and rejoice, when they are to suffer for the
confession of the gospel. John 14.16. He will give you another comforter. 6. To
confirm. He makes the Apostles courageous and bold, who were before timorous,
and wrapped, and entangled with many doubts. These things we may plainly
see, if we compare that Sermon which Peter made at Whitsontide, with their
speech who went to Emaus, who say, Luk 24.21. We trusted that it had been he
that should have delivered Israel. The holy ghost then is the spirit of comfort
and joy. John. 16.22. Your joy shall no man take from you. These are the chief
and principal parts of the holy ghostes office, unto which may be referred
all the gifts of the holy ghost, as well those which are properly bestowed
on the godly, as also those which are common to them with the reprobate. All
those gifts we may briefly comprise in this division. The gifts of the holy
ghost either are common to the godly, and ungodly, or proper to the godly
only. Those which are common to the godly and ungodly, are given either to
certain men and at certain times, or at al times, and to all the members of
the Church. Those which are given at certain times and to certain men, are
these: The gift of miracles, and of tongues, prophecies, the faith of miracles;
and these were necessary for the Apostles and the primitive Church, when the
gospel was first to be dispersed. Those which are given at all times, and to
all the members of the church, are these: the gifts of tongues, and of
knoweledge, and the gift of interpretation. These are always necessary for
the church, and belong to the maintainaunce and preservation of the Ministry,
and are now also given to every member of the church, according to the measure
of Christ's gift, as the calling and vocation of every member needs. The
gifts of the holy ghost proper unto the godly, are, justifying faith, prayer,
love, and other gifts profitable to salvation. Objection. Many out of the
church have had tongues and sciences: the tongues therefore and sciences are
not the gifts of the holy ghost. Answer. The tongues and sciences out of the
church are also the gifts of the holy ghost, but by a general working of god,
which is without the true knowledge of him. But in the church, the tongues and
sciences are the gifts of the holy ghost, joined with the true knowledge of
god.

Moreover al those gifts (as we said) are fitly referred to those six
principal parts before numbered of the holy ghosts office; as the knowledge
of tongues, and of sciences to his function of teaching: and that miraculous
and extraordinary gift of tongues partly to his function of ruling (for the
holy ghost did rule and govern their tongues) partly to his function of
teaching and confirming. So also the gift of Prophecy and interpretation
belongs to his office of teaching. For he teaches both by illightening the
minds within by his virtue, and by instructing them without by the word. The
institution and ordinance of the Sacraments appertains to his office of
teaching, but chiefly to his office of confirming. Faith and conversion belong
to his office of regenerating and conioyning us with Christ. That he is the
spirit of prayer, instructing us how to pray, belongs to his office of
ruling and governing. In like sort the rest of the gifts may be referred to
certain parts of the Holy Ghostes office.

Furthermore the holy ghost, in respect of this his office, has diverse titles
of commendation in the Scripture. For hereof he is called, 1. The spirit of
adoption; because he assures us of the fatherly good will of god toward us,
and is a witness unto us of that free goodness and mercy, wherewith the
father embraces us in his only begotten son. Therefore, Romans 8.15. By this
spirit we cry Abba Father. 2. He is called the earnest and seal of our
inheritance; because he assures us our salvation. 2. Cor. 1.21. It is god
which stablisheth us with you in Christ, and has anointed us: who has also
sealed us and has given the earnest of the spirit in our hearts. Ephesians. 1.13.14.
In which gospel also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy
spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance. 3. He is called
Life, because he quickneth us: or (as the Apostle says) The spirit of Life,
who mortifieth the oulde man, and quickneth the new. Romans 8.2. The Law of the
spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus has freed me from the Law of sin
and of death. 4. He is called Water, whereby he refreshes us being almost dead
in sin, and makes us fruitful that we may bring forth fruit. 5. He is
called Fire, because he does daily burn up and consume concupiscences and
vices in us, and kindles our hearts with the love of God and our neighbor.
6. He is called the Fountain, because all celestial riches do flow unto us
from him. 7. He is called the Spirit of prayer. 8. The Oil of gladness:
Heb. 1.9. Wherefore god, even thy God has anointed thee with the Oil of
gladness. 9. He is called the Comforter, because he works faith in us, and
purifieth our consciences, and so comfort us, that we exult and rejoice in
afflictions. 10. He is called Intercessour, because Roman. 8.26. The spirit
makes request or Intercession for us with sighs, which cannot be expressed.
11. He is called lastly, the Spirit of truth, of wisdom, of joy, of
gladness, of the fear of God, of boldness, and the like.

Objection. It was said before that the holy ghost is the earnest of our
inheritance; But Saul and Judas had the holy ghost, neither yet obtained they
the inheritance, but were reprobate: Therefore the holy ghost is not the
earnest of our inheritance. Answer. Saul and Judas had the holy ghost, as
concerning some gifts of the holy ghost; But they had not the spirit of
adoption. Reply. But it is the same spirit. It is the same spirit indeed, but
does not work the same things in all. For he woorketh adoption and conversion
in the Elect only. Object. 2. Those parts of the spirits office before
specified, are not proper to the holy ghost, but belong also to the Father and
the son. Therefore they are not well assigned to the Holy ghost as proper.
Aunsw. They belong also to the father and the son, but mediatlie by the holy
ghost. But unto the holy ghost they belong immediately. Reply. But after the
same manner also it seems, that the preservation of things, the invention of
arts and sciences, and the like, are to be attributed as proper functions unto
the Holy ghost. For those also does the Father and the son work by the holy
ghost; according as it is said, Wise. 1.7. The spirit of the Lord fills all
the world. Answer. To the assigning of a work as proper unto the holy ghost,
is required, not only that it be immediately done by him, but in such wise
also, as that he be acknowledged and worshipped therein. Now there does the
holy ghost work properly where he sanctifies and halloweth; for therefore
also is he called holy.

4 Of whom the holy Ghost is given, and wherefore.
HE is given of the Father and the Son, and also by the Son of the Father, but
not by the Father. For the Father gives the holy ghost from no other but from
himself, as who is of no other, but of himself, neither works from any
other, but from himself: The son gives the Holy Ghost from the Father, from
whom also himself both woorketh and is. That he is given of and from the
Father, these testimonies do confirm. Act. 1.4. He commanded them to wait
for the promise of the Father. Act. 2.17. J will power out of my spirit upon
all flesh. John 14.16. verse. 26. I will pray the Father, and he shall give
you another comforter. The Father will send him in my name. That the Holy ghost
is given of the son these testimonies do prove. John. 15.26. I will send
you from the Father the spirit of truth. John. 16.7. If I depart, I will send
him unto you. Acts. 2.33. Since he by the right hand of God has bin exalted,
and has received of his father the promise of the Holy ghost, he has shed
forth this which ye now see and hear. Wherefore the son also gives him,
but in this order, that the son sends him from the Father; whence is
gathered a strong argument for proof of Christ's godhead. For who gives the
spirit of god, and who has any right or title unto him, but god? For the
humane nature of Christ, so far off is it that it should have this right and
power to send the Holy ghost, that contrarily it self was hallowed and
sanctified by the Holy ghost.

Now we are so to understand this giving of the goly ghost, as that the Father
is effectual and forcible by him, and that because the holy Ghost will, the
Fathers will going before, work and effectuate this. Here is then to be
observed the order of operation, which is here kept in working. The Fathers
will goes before, the will of the Son and the holy Ghost follows.

The cause, wherefore he gives us the holy ghost, is none other, but only of
his free Election through the intercession of his son. Ephesians. 1.4. Which has
blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ: as he
has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world. John. 14.16. I will
pray the Father, and he shall give you another comforter. The son gives us
him, or he is given by the son, because he has obtained for us by his merit,
that he should be given unto us.

5 Unto whom the holy Ghost is given.
THE spirit of sanctificaton is given to the Elect only. John. 14.17. The world
can not receive him, because it sees him not, neither knows him. Or, the
holy Ghost is given to the whole Church or assembly of those that are called,
both to the Elect, and to hypocrites; and further he is not otherwise given unto
them, than as themselves also be willing, and desirous of him: and then is
augmented and increased in them if they persevere. To the Elect he is given not
only as concerning the knowledge of gods doctrine, but also as concerning
regeneration, faith, and conversion: because, besides that he kindles in them
the knowledge of Gods truth and will, he does further also regenerate them, and
endowe them with true faith and conversion. But to Hypocrites the holy ghost
is given only, as touching the knowledge of doctrine, which is not profitable
unto salvation to them, as it is unto the Elect and chosen. For unto the Elect
the holy ghost is so given, that he works and effectuateth in them his gifts
to their salvation, and themselves also may know and feel by those gifts
imparted unto them, the holy Ghost dwelling in them.

Hence it is apparent, how the knowledge of tongues, sciences, and the like
gifts bestowed on the Heathen, differ from those which are bestowed on the
church. For they who amongst the Heathen excelled in the knowledge of tongues
and good arts, and things profitable, had indeed the gifts of God, but not
the holy ghost; whom none are said to have, but they whom he has sanctified,
and who acknowledge him to be the author of the gifts received. We must
observe here, that the holy ghost is given, either visiblie, when he
bestows his gifts, adjoining outward signs and tokens; or inuisibly, when he
bestows his gifts without signs or tokens. He was given visiblie unto the
Apostles and others in the primitive church. Acts 2.3. There appeared unto
them cloven tongues, like fire, and it sat upon each of them. Acts 10.44. The
holy Ghost fell on al them which heard the word. And these and other like
speeches are so to be expounded, as that the sign takes the name of the
thing it self: and therefore that is affirmed of the thing which agrees unto
the sign: by which sign the holy Ghost witnesses his presence and efficacy.
So also John saw the holy Ghost descending on Christ in bodily shape like a
Dove. He saw then the shape of a Dove, under which god showed the presence of
his spirit: wherefore we must not think that there is local motion in God,
but his presence and operation, which he shows and exercises in the church.
For the Holy ghost is spread abroad every where and fills both heaven and
earth: In which respect he is said to be given, sent, powered out, when by his
effectual and forcible presence he does create, stir up, and by little and
little perfect his gifts in the members of the church.

6 How the holy ghost is given and received.
HE is given after an ordinary way by the ministry of the Word, and by
the use of the Sacraments: and first, in manifesting himself unto us through
the studying and meditation of the doctrine of the gospel. For when he is known
of us, he will communicate himself unto us; and when he shows himself to be
known of us, he does also renew and reform our hearts. So did he work in
the Elect by Peter's Sermon in the day of Pentecost, Acts 2.37. Likewise he
wrought in Cornelius and the rest there present, by the same Peter speaking,
Acts 10.44. But yet notwithstanding he does so work by the word and
Sacraments, as that he is not tied to these means. For he converted Paul in
his journey: He furnished John Baptist with his gifts while he was yet in
the womb. Secondly he is given, by woorking a desire of him in the Elect. For
he is given to them that desire him, Luke 11.13. Hence is drawn a forcible
argument to prove the Godhead of the holy ghost. For to work effectually by
the ministry is proper to God only. 1. Cor. 3.7. Neither is he that planteth
any thing, neither he that waters, but God that gives the increase. Matthew.
3.11. J baptize you with water to amendment of life, but he that comes after
me will baptize you with the holy ghost, and with fire. Romans 1.16. The gospel
is the power of god; because the holy ghost is forcible in working by it;
whereupon also the gospel is called the ministration of the spirit, 2.
Corint. 3.8. Now the holy ghost is received by faith: Ephesians. 1.13. Wherein also
after that ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy spirit of promise. The
world cannot receive the spirit of truth, because it neither sees him, nor
knows him. Objection. But faith is the gift and fruit of the holy ghost.
Ephesians. 2.8. By grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves;
it is the gift of god. 1. Corinthians. 12.3. No man can say that Jesus is the
Lord, but by the holy ghost. Answer. 1. The woorking of the spirit is in
order of nature before faith, but in time both are together: because the first
beginning of faith is the receiving of the holy ghost. 2. Faith being once
begun, the holy ghost is more and more received, who woorketh afterward other
things in us by faith. As it is said, Galat. 5.6. Faith works by love.
Acts 15.9. By faith men's hearts are purified.

7 How the holy ghost is retained.
THE holy ghost is received and kept, 1. By meditation in the doctrine of the
gospel, and by studying to profit therein. Psalm. 1.2. He that does meditate
in the Law of the lord da^^ and night, shall be like a tree planted by the
rivers of waters, that will bring forth her f^uite in one season. Coloss. 3.16.
Let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteouslie in all wisdom, teaching and
admonishing your selves. 2. He is kept by increase and continuance of
repentance and amendment of life, that is, by a desire of bewaring to offend
against our conscience. Matthew. 13.12. Unto him that has shall be given.
Reuelat. 22.11. He that is righteous, let him be righteous still. Ephesians. 4.30.
Grieve not the holy spirit of god, by whom ye are sealed unto the day of
redemption. Hither may be referred a desire of avoiding evil company and
sin. For he that will avoid sin, must avoid al occasion of sinning. 3.
He is retained by daily and earnest praie^ and invocation. Luk 11.13. How
much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy ghost to them that desire
him? The same we may see in that panoplie or complet harness which the
Apostle describes Ephesians. 6.14. Likewise it is confirmed by the example of
David, who prays Psalm. 51.11. That god will not take his holy spirit from
him. 4. He is retained by applieng gods gifts to their right use, that is, to
his glory, and to the safety of our neighbor. Luke. 22 32. And when thou art
converted, confirm thy Brethren. Matthew. 25.29. Unto every man that has it
shall be given; and from him that has not, even that he has shall be taken
away.

8 Whether and how the holy Ghost may be lost.
HE may be lost of Hypocrites, and reprobates. Of the Elect he is never wholly
lost, but only as touching many gifts: because they always retain some
gifts. Neither is he finally lost of the Elect, because at length they
return to repentance. But of the reprobate he is altogether or wholly lost, and
finally, so that they never receive him. Objection. But the holy ghost departed
from Saul; Therefore he may also depart from the Elect. Answer. He departed
from Saul; but not the spirit of regeneration, for he never had him. Reply. Yea
but the regenerating spirit also departs: because David prays, Psalm.
51.12. Restore to me the joy of thy salvation. Answ. He is lost oftentimes as
concerning some gifts of regeneration, but not wholly. For it cannot possibly
be, that the Godly should retain no remnants, seeing they do not sin to
death. A man (says Bernard) never abides in the same state: either he goes
backward, or forward. For this difference is to be observed and held, for the
assoiling of that question; How namely the perseverance of the Elect may be
notwithstanding certain, albeit they leese the holy Ghost; which is, because
they are never wholly and finally destitute of the holy Ghost. Now the holy
Ghost may be lost four ways, and those contrary to those other means,
whereby he is retained. 1 By neglecting the Word and Doctrine. For Paul
wills Timothy to stir up the gift of God which was in him: and also
teaches him how that may be done. 1. Tim. 4.15. By giving attendance to his
reading, to exhortation and doctrine. 2 He is lost by carnal security, and by
giving over our selves to commit wickedness against our conscience. 3 By
neglect of prayer. 4 By abusing the gifts of the holy Ghost; as when they are
not employed to his glory, and to the safety of our neighbor. Luke 8.18. Unto
him that has shall be given: from him that has not, even that he has shall be
taken away.

9 Wherefore the holy Ghost is necessary.
HOW necessary and needful the Holy Ghost is, and for what causes, does
clearly appear by these places of Scripture. Ioh. 3.5. Except that a man be
borne of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of Heaven.
1. Cor. 15.50. Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God. 2. Cor. 3.5.
We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing, as of our selves;
but our sufficiency is of God. Hence we may thus conclude: without whom we
cannot think, much less do ought, that is good, and without whom we can
neither be regenerated, nor know God, neither attain unto the inhetaunce of the
celestial kingdom; without him we cannot be saved. But without the holy Ghost
these things cannot be done, by reason of the corruption and blindness of our
nature. Therefore without the holy Ghost it cannot be, that we should be saved,
and so it follows that he is altogether necessary for us unto salvation.

10 How we may know that the holy Ghost dwells in us.
WE know that we have him, by the effects, or by his benefits and blessings
in us, as by the true knowledge of God, by regeneration, faith, and the
inchoation or beginning of new obedience; or by a readiness and willingness
to obey God. Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith, we have peace toward God.
The love of god is shed in our hearts. Again, we know it by the testimony and
witness which he bears unto our spirit, that we are the Sons of god.
Moreover most certain testimonies and tokens of the holy Ghost dwelling in us,
are, Comfort in the midst of death, joy in afflictions, a purpose to persevere
in faith, sighs, and ardent prayers, a sincere professing of Christianity. 1.
Corint. 12.3. No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy ghost. In
a word, by faith and repentance, we know that the holy Ghost dwells in us.

OF THE CHVRCH.
THE questions to be observed.

1 What the Church is. 2 How many ways it is taken. 3 What are the marks
thereof. 4 Wherefore it is called holy and Catholic. 5 What is the difference
between the Church and the commonweal, or civil state. 6 Whence it is, that
the Church differs from the rest of mankind. 7 Whether any may be saved out
of the church.
1 WHAT THE CHVRCH IS.
When the question is, what the Church is, it is presupposed that there is a
Church, so that it is not necessary to make a question, Whether there be a
church. Now as concerning the name, (...)
Ecclesia (which we call the church) it is natiuely a Greek word, and comes
from a word which signifies, to call forth. For the custom was in Athens that
a company of the citizens were called forth by the voice of the crier from
the rest of the multitude, as it were namely, and by their Hundreds, to an
assembly, wherein some public speech was had, or to hear relation made of
some sentence or judgment of the Senate. And thus differs the word Ecclesia,
from Synagoga, or Synagog. For Synagoga signifies any manner of congregation,
be it never so common and inordinate. But Ecclesia betokens an ordained
congregation, and such as is called together for some cause. From hence the
Apostles translated the name, Ecclesia, to their purpose, terming the Church by
it for resemblaunce and likeness sake. For the church is gods congregation,
neither coming together by chance without cause, nor being inordinate: but
called forth by the voice of the Lord, and the cry of the word, that is, by
the ministers of the gospel, from the kingdom of Satan, to hear or embrace
Gods word. This congregation or company of those which are called of God to
the knowledge of the gospel, the Latins keeping still the Greek word, call
Ecclesia. But it shall be requisite, that we a little more fully define what
the Church is. The church of God is a congregation or company of men, The
definition of the Church.
chosen from everlasting of god to eternal life, which from the beginning of
the woorld unto the end thereof, is gathered of the son of god out of all
mankind by the holy ghost and the Word, consenting in true faith, and which
the Son of God defends, preserves, and at length glorifieth with glory
and life everlasting. Thus is the true Church of God defined, whereof the
Creed does properly speak. Objection 1. They which are in the church, perish
not, as the definition affirms: Many hypocrites are in the Church. Therefore
either hypocrites shall not perish, or it is false, that they which are in the
Church perish not. Answer. They which are in the invisible Church perish not;
and of this was our definition. But the Minor propos^^ion speaks of the
visible Church, in which are many hypocrires. Objection. 2. Where the
invisible church is not, neither is the visible. Jn the time of popery was not
the invisible church: therefore there was not the visible. Answer. I deny
the Minor: For there also were remnantes, that is, there were always some
mingled with those dregs who held the foundation, some more purely, some less.
In sum, the Church was oppressed, but not extinguished.

2 How many ways the church is taken.
THE church is taken either for the true church, The false Church.
or for the false. The false church is improperly called the church, and is a
company arrogating unto themselves the title of Christ's church; but which do
not follow the same, but rather persequute it. The true church is either
visible, The true church (...) either v^^ible or invisible.
or invisible. The visible church is a company among men, embracing and
professing the true and vncorrupt doctrine of the Law and the Gospel, and
using the Sacraments aright according to Christ's institution, and professing
obedience unto the doctrine: in which company are many unregenerated, or
hypocrites, In the (...) perish.
consenting notwithstanding and agreeing to the doctrine: in which also the Son
of God is forcible to regenerate some by the virtue of his spirit unto
everlasting life. Hither appertain the parables of the seed and the tares.
The invisible church is a company of those which are elected to eternal life,
in whom a new life is begun here by the holy Ghost, and is perfected in the
woorlde to come. They which are in this invisible church, They which are in the
invisible Church never perish.
never perish, neither are any hypocrites therein, but the Elect only, of whom
it is said, Ioh. 10.28. No man shall pluck my sheep out of mine hands.

Moreover both these parts of the true Church, both visible and invisible, are
either universal or particular. The Universal visible Church, The Universal
visible Church.
is the company of all those which profess the doctrine, wheresoever in the
world they be. The particular Visible Church, The particular visible.
is also a company of those which profess the doctrine, but in some certain
place. The Visible Church is Universal in respect of the profession of one
Faith in Christ, and of one Doctrine and worship. But it is particular, in
respect of place and habitation, The Universal Invisible.
and of diversity of rites and customs. So also the Invisible Church is
Universal, as all the Elect, in whatsoever place they be, and at whatsoever
time they lived, have one faith: The particular Invisible
again it is particular, as either in this or that place they have the same
faith. Now all particular Churches are parts of the Universal, and the
Visible are parts of the Universal church Invisible. And of this Universal
Jnuisible Church does the Article of our Creed speak properly, I believe the
Holy Catholic Church. For besides that the universal invisible church is
catholic, it is also nobilitated with this title, that it is Holy. Further,
in this is the true communion of Saints between Christ, and al his members. It
is called invisible, not that the men are invisible: but because their faith
and godliness is invisible, neither is known of any, but of themseleus, in
whom it is: neither can we indeed discern certainly the godly from the
hypocrites in the church. The Triumpha^t and Militant, parts of the Universal
Invisible.
The parts of this universal invisible church may these two not unfitly be
accounted; The church Militant, and Triumphant. The Militant, is in this world,
fighting and warring under the banner of Christ against the Devil, the woorlde
and our flesh. The Triumphant, which both now triumphs with the blessed
Angels in heaven, and shall after the resurrection enioie a full triumph. Now
although the Militant church is that universal invisible church which
remains as yet in the field and is fighting on earth, yet it is, and lies
hid in the visible church. And therefore there is almost the same difference
between the universal visible church, and this Militant which is between the
whole and a part. Objection. If the whole be visible, the part also is visible.
Answer. That part is also visible, as concerning the men Elected, or as they
are men, and as they profess the doctrine of the visible church: but it is not
visible, as concerning the godliness or faith of men, or as concerning faith
and repentance in men. That this invisible church militant here on earth is a
part of the visible church, is apparent even out of this place of Paul, Romans
8.30. Whom the Lord predestinate, them also he called. This calling, whereby
the Lord calls us, is of two sorts, inward, and outward: the inward Saint
Paul says, was wrought according to the purpose of saving men; and the Elect
are called by both. Hypocrites are called only by the outward calling. And
in respect of this outward calling is the church called visible, and the
Church of the called, wherein are hypocrites also. But the invisible is called
the company or church of the Elect and chosen.

The Church of the old Testament, and the New.
There is also another division of the Church, into the Church of the old
Testament, and of the new. The church of the old testament is a company or
congregation embracing the doctrine of Moses and the Prophets, and making
profession that they will embrace in Jury the Mosaicall ceremonies and keep
them, and as well in Jury, as also out of Jury embrace the things signified
by those ceremonies, that is, believing in the Messiah which was to be
exhibited. The church of the new testament has not these differences, because
all believe in the Messiah already exhibited. This Church is a company
embracing the doctrine of the Gospel, using the Sacraments instituted by
Jesus christ, and believing in him being exhibited the true Messiah.

3 What are the tokens or marks of the Church.
THE marks of the true Church are, 1. 1 Profession of the true doctrine.
Profession of the true, vncorrupt, and rightly understood doctrine of the Law
and Gospel, that is, of the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles. There
concur withal oftentimes errors; but yet notwithstanding this mark is sure, if
the foundation be kept, albeit stubble be builded thereon: yet so, that those
errors or stubble be not maintained. 2. 2 The right use of the sacraments. 3
Profession of obedience to the doctrine.
The right and lawful use of the Sacraments. 3. Profession of obedience to
the doctrine or ministry. Objection. In many churches which profess true
doctrine this third mark is not seen: therefore they are no churches.
Answer. 1 There are many in them, who indeed yield, and endeavor to yield
obedience. 2. Al obey, acknowledging by their profession, that sins ought not
to be maintained. But it is necessary that this third mark should be added:
because they should mock God, who would say that they received this
Doctrine of Christ, and would not frame their lives according unto it. Matthew.
28.19. Go and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and
the Son and the holy Ghost; Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I
have commanded you. In these words of Christ are all those three marks of
the Church contained. Objection. 2. Not all, that challenge these marks, are
the Church, because all have them not, though they challenge them.
But those which all Schismatiques and heretics do challenge unto them, are
not the marks of the true Church. But all of them do challenge these unto
them: therefore they are not the marks of the true Church. Ans. I deny the
Mayor. For we are not to see whether they challenge the^, but whether they have
them. So also would it follow, that the heavenly blessings, which are proper
to the true Church, are theirs also, because they challenge them. Object. 3.
Without which the church cannot be, that is a mark thereof. But without the
ordinary succession of Bishops the church cannot be. Therefore it is a mark
thereof. Ans. By ordinary succession in the ministry, The ordinary
succession of Bishops no necessary mark of the Church.
is meant the succession of ministers in the same true doctrine and
administration of Sacraments. And if the proposition be so understood, it is
true: for such a succession is nothing else, than those notes which we have
put. But in the conclusion of this objection is understood that there should
be an ordinary succession into the same place, whether they teach the same
doctrine or a diverse from it. And so also it should be a tying of the Church
to a certain City, Region, and so forth. Saint Augustine against Manichaeus
his Epistle, cap 5. shows how he was brought to the faith of the Catholic
Church. For he says, That he obeyed the catholics, when they said, Believe
the gospel: and there he brings forth that common saying: I would not
believe the gospel, except the authority of the catholic church moved me
thereunto. By the testimony therefore of the church he was moved to read the
gospel, and to believe that heavenly doctrine was contained therein. But does
he, after he believed the gospel, promise that he would believe the church
more than the gospel, if the church determine, or propound any thing, which is
either contrary to the gospel, or can be proved by no testimony of
Scripture? This doubtless Augustine never meant. Naie, elsewhere he denounces
Anathema, and bids a curse come to them, who declare any thing besides that
which we have received in the writings of the Law and Gospel. And in the
selfsame place he witnesses, That he, because he believes the Gospel,
cannot believe Manichaeus, for that he reads nothing in the Gospel of
Manichaeus Apostleship. Therefore traditions or ordinances of the church, bring
us unto the scripture, and ty us to that voice which sounds in the Scripture.

The Papists wr^ngling about Traditions.
But here it must be observed, how honestly and fairly the Papists deal.
For wheresoever they meet with the word Tradition, that by and by they wrest
to their traditions, which can not be proved out of the word of god. As when
Paul says. 1. Cor. 15.3. J delivered unto you that which J received: straight
ways they cry out, hear you traditions? I hear; but read on there in the
words following Paul himself by writing declaring what those traditions are.
J delivered unto you, how that Christ died for our sins, according to the
scriptures, And that he was buried, and that he arose the third day,
according to the scriptures. Paul's traditions written verities and registered
scriptures.
Hear you hear Paul's traditions to be doubly things written. For first
they were taken out of the scripture of the old Testament; Secondly they were
committed to writing by S. Paul himself. So Paul says of the Lords supper.
1. Cor. 11.23. I have received of the Lord, that which also J have delivered
unto you. But this tradition, after the Evangelists, himself also has set
down in writing. The Jesuits cite the saying of Paul, 2. These. 3.6. Withdraw
your selves from every brother that walks inordinately, and not after the
tradition which he received of us. But a little after in the same chapter he
describes what tradition he means, as it is manifest to him that looks on
the place. And yet will they thence prove that many things are to be
believed, which can not be proved by any testimony of Scripture. The like
impudencies they show in another testimony taken out of Luke. Act. 16.14. They
delivered them the decrees to keep ordained of the Apostles and Elders, which
were at Jerusalem: When a little before, Cap. 15.23. he witnesses that those
decrees were set down in letters written by the Apostles.

But we are to keep and hold the notes and marcks before set down; First, in
respect of Gods glory, that enemies may be discerned from Sons. Secondly, In
respect of our own salvation, that we may join our selves to the true Church.
For there are three sorts of men. 1 They, who openly profess and declare
themselves to be enemies. 2 Hypocrites 3 The company of the Elect chosen.

4 Why the Church is called holy and Catholic.
THE Church is called Holy. The church holy in respect of Christ's holiness
imputed, and their own begun. Catholic in respect of place and time.
1 Because Christ's sanctification is imputed unto it. 2 Because al his members
have begun all the parts of obedience. It is called Catholic. 1 In respect
of places, because it is spread through the whole world. For there is one
Universal Church of all places, and degrees of life, neither is it tied to a
certain place and kingdom, or to certain succession. 2 In respect of times:
Because there is but one true Church of all times, which also is at all times
so Catholic, as that it is dispersed through the whole world, nether is at any
time tied to any certain place. It is not called Catholic, because it
possesses many kingdoms. For Catholic is a title given unto the Church in
the Apostles time, for before time the Church was limited within narrow
bonds. Now, that there is but one Church of al times and ages from the
beginning of the world unto the end, it is out of doubt. For, 1 It is
manifested that the Church has ever been. Neither can Abraham's days be
objected, as if before he was called there had been no worship of the true God
in his family, and himself had been after his calling alone without any
others. For before his calling he held the foundations and grounds of Doctrine
of the true God, though it were darkened with superstitions mingled therewith.
Again, Melchisedec lived at the same time, who was the Priest of the most high
God; and therefore neither was Abraham after his calling alone, but there were
others besides him, worshippers of the true God, whose priest was Melchisedec.
2 That the Church, as it has been ever, so shall also continue ever,
appears by these testimonies. Isay. 59.21. My words shall not depart out of
thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed. Ier. 33.20. If the night and day
may be changed, then shall my covenant also be changed. Mat. 28.20. I am with
you always until the end of the world. Moreover Christ was ever and ever shall
be King, Head, and Priest of the Church. Wherefore the Church was ever, and
ever shall be. And hence also it is manifest, That the Church of both
testaments is one and the same; that which is confirmed also by the article
following. For Christ is the sanctifier of his Church, who is common to men of
both testaments. Hither appertains the Question of the authority of the
Church. Which I omit. In this we will consider here only that opinion or
saying, The church does not err. How the church may be said not to err.
Which is true after this sort. First, the whole does not err, though some
members thereof do er. Secondly, it does not err Universally, although in
some points of Doctrine it may. Thirdly, It erreth not in the foundation.

5 In what the Church differs from the commonweal.
7 Differences between the Church and commonweal.
THE Church differs from the commonweal. 1. Because commonweals are
distinct, and kingdoms of the world, in diverse places and times. The Church
is always one and the same at all times, and with all men. 2. The kingdoms
and states of the world have many Heads, or one chief Head, and many other
inferior Heads besides, and that on earth. The Church has but one, and that
in heaven. 3. The commonwealth is governed by certain laws made for the
maintenance of outward peace and tranquillity. The Church is ruled by the Holy
Ghost and the word of God. 4. The commonwealth or civil state requires
outward obedience only. The Church requires both, as well inward obedience
as outward. 5. In civil states and commonweals there is power and liberty
to make new laws positive by the authority of the magistrate, the violating
of which laws binds men's consciences, and deserves corporal punishments:
The Church is tied to the word of God, unto which it is not lawful to add
ought, or to detract ought from it. 6. The civil state has corporal power,
wherewith it is armed against the obstinate and disobedient. For he may and
ought by force to curb these, and to punish them by the sword. The Church
punishes by denouncing of Gods wrath out of the word of God. 7. Jn the Church
are always some Elect and Holy; but not always in the commonwealth.

6 Whence arises the difference of the Church from the rest of mankind.
THE cause of the difference is the Election of God. Election puts the
difference between the Church and others.
Act. 14.16. Jn times past god suffered all the Gentiles to walk in their own
ways. Romans 9.18. God has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he
hardens. Ioh. 6.37. All that the Father gives me shall come to me. Romans
8.29.30. Those which he knew before, he also predestinate to be made like to
the Image of his Son, and whom he predestinate, them also he called. By these
words we are also taught that the promise of grace is general, in respect of
the Elect, or believers. God verily would have all to be saved, and that, Romans
11.7.
1 Jn respect that he loves the salvation of all. But the Elect only have
attained to that salvation. 2 In respect that he inuiteth al to salvation. But
the rest have been hardened. The Efficient cause then of this difference, is
the Election of God willing to gather unto himself, a Church in earth.
Secondly, the Son is a mediate executour of this will and purpose; The holy
ghost immediate. Thirdly, The word of God is the instrumental cause.

Now the cause of the difference being known, let us in a word see, what
that difference is. Three sorts of men.
We are to observe therefore that there are three sorts of men very much
different one from another. For some men are even in profession estraunged and
aliants from the church, as who deny faith or repentance, and therefore are
openly enemies of the Church: others are called, but not effectually, which
are al hypocrites. Others lastly are called effectually, which are the Elect,
who are but a little portion, according to that of Christ, Matt. 20.16. Many
are called, but few are chosen.

7 Whether any one may be saved out of the Church.
None saved out of the church.
NO man can be saved out of the Church: For whomsoever God has chosen and
elected to the end, which is eternal life, them he has chosen to the means,
which is the inward and outward calling. Objection. Therefore Election is not
free. Answer. It is free; because God chose freely, both to the end, and to
the means. But after he has once destined and ordained men to means, he
never changes: We are here also to hold against the Anabaptists, That
infantes, which are borne in the church, are also of the church.

OF PREDESTINATION.
THIS common place of Predestination, or election and reprobation, arises out
of the former place Of the Church, and is joined with it.

The special questions are.

1 Whether there be Predestination. 2 What it is. 3 What is the cause thereof.
4 What are the effects thereof. 5 Whether it be unchangeable. 6 How far it is
known unto us. 7 Whether the Elect be always members of the church, and the
reprobate never. 8 Whether the Elect fall from the church, and the reprobate
remain ever in the church. 9 What use there is of this Doctrine.
1 WHETHER THERE BE PREDESTINATION.
Predestination proved by Testimony of scripture.
THAT there is predestination, testimonies of scripture do confirm, Mat. 20.16.
Many are called, but few are chosen. Ioh. 15.16. Ye have not chosen me, but I
have chosen you. John. 10.16. Other sheep have I also, which are not of this
foulde. Ephesians. 1.5. Predestinate according to the good pleasure of his will.
Acts. 18.10. J have much people in this city. Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us in
him. Romans 8.30. Whom he predestinate, them also he called. By these and the
like places we learn that some are elected, some not, and therefore there is
predestination.

When the Question is, whether there be predestination, the^ this is in
Question: Whether there be any such counsel of God, which has severed some
to be saved and others to be reprobate. Some say, that Election, when mention
is made thereof in scripture, is taken for some excellency, for which a man is
worthy to be elected or chosen: as we may say, a Choice and gallant horse. So
also they interpret reprobation, but falsely: for it is the eternal counsel
and purpose of God.

That there is Reporbation is apparent by diverse places. Reprobation proved by
scripture.
S. Paul says, Romans 9.22. That god does show his justice on the vessels of
wrath. Mat. 13.11. It is given unto you to know the secrets of the kingdom of
heaven: but to them it is not given. Iud. verse. 4. who were before of old
ordained to this condemnation. Mat. 14.25. ^hou have had these things from the
wise. John. 10.26. Ye are not of my sheep. Pro. 16.4. He has made al things
for his own sake: even the wicked for the day of evil.

1 Objection. But the promise of grace is universal. Answer. It is
universal, in respect of the faithful, that is, it belongs to all those who
believe. But it is particular, in respect of al men. Our adversaries say, that
those which are converted may fall away. Which is, to weaken and diminish the
general promise. Reply. But it is said, 1. Tim. 2.4. That God will that al men
be saved. But contrary, Matthew. 20.16. Places of scripture reconciled,
concerning gods will to save, and not to save men.
Many are called, but few chosen. Matthew. 13.15. This peoples heart is waxed
fat, says the Lord, least they should return, that J might heal them. And
here it is said, that God will that some be not saved. Therefore these
testimonies are contrary one to another. Answer. 1. God will that al be
saved; as he is delited with the salvation of all. Albeit elsewhere it is
said, That he reioiceth at the destruction of the wicked, Prou. 1.26. yet he
reioiceth not thereat, as it is a vexation or destruction of his creature, but
as it is an execution of his justice. 2. He will that all be saved, in as much
as he inuiteth al to repentance: But he will not have all saved, in respect of
the force and efficacy of calling. Acts. 17.27. He does good unto al, if so
be they might have groped after him, and found him. Romans 11.7. The Elect
obtain it: the rest are hardened. He says verily unto all: Honesty of life
pleases me: ye owe it unto me. But he says not to al, I will work it in you;
but to the elect only, because from everlasting it has so pleased him.

2 Objection. He that gives unequally to those that are equal, is an accepter
of persons. Answer. It is true, First, if he gives to those which are
equal unequally for any outward causes or respects, that is, for such
causes as are not that condition, in respect of which equal rewards or
punishments were to be given or not to be given; that is, when the cause which
is common to both, is neglected, and other things regarded, which are not the
cause, as riches, honors, and the like. But here God respects the receiving
of this benefit, and conversion, and gives eternal life to them which have
these. Secondly, he that gives unto those, which are equal, unequally,
being bound to any, were an acceptour of persons. But God gives most freely,
of his mere mercy and grace. He is bound to no man: because we were his
enemies; therefore he might most justly have excluded all. And if injustice
should any way fall into God (which God forbid that we should think) he should
be unjust, and an acceptour of persons in that he gives any thing at all. But
if thou being moved with pity and compassion, should give a farthing to
one beggar, and a penny to another, thou art not therefore an acceptour of
persons. Matthew. 20.15. Js it not lawful for me (says Christ) to do as I
will with mine own? Js thine eye evil, because J am good? Romans 11.35. Who has
given first unto the Lord? To know this is behoouefull for the glory of God.

3 Objection. It is meet and just, that he who has taken a sufficient ransom
for all sins, should receive al men into favor. God has received a sufficient
ransom for the sins of the whole world. Therefore he should receive al into
favor. Christ's ransom, though sufficient for all, yet not applied to all, does
not save all.
Answer. It must not only be a sufficient ransom for all, but must be also
applied unto al receiving it by faith: but it is not applied unto al: because
it is said, John 17.9. I pray not for the world, but for them which thou have
given me. Reply. A sufficient ransom ought to be applied unto all. Christ's
ransom is sufficient. Therefore it ought to be applied unto all. That a
sufficient ransom ought to be applied unto all is proved, because this is a
property of infinite mercy, to do good unto all. Answer. We deny that
infinite mercy consists herein. It consists not in the number of those
that are saved, but in the manner how they are saved. Moreover he will not
give this benefit unto all: because he is withal most wise and just. He may
together exercise both his mercy and his iustie. John 3.16. God so loved the
world, that he has given his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in
him should not perish, but have eternal life; He that believes not is
condemned already.

4 Objection. He that takes a sufficient ransom for all, and yet does not
save all, is unjust: because he takes more than in equity he should. God
takes a sufficient ransom for all, and yet does not save all. Therefore he is
unjust. Answer. He is unjust, except himself give the ransom. But God gave
it. Therefore he takes of his own, not of ours. Secondly, The sufficiency of
the ransom does not bind god to the receiving of al, but the applying of it.
But he has not entered into any bond, that he will apply that ransom to all.

5 Object. He that afflicts some for his own glories sake, God not unjust,
though he afflict some for his glories sake.
is an unjust God. Answ. This proposition is false being generally taken. For
though it be true in creatures; yet is it false in god. Because god is the
chief good: and greatest regard ought to be had of the chief good. Now the
chief good, that is, gods glory, did require, that not only his mercy, but
his justice also should be manifested. Secondly, We answer, that, he is
unjust, who afflicts some, and that without any trespass or fault of their
own. For God for his glories sake does suffer some to perish, while themselves
willingly perish and fall away. Thirdly, God is bound to none, to save them, as
neither he was to create them. He suffers men to fall into sin: but, 1
Themselves willingly falling. 2 Himself not being bound to save them. 3 Being
bound to have more regard of his own glory, than of men's salvation.

6 Objection. He that destineth to the end, destineth also to the means,
whereby we come to the end. God destineth some to the end; that is, damnation.
Therefore he destineth them to the means also, which are sins. For, that
sins are the means to come to damnation is proved; because that is a mean,
without which we cannot come to the end; as none can come to damnation without
sin. Answer. Means are of two sorts. Some, which go howsoever before the
end, that is, which he uses who tends to the end, and by the help whereof he
obtains and accomplisheth the end which he intends. Other means there
are which come indeed unto the end, but are not done by him, which intended
the end. Those he may suffer or admit, but it follows not that he will them.
Wherefore I answer unto the Mayor: He that will the end, will also the means
which himself works, and by which he works to obtain that end, which he
entendeth: but not all means: otherwise there shall be more in the conclusion
than in the premises. Neither will he also those things, which he
permits, that is, he hinders them not from being done, if they hinder not
his end.

God in calling all, and yet saving but some, does not dissemble.
7 Objection. He that calls all, and yet will save but some only,
dissembleth: God does so; Therefore he dissembleth. Answer. Of mere
particulars naught follows. Or, there is a fallacy in putting that which is
no cause, for a cause. Wherefore to the Mayor we answer: He does not do it,
to illude men; but either to leave all without excuse, or to inuit them to
repentance. And further, if you understand the Mayor generally, it is to be
denied: because there may be another cause; and if it be so taken, it is thus
to be distinguished. He that calls all, and yet will save but some only, to
illude men, or to deceive them, he dissembleth; if he call them indefinitely,
or with a mind not willing to work in them to obey. But God never promised,
that he would work this in all. Wherefore there is no contradiction in
these propositions: All ought to do it, and, I will work in some to do it:
because the same thing is not denied in the one, which is affirmed in the
other; but a diverse thing.

The secret counsel of God, as touching our salvation is reueiled unto us.
8 Objection. They, whose salvation depends on the secret counsel of god,
cannot have comfort. Our salvation depends on the secret counsel of God.
Therefore we cannot have comfort. Answer. We can not have comfort, before it
is reueiled unto us. But that secret counsel of God is opened unto us by the
son and the Holy Ghost. Likewise by the effects. Romans 5.1. 1. Being justified
by faith we have peace toward God. 2. Cor. 1. 22. and 5.5. He has sealed us
and has given the earnest of the spirit in our hearts. He that has created
us for this things, is God, ^ho also has given unto us the earnest of the
spirit. Romans 8.16. The same spirit bears witness with our spirit, that we
are the children of God. 1. John. 3.24. Hereby we know that he dwells in
us, and we in him, even by the spirit which he has given us.

9 Objection. That which is done in vain, no man should endeavor. But the
reprobate do in vain repent: because it is ^posible that they should be
saved. Answer. This is true, if any knew that they were reprobate. But God
will have no man so to determine of himself. 2. It is a contradiction, to be
a reprobate, and to show repentance for if they did repent, then were they not
now reprobates. Therefore there comes no danger by this absurdity.

10 Objection. That d^nger which is not, The Elect (...) wary and circumspect.
need not to be taken heed of. But unto the Ele^t there is no d^nger of
c^nd^^nation. Therefore they need not take heed thereof. Answer. The Mayor
is true, if there should be no danger, whether heed be taken, or not taken.
But there is no danger unto the elect, that is, being heedefull and bewaring of
any danger that may come. But all the elect are heedeful, circumspect and
wary: and those who are not heedful, are not elected. For from whom God
auerteth and turns away this danger, he works also in them to be wary and
to take heed thereof. Romans 8.3. Whom he predestinate, them he justified. They
therefore do amiss, who think to receive comfort, without any desire of a
good conscience. Reply. But if they must take heed and beware they are
uncertain. Answer. No; because they have this as a spur to go forward and
persevere. But, To be certain, and, not to have a desire of repentance and
amendment of life, implies a contradiction: as if thou should say, I am
certain of my reward, therefore I will not run: for a reward is not given
but to him that runs. These propositions do mutuallie one follow another,
To be certain of salvation, and to have a desire of conversion and amendment
of life.

2 What Predestination is.
PRedestination differs from providence, The difference b^tweene
predestination and providence.
as a special from the general. For providence is the eternal counsel of
God concerning al creatures: but Predestination is the eternal counsel of GOD
concerning the saving of men and Angels. Wherefore Predestination is the
eternal, most just, and unchangeable counsel of God, of creating men, of
permitting their fall into sin and eternal death, of sending his Son into
flesh, that he might be a sacrifice, and of converting some by the word and
the holy ghost for the Mediators sake, and saving them in true faith and
conversion, and of leaving the rest in sin and eternal death, and raising
them up to judgment, and casting them into eternal pains. Here is spoken of
men which shall be saved, and not saved: therefore to them only, and not to
Angels does this definition of Predestination agree.

Election.
The parts of Predestination are, Election and Reprobation. Election is the
eternal, unchangeable, free, and most just decree of god, whereby he has
decreed to convert some to Christ, to preserve and keep them in faith and
repentance, and by him to give them eternal life. Reprobation.
Reprobation is such a decree of god, as whereby he has decreed to leave some
according to his most just judgment in their sins, to punish them with
blindness, and damnation, and to condemn them being not made partakers of
Christ everlastingly. That Election likewise, as also Reprobation are both the
decree of god, these and the like sayings do prove. John 13.18. I know whom
I have chosen 2. Tim. 1.9. His grace was given to us before the world was.
Romans 9.18. He has mercy on whom he will. Both therefore election and
reprobation, were made by counsel, and therefore both are a decree, and that
eternal: because there is no new thing in God, but all from everlasting and the
Scripture does manifestly say, Ephesians. 1.4. That God has chosen us before the
foundation of the world. Seeing then he has chosen us, he has therefore
rejected the rest. That which the very word of choosing does show. For,
whatsoever is chosen, the same is chosen, other things being rejected. This
Election is of grace and free, that is, not in respect of any good foreseen
in us. He has mercy on whom he will, that is, He gives freely what he
gives. Joh. 15.16. You have not chosen me.

3 What the causes of Predestination, or Election, and Reprobation.
The efficient cause of our election, Gods good pleasure, not any thing in us.
THE efficient and motive cause, is the good pleasure of God. Matthew. 11.26. It
is so, O Father, because thy good pleasure was such. God has not foreseen any
thing in us, for which he should choose us, for there can be no good in us, as
of our selves. For if any good be found in us, that he does work wholly in
us: and he woorketh nothing in us, which he has not decreed to work from
everlasting. Wherefore the alone gracious and most free good pleasure of God,
or the alone free mercy of God is the efficient and motive cause of our
Election. Ephesians. ^ 5. God has predestinate us to be adopted through Jesus
Christ unto himself according to the good pleasure of his will. See further,
Roman. 9.11. Coloss 1.12. 2. Timot. 1.9.10. The cause of reprobatio^ in God
In like manner also the efficient cause of Reprobation is the most free good
pleasure of God. For we being all by nature the children of wrath, had al
perished, if sin were the cause of reprobation. Wherefore the cause of
reprobation is not in men themselves, but that is in God his will of showing
forth his justice. Therefore of particular men, why this man is elected, and
he reprobated, there can be no other reason given, but the good pleasure of
God only. But the cause of damnation is altogether in men, The cause of
Damnation in men.
which is sin. The supreme final cause of Predestination is gods glory: and
the last and proper final cause of Election, is the manifestation of Gods
goodness and mercy in freely saving the Elect. The next and nearest final
cause of our Election, is our Justification, when God does in his Son freely
account us for righteous. Both which final causes the Apostle compriseth in
these words: Ephesians. 1 6. He has predestinate us to the praise of the glory
of his grace, wherewith he has made us freely accepted in his beloved.
Likewise of the contrary: The first final cause of Reprobation is the
declaration of gods justice, severity, and hatred against sin in the
reprobate.

1 Objection. God did foreknowe our works: Therefore he choose us for our
woorks. Answer. He did foreknowe those good things which he purposed to
work in us, as also he foreknewe the persons: otherwise he could not have
foreknowen any good works. So could he not have foreseen any evil, except he
had purposed to permit the same.

2 Objection. Christ's merit applied unto us by faith, is the cause of our
Election. Therefore not the good pleasure of God. Answer. Christ's merit is
not the cause of election, but is reckoned among the effects thereof.

3 Objection. Evil works are the cause of reprobation, therefore good works
are the cause of election. Answer Evil works are not the cause of
reprobation, but of that which follows reprobation, that is, of damnation.
Good works go not before in him that is to be justified, muchlesse are they
the cause of election, but they follow in a man being justified, and draw
their original and their perpetual efficacy and virtue from gods me^e grace.

4 Wha^ are the effects of Predestination.
THE effect of election is the whole woork of our salvation, and all the degrees
of our redemption 1. The creation and gathering of the church 2 The sending and
giving of Christ the Mediator, and his Sacrifice 3. Effectual calling of men
to his knowledge, which is the conversion of the Elect by the holy Ghost and
the word. 4. Faith, iustif^cation, regeneration. 5. Good works. 6. Final
perseueraunce. 7 Raising unto glory. 8. The effects of Reprobation.
Glorification and eternal life. The effects of Reprobation are, the creation
of the reprobate, privation of gods grace, blinding, hardening, perseueraunce
in sin, raising to judgment, and casting into eternal torments.

Objection. Diverse or contrary causes have contrary effects. The effects of
election are good works. Therefore evil works are the effects of
reprobation. Answer. The Mayor is not always true, in voluntary causes. For
there is a dissimilitude: Because God purposed only to permit evil woorks, but
to work good in us. But the proper cause of evil works is the Devil, and evil
men. Reply. But god hardens and blinds men. Blindness is an effect of
reprobation, and a sin: Therefore sin is an effect of reprobation.
Answer. Blindness is a sin in respect of men who admit it, and as it is
received of them* and purchased by their own demerite: but as it is inflicted
of God, it is a just punishment. And, that God does deliver some from that
blindness, is of his mercy.

Objection. Hardenesse or induration is an effect of reprobation, and is a
sin. God is author of reprobation* therefore of hardness also, and so of sin.
Answer. Hardness is an effect of reprobation, but so that it is done
according to reprobation, but comes not from it.

Hardness and blindness or ex^ecation, are according to reprobation, or
according to predestination, as they are sins. But they are effects of
reprobation or predestination, as they are most just punishments.

5 Whether Predestinati^n ^e unchangeable.
PRedestination is firm, sure, and unchangeable* which may appear even by
the general reason: Predestination, unchangeable.
Because God is unchangeable, and does not depend on the interchangeable
course of things, but the same rather depends on his decree. What therefore
he has from everlasting decreed, of saving the elect, and condemning the
reprobate, that has he vnchaungeablie decreed. And therefore both election and
reprobation is firm and unchangeable. For whom he wo^ld, and has decreed
from everlasting should be sau^d, them also he now will, and so hereafter
perpetually. The same al^o we are to think concerning reprobation. Neither are
there wanting testimonies of Scripture, whereby the same is confirmed. John
6.39 This is the Fathers will, that of al which he has given me, I should
loose nothing. Isai 46.10. My council shall stand, and J will do whatsoever I
will. Mal 3 6. I am the Lord, I change not. Ioh. 10.28. None shall pluck my
sheep (...) of my hand. Ioh. 1.^6 Ye believe not; for ye are not of my
sh^epe. ^. Tim. 2.19. The foundation of god remains sure, and has this
seal, the Lord knows who are his. The foundation, which Paul so calls, is
the decree of saving the El^ct. 1. Because it is the beginning and welspring of
our salvation, and the end thereof, and of all the means tending to salvation.
2. It is called the foundation, for the surenesse and firmness thereof,
because the same is never shaken. These things are needful for us to know,
that we may have firm comfort, and consolation, that we may believe
eternal life, and so al other Articles of christian faith. The reason is often
repeated, and therefore often to be meditated of: because he that denies
himself to be certain of the grace to come, is uncertain also of the present
grace of God. For God is unchangeable.

6 How far forth Predestination, or Election, and Reprobation is known unto us.
IT is known unto us in general; as, That some are Elect, and some Reprobate:
but not in special, whether this or that man be. But of our own Election every
of us not only may, but also ought to be in special certain and assured. And
verily thereof we shall be certain by the effects; Every man ought to be
assured of his own Election, in special.
namely by conversion, that is, by true faith and repentance. For that we may
believe and know that we are certainly chosen to eternal life, we are bound to
believe in Christ, and to believe also eternal life. But this we cannot
believe, except we have true faith and repentance. And as every one ought to
have both these: So also every one ought certainly to hold, that he is of the
number of the Elect. Otherwise they shall accuse God of lying. Romans 5.2. We
rejoice under the hope of the glory of God. Christ is our intercessour,
woorking our everlasting salvation. I believe everlasting life, that is, not
spiritual life only, but everlasting also, which being here begun I carry
hence with me out of this life. Neither only in special does every one
know his own Election by faith and conversion, but it is in general also
known, that some are Elect. The Election of others is to be believed in
general.
And in general thou oughtst not only to hope, but also certainly to believe
that there are other besides thee elected. For thou art bound to believe the
Article of the Church, because that has bin at al times and now is. But thou
alone by thy self art not the Church, and therefore thou must not say with
Elias, I am left alone. But to discern of particulars, and of every single
man, is not thine to do. Thou art notwithstanding well to hope of the Election
of others, eue^ as concerning every particular man. In general, is the whole
Election, of all: in special, there is a diverse consideration of himself,
and of others.

No certainetie of reprobation either concerni^g our selves, or others.
Of Reprobation no man ought to judge or determine any thing certainly, either
as touching his own, or as touching an others reprobation, before the end of
his life. For he that is ^or yet converted, may be here after converted before
he d^^. No man therefore ought to judge of others that they are reprobates, but
to hope well of them: and of himself every man ought certainly to believe
that he is an elect. For we have a general commandment.

7 Whether the Elect be always members of the Church, and the Reprobate never.
The elect are then first member of the Church when they are regenerated.
THE Elect are not always members of the church, but then first, when they are
converted and regenerated by the holy Ghost. For it is said, Romans 8.9. Jf any
man has not the spirit of Christ, the same is not his. Likewise, the church
is called holy: But then first are the Elect holy when they are converted. For
Saint Paul expressly says, 1. Corint. 6.11. And such were some of you; but
ye are washed. Again, Coloss. 1.13. He has translated us into the kingdom
of his dear Son. Now some are borne, live, and die in the church: others are
not born in it, but are called, either soon, or late, unto the visible church:
some both to the visible and invisible church: as the thief on the cross. As
also those of the Gentiles, of whom Christ sp^ke, Joh. 10.16. J have other
Sheep. Some either are borne in the visible church or come unto it, who
nevertheless are not members of the invisible, and who sometimes depart from
the visible. Such are the reprobate, who are not al always estr^i^ged from the
church, but are sometimes made members of the visible Church, though sometimes
they depart from it. 1. Io^. 2.19. They went our ^ro us. Act 2^.29. Grievous
wolves shall enter in among you.

Object. These terms are mutuallie affirmed one of the other, To be saved,
Elected, To Believe: For all believers are Elected, and to be saved. And al who
are to be s^u^d and are Elected, do believe. Answer. These terms indeed are
mutually one affirmed of another, but yet with a certain limitation: All true
believers and all that are to be saved, are Elected, and that always and at all
times: But all that are Elected are both believers and to be saved; but yet
not always: The Elect are to be saved always, but are not both believers, and
to be saved always: For at one time they may be said that they are to be
saved, and at another that they are believers, at another that they are saved.
Thus fair then are these terms mutually affirmed each of other, as that all the
Elect do believe, or shall believe before the end of their life. For now is
the time of grace; then shall be the time of judgment.

Objection. Christ notwithstanding calls those which were not as yet
c^nuerted of the Gentiles his sheep. J have, says he, other sheep which are
not of this fold, that is, of this part of the Church which is to be gathered
out of the Jews. Wherefore those other sheep seem to be of the general
flock. Answer. They were then sheep according to the providence and counsel
of God, but they were not sheep as concerning the fulfilling of his decree:
that is, they were predestined sheep. In sum; The Elect are not always
members of the church; but yet it is required of necessity that in this life
they be brought unto the Church, though it be sometimes even at the very point
of death. This is it, which is said, That all the Elect must in this life
begin eternal life. The Reprobate are indeed sometimes members of the church,
neither are they always estranged from it, but their coming is no true
coming to the Church: neither are they ever members of the invisible Church,
that is, of the Church and company of Saints. For from this they are ever
aliens.

8 Whether the Elect may fall from the Church, and the Reprobate abide always
in the Church.
THIS question is cleared and laid open by those things, which are spoken of
the unchangeableness of election, and of the perseverance of the Saints, The
Elect cannot (...) holy and (...) ^om the Church.
and godly. The Elect when they are once indeed come unto the Church of the
Saints, they may sometime fall from it, but wholly and finally forsake it they
never can. Not wholly; because they never so defect or fall, that they become
enemies of God and the Church. Not finally; because they persist not in this
Apostasy, but at length return to repentance, 1. J^h. 2.19. They went out
from us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of us, they would have
continued with us. Isai. 42.3. A bruise breed shall he not break; and the
smoking flax shall he not quench. Ioh. 10.28. No man shall pluck my sheep
out of mine hand. The reprobate at the length fall finally from it.
All the reprobate and hypocrites do at length finally depart from the Church,
and together with those gifts, which they had, they leese also those gifts,
which they seemed to have.

Object. The Godly also oftentimes fall away, as David and Peter. Ans. They
fall; but neither wholly, nor finally: which also befell unto Peter. For he
retained still in his mind the love of Christ, although for fear of danger he
denied him. He acknowledged also afterward his offense, and did truly repent
him thereof. David also did not wholly fall away, but being rebuked of the Lord
by the Prophet, he truly repented, and showed that his faith was not quite
dead: but in a slumber rather for a season. But hypocrites and the reprobate,
do at length wholly and finally revolt and fall away. For they do so at last
fall away, that they never return to repentance. And because the true love of
God was never in the^, and so neither themselves ever were of the number of
gods elect Saints; therefore at length they wholly and altogether depart and fall
away from the Church.

9 What is the use of this doctrine.
THE use of this doctrine is, 1. That the glory of our salvation be in whole
ascribed and given to God. What have thou that thou have not received? 2. That
we may have sure and certain comfort. This we shall have, when as we shall not
doubt of those things, which are here taught; and that especially, if every of
us be certainly persuaded that the decree of God of saving his elect is
altogether unchangeable, and further that himself also is of the number of the
elect, even a member of the invisible Church, and therefore shall never depart
from the Church and communion of Saints: because it is sanctified of God, and
therefore is holy and conformed unto God, not in perfection, but is holy first
by imputation, by reason of the holiness of Christ imputed unto it; next by
inchoation, because the holy Ghost does by little and little renew it, and
repu^ge it from the filth of sin: and lastly it is holy, because it is
dedicated to a holy, sacred and divine use, and severed from the wicked, which
are without the church. To believe therefore the holy Church, is, to believe,
that in this visible company and society are some true repentants and truly
converted, and my self to be a lively member of the invisible and visible
Church.

OF THE COMMUNION OF SAINTS.
THE Articles following are concerning the benefits of Christ bestowed on the
Church by the holy ghost. The Communion of Saints signifies, 1. The communion
of Christ's members with him, and among themselves.
The Union of the Church with Christ, and of his members among themselves. 2.
The communion or participation of all Christ's benefits. For all the Saints
have the same reconciliation, redemption, righteousness, salvation,
sanctification, by and for Christ. All the Saints have the same benefits
common, which are necessary to salvation. Ephesians. 4.4. There is one body and one
spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your vocation: one Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism. 3. It signifies the distribution of special gifts.
These particular gifts also are common to the whole Church, as which are
bestowed on some members of the Church for the salvation of the whole body;
even, For the gathering together of the Saints, Ephesians 4.12.
for the work of the ministry, and for the edification of the body of
Christ. But they are so distributed unto every member, as that some excel and
go before othersome in gifts and graces in the Church. For the gifts of the
holy Ghost are diverse, and to every one of us is given grace according to the
measure of the gift of Christ. Ephesians. 4.7.
4. It signifies an obliging or binding of all the members, to employ and refer
al their gifts to the glory of christ their head, and to the salvation of the
whole body and of every member mutually.

Why the faithful are called Saints.
The faithful are called Saints in three respects, 1. Jmputatiuelie, that is,
in respect that Christ's sanctity and nolines is imputed unto them. 2.
Inchoatiuely, that is, in respect that conformity and agreeablenes with the
law is incli^ated or begun in them. 3. In respect of their separation: because
they are selected and separated for all other men. By this then, which has
been spoken, it appears what is to believe the communion of Saints; namely,
to believe that the Saints (of which number I must needs certainly be assured
my self to be one) are united by the spirit unto Christ their head, and that
from the head gifts are poured down unto them, both those which are the same
in all necessary to salvation, as also those which being diverse and diversely
bestowed upon every one are requisite for the edification and building of the
Church.

Now must we a little more at large expound the first and chief part of the
communion of Saints, That is, the union, or coherence of all the Saints, that
is, of the whole body of the church with Christ the head, and of his members
among themselves, which is wrought by the Holy Ghost, even by the same spirit,
who dwells in christ the head, and in all his members. And by this union
christ conformeth his Saints, and makes them like unto himself by the same
spirit which is common to both, and works the like in both, reserving still a
difference in working: for in the head he works al gifts and graces, and
those most perfectly: in the members he works those gifts which are
convenient for every one, and so much as is for every one requisite and
necessary. This union of Christ with his members, and of his members mutually
among themselves, is confirmed and declared by these places of Scripture. John
15.5. J am the vine, ye are the branches: He that abides in me, and I in
him, the same brings forth much fruit. 1. Cor. 12.13. By one spirit are we
all baptized into one body. 1. Cor. 6.17. He that is joined unto the Lord is
one spirit. 1. John 4.13. Hereby know we, that we dwell in him and he in us:
because he has given us of his spirit. Hence it is clear how absurd their
fancy is, who contend that this communion is a subsistence or personal being
of Christ's body among our bodies, or of our bodies blended and mingled with
his. The same is refuted by that often alleged comparison of the head and
members. For those are coherent and grow together, but are not in a mixture,
nor mingled one with another. Whence also we may easily judge of that
communion, which is in the Sacraments. For the Sacraments seal nothing else
but that which the word promises. But to let this pass, the same is also
hereby refuted, that this communion must be continued for ever. For to this
end does Christ communicate himself to us, that he may dwell in us: Wherefore
such as is his abiding and dwelling, such is his communion: But christ's abiding
and dwelling is perpetual: Therefore his communion also is perpetual. This
argument is most strong and firm, and therefore for the assoyling it they have
been feign to devise their Vbiquite. For to obtain that other communion which
they would have, they must needs affirm, that Christ dwells always bodily
in all his Saints.

OF REMISSION OF SINS.
THE chief Questions.

1 What remission of sins is. 2 Who gives it. 3 For What. 4 Whether it
agrees with Gods justice. 5 Whether it be freely given. 6 To whom it is given.
7 How it is given.
1 WHAT REMISSION OF SINS IS.
REmission of sins is the purpose of God not to punish the sins of the
faithful, even as if they had never sinned: Remission of sin, is Gods will
not imputing unto us our sin, and imputing Christ's righteousness.
which purpose of not punishing their sins God does withal declare unto us.
Roman. 5.5. For the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost
which is given unto us. It may be also defined thus: Remission of sins is the
pardoning of deserved punishment, and the giving or imputing of another^
righteousness, to wit, the righ^eousnes of Christ. But more fully it is defined
on this wise: Remission of sins is the will of God, which to the faithful
and Elect imputes not any sin, and therefore does in like sort love them,
as if they had never sinned, and delivers them from al punishment of sin and
gives them eternal life freely for the intercession and merit of Jesus Christ
the son of God our Mediator. Now albeit God ^or the merit of his son
remitteth our sins to us, yet he afflicts us as yet in this life, not thereby
to punish us, but fatherly to chastise us. Neither yet because god does not
punish us for our sins, must we therefore think that he is not displeased with
them. For he is highly displeased and offended with the sins also of his Saints
and chosen.

2 Who gives remission of sins.
REmission of sins is given of God only, who (as the Prophet Isaiah says,
cap 43. 25.) puts away our iniquities: And this is done both of the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost. For we are baptized in the name of all three: Now
Baptism, Remission of sins is the work of all three persons.
as also it is said of John's Baptism, is wrought for remission of sins: and
of the Son the Scripture affirms plainly; That the son of man has power
to remit sins. Likewise it is said of the holy Ghost, that he was tempted:
that he is offended and grieved. Wherefore he also has power to remit sins.
For none can remit sins, but he against whom sin is committed and who is
offended by sin. And Christ also in plain words in the Evangelists
speaks of the sin against the holy Ghost. Now the cause, that God only,
that is, the father, the son, and the holy ghost, only remit sins, is this;
because none but the party offended can remit sins: but only god, the father,
the son, and the holy ghost is offended by our sins. Therefore god only can
remit them, and consequently no creature is able to grant ought of this right
of god. Whereupon also David says; Psalm. 51.4. Against thee only have I
sinned, and done evil in thy sight.

How the ministers, and the Church are said to remit sins.
Objection. But the Apostles also and the Church remit sins; because it is
said, Matthew 18.18 Whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven,
and whatsoever ye loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven and Ioh. 20.23.
Whose soever sins ye remit they are remitted unto them; and whose soever sins
ye retein, they are retained. Therefore not God only remitteth sins.
Answer. The Apostles remit sins in that they are the signifiers and
declarers of Gods remission. Likewise also the Church remitteth sins, when
according to the commandment of God she denounces remission of sins to the
repentant. Again one neighbor remitteth sins and trespasses unto another,
as concerning the pardoning of the offense. But God only freeth us from the
gilt of sin, by his own authority: God only washes us clea^e from sin.
In a word, God only remitteth unto us all sins, that is, original, and
actual, whether they be of omission, or of ignorance. Psalm. 103.3. Which
heal^th all thine infirmities. Romans 8 1. There is no con^emnation to them that
are in Christ Jesus.

3 For what remission of sins is granted.
REmission of sins is granted, not verily of any lenity, which is repugnant
to justice, but of the free mercy of God, Remission of sin* granted for
Christ's intercession and merit.
of mere grace, and Gods free love, for the intercession and merit of Christ
applied by faith. 1. Pet 3.18 Christ has once suffered for sins, ^he just
for the unjust that he might bring us to God. 1. John. 1.7. The blood of Jesus
Christ cleanses us from all sin. Colos. 1.19. It pleased the Father that in
Christ should all fullness dwell. and by him to reconcile all things to
himself, and to set at peace through the blood of his Cross both the things
in earth, and the things in heaven. Heb. 12.24. Ye are come to Jesus the
Mediator of the new Testament, and to the bl^ud of sprinkeling, that speaks
better things, than that of Abel. Ephesians 1.7. By Christ we have redemption
through his blood, even forgiveness of sins* according to his rich grace.
For entreatie can not be made whithout satisfaction: because that were to
desire, that God would yield s^me-what of his justice.

4 Whether remission of sins agrees with Gods justice.
IT is true indeed, that it behooves god, as a just judge, Gods justice
satisfied for sin by christ, though it be remitted unto us.
not to leave sin unpunished, and therefore not to remit it except some
satisfaction be interposed. But neither does God leave it unpunished; for he
punishes sins in Christ or in the sinners themselves most sufficiently. God
pronounces us in such sort just, as he pronounces us not to be obnoxious to
punishment, because of the most perfect satisfaction of christ; and this does
not contrary or cross the justice and truth of God. Object. The justice of
God requires, that they be punished who sin. Therefore such a remission of
sins, as is granted without sufficient punishment of the party sinning, is
impossible, or does contrary and cross the justice of god. Ans. It is contrary
to gods justice, not to punish sin at al, that is, neither in him that sins,
nor in any other who undergoes the punishment for him that sins. Reply. To
punish one that is innocent in place of him that has offended, is repugnant
also to Gods justice. Ans. True; if the innocent party be such a one, who 1.
will not undergo the punishment. 2. Is not of the same nature with the offender.
3. Is not able to suffer sufficient punishment. 4. Is not able to recover out
of it: for God will not have him that is innocent to perish for an offender. 5.
Js not able to restore and convert the offender, that he may thence forward
cease to offend, and further to give him faith, which may embrace and receive
this his benefit. But all these conditions are in Christ, as clearly appears
by the testimonies following. Ephesians. 5.2. Christ has loved us and has given
himself for us, to be an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor
to god. John. 10.15. I lay down my self for my sheep. Isai. 53.5. He was
wounded for our transgression. 2. Cor. 5.15. Christ died for all, that they
which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died
for them, and rose again. John. 2.19. Destroy this temple, and in three days
J will raise it up again. John. 10.17. I lay down my life that J might take
it again. Ephe. 5.25. Christ loved the Church and gave himself for it, that
he might sanctify it. Tit. 2.14. He gave himself for us, that he might
redeem us from all iniquity, and purge us to be a peculiar people unto
himself, zealous of good works.

5. Whether remission of sins be freely given.
Our sins ^ted freely in respect of us, thou^h they cost Ch^^st ^ul dee^ly.
ALbeit God remitteth not our sins unto us, except a most sufficient
punishment be first paid for them: yet he remitteth them freely unto us for
Christ's sake, whom our debts cost enough. Object. If he pardons them for
christ's satisfaction; then does he not remit them freely. Ans. He remitteth
them freely in respect of us, that is, without any satisfaction of ours, and
pardons them for the satisfaction made by another. Reply. And he that after
this sort pardons does not freely pardon: for this is a rule, what a man
does by another, that he seems to do by himself. Wherefore we our selves
pay it in paying it by Christ. Answ. God also gives us freely this price and
ransom, that is, this satisfier and Mediator Christ, who is not bought of
us. Joh. 3.16. So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son,
that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have life everlasting.
It is all one, t^ h^^e remiss^on of sins, and to be just. Reply. The (...)
the (...) us to avoid sin, but to do good also. Therefore (...), that our
sin be forgiven: but also good w^^rkes (...) and necessary that we may be
just. Answ. The om^sion of good is also sin. But this also is remitted. He
that can do good, and does it not, is a sinner and accu^sed. But God does not
hate us, neither has he a will to punish us for those sins, for which Christ
has sufficiently satisfied, in whom also we have perfect remission of all our
sins, so that by his only merit we are reputed just before God.

6 To whom remission of sins is given.
REmission of sins is given to all the elect, and to them alone, Remission of
sinne^ given unto all the Elect, and to them only.
because it is given to them all and alone, who believe, and none believe, but
the elect only: for the reprobate never have true faith and belief. Yet all
the elect have not always remission of sins, but all believers have it
always; because they only have remission of sins, who believe that they
have it. But this the elect do not always believe: but then first, when they
are converted, and endued with faith, yet in respect of the secret and
fore-determined purpose of God, they have always remission of sins. Now,
Infants have remission of sins, because they have faith and conversion, in
aptitude and inclination, though not actually.

7. How remission of sins is given.
REmission of sins is given by faith, Remission of sins given by faith,
through the working of the Holy Ghost.
by which being wrought and kindled in us by the holy Ghost, we receive the
same. Therefore the purpose and decree of God, of remitting sins, is
everlasting; but the executing and performance thereof is, when by faith we
apply remission of sins unto us. So also God does always love his elect, but
that love is not poured out in their hearts before their repentance. For they
have that certain testimony of conscience by the gift of the holy Ghost, that
they are loved of god and so have their sins remitted, who truly convert and
repent.

O^ THE RESVRRECTION OF THE FLESH.
THE chief qu^stions.

1 What the Resurrection is. 2 The Errors concerning the Resurrection. 3
Whence it may appear that the Resurrection shall certainly be. 4 For what
end the Resurrection shall be. 5 By whom. 6 How. 7 When. 8 What bodies shall
rise. 9 Whether the soul be immortal.
1 WHAT THE RESVRRECTION IS.
THE Word Resurrection signifies sometime preservation. The resurrection of
the flesh is a restoring of the substance of our bodies after death, even of
the same matter whereof they now consist, and a reviving and quickening of the
same bodies with life immortal and incorruptible, by the same immortal soul
whereby they now live, which God will work by Christ in the end of the
woorlde, by his divine virtue and power; which restoring also shall be of the
elect unto the eternal glory of God, but of the reprobate unto eternal
pains. That is, 1. There shall be a restoring of the same body, which is, a
recollecting and gathering together of the same matter which was scattered and
severed into all the Elements. 2. An uniting of it with the same soul, and a
reviving of it (...) the same soul, which also it had before. 3. A putting off
of al infirmities, and a putting on of immortality

2 The Errors concerning the Resurrection.
THE Errors held of the resurrection, are of three sorts. Some have utterly
denied it, and have avouched the souls to die together with the bodies. 2. Some
have granted the immortality of the soul, but have constred the resurrection
to be a resurrection in this life: but the bodies they denied to rise at all,
although the souls of the godly have fruition, after death, of everlasting
happiness. 3. Some, as Anabaptists, deny that the very self same bodies,
which we now have, shall rise again, but they say that Christ at his second
coming will make new bodies.

3 Whence it may appear that the Resurrection shall certainly be^.
IT may be verily collected probably out of philosophy that there shall be
sometime a resurrection: Probable proofs of the Resurrection yielded by
philosophy, but no necessary demonstrance.
but no necessary demonstration can be yielded thence, that the Resurrection
shall certainly be. For in philosophy are many principles, which accord not
with the sacred writings of Gods spirit. Again, in philosophy, the knowleege
which it has of Gods justice and truth is but a maimed reason. But in the
holy writ of God the reasons are firm and true. Hence alone therefore is
demonstration given for the most certain accomplishment of the Resurrection.
And this first by testimonies of scripture: then by reasons drawn out of
scripture.

The testimonies of Scripture, The Testimonies of scripture, for demo^strance
of the Resurrection.
which confirm the certainty of the resurrection hereafter to come, are most
evident, and those taken both out of the old and new Testament. Job 19.25. I
am sure that my redeemer lives, and he shall stand the last on the earth: and
though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet shall I see God in my flesh.
John 5.28. The hour shall come, in the which all that are in the graves shall
hear his voice: And they shall come forth that have done good unto the
resurrection of life, but they that have done evil unto the resurrection of
condemnation. John 6 40. I will raise him up at the last day. 1. Corint. 15.13.
If there be no resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not risen: And if
Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and your faith is also vain.
Reasons drawn out of the scripture, for proof thereof.
The reasons which are drawn also out of Scripture, are diverse. 1. God
promises eternal life, not to the soul only, but also to the body of the
godly: and contrary, to the ungodly he threatens eternal punishment and
pains both of body and soul: and these promises and threatninges of God must
be fulfilled: For the certainty of them is unchangeable: But they shall not
be fulfilled, if the dead shall not rise. Seeing therefore God does most
certainly in his good time accomplish that, which he promises to the godly,
and menaceth to the wicked; it follows of necessity that the dead must rise
again. 2. The mercy of God is perfect, as which extends it self to the
whole man, and which will have us wholly saved: Therefore our bodies also shall
rise again. 3. The mercy and love of God toward the godly is perpetual and
unchangeable* so that what he once will, of his fatherly love toward them,
perform unto them, the same he ever will. But he will have the godly saved
both in soul and body: therefore they must be both in soul and body, even
whole saved: and therefore that they may be whole saved, they must needs
rise again 4. The perfect justice of God requires, that the same wholly
whereby they sin, should be punished with eternal pains. But they sin
both in their whole body and in their soul. Therefore their bodies also must
be raised again, because they ought no less in body than in soul to suffer
eternal pains. 5. Christ is risen: therefore we also shall rise. This sequel
is most sure. For, first, Christ therefore rose again, that he might raise
us. Secondly, Christ is our head, and we his members. Seeing then Christ our
head is risen, we also his members doubtless shall rise. For the glory of the
head requires this, that he have his members suitable and in like condition
with him. Wherefore if the members should continue rotten, the head should not
be glorious. Thirdly, The same spirit is in us, which is in Christ raised: he
ioineth and unites us with Christ, and works the same in us, which he does
in Christ, neither is at any time not like himself. But he has raised
Christ: Therefore also he will raise us. 6. It is said that Christ shall have
an everlasting kingdom, but this he should not have, if our bodies should
always continue in death: for neither would it suffice that our souls are
immortal, or eternal without our bodies. For that Christ's kingdom may be
eternal, he must have eternal subjects, and those wholly eternal. Therefore
our bodies also shall rise, that so we whole may be subject eternally unto
Christ our king. 7. Christ is a perfect Savior, because he has saved and
reconciled to god whole man. Therefore our corrupt body also shall be raised
by Christ, and rise again. 8. Christ is not of less force to save than Adam
to leese. Nay, Christ has restored unto us all that which Adam lost and
destroyed by sinning, yea and far more and greater things by his merit. Adam
had lost from us among other gifts the eternal life also of our bodies.
Therefore Christ has restored it unto us, and consequently, we shall
certainly rise again. 9. God is the God of whole man. This reason Christ also
uses against the Sadduces: Mat. 22.31. Have ye not read, what is spoken unto
you of God, saying: I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Jsaac, and the god
of Jacob? God is not the god of the dead, but of the living: And so God is the
God of whole man, not of a part only. For if he were God of a part, that is,
of the soul only, he were not perfectly and fully our God. 10. He published
his law unto man, after the fall: Therefore he will have man once keep it.
But that is not done in this life. Therefore it shall be done in the life to
come, and therefore men shall rise again. 11. The wages of sin is death.
Therefore sin being abolished, death shall be abolished: and so death being
abolished, we shall rise again unto everlasting life. To this end also our
bodies were made, that in them as temples the holy Ghost might dwell for ever.

4 For what end the Resurrection shall be.
THE last end of the Resurrection is gods glory. The ends of the
resurrection, 1 Gods glory.
For to this end shall the Resurrection be, that God may manifest, and together
fully and perfectly exercise both his mercy toward the faithful, and his
justice toward the reprobate: and so may declare the unutterable certainty of
his promises. The next and subordinate end to the former, is the salvation and
the glory of the Elect: and of the contrary, 2 The salvation and glory of
the elect, and the damnation of the reprobate.
the damnation and punishment of the reprobate. For the Elect, or Saints of
god, shall rise to everlasting life. Revel. 3.21. To him will J grant to sit
with me in my throne. Revel. 7.13. They shall be araied in long white robes.
Dan. 12.3. They shall shine as the Sun. But the wicked shall rise to be
drawn to everlasting pains and torments. Mat. 25.41. Depart from me ye
cursed, into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the Devil, and his Angels:
and a little after; And these shall go into everlasting pain, and the
righteous into life eternal. Objection. Christ's Resurrection is the cause of
our Resurrection: and also the benefit of Christ's Resurrection is our
Resurrection: But this cause and this benefit belongs not to unbelievers and
Jnfidels. Therefore they shall not rise. Answer. This whole reason is
granted, namely, that the wicked shall not rise because of Christ's
Resurrection; but hence it follows not that they shall not rise: because they
shall rise in respect of another cause, which is, that they may be punished.
There is but one end indeed of our Resurrection in respect of God, which is
his glory: but the manner of coming to this end is diverse.

5 By whom the Resurrection shall be.
The Resurrection by Christ.
THE Resurrection shall be by Christ: for by the force and virtue of Christ our
Savior we shall rise. Joh. 6.44. J will raise him up in the last day. Which
speech of Christ is to be understood of the body. For he does not raise up
the souls, because they die not. Now Christ, man, shall raise us, though by the
virtue of his Godhead. Joh. 5.28. The hour shall come in the which all that
are in the graves shall hear the voice of the Son of man. Act. 17.31. God
has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in righteousness by
that man whom he has appointed, whereof he has given assurance unto all men,
in that he has raised him from the dead. And hence arises unto us great
consolation and comfort. Because he is true man who shall raise us, he will not
neglect his own flesh, and members, but will raise them, even us will he raise
to eternal life, for which cause he took our flesh and redeemed us. Objection.
But the father is said to raise us, yea to raise Christ himself: Romans 8.11.
He that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal
bodies, because that his spirit dwells in you. Therefore we shall not be
raised by Christ, nor by the power of Christ. Answer. The Father shall raise
us by his Son mediately. But the Son shall immediately raise us with his
spirit, as being our only Redeemer. Phil. 3.20. We look for our Savior from
heaven, even the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body, that it
may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working,
whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself. But the spirit
shall immediately raise us by himself.

6 How the Resurrection shall be.
At the resurrection, 1. The dead shall be raised.
1 THE dead shall be raised with a shoute, and with the voice of the
Archangell, and with the trumpet of god: and shall be presented before the high
and most just judge, Jesus Christ. The resurrection therefore shall be in
glorious manner, and openly, not fearefullie, nor in secret: and shall be far
other, than that, which was wrought in some men at the resurrection of Christ.
For it shall be done, all beholding it, yea with the exceeding joy of all the
godly, and with the exceeding fear and trembling of the wicked. 2. They who
then shall remain alive, 2 The living shall be changed
shall be in a moment of time changed, and be made of mortal, immortal.
Read Cap. 15 of the former to the Corinthians, and Cap. 4. of the former to the
Thessalonians.

7 When the Resurrection shall be.
THE Resurrection shall be in the end of the world. In the last day. Joh. 6.40.
J will raise him up at the last day. This question is to be held and proposed
of us, that our faith be not troubled, while we are forced to expect and
tarry: or that we may not imagine to our selves any certain time, when we
think these things will happen; and so begin to doubt, and think our selves
to be deluded, when those things fall not so out nor come to pass at the time
appointed by us. This question makes for the increase of hope and faith in us.

8 What bodies shall rise.
THese self same bodies shall rise, The same bodies shall rise. Job. 19 26.
Ephesians. 6.8. 2. Cor. 5.10.
and not others created of christ, as the Anabaptists will have it. For Job
says, Jn this flesh shall J see my Lord. And the Apostle says, Every man
shall receive in his body, according to that he has done. If then the bodies
which have sinned, shall receive accordingly, not other bodies, but the same
shall rise. And the very word it self of rising enforces as much; for nothing
can rise, but that which is fallen. Wherefore seeing our bodies shall rise, no
other bodies shall rise or be quickened, than those which have fallen, and are
dead; or no other, than those which do fall and die. How flesh and blood i^
denied the heavenly inheritance.
Objection. But saint Paul says, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the
kingdom of god. Therefore our bodies cannot possess the kingdom of god,
because they are flesh and blood. Answer. The flesh, oftentimes signifies
some quality, or the substance, in respect of some certain quality. So
flesh, that is, being sinful and corruptible, shall not possess the kingdom
of God: but our flesh then shall no more be able to sin, neither shall it be
corruptible. Objection. 2. Our bodies shall be spiritual. 1. Cor. 15.44. It is
sown a natural body, and is raised a spiritual body. Therefore our bodies
shall not then have the properties of our flesh. Answer. In what sense our
bodies shall be spiritual.
They shall be indeed spiritual, but shall not have all the properties of a
spirit, but some only, because they shall be agile and quick, mighty, and
vncorrupt; and indeed are therefore chiefly called spiritual, because they
shall be guided by the spirit, neither shall any more the natural life
remain in them. That this is true, is apparent by these reasons. 1. The
Apostle himself adds; This corruptible must put on incorruption. 2. He
calls it a spiritual body: but a spirit is no body. 3. Jf any body
after the resurrection should be so spiritual, as not retaining at all any
bodily properties, then surely Christ's body should have been so: but now he
says to the Apostles, Luke 24.39. Handle me, and see, for a spirit has not
flesh and bones, as ye see me have. Objection. 3. How are we said to believe
the resurrection, when as yet we are said to hope for the resurrection to
come? Answer. We are said to hope for the resurrection, as it is an effect of
Gods counsel: we are said to believe it, as it is the counsel it self and
purpose of God.

9 Whether the soul be immortal.
The causes for which this Question is to be moved. Mat. 22.23. 2. Tim. 2.17.
BEsides that this question belongs to the Article of the Resurrection; the
explication also thereof in it self shall not be altogether unprofitable or
fruitless. For not now only do they begin to dispute against the
immortality of the soul, but the Sadduces also denied it, as they likewise
that said the Resurrection was past already unto him that believed, neither
made any other resurrection besides that spiritual resurrection of the
regenerate: Likewise also some Anabaptists deny the immortality of the soul.
Moreover Paul the third, Pope of Rome, when he was breathing out his soul and
ready to die, said, that now at length he should try and know three things,
whereof in his whole time he had much doubted. 1. Whether there were a god. 2.
Whether souls were immortal. 3. Whether there were any hell. Wherefore it
ought not to seem strange, if this question be moved, neither shall it be
altogether vain and needelesse: both because it serves for the controuling,
and refuting especially of Epicures: and also because it makes for the better
understanding of some places of holy Scripture. But because there have been,
and even now are, who have taught, that the soul of man, like as of brute
beasts, is nothing else, but life or the vital power, arising of the
temperature and perfection of the body, and therefore dies and is
extinguished together with the body, and (as some of them speak, who will
seem to believe the resurrection of the dead) does sleep when the body
dies, that is, is without motion or sense until the raising of the body,
which indeed is nothing else, than that the soul is mortal, that is, a mere
quality only in the body, and when the body is dissolved becomes nothing,
because if it were an incorporeal substance, it could not be without sense and
motion: against these we are to hold the records of Gods word and writ,
concerning the spiritual and immortal substance of man's soul. The soul an in
corporeal substance.
That the soul of man is not only a form, or perfection, or temperament, or
force and power, or an agitation arising out of the temperature of the body,
but a substance incorporeall, living, understanding, dwelling in the body,
and susteining and moving it: these places following of holy Scripture do
show. Psalm. 48. His soul shall be blessed in life. Heb. 12. God is called the
Father of spirits. And it is said of the faithful: Ye are come to the
celestial Jerusalem, and to the company of innumerable Angels, and to the
spirits of just and perfect men. 1 Cor. 2.11. No man knows the things of a
man, save the spirit of a man, which is in him. In these and the like places
of Scripture, both the soul of man is called a spirit, and the properties of
a living and understanding substance are attributed unto it. Wherefore to no
purpose do the adversaries of this doctrine oppose those places in which the
name of the soul is taken for the the life and will of man: as Matthew. cap. 6.
The soul is more worth than meat. Job. 13.14. J put my soul in my hand. For
by the fore-alledged places it is manifest, thnt this is not general, but is
used by a Metalepsis.
figure of speech, whereby we call the effect by the name of his cause.

Now the immortality of the soul is proved by manifest places of holy
Scripture. 1. Luk 23.43. The soul immortal.
Christ hanging on the cross said to the thief, this day shall thou be with
me in Paradise. But he could not be there in body: because that was dead and
buried. Therefore his soul was gathered with Christ's into Paradise, and so
consequently the soul lives. 2. Paul says, Phil. 1.23. I desire to be
loosed, and to be with christ: he speaks of the rest and joy, which he
should enioie with christ. But they, who feel nothing, what can their joy or
happiness be? Wherefore they also are refuted in this place, who say men's
souls sleep, and so withal deny the immortality of the soul. 3. Wised. 3.1.
The souls of the just are said to be in the hands of god. 4. Matt. 22.32. God
is not the god of the dead, but of the living: Therefore the souls live. 5.
Luke 23.46. Into thy hands I commend my spirit. 6. 2 Corinthians. 5.8. When we
remove out of the body, we may go unto the Lord. Wherefore the souls sleep
not, as some Anabaptists will have the^: but enioie immortal life, and
celestial glory with the Lord. 7. In the Revelation cap. 6.10. The souls of
the godly, that were killed, are said to cry with a loud voice under the
altar saying, How long Lord, holy, and true, do not thou judge and avenge
our blood on them that dwell on the earth? Wherefore the souls live. 8. Luke
16.22. Lazarus is said to be carried into Abraham's bosom: and out of the same
place also it is apparent concerning the souls of the wicked. For the rich
glutton is also said of the contrary to be carried down to hell. These
testimonies therefore of Scripture teach and confirm most evidently, that not
only in the body before death, and after the resurrection of the body, but
also in the whole space and time coming between, the souls are, live, feel,
understand, out of the body; though the manner of their operations be to us
unknown. Wherefore also this gift of immortality, has some similitude with
God, who alone, as the only fountain and author of life, has immortality.
1. Timot. 6.

Man should have lived immortallie if he had not sinned.
But furdermore, that man should have lead a blessed life immortallie and for
ever not in soul only, but also in body, if he had not purchased death and
mortality unto himself by sin; is first hereby proved, because by sin death
entered into the world as the wages of sin, Romans 5. and 6. Next, because we
being freeed from sin by christ, are also freed from death. And lastly,
because God himself did withdraw from man, being made by sin subject unto
death, the sign or sacrament of immortality, which was the fruit of the tree
of life: Genesis 3. Wherefore their objections are naught worth, who imagine the
souls after death to sleep or vanish away; For Genesis 1. and 1. Cor. 15. Adam
is said to have been made a living soul, not simply, as these will have it,
like as other living creatures are termed in the same place living souls, but
as being made to the image and similitude of God, which he has not in common
with other creatures.

Genesis 2. When God says, Jn the day that thou eatest of the tree of knowledge
of good and evil, thou shall die the death: he does not threaten unto man the
destruction or extinguishing of his soul, but eternal death, that is, Sundry
places of scripture, (alleged against the immortality of the soul)
interpreted according to their right sense and meaning.
the horrible feeling and terror of Gods wrath and judgment, and to live
forsaken and cast from God, subject to all miseries and torments, an adioint
of which death is the separation of the soul and body, which at that time
through the mercy of God, that mankind might be saved, was differred. For so
was Adam dead while yet he lived in Paradise according to Gods denouncement,
even as soon as he had eaten of the forbidden fruit. So in eternal death live
all the damned and reprobate, Whose fire shall not be put out, and their worm
not die. So, Ephesians. 2. they are said to be dead through sin, who live in sin
without repentance. And Ephesians. 5. He is willed to rise from the dead, who is
reclaimed from sin to God. And Romans 7 5. Paul says that he was dead through
the knowledge of his sin, and the wrath of God.

Job. 11. Act. 7. 1. Cor. 11. 1 Thessalonians. 4. The dead are said to sleep: but
this is by a Synecdoch^*
figure of speech, translating that which is proper unto the body, to the
whole man. For that this belongs to the body, which is to be recalled from
death to life, as it were from sleep to wake again, many places declare, as
Job 7. Behold now, I sleep in the dust. For not the soul, but the body
only sleeps in the dust and grave.

The Preacher says, The condition of the children of men, Eccle. 3.1^.
and the condition of beasts, are even as one condition unto them. Therefore
there is no immortality of the soul. Ans. It is a fallacy concluding that
which is in some respect so, to be simply so. 1. Men die as beasts, in that
men must needs once die, and depart out of this life; because men are not here
to continue for ever, nor have here a settled place. 2. Men die as beasts,
that is in the sense and judgment of the wicked.

Blessedness and the kingdom promised to the Godly is said then first to
fall unto them at the last day. Mat. 24.25. Mar. 13. Dan. 12. But these places
show not, that the souls of the godly do not presently, when they depart
from their bodies, enioie celestial blessedness and joy, but that at the last
day, when their bodies are raised again, their felicity and glory shall be
consummated and made absolute. For so we pray, thy kingdom come, when yet God
now also reigns in us.

Of that which is said, 1. Corint. 15. If in this life only we have hope,
we are of all men most miserable, they thus reason. He that is blessed and
happy before the resurrection, is not without the resurrection most miserable:
But we without the resurrection should be of al men most miserable: Therefore
we are not before the resurrection blessed and happy. But the Mayor we
answer. He is not miserable without the resurrection, who cannot only
before it but without it also be blessed: But we are in such wise blessed
before it, that notwithstanding without it following and ensuing we cannot
enioie that former blessedness: because God has joined with so inseperable a
knot the beginning and proceeding and finishing or perfection of the Electes
blessedness, that none can have the beginning, who must not come to the end
and consummation thereof. Wherefore either we must rise again, or we must want
also that celestial blessedness before the resurrection. Romans 8.11. Jf the
spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you: he that raised
up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies.

Heb. 11.39. These all through faith are dead, and received not the promise.
Therefore they received not their country. We answer first; Although they
dying had not found their country: yet would it not follow of these words,
that they are not at al, or have no sense after death. For he that is not, or
has no sense, seeks not his country. Secondly, The author of that Epistle
does not speak of the life after death, which is lead in the celestial
country, 2. Cor. 5. but of this life, in which the faithful walking their
pilgrimage sought for the celestial country, not finding their country on
earth.

Psalm. 78.39. They are flesh, a wind that passes away and comes not
again: By these and the like speeches the brevity of man's life, and the
frailty and perishing of all humane affairs without God, is described and
bewailed. For as here they are compared to a wind eftsoons vanishing away, so
Psalm. 103. they are compared to dust, grass, and flowers of the field.
Likewise, Job. 14. He shoots forth as a flower, and is cut down, and
vanishes as a shadow. Isaie. 40.6. All flesh is grass. But if they urge the
very word in these speeches, it will follow that not only after death
there is nothing remaining, but that there is not any resurrection, when he
says, a wind that passes and comes not again: as also flowers and
shadows, whereunto man is compared, do so perish, that they are not recovered.

Psalm. 88.5. I am counted as the slain lying in the grave, whom thou
remembrest no more. In these words the Prophet does not signify, either
himself or the dead to be exempted from Gods providence: but he complains
that he is forsaken of God, even as the dead seem to men not to be cared for
of him: and therefore he speaks not according to the sense of faith, but of
his own opinion, and weakness, and misery, who judges those to be forsaken
and neglected of God, whose delivery for a while he does differ. But what
faith in the mean season suggesteth and tells the godly even when they
wrestle with temptation, he shows Psalm. 11.2. when he says: The just shall
be in everlasting memory.

Psalm. 146.4. His spirit departs, and he returns to his earth: the^ his
thoughts perish. Here he says not the spirit or soul of men perishes, or
vanishes, or dies, or is bereaved of sense, but that it departs, to wit,
from the body wherein it dwells: and that, not the spirit, but the man
returns to his earth, that is, as concerning his body, which was made of
earth, as is written Genesis 3 and Eccles. 12. And lastly he says that his
thoughts perish, which is not, that the soul is after this life bereaved of
reason, judgment, and sense of the mercy or wrath of God, but that his
purposes and counsels are made frustrate, which man in this life had settled
with himself to bring to pass: in which sense it is said, Psalm. 112.10. The
desire of the wicked shall perish.

They gather also other sayings, which take away all praising and worshipping
of God from the dead. As Psalm. 88.10. Will thou show a miracle unto the dead?
Or shall the dead rise and praise thee? But in such speeches death and hell, or
the grave, have two significations. They who are spiritually dead, whether
before or after the death of the body, that is, they who are deprived of gods
grace, and forsaken and rejected of god, and are in hell, that is, in the place
and torments of the damned, or else in this life despairing and destitute of
comfort, shall not praise god at all, neither in this life, nor in the life to
come. But they who are dead, not spiritually, but corporally only, albeit they
shall not praise god in this life while their bodies are in hell, that is, in
the grave, yet in soul they shall not cease to acknowledge and praise god in the
other life, until when receiving their bodies again, they shall magnify him
in both, in the celestial eternity. But in the mean season, because god will
also be agnised and magnified of men in this life, therefore both the whole
Church, and every one of the faithful, not only pray that they may not fall
into that forsaking, and into that sense of gods wrath, wherewith the wicked
are oppressed; but also desire that they may be in this mortal life preserved
and defended, until the end thereof by god appointed be expired. For the
Saints do not simply stand in fear of the bodily death and grave; but that
they may not be forsaken of god, neither fall into desperation and destruction,
or their enemies insult against god, when they are overthrown; this with daily
and ardent prayers and petitions they beg and crave continually.

Now that which the adversaries ad farther out of the Psalm. 146.2. I will
praise the Lord during my life: as long as J have any being, I will sing unto
my God; this makes nothing with the^: For he restrains not the praising of
God to the time of his mortal life, but only he says that he will spend all
that time in Gods praises, which notwithstanding in many other places he
extends to continue al eternity; as Psalm. 34. I will praise the Lord
continually. But oftentimes this particle, until, or, as long as, signifies a
continuance of the time going before some event, without any excluding of the
time following: as 1. Cor. 15.25. He must reign until he has put al his
enemies under his feet.

Job. 10.20. Let him cease and leave off from me, that I may take a little
comfort, before I go and shall not return. He denies in these words that he
shall return into this mortal life, and to converse among men in this
woorlde; but he denies not that he in the mean season has his being and
does live, until again he see God in his flesh, even the same Job, who the^
was afflicted: As himself says, ca. 19.26. Job 3.11. Why died I not, when I
came out of the womb? Here also Job does not deny, the souls after death to
be, live, feel and understand, but only he says, the miseries of this
present life are not felt: If they urge, that neither the evils of the life to
come are felt; because then Job should wish for a bad change: we answer,
that Job wishes not for the death of the wicked, but of the godly. But if they
ad further, That Job does make Kings and Princes also which gather gold unto
them, small and great, that is, al men, good and bad, partakers of this rest:
our answer is out of the process and course of his whole speech, that Job
does not teach here, what is the state of men after this life, but only
desires to be rid of his present misery, and therefore through humane
infirmity and impatiency, does compare the sense and feeling of his present
miseries with the death and state of the dead, whatsoever it be; as they who
are grievously tormented with present distresses and calamities prefer any
thing whatsoever before that which they suffer. So also chapter 7. he speaks
as one despairing of delivery in this life. Remember that my life is but a
wind, and that mine eye shall not return to see pleasure. For so he expounds
himself, when he adds: He shall return no more to his house, neither shall
his place know him any more. So likewise cap. 17. My breath is corrupt, and
the grave is ready for me. They are words of one despairing of life and
salvation, god being wrath and angry. But chapter 34.14. when it is said; If he
set his heart upon man, and gather unto him self his spirit, and his breath, Al
flesh shall perish together: it is not said that the soul does sleep, or
perish, but that by the departure thereof the body dies and is dissolved.

Further they add: Jf presently after death the godly were blessed, then
injury was done unto them, who were called again into this mortal life. But
to this we answer, That neither god can be injurious to any man, whereas he
is in no man's debt: neither can any thing happen better or more acceptable unto
the godly, than to serve for the manifesting of gods glory, either by life or
by death. As Phil. 1. it is said: As always, so now Christ shall be magnified
in my body, whether it be by life, or by death, etc.

Last of all, if they say, that the soul has neither sense, nor action, but
by bodily instruments, and therefore being naked and destitute of these, is
destitute also of sense, motion, and operation: To grant unto them this
Antecedent, of the soul being in the body: yet notwithstanding of the soul
freed from the body, both learned Philosophers confess the contrary, and the
word of god testifies the contrary: as 1. Cor. 13.9. We know in part, and we
prophecy in part: but when that which is perfect is come, then that which is
in part shall be abolished.

OF EVERLASTING LIFE.
THIS Article is placed in the end: 1. Because it is perfectly fulfilled after
the rest. 2. Because it is an effect of all the other articles; that is, we
believe all the other articles for this, and all things that we believe were
done, that we might believe this article, and so at length enjoy everlasting
life. This article is the end and roof of our whole salvation and life.

The chief questions of everlasting life.

1 What everlasting life is. 2 Of whom it is given. 3 To whom it is given. 4
Wherefore it is given. 5 When it is given. 6 How it is given. 7 Whether in this
life we may be assured of everlasting life.
1 WHAT EVERLASTING LIFE IS.
What life is in general.
LIFE is defined among Philosophers diversely; and it is indeed a word of
diverse significations, and signifiyng diverse things. In general it is, either
the very existence and being of the soul with the body, or the operation of a
liung thing: that is, it signifies to be, or to do those things which are
proper unto a living nature, for it is taken both for the first act and for the
second. Therefore death is the destruction of a living thing and of the power
or faculty of woorking. Or, Life is an aptitude of a living thing to work the
operations proper unto it, and is also the operations themselves, by reason of
the Union of the body with the soul. Generally, both as touching god, and
Angels, and men, it is the existence or being of a living thing, and the
faculty or power wherewith every living thing being endewed does exercise
the operations and actions of life. Spirits also live: but they have not that
from life, but from their very nature and essence. Now when we mention
everlasting life, we restrain the word: for then it speaks of the
everlasting life of men and Angels. That is called Everlasting, 1. Which has
neither beginning nor ending. Life everlasting has a beginning, but no end.
2 Which has no beginning, and has an ending, as the decrees of god. 3. Which
has a beginning, but shall have no end, as everlasting life.

But this question seems inexplicable, because it is said thereof. Jsai.
64.4. and 1. Cor. 2.9. Neither eye has seen, neither ear has heard, neither
came into man's heart the things which god has prepared for them that love him.
Yet we will see what may be known concerning this question of the holy
Scripture.

1. Life in general signifies to live, or to be, as we restrain being to a
thing living: that is, to be endued with a soul, which soul is that, whereby
we live; and the natural life is the remaining or dwelling of the soul in a
living body; and the operation of the soul, or the faculty of the soul
working those actions which are proper to a living thing. For the soul is the
essential form of life: which who have, live.

2. Everlasting life is nothing else but to be: as we restrain being to a
regenerate man: which To be, The full definition of everlasting life.
is to have the Jmage of god restored, according to which we were at the first
created. But to explane and expound this we have need of a more full definition.
Wherefore everlasting life is the habitation or dwelling of god in Angels and
men by the holy ghost, and the true knowledge of god, his will, and all his
works, kindled by the same spirit in their hearts, and true and perfect
righteousness and wisdom, that is a perfect conformity and correspondence of
their will and powers and operations with the mind and will of god: as also a
joy resting on god, and a sufficiency of all good things in god as touching
both soul and body, which shall never be interrupted, hindered, or have an
end. Life everlasting is, 1 The know^ege of God and wisdom.
The proof and confirmation of the parts of this definition is easy. 1. It
is the knowledge of God, and wisdom. John. 17.3. This is life eternal, that
they know thee to be the only very God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus
Christ. 2. 2 Righteousness.
It is righteousness. Luke 20.36. They are equal unto the Angels, 3 Joy. 4
Sufficiency in God.
and are the sons of God, since they are the children of the resurrection. 3.
It is joy. Ioh. 16.22. Your joy shall no man take from you. 4. It is
sufficiency in god. Revel. 21.22. The Lord god almighty and the Lamb are the
Temple of it: And the City has no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to
shine in it: for the glory of god did light it: and the Lamb is the light of
it. All those good things which we possess here shall then be perfect. 1. Cor.
13.10. When that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be
abolished. 5 Without interruption.
5. It shall not be interrupted. Revel. 21.4. God shall wipe away all tears
from their eyes. Luke 1.33. Of his kingdom shall be no end. Dan. 7.27. And
the kingdom, and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole
heaven, shall be given to the holy people of the most high, whose kingdom is
an everlasting kingdom, that is, which has neither beginning nor ending.

3 Everlasting life is that, which has a beginning, but is without end. In
this third sense also shall we enjoy everlasting life. Objection. Everlasting
life is to live everlastingly. But the wicked also shall be raised, and be
immortal, because they shall live eternally: Therefore the wicked shall have
everlasting life. Answer. By the name of everlasting life is not meant the
presence of the soul in the body, that is, the natural life: but this being
presupposed, there is further meant a spiritual life which the holy Ghost
woorketh by his proper function and office. Now with the natural life in the
wicked shall be joined, 1. A reiection from God. 2. A privation and want of
the knowledge and grace of God. 3. A perpetual and unutterable torment and
vexation. Their worm shall never die. There shall be weeping, and gnashing of
teeth. Here-by is understood that everlasting death is, The everlasting death
of the wicked.
and is so called, not because the reprobate, by once dyeng shall fulfill it,
but because they shall die perpetually, and shall feel perpetual torments.

2 Who gives everlasting life.
Everlasting life, the work of all three Persons.
GOD alone gives eternal life; and the Father gives it by the son and the
holy ghost. Of the Father it is said Ioh. 5.21. As the Father raises up the
dead, and quickneth them, so the son quickneth whom he will. In which place the
same is affirmed of the son also, as in like manner in these following. Ioh. 14.
In him was life. Isai. 9.6. The Father of eternity. John. 10.28. I give unto
them eternal life, that is, not by merit only, but also by power, and
working. Of the Holy Ghost likewise it is said, John 3.5. Except a man be
borne of water and the spirit, he can not enter into the kingdom of God. Romans
8.11. He that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal
bodies by his spirit dwelling in you. And this testimony is to be observed
for the confirmation of the Godhead of both. Objection. But the ministers also
give life: according to that of Paul, 1. Cor. 4.15. In Christ Jesus J have
begotten you through the Gospel. Answer. Christ and the holy Ghost give life
by their own power: the ministers are only instruments by whom Christ works
through the virtue of his spirit. Reply. But Christ gives life by a
communicated power: Therefore not by his proper power. Answer. He gives it by
a power communicated, but communicated from everlasting, as he was begotten
from everlasting. Ioh. 5.26. As the Father has life in himself, so likewise
has he given to the Son to have life in himself.

3 To whom everlasting life is given.
EVerlasting life is given to all the Elect, All the Elect, and they alone are
partakers of everlasting life.
and to them only. Joh. 10.28. I give unto them eternal life, that is, to my
sheep, who are his elect and chosen. John. 17.9. I pray for them: I pray not
for the world, but for them which thou have given me, for they are thine: and
verse 12. Those that thou gave me have I kept, and none of them is lost, but
the child of perdition. Again, faith and repentance are proper unto the
Elect only: but these are part of eternal life. Therefore eternal life
belongs to the Elect only. Romans 11.7. The Elect have obtained it, and the
rest have been hardened. We must observe in this place, whereas the question
is, To whom everlasting life is given, that it is better to answer, That
eternal life is given to the Elect, than to say, it is given unto the
converted. As they are elected, so the^ are but chosen to eternal life: as
they are converted, so they are in part admitted unto it, and begin to b^ put
in possession of it.
For conversion and faith are the beginning of eternal life: And to say,
Eternal life is given to the converted, were all one, as if you would say,
life is given to the living.

4 For what cause everlasting life is given.
THE impellent or motive cause of everlasting life given unto us, is the alone
free mercy of God. (For a good thing does communicate it self and make others
partakers of it) and his love toward mankind: God of his ^ree mercy gives
us for Christ's sake everlasting life, that we might praise and magnify the
same his mercy for ever.
And he will that everlasting life be given us, and himself gives the same
unto us, for the alone intercession and merit of Christ imputed unto us, by the
coming and interposing whereof gods mercy is more illustrated and manifested
than without it. But no work of man either foreseen in us, or present, is the
cause of this eternal life, whereunto notwithstanding we are brought by many
means. Before the beginning of eternal life, our works merit eternal death:
after the beginning thereof, all our works are effects thereof: and nothing
is cause of it self. The final cause, or end, for which eternal life is given
us, is, that the mercy of God might be acknowledged and magnified of us. Ephesians.
1.6. To the praise of the glory of his grace, wherewith he has made us
accepted in his beloved. For the same cause God gives us eternal life, for
which he chose us.

5 When everlasting life is given.
Everlasting life is begu^ here by conversion.
IN this life is given the beginning of eternal life; and that necessarily. For
unto whom life everlasting is not begun to be given here, that is, who
begins not here to feel a part of eternal life, to wit, faith, and
conversion: unto him life everlasting shall never be given after this life. 2. Corinthians. 5.2. Therefore we sigh desiring to be clothed with our house, which is
from heaven. Because that if we be clothed, we shall not be found naked. It is
consu^mated in the world to come, by glorification.
The consummation of everlasting life is after this life* for unto whom
everlasting life is begun to be given here, to them shall it be given
finished, complete and consummated. And of this consu^mation there are two
degrees: one, when the soul is presently carried into heaven; because by the
death of the body we are freed from all infirmity: the other degree is
greater, higher and more glorious, when in the resurrection of the bodies the
souls shall again be united to their bodies, because after the resurrection
we shall be made glorious, and shall see God even as he is. John 5.24. He that
hears my word, and believes in him that sent me, has everlasting life, and
shall not come into condemnation, but has passed from death to life. 1. John.
3.2. Now are we the Sons of GOD, but yet it does not appear what we
shall be: and we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him: for
we shall see him as he is.

6 How everlasting life is given unto us.
EVerlasting life is given unto us by the holy Ghost, God gives v^ everlasting
^i^^ by the outw^ ministry (...), and the ^warde mi^ of the spirit
and the holy Ghost gives it us in this life by the ministry of the word; by
the word he works in us the knowledge of God and his will: This knowledge
has following it a study and desire more and more to know God, and to live
according to the prescript of his will. It is given here unto infants, so that
they have an inclination to repentance and faith. But the consummation and
accomplishment of everlasting life shall be given us after this life
immediately. Now that it is here given us mediately by the word, is proved
by plain testimonies of Scripture. John. 6.68. Whither shall we go? (say the
Disciples) Thou have the words of life. 1. Corint. 4.15 Jn Christ Jesus J have
begotten you through the gospel. Romans 116. The gospel is the power of God unto
salvation to every one that believes. And this is the ordinary manner of
giving us this beginning of everlasting life, namely by the word mediately.
But there is another manner of giving the same unto infants, and by miracles.

7 Whether we can be assured in this life of everlasting life.
IN this life not only we may, Our assurance of everlasting life is
necessary and grounded upon sure reasons.
but we ought also to be assured and certain of everlasting life; otherwise
we shall never have it. For it is given to all the elect, and to them only. And
we may be certain of it by faith, even by a full persuasion of the good will
of God toward us: likewise by the beginning of true repentance, which is a
full purpose and intent to live according to gods commandments; lastly, by the
peace of conscience, by a desire of God, and by a joy and gladness in God.
This assurance and certainty is grounded on sure and strong reasons. 1. The
author of everlasting life is unchangeable, even GOD himself. 2. Gods election
is unchangeable. 3. Christ is heard in all things, which he desires of his
Father. But he prayed that his father would save all those whom he had given
him. 4. God will not have us to pray for good things necessary to salvation
with a condition, but simply. 2. Tim. 2.19. The foundation of God remains
sure, the lord knows who ar his. Ioh. 10.28. No man shall pluck my sheep out
of my hand. I give unto them eternal life: but it were not eternal life, if it
could be interrupted or broken off. Of the consummation of everlasting life we
must be assured by the beginning thereof. Romans 11.29. The gifts and calling
of God are without repentance. God is faithful: therefore as he has
begun, so also will he accomplish and end. Wherefore to doubt of the
continuance and consummation of everlasting life, is to overthrow the faith
and truth of god. Now of the beginning of eternal life we are assured chiefly
by a true faith, which withstandeth doubts, that is, which has a purpose to
resist the Devil, and cries, I believe Lord, help my unbelief. But this faith
cannot be without repentance, and therefore by an assured repentance we are
also assured of the beginning of everlasting life, and therefore withal of the
consummation thereof.

That which now has been spoken of this article does sufficiently declare,
what is, To believe everlasting life: namely, assuredly and certainly to be
persuaded, 1. That after this life there shall be also a life, wherein the
Church shall be glorified: and God magnified of her everlastingly. 2. That J
also am a member of this Church, and therefore partaker of everlasting life. 3.
That J also in this life have and enjoy the beginning of everlasting life.

OF JUSTIFICATION.
THIS doctrine Of justification, is one of the chief points of our faith, not
only because it treats of the chief and principal matters, but also
because this doctrine is most of all others called by heretics into
controversy. For there are two principal controversies between the Church and
Heretics: The first, Of the doctrine concerning God, the other, of this
doctrine of Justification, and either of these doctrines being overthrown,
the other points of our faith easily go to wrack. Wherefore we ought chiefly
to fence and strengthen our selves against heresies, in the doctrine concerning
God and justification.

The special questions.

1 What justice or righteousness is in general. 2 How manifold it is. 3 What
justice differs from justification. 4 What is our justice or righteousness. 5
How it is made ours. 6 Why it is made ours. 7 Why it is made ours by faith
only.
1 WHAT JUSTICE OR RIGHTEOUSNESS IN GENERAL IS.
A Definition so general of justice can scarce be given, as may agree both to
God and creatures, (even such as may agree to the furthest and highest kinds
of justice or righteousness, which are, Uncreate, and created righteousness)
except we will make a definition full of ambiguity. For uncreated justice or
righteousness is God himself, Uncreate Justice is God himself.
who is the very squire and rule of all justice. Created justice is an effect
of uncreate or divine justice in reasonable creatures. This created justice or
righteousness may be defined generally, in such sort as the definition shall be
alike common to all sorts thereof. Justice therefore or righteousness in
general (as it agrees to reasonable creatures) is a fulfilling of those laws
which belong unto reasonable creatures: Our created Justice, is our conformity
with Gods laws appertaining unto us.
or is the conformity or correspondence of reasonable creatures with the laws
appertaining and belonging unto them. It may be also defined on this wise:
Justice is a conformity with God, or with the law of God: Or, it is a
fulfilling of Gods law. (...).
For justice or righteousness is the observance of the law: (...).
as sin is the transgression of the law: and the name Righteousness is derived
from Right, which is the law it self: and conformity with the law is
righteousness it self. This we must know because we must be justified by the
fulfilling of the law: and we must understand that the law is not abolished,
but established, by the gospel. For the righteousness and justice of the Gospel
is the fulfilling of the law: but does not at all disagree from the law.
Object. He that is just and righteous is conformed and agreeable unto the law.
To justify is to make just. Therefore to justify is to make one agreeable
unto the law. Answer. All this is granted: that is either in himself to be
so, or in another. Now these are all one, the imputed righteousness or justice
of an other, the righteousness, of the Gospel, the righteousness of faith.
Wherefore to justify is, to assoile and absolve one from sin, for that justice
or righteousness, which either is in himself, or in an other. This signification
and meaning of the word is proved throughout the whole Epistle to the Romans:
It was imputed to him for righteousness.

2 How manifold Justice is.
Legal Justice.
Justice (we speak in general of created justice) is legal and Euangelical.
Legal justice is the fulfilling of the Law, performed by him, who is thereby
said to be just: Or, it is such a fulfilling of the Law, which one performs
by his own obedience: or, it is a conformity in the Law, which is in him also
who is called just. This legal justice either is in us, or in Angels, or in
Christ, as he is man, as an accident inherent in his subject. Euangelical
justice is also a fulfilling of the Law, but is not in him who is called thereby
just or righteous, but in another, and is only imputed unto him who is
thereof called just: This is christ's justice or righteousness performed for us;
or that ransom of the Son of God imputed unto us by faith. Evangelical
Justice, or the Justice of the Gospel.
It may be also defined briefly thus: Euangelical justice is a conformity
with the law performed by Christ, and imputed of God to us by faith. The legal
justice is performed either by the obedience of the law, or by punishment: For
the law necessarily requires one of these. That which is performed by the
obedience of the law, is either general or particular. The general, is an
observing of all the laws which belong unto us; or it is an obedience according
to all the laws unto us appertaining, 1. These. 4.11. Study to be quiet, and
to meddle with your own business.

General or Universal Justice. ^erfect Justice.
This general justice is of two sorts: perfect and imperfect. The perfect is an
external and internal obedience to all the laws belonging unto us. Or, it is a
perfect both inward and outward conformity with the law of God. Deuteronomy. 27.26.
Cursed be he that confirms not all the words of this law to do them. The
imperfect or begun justice, Imperfect Justice.
is a conformity begun only and imperfect, even such a justice as does not
do all things, or not after that manner, which the law requires. This
imperfect justice is also of two sorts; Philosophical Justice.
the one Philosophical, the other Christian. The Philosophical, is a
knowledge in the mind of Gods law and virtues, imperfect, obscure, and weak,
and whatsoever manner of purpose in the will and heart to do those things
which are right and honest, according to that imperfect knowledge: and a
directing and governing of their behavior and manners according to the laws.

Christian Justice.
The Christian, is regeneration, or a knowledge of God and his law, imperfect
indeed, yet more notable and perfect than the philosophical, and to be
perfected after this life: rising from faith and the love of God, kindled in
the hearts only of the regenerate, by the virtue and operation of the holy
ghost through the gospel, and joined with an earnest and serious inclination of
the will and heart to obey God according to all his commandments.

The particular justice, Particular Justice. Commutatiue Justice.
is that virtue which gives to every one his own: and is of two sorts,
Commutatiue or exchanging, and distributive. The Commutatiue observes
equality of things and prices in exchanges and contracts or bargains. The
Distributive, Distributive Justice.
observes a proportion in distributing offices, goods, rewards, punishments,
giving rewards and punishments agreeable and proportionable unto the persons.

There is also an other division of justice, namely, Justice of the person and
of the cause.
Of the person, and of the cause. Justice of the person, when a person is just
and agreeable to the law. Of the cause, when he has a just and good cause in
any controversy, whether the person himself be good or bad.

3 In what justice differs from justification.
Justice is the very conformity it self with the law, and the fulfilling of
the law, and the thing whereby we are just before god: which is the very
satisfaction of Christ performed on the Cross. Justification is the
application of that justice, What Justification is.
and by this application, the thing whereby we are just, even that justice and
satisfaction of Christ, is made ours: and except that be made ours, or applied
and imputed unto us, we cannot be just: as neither the wall is made white,
except whitenes be applied unto it. For even in like manner does justice differ
from justification or justifying, as whitenes from whitening, so application
and imputation are not all one: for imputation is not extended so far as
application. For God alone does impute: but we also do apply unto us.

Now Justification is divided in like sort as is Justice. Legal Justification.
For there is one Justification legal, which is a working of that conformity
with God, or with the law of God in us, when as we are regenerated. There is
another Justification Evangelical, which is an application of the Evangelical
Justice unto us, Evangelical Justification.
but not a transfusion of the qualities into us: or, it is an imputation of
another justice, which is without us, and an assoiling and absoluing of us in
judgment. Psalm. 143.2. In thy sight shall none that lives be justified.
Therefore that justice, whereby, being applied and imputed unto us, we are
justified, is not in us, but without us.

4 What is our justice.
Our righteousness is Christ's satisfaction, which consists in his whole
humiliation.
OUR Justice or righteousness, that is, the justice or righteousness of the
Gospel, whereby we are just in the sight of God, is not our conformity with
the Law: but it is Christ's satisfaction performed unto the Law for us, or the
punishment, which he sustained for us, and so his whole humiliation (that is,
his taking of flesh, his undertaking of servitude, penu^ie, ignominy, and
infirmity: his suffering of that bitter passion and death: all which he did
undergo for us, but willingly) and that humiliation and satisfaction freely
of God imputed unto us his faithful and believers. 1. Corinthians. 2.2. J esteemed
not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ and him crucified. Coloss.
2.10. Ye are complete in him. Romans 5.19. By the obedience of one shall many be
made righteous. Isai. 53.5.6. With his stripes we are healed. The Lord has
laid upon him the iniquity of us al. Now that Christ might perform
obedience and satisfy for us, it behooued him to be our Mediator, being by
himself just and holy. Heb. 7.26. For such an High Priest it became us to
have, holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than
the heavens. All these things are true perfectly and wholly in Christ. For he
has perfectly fulfilled the Law for us 1. by the holiness of his humane
nature. 2. Phil. 2.8.
by his obedience: for he became obedient unto the death, eue^ the death of the
cross: And the former fulfilling of the law, namely, the holiness of Christ's
humane nature, was requisite for the other, even for his obedience. This
obedience and satisfaction of Christ is our satisfaction, and our proper
justice, for which we please god, for which we are received into favor with God
the Father, and which is imputed unto us. That former fulfilling of the Law is
indeed imputed also unto us, namely the humiliation and justice or
righteousness of Christ's humane nature, that we may be reputed holy before
god: but this holiness of Christ is imputed unto us for his obedience or
satisfaction sake: because he satisfied for us gods justice, in susteining
eternal punishment and pains, which we should have sustained everlastingly.
Hence is it, that the effusion of Christ's blood (as being the complement and
consummation of Christ's satisfaction) is only said to be our justice and
righteousness. 1. Ioh. 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from al
sin, that is, not only from that which is past, but also from that which is to
come.

Objection. The sins for which Christ has satisfied cannot hurt, but christ
has satisfied for sins past and to come. Therefore sins past and to come
cannot hurt us. Answer. Now knitte and force this reason, that we may see
whither it tends. Reply. That which hurts not we need not to eschew:
sins to come hurt not: therefore we need not beware of sins to come.
Auns. 1. The Minor is false: For god is offended with sins, which is the
greatest hurt: and further, sins bereave us of that conformity with God, and
purchase bodily pains unto the faithful. But we are to distinguish between
these questions. 1. How a reasonable creature may be just before god. 2. H^w
man, being a sinner, may be just before god. 3. Whether a reasonable creature
may merit or deserve ought at gods hands. To the first question, we answer,
That a reasonable creature may be just before God by the conformity with the
law inherent in him, as blessed men and Angels are just. To the second, That
man, being a sinner, is just by the imputation only of Christ's merit: and of
this question is our speech, when we speak of justification. To the third,
That no reasonable creature can deserve ought at gods hands. Luke 17.10. When
ye have done all, say, We are unprofitable servants. For neither is Christ's
obedience verily any merit, in this respect, as if any good came to God by it,
but in respect of the dignity of the person, because it was Christ that
suffered, it is called merit. But a man, which is a sinner, cannot be just
before God. 1. Because before his justification his works are corrupt. 2.
Also after his justification the works of a man, which is a sinner, are
imperfect. 3. And when they are perfect, as in the life to come they shall be,
yet can we not satisfy for the sins past: for we owe those works, when we
do them.

5 How Christ's satisfaction is made our justice and righteousness:
THIS question is adioined, because it seems absurd that we should be
justified by that which is another man's, Christ's satisfaction made ours two
ways. 1 By God imputing it or applyeng it unto us.
and not ours. The satisfaction or justice of Christ is made ours, or applied
unto us, two ways, that is, by a double application. The former application is
Gods, who in respect of that fulfilling of the Law performed by christ,
accepts us, and applies the same unto us; that is, he imputes it, no less
than if we had never sinned, or at least had paid and suffered sufficient
punishment for our sins. For albeit to justify signifies to make just, yet
in the Church it signifies another thing, and is taken in another sense. Or
god does apply it, when he imputes the fulfilling of the Law performed by
Christ unto us, even as if it were performed by us, neither will at all punish
us. But to impute, is, to accept christ's satisfaction, performed to this end,
that it might be our justice and righteousness. 2 By our selves, applyeng it
unto our selves.
We then also apply unto us the fulfilling of the Law performed by Christ,
when we are steadfastly persuaded, that God does impute, apply and give it unto
us, and for it reputeth us for just, absoluing us from al guilt. Without this
application the former is not at all: and this latter is also from God. For God
first imputes unto us Christ's satisfaction; then he engendereth faith in us,
whereby we may apply the same unto us. Whence also it appears, that Gods
application does go before, and is the cause of our application, which is of
faith; albeit his is not without ours; as christ also says, Ioh. 15.16. Ye
have not chosen me, but I have chosen you. Moreover we may then be assured
and certain that the righteousness or satisfaction of Christ is imputed unto
us of God, When we may be assured of Christ's satisfaction imputed unto us.
when we earnestly desire the grace of God, and feel the holy ghost to work
in us a true confidence in the Mediator of the faithful. That which we have
now spoken of both applications, both gods, and ours, does manifestly show
what is meant in this place by justifying: Which is, that, to justify, is not,
to make one just who is unjust: but to repute him for just and righteous who is
unjust, and to absolve the unjust and unrighteous from al guilt, and not to
punish him, and this for another justice and righteousness imputed by faith
unto us. Objection. But to justify is to make one just who is unjust.
Answer. This indeed is true, in general, but in the Church it is taken
otherwise. For the legal justification, is a woorking of justice and
righteousness in us, as in one subject. But the justification of the gospel,
whereof we speak here, is a far diverse thing. For the subject of that
justice and righteousness, which is made ours by the Gospels justification,
that is, whereby being appplied by faith unto us we are reputed just and
righteous, is Christ himself: and we are only the object of this justice,
and the matter about which it is conuersaunt, but the matter wherein it is
inherent is Christ only.

6 Why Christ's satisfaction is made ours.
THE perfect fulfilling of the Law performed by Christ for us is made ours or
applied unto us, The cause of Christ's sat^sfaction applied and imputed, is in
God only, not in us.
through the alone and free mercy of God, as who from everlasting did
predestinate us, and freely choose us, to whom he might apply of his mere grace
by faith that justice and righteousness at his appointed time. Wherefore al
imagination and affirmation of merit is to be taken away, as which fights
with the grace of God, and is a denial of his divine grace. For the grace and
mercy of GOD is the only cause of both applications. He of his goodness
infinite and passing measure, applies Christ's merit unto us, and makes that
we also may apply the same unto us. The cause therefore, why this application
is wrought, is in God alone: but not at al in us, that is, it is neither any
thing foreseen in us, neither also our apprehension and receiving of this
justice. For all the gifts and graces which are in us, are effects of the
application of Christ's merit: and therefore that merit of Christ is no way
applied unto us for the works sake which we do, but this is done, as the
Apostle teaches Ephesians. 1.5. according to the good pleasure of his will.
Whereupon also it is said, 1. Cor. 4 7. What have thou that thou have not
received? And Ephesians. 2.8. By grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of
your selves: it is the gift of God. And here it is to be observed, that, to be
saved by the grace of God, and to be justified by faith, are not all one: for
that signifies the impellent or motive cause in God: this the instrumental
cause in us, whereby we apprehend the righteousness of Christ imputed unto us.
Christ is in respect of our justification, 1. As the subject and matter wherein
our justice is. 2. As the impellent cause, because he obtains it. 3. As the
chief efficient, because he together with his Father does justify us: and 4.
Because he gives us faith whereby we believe and apprehend it. The mercy of
god is, as the impellent cause thereof in GOD. Christ's satisfaction is the
formal cause of our justification, giving the very life and being unto it.

7 Why Christ's satisfaction is made ours by faith only.
Faith the apprehensiue instrument of Christ's satisfaction.
CHRIST'S satisfaction is made ours by faith alone: 1. Because faith is the
only instrument which apprehends Christ's satisfaction. 2. Because the proper
act and operation of faith, and not any other act of virtue, is the application
or apprehension of Christ's merit: yea, faith is nothing else than the
acceptance it self, or apprehension of another justice, and of the merit of
Christ. 3. It is done by faith only: because we are justified by the object of
faith only, to wit, by the merit of Christ alone, besides which there is no
justice of ours, nor any part thereof. For we are justified freely for
Christ's sake, without works: There is nothing which is our justice and
righteousness before God, neither in whole, nor in part, besides Christ's
merit: only by receiving and believing another justice, and not by working
we are justified. Not by working, nor by meriting, but by apprehension and
acceptance only we are just and righteous. Wherefore we are justified by faith
only; by faith, as Saint Paul speaks, as by a mean and instrument: but not
for faith, as the Papists say, who will admit both these manners of speaking, as
if faith were indeed the application, whereby we apply unto our selves
Christ's justice, but were also besides a certain work or merit, whereby we
merit to be just. Now the exclusive particle (only) is added, that
whatsoever merit of ours may be excluded and faith understood with relation
and respect to Christ's merit, which is our justice: That so the sense may be:
Christ's merit justifies us, and not faith it self: that which is
apprehended does justify us, and not the instrument which does apprehend.
Nevertheless, this proposition, We are justified by faith, may be
understood also without relation, to wit, we are justified by faith, as by a
mean. But this proposition of the Apostle, Faith was imputed to him for
righteousness, and other the like are necessarily to be understood with a
relation unto Christ's merit and justice. Faith was imputed unto him for
righteousness, as faith is the apprehending instrument of righteousness
apprehended, faith being as it were the hand wherewith the Justice of Christ
is received: and by this means faith is wholly excluded from that which is
received by faith; unto which nature notwithstanding of faith it were
repugnaunt, That For faith we should be just and righteous. For if for faith;
then faith were now no longer an acceptance of another righteousness, but
were a merit and cause of our own justice, neither should receive another
satisfaction, which now it should have no need of.

Objections against this Doctrine of Justification.
1 Objection. We are justified by faith. Faith is a work. Therefore we are
justified by the works thereof, that is, by the merit of faith. Answer.
First the consequence of this reason is denied, because more is in the
conclusion than in the premises: of which premises this only follows. That
by that work we are justified, as by an instrument or mean, not as an
impellent cause. Now it is one thing to be justified by faith, that is, to be
justified, (faith only being the mean to receive it) by the blood of Christ:
and it is another thing to be justified for faith, that is, for the merit of
faith. 2. The kind of affirmation is diverse: for in the Mayor, faith is
understood with relation to Christ's merit, in the Minor it is taken
absolutely and properly.

2 Objection. Justice is that whereby we are formallie or essentiallie just.
Faith is justice. Therefore we are by faith formallie and essentiallie just.
Answer. The consequence of this reason is to be denied, because the kind of
affirmation is diverse. For the Mayor is meant properly; but the Minor Per
Metalepsin.
figuratively, one thing being taken for another, faith for the object of
faith, which is Christ's merit and justice.

3 Objection. Faith is imputed for righteousness, as Paul says. Therefore for
faith we are righteous. Answer. This is also figuratively understood: because
by faith, which is imputed for righteousness, is correlatiuely understood the
object of faith, unto which faith has relation. For Christ's merit, which is
apprehended by faith, is properly our justice, and this merit of Christ is the
formal cause of our justice. The efficient of our justice is God, applying
that merit of Christ unto us. The instrumental cause of our justice is faith.
And therefore this proposition* We are justified by faith, being legallie
understood with the Papists, is not true, but blasphemous: but being taken
correlatiuely, that is, Euangelically, with relation to Christ's merit, it is
true. For the correlatiue of faith is the merit of Christ, which faith also as
a ioint-relatiue or correlatiue respects, and as an instrument apprehends.

4 Objection. That which is not alone, does not justify alone: Faith is not
alone. Therefore faith does not justify alone. Answer. Here is a fallacy
of composition, the reason being deceitfully composed. For the word alone,
is composed and joined in the conclusion with the predicate, which is the
word justify: but in the premises or antecedent, it is joined with the
verb is. The Argument is true, if in the conclusion alone be not sundred from
the verb is, or from being, which is the participle of is, but be joined with
it, on this wise: Faith therefore does not justify alone, that is, being
alone. For if it be so understood, the argument is of force: for faith is never
without works as her effects. Faith justifies alone, but is not alone, when
it justifies, having works accompanying it, as effects of it, but not as
ioint-causes with it of justification.

5 Object. That which is required in those who are to be justified, without the
same faith does not justify. Good works are required in those who are to be
justified. Therefore without good works faith does not justify. Auns. The
particle without is ambiguously and doubtfully taken: for in the Mayor it is
taken thus; Faith without it, that is, being without it, does not justify: So
that the same fallacy is in this objection which was in the former. The Minor
also of this objection is more at large to be explaned. In them who are to be
justified more things are required, but not after the same manner. Faith is
required in them who are to be justified, as an instrument apprehending
another justice. Good works are required in them, not as a cause of
justification, but as effects of faith: and as it were a testimony of their
faith and thankefulnes. For faith is not without her fruit. Now to apply the
merit of Christ is the proper act of faith, but other good works are not so,
though they also proceed from faith: Wherefore also the apprehension of
Christ's merit is after another manner required in them that are to be
justified, than are other good works. For faith with this her proper act
(without which faith cannot be considered) is required as a necessary
instrument, whereby we apply Christ's merit unto us. But good works are not
required, that by them we may apprehend Christ's merit, and much less that for
them we should be justified: but that by them we may show our faith, which
without good works is dead, and is not known but by them. Whatsoever is
necessarily coherent with the cause, that is not therefore necessarily required
to the proper effect of that cause: but good works, although they are
necessarily coherent and joined with faith, yet are they not necessary for the
apprehension of Christ's merit, that we should over and besides faith, by them
also apply the same unto us.

6 Objection. The Messiah brings everlasting justice and righteousness.
Jmputed righteousness is not eternal. Therefore we are not thereby justified.
Answer. It is said that Christ's righteousness shall be an everlasting
righteousness; but after a diverse manner. For in the life to come we shall
be just after another manner, than in this life. For although we shall then be
just by the same righteousness, even by the righteousness of Christ imputed unto
us: yet with this shall also the legal justice and righteousness be continued,
so that then also by the legal righteousness we shall be perfectly just,
because now only we are, as concerning that, but in part and beginning just.
Each justice, both the justice of the Law, and the justice of the Gospel, is
eternal, by continuation: And the justice and righteousness of the Gospel,
that is, the justice of Christ imputed unto us, is eternal by continuation of
the imputation: The justice of the Law is eternal by continuation of good
works, even as it is continued by good works, first, and beginning in this
life, until at length after this life it be perfected, and become perfect,
and so continue to al eternity.

7 Objection. Knowledge does not justify. Faith is a knowledge. Therefore
faith does not justify. Answer. Knowledge alone, does not justify. But
justifying faith is not a knoweledge only, but also a confidence and sure
persuasion, whereby as a mean we apply Christ's merit unto us. And
furthermore, Knowledge and this sure persuasion are much different. Knowledge
is in the understanding: but this is in the will. Therefore a sure persuasion
or confidence is not only a knoweledge of a thing: but also a will and purpose
of doing or applieng that which we know, or of resting in it, so that we are
thereby secure, and take joy of heart therein.

8 Objection. Saint James says, cap. 2.24. Ye see then how that of works a
man is justified, and not of faith only. Answer. 1. He speaks of that
justice, whereby we are justified through our works before men, that is, are
approved just, or are found to be justified: but he speaks not of that
justice whereby we are justified before God, that is, whereby we are reputed
of God just for unjust. For he says in the same chapter: Show me thy faith by
thy works, and J will show thee my faith by my works. 2. He speaks not of
a true or lively faith, but of a dead faith, which is without works.

9 Objection. Evil works condemn. Therefore good works justify. Ans. 1.
These contraries are not matches: for our evil works are perfectly evil; our
good works, are imperfectly good. 2. Although our good works were perfectly
good, yet should they not deserve eternal life, because they are debts. Unto
evil works a reward is given by order of justice: unto good works not so,
because we are obliged and bound to do them. For the creature is obliged unto
his creator, neither may he of the contrary bind god unto him by any works or
means to benefit him.

10 Object. Saint John says 1. Ioh. 3.7. He that does righteousness is
righteous. Therefore not he that believes. Ans. 1. He is righteous before me^,
that is, by doing righteousness, he declares himself righteous to others: but
before god we are righteous, not by doing righteousness, but by believing. 2.
He shows there not how we are righteous, but what the righteous are, when he
says, that he that is regenerated, is also justified.

11 Objection. Christ says, Luke 7.47. Many sins are forgiven her: because
she loved much. Therefore good works are the cause of justification. Ans. 1.
Christ here reasons from the latter to the former, from the effect which
comes after, to the cause which goes before. Many sins are forgiven her:
Therefore she loved much: and because there is a great feeling in that woman
of the benefit, it must needs therefore be that the benefit is great, and
many sins are forgiven her. That this is the meaning of Christ's words,
appears by the parable which he there uses. 2. Not every thing that is the
cause of consequence in reason, is also the cause of the thing it self which
follows in that consequence of reason. Wherefore it is a fallacy of the
consequent, if it be concluded, Therefore for her love many sins are forgiven
her. For the particle (because) which Christ uses, does not always signify
the cause of the thing following: It follows not, The Sun is risen, because
it is day: Therefore the day is cause of the rising of the Sun: the contrary
rather is true.

12 Objection. That which is not in the Scripture, is not to be taught, or
retained. That we are justified by faith only, is not in the Scripture,
neither the words themselves, nor the sense of the words: Therefore it is not
to be retained. Answer. To the Mayor we say, That which is not in Scripture,
neither in words nor in sense, is not to be retained. But, that we are
justified by faith only, is contained in Scripture, as touching the sense
thereof: For we are said to be justified freely, Romans 3.27. Gal. 2.16. Ephesians.
2.8, 9. Tit. 3.5. 1. John. 1.7.
without the works of the Law: by faith, without merit: Not of any
righteousness which we have done: The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from
al sin. Therefore no woork shall be meritorious: If no work, Therefore are
we justified by faith only apprehending Christ's merit. Wherefore we are
necessarily to retain the particle (only) 1. That all merit either of faith
or our works may be removed from this woork of our justification. 2. That it
may be showed that faith, not the merit of faith, is necessarily required to
justice, because the justice or merit of Christ is given by faith only, and
by this mean alone we receive that justice and righteousness.

13 Objection. Jf Christ has satisfied for us, we shall not be justified
freely, but for merit and desert. Answer. We are justified freely in
respect of us, not freely in respect of Christ, whom the saving of us cost full
dearly.

14 Objection. Reward presupposes merit; So that where reward is, there is
also merit. For reward and merit are correlatiues, whereof if one be put,
the other is put also: But everlasting life is proposed as a reward for good
works; therefore also the merit of good works is everlasting life. Answer.
The Mayor is sometimes true as concerning creatures, as when men may merit or
deserve of men. But neither always among men does it follow that there is
merit, where there is reward. For men also oftentimes give rewards not of
merit or desert. Now it is improperly said of God, that he proposes eternal
life unto our works, as a reward: for we can merit nothing at Gods hands by
our works. But for this cause especially does God say, that he will give a
reward to our works, thereby to show that good works are grateful and
pleasing unto him.

15 Objection. That which is not required unto justification is not necessary
to be done. Good works are not required unto justification. Therefore it is
not necessary to do them. Answer. The Mayor is false, if it be meant
generally: because we ought to do good works in token of thankefulnes. But
if the Mayor be meant particularly, then nothing can be concluded, the
premises being mere particular: now good works are as an effect without
which the cause, to wit faith, cannot be. Therefore good works verily are
necessary, but not as any cause or merit of justice.

16 Objection. He that is justified by two things, is not justified by one
only. But we, besides that we are justified by faith, are justified also by the
merit and obedience of Christ: therefore not by faith only. Answer. He that
is justified by two things, is not justified by one only, that is, after one
and the same manner. But we are justified by two things, after a diverse
manner. For we are justified by faith, as by an instrument apprehending
justice: but by the merit of Christ, as by the formal cause of our justice.

17 Object. Doctrine which makes men profane, is not to be delivered. But this
doctrine, that we are justified by works, makes men profane. Therefore it is
not to be delivered. Ans. If it should so fall out with any man, it were but an
accident. Reply. Even those things which fall out to be evils by an accident
are to be eschued: But this doctrine makes men by an accident evil: Therefore
it is to be eschued. Answer. Those things which fall out to be evils by an
accident are to be eschued, if there remain no greater cause, for which they are
not to be omitted, which by an accident make men evil. But we have greater
causes, why this doctrine ought to be delivered. 1. The commandment of God.
2. Our own salvation.

18 Objection. Christ has brought us eternal justice. This applied justice is
not eternal: Therefore this is not our justice, but God himself is our
justice. Answer. The Lord is our justice, that is, our iustifier. But that
our applied justice is eternal, has been showed before; because the imputation
thereof is continued to all eternity. That justice also of the Law which is
begun in us in this life, shall be continued, and perfected in the life to
come. But that justice which is God himself is not in us: because so God
should be an accident to his creature, and become justice in man. For justice
and virtue are things created in us, not the essence of God. Moreover
Osiander, who obiecteth this, does not discern the cause from the effect. As
we live not, or are wise by the essence of God (for this is all one, as to say,
that we are as wise as God) so also we are not just by the essence of God.
Wherefore nothing is more impious than to say, That the essential justice of
the creator is the justice of the creatures: for thereof it would follow, that
we have the justice of God, yea the very essence of God. The cause must be
discerned from the effect, increate justice from created justice.

19 Objection. Where sin is not, there is no place for remission or
imputation. Jn the life to come sin shall not be. Therefore no place there
for remission or imputation. Answer. In the life to come shall not be
remission of any sin then present, but the remission which was granted in this
life shall continue and endure for ever. And that conformity also which we shall
have with God in the life to come, shall be an effect of this imputation.

20 Objection. Ten Crowns are part of a hundred Crowns in payment of a debt.
Therefore good works also may be some part of our justice. Answer. There is
a dissimilitude: because ten Crowns are a whole part of an hundred Crowns.
But our works are not a whole and perfect part.

21 Objection. It is said that Phinees work and deed was imputed unto him for
righteousness. Answer. The meaning of the place is; That God did approve his
work: but not, that he was justified by that work.

Why we are justified by christ's merit only.
We are justified by the merit of Christ only, 1. For his glory; that his
sacrifice might not be extenuated and made of less value 2. For our own
comfort; that we may be assured, that our justice does not depend upon our own
works; but upon the sacrifice of Christ only: otherwise we should leese it a
thousand times.

Why we are not Justified partly by faith, and partly by works. Gal. 3.10.
We are justified not partly by faith, and partly by works, 1. Because works are
imperfect, and therefore our justice also should be then imperfect. Cursed is
every man that continues not in all things which are written in the book of
the law to do them. 2. Although they were perfect, yet are they due and debt:
So that we cannot satisfy for an offense past by them. When ye have done all
that ye are commanded, say, we are unprofitable servants. 3. They are Gods
works, who works them in us. 4. They are temporary, neither have any
proportion with eternal blessings. 5. They are effects of justification;
therefore no cause. 6. They are excluded, that we might not have, whereof to
glory. 7. If they were part of our justification, our conscience should be
destitute of stable and certain comfort. 8. Christ should have died in vain.
9. We should not have the same way to salvation. 10. Christ should not be a
perfect Savior.

Why our works are imperfect, and therefore cannot merit.
Now our works are imperfect, 1. Because we omit many things which we should
do, and do many things which we should not do. 2. Because we blend and
mingle evil with that good which we do; that is, we do good, but we do it
ill. The things are good which we do, but the manner after which we do
them is not good.

OF SACRAMENTS.
THE Sacraments are a part of Ecclesiastical ministry. And as touching
Ecclesiastical ministry the questions are, 1. What is the use of the
ministry. 2. What are the parts thereof. 3. In what those parts agree and
accord. 1. The chief and last use of the ministry of the Church is, that we
being brought to Christ, may be confirmed and assured of Gods will, that is,
that it teach us the will of God, exhort us to embrace Gods blessings and
benefits, and ascertaine us of the continuance of the same. 2. The parts of
the ministry are the Sacraments, and the word. 3. The Sacraments so accord
and agree with the word, that whatso^uer is promised us in the word, of the
obteining of our salvation by Christ, the same the sacraments, as signs and
seals, annexed to the word as it were unto a Charter or letters patent,
confirm unto us more and more, thereby to help and relieve our infirmity.
Whereby also it is apparent, that the chief use of the sacraments to, is, in
respect of God, the confirmation of our faith, like as also the ministers
themselves, whatsoever they do in respect of their ministry, that they
especially do, to declare and confirm gods will unto us. Objection. It is
said, That the spirit and the Word work faith in us, and the sacraments
nourish it being wrought. These three therefore differ nothing one from an
other. Answer. First, The Holy Ghost works and confirms faith in us, as
the efficient cause thereof, the Word and sacraments as Instrumental causes. 2.
The Holy Ghost also can work faith in us without them: But the Word and
Sacraments without the holy Ghost can work nothing. 3. The holy ghost
wheresoever he dwells, is effectual in woorking: The word and Sacraments are
not so. These things briefly were first to be spoken in general concerning the
ministry.

It remains, that we now in few words entreat Of the Sacraments, which are
the other part of the ministry of the Church. The right and direct method of
interpreting this doctrine of the Sacraments, requires, that first we speak
of the Sacraments in general. And this way may we not unfitly entreat in
special of the Supper and Baptism, to wit, if we take in declaring each
Sacrament in special, the same questions, and that course and order of the same
questions, which we must observe and follow concerning the Sacraments in
general: and lastly, if we apply those testimonies which speak of the
Sacraments in general, to the handling and declaring of the Sacraments in
special.

The chief Questions concerning the Sacraments.

1 What Sacraments are. 2 What are the ends of Sacraments. 3 Jn what Sacraments
differ from Sacrifices. 4 Jn what they agree with the Word, and in what they
differ from it. 5 How the Sacraments of the old and new Testament agree. 6 What
Sacramental union is. 7 What the things differ from their signs. 8 What forms
of speaking of the Sacraments are usual to the Church and Scripture. 9 What is
the lawful use of the Sacraments. 10 What the wicked receive in the use
thereof. 11 How many Sacraments there are of the new Testament.
1 WHAT SACRAMENTS ARE.
The original of the word, Sacrament.
THAT we may know what Sacraments properly are, the name it self of Sacrament
is first to be considered. Among the ancient Romans this word, Sacrament,
signified a solemn form of an oath taken in war, which they called a
military Sacrament, so called of Sacrando, that is, of sacring or consecrating
them, because by that oath every one was consecrated or destined to this
captain, and not to any other to serve him. Hereof it is that some will have
these ceremonies, instituted by God, therefore to be so called, for that as
soldiers did oblige and bind themselves by that military Sacrament unto
their captain, so we bind our selves unto our captain Christ, by a solemn
oath, in the presence of god, Angels and men. This truly is not unapt or
unmeet metaphor: but yet I think rather that the original of this name came
from the old Latin Translations, in which wheresoever the word mystery is
used in the new Testament, for the same they commonly in Latin put the word
Sacramentum. Now mystery comes from a Greek verb, (...), which signifies,
to institute, instruct, or initiate one in holy matters, or matters of
religion. But that Greek verb, (...), is derived from another which is, (...),
which signifies to shut, because (as Eustathius says) they, who were
initiated or entered in holy rites, were to shut their mouth, and not to utter
those things which were secret. Now a mystery is said to be, either a secret
thing it self, or the sign of a secret thing, or that which has a secret
signification, which none understand but they who are initiated in holy rites.
By a sign, we understand an external and corporal thing and action, or a
ceremony instituted and ordained by God, which betokens a certain internal
thing and spiritual. Which the Grecians call a mystery; and is otherwise
called of Divines a Sacrament. And some such signs god always would have to
be extant in his Church, whereby the good will of God toward men might be
recorded and made known, that men of the other side might declare and show
their faith toward God, and other duties of piety and godliness. Sacraments
therefore are so called mysteries, because they have a secret signification,
which none understand but they who are initiated and instructed concerning the
substance of sacred matters, or the points of Christian Religion.

Having seen now what the name of Sacrament signifies, it rests, that we
consider the thing it self, and define what Sacraments are. The definition
whereof is this. Sacraments are sacred signs and seals object to our eyes,
The Definition of sacraments.
ordained and instituted by God, that by them he might the more declare and
seal the promise of his gospel unto us.

The parts of this definition are in number three: The first part apperteineth
to the kind of Sacraments, the latter two to their difference. To the kind,
whereof they are, it apperteineth, that they are sacred signs and seals, that
is, divine, The sacraments are sacred seals.
and signifieng or betokening sacred things, such as belong to gods worship and
the salvation of men. A sign and a seal differ one from the other, as a
general thing from a thing more special. For every seal is a sign, but not
every sign a seal. A seal certifieth and confirms a thing: A sign only
shows it. A sign is a thing signifieng somewhat else than that which it
shows to the senses: or, a sign is that, whereby the understanding
understands some things else, besides the sign it self. So words are the
signs of things. Moreover signs are of two sorts: some are only
signifieng, others are confirming also, that is, such signs, as whereby we
reason and conclude also of the thing which they signify, neither only
understand by them, what they signify, but also argue and reason from them, so
that we are not left in doubt or uncertain, whether that be true or false,
which they signify. Sacraments therefore serve in the same steed, that
pledges do: for both they signify that there is some thing promised unto
thee, and withal they assure and confirm the same unto thee, in regard whereof
it is also added, that they are seals. Now these signs and seals are called
sacred and holy, because they are given us of God. For holy and sacred things
are of two sorts, 1. Those things which God performs unto us. 2. Those
things which we perform unto God. These signs are said to be object to our
eyes, that is, visible: because they ought to be such, seeing they are to
signify things invisible. Moreover they must be such, because they must be
stays and props of faith, and be perceived by the outward sense, that the
inward sense may thereby be moved. For that which thou see not, is no sign.
And he that makes a sign to be invisible, does imply a contradiction, and
speaks contraries. For not the signs signifieng, but the things signified are
invisible. Whence it is, that the ancient writers define a sacrament thus: A
sacrament is a visible sign of invisible grace.

By the sacraments God seals unto us his promise.
To the difference of sacraments (whereby they have their several being as it
were, and are different from other sacred things) appertain these two
properties. 1. That they are ordained and instituted by God 2. That they are
instituted to this end, that God may by them seal and assure unto us his
promise. And that these signs were instituted of God alone, it is certain.
For as God alone pronounces concerning his will, and teaches us the same, and
gives us his promise of grace; so he alone assures and confirms this
promise unto us by his sacraments. Wherefore God alone has authority to
institute and ordain a sacrament. And this institution of sacraments
Contains two things. God only may ordain a sacrament.
1. The appointing and commanding of the rite and ceremonies: 2. The promise of
grace annexed to this rite, whereby God promises that he will give the thing
signified unto such as lawfully and rightly use the sign. And these things
are proper to God alone. For as the receiving into grace and favor, and
remission of sins belongs to god alone: So also does the promise thereof.
And as god alone instituteth and appoints unto himself his public
worship, so he alone is able to confirm unto us by his public worship, and
ministry, and by his sacraments, the promise of grace, that is, the promise
of receiving all blessings and benefits necessary to salvation, which are
signified and confirmed by the ceremonies and rites of sacraments. Wherefore
mention is also made of the promise in the definition of sacraments, that so
that difference of sacraments may be the better perceived and discerned:
because god has given to men testimonies also of other things. This promise of
grace the scripture calls also the promise of the Gospel: because god does
especially and chiefly in the gospel promise it unto us. And further he
declares the same being promised in the gospel, and shows it more clearlie
by sacraments: and this, by reason of the analogy, proportion and similitude,
which the signs have with those things which are signified by those
sacramental signs. For as a similitude declares and explaneth that whereof it
is a similitude, so the sacraments declare that, whereof they are sacraments.
And as a true similitude is not understood, except the analogy of the
similitude be understood: so neither are the sacraments; except we understand
the analogy and proportion which they have with the thing signified. Neither
does god by his sacraments only declare the promise of the gospel, but also
seals the same unto us. 1. Because god when he speaks with us, whether it
be by his Word, or by a sign, is always alike true. And therefore he
assures and makes us certain of his will, both by his word and by his
sacraments. 2. Because sacraments are seals and pledges annexed to the
promise, which who so uses rightly, that is with true faith and repentance;
unto him those pledges and seals seal and confirm most assuredly, that he
shall be partaker of the things themselves signified, which are spiritual.

2 What are the ends of Sacraments.
THE chief and principal end of sacraments is contained in their
definition, namely, 1 Sacraments are ordained to be seals of gods covenant.
to be signs of the covenant, that is, that God may testify that he does
in a lawful and right use of them bestow the thing promised, and so may
confirm our faith, instruct us by his Sacraments, and by them exhort us to
receive and embrace the blessings purchased by Christ, and further seal by
those sacraments these benefits and blessings of christ unto us; (and this, 1.
Because sacraments are signs. 2. Because they are pleadges having a promise:)
and lastly that by these signs and pleadges of Gods favor toward us, the
holy Ghost may effectually move our hearts, no less, than by the word.

The second end, is the distinguishing of the church from Paynims and al other
sects whatsoever. 2 To distinguish the Church from others.
For God will have his Church to be beheld in the woorld, and to be known by
these sacred signs, as Soldiers are known by their military tokens, and
sheep by those marks which their shepherd seareth in the^. He wills the Jews
to be circumcised, and Christians to be baptized, he interdicteth aliantes and
strangers, and excludes them from eating of the Paschal Lamb. God will have his
kingdom discerned from the Synagogue of Satan, for these two causes. 1. For
his own glories sake. 2. For our comfort and salvation. For as he will not
have himself shuffled and mingled with Idols: So neither will he have his
people shuffled and mingled with the kingdom of the Devil.

3 To profess and testify our thankfulness.
The third end, is the profession and testification of our thankefulnes and
duty toward God, which is that bond, whereby we are obliged unto Christ to
be his people, as he is our God, to show true repentance, to believe in him,
and to receive of him his benefits offered unto us.

4 To propagate and maintain the doctrine.
The fourth is, the propagation and maintenance of the doctrine: because God will
not have the use of his Sacraments to be without the word and explication
thereof.

5 To give an occasion to the younger to enquire and learn the things by them
signified.
The fifth is, an occasion thereby given to the younger sort to enquire what these
things mean, and so an occasion also of explicating and preaching the benefits
of Christ unto them. As also the Lord says unto his people. Exodus 13.14. When
thy son shall ask thee to morrow saying, what is this? Thou shall then say
unto him; With a mighty hand the Lord brought us out of Egypt, out of the
house of bondage.

6 To be the bonds of mutual Charity.
The sixth and last end is, that they may be the bonds of mutual dilection and
love; because they who are entered into an association or confederacy with
Christ the head of the Church, ought not to be at difference among themselves.
1. Cor. 12.13. By one spirit are we all baptized into one body. In like
manner the Sacraments are the bonds of public meetinges and congregations in
the Church, 1. Cor. 11.33. When ye come together to eat, tarry one for
another. 1. Cor. 10.17. For we that are many, are one bread and one body,
because we are all partakers of one bread. Ephesians. 4.5. One God, one Faith, etc.
But we can not settle among us this communion, neither maintain and continue
it being once settled, neither profitablie annunciate and show forth the death
of the Lord, as long as we dissent and jar among our selves contentiously
about the institution of the Sacraments. The Sacraments are pledges of that
communion which Christians have first with christ, and then between themselves.

3 Jn what Sacraments differ from sacrifices.
WE must hold and observe a difference between Sacrifices and Sacraments,
Sacraments and sacrifices differ in their chief end
that we may know what to do, when we come unto them. Now they differ in the
principal and chief end. For sacraments are only ceremonies. Sacrifices may be
ceremonies and moral works also, as the sacrifices of thanksgiving are our
works toward God, whereby we yield due obedience and honor unto God; such
are the sacrifices of praise and thankfulness. A sacrament, is gods work
toward us, wherein he gives some thing, to wit, the signs and the things
signed; and wherein he testifies of his offering and bestowing his benefits
upon us. Or the distinction between them may be given thus: A sacrifice is a
woork, in which we yield some obedience and worship unto God. But a sacrament
is a work, in which GOD gives somewhat unto us: First, outward signs;
Secondly, Things signified by them. The same things may be sacrifices and
sacraments.
A sacrament and a sacrifice may be sometimes together in one and the
selfsame thing: but they are sacraments in respect of God, in respect of us
sacrifices, and those only eucharistical and of thanksgiving. For there is
but one only sacrifice propitiatory by the ransom of Christ offered for us
on the cross. Objection. The Passover and other ceremonies of the oulde
testament were both sacrifices and sacraments. Therefore sacraments do
nothing differ from sacrifices. Answer. More is in the conclusion, than in
the premises. Because this only follows; That the same thing may be a
sacrament and a sacrifice. So Baptism, and the Lords Supper are sacraments, and
sacrifices: They are sacraments and that principally; because they are the
work of god, who gives us some thing in them, and does therein testify his
gift unto us. For in them he reaches unto us certain Symbols and tokens by
his ministers, as also by his ministers he speaks by his mouth unto us:
according as it is said, Luke 10.16. He that hears you, hears me. So
therefore every minister reaches with his hand the sacraments unto us, and
we receive them at their hands, as at the hands of God, if so we take them
with reverence: but much more God gives, and as it were reaches with his
hand unto us, in the lawful and right use of the sacraments, the things
themselves which are signified by the sacraments. Furthermore, Baptism and
the Lords Supper are sacrifices, not indeed principally, but as they are our
woork, which we perform to God; that is, as we receive these signs, as it were
from the hand of God, and so declare our obedience toward God.

4 Jn what sacraments agree with the Word, and in what they differ from it.
The sacraments and the word ag^^e.

In exhibiting the same things unto us.


THE Sacraments agree with the Word in these things, 1. Both exhibit the same
things unto us. For by both god does testify unto us his will, and by both he
proposes the same benefits, the same grace, and the same Christ unto us;
neither does God confirm or represent by his Sacraments any other thing, than
he has promised in his word; and they who seek for any other thing in the
Sacraments than is prescribed in the word of god, frame and make Idols. 2. Both
are from the holy Ghost, and so both also confirm and establish faith. 2 In
proceeding (...) the Holy G^ost

3 In being institu^^^ and offered by God.

4 In being acco^p^^^hed by God.


3. God instituteth both, God offers both. 4. God accomplisheth both by the
Ministers of his Church. For he speaks with us in his Word by the
ministers, and by the Ministers he offers and gives us these signs in his
Sacraments. But the things themselves which are signified by these signs,
the son of God immediately offers unto us. He says, Joh. 20.22. Receive
the Holy Ghost. And John says of him, Matthew. 3.11. Indeed J baptize you with
water to amendment of life; but he that comes after me will baptize you
with the holy Ghost and with fire.

The Sacraments differ from the word in these things, 1. In substance and
nature: They disagree,

1 In substance and nature.


For first, Words signify according to the appointment of men, who^ it pleased
that things should so be expressed and signified. Signs signify according to
a similitude, which they have with the things by them signified. Secondly,
Words we hear, and read: Signs we perceive also by feeling, seeing, and
tasting. Thirdly, Words signify only: Symboles and signs confirm also. 2.
The Word of the promise and commandment is proposed without any
difference, 2 In the persons, (...) they are offered.
to al. To the unregenerate, that they may either begin to believe and be
regenerated, or may be left without excuse: to the regenerate, that they may
the more believe and be confirmed. The Sacraments are given only to the
members of the Church, whose faith is by them confirmed and preserved. The Word
is preached to all at once: The Sacraments are given to every member of the
Church severally: one is baptized after another. and the supper is ministered
to one after another. 3. The Word is the instrument of the holy Ghost by
which he begins and confirms our faith: 3 in their use.
and therefore the Sacraments must follow the Word. The Sacraments are the
instruments of the holy Ghost, by which he begins not, but only
confirms our faith: and therefore the Word is to go before them. The reason
of this difference is, because the Sacraments, without they be understood,
never move. There is no desire after a thing which is not known. But yet in
Infants the case is diverse. For in them faith is begun by the holy Ghost,
neither is confirmed by the Word, but by an inward working and efficacy; and
they who are borne in the Church, to those in their infancy appertains the
covenant and the promise. 4. The Word is necessary and sufficing unto
salvation in them who are of an understanding age. 4 In their necessity.
For faith comes by hearing. But the Sacraments are not preciselie and
absolutely necessary unto all. For that saying of S. Augustine is most true.
Not the want, 5 In their manner of working.

6 The word may be effectual without the sacraments, but not the sacraments
without the Word.

7 The Word is confirmed by the sacraments.

8 The Word may not be preached unto Infants: some sacraments may be given
them.


but the contempt of them condemns. 5. The Sacraments by gesture, the Word
by speech declares unto us the will of God. 6. The Word may be without the
Sacraments, as both in private and public expounding of the scripture, and
that effectually also, as was apparent in Cornelius, Act. 10. But the
Sacraments cannot be so without the Word. 7. The Word is that which is
confirmed by signs annexed unto it: the Sacraments are those signs whereby it
is confirmed. 8. The Word is to be preached unto those only, who are of
understanding, the Sacraments are to be given unto Infants as Circumcision and
Baptism. Austine said, That a Sacrament is a visible Word: most briefly and
most aptly expressed he both the agreeing and differing of the Word and
Sacraments. For when he says, That a Sacrament is a Word, he shows in what
the Word and Sacraments agree, which is in that they teach the same. When he
adds Visible, he shows the difference, that is, that they differ in rite
and ceremony.

5 How the sacraments of the old and new Testament agree, and how they differ.
The Sacraments of the old and new Testament, differ.

1 In rites. 2 In number 3. In signification.

THey differ first in rites, whereof change and alteration was made at christ's
coming, that thereby might be signified the ceasing of the old Testament, and
the beginning or succeeding of the new Testament. 2. They differ in multitude
and number. There were mo and more laborious, here fewer and more easy rites.
3. In signification. Those signified christ to come, these Christ that was
come. The signification is diverse, as the circumstance of time is diverse,
which the sacraments of the old and new Testament signify. For the sacraments
of the old church, signified the time to come of christ which should come: our
sacraments signify the time past of Christ already manifested in the flesh.
4. In the persons whom they bound.
4. Jn binding and obliging men. The old bound only Abraham's posterity, ours
bind the whole church of all nations and countries. 5. In continuance.

6. In clearnes.


5. Jn continuance. The old were to endure but until the coming of the
Messiah: the new until the end of the world. 6. Jn clearenesse. Those are more
obscure and dark, because they signify things to be manifested: but these more
clear and plain, because they signify things already manifested. They agree,
1. In the Author. 2. In substance.



They agree, 1 Jn the author. 2. Jn the things signified, or in substance.
For by the sacraments of both testamentes the same things are offered,
signified, and promised unto us, even remission of sins, and the gift of the
holy ghost, and that by christ alone. This is proved in the Epistle to the
Hebrews. Jesus christ yesterday, and to day, the same is also for ever. But
these are not in respect of rites and ceremonies the same: therefore they are
the same in respect of the thing by them signified. 1. Corinthians. 10.2. The
Fathers under the Law were baptized in the cloud and in the Sea, and did al
eat the same spiritual meat. Coloss. 2.11. By christ ye are circumcised with
circumcision made without hands, that is, In Baptism we receive the same
benefits, which they did in circumcision without Christ therefore, who is the
thing signified of all the sacraments both of the old and new testament, no
man was ever saved, or now is, or ever shall be saved. Whence it follows,
that the Fathers in the old testament had the same communion with christ, which
also we have, and that it was no less signified and confirmed then unto them
by the word and sacraments, than it is now unto us in the new covenant.
Wherefore it is not only idolatry, to seek another communion of christ, than
is in the word, but also to seek another communion of christ in the sacraments
of the new Testament, than which was in the sacraments of the old testament.

6 What the sacramental union is.
THE foundation or matter in the Sacraments are the rites and ceremonies or
external visible actions instituted by God, which are performed by men after
a certain and solemn manner, and are called by a relative or respective name
signs or sacraments. The term respected or correlatiue, is Christ and al his
benefits, or the internal spiritual working of God in us according to the
promise of the gospel: this is called the thing signed or signified by the
sacrament, because it is signified and confirmed by the outward rite. The
relation it self that is between these, (which makes both to become
relatiues, or respectiues, being in their own nature absolute things,) is the
order instituted by God, the signifieng of a spiritual thing by a corporal
thing, and the sealing of the thing signified. The correlatiues are the things
signified and the signs. Hereby now appears that this conjunction of
things with their signs, or sacramental union, is not corporal or local.
Now this union consists in two things. 1. Jn a similitude and proportion of
the signs with the things signified. 2. In the ioint-exhibiting or receiving
of the things, and in the lawful and right use. The faithful only, in the
lawful and right use, receive the signs of the ministers, and the things
signified of Christ: and when we so receive both, that is the sign, and the
thing signified, the same is called sacramental union. For in these it
consists, and not in a presence of the thing and the sign in one and the
same place, and much less in any transmut^^ion or transsubstantiation.

Sacramental union therefore is such, as agrees to all sacraments: and such
as was the union of Christ with the old sacraments, such is it also now. A
sacrament, is a respective or relative word. The foundation we said to be a
ceremony instituted by GOD: Christ or the communion of Christ and al his
benefits, are the term. The relation is the ordination of that rite or
ceremony to the thing signified, that is, both Christ himself, and his
benefits, or the communion and participation of christ and his benefits. For in
every sacrament are these two, the thing signified, and the signs. Now the
thing and the sacrament differ, as the relative, and the correlatiue. As
therefore the things cannot be without the sign: so if you take away the sign
from the thing, it remains no more a sign, because the relation consists
in the ioining of things: As the master is no more a master, if he have no
servant. Wherefore the things and their signs are distinguished, but not
sundered and separated. Briefer thus: Jn every sacrament are the sign and the
thing signified. The thing is christ himself and his benefits, or the
communion and participation of christ and his benefits. The thing and the
sacrament differ in this. The thing is not properly the sacrament, neither are
the signs sacraments. The sign is not the thing: but if you take away the
sign, the thing remains no longer, neither the sign, if you take away the
thing. Therefore they are to be discerned, not to be sundered. Wherefore these
two must be together, so that if one be taken away, the other remains no
longer that, which before it was said to be. Of all this which has been said
we conclude, that there is a sacramental union and conjunction of the things
and signs in sacraments; and it consists, ^. Jn a similitude whereby the
thing is signified, shadowed, and re^^^sented. For if the signs have not a
resemblaunce and similitude with the things, they are now no longer signs. 2
In the ioint-receiuing of the things and signs. In these consists the
conjunction of the things and signs.

7 In what the things differ from the signs.
THE signs differ from the things signified, 1. In substaunc^^ The signs are
corporeal, visible, earthly: the thin^^ ^^^uenly, invisible, spiritual.
Objection. But the body of (...) is a corporeal thing. Answer. By spirtuall
things are here meant those, which are through the woorking of the holy ghost
received by faith only, and not by any part of our body. 2. They differ in the
manner of receiving: the signs are received by the hand, mouth, and parts of
the body, and therefore also of vn^ (...) are received by faith only and the
spirit, and therefore of the faithful only. 3 In the end or use. The things are
given for the possessing of eternal life, they are eternal life it self, or
some part thereof. The signs are received for the sealing and confirming of
our faith concerning the things themselves promised. 4. The things signified
are necessary, and are necessarily received of all the members of the true
church: The signs are received of them only, who are able to receive them. The
signs are diverse, the rites and ceremonies variable: the things are perpetual
and the same in all sacraments.

8 What phrases and forms of speaking of the sacraments are usual unto the
Church and scripture.
THe forms of speaking of sacraments, are partly proper, Proper forms of
speaking.
and partly figurative. The proper are, 1. When the sacraments ar called
tokens, signs, seals, and those sealing and confirming unto us, that God will
give those things which he has promised. So Circumcision is a seal of the
righteousness of faith. And it shall be a sign in thy flesh. 2. When unto the
signs are expressly adioined promises; namely, that we shall receive the things
signified by the^; as when it is said, Mar. 16 16. He that shall believe, and be
baptized, shall be saved. A figurative or sacramental kind of speaking is,
Figurative forms of speaking.
1. When the names of the things are given unto the signs: as the Paschall
Lamb called the Passover. 2. Contrariwise, when the names of the signs are
attributed to the things. 3. When the properties belonging to the things are
attributed to the signs. As, the bread which we brake, is it not the communion
of the body of christ? so baptism is said to wash away sins, to save, to
regenerate. 4. When contrariwise, the properties of the signs are attributed to
the things themselves. As, The rock was christ. We are washed by the blood of
Christ. Al these phrases of speech signify the same thing: which is, the
promise of god adioined to the ceremony; and this therefore, 1. Because the
signs represent and seal the things. Baptism is the washing of regeneration.
2. Because the things and the signs are together received by the faithful, in
the right use thereof.

9 What is the right and lawful use of Sacraments.
THE right use of Sacraments is, In the right use of sacraments is respected, 1
The institution of Christ, which must be pure. 2 The persons receiving* who
must be believers.



1. When the rites ordained by God are observed and not corrupted. The
institution of Christ is to be retained pure, and vncorrupt: the additions of
Antichrist are to be taken away, and those things which he took away, are
again to be added. 2. When those persons use those rites for whom God has
ordained them. Wherefore the household of Christ only, that is, Christians, who
by profession of faith and repentance are the Citizens of the Church, must use
these rites. Act. 8 37. If thou beleeuest with all thine heart, thou may be
baptized. So also they are baptized of John. Matthew. 3.6. who confess their
sins. 3 The end for which they were instituted.
3. When the rites and Sacraments are used to that end, for which they were
instituted. For it is not lawful to transform the rites to any other end or
use, besides that whereunto they were ordained. 1. Because that is not to obey
Gods commandment. 2. Because if the signs be changed or converted to another
use, or the covenant not kept, the consent of him that promises is lost,
without which the sign or earnest confirms nothing. Wherefore the Sacraments
without their right use are no Sacraments, but rather vain and fruitles
spectacles, neither have they the nature of Sacraments: But the right and
lawful use of them consists especially in faith and repentance: They who
have not this, unto them the Sacraments are no Sacraments. Wherefore they are
besides themselves, who say that unbelievers and infid^ls receive together with
the signs the things signified by the signs.

10 What the wicked receive in the use and administration of the Sacraments.
The wicked receive the bare sign, without the things thereby signified.
THE wicked receive the bare signs only, and those to their judgment and
condemnation. 1. Because the benefits of Christ are received only in the
right use of the Sacraments: But they neglect the right use of them, who
receive them unworthily: Wherefore Paul also says, 1. Cor. 11.27. Whosoever
shall eat this bread, and drink the cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. But the wicked eat and drink it
unworthily, because they profane the sacraments, and transform God into the
Devil, and the sons of God into the sons of the Devil. 2. Unto whom nothing
is promised in the Word; to him the sacraments seal nothing. For after what
manner and unto whom a Charter promises any thing, after the same manner and to
the same men does the sign and seal annexed unto the Charter promise the same
also. Semblably God perfourmeth his benefits after the same manner and unto
the same persons, after which manner and unto which persons he promised them.
But unto the wicked he has promised nothing, so long as they remain in their
unbelief. 3. We receive spiritual things by faith. The wicked have not
faith. Therefore neither do the wicked receive spiritual things. 4. To be
wicked, and to receive the sacraments entirely, implies a contradiction.

11 How many sacraments there are of the new Testament.
IN the new Testament are only two sacraments, But two Sacramentes^ the new
Testament.
the use whereof in the Church is perpetual and universal by the consents of
Ambrose, and Austine: Baptism, which succeeded in the place of circumcision
and other purifiynges of the law: and the Lords supper, which the Paschal Lamb
shadowed and prefigured. These two, and no more; did Christ institute. For
those are only sacraments of the new Testament, which are, 1. Ceremonies. 2.
Jnstituted of Christ for the whole Church. 3. Having the promise of grace
adioined unto them. But there are only two such sacraments, as appears by
their definition: Wherefore Penance, private absolution, matrimony, The
Papists other five S^craments are no Sacrament^.
unction, and laying on of hands are no sacraments. For it is certain, that
penance and private absolution, are only the declaration and preaching of the
Gospel. But the preaching and publishing of grace must not be confounded with
the annexed seals of the promise of grace. Unction, and laying on of hands are
indeed ceremonies: but neither were they instituted of Christ for the whole
Church: neither have they the promise of grace adioined. The thing signified by
extreme Unction has ceased in the Church. Matrimony is no ceremony, but a
moral work. The Papists reckon it among sacraments: because the old latin
translation translateth the Greek word, (...) (that is, a mystery) by the
word Sacrament, Ephesians. 5.32. where the Apostle speaks of marriage. But Paul
himself is to be heard rather, than the latin interpreter. No man is ignorant,
that mystery is of as large and ample extent in signification with the
Grecians, as arcanum (which signifies, any secret or hidden thing) is with
the Latins. Wherefore they must confess and grant all arcane and secret
things to be sacraments. And so, if Matrimony be the seventh sacrament, the
will of God shall be the eight sacrament; and the calling of the gentiles, the
ninth. For so does the same interpreter in the same Epistle interpret the same
greek word* Ephesians. 1.9. and 3.9. But Saint Paul in that place, cap. 5.32. uses
the word, mystery, to design and signify the conjunction of Christ and his
Church, and not the conjunction of man and wife.

Certain Conclusions of the Sacraments, in general.
1 GOD has always adioined unto his promise of grace and eternal life some
signs and rites, which the church calls sacraments. Circumcision was
commanded and enioined Abraham. By Moses the sacrifices and rites were
increased, which endured unto Christ, who instituted Baptism and the supper.

2 Sacraments therefore are the signs of the eternal covenant between God and
the faithful, that is, they are rites, commanded and prescribed to the church,
and added unto the promise of grace, whereby, as by visible and certain
testimonies, God might signify and testify that he communicates and
imparteth Christ and his benefits to al those that use and receive these
tokens and symboles with a true faith, according to the promise of the gospel:
and that hereby also he might confirm in them a full persuasion and trust of
his promise: and that the church also of the other side might by the
participation of these symboles and tokens profess publicly their faith and
thankefulnes toward God, and bind themselves unto it, preserve and propagate
the memory of christ's benefits, be discerned from all other sects, and
obliged and stirred up to a mutual dilection and love under one head christ
Jesus.

3 Rites and ceremonies, which are not commanded of God, or are not instituted
to this end, as to be signs and tokens of the promise of grace, are not
signs and tokens of the church: for a sign can confirm nothing but by his
consent and promise, from whom the thing promised and signified is expected and
looked for. No creature therefore can institute any signs or pledges of Gods
will.

4 Two things are to be considered in all sacraments: the visible, terrene,
and corporal signs, which are the rites and ceremonies, and the visible and
corporal things, which God exhibiteth unto us by his ministers, and we receive
corporally, that is, by the parts and senses of our bodies. And the things
signified, invisible, celestial, and spiritual, that is, christ himself and
all his benefits, which are communicated unto us of God by faith spirituallie,
that is, through the virtue and working of the holy ghost.

5 The mutation and change of the signs is not natural, but respective and in
relation, neither is wrought as touching their nature or substance, which
remains still the same, but as touching their use whereby they are
resemblances of other things.

6 The conjunction also or union of the signs and the things signified, is
not natural or local, but respective, by the ordinance and appointment of God,
whereby things invisible and spiritual are represented by visible and
corporal things, as it were by visible words, and are exhibited and received
together with the signs, in their right use and administration.

7 The names and properties of the things signified are attributed to the
signs, and contrary, the names and properties of the signs unto the things,
in respect of the similitude, or of the signification of the things by the
signs, and in respect of the joint exhibiting and receiving of the things
with the signs, in the right use.

8 The right use of the sacraments is then, when as the faithful keep those
rites, which God has commanded, to those ends, for which the sacraments were
instituted by God. The institution consists in the rites, persons, and ends:
the violating whereof breeds an abuse.

9 Jn this use the things signified are always received together with the
signs. Therefore the signs are not empty or void and without the things,
although the things are received after one manner, and the signs after
another.

10 Without the use instituted by God, neither are the ceremonies any
sacrament, neither are the benefits of God, which are signified by them,
received together with the signs.

11 The signs are received of the godly to salvation, of the wicked to
condemnation. But the things signified only the godly can receive to their
salvation.

12 In the Elect notwithstanding, after they are converted, the fruit also of
the sacrament unworthily received does at length follow. And in them also that
unworthiness, which by reason of their defectes concurreth in their receiving,
albeit they are sometimes chastised for the same, yet nevertheless is it
pardoned them; so that that unworthiness does not hurt or impair their
salvation.

13 Some sacraments are to be received but once in our life: others more
often. Some are to be given to those of understanding only: others to infants
also. Even as they were instituted by God either in once making his covenant
with all the Elect and those which were to be received into his church, as
circumcision and baptism: or after sundry falls and combats of temptations,
for the renewing of his covenant, and for the fostering and preserving of the
unity and assemblies of his Church; as the Arc, the Passover, and other
sacrifices, and so likewise the Lords Supper.

14 Those things agree in common to the sacraments of both the old and new
covenant, which have been spoken of in the definition. But their differences
are these: that the oulde show Christ who was after to be exhibited, the new
Christ already exhibited with his benefits. The rites of the old were diverse
from ours and more in number, as circumc^sion, sacrifices, oblations, the
Passover, the Sabbath, woorshipping at the Arc. Christians have others, and
those only two, Baptism, and the Supper. The oulde were darker; the new are
clearer, and more manifest. The old were proper and peculiar to Abraham's
posterity and their servants, the new are commanded to the whole church,
which is to be gathered both of Jews and Gentiles.

15 The sacraments and the preaching of the gospel agree in this that they
are the work of God, which he exercises toward his church by his ministers,
who teach, promise, and offer unto us the same communion of Christ and all his
benefits: and also they agree in this, that they are the external
instruments of the holy ghost, by which he moves our hearts to believe, and
so by the coming and means of faith, makes us partakers of Christ and his
benefits. Neither yet is the working and operation of the holy ghost to be tied
here: neither do these profit but rather hurt them who apply not unto
themselves by faith that which the words and rites signify.

16 The sacraments differ from the word; because the word does by speech,
and they by gestures and motions signify the will of god toward us. By the
word faith is both begun and confirmed: By these it is confirmed only in the
lords supper. The word also teaches and confirms without the sacraments; But
the sacraments do not without the word. Without the knowledge of the word they
who are grown to understanding are not saved: But men may both be regenerated,
and saved, without the use of the sacraments, if it be not omitted through
contempt. The word is preached also to the unbelievers and wicked men. Unto the
sacraments the church must only admit them, whom God wills us to account for
members of the church.

17 Sacraments, and sacrifices agree in this, that they are works commanded of
God, to be done in faith. A sacrament differs from a sacrifice, in that God
by sacraments signifies and testifies unto us his benefits, which he
performs for us. By sacrifices we yield and offer our obedience unto God.

18 Wherefore also one and the same ceremony may be considered both as a
sacrament, and as a sacrifice, as whereby God in giving us visible signs,
testifies his benefits toward us, and we in receiving them testify again
our duty toward him. And this testification of our faith and thankfulness
depends of that testif^cation of gods benefits toward us, as of the chief
and proper end and use of the sacraments, and is thereby raised in the minds
of the faithful.

The confirmation of such of the former conclusions, as most require it.
THE confirmation of the second conclusion. The definition therein delivered of
sacraments, is expressed, Genesis 17.11. Exodus 20.10. Exodus 31.14. Thou shall keep
my sabbothes. Now, that sacraments are rites commanded and prescribed to the
church by God, is apparent by the instittuion of the^: as also that they are
rites adioined unto the promise as visible signs and tokens thereof; Because
al sacraments are necessary duties toward GOD. But chiefly and principally
they are gods benefits toward us; as circumcision did portende and show
remission of sins and mortification; Deuteronomy. 30.6. Heb. 8 9.10. Neither only
do we signify them in confessing and celebrating them, but chiefly God
himself does signify them unto us, test^fieng and confirming them unto us by
the ceremonies of sacraments. For the Ministers, as well in the administration
of the sacraments, as in the preaching of the word, ^ea^e the person and
possess the place of God, to the Church. Mat 28.19. Teach and baptize all
nations John. 4.2. Jesus did baptize: when yet not he himself, but his
disciples did baptize. So of the sign and ceremony of inauguratio^ or
anointing one to be King it is said 1. Sam. 10.1. The Lord has anointed thee:
When yet Samuel was sent to anoint Saul. They further are therefore said to
confirm our faith, because the scripture witnesses them to be the signs and
tokens of the mutual and everlasting covenant between God and the faithful,
which God signifies unto us in the bestowing of his benefits promised us in
the Gospel. But God is alike to be believed, whether by signs, or by words,
which signify his will: because not only our sacrifices and obedience, but
also the signs of grace delivered unto us by God have in their right use the
promise of grace adjoined unto them: As, He that shall believe, and shall be
baptized, shall be saved. And lastly, because the scripture to signify the
receiving or want of the things signified, alleges the receiving or want of
the signs: As Ps 51.7. Purge me with hysop and I shall be clean. Deuteronomy. 30.6. The
Lord will circumcise thy heart. Romans 6.3. All we which have bin bapitised. 1.
Cor. 10.16. The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of
Christ? And hereof also follow the other ends specified in the definition, in
this second conclusion. As, That the sacraments discern and sever the church
from other sects. This is manifest both by effects, and by Testimonies. Exodus
12.45. A strainger shall not eat thereof. Romans 3.1. What is the profit of
circumcision? Much every manner of way: because unto them were committed the
Oracles of God, Ephesians. 2.11. Ye being in times past Gentiles, and called
Uncircumcision of them, who were at that time without Christ, and were aliants
from the commonwealth of Jsraell, and were straingers from the covenants of
promise, and had no hope, and were without God in the World. Genesis 17.11. Is
shall be a sign of the covenant between me and you; and it shall be my
covenant, in your flesh. Another end is, that they preserve the memory of
Gods benefits. 1. Cor. 11.26. As often as ye shall eat this bread, ye show
the Lords death until he come. Exodus 12.14. This day shall be unto you a
remembrance. Deuteronomy. 6.8. Thou shall bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and
they shall be as signs of remembrance between thine eyes. Luke 22.19. Do
this in remembrance of me. Lastly, they are also bonds of love: because they
who are confederated with God, are united also among themselves. Ep. 4.5. One
Lord, one faith, etc. 1. Cor. 10.17. We being many are one body.

The confirmation of the fourth Conclusion. The distinction there delivered is
manifest in it self. The receiving of the signs is corporal and external.
But the things especially signified are not received without faith, because
they are promised to believers only. And the signs are no otherwise true,
than the promises, unto which they are annexed. Again, the signs declare the
same to the eyes, which the promise declares unto the ears. As therefore the
promise is but an empty sound without faith: So also are the ceremonies vain
spectacles. Again, The things signified are the communion of Christ and all
his benefits. But this can no man have otherwise than by faith, either in the
use, or without the use of the Sacrament.

The confirmation of the sixth conclusion. Such is the conjunction of all signs
with their things signified, as that they represent the things signified, and
confirm the acceptance of them: For the pledges or tokens and symboles
testifieng other things, are, though not in the same place, yet together with
the things testified and signified. The Reason is; Because to make one thing a
sign of another thing, is not to include or tie the thing with the sign, as
that they should be in one place, but to ordain the sign to signify the
thing, the sign being in the same place with it, or in some other place.
Again, the nature of the things signified by the sacrament does not admit this
local union. For some are subsisting forms, some accidents, not inherent in the
sacramental signs, but in the minds of men; as the gifts of the holy ghost.
Some are corporeal, and in one place only, and not locallie existent,
wheresoever the sacraments are used; as the flesh and blood of Christ.

The confirmation of the seventh Conclusion. The scripture speaks thus of the
Sacraments. Circumcision is the covenant. The Lamb is, the Passover. The
blood of the sacrifices, the blood of the covenant, the expiation of the
sacrifices, the Sabbath, the everlasting covenant. The mercy seat of the
Arc: Baptism a clensing washing. Bread and wine, the body and blood of
Christ. And so the scripture expounds it self, when circumcision is called
the sign of the covenant; The Pascal Lamb, the sign of the passover: The
Sabbath, a perpetual sign of grace and sanctification: The ceremonies, types
and shadows of true things: The believer and baptized shall be saved; and of
the signs, and symboles of the Lords supper it is said, that they are to be
received for our reconciliation.

The confirmation of the tenth conclusion. The signs of the covenant, confirm
nothing unto them who keep not the covenant, or who refer them to another
end. But the sacraments are signs of the covenant, whereby God binds
himself to give unto us remission of sins and eternal life freely for
Christ's sake: and we bind our selves to the yielding and performance of faith
and new obedience. Therefore they confirm not, neither ^ssure them of Gods
grace, who are without faith and repentance, or use other rites, or to some
other end, than God has appointed. Moreover, J^ is superstitious and
idolatrous to attribute the ^^stif^cation of gods grace either to the external
work and rite without the promise, or to any other work invented by men.
Wherefore the abusing or not right using of the sacraments has not the grace
of God accompanying it, or assures any man of it. As it is said, Romans 2.25.
Circumcision is profitable, if thou do the law, etc.

The confirmation of the 11. conclusion. The figure of Baptism being
correspondent to the Arc of Noah, does also save us; not the outward washing
away of the filth of the flesh, but the inward testification of a good
conscience toward god. The bread which we break, is it not the communion of
the body of Christ? And seeing the sacraments are an external instrument
whereby the holy Ghost fostereth and preserves faith: it follows that they
serve for the salvation of believers, as does the word. But contrary, the
wicked, through the abuse of the sacraments, and the contempt of Christ and
his benefits, which are offered unto them in his word and sacraments, and
through the confession of his doctrine which they embrace not with a true faith,
purchase unto themselves the anger of God, and everlasting pains, according to
the saying of the Prophet Esaias, cap. 66 3. He that kills a Bullock, is as if
he slew a man: he that sacrifices a sheep, i^ as if he cut off a dogs neck.
And saint Paul, 1. Cor. 11.27. Whosoever shall eat this bread and drink the
cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the
Lord. But the things signified, because they are received by faith only, and
are either proper unto salvation, or salvation it self, as, Christ and his
benefits; they cannot be received of the wicked, neither can they at all be
received, but unto salvation.

The confirmation of the 12. conclusion. A promise and the sign of a promise
having a condition of faith and fidelity adioined unto it are ratified,
whenever the condition is performed. But such is that promise, which is
signified and confirmed by the sacraments. Therefore if in the use of them
faith does accompany, which believes the promise, the things promised and
signified are received together with the signs. Eze. 16.59. I might deal with
thee as thou have done, when thou did despise the oath in breaking the
covenant: Nevertheless I will remember my covenant made with thee in the
days of thy youth, and J will confirm unto thee an everlasting covenant.

The confirmation of the 13. conclusion. The iterating of circumcision or
Baptism has been no where received or admitted. Neither is the reason hereof
obscure or unknown: because those sacraments were instituted, to be an
initiating or solemn receiving of men into the Church, which is always ratified
unto him that is penitent, and persisteth therein. But the use of other
sacraments is commanded to be iterated: as of the sacrifices, the Passover,
worshipping at the Arc, Cleansings: as also of the Lords Supper. The cause is,
because they are a testimony, that the covenant which was made in Circumcision
and Baptism, is ratified and firm to him that repents. And this exercising
of our faith is always necessary.

The confirmation of the 14. conclusion. That there is one common definition
agreeing to the sacraments both of the old and new testament, has been
showed before. That the difference of them consists in the number and form
of the rites, is apparent, by a particular enumeration of them. For in the new
testament it is manifest that there are but two, because there are no other
ceremonies commanded of god, and having annexed unto them the promise of
grace. And that the old sacraments signify Christ, which hereafter should
be exhibited, the new, Christ who already was exhibited, is apparent by the
interpretation delivered of them in holy writ, whereof we spoke in the
definition. Now they differ in clearenes, because in the new Testament the
ceremonies are purer, and signifiyng things complete and perfect. In the old
were more rites shadowing things to come, all the circumstances whereof were
not as yet declared.

The confirmation of the 15. conclusion. What the Ministers do in Gods name in
the administration of the sacraments, and also that God by the sacraments
signifies, that is, teaches, offers, promises us the communion of Christ,
was declared in the second confirmation. Hereof follows the next, which is,
that the holy ghost does move our hearts by them to believe. For seeing the
sacraments are a visible promise, they have the same authority of confirming
faith in us, which the promise it self has which was made unto us. Of this
follows the third. For that which serves for the kindling or raising of
faith in us, the same also serves for the receiving of the communion of Christ
and his benefits. And because we attain unto this by faith. Therefore it is
said: The bread is the communion of the body of Christ: Baptism does save us.
Neither yet does the holy Ghost always confirm and establish faith by them,
as the examples of Simon Magus, and of infinite others do show. That the use
of them hurts without faith, has been proved in the second Conclusion.

The confirmation of the 16. conclusion. The sacraments without the word going
before, do neither teach nor confirm our faith: because the meaning and
signification of them, is not understood, except it be declared by the word,
neither can the sign confirm any thing, except the thing be first promised.
An example hereof are the Jews, who observed and now do observe the
ceremonies, but adioine thereto the not understood promise of the grace and
benefits of Christ. Without the Word those who are of understanding are not
saved, either by doctrine, as by ordinary means, or by an internal and
extraordinary knowledge. Joh. 3.18. He that believes not in the son, is
already condemned. Romans 3.17. Faith comes by hearing: and hearing by the
word of god. But they may be saved without the sacraments: because although
by some necessity they be deprived of these, yet they may believe, as the
thief did on the Cross. Or: if they be infants, according to the condition of
their age they are sanctified, as John in the womb, and many infants also in
the womb, who died before the day of circumcision. The Word also is to be
preached unto the wicked, because it is appointed to convert them. But the
sacraments are to be administered unto them, who are acknowledged for members
of the church; because they are instituted for the use of the church only.
Act. 8.37. Thou may be baptized, if thou beleeuest.

The confirmation of the eighteenth conclusion. The confirmation thereof is
manifest by the Passover, and other sacrifices, as also by the sabbath: which
all were commanded by God, that the godly might celebrate and worship God, and
show themselves grateful unto him, and might withal take the signs and
tokens of those benefits of God, which they received by the Messiah. So
Baptism is a confession of christianity, and a sign, whereby Christ
testifies that we are washed by his blood. The supper of the Lord is a
thanksgiving for the death of Christ, and an advertisement that we are
quickened and revived by his death, and are made his members, and shall remain
and continue with him for ever.

OF BAPTISM.
THE principal questions are.

1 What Baptism is. 2 What are the ends of Baptism: or for what it was
instituted. 3 What is the sense and meaning of the words of the institution
thereof. 4 What are the forms and kinds of speaking of Baptism. 5 Who are to
be baptized. 6 The lawful and right use of Baptism. 7 In place whereof
Baptism did succeed. 8 How Baptism agrees with circumcision, and in what
is differs from it.
WHAT BAPTISM IS.
Baptism is an external washing instituted by the son of God, with the
pronouncing of these words, I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and the
Son, and the holy Ghost; to be a testimony, that he who is so washed or
dipped, is reconciled through Christ by faith, and is sanctified by the spirit
unto eternal life. Go, says Christ, and teach all nations, baptizing them in
the name of the Father, and the son, and the holy ghost. It may also be fitly
defined on this wise: Baptism is a ceremony instituted by Christ in the new
testament, whereby we are washed with water in the name of the Father, the
son, and the holy ghost; to signify, that we are received into favor for the
blood of Christ shed for us, and are regenerated by his spirit, and also to
bind us, that hereafter we endeavor in our actions and deeds truly to testify
newness of life. We are said to be received into favor, for the blood of
Christ shed for us, to wit, on the cross, that is, for christ's whole
humiliation applied unto us by faith.

Baptism no bare sign only.
Objection. Baptism is said to be an external washing of water, therefore
baptism is a bare sign only. Answer. This is a fallacy of division,
dividing those things which are to be joined. Because when we say that
Baptism is an external sign, we join with the sign the thing signified.
Moreover there is no particle added which excludes the thing: And Baptism is
in it own nature a bare sign; but the promise comes thereto, and is joined
with this sign.

The differences between Baptism and the washings of the old Testament.
2 Objection. There were washinges also in the oulde testament: Baptism is a
washing: Baptism therefore is a sacrament of the old testament. Answer. The
washings in the oulde testament, were not a sign of the receiving into the
church, as is Baptism. They signified Christ to come. They did bind the Jews
only: Baptism extends and belongs to al nations, or to the whole church.
They were also instituted to wash away a ceremonial uncleanness: Baptism, to
wash away a moral uncleanness: and hence is it, that Baptism is called in
the scripture a lauour or washing, to wit, in respect of that washing of the
moral uncleanness, that is, in respect of that inward or spiritual washing,
whereby we are washed or cleansed from our sins. Now this washing is of two
sorts. The washing of Baptism is of two sorts.

1 The washing of blood. 2 The washing of the spirit.

1. The washing of blood, when we are washed by the blood of Christ, which is
the remission of sins, for the bloodshed of christ. 2. The washing of the
spirit, when we are washed by Christ's spirit, which is our renewing by the
holy Ghost, that is, the changing of evil inclinations into good, which is
wrought by the virtue of the holy Ghost in our will and heart, that we may have a
hatred of sin, and contrariwise, a purpose to live according to the will of
God. That this twofold washing from sins, is signified by the sacrament of
Baptism, is apparent by this place, Mar. 1.4. He preached the Baptism of
amendment of life, for remission of sins. Wherefore Baptism is a Symbol and
sign of both washinges, or of both benefits (namely both of remission of
sins and amendment of life) not only because this sacrament has some
similitude and correspondence with both: but also because these two benefits
are ever joined together, and neither can be without the other. Roman. 8.9. If
any man has not the spirit of Christ, the same is not his. In sum: to be
washed by the blood of Christ, is, to receive remission of sins for the
bloodshed of Christ. To be washed by the holy ghost, is, to be regenerated,
that is, to have our evil cogitations in us changed into good, and also to
have in our will an heart, a desire, and endeavor to obey God. Now then our
justification and our regeneration differ; in that our justification is a
washing by the blood of Christ, our regeneration is a washing by the holy
Ghost, as has been already said. But Baptism is the sign or seal of both,
both of justification and of regeneration. Regeneration or the mutation of our
evil inclinations into good, although it be not perfect in this life, yet the
beginning thereof is here in all the godly, and that mutation is felt of all the
godly in this life, so that they are greatly also grieved for the defect
thereof. Wherefore Baptism comprehends 1. The sign, which is, water, 2. The
ceremony, as the sprinkling of water, or the dipping into, and again
returning out of the water. 3. The things themselves; which are, First, the
sprinkling of the blood of Christ, and the imputation of his righteousness:
Secondly, the mortification of the old man, for which cause we are said to put
on Christ in Baptism. Thirdly, the quickening of the new man into a certain
hope of the resurrection to come by christ. Fourthly, The sign, which not only
signifies, but also confirms. Fifthly, The sign, which has that authority
and power of confirming from the commandment and promise of god.

2 What are the ends of Baptism.
THE ends of Baptism are, 1. That it should be a mark, whereby the church may
be discerned from all other nations, and sects, Go and teach all nations
baptizing them: 1 To be a discerning badge of Christians.
as if he should say, Gather the church by baptism and the word and whom ye
shall make my Disciples believing with their whole heart, al them and them alone
baptize, and separate unto me. Act. 10.47 Can any man forbid water, that these
should not be baptized, which have received the holy ghost as well as we?

2 The chief and proper end of Baptism is, 2 To confirm our faith.
to be a confirmation of our faith, that is, a testification, when Christ
testifies that he washes us with his blood, that he bestows on us
remission of sins, justification and regeneration. Or, the chief end of Baptism
is, to be the sealing of god, and also the sealing or obsignation of the
promise of grace, and a testimony of gods will, that he gives us these gifts
at this present: and will give them ever hence forward. For he baptizeth us
by the hands of his minister, and by him signifies unto us this his will. That
Baptism is a testimony and confirmation of this will of god concerning his
bestowing salvation on us, appears by this also which follows, namely,
because we are baptized in the name of the father, and the son, and the holy
ghost: that is, we are assigned and deputed to God the father, the son, and
the holy ghost, and are claimed to be his own. 2. Because god has promised
salvation unto him who shall believe and shall be baptized. 3. Testimonies of
Scripture also confirm the same. Act. 22.16. Why tariest thou? Arise and be
baptized, and wash away thy sins in calling on the name of the Lord. Mat.
16.16. He that shall believe and shall be baptized, shall be saved. Roman.
6.3. Know ye not, that al we which have been baptized into Jesus Christ, have
been baptized into his death? We are buried then with him by Baptism. Tit.
3.5. According to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of the new birth, and
the renewing of the holy Ghost. 1. Pet. 3.21. To the which also the figure that
now saves us, even baptism agrees. By this end of baptism it appears, why
baptism is not reiterated or used again: namely, because baptism is a sign
of our receiving into favor, and the covenant, which is ever firm and
ratified to them who repent, seeing it depends not on the person of him that
baptizeth. Moreover regeneration is wrought but once only: For he who is
once truly engraffed into Christ, is never cast out: and therefore it is
sufficient, that baptism, which is the washing and sign of regeneration, be
received but once only: chiefly, seeing regeneration or salvation has not a
necessary dependence on baptism.

3 To bind us to be thankful unto God, and to be a testimony of this our duty.
3 Baptism is instituted to be a testification of our duty toward God, and a
binding of us and the church to the knowledge and worship of God, into whose
name we are Baptized. We bind our selves in Baptism to thankefulnes:
namely, fi^s^ to faith, that is, to receive the promised benifits with faith,
and then withal unto repentance and amendment of life. Romans 6.3. We are
Baptized into the death of Christ. 1. Cor. 9.11. Such were some of you: but ye
are washed. To be baptized into the death of Christ, is 1. To be partakers of
Christ's death, no otherwise than if our selves were dead. 2. To die also our
selves, which is, to mortify the lusts of our flesh. This mortification god
promises us in baptism, and binds us unto it.

4 Baptism is instituted to be a signification or an advertisement unto us of
the Cross, 4 To advertise us of the Cross, and of our preservation and
deliverance.
and of the preservation of the church therein, and of the deliverance of the
Church from it. Mat. 20.22. Are ye able to be baptized with the baptism, that
J shallbe baptized with? Deliverance from the Cross the very ceremony it
self of Baptism does show. For we are dipped in deed, but we are not drowned
or choked in the water. Moreover in respect of this end, Baptism is compared
unto the flood. For as in the flood and diluge, some were shut into the Arc,
the rest of mankind perishing; so in the Church, they who cleave unto Christ,
although they be pressed with calamities, yet at length in their appointed
time they are delivered. Hither also belongs that place of Paul, where he
co^pareth the passing over the red Sea to Baptism. 1. Cor. 10.2. Al were
baptized unto Moses, in the Cloud, and in the Sea.

5 Baptism is instituted to signify the unity of the Church, 5 To signify the
unity of the Church.
and therefore is a confirmation of this article, I believe the catholic church.
This end nevertheless may be contained under the first, as also that, that
Baptism is a binding of the members of the church among themselves to mutual
love. Because when Baptism seuereth the members of the church from others, it
does also join and unite them among themselves.

6 It is instituted to be a token and Symbol of our receiving and entrance
into the Church, like as in the first end of Baptism, 6 To be a token of our
entrance into the church.
which is a distinguishing of the Church, from al others. For these are opposed
and contradictory, to be, and not to be in the Church: to enter, and not to
enter into the Church. Hither appertain all those places, in which those who
were become Christians, are said to have bin presently Baptized. Wherefore the
Supper also is given only to them who are baptized: for they only are received
into the church.

7 It is instituted to be a means of preserving and propagating the doctrine of
the free promise through the death of christ: 7 To be a means of preserving and
publishing more largely the Doctrine of Gods free promise.
that the baptized may have occasion to teach and learn who is the author, and
what is the meaning or signification of Baptism.

3 What is the sense and meaning of the words of the institution of Baptism.
THE confirmation of the Definition and chief ends of Baptism is contained in
the words of the institution, which are read in S. Matthew and S. Mark. Go
and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the father, and the son,
and the holy ghost. He that shall believe, and shall be baptized, shall be
saved: but he that will not believe, shall be damned. These are briefly to be
expounded and declared, Teach all. Teach all, and not some nations, neither
Abraham's posterity only. Here is the difference of the sacraments of the old
and new Testament. For Christ did not institute this new sacrament for the
Jews only, to whom properly did belong the old sacraments: but to all others
also succeeding. Baptising them. That is, all, who by your doctrine come unto
me, and are made my Disciples. And among them are numbered the Infants also of
such as come unto Christ, or are Christ's Disciples: For their Infants also are
Disciples, as being borne in the school of Christ. For to be borne in the
Church, serves to the Infants insteede of their profession. The word is to go
before the Sacraments.
The order here is to be noted and observed. He wills first, that they be
taught, and after, that they be baptized. Wherefore he will not have the
sacraments to be dumb, but signifies that the word ought to go before, and
then the sacraments to follow. In the name of the Father, and the son, and
the holy ghost. These words, Jn the name, signify 1. That Baptism was
instituted by the common commandment and authority of these three; and that
these three persons do command, that they who will be members of the Church,
be baptized. Wherefore it is of like force, when the Minister baptiseth, as if
God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost did baptize. And hereof also it
is manifest, that these three persons, are the three subsistentes, or persons
of the Godhead. 2. They signify, that these three persons confirm unto us by
their own testification, that they receive us into favor, and perform that
unto us which is signified by baptism: which is, salvation, if we believe, and
be baptized: Where is noted the second end of baptism. 3. To be baptized in
the name of the Father, the son, and the holy ghost, i^, That he which is
baptized, be bound to the knowledge, faith, worship, trust, honor, and
invocation of this true god who is the Father, the son, and the holy ghost.
This is the third end of baptism, which Paul also in these words declares;
Were ye baptized into the name of Paul? As if he should say; Ye ought to be
his, to whom ye have given your name, and bound your selves in Baptism. 4.
Baptising them in the name of the Father, the son, and the holy ghost, that
is, Baptising them by invocation of the three persons, inuocating the name of
the father, the son, and the holy ghost upon them: Which three persons
receive us into favor: And the Father verily receives us into favor, for the
son, by the holy Ghost, whom the son gives us from the Father. He that
shall believe. This is added unto the promise. For they who are Baptized, can
not receive that which is promised and sealed in Baptism, but by faith. And in
these words is noted briefly the right use of Baptism, in which right use the
sacraments are ratified. But in whatsoever corrupt and unlawful use and
administration, the sacraments are no sacraments; but are sacraments to them
only who receive them with a true faith. And shall be baptized. He would
confirm us also by the outward sign: and therefore this is added, and shall
be baptized, that we may know that not only by faith, but by the outward
sign also we are assured, that we are of the number of them who shall be
saved. Unto both, both unto Faith and unto baptism, the promise is adjoined,
but after a diverse manner: unto faith, because it is the only instrument
whereby the merit of christ is apprehended: unto Baptism, because it is the
sign and token of this benefit. He shall be saved. That is, let him, that is
baptized, know that he has, if he believe, those benefits, which are
signified by the external rite: namely, that he is justified and regenerated.
He that will not believe, shall be condemned; that is, although he be
baptized. The use of the sacrament without faith does not save: Therefore with
faith it does save. The want of the sacrament does not condemn; yet so, as
that want of the sacrament be without contempt. For not the want, but the
contempt of the sacraments condemn, as which can-not possibly be where faith
is. And hence it comes, that if we convert this proposition, He that shall
believe and be baptized shall be saved, we can-not retain both necessarily:
Now we convert it thus; He that shall be saved, shall believe and be
baptized; this proposition is not necessary, because some may be saved, which
are not baptized, but none can be saved which do not believe. Wherefore there
is not the same necessity of faith, and the sacraments: The sacraments are
then necessary, when they may be had according to the ordinance and
institution of God. For the contempt of the sacrament, when it may so be had,
is repugnant unto faith. Objection. Christ attributes salvation both to faith,
and to baptism. Therefore in converting the proposition, we must affirm both
of it, and so affirm of him that is to be saved, that he is also to believe
and to be baptized. Answer. Christ attributes salvation to both, but not to
both alike: to faith as the mean, to Baptism, as the sign whereby salvation is
sealed unto us.

4 What are the forms and manners of speaking of baptism.
Proper and improper forms speaking, of baptism.
THE forms of speaking of baptism are, either proper, or improper. Proper
forms of speaking are these. 1. Baptism is a sign of the washing away of
sin. 2. He that shall believe, and shall be baptized, shall be saved. Improper or
figurative kinds of speaking are, 1. Baptism is a washing away of sins. 2.
Baptism washes away sins. These four speeches are equivalent, and signify
this one speech, Baptism is a certain sign or token of remission of sins
unto believers. These and the like figurative speeches of the sacraments are to
be interpreted like as the figurative speeches of the sacrifices. The
sacrifices are called oftentimes an expiation or doing away of sins: and
yet the Apostle affirms, that it is impossible that the blood of bulls and
goats should take away sins. So when it is said, Baptism saves us, or it is
the washing of the newbirth, or, it is the washing away of sins: it is al
one, as if it were said, Baptism is the sign or token of al these. Now the
Scripture speaks after this sort, mutually changing the names of the signs
and things, First, in respect of an analogy or proportion between the sign
and the thing signified. For such a manner of thing is the thing signified in
his kind, as the sign is in his kind. For as water, that is, the sign,
washes away al filth; so also the blood of Christ, that is, the thing
signified, washes and cleanses us from sin. And as the sign is applied
outwardly by the minister, so God will bestow and apply inwardly the thing
signified by the virtue of his spirit, unto them, who receive the sign with a
true faith. As the ministers work without, so God does woork within. Secondly,
the Scripture so speaks, for the confirmation of faith in us: for the signs
testify Gods will toward us: which they testify by reason of the promise
adjoined, such as is this, He that shall believe, and shall be baptized, shall
be saved: Thirdly, it so speaks in respect of the ioint-exhibiting of the
things with the signs, or in respect of their signification: because God does
signify unto us some thing by the sign, which is, that we do as certainly
receive the things as we do the signs. And these appertain to them who use
the sacraments rightly.

5 Who are to be baptized.
THey, who are not as yet the Disciples of Christ, that is, They are not to be
baptized, who believe not the Doctrine.
of the number of them which are called, neither agreeing unto the doctrine,
nor obedient unto the minister; are not to be admitted unto baptism. Neither
ought they to desire baptism who feel themselves not to be as yet the
Disciples and Scholars of Christ. For Christ says first, Teach al nations, and
then he wills them to be baptized. Wherefore al they and they alone are to
be baptized according to the commandment of Christ, unto whom the covenant
does belong: namely, such, as are, and so ought to be accounted, members of the
visible church; whether they be of understanding, professing faith and
amendment of life, All that are the scholars of christ, are to be baptized.
or infants born in the womb of the church. For all the children of the
faithful are in the church of God, except they exclude themselues^. Or, Al
they are to be baptized, who are to be accounted for the Disciples and
Scholars of christ. But for the Disciples of christ are to be accounted al
those of understanding who profess faith and Repentance, neither they only,
but their infants also, which are borne in the Church, that is, in the school
of Christ: which also teaches and instructs them by his holy spirit
according to their capacity, The Infantes which are borne in the Church are to
be Baptized.
or as the condition of their age will bear.

And these are the reasons, whereby is proved that infants are to be baptized.
1. Baptism is a sign of our entrance into the church, which ought wholly to
be baptized: According to that, Tit. 3.5. Baptism is the washing of the new
birth: And 1. Cor. 12.13. By one spirit are we all baptized into one body: but
infants belong unto the church: as it is said, Mat. 19.14. Suffer the little
children to come unto me. Therefore infants ought to be baptized.

2 Baptism is a seuering, or a sign of distinguishing the whole church from al
other sects, and so from the rest of all mankind. Wherefore baptism is to be
given unto all the members of the visible church and the citizens of Christ. But
infantes are citizens of Christ's kingdom, and members or part of the church:
Wh^^efore that right of enfranchising the^ to be the citizens of christ's church
ought not to be denied unto infantes: but they ought to be baptized, that so
being engraffed and received into the Church, they may be by this sign and
token discerned together with the whole church from al others.

3 Unto whom belongs the benefit of remission of sins and regeneration,
they are to be baptized. For unto whom the things signified belong, unto them
also does the sign belong, except some condition in the manner of using it
hinder, or except there be some circumstance of the institution hindering and
letting the use of the rite and ceremony. Whence it is that Peter says, Acts
2.38. Amend your lives, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus
Christ. And again; For the promise is made unto you, and to your children.
Again, Act. 10.47. Can any man forbid water that these should not be baptized?
Wherefore infants also are to be baptized, neither ought the sign to be denied
the^, as unto whom belongs the thing signified, which is the benefit of
remission of sins, and regeneration, and that according to the form of the
covenant or promise, whereof they also are made partakers. Genesis 17.7. J will
be thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee. And 1. Cor. 7.14. Your
children are holy. Matthew. 19.14. Suffer the little children to come unto me.
Act. 2.39. The promise is made unto you, and to your children. So also John
Baptist was sanctified in the Womb. If a man diligently weigh these
testimonies of scripture, he shall perceive doubtless not only that it is
lawful, but also that this sacrament must and ought to be given unto Infants:
because the Infants are holy, the promise is made unto them, theirs is the
kingdom of God, and God says also that he is their God, who certainly is
not the God of the wicked. Moreover there is no condition or circumstance, in
the Infants, hindering the use of Baptism. Can any man then forbid water,
that these should not be baptized, who are partakers of the same benefits
with the whole Church?

4 Baptism in the new testament succeeds circumcision, and indeed so
succeeds, as it has the same use, which circumcision had in the old
testament. Coloss. 2.11. Ye are circumcised in Christ, with circumcision made
without hands, by putting off the sinful body of the flesh, through the
circumcision of Christ, in that ye are buried with him through Baptism, in
whom ye are also raised up together. But in the old testament, circumcision
was to be given to those Infants which were born in the Church of the old
testament, who were also therefore circumcised. Therefore Baptism also is to
be given to the Jnfants borne in the Church of the new testament, as being our
circumcision, that is, a sacrament whereby the same things are confirmed and
conferred, and that unto all them, now in the new testament, which were
confirmed, and unto all which they were confirmed and conferred in the old
testament by circumcision. Wherefore they who deny Baptism to Infants born in
the church, spoil the^ of their right. For they who are born in the church,
are Citizens of the Church, by the grace and benefit of the Covenant, and
therefore the right of Citizens belongs unto them by the same benefit of the
covenant, and to be borne in the Church is unto Infants in steed of
profession of faith and repentance.

Certain objections against the Baptism of Jnfants refuted.
1 Objection. They who believe not; Infants believe by an inclination to faith,
and therefore are to be baptized.
are not to be baptized: For it is said, he that shall believe, and shall be
baptized etc. But Jnfants do not believe. Therefore they are not to be
baptized. For unto the use of Baptism faith is necessarily required: for
whosoever shall not believe, shall be condemned. But unto those that are
condemned the sign of grace must not be given. Answer. First, the Mayor is
false: for it holds not generally. We might, for instance, oppose unto them
the example of circumcision, which was given to Infants who could not yet
believe. It is true therefore of those, who are of understanding, that of them
none are to be baptized, but such as believe. Neither yet are they able to
pronounce of those, who are of understanding, that they do believe. Wherefore
if Infants are not to be baptized, because they have not faith; neither are
they then, who are of age and understanding, to be baptized, of whom it cannot
be known whether they do believe or no. As, Simon Magus was baptized, and yet
was an hypocrite. But say they, Profession of faith is sufficient for the
Church. We confess that this is true, and we add further, that to be borne
in the Church, is unto infants in steed and in place of profession. 2. Where
they say, That unto the use of baptism faith is required, we grant it, but
yet distinguishing of faith: so that we say, Actual faith is required in those
of understanding, but in Infants is required an inclination only to this
Actual faith. So unto the use of circumcision was required Actual faith in
those of understanding, but in Infants an inclination thereto only. 3. We deny
their Minor proposition, which denies that Infants do believe: For Jnfants
do believe after their manner, that is, according to the condition of their
age, whereby they have an inclination to believe, or do believe by
inclination. For faith is in Infants potentiallie and by inclination, albeit
faith be not in them actuallie, as in those, who are of age and understanding.
And as wicked Infants, which are without the Church, have not actual impiety
and wickedness, so godly Infants, which are in the Church, have not actual
piety, and godliness, but an inclination only to godliness. Furdermore, Infants
also have the holy Ghost, and are regenerated by him, as was John when as yet
he was in the womb. And it is said unto Ier. cap. 1.5. Before thou came out
of the womb, I sanctified thee. If Infants have the holy Ghost, then doubtless
he works in them those things, unto which are necessary salvation. Wherefore
Infants donot profane Baptism.

2 Objection. It was never commanded, that Infants should be baptized. Christ
commande^ that Infants should be baptized.
Answer. We have a general commandment. For Christ commands that all
his scholars and disciples be baptized: Teach, says he, al Nations, baptizing
them. But Infants are scholars and disciples of Christ, because they are borne
in the school of Christ, and are taught according to their manner. The same
did Peter command, saying, Unto you the promise is made, and unto your
children: Again, Can any man forbid water, that these should not be
baptized? Paul also commands this, when he teaches, That we are
circumcised in Christ, and are buried together with him by baptism. Baptism
therefore was substituted in the place of circumcision, which substituting of
baptism is in steed of a commandment.

3 Objection. If Infants are to be baptized, Infants are not to be admitted to
the Supper, although they are to be baptized.
they are also to be admitted unto the Supper: for the Supper is to be given
to the whole Church as well as baptism. Answer. This reason does not follow,
because there is a difference between baptism and the Supper. For baptism is
an entrance and receiving, or a sign of receiving into the Church: whence it
comes, that the supper is to be granted to none, except he be first
baptized. But the Supper is a confirmation of our receiving into the Church:
whence it follows, that they who are baptized, are not straight way to be
admitted unto the Supper. For Infants ought only to be admitted unto those
sacraments, which are signs of our receiving into the covenant and the Church:
but such a sacrament is baptism, (as has been said) in the new testament.
The Supper is instituted for our confirmation, to be a sign* whereby GOD
might confirm and seal unto us, that he having once received us into the
Church, will also evermore preserve us in it, that we never fall from it or
forsake it; and also that he will continue his benefits once bestowed upon us,
and will cherish and nourish us by the body and blood of Christ. This they who
are of age and understanding, stand in need of to be a confirmation unto them,
as who are diversely tempted. Unto baptism regeneration suffices by the holy
Ghost, or an inclination to faith and repentance. 2. Jn the Supper are added,
and required conditions, which hinder the use thereof to be granted unto
Jnfants. And therefore, although they are to be baptized, yet they ought not to
be admitted unto the Supper. For unto those sacraments only are Infants to be
admitted, which have no such condition adioined, whereby their age is excluded.
But the conditions which are in the Supper do altogether exclude Infants from
the use thereof. For in the Supper it is required, 1. That they who use the
sign show forth the death of the lord. 2. That they try themselves, whether
they have faith and repentance, or no. And seeing the age of Infants can not
do these things, Infants are for good cause excluded from the Supper.

6 What is the right and lawful use of Baptism.
The dross, which the Papists blend with the simplicity of Christ's
institution in baptism, is to be rejected.
THE right and lawful use of baptism is, when the ceremonies or rites
instituted by Christ in baptism are not changed. Whence it is manifest, that
the dross and filth of Papists; as oil, spettle, and exorcisme or
coniuration, is to be thrown away. Objection. But these appertain and belong
to order and comeliness. Answer. The Holy Ghost knew well enough, what did
appertain thereunto. Reply. But they appertain to the signifieng of some
thing. Ans. It belongs not to men, to Institute any sign of Gods will. This
also we are to think and judge of others of the same hatching. 2. The use of
baptism is right when baptism is given to them, for whom it was instituted,
which are all the converted, or members of the church. 3. When baptism is used
to that end, whereunto it was instituted: not for the healing of cattle: but
when the true ends thereof are respected. Briefly, the lawful and right use of
Baptism is, when he that is converted is baptized according to the lawful
rite and end. Now, Baptism may not be reiterated, 1 Because it depends not
on the person of him that baptizeth. And further he that is once engraffed into
Christ shall never be cast out or rejected: and therefore it suffices to be
once received. 2 Salvation does not depend on baptism.

7 In place whereof baptism succeeded.
Baptism succeeded in the room of circumcision.
Baptism succeeded in the place of circumcision, which is proved, first, by
the word of the Apostle before alleged: For he says, That we are
circumcised in Christ, with circumcision made without hands, by putting off
the sinful body of the flesh, through the circumcision of Christ. The Apostles
purpose is by this speech to show, that there is no fruit or use now Of the
circumcision which was made with hands, because that was accomplished and
fulfilled in christ, which was by it prefigured and shadowed. Now to declare
and expound these words he presently adds, that they are buried together with
christ by baptism: by which words he shows that the complement and truth of
baptism is the co^plement and truth of circumcision, seeing baptism signifies
one and the self same thing to us, which circumcision signified of old time
unto the Fathers: which is, that spiritual circumcision, which christ
accomplisheth and performs in us. This only is the difference: that baptism
is the sign of the thing exhibibited, which circumcision prefigured when it
was yet absent and not exhibited. Wherefore we are taught by this place of
Paul, that baptism is the same to Christians, which circumcision was before to
the Jews. 2. That baptism was substituted in the place of circumcision, this
also conuinceth, for that as circumcision, so also baptism is a sign of
admission and receiving into the Church. For as the infantes of Jews and
Proselytes, being borne citizens of the church, were thorough grace
circumcised: but those who were of elder years, were then first admitted unto
circumcision, when they professed Iudaisme: so also the infantes of christians
are presently baptized, but the elder sort are not, until they have made
profession of true christian doctrine, insteede of which profession it serves
the infantes that they were born in the church. There are other reasons also
besides the testimonies of holy scriptures, drawn especially from the use of
Baptism, whereby it may be confirmed, that Baptism succeeded circumcision.
Now to succeed any sacrament, is, the former being abolished, to be substituted
in place thereof, and that so, as to have the same use and end, which the
former sacrament had, and to have also the same thing signified. So is there
the same thing signified by baptism, which was before by circumcision.
Moreover the citizens of the church are no less received by baptism, and are
discerned from al other men, than in times past by circumcision. Object. If
baptism succeeded circumcision, then now also only the males are to be
baptized, if the circumstances of circumcision be kept. Answer. The
circumstances are not now determined as then: because also these were peculiar
and special which may be omitted without breach of the commandment. But this
is general and agreeing to both, that the children of the godly ought by this
sign to be engraffed into the church, whether that be done on the eight day,
or presently after their birth.

8 How baptism agrees with circumcision, and wherein it differs from it.
CIrcumcision and baptism agree, Baptism and circumcision agree, 1 In the end
which they respect. 2 In the thing which they work. 3 In the thing which they
signify.


The differences of Circumcision and baptism.


1. In the chief and principal end, whereas in both is sealed the promise of
grace by christ, which is always one and the same. 2. By both of them is
wrought our receiving into the Church. 3 By both is signified regeneration. Ye
are circumcised in christ with circumcision made without hands.

Circumcision and baptism differ, 1. In rites: For the same are not the rites
of circumcision and of baptism. 2. Circumcision (on gods behalf) promised
grace for the Messiah to come, baptism for the Messiah exhibited. The
circumcised were received into favor for christ which was to be exhibited. the
baptized are received for christ exhibited. 3. Circumcision had a promise also
of a corporal benefit, that is, it was a testimony also, that god would give
a certain place for the church in the land of Canaan, until the coming of the
Messiah. Baptism has no promise in particular of any temporal benefit. 4.
Circumcision (on our behalf) did bind to the observing of the whole Law,
ceremonial, judicial, and moral. Baptism binds us only to faith and
amendment of life; that is, to observe only the moral law. 5. Circumcision was
instituted for the Jsraelites. Baptism was instituted for all nations that are
desirous and willing to come unto the society of the church. 6. Circumcision
was to last until the coming of the Messiah: baptism shall continue until the
end of the world.

CERTAIN CONCLVSIONS OF BAPTISM.
1 Baptism is a sacrament of the new testament, whereby christ testifies
unto the faithful, which are baptized in the name of the Father, and the Son,
and the holy Ghost, remission of all their sins, the giving of the holy
Ghost, and their engraffing into the church and his body: and they of the
other side profess that they receive these benefits from God, and therefore
will and ought hereafter to live unto him, and to serve him. And further the
same baptism was begun by John Baptist, and continued by the Apostles; because
he baptized into christ who should suffer and rise again, and they, into
christ who had suffered and was risen again.

2 The first end of baptism instituted by God is, that God might thereby
signify and testify that he cleanses by blood and the holy ghost them,
which are baptized, from their sins, and so engraffeth them into christ's
body, and makes them partakers of his benefits. 2. That baptism might be a
solemn receiving or matriculating and admitting of every one into the visible
church, and a distinguishing mark of the church from all sects. 3. That it
might be a public and solemn profession of our faith in christ, and our bond
whereby we are obliged to faith and obedience toward him. 4. That it might
advertise us of our sinking into afflictions, and of our rising out of them
again, and deliverance f^m them.

3. Baptism has this force and power to testify and seal, by the
commandment of God, through the promise of grace adioined by Christ unto this
rite rightly used. For Christ baptiseth us by the hand of his ministers; as he
speaks unto us by the mouth of his ministers.

4 Wherefore there is in baptism a double water: An external visible water,
which is elementary, and an internal invisible, celestial, which is the blood
and spirit of christ. So also there is a double washing. An external visible
and signifieng washing, namely the sprinckling or pouring of water, which is
corporal, that is, is perceived by the parts and senses of the body: And an
internal, invisible, and signified washing, namely remission of sins, for the
blood of christ shed for us, and our regeneration by the holy ghost, and our
engraffing into his body, which is spiritual, that is, is perceived and
received by faith and the spirit. Lastly, there is also a double administer
of baptism: An external of the external baptism, which is the minister of
the church, baptizing us by his hand with water: An internal of the internal
baptism, which is christ himself baptizing us by his blood and spirit.

5 Neither is the water changed into the blood or spirit of Christ, neither is
the blood of Christ present in the water, or in the same place with the water.
Neither are their bodies, who are baptized, washed therewith visiblie: neither
is the holy ghost by his substance or virtue more in this water than elsewhere;
but in the right use of baptism he works in the hearts of them, who are
baptized, and spirituallie sprinckleth and washes them with the blood of
christ, and he uses this external Symbol or sign, as an instrument, and as a
visible word or promise to stay and stir up the faith of them who are baptized.

6 When as then Baptism is said to be the washing of the new birth, or to
save us, or to wash away our sins, it is meant, that the external Baptism is
a sign of the internal, that is, of regeneration, or our new birth, of
salvation, and spiritual washing, and this internal Baptism is said to be
joined with that external Baptism in the right use and administration thereof.

7 But notwithstanding, so is sin in Baptism abolished, that we are delivered
from being obnoxious to the wrath of God, and from the condemnation of
eternal punishment, and further, newness of life is begun in us by the holy
Ghost; but yet the remnants of sin remain in us until the end of this life.

8 Now all they, and they alone receive Baptism according to the right use,
who are renewed, or renewing, and are baptized to those ends, whereto Baptism
was by Christ instituted.

9 The Church does rightly administer Baptism to all them, and to them alone,
whom she ought to repute in the number of the regenerate or members of Christ.

10 Seeing also the infants of christians are of the church, into which Christ
will have al those received and enrolled by baptism, who belong unto him, and
therefore baptism was substituted in the place of circumcision, (whereby as
well unto the infantes as unto the elder sort, which did belong unto the seed
of Abraham, justification, regeneration, and receiving into the church was
sealed) and therefore no man can forbid water, that they should not be
baptized, who have received the holy ghost purifieng their hearts. Those
infantes then must necessarily also be baptized, who either are borne in the
church, or come together with their Parents to it.

11 As the promise of the gospel, so baptism being received unworthily, that
is, before conversion, is ratified and profitable unto salvation to them that
are penitent, and the use thereof which was before amiss and unlawful, is
now become unto them right and lawful.

12 Neither does the wickedness of the minister make baptism void or of no
effect and force unto them, so that it be administered into the promise and
faith of Christ: and therefore also the true church does not baptize them who
have been baptized of heretics, but only must inform and enstruct them with
true doctrine concerning Christ and baptism.

13 And as the covenant once made with god, is also afterward, after sins
committed, perpetually firm and of force to the repentant: so also Baptism
being once received, confirms and assures the repentant all their life time
of remission of sins; and therefore neither ought it to be reiterated,
neither to be differred until the end of our life, as if it so only cleansed
men from sins, if no sins be committed after it is once received.

14 Neither yet are all those, who are baptized with water, whether they be of
understanding, or Infants, partakers of the grace of Christ. For the
everlasting election of God, and his calling unto the Kingdom of Christ is
frree.

15 Neither are all, who are not baptized, excluded from the grace of Christ.
For not the want, but the contempt of the Baptism shuts men out of the
covenant of God made with the faithful and their children.

16 And seeing the administration of the Sacraments is a part of the
Ecclesiastical ministry, they who are not called unto this, and especially
weomen, may not take upon them the power and authority to baptize.

17 Rites which are patched by men to Baptism, as hallowing of the water,
tapers, exorcisms, chrisme, salt, crosses, spetle, and such like are worthily
reputed in the Christ, as a corruption of the sacrament.

OF CIRCVMCISION.
THE latter two questions of Baptism before expounded, are also common unto
the doctrine of circumcision: and those things, which may be spoken of
circumcision, are not unfitly annexed unto the doctrine of baptism. It
remains therefore, that we briefly discuss those questions which are
especially to be observed concerning circumcision. These are in number four.

1 What circumcision is. 2 What are the ends of circumcision. 3 Why it is
abolished. 4 Why christ was circumcised.
1 WHAT CIRCVMCISION IS.
CIrcumcision is that rite, whereby all the males of the Israelits were
circumcised according to the commandment of God, that this right might be a
seal of the covenant made with Abraham's posterity. Unto other Nations, but
not unto the Jews, it was free to be circumcised, or not to be circumcised.

We must here observe, that they of the old testament were of three sorts. 1.
Jsraelites, which were of Abraham's posterity, and were necessarily bound by
the Law to observe circumcision and the ceremonies. 2. Proselytes, who of the
Gentiles were converted unto the Jews, and did more and more for co^firming of
their faith submit the^ selves unto circumcision, and the whole ceremonial
law; 3. Those of the gentiles who were converted unto the Jews, but did not
observe the ceremonies. For unto the gentiles and Prosylites it was free to
keep, or not to keep circumcision and the ceremonies. These latter were
called also Religious men, who embraced only the doctrine and promises of god.
Object. The males only were circumcised: therefore the women were shut out
from the covenant of grace. Answer. The women were comprehended in the
circumcision of the males: And God spared the weaker sex. And it sufficed for
them, to come of godly progenitors.

2 What are the ends of circumcision.
CIrcumcision was instituted, 1. That it might be a sign of the grace of God
toward Abraham's posterity, and that doubly. First, that God would receive
the believers by the Messiah who was to come: Secondly, that he would give them
the land of Canaan, and grant his church a certain place there, until the
coming of the Messiah. 2. That it might be a bond to bind Abraham and his
seed unto thankefulnes, or to faith and repentance, and so to keep the whole
law. 3. That it might be a mark to distinguish the Jews from other Nations
and Sects. 4. That it might be a sacrament of initiating and receiving them
into the church. 5. That it might be an accusation and a signification of
uncleanness. For that rite did show, that all men were subject to sins, and
unclean. 6. That it might be a sign, which should show and signify that
the means of their deliverance through Christ which was to come, should not
come elsewhence than from the blood of Abraham.

3 Why circumcision is abolished.
CIrcumcision is abolished, 1. Because the thing signified is exhibited. For
among other things it signified, that the Messiah promised unto the Fathers
should come at length in his appointed time, and should in our behalf take our
nature. 2. Because circumcision was instituted for the seuering of the Jews
from all other Nations: but now the church, that difference being abolished, is
collected and gathered out of al Nations. And now the sacrament of baptism
performerth the same unto us, which circumcision did unto them. Moreover, as
circumcision was a sign unto them of their receiving into the people of God.
So is baptism unto us the first mark which seuereth the church from the wicked.

4 Why Christ was circumcised.
CHrist was circumcised, 1. That he might signify that he was also a member
of that circumcised people. 2. That he might show, that he received and took
our sins on himself, that he might satisfy for them. 3. That he might
testify that he did entirely and fully fulfill the law in our behalf. 4.
The circumcision of Christ was a part also of his humiliation and Ransom.

OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
THE chief questions.

1 What the Supper of the Lord is. 2 What are the ends thereof, or, wherefore
it was instituted. 3 What is differs from Baptism. 4 What is the sense and
meaning of the words of the institution. 5 What is the difference between the
Lords Supper and the Papists Mass. 6 What is the right use of the Supper, 7
What the wicked receive in the Supper. 8 Who are to come and to be admitted
unto the Supper.
1 WHAT THE SVPPER OF THE LORD IS.
FIrst we will see, by what names the Supper of the Lord is called* then we
will in few words define what it is. This action, or ceremony, or rite
instituted by a Christ a little before his death is called, A supper, Why it is
called a Supper.
from the first institution of it: that is, in respect of the original or
first beginning of this rite, or in respect of the time wherein this ceremony
was instituted, which circumstance of time the church has changed. It is
likewise called Synaxis, that is, Why a convent.
a convent, in respect of the assembly and convent of the church, because some,
either few, or many assemble and meet together, in celebrating of the supper.
For in the first celebration the Disciples were present; Take this, and divide
it among you. Wherefore it must needs be that there was some number there;
which also appears by the Apostle repeating the first institution. 1. Cor.
11. where in the end he adds, When ye come together to eat, tarry one for
another. And further that more ought to come together to celebrate the supper,
this end of the supper does evidently enough show, in that it was instituted to
be a token and even a bond of love. For we that are many, are one bread, and
one body. It is called also the Eucharist, Why, the Eucharist. Why, a
sacrifice. Why, Missa.
because it is a rite and ceremony of thanksgiving. Last of all, it is called
also a sacrifice, because it is the commemoration of christ's propitiatory
benefit. And at length it was also called Missa, from the offering, or from the
dimissing of the rest who might not communicate, after the sermon which went
before the celebration was finished.

Now let us come to define the Lords Supper.
The definition of the Lords Supper.
THE Lords supper is a ceremony or sacrament instituted and appointed of christ
unto the faithful, for a memorial of him, whereby christ does certainly
promise and seal unto me and all the faithful, first that his body was
offered and broken on the cross for me, and his blood shed for me, as
truly, as I see with my eyes the bread of the Lord to be broken unto me, and
his cup distributed: and moreover that he does as certainly with his body
crucified and his blood shed feed and nourish my soul unto everlasting life, as
my body is fed with the bread and the cup of the lord received from the hand of
the minister, which are offered to me as certain seals of the body and blood
of Christ. It may be also more briefly defined on this wise. The lords supper
is a distributing and receiving of bread and wine, commanded of Christ unto
the faithful, that by these signs he might testify, that he has delivered
and yielded his body unto death, and has shed his blood for them: and does
give them those things to eat and drink, that they might be unto them the
meat and drink of eternal life, and that thereby also he might testify, that
he would dwell in them for ever: And again, that of the otherside he might by
the same sign bind them to mutual dilection and love, seeing Christ spares
not to give his body and blood for us. This is confirmed not only by Christ
in the Evangelists, but also by Paul, who expressly says, The cup of blessing
which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ?

The Signs and things signified in the Lords Supper.
Moreover, the signs in this sacrament are, bread and wine: bread broke and
eat; wine distributed and taken. The things signified are, 1. The breaking of
the body, and the shedding of the blood of Christ. 2. Our union and conjunction
with christ by faith, so that we draw life everlasting from him, and are made
partakers, as of Christ himself, so also of all his benefits; as the branches
are made partakers of the life of the vine. We are advertised of this our
communion with christ, First, by the proportion which the signs have with the
things, and Secondly by the promise which is adjoined. And the proportion
does chief^^ propose and show two things unto us 1. The sacrifice of Christ.
2. Our communion with christ, because the bread is not only broken, but is also
given us to eat. Now the breaking of the bread is a part of the ceremony,
whereunto a part of the thing signified does answer This difference does
Paul testify, when he says: This my body which is broken for you Here
rec^iuing and eating is a part of the ceremony, whereunto doo^h answer the
thing signified, ^o wit, the eating of christ's body. Now this divine and
spiritual thing, namely the breaking and communicating of christ's body, is
signed and confirmed by this ceremony which is the breaking and receiving of
bread, for two causes. 1. Because Christ commands these rites unto which we
ought to give no less credit, than if Christ himself did speak with us. 2.
Because he annexeth a promise, that they who observe these rites with a true
faith must be assured and certain that they have communion with Christ. Wine
is added, that we should know the perfection and accomplishment of our
salvation to be in his sacrifice, and that there was nothing which could be
further desired. The wine is severed from the bread* to signify the violence
of his death, because his blood was sundered from his body.

2 What are the ends of the Lords supper.
THE ends, for which the Lords supper was instituted, are, 1. That it might be
a c^nfirmation of our faith, that is, a most certain testification of our
communion and union with christ; because Christ testifies unto us by these
signs, that he does as verily feed us with his body and blood unto
everlasting life, (...) we receive, at the hand of the minister, these the
Lords signs. And this testification is directed to every one who receives
the signs with a true faith: and further also we so receive the signs at the
ministers hand, as that rather the Lord himself gives them us by his m
nisters. Wherefore christ is said to have baptized more disciples, than John,
when yet he did it by his Apostles, and other disciples. 2. That it might be
a public distinction, or mark, discerning the church from all other nations
and secte^. For the Lord instituted and appointed his supper for his disciples,
and not for others. 3. That it might be our testification to christ and the
whole church: Which is a public confession of our faith, and a solemn
binding of our selves to thankefulnes and the celebration of this benefit.
Both which are proved by these words of christ: Do this in remembrance of
me. This remembrance is taken first, for faith in the heart; then for
thanksgiving and our public confession. 4. That it might be a bond of the
churches assemblies and meetings: because the Supper was instituted that it
should be done and celebrated in a congregation, and that either great or
small. Therefore the Supper (as was said before) is called a Synaxis.
convent: and Christ expressly commands, Drink ye all of this. Likewise
Paul, When ye come together to eat, stay one for another. 5. That it might
be a bond of mutual love and dilection: because the Supper testifies, that
all are made the members of christ under one head: as also Paul says: For we
that are many are one bread and one body, because we are all partakers of one
bread.

The Lords supper may not be celebrated by one alone.
Of this which has been spoken, we gather that the Lords Supper ought not to
be celebrated by one only. 1. Because it is a communion, and the sign of our
communion. 2. Because it is a thanksgiving, and all ought to give thanks unto
God, and by consequent, he that thinks himself unworthy to communicate with
others in the Lords Supper, does withal confess himself not to be fit to
give thanks unto God. 3. Because christ together with his benefits, is not
proper to any, but common to all. 4. Christ called all his household unto it,
even Judas himself. 5 That some abstain from coming to the supper, it
comes of a certain evil and corrupt motion, because they think them selves
not worthy enough to approach unto this table. All are worthy who believe
themselves to be delivered by Christ from eternal damnation, and desire to
profit and go forward in godliness. In sum; if the Supper be received by
one only, th t is done against the use, appellation, institution, and nature
of the sacrament.

Objection. Christ, in the word of the Institution of his supper, puts as
the principal end of his supper, his remembrance: therefore the confirmation of
faith must not be made the principal end of his supper. Answer. The reason
follows not, to the denial of a part, by putting the whole. For the
remembrance of Christ is the whole, wherein is comprised both our confession,
and our solemn bond to thankfulness, and also the confirmation of our faith.
Wherefore rather by inuerting the reason I thus infer and conclude: because
the remembrance is the supper, therefore it is the confirmation of our faith:
and because also Christ proposes unto us that ceremony or rite, which must
be unto us a remembrance of him, he does verily propose also a confirmation of
our faith which is nothing else, but a remembrance of Christ, and his
benefits. Objection. The holy ghost confirms our faith. Therefore the
supper does not. Answer. The reason follows not, to the removing of an
instrumental cause by the putting of a principal cause.

3 What the supper differs from Baptism.
THE supper differs from baptism, 1. Jn ceremonies or rites. 2. In the
circumstances of the institution and use, or in the significations of the
ceremonies. Baptism is a sign of the covenant entered and made between God
and the faithful. The supper is a sign of the continuing of that covenant.
Or, baptism is a sign of regeneration and of our entrance into the church.
The supper is a sign of their fostering, abiding, and preservation, who are
once entered into the church. The new man must first be borne by the spirit of
Christ, as is a natural man by natural conception: and the sign of his
renewing or regeneration is baptism. Afterward, when he is once renewed and
borne again, he must be fostered and nourished by the body and blood of
Christ, the sign of which nourishing is the supper. Now it is one and the same
Christ who both regenerateth, and nourishes us to eternal life.

And albeit it is the same participation of christ, namely both the Washing
away of sins by the blood of christ, The same thing is sealed in Baptism, and
the Supper, but the manner of ^e^ling is diverse.
which is represented in Baptism: and the Eating and drinking of the body and
blood of Christ which is confirmed unto us in the Supper: yet notwithstanding
that signification of our new birth is sealed by the dipping of our body into
the water of Baptism: and this of our maintenance and preservation is
d^painted and sealed, by the eating and drinking of bread and wine, in the
Supper. And therefore the thing signified of the sacraments is not diverse
because it is the same, to be washed with the blood of christ, and to drink
the blood of Christ. But the manner of sealing one and the some thing, is
diverse. 3 In baptism is required confession of faith and repentance in the
Elder sort; in Jnfants it is sufficient, if they be borne in the church: seeing
they that are born in the Church are therefore reputed for regenerate, or
members of the church, because they have an inclination to faith and
repentance. But in the supper is added a further cond ti^n of examining
himself, and of remembering the Lords death. Do this in remembrance of me.
Let a man examine himself. Baptism therefore is due unto the whole Church:
unto infants, who are the children of faithful Parents, no less than the
elder sort enrolling themselves and giving their names to Christ. The supper is
granted to such only as are believers and repentaunt. 4. Baptism must go
before and the supper follow: Whereupon in the ancient church after the
Sermno, were dimissed such as were excommunicated, likewise those that were
possessed or troubled with an evil spirit, and the Catechumens, that is, such
as old not as yet understand the g^ounds and principles of religion, or were
not as yet baptized. So of old, they who were not yet circumcised did not
observe the sacrifices or ceremonies. Now if they who were baptized, before
they have made conf^ssion of their faith and repentance* are not as yet to be
admitted unto the supper: much less are they, who being baptized live after
the manner of swine and dogs. 5. Baptism is not to be rei^erated, but once
only to be received in our life time: The supper is often to be received of
us: Because baptism is a sign of our receiving into the church, and
covenant; and the covenant once made, is not again undone or made void to
those that repent, but remains ratified and firm for ever. The supper is a
confirmation of our faith concerning the eternal continuance of the covenant:
which confirmation is necessary, and therefore the supper is often to be
iterated. Hereof it is, that the Apostle says of the supper. As often as ye
shall eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye show the Lords death til he
come. But of baptism he says, That al we which have been baptized into
christ, have been baptized into his death. And Christ, He that shall believe,
and shall be baptized, shall be saved. And seeing also the supper was therefore
to be instituted, that in it should be made a public remembrance,
recounting, and showing of Christ's death, it is often to be celebrated.

6 What is the sense or meaning of the words of the institution of our Lords
supper.
HEre are both those very odious questions contained concerning the sense of
Christ's words in his supper. The Transubsta^^^^ and Consubstantiaries rely
not on the simple meaning of Christ's words.
The Transubstantiaries together with the Consubstantiaries do bost and
glory, that they understand the words of Christ simply and aright. But
neither perform that, which they brag and boast of. For that is the true
simplicity and propriety of the word, whereunto, for the just understanding
and interpretations thereof, nothing is to be added, neither ought to be taken
from it, neither any thing altered. For as many as hold that the body of Christ
is With, Jn, or Under the bread, they add unto the words of Christ, and
depart from true simplicity. For if that which Christ said is simply to be
retained, that is not to be admitted which he said not, as is, The bread is
both bread and the body of Christ; but simply this only, The bread is the body
of christ. He said not, My body is with, or in, or under the bread* or, the
bread is both bread and my body together: neither added he, as these ad of
their own, really, substantially, corporally; but he uttered these bare words
of the bread, This is my body. Neither have the Traunsubstantiaries their
opinion drawn from the words of Christ simply understood, namely, that of
the bread is made the body of Christ, or, the bread is changed into the body
of Christ. For this is their own forgery, and invention. For Christ said not,
That the bread was now made, or was a making, or should be made, but simply
said, The bread is his body: where no change could come between, so that the
words of christ be simply understood. Therefore falsely do they persuade the
people, that they simply rest on the propriety of christ's words, when as
manifoldly and most far they swerve and depart from it. Wherefore the true
sense and meaning of the words is diligently to be considered. The holy
Evangelists Matthew, Mark, and Luke do most specially of al others describe
the institution of the Lords supper, and besides them the Apostle also
declares it no less plainly and luculen^ly; who thus speaks, 1. Corint. 11.
verse. 23.24.25.26. I have received of the Lord, that which J also have
delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus in the night that he was betrayed,
took bread: And when he had given thanks he brake it, and said, Take, eat:
this is my body which is broken for you; this do ye in remembrance of me.
After the same manner also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, This cup
is the new testament in my blood: this do as often as ye drink it, in
r^membrance of me. For as often as ye shall eat this bread and drink this cup,
ye show the Lords death til he come. These words of the Apostle we will briefly
expound, and then we will demonstrate them by true and firm arguments.

In the night that he was betrayed. This circumstance is specified by the
Apostle, to give us to understand, that Christ would at the last supper of the
Passover institute this his supper, to show, 1. That now an end was made of all the old sacrifices, and he did substitute a new sacrament, which should
s^cceed, and should be observed that Paschal sacrament being abolished. 2. That
the same thing might be signified, difference only of time excepted. For the
Paschal Lamb signified Christ which should come and should be sacrificed; The
supper, Christ already sacrificed. Objection. But when the supper was
instituted, Christ was yet to be sacrificed. Answer. But then was at hand the
offering up and sacrificing of Christ: For a few hours after, he was
sacrificed, and the supper was from that time forward to signify christ
sacrificed. 3. That he might stir up in his Disciples, and in us greater
attention and marking of the cause, for which he did institute it, and that we
might understand how earnestly Christ would have this supper to be recommended
unto us: seeing he did nothing before his death, but that which was of most
weight and moment. Therefore did he in the very point or instaunt before his
death institute it. For it is as it were the testament, and last will of our
testatour: For which cause it is added, In the same night that he was betrayed.

He took bread: That is, unleavened bread, nor leauened, which then they did
eat of at the table. The institution of the Supper, and Unleavened bread did
concur then together and fall out by an accident: and therefore he prescribed
not any certain manner of baking bread for the lords supper. Yet
notwithstanding the bread of the Lords supper differs from common bread:
because this is taken for the nourishment of the body; but that for the food
and nourishment of the soul, that is, for the confirmation of our faith. And
here we are to note, that he is said to have taken bread from the table. He
took not his body therefore: neither took he his body in the bread, with
the bread, or under the bread.

When he had given thanks. He gave thanks for his office now performed and
finished on earth (his last act yet remaining to be done) that thus it had
pleased the Father to redeem mankind, or that the typical passover was
abolished, and the signified passover was now exhibited, or lastly, he gave
thanks for the admirable and wonderful gathering and preserving of the church.

He brake it. That is, he brake the bread, which he took from the table, and
distributed the same, being one, amongst many; not any other invisible thing
hidden in the bread. He brake not his body, but the bread, as S. Paul says.
The bread which we break, etc. Now he distributed the bread, being one, among
many, because we that are many are one body. But the cause, for which he
brake this bread, was to signify his passion and the separation of his body
from his soul. Wherefore the breaking of bread is a necessary ceremony, both
in respect of the signification, and in respect of our confirmation, and
therefore is this ceremony also to be retained. 1. Because Christ has
commanded it. 2. For our own comfort: that we may know, the body of Christ
to have been as certainly crucified for us, as we see the bread to be broken.
3. That the opinion of transubstantiation and consubstantiation may be pulled
out of men's minds.

Take. This commandment belongs to the disciples, and to the whole Church of
the new Testament. Whence it is clear and manifest, 1. That the mass is not
the Supper of the Lord, but a private supper of him that sacrifices. 2. That
we must not be idle beholders of the supper, but religious receivers of it. 3.
That the lords supper is not to be celebrated, but in an assembly or
congregation. 4. That the supper is a sign in respect of God.

This is my body. This, that is, this bread. Objection. Then should it have
been said, These Greek pronouns cannot be expressed with the like English
particle^. Because the words, BREAD, and BODY, being of diverse genders in
Greek, the Greek pronouns also are diuer^e: when a^ in English our particle
THIS serves for words of all genders.
(...). Answer. (...), is as much as if he had said, this thing which I have
in my hand.

And that it is so to be understood is proved by these reasons, 1. Christ
took nothing but bread, he brake bread, and gave bread to his disciples to
eat. 2. Saint Paul says expressly, The bread which we break, is it not the
communion of the body of christ? 3. Of the Wine it is said, This cup is the
new testament. Wherefore after the same manner is it said, This, that is, this
bread, is my body, that is, a sign of my body, which is broken and delivered
unto death. Wherefore far be it from us, that we should say, that Christ took
bread visiblie, and his body invisibly. It is to be observed, that he says
not, Jn this is my body: or, this bread is my body invisible: but, This bread
is my body.

Which for you; My Disciples, that is, for your salvation.

Is broken. Objection. But Christ's body neither was, nor is broken. Answer.
He has a respect to the signification, which the breaking of the bread did
import. Now this breaking signifies the pains, and renting of Christ's
body, and the violent sundering of his soul and body one from the other. For
as the bread is broken and parted into diverse parts, so the soul and body of
Christ were separated and parted from each other.

Do this. That is, Being gathered and assembled together, take bread, give
thanks, distribute it. He understands the whole action which he
commands, and that to us which believe, and not the Jews, who were ready to
crucify him.

In remembrance of me That is. Thinking and meditating of my benefits, which
I have done for you, and which are by these rites recalled into your memory;
and further verily feeling and finding in heart, that I give you these my
ben^fites: and therefore celebrating them by public confession before God,
and Angels, yea before men also, and so giving me thanks for them. This
remembrance is the whole, whose parts are, the memory of christ's benefits;
faith, whereby we apply christ and his merit unto us; thankfulness, or
public confession of his benefits. Wherefore it follows not, Christ did
institute his supper for a remembrance of him; therefore he did not institute
it for confirmation of our faith. For this objection is no less frivolous.
than if I should say, The holy Ghost confirms our faith: Therefore the supper
does not. For, as it has been said before, the reason follows not to the
remoouing of the isntrumental cause, by the putting of the principal cause:
as neither does it follow to the deni^l of a pa^^, by the putting of the
whole. For Remembrance compriseth the remembering of christ's benefits, faith,
and thanksgiving. For by his sacraments christ remembers us of himself, and
his benefits, and by his sacraments he raises and establishes in us our
trust and confidence in him. And further of that remembrance of christ's
benefits, it must follow, that we also yield thanks unto him therefore
publicly.

This cup is the new testament. Or, the covenant, as both the Berith.
greek, and (...).
Hebrew word admits. Now it is called the new covenant, that is, renewed, or
(to speak it in a word) fulfilled. And this new covenant is our
reconciliation with God, the communion and participation of Christ and all his
benefits by faith in the sacrifice of Christ now fulfilled and finished,
without any observation of the ceremonies of the old Passover. The supper is
called the new covenant, because it is a sign and a seal of this covenant,
signing and sealing unto us our reconciliation with God, and our conjunction
with Christ which is wrought by faith. Now in calling the supper the new
covenant, first he comprehends both the promise, and the condition which is
expressed in the promise, namely faith and repentance: Whereof also it
follows, that the supper was for this cause also instituted, that it might be
a bond to bind us to lead a christian life. Secondly, he makes an opposition
between the new covenant, and that covenant which was the Passover, together
with the rites thereof. For the supper signified Christ offered. The Passover
signified Christ who should be offered. There is notwithstanding no small
similitude and agreeing of both. For both signify our reconciliation with God,
and conjunction with Christ.

J^ my blood: which is shed for you for remission of sins. The shedding of
Christ's blood is the merit for which, being apprehended of us by faith, we
receive remission of sins.

For as often as ye shall eat. The supper therefore is often to be iterated
and celebrated. 1. Because of the words of the institution. 2. In respect of
the end and purpose of the institution; because it must be done in
remembranuce of Christ.

Show the Lords death. That is, believe that Christ died, and that for you:
and then, profess it also publicly before all.

Till he come. Therefore it must be observed unto the worlds end: neither is
any other external form to be looked for until the day of judgment.

The words of the institution, which have been hitherto expounded, may be made
more plain and clear by these words of the Apostle. The cup of blessing,
which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread
which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? The cup of
blessing: that is, the cup of thanksgiving, which is received namely to this
end, that we may yield thanks to Christ for his death and passion. The
communion of the body, likewise, the communion of the blood, is, to be made
through faith partaker of Christ and all his benefits, the same spirit being
in us, which is in Christ, and woorking the same in us, which he works in
Christ. Bread and wine is the communion, that is, it is the sign of our
communion with Christ. Now our communion, as the Apostle briefly declares,
consists in this: that we who are many, are one body. Whence it is most
easy to collect, that this communion is not a corporal eating. For it is
wrought only by faith and the holy Ghost. Christ is the head, and we the
members, and all we, who are members, have also a communion of all Christ's
benefits. Therefore the head is common, the benefits common, and so the
members also common among themselves; wherefore their love and dilection is
common and mutual.

We understand now what is the true meaning of the words of the institution,
especially of those about which is greatest co^trouersy; which are these. This
is my body; that is, (to repeat in few words the true sense of them) This
bread broken of me and given to you, is a sign of my body for your sakes rent
and delivered unto death, and a certain seal of your conjunction with me, so
that he who believes and eats this bread, does truly and reallie after a
sort eat my body. This our judgment and interpretation, or Christ's rather, is
most true, and unto the truth of the Gospel most agreeable. Here especially
resist^unce is made, and the greatest controversy is about the word or
understanding of the word.

For our adversaries understand those words so, as they maintain thereof to
follow, that Christ's body is present and eaten corporally. But in the mean
season they consider not that those words are sacramentallie to be taken, or
that the speech is sacramental, and therefore is not to be taken as proper and
simple, as it should be, if thence were gathered, that the bread is changed
into Christ's body. Now to the sign here is attributed the name of the thing
signified, both for the conjunction which the thing signified has, in the
right use of the supper, with the sign, and also for the proportion which the
sign has with the thing signified.

Come we now to those arguments, whereby we may confirm our interpretation
and opinion to be true. The arguments, which we will use, are of three sorts,
such as are wont to be also in like controversies. 1. Some are taken from the
nature of the thing or subject, that is, by understanding the speech as the
thing it self does bear and suffer. 2. Some are drawn from an analogy of
the articles of our faith, or from a conference of places, or parts of
christian doctrine: for the holy spirit is the spirit of truth. 3. Some are
taken from other like places of scripture, where the same thing is delivered in
such words as are manifest, and whereof there is no controversy.

The first sort of Arguments, which are taken from the nature of the sacraments.
THE very manner and form of speaking yields us a firm and strong
argument: Bread is the body of Christ: but bread is not in it own proper
substance his body: (for by reason hereof have they invented
consubstantiation) therefore it is a figurative speech, even such a one as is
usual unto sacraments, and is declared in the institution.

2 Sacraments confirm, exhibit, promise, seal no other thing than the word
does: In the word is promised no corporal eating. Therefore neither is any
such thing confirmed by the sacrament.

3 In all sacraments, when the names or properties of the things are attributed
unto the signs, there is not signified the corporal presence of the thing, but
first, a similitude of the things with their signs, then a conjunction and
union of the things with their signs in the right use: but in this sacrament
Christ attributes the name of the thing, which is his body, to the sign:
therefore there is not thereby signified a corporal presence of his body.

4 The communion of Christ, which is promised in his word and sacraments, is
not corporal: but the communion of Christ, which is given in the supper, is the
same with that which is given in the word and in all sacraments: therefore the
communion of Christ in the supper is spiritual.

5 There is one and the same signification of all the Sacraments of the old and
new testament. This is manifest, because in all the promises the same benefits
are promised unto us, which are promised in the sacraments. The sacraments are
the visible word; and the sacraments promise the same which does the word.
But in the Gospel is delivered a communion which is wrought by faith. That
there is the same signification of the sacraments of both Testaments, the
Apostle shows, 1. Cor. 12.13. By one spirit are we all baptized into one
body. And 1. Cor. 10.2.3. All were baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and in
the sea, and did all eat the same spiritual meat. Objection. There is not the
same thing signified of all sacraments. For in baptism, the thing is the
washing by the blood of Christ, in the supper, the body and blood of Christ.
Answer. The thing is not diverse, because it is the same, to be washed by the
^^^ud of Christ, and to drink the blood of christ. But the manner of signifiyng
one and the sme thing is diverse, that is, there is a diverse similitude of one
and the same thing signified by the signs, or, one and the same thing has a
diverse similitude or proportion. Therefore as in baptism so in circumcision
likewise and the Passover is promised a spiritual thing, not a corporal: and
so also here in the Lords supper.

6 The nature of all sacraments is, that the signs be understood corporally,
that the things signified must be taken spiritually, and that the visible
things be not the signified things, but only signs and pledges of them.

7 The conceit of a corporal presence of Christ under the bread is wholly
different and diverse from the formal consideration of a sacrament. Therefore it
is to be rejected. The antecedent is proved: because it cannot be accounted
either for the sign, or the thing signed. It is not the sign or sacrament
because it is not object unto the senses. And further, it has no proportion or
similitude with the thing, that is, with the spiritual eating. Neither can it
be said to be the thing signed, seeing the scripture no where preaches of an
essential transfusion, and real commixtion of Christ's flesh with our bodies,
neither can there be any, except we entertain the follies and dreams of
Eutychians and Schuenkfeldians. For the sacraments testify of those blessings
only, and them only do they seal unto us, which are contained in the
promise of the Gospel. Therefore no place is left for a substantial presence of
the body in the bread, as being altogether fruitles and unprofitable.

8 Sacraments or signs ought to be visible, so that it deserves not (says
Erasmus) to be called a sacrament, which is not accomplished by an external
sign. For to this end and use are they given of god, that they may
effectually show as it were to our outward senses, that which is promised in
the word, and performed by the holy Ghost in our hearts, that they may be
visible testimonies and pledges of the promise of grace exhibited and applied.
Whence is that saying of Austin: A sacrament is a visible word: it is a
visible form of an invisible grace. Therefore no thing or action, which is
invisible, insensible, and not natural, can make the nature or appellation of a
sacrament. And consequently, they who will have christ's flesh to be in, under,
or with the bread, or will have the bread to be transubstantiated into his
flesh, let them show us a visible and sensible eating of it in the supper,
least they seem to dissent from the ancient fathers.

9 There must be an analogy and proportion between the sign or sacrament,
and the thing signified, or the thing of the sacrament: f^r except the
sacraments (says Austin) had some similitude of those things whereof they are
sacraments, they were not verily any sacraments. Now if christ's flesh be
also a sacrament, and the thing of these sacraments be invisible grace: what
proportion then and similitude shall there be between the two sacraments? But
seeing there can be none, it follows that christ's flesh may not be called a
sacrament, as being no less the thing it self of the sacrament, than eternal
salvation, signified, by way of proportion, by visible bread, as by a sign.
Wherefore the sacramental eating, which is done naturally by the mouth, does
not belong unto the body of Christ considered by it self, in any Physical or
natural respect: because unto this sacramental eating the external signs
only are object in their own nature. Saint Austin demanding how bread is the
body of Christ, and wine his blood; these (says he) brethren are therefore
called sacraments, because in them, one thing is seen, and an other thing
understood. That which is seen, has a corporal form; that which is
understood, has a spiritual fruit. If then thou will understand the body of
Christ, hear the Apostle speaking to the faithful: Ye are the body of Christ
and his members. Jf then ye be the body of Christ, and his members, your
mystery is set on the table, etc.

These are the Arguments deduced out of the nature of the thing or subject,
which is, by understanding the speech as the thing does bear and permit.

The second sort of arguments, which are deduced from the analogy of faith.
FIRM and strong reasons are drawn, from the article which is concerning the
truth of Christ's humane nature.

1 Christ took a true humane nature, like unto us in all things, except sin.
This nature therefore cannot be in more places at one and the same time, and
therefore neither can it be together in heaven and in the bread: because it is
proper unto the nature of God only, to be at once in diverse places. Christ's
body is finite, as being a true body: but it is now in heaven, as is proved out
of the article of his ascension into heaven. Therefore Christ's body is not in
the bread. Many abuse this argument, omitting the first ground which is
altogether true and necessary. For glorification does not destroy or abolish
the nature of his humane nature. Handle me and see: for a spirit has not flesh
and bones, as ye see me have. While they beheld him, he was taken up. 3. Jf
the true and very body of Christ be infinite, it is also invisible and
insensible. Therefore that which was seen, suffered and wrought on earth, was
no true body, but apparent and fantastical: because it can not agree, no not
to the Godhead it self, to be at one time finite and infinite, sensible, and
insensible: and so all those things, which are spoken of christ in the
articles of our Belief should not have been done indeed, but only should
have seemed and appeared to be done, and so we should remain as yet in death.

2 There are good arguments also derived from the article which contains the
communion of saints with christ. 1. Such is the communion of saints with
Christ now, as it was of old, and shall be hereafter, and such also is the
communion of those saints which use the sacrament, as of them who are by
necessity excluded from it. But such a communion of saints with Christ is
spiritual, as the Apostle does show, 1. Cor. 6.17. He that is joined unto the
Lord is one spirit. 1. Ioh. 4.13. Hereby know we, that we dwell in him, and he
in us: because he has given us of his spirit. John. 15.5. He is the vine, we
are the branches. Ephesians. 1.22. and 4.15. and 5.30.31. He is the Bridegroom,
and we with the whole Church are his spouse. 2 Such is our eating of Christ, as
is his abiding in us: but this is spiritual. For that Christ's abiding in us is
spiritual, is sufficiently perceived by this, in that such is his abiding in
us, as is his Fathers. Jf any man love me, he will keep my word, and my
Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and will dwell with him. But
how does the Father dwell in us, or abide with us? Truly, by his spirit.
Therefore Christ also so abides with us, or dwells in us. 3 Christ abides
in us perpetually: Therefore that abiding or presence is not corporal; because
as touching his humane nature, he says, Me ye shall not have always.
Therefore he is not eaten of us corporally, nay he cannot be eaten of us
corporally, except he be in us corporally, and that also perpetually.

3 Unto the former may be adioined also arguments taken from the sacrifice and
adoration: Wheresoever Christ is present corporally, whether it be after a
visible or invisible manner, there he is to be adored, to wit, by our minds
and the motions of our bodies converted and turned thither: But he is not to be
adored in the supper. Therefore he is not present in the supper corporally.
That he is not to be adored in the supper, is easily proved. For it is never
granted in the new testament, to tie and bind invocation to any certain place.
Ioh. 4.21. The hour comes, when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor at
Jerusalem worship the father. Again, Jf christ be so be adored and worshipped
in the supper, by our minds and motions of body converted unto the bread,
that whole oblation and sacrifice should consist in the hands of sacrificing
Mass Priests, because they offer the Son unto the Father to obtain remission
of sins; and so were his crucifieng to be reiterated.

The third sort of arguments, which are drawn from like places of scripture,
where namely the same thing is delivered in words, whereof there is no
controversy.
1 Corporal eating is in express terms condemned by the holy Ghost. It is
the spirit, says Christ, that quickens, the flesh profits nothing: By
these words Christ expressly condemns the corporal eating of his flesh,
whether visible, or invisible.

2 The bread which we break (says the Apostle) is the communion of the body of
christ. But this communion is spiritual: because when the same Apostle opposes
it to the communion of devils (ye cannot, says he, drink the cup of the Lord,
and the cup of devils: ye cannot be partakers of the lords table, and of the
table of Devils) by these words the Apostle denies that the wicked can be
partakers of the body and blood of christ in the supper. And therefore there
is no corporal eating of the body and blood of christ in his supper.

3 Christ says that the bread is his body: Therefore they tie not themselves
to the very word, who say that christ's body is in the bread, under the
bread, with the bread.

4 The cup is the new testament, that is, the cup is a sign of the new
testament: for it cannot be otherwise meant or taken. For the new testament is
the seal of the promise, or the promise it self, but not the thing promised.
Likewise: The cup is the communion of the blood of christ: The bread is the
communion of the body of christ: But this communion is a spiritual eating and
drinking of the body and blood of christ, as is apparaunt by the words of the
Apostle: and the signs of that spiritual eating and drinking are bread and
wine.

5 In the Evangelist, To eat christ, which is the living bread which descended
from heaven: Likewise, To eat Christ's flesh, and to drink his blood,
signifies to believe in Christ. Therefore in the words of the institution it
signifies the same also: because christ does not here otherwise expound them.

6 There are also the like places of scripture uttered sacramentally of other
sacraments, which confirm also the truth and meaning of this: as,
Circumcision is the covenant: The lamb is the Passover; The leuitical
sacrifices are said to be an expiation or doing away of sin: The blood of
sacrifices is called the blood of the covenant. Baptism is the washing of the
new birth: Therefore these words also, This is my body, are in like sort
sacramentally spoken.

7 Christ commands his supper to be celebrated, and the bread and wine to
be eaten and drunken, in remembrance of him: but this remembrance is chiefly
performed by faith, not corporally. Moreover, that, in memorial whereof we do
any thing, is not it self present, because we are not said to remember things
that are present.

8 By one spirit are we al baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or
Grecians, whether we be bond or free: and have been al made to drink into one
spirit. Wherefore after the same manner do we al eat the same bread. Which
Paul also manifestly shows, affirming, That all the Fathers did eat the same
spiritual food. That eating therefore is not corporal, whereby we are made
partakers of the body and blood of christ: otherwise before the coming of
christ the fathers should not have been at al made partakers of christ, as
having not as yet taken flesh.

Unto these arguments drawn out of the sacred Scripture and the ground of our
faith, may be added testimonies of the fathers and the purer church, of al
which we will at this present bring only that one notable saying of Macharius
the Monk: Bread and wine are a correspondent type of his flesh; and they who
receive the bread which is showed, eat the flesh of Christ spirituallie.

AGAINST THE TRANSVBSTANTIATION OF THE PAPISTS.
NOW it is easy to see what we are to think of Transubstantiation; even that
it is an impious invention and devise of the Papists: which also we will show
and prove briefly by diverse reasons.

1 Paul calls expressly that, which is taken, bread, both before and after
the eating: Therefore that which is taken in the supper is not really the body.

2 Christ brake bread: but he did not then break his body: Therefore the
bread is not really his body.

3 The Bread was not given for us; But the body of christ was given for us:
Therefore the bread is not really Christ's body.

4 Christ wills us to take this sacrament, and to take bread and wine, in
remembrance of him. Therefore the bread is called the body of Christ, not
reallie, but in that it is a memorial of his body, that is, the bread is a
remembrauncer unto us of christ's body, even as also it is commanded in the
words of the institution, Show the Lords death til he come.

5 The Analogy and proportion of the sign and the thing does manifestly enough
refel transubstantiation. For in every sacrament ar these two, the sign, and
the thing signified: but the sign should perish if the bread should be
transubstantiated, that is, if there should be a change of the bread into
christ's body: for so should remain the thing signified only, and not the
sign, and therefore no sacrament.

O^iection. But the Accidents of bread and wine, do still remain, as
whiteness, softness, and such like. Answer. But so will there not be a
proportion between the sign, and the thing signified, because accidents do
not nourish. You can not say, as the accidents of bread and wine nourish the
body, so the body of Christ nourishes my soul unto everlasting life And
further also, the promise of God would by this means be made void and
frustrate. For God promised that he would give the Messiah, not of the
substance of wheat and wine, but of the seed of David, Reply. But we say not
that the bread and wine are converted into the substance of Christ's body, but
that the substance of the bread and wine vanishes quite away, and in place
thereof succeeds the substance of the body and blood of Christ. Answer. Of
this bread christ speaks, That it is his body, and the same bread both
before, and in, and after the administration of it, is called bread. Christ
says not, this which is under the form of bread, is my body: but he says,
this, that is, this bread, is my body. And Paul says, The bread whith we
break, is the communion of the body of Christ: And again, For we that are
many, are one bread and one body. Again, As often as ye shall eat this
bread etc. And a little after, Whosoever shall eat this bread unworthily, etc.
Moreover; Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread.
Wherefore it is plain and evident that the substance of bread and wine
neither is changed, neither perishes, neither lies hid under a form, but
remains still the same bread and the same wine.

Now that there is no transubstantiation or conversion of the substance of
the bread and wine into the body of Christ, is thus proved. If there be
any transubstantiation, christ's institution is perverted: for it abolisheth
and brings to nothing the substance of the bread, which is the very thing,
that in this ceremony is the body of christ. For seeing the bread is the body of
Christ, then doubtless, if the bread remain not, neither does the body of
christ remain in the supper, and so christ's words are no longer true, when
he said that that bread is his body, and that wine his ^loud. The
Transubstantiaries, if they be demanded, what thing it i^ that they call the
body of christ in the supper; certainly they will not answer, it is bread:
for they have no bread left in the supper, because it is transubstantiated: but
they will send us to the very substance of christ's body absolutely considered,
covered on the altar with the accidents of bread. Wherefore all they er who
object and present the body of christ, being considered by it self in it own
proper matter and subject, to the external actions of the supper. These and the
former reasons refell consubstantiation also; wherefore neither will we bring
any more reasons severally against it. Only some certain objections of the
Consubstantiaries themselves we will refute.

A refutation of objections framed to confirm consubstantiation.
1 Objection. Christ said, This is my body. But Christ is true. Therefore we
must believe him, setting apart all Philosophical subtlety and sharpenes, and
so by consequent, bread is not a sign of his body. Answer. We grant their
argument, if they prove that Christ puts this to be his meaning, namely,
that Jn, Under, and With the bread, is his body. Reply. But it is said here,
This is my body. Answer. In other sacraments also are the like speeches:
as, The Paschal Lamb is called the Pass^ouer, Bap^isme the washing of the
newe-birth, Circumcision the covenant. Reply. But we say not that the bread is
the body of Christ reallie, as the Papists say, but that the body is in the
bread. Answer. But in this respect the Papists seem more to keep the word,
whom yet the Apostle expressly refuteth, calling it bread both before the
eating, and in the eating, and after the eating. 2. It is no where said either
by Christ or by Saint Paul, That the body of Christ is in the bread, under the
bread, with the bread, neither any where in scripture is this expressed. But
the true sense and meaning of those words is expressed in the text it self:
namely, that the bread is the body of Christ symbolically, that is, as a
symbol or toke^ of it. For in the text it is plainly said, Do this in
remembrance of me. So Paul also calls the bread, the communion of the body
of christ. Wherefore the bread is the representing or symbolical and signifieng
body of christ. The bread is a sign of christ's body, but not a covert wherein
his body it self remains.

2 Objection. Christ is omnipotent. Therefore his body may be there, and so,
because he said it, it is there. Answer. The reason is of no force, which will
conclude a thing to be done, because it may be done. Reply. Whatsoever is at
the right hand of God is every where. Answer. It is false. For the sitting
at the right hand of God signifies the union of both natures in Christ, his
power and rule, and excellency of gifts. Now although he rule all things, yet
is it not necessary that he should be present in body It is sufficient
that his person is every where, and is present in dignity. As also he
sustained all things even then, when he hung on the Cross, neither yet was
his body every where. Therefore to say, that christ sits at the right hand
of the Father, signifies that christ is the person by whom the Father
mediately governs and rules al things, especially the church. But no part
of this Sitting is the vbiquitie of christ's body: and it suffices that
christ's person is every where.

3 Objection. That which quickens and nourishes us, is received into us, the
body and blood of christ do quicken us: therefore they are received into us.
Answer. The Mayor is but mere particular, and therefore false in general for
not whatsoever quickens and nourishes us, must necessarily be received into
us. That only must be received into us necessarily, which quickneth and
nourishes naturally, that is, by a ioint-touching of our body. This meat,
which so nourishes us after a natural manner, does not nourishe us, except
thereby the substance of our body be increased. But we speak far
otherwise of the nourishing of the soul, which is spiritual. Christ's body
does not at all nourish us naturally: for it does not being received into us
quicken us, by working in us new corporal qualities, like as a medicine does:
but the body of christ nourishes and quickens us after a manner diverse from
that natural nourishing; and accordingly as this manner of nourishing and
quickening requires, so receive we christ's body. The manner whereby christ's
body and blood nourishes us, is, 1. The respect of his merit. For, for us
christ's body is given, and his blood shed for us, and for the body and blood
of christ we have eternal life given unto us. After this manner then the body
and blood of christ quickens us, as it is a merit deserving for us this
blessing. 2. His body and blood quickens or nourishes us, when we receive
that merit of christ's body and blood: that is, when we believe with a true
faith that for it we shall have eternal life. This faith rests and hangs
on christ hanging on the Cross, not corporally dwelling in us. 3. It
nourishes us, when the same spirit unites us by faith unto christ, and
works the like in us, which it does in christ. For except we be graffed into
christ, we do not please God. For he will on that condition receive us, and
pardon us our sins. So that by faith through the working of the holy Ghost,
we be joined with christ, and engraffed into him. Seeing then this is the
manner, whereby the body and blood of christ quicken and nourish us, there is
no need of any descending of the body and blood of christ into our bodies.

4 Objection. The eating of bread is done by the mouth: But the eating of the
body is the eating of bread. Therefore the eating of the body is done by the
mouth, and is corporal, when it is said, Take and eat. Answer. This
eating, whereof mention is made here, is performed by the mouth, not simply,
but as concerning the sign. But it is not done by the mouth, but is
spiritual, as concerning the thing signified and spiritual. Reply. This is my
body, that is the invisible body which J have in my hands. Answer. But the
body is the thing signified and spiritual, other-wise there will be no
proportion between the sign and the thing signified. It follows therefore
that he says, The bread is my body: So that the bread is that whereof the
body is affirmed. For in this speech the thing signified is affirmed of the
sign.

5 Objection. The Words are not to be changed. Christ used the word, Js;
Therefore there may not be put in place thereof the word, Signifies. Answer.
The words are not to be changed into another sense, than God will have. But
otherwise they are often to be changed: As when it is said, Pluck out thine
eye. For words are to be understood according to the nature of things.
Moreover they themselves, who accuse us of change, do more make this change
and mutation than we. Reply. The body of christ was broken and crucified for
us: not the sign of the body. Therefore the bread is the substantial body
of christ. Answ. I grant: for the bread signifies that very body, which was
borne of Marie and crucified.

Question. Why then are the things signified attributed to the signs, Two
causes why the thing, signified are attributed to the signs.
and the signs called by their names, if neither consubstantiation, nor
transubstantiation be thereby signified? Answer. There are two causes
alleged hereof: A similitude or likeness, and a certainty. 1. The
similitude or proportion of signs and the thing signified is, first: As the
bread and wine nourish our body, so the body and blood of christ nourish us
unto everlasting life. Secondly, As the bread and wine are received by the
mouth, so the body and blood are received by faith. Thirdly, As the bread is
eaten being broken, so the body of christ is received being sacrif ced and
broken. Fourthly, As in corporal food, is required an appetite unto it, so
also in this spiritual food is required faith. Fifthly, As of many corns is
made one loaf, so are we being many made one body. Wherefore by reason of
this similitude of the sign and the thing signified, the thing signified is
attributed unto the signs. 2. The certainty of the signs in the cause
likewise why that is aff^rmed of the signs, which is proper unto the thing
signified. For the s^gnes testify that christ's sacrifice is accomplished, and
for our behoof and commodity: because it is certainly and truly applied unto
us.

Here last of al is to be observed, that the eating of christ's body does
comprise and comprehend, 1. Faith. 2. That by faith we are made partakers of
christ, that is, we are united unto Christ, and our communion is wrought by
faith: and the holy Ghost is the bond of this our union and conjunction with
Christ. 3. That we are made partakers of Christ's benefits, justification, and
remission of sins. And this ensues of that union of Christ with us. 4. It
comprehends also the benefit of our regeneration, whereby we are made like
and conformed unto christ, because the same spirit dwelling in us and in
christ, works also the same things in us. This eating is easily collected, as
out of many other places, so also out of this saying of christ. I am the living
bread which comes down from heaven; if any man eat of this bread he shall
live for ever. And the bread that I will give, is my flesh, which I will give
for the life of the world.

5 What is the difference between the Lords supper, and the popish Mass.
THIS question is necessary, by reason of errors which have c^ept into the
church. It is otherwise demanded, Why the Mass is to be abolished ^ut here
this question is also contained and comprehended: because these differences and
contrarieties of the Lords supper and the Mass, are the causes why the Mass
is to be abolished. First let us speak a few words of the name of the
Mass, or, Missa. The word Missa seems to have his name from an ancient
custom of Ecclesiastical rites and actions, The original of the word Missa,
which we call the Mass.
in the end whereof leave was given of departure to the Catechumenes, the
possessed with spirits, and the excommunicated persons: and so the word Missa
seems to be used, as it were a mission or sending away, because it was the
last part of divine service. Others will have it to be so called from a
dimission, or from the manner of dimissing them; because they were demised with
these words, ^te, Missa est, that is, go, you may depart: or, as others
interpret it, go, now is the collection or alms, which they will have to be
called Missa, of the sending it in (as we may so speak) or throwing or casting
it in for the poor. Some will therefore have it derived from the Hebrew Masah,
that is, tributes, which was wont to be paid of every one. The word is found
Deuteronomy. 16.10. Missach, nidbath i^decha, A free gift of thine hand. Now that
offering was called so, being as it were a yearly tribute, which yet was no
exaction, but given freely. Others interpret it to be a sufficiency, which
is, that there should be given so much as was sufficient, and perhaps this is
the truer: because. Deuteronomy. 15. The Lord commanded the Jsraelites, that they
should open their hand unto the poor, and should lend him sufficient for his
need. This the Chaldee Paraphrast interprets to be Missah.

Hereof our men think that it was called Missa, as if it were a tribute, and
free offering which should be every where offered unto God in the church for
the living and the dead. But this is not of any likelihood to be true. It is
manifest indeed that the church has borrowed some words from the Hebrews, as,
Satan, Osanna, Sabaot, Halleluia, Pascha, and such like. But those words came
not to the Latin church, but by the greek church, and those words are found
in the greek testament, when first it was written in greek. And therefore we
have no Hebrew words derived unto our Church, which the greek church had not
before us. If also we will search the greek Fathers, the word Missa will
never be found to have bin used by them. Therefore I think not that the word
Missa was taken from the Hebrews. But Missa, which doubtless is a latin
word by original, Tertul. li. 4. contra Mar. Cypr. de bono patient. and
epist. 4. li. 3.
seems to have been taken from the Fathers, who used Remissa, for Remissio,
as Tertullian; We have spoken, says he, of de remissa peccatorum.
remission of sins. And Cyprian: He that was to give daturus remissam
peccatorum.
remission of sins, did not disdain to be baptized. And again he uses
the same word: He that blasphemeth against the holy ghost, has not remission
of sins. Wherefore as they said Remissa for Remissio, so they seem also to
have said Missa for Missio. And therefore they called that Missa, which was don
after the missio^ or sending away of the catechuments. We reject both the name
and the thing. For this word does not agree unto the Lords Supper; because
the Lords Supper has nothing common and agreeing with the name of Missa,
albeit it was used of the ancient writers. Moreover we have no need of this
name. For we have other words for this pvrpose most convenient and agreeable.

The repugnancie of the Mass with the Lords supper.
NOW let us see the differences of the Supper and the Mass, and those most
contrary one to another, and such as in respect whereof the Mass ought to be
abolished.

1 The Popish Mass is a manifold, changing or abolishing rather of the rite
instituted by Christ. For it takes away the cup from the people, and adds
many toies, when as notwithstanding no creature has any power to institute
any sacraments, or to change or abolish the constitutions and ordinances of
God.

2 The Mass transformeth the sign into the thing signified. For it denies
that there is any bread and wine remaining; but says, it is the flesh and
blood of Christ substantiallie, which is flat repugnant to the nature of the
Lords supper.

3 In the Mass the Papists make other heavenly gifts to be, than which are
found in the word and other sacraments, or in the promise annexed unto them. As
where the Masse-Priestes faigne that the Mass does merit, even by the work it
self wrought, that is through the external rite and action, both for him that
celebrateth, and for others, not only remission of sins, but the healing
also of men, oxen, swine, and cattle diseased. and so withal they coin this
too, that forsooth those signs of bread and wine are a sacrament even without
the use also and administration. Likewise they will have other things to be in
the Mass, than are in any sacrament, which is the very carnal descending and
abiding of Christ's body therein, which is contrary to the nature of al
sacraments.

4 The Mass is repugnant to the sacrifice of Christ: the supper confirms and
testifies that we are justified, for the alone sacrifice of Christ wrought and
finished on the Cross: but the Mass contrary to the testimonies of scripture
makes more propitiatory sacrifices: this is their treading and trampling
Christ's blood under foot, when they say it has not merited perfect remission
of our sins. Objection. The Mass is called a sacrifice of the Papists, and
likewise the supper is called a sacrifice by the Fathers: therefore the Fathers
were Papists. Auns. The Papists call the M sse a propitiatory sacrifice. The
fathers call the supper a sacrifice, and so it is, but an Eucharistical or
thanksgiving sacrifice. Again, it is even that same sacrifice which Christ
offered, in such sort, as the bread is the body of Christ The Papists will
have it to be a diverse sacrifice, whereby is obtained remission of sins.
Now it is one thing for the same sacrifice to be often offered: and an other
thing for one sacrifice to be once offered, and that sufficient to take away
all sins. This sacrifice alone is sufficient for remission of sins, and,
this sacrifice with others is offered for sins; these speeches are
contradictorie.

5 The Mass is repugnant to Christ's Priesthood* because he is the only
high Priest who has power to offer himself. The Pope with his companions most
impudently pulls this honor to himself. For these deceivers and lying men
feign with great contumely and despite to christ, that they offer again christ
unto the Father, and that they alone are worthy men to offer christ unto his
Father: when yet no man, no Angel, neither any creature is of that dignity and
worthiness, as that he may sacrifice the son of God. For the Priest is abooue
the sacrifice: they therefore who will be the Priests to offer christ, mount
and lift themselves above him. Objection. The Pri^st^ stay not, but offer
only and present the son unto the father, that for his sake he may remit us
our sins, and so they only apply that one and only sacrifice of christ.
Answer. It is enough that they say, that they offer Christ with their hands.
For (...) ^emaineth that they make themselves Priests. Neither is it material,
that they deny that they slay Christ. Many things were offered of old by the
Priests, which were not slain, neither were of that quality, but were only
offered, as cakes, and liquid offerings, and burnt offerings, and such like. The
Jews indeed slew Christ, but they did not sacrifice him: but Christ himself
was willingly slain, and therefore sacrificed himself. Heb. 9.14. Christ
through the eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God: and verily
he offered himself once a sacrifice unto his father for us. Heb. 9.28. Christ
was once offered to take away the sins of many; and to them that look for
him shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation. Heb. 10.12.
Christ after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, sits for ever at the
right hand of God. Now the Papists contrary to these manifest places of
scripture will have Christ to be often offered in the Mass.

6 The Mass is repugnant to the doctrine of grace and justification, which
teaches, that in this life only is the time of obteining favor, by faith
alone, for the only merit of christ. The papists neglecting faith, which
they have no knowledge of, and rejecting Christ's merit, substitute in place
thereof this idolatrous invention. For through and for this sacrifice of the
Mass, and so for this work (as they speak) wrought, they maintain that the
dead also obtain remission of sins.

7 The Mass is repugnant unto the articles of our faith concerning the true
humanity of christ, concerning his true ascension into heaven, and his
returning from thence, at the day of judgment. For they make a corporal
presence of christ in the Mass, saying that christ is invisible present under
the form of bread and wine, the substance of the bread and wine being
abolished, as often as the Mass is celebrated, and this presence of Christ is
corporal, when the accidents only of the sign remain. It is contrary also
to the nature of sacraments, which permits not the substance of the signs to
be abolished, neither requires any natural connection of the signs and
things: and therefore neither is it required in the Supper, which leads us to
christ crucified; and reigning in heaven, and from thence communicating
himself unto us.

8 The Mass is contrary to the communion of Saints with Christ. For it
imagines an execrable invention, which is, that Christ's body does descend
into our bodies, and remains as long within our bodies as the forms remain
of bread and wine. But the supper reaches that we are made members of Christ
by the holy gh st. and ingraffed into him.

9 The Mass is repugnaunt to the true worship of God, because it makes Christ
to be there corporally present, and so by consequent there to be worshipped.
Even as of old before his ascension it was not only lawful, but in duty
required; that Christ should be worshipped in whatsoever place he was, and so
also did his Disciples always worship him, when he was present, as also when
he ascended from them: but after his ascension they did not from that time
adore and worship him, turning unto any one particular place more than other.
Wherefore seeing the Papists in their Mass tie the worship and adoration of
christ unto a thing, whereunto christ himself by express word has not tied
it; they profess them selves to be idolaters, and do no less absurdly and
impiously in this, than if they should worship Christ at a wall, or if they
should worship a pillar falling down before it. Which we prove, 1. Because no
creature has power to ty the woorshippe of God to any thing or place, wherein
God has not commanded by express word himself to be worshipped, and wherein
God has not promised to hear us. And hereby is the cause of that difference
plainly scene, why the Jews directing their prayer to the propitiatory or
mercy seat did notwithstanding withal in spirit worship the true God, and
were by promise from him assured to be head: but worshipping in Dan, and in
Bethel, and in the high places, and in the temple of Samaria, were idolaters
not knowing what they worshipped. Ioh. 4 22. Ye worship that which ye know
not: we worship that which we know: for salvation is of the Jews: and the
cause of this thing is more at large declared in the second of Kings cap. 17.
2. Because in the new testament all worship which is tied to any certain
place on earth is utterly taken away, and spiritual worship only required,
stirred and kindled by the holy ghost, and done with a true faith, and
knowledge of God Ioh. 4.21. The hour comes, when ye shall neither in this
mountain, nor at Jerusalem worship the Father. In these words Christ does
plainly take away worship tied and restrained to any certain place on earth.
Wherefore we must also take away and have in detestation this impious
invention of christ's corporal presence in the Mass, or in the bread and wine.
For this being but, that christ is in body present in the bread (whether it be
said to be done by transubstantiation, or by consubstantiation) the popish
adoration stands fast: and of the contrary side the presence of Christ's body
in the bread is taken away, if we take away this foul and shameful Popish
adoration of Christ's body lying covertly by their judgment under the forms
of bread and wine. Now withal we are here to observe, What it is, to worship
christ in the bread, namely, to direct our worship in soul, mind,
cogitation, and, as much as may be, in the motion of our bodies to the place in
which the bread is, and turning thereto to yield reverence unto christ, as if
he were present there m re than elsewhere. So of old they worshipped God at
the Arc, turning thereto with their minds, and as much as might be, with
their external grace and inclination of body.

1 Objection. The Mass is an application of Christ's sacrifice: Therefore it
is not to be taken away. Aunsw. I deny the Antecedent: because we apply
Christ's merit by faith only. Object. 2. There must be a perpetual sacrifice
in the Church, because Jsai foretold^, that it should be from sabbath to
sabbath. Answer. There must indeed be a perpetual sacrifice in the church,
which is the sacrifice of thanksgiving. 1. Because it is a remembrance of
Christ's sacrifice. 2. Because alms were given in the primitive church, after
the supper was ended, which were a sacrifice. 3. The supper also is an
Eucharistical or thanksgiving sacrifice. For a propitiatory sacrifice, the
Fathers never dreamt of.

6 What is the right and lawful use of the supper.
THE right and lawful use of the supper consists in three things. 1. When
the rites and ceremonies instituted of CHRIST, are retained and observed; yet
so that they be not observed of one or two privately: but that in a
convenient and lawful assembly of the church the bread be broken,
distributed, and received: and the wine given to all that communicate in
remembrance of Christ's death, that is, for confirmation of their faith, and to
show their thankfulness. 2. When the rites are observed of those persons, for
whom Christ did institute them; that is, when the bread and wine is
distributed and received of others, of whom the Lord would have it received,
namely, not of his enemies, but of his Disciples, which are the faithful. For
the observing of the rite without faith and repentance, is not the use, but the
abuse of it. 3. When the supper is received for the right end, which is, in
commemoration and remembrance of the Lords death.

7 What the wicked receive in the Lords supper.
THE wicked receive. 1. The bare signs only, namely bread and wine. 2. They
receive those signs to their condemnation, or they eat their own dannation.
Now to eat damnation, is, through incredulity and abusing of the sacrament
to be abalienated and repelled from christ and al his blessings: or, through
abusing of the sacrament being received without faith and repentance,
grievously to offend God, and so to draw upon themselves temporal and
everlasting punishments, except they repent. Contrariwise, to eat christ, is,
through faith to be made partaker of his merit, efficacy, and benefits. For
no man can eat christ, and not withal be made by faith partaker of his
merit, efficacy, and gifts. No man therefore can both eat Christ, and
withal eat his own damnation: and therefore false is their objection, who
say thus: The wicked eat damnation unto themselves: Therefore they eat
Christ. Reply. But why eat the wicked damnation unto themselves, seeing it is a
good work to receive the sacraments? Answer. It is a good work by it self,
but not unto the wicked. The receiving of the sacraments is a good work, when
the true and right use is adioined: otherwise it is made not a commanded, but
a forbidden work, as also God says: He that kills a bullock is as if he
slew a man. So Paul: If thou be a transgressour of the Law, thy circumcision is
made uncircumcision.

Now for these causes the wicked eat unto themselves, The causes, for which
the wicked are said to eat unto themselves damnation.
and draw on themselves damnation. 1. Because they profane the signs, and by
consequent the thing signified, by laieng hold on those things, which were
not instituted for them, but for the Dis^iples of Christ. 2. Because they
profane the covenant and testament of God, by taking unto themselves the
signs and tokens of the covenant. They will seem to be in league with GOD,
when as they are in league with the Devil, and not with God, whom by this
means they would make the Father of the wicked. 3. Because they tread under
foot the blood of Christ. His benefits indeed are offered unto them, but they
receive them not with faith, and so mock God, while they profess that they
receive the benefits of Christ, when as they do or mind nothing less, and
add this new offense to their other sins. 4. Because they condemn
themselves by their own judgment. For approaching unto the Lords table they
profess that they accept of this doctrine, and do believe no salvation to be
without Christ: and yet in the mean season are conscious unto themselves, that
they are hypocrites, and so condemn themselves.

8 Who ought to approach and be admitted unto the supper.
THIS question also contains two several parts in it; unto which we are
severally to answer. In the former part is demanded, who ought to approach
unto the supper: In the latter, who ought to be admitted. And this latter part
is larger and more general, because not the godly only, but hypocrites also,
who are not yet known to be such, are to be admitted unto the supper.

The godly only ought to approach unto the supper.
First then is to be considered, who ought to approach thither. They only ought
to approach unto the supper, who live in true faith and repentance, and so who
have faith and repentance not in possibility only, but also actuallie:
whereby this objection is refuted, that Jnfants have faith, and therefore ought
to approach unto the Lords Supper. For they ought not to come in respect of
this circumstance, which is adioined in the institution of the Supper, Not
Infants.
Show the death of the Lord: Likewise, Let a man examine himself, and so let
him eat of this bread, and drink of this cup.

Wherefore we understand in this place an actual faith, which is a knowledge,
confidence, beginning of obedience and a serious and earnest purpose to live
well. But Infants have faith only potentiallie and in possibility, not
actually: they have an inclination only to faith; or they have faith only by
inclination, but they have not an actual faith. Not the wicked, and hypocrites.
F^^thermore, that it is not lawful for the wicked to approach unto the Supper,
it is manifest: For the sacraments are instituted only for the faithful and
those which are converted, to seal to the^ the promise, and to confirm their
faith. The Word notwithstanding is common to the converted and unconverted,
that the converted may hear it, and be confirmed by it; and that the
unconverted also may hear it, and thereby be converted. Wherefore from the
nature and subject of sacraments is drawn this demonstratiue proof: What God
has instituted for his household and children, that hypocrites and aliants from
the Church ought not to receive. Moreover Paul also interdicteth all the wicked
without any exception from coming unto this holy supper, by words
authentic; in which namely he commands, that every man try and examine
himself, and so eat of that bread, and drink of that cup. But to examine
himself, is to try whether he has faith and repentance. Wherefore he will
have him to come, who has these things in him. But how shall a man know that
he has these things? 1. By a purpose and desire to obey god according to all the commandments of God. 2. By a confidence and tranquillity of conscience.
Hope makes not ashamed: because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by
the holy ghost, which is given to us. 3. By effects, as by the beginning of
inward and outward obedience. Unto these may be adioined also general
testimonies, whereby unbelievers are forbidden to come to the Supper. As Mat.
5.24. Leave there thine offering before the altar: first be reconciled to thy
brother, and then come and offer thy gift. Likewise, 66.3. He that kills a
Bullock is as if he slew a man.

The second part of the former question is, Who ought to be admitted unto the
Lords Supper.
THey are to be admitted of the Church, who in words and deeds profess true
repentance: they also who express and show a profession of faith and
repentance in the actions of their life, are to be admitted: but not they,
whosoever simply do avouch that they believe all things. For he that says he
believes and has not works, is a lier, and denies indeed that which he
affirms in words, according to that of the Apostle: They profess that they
know God, but by works they deny him, and are abominable, and disobedient,
and to every good work reprobate. So saint James also shows, That faith
which is without works, is dead. The reasons, why they are to be admitted
only, who both by their confession and life profess faith and repentance, are
these, 1. Because the church should profane Gods covenant if it should admit
unbelievers and men impenitent. For he that does a thing, and he that
consents unto it, are both obnoxious to the same law. To profane the
covenant of God, is, to commend and acknowledge them for the confederates or
friends and fellows of God, who are Gods enemies, and so to make God such a
one, as has entered a covenant and is in league with hypocrites and wicked
men. Now the covenant of God is two ways profaned, namely as well by
communicating and imparting the signs of the covenant to them unto whom God
promises nothing, as by receiving and using the signs without faith and
repentance. For not only they profane the covenant, who being as yet
impenitent; take the signs of the covenant unto them, but they also, who
wittingly and willingly give the signs unto those, whom god has shut from his
covenant. They make therefore God a fellow and friend of the wicked, and the
son of the devil the son of God, whosoever reach the signs unto the wicked.
Object. He that gives to him that abuses it, sins. The church gives the
supper unto hypocrites which abuse it. Therefore the church sins. Ans. He
that gives the supper to one which abuses it, sins, if he wittingly and
willingly does it: otherwise he sins not, but they who abuse the supper
purchase damnation to themselves. But the godly are not made partakers of that
profanation of the covenant profaned by the wicked, if they know not the
wicked approaching unto the supper, neither do willingly admit the wicked.
Reply. If they sin, who give the supper wittinglie to him that abuses it,
then does the Minister also sin, if he distribute it unto such a one, where
yet there is no sentence passed of excommunication. Answer. True; if he do
it willingly: but if the church proceed not against such a man, and the
minister notwithstanding be instant upon the Church, and do his duty, he is
blameless, and the sin shall lie on others, even on the Church. 2. They are
not to be admitted to the supper, who profess not faith and repentance both
in life and confession; because if such should be admitted, the church should
stir up the anger of God against her self; as of whom wittinglie and
willingly this should be committed. Now that by this means the wrath of
God is stirr^d up against the church; the Apostle sufficiently witnesses,
saying: For this cause many are weak and sick among you, and many sleep.
For if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged. God therefore is
angry with the consenters, and so punishes them, because he punishes the
wicked whom they co^senting thereto admitted: for by both the supper of the
Lord is alike profaned. 3. Christ has commanded that the wicked be not
admitted. And if any deny that any such commandment is extant, yet the
substance and tenor of the commandment shall be easily proved. For christ
instituted his supper for his disciples, and to the^ alone he said, I have
earnestly desired to eat this Passover with you. Take this and part it among
you. This is my body, which is given for you. This cup is the new testament in
my blood, which is shed for you. Wherefore the supper was instituted for
Christ's disciples only; all others, for whom Christ died not, are excluded.
But yet for all this, those hypocrites are to be admitted together with the
godly unto the supper, who are not as yet manifested, because they profess in
confession and outward actions faith and repentance. But none ought to approach
thither, but true believers. For these only excepted, all others, yea even
those hypocrites, which are not as yet manifested, eat and drink unto
themselves damnation, and profane the Lords sacred Supper. Objection. They
then who avoid the profaning of the Lords Supper, do well: but they who
refrain from the Lords supper in respect of some hatred they bear to others,
or for some other sins, avoid the profaning of the supper. Therefore they
do well Answer. They who avoid the profaning of the supper do well, if they
avoid it in such sort as they ought, namely by repenting themselves of those
sins which have been the causes of their refraining.

CERTAIN CONCLVSIONS OF THE SVPPER.
1 THE other sacrament of the new testament is called, the supper of the Lord:
not as if it were necessary that the church should celebrate it in the Evening
or usual time of supper: but because it was instituted of Christ in that
supper which he last had with his Disciples before his death. It is called the
table of the Lord, because Christ does feed us in it. It is called, the
sacrament of the body and blood of christ: because these are communicated and
imparted unto us in it. It is called the Eucharist, because in it are given
solemn thanks unto Christ for his death and benefits. It is called Synaxis,
or the convent, because it ought to be celebrated in the conuents and
assemblies of the church. It is called also of the ancient a sacrifice,
because it is a representation of the propitiatory sacrifice accomplished by
Christ on the cross, and a thanksgiving, or Eucharistical sacrifice for the
same. There is a third reason also why they called it a sacrifice: because the
ancient were wont themselves to confer bread unto it: and therefore were they
said to offer, that is, to confer and give in several bread to that use.

2 The supper of the lord is a sacrament of the new testament, wherein
according to the commandment of Christ, bread and wine is distributed and
received, in the assembly of the faithful, in remembrance of christ: which
is, that christ might testify unto us, that he feeds us, with his body and
blood delivered and shed for us, unto eternal life; and that we also might for
these his benefits give solemn thanks unto him.

3 The first and principal end and use of the Lords supper is, that Christ
might therein testify unto us, that he died for us, and does feed us with
his blood and body unto everlasting life, that so by this testification he
might cherish and increase in us our faith, and so consequently this spiritual
food and nourishment. The second end is thanksgiving, for these benefits of
Christ, and our public and solemn profession of them, and our duty toward
christ. The third is, the distinguishing of the church from other sects. The
fourth: That it might be a bond of mutual love and dilection. The fifth; That it
might be a bond of our assemblies and meetinges.

4 That first end and use, which is the confirmation of our faith in Christ,
the supper of the Lord hereof has, because Christ himself gives this bread
and drink by the hands of his ministers to be a memorial of him; that is, to
admonish and put us in remembrance by this sign as by his visible word, that
he died for us, and is the food of eternal life unto us, while he makes us
his members: both because he has annexed a promise to this rite, that he will
feed those, who eat this bread in remembrance of him, with his own body
and blood, when he says, This my body: and also because the holy ghost does by
this visible testimony move our minds and hearts more firmly to believe the
promise of the gospel.

5 There is then in the Lords supper a double meat and drink, one external,
visible, terrene, namely bread and wine: and another internal. There is also a
double eating and receiving: an external, and signifieng, which is the
corporal receiving of the bread and wine, that is, which is performed by the
hands, mouth, and senses of the body: and an internal, invisible, and
signified, which is the fruition of Christ's death, and a spiritual engraffing
into Christ's body: that is, which is not performed by the hands, and mouth
of the body, but by the spirit and faith. Lastly there is a double administer
and dispenser of this meat and drink; an external, of the external, which is
the minister of the church delivering us by his hand bread and wine: and an
internal of the internal meat, which is Christ himself feeding us by his body
and blood.

6 Not the body and blood of Christ, but the bread and wine are the signs
which serve for confirmation of our faith: for the body and blood of Christ
are received, that we may live for ever. But the bread and wine are received,
that we may be confirmed and assured of that heavenly food, and daily
more and more enioie it.

7 Neither is the bread changed into the body of Christ, nor the wine into the
blood of Christ: neither does the body and blood of Christ succeed in their
place, they being abolished: neither is Christ's body substantially present in
the bread, or under the bread, or where the bread is: but in the right use of
the Lords supper, the holy Ghost uses this Symbol, as an instrument, to
stir up faith in us, by which he more and more dwells in us, engraffeth us
into Christ, and makes us thorough him to be just and righteous, and to draw
eternal life from him.

8 Now when Christ says, This, that is, this bread, is my body, and, This cup
is my blood, the speech is sacramental or metonymical, because the name of the
thing signified is attributed to the sign it self: that is, it is meant, that
the bread is the sacrament or sign of his body and does represent him, and
does testify that Christ's body is offered for us on the cross, and is
given unto us to be the food of eternal life, and therefore is the instrument
of the holy Ghost to maintain and increase this food in us, as Saint Paul
says, 1. Corinthians. 10. The bread is the communion of the body of Christ, that
is, it is that thing, by which we are made partakers of christ's body. And
elsewhere he says: We have been al made to drink into one spirit. The same is
the meaning also: when it is said, that the bread is called christ's body, for
a similitude which the thing signified has with the sign, namely, in that
christ's body nourishes the spiritual life as bread does the corporal
life: and for that assured and certain joint receiving of the thing and the
sign in the right use of the sacrament. And this is the sacramental union of
the bread which is showed by a sacramental kind of speaking* but no such
local conjunction, which is by some imagined.

9 As therefore the body of christ signifies both his proper and natural
body, and his sacramental body, which is the bread of the Eucharist: so the
eating of Christ's body is of two sorts; one sacramental of the sign, to wit,
the external and corporal receiving of the bread and wine: the other real or
spiritual, which is the receiving of christ's very body it self. And to
bel^eue in christ dwelling in us by faith, is, by the virtue and operation of
the holy ghost to be engraffed into his body, as members to the head, and
branches into the vine: and so to be made partakers of the frutie of the death
and life of christ. Whence it is apparent that they are falsely accused who thus
teach, as if they made either the bare signs only to be in the Lords Supper,
or a part^cipation of christ's death only, or of his benefits, or of the holy
Ghost, excluding the true, real, and spiritual communion of the very body of
Christ it self.

10 Now the right use of the Supper is, when the faithful observe this rite
instituted by Christ, in remembrance of Christ: that is, to the stirring and
raising up of their faith and thankfulness.

11 As in this right use the body of Christ is sacramentallie eaten: so also
without this use, (as by unbelievers and hypocrites) it is eaten sacramentally
indeed, but not reallie, that is, the sacramental Symboles or signs bread and
wine are received, but not the things themselves of the sacrament, to wit, the
body and blood of Christ.

12 This doctrine of the supper of the Lord is grounded upon very many and
those most sound and firm reasons. All those places of Scripture confirm it,
which speak of the Lords supper; and Christ, calling not any invisible thing
in the bread* but the very visible and broken bread it self his body
delivered or broken for us: which whereas it cannot be meant properly,
himself adds an exposition, that that bread is truly received in
remembrance of him; which is as if he had said, That the bread is a sacrament
of his body. So likewise he says, the supper is the new testament, which is
spiritual, one, and everlasting. And Paul says it is the communion of the
body and blood of Christ, because all the faithful are one body in christ; who
cannot stand together with the communion of Devils. Likewise, he makes one and
the same engraffing into christ's body by one spirit to be both in Baptism
and in the Lords Supper. Moreover the whole doctrine and nature of sacraments
confirm the same, all which represent unto the eyes the same spiritual
communion of christ to be received by faith, which the word or promise of the
Gospel declares unto the ears. Therefore they are called by the names of the
things signified, and in their right use have the receiving of the things
adioined unto them. The Articles also of our faith confirm it, which teach
that christ's body is a true humane body, not present at once in many places,
as being now received into heaven, and there to remain, until the Lord return
to judgment; and further that the communion of Saints with christ is wrought
by the holy Ghost, not by any entrance of christ's body into the bodies of
men. Wherefore this sentence and doctrine is of all the purer antiquity of the
church with most great and manifest consent held and professed.

13 The Supper of the Lord differs from Baptism, 1. Jn the Rite and manner
of signifieng, because the dipping into the water or washing signifies a
remission and purging out of sin by the blood and spirit of Christ, and our
society and fellowship with christ in his afflictions and glorification. But
the distributing of the bread and wine signifies the death of Christ to be
imputed to us unto remission of sins, and our selves engraffed into Christ to
become his members. 2. They differ in their special use, because Baptism is
the testimony of our regeneration, and of the covenant made between us and
God, and of our receiving into the Church: But the Lords supper testifies that
we are ever to be nourished by Christ remaining in us, and that the covenant
made between God and us shall ever be established and ratified unto us, and
that we for ever shall abide in the church and body of Christ. 3. They differ
in the persons, to whom they are to be given. Baptism is given to all those,
who are to be accounted for members of the church, whether they be of years
and understanding, or infants. The Lords Supper is to be given to them only,
who are able to understand, and celebrate the benefits of christ, and to
examine themselves. 4. They differ in the often celebrating of them. Baptism
is to be received but onc^ only, because the covenant of God being once made
is always firm and of force to the penitent: But the Supper is often to be
received, because an often renewing and recalling of that covenant to our
remembrance, is necessary for our faith. 5. They differ in the order which is
to be observed in use of them. Because Baptism is to be given before the
Supper, and the supper may not be given unto any except he be first baptized.

14 They come worthily to the Lords Supper, who examine themselves, that is, are
endewed with true faith and repentance. They who find not this in themselves,
ought neither to come without it, least they eat and drink their own
judgment; nor to differ repentance wherewith they should come, least they draw
upon themselves hardness of heart and eternal pains.

15 The church ought to admit all those unto it who profess themselves to
embrace the ground and foundation of christian doctrine, and to have a purpose
to obey it: but those must be repelled, who will not desist either from their
errors and blasphemies, or from manifest sins against their conscience,
being admonished by the church and convicted of error.

16 The Pope has corruptly taken away the breaking of the bread from the
rite of the supper, and bereaved the people of the use of the cup: Corruptly
also has he deformed the supper of the Lord, with adding so many ceremonies
not delivered by the Apostles, into a theatricall or pageant-like Mass, that
is, into a Jewish superstition and stagelike rounds and conueiances. But more
wicked and idolatrous inventions are these: That the Mass is a propitiatory
sacrifice, wherein christ is offered by the Mass Priests for the quick and
dead, and is by the force of consecration substantiallie present and abides so
long as those forms of bread and wine remain uncorrupted, and further, does
bestow the grace of God and other benefits upon them for whom he is offered; of
whom also he is eaten with the mouth of their body, yea though they have no
good inward motion in them: and lastly is, being treasured and laid up and
carried about under those forms, to be worshipped. Jn respect of these foul
monsters, it is necessary that the Mass be quite and clean abolished out of
the christian church. In sum they are these, 1. Transubstantiation. 2.
Bread-worship. 3. Sacrifice. 4. Maiming of Christ's Supper.

THE APPENDIX OR ADDITION ADIOINING UNTO THE FORMER TREAtise of the Supper.
Certain principal arguments of the Consubstantiaries against the sincere
doctrine of the Lords Supper, and the Sacramentaries, as they call them:
together with a refutation of them.
1 THE errors of the Sacramentaries (say they) are, that there are but bare
signs and Symboles only in the supper. Answer. We teach that the things
signified are together with the signs, in the right use, exhited and
communicated, albeit not corporally, but in such sort as is agreeable unto
sacraments. 2. The Sacramentaries say, That christ is present only according
to his power and efficacy. Answer. We teach that he is present and united
with us by the holy Ghost, albeit his body be far absent from us: like as
whole Christ also is present with his ministry, though diversely according to
the one nature. 3. The Sacramentaries, say they, affirm that an imaginary,
figurative or spiritual body of christ is present, not his essential body.
Answer. We never spoke of an imaginary body, but of the true flesh of
Christ, which is present with us, although it remain in heaven. Moreover we
say that we receive the bread and the body, but both after a manner proper to
each. 4. The Sacramentaries, say they, affirm, that the true body of Christ,
which hung on the cross, and his very blood which was shed for us, is
distributed, but is spirituallie received of those only who are worthy
receivers; as for the unworthy, they receive nothing besides the bare signs
unto their condemnation. Answer. All this we grant, as being agreeable unto
the word of God, the nature of sacraments, the analogy of faith, and the
communion of the faithful.

Certain arguments of the Consubstantiaries, whereby they go about to
overthrow our doctrine of the Lords Supper: together with the refutations of
them.
1 THE words of the institution are open and plain, This my body, this is my
blood. Answer. They allege these words against themselves. For they say,
That the body of Christ is received reallie in, under, with the bread: when
christ says, that the very bread is his body. Wherefore they do a double
injury unto the church: first, while they thrust upon the church their own
words for Christ's. Secondly, while they imagine that the church perceives not
these speeches to be diverse, In the bread is my body, and, The bread is my
body. They accuse Christ also for a lier: for they deny that the bread is his
body, but that his body is in the bread. Let them look therefore unto it, how
they will answer Christ at the last judgment for this blasphemy and reproach.
The Papists also do more retain the very words of Christ. But these retain
not the word, but follow the sense and meaning. We must see therefore which
part follows it. Ours shall be proved in the end. Reply. Christ adds an
exposition of his mind, Which is given for you, and, Which is shed for you.
Answer. First, this is a begging of that which is in question. For they take
as granted, that the bread is properly called the body, which yet lies upon
them to prove. For it is a sacramental manner of speaking. Secondly, we return
their own reason upon them by inuerting it thus. The body of Christ properly
so called was given for us. But the bread was not given for us: Therefore the
bread is not the body properly so called. Likewise, as the bread is the body
broken, so the breaking of the bread is the breaking of the body. But the
breaking of the body is the crucifieng thereof. Therefore the bread broken is
but sacramentally and by representation, the body broken.

2 They reason from the author, who said it, and is true. Answer. This is also
a begging of that which is in question. They must prove that Christ said, his
body was in, under, with the bread. And further a man may speak figuratively,
and yet speak perspicuouslie and plainly. Reply. He is also omnipotent.
Therefore he is able to be eueriewhere, and so in the bread. Answer. Albeit
he were able to bring to pass, that two flat repugnaunt things should be true
together: yet will he not do it. Again, God is not able to work
contradictories, or things flat repugnaunt, because he is true. Now, to will
those things which are contradictorie, argues a lier. Wherefore we deny not
the truth and omnipotency of God; but these men's lies: nay rather we defend
gods truth, affiming that God does that which he spoke. But they oppugn it
making contrary wills to be in God. Reply. Christ's body has many
prerogatives not agreeable to our bodies: as that he was borne of a Virgin,
walked on the sea, was at one time and together in the grave, in Hell, and in
Par^dise: and passed through the gates when they were fast shut. Answer.
These examples are partly not matches, and partly false. For this may agree
unto a creature, to walk on the waters, as it did unto Peter: to pass through
the gates shut, as is agreeable to the nature of a spirit. Again, These
examples are not matches nor of the same quality with that which is in
question. Because these do not ^mply a contradiction. For when he is said to
be borne of a Virgin, he is not said withal, not to be borne of a Virgin.
But to be both finite and infinite (as they will have Christ's body who
consubstantiate it with the bread) these implie a contradiction. Now it is
false, that they say, that he passed thorough the gate^ shut, whereas the
gates might yield and o^en unto him: as also, that he passed through the door
or stone of the grave, when as it is said that the Angel did open it: and
lastly, when they say, that Christ's body was at once and together in more
places: which they seem to have taken out of Austine. But Austine said, That
his body was in the grave, his soul in hell, and his Godhead eueriewhere.

3 They reason from a circumstance of the time: The same night in which he was
betrayed. No man which speaks seriously, speaks figuratively, Christ
instituting his supper spoke seriously. Therefore without any figure. Answer.
I deny the Mayor: because by that position no man that speaks seriously
should speak figuratively, which is most false. God speaks in all sacraments,
though figuratively, yet seriously. I have earnestly desired (says Christ) to
eat this Passover with you. Wherefore I answer, that he uses not jesting
or obscure figures. This figure is perspicuous, because it is usual, and his
disciples speak so: Where will thou that we go, and prepare that thou may
eat the passover? It is usual also in all sacraments It is forcible and
emphaticall, because it expresses the similitude of the sign and the thing
signified, and the certainetie of the conjunction of both in the right use and
administration. Again we inuert their reason, and say, Because christ spoke
seriously, therefore he used a figure which does well express and declare the
thing. Reply. Christ said, This cup is the new testament. Jn wills and
testaments men speak properly. Christ here instituteth a sacrament: therefore,
etc. Answer. I deny the Mayor, and inuert the reason: for seeing he would
institute a sacrament, therefore he spoke figuratively, calling his Supper the
new Testament; which is figuratively to be understood for these two reasons.
1. Because otherwise there should be two covenants, the one proper, and the
other the supper. 2. Otherwise also they should be shut out from Gods covenant,
who cannot come to the supper, and all who came to the supper should be in the
covenant. Objection. Christ says, In my blood. Therefore the real blood of
christ is in the supper, and is drunk by the mouth. Answer. We conclude the
contrary rather by those words of Christ. Because the new testament was
made by Christ's blood shed on the Cross and applied unto us by faith, not
drunk by the mouth: for otherwise they should be excluded from the testament
and covenant, who were not able to come to this sacrament. Reply. There is a
great force in the word, New. That which was done in the old testament
typicallie, is done in the new reallie. Answer. If they add, Therefore done
by the mouth of the body: they bring in more in the conclusion, than was in
the antecedent. For there was no type in the old testament which did signify
the eating of Christ with the mouth. 2. We inuert their reason. Christ's body
was no otherwise eaten in the new testament, than in the old: But in the old
it was eaten spirituallie only: Therefore in the new also it is so eaten.
Reply. The new testament differs from the old, because in that were types,
in the new is the body it self, Heb. 9. Col. 2. Answer. This difference of
the old and new testament is no where set down in holy scripture that Christ
is eaten in the old not really, and in the new corporally by the mouth. In the
places which are alleged out of the Apostle, the body signifies that the
shadow was only of the old testament and was accomplished and fulfilled by
Christ. Because there the body is opposed to those shadows: and further
because he calls it the body of christ: which kind of speech shows that
by Christ was wrought the accomplishment and fulfilling of the types or
shadows of the Old Testament. Moreover, albeit we have Christ exhibited in
the new testament, and he is there borne man, yet notwithstanding it does
not therefore follow hereof, that his body is in the bread, but only that it
is in the new testament.

4 They reason from the consent of the Evangelists, and saint Paul. Matthew, as
Theophylact calculateth, writ his gospel eight years after christ's assension:
Mark, ten years: Luke, fifteen years: Paul, twenty years. And all use the
same words. A speech that is often uttered with the same words is not
figurative. Such is the speech of the Lords Supper. Therefore it is not
figurative. Answer. It is false that a speech often uttered in the same words
is not figurative: because when a figure is conspicuous, known, and forcible,
as this, it is retained. Again, the Evangelists repeat the words of Christ,
because he spoke figuratively. Often, though it be figurative, is this
repeated: He shall baptize with the holy Ghost and with fire. Ioh. 1. Matthew. 3.
Moreover we deny that this speech of Christ's Supper was repeated by all in the
same words. 1. Because Matthew and Mark say, This is my blood of the new
testament. Luke says, This cup is the new testament in my blood. 2. Matthew
and Mark say, This is my body. Luke adds, which is given for you: Paul,
which is broken for you. 3. Paul says, That the bread is the communion of the
body of Christ. And albeit in this place he speaks not purposedly of the
Supper, yet he stirs up and exhorts unto it. Reply. It is the same sense
and meaning. Answer. The question is not now of the sense and meaning of the
words, but of the identitie of the words, that is, whether they be the same
words. Reply. Where there is no mention at all of any figure, there is no
figure. Answer. This is false. For foolish were it, and men should seem to
make show and ostentation of their skill and art, if they should say that they
used a trim figure. And the scripture also often speaks figuratively, and yet
does it not ad withal that it speaks figuratively. Furthermore, they make
mention hereof, when they show, that it consists of the nature of the subject
and the attribute. The body was borne of the Virgin, crucified, and so forth.
The bread is made of meal. Secondly, Christ wills this to be done in
remembrance of him: Therefore the bread is called his body, as a memorial
of his body. Thirdly Matthew and Mark say, This is my blood of the new
testament. Paul and Luke say, This is the new testament in my blood. Now the
new testament is the bond whereby God has bound himself to receive the
faithful and repentant into favor, and they bind themselves to yield faith
and obedience unto him. Fourthly, Paul says, That the bread is the communion
of Christ's body, which is not any corporal eating. 1. Because the faithful are
thereby one body in christ. 2. Because he compares it with the Communion of
the altar in the old testament, which was not corporal. 3. Because it can agree
but to the faithful only, and not to the wicked. 4. John shows that
communion: If we walk in the light we have fellowship one with another, and
the blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses us from all sin. And further
this communion whereof saint Paul speaks, is our union with Christ, and
fruition of all his benefits by faith. Hither belongs the similitude of the
body and the members, the vine and the branches; which have nothing to do
with any corporal eating. This communion was and is common to all the faithful
from the beginning unto the worlds end. But they could not eat the body of
christ corporally by their mouth. That we might grow up unto him, by whom all
the body is coupled and knit together. He that is joined unto the Lord, is one
spirit. And by one spirit are we all baptized into one body. Hereby know we,
that we dwell in him, and he in us; because he has given us of his spirit.
This union therefore is that communion, which is wrought by the holy Ghost.
Wherefore it is spiritual For bread cannot be this communion but by a figure,
as it is a sign of it. Reply. He that is guilty of the body of Christ,
eats it. They who receive unworthily are guilty of the body of Christ.
Therefore they eat it corporally: for spirituallie they cannot: because if
they could so eat it, they should not be guilty. Answer. The Mayor is
false For he is guilty of Christ's body who by his sins hangs it on the
Cross again, and despises Christ's benefit. For any real eating is not
required to this guilt, but he that will not receive Christ offered by faith,
is thereby made guilty. So the injury done unto the Arc, is said to be done
unto the Lord. Reply. They that discern not the Lords body, eat it. But the
guilty discern it not; Therefore they eat it. Answer. If the Mayor be
taken sacramentally, as of the bread, which is called and is the body of
Christ, it is true: but if properly, it is false. For, not to discern his
body, is not to give due honor to it, to contemn it, yea not to receive the
thing signified So Heb. 10.29. They are said to tread under foot the son of
God, and to count the blood of the testament as an unholy thing, who contemn
him.

5 They reason from the testimonies of the Fathers and the godly of ancient
times in the purer state of the church. Answer. The sayings of the Fathers
are to be understood sacramentally, or of our spiritual communion. Reply.
Austin says, thou shall receive this in the bread, which hung on the cross:
and this in the cup, which was shed out of christ's side. Answer. In the bread,
as in the sign, that is, together with the sign thou shall receive the thing
signified. When we receive the bread, we are certain that we have Christ.
2. Reply, Cyrill upon John says: By natural participation, not only
spirituallie, but also corporally: not only according to the spirit, but
also according to the flesh, corporally and essentially. Ans. Cyril speaks
not of the manner of eating, but of the thing which was to be eaten. He shows
that we are made partakers not only of christ's spirit, but also of his human
nature. Now he understands a spiritual communion. 1. Because he cites those
places concerning it. Ioh. 6. and 1. Cor. 10. where no mention is made of
corporal eating. 2. He speakeih of the presence of Christ, not in the bread,
but in us. 3. He proves the abiding of Christ in us by the use of the
Supper, not by any corporal eating. 4. He so describes it, that he says, It
shall continue in the life to come. 5. He speaks of that communion, which is
proper unto the Saints. Now this is spiritual; for otherwise it should befall
also to the wicked.

The shifts of Consubstantiaries, whereby they go about to elude and shift off
certain of our objections, not all: for mo are objected against them.
1 We make not, say they, any Capernaiticall eating. Ans. We demand of them
whether Christ be eaten by the bodily mouth; be it after a gross, or after
finer manner. But how ever they answer, in that opinion which they hold, there
is too too much idolatry. For christ refuting the Capernaites, does not
distinguish the eating of him, into a gross and a finer manner, but says
simply, That his body can not be eaten with the bodily mouth: for he says,
that he must ascend; And that the words which he speaks are spirit and
life.

2 We mainetaine not Vbiquitie: for there is not a word thereof to be
found. Answer. Here is to be observed the dissension of the adversaries
about Vbiquitie. But neither is a word to be found hereof, That the body of
Christ is together in two places. And further, of this their opinion follows
Vbiquitie. For he that is together and at one time in more places, must needs
be infinite, and therefore eueriewhere.

3 We overthrow not the article of Christ's ascension. Answer. Yea, but they
do overthrow it. For while they hold, that, as often as the supper is
celebrated, Christ is corporally eaten, they must needs say that he remained
and is invisible on earth. But he is said to have left the world, to have
ascended from a lower place into an higher, and to remain in heaven, until
he come to judgment. Now, that some except, That Christ does descend from
heaven, as often as the supper is administered; it is already refuted.

4 We take not away the doctrine of the properties of christ's humanity.
Answer. They altogether take it away. For they will have his humane nature to
be such, as is not seen, nor felt, nor limited in place. Reply. But christ did
put off these infirmities, and retained the essential properties. Answer. But
these are very essential properties, which being taken away, the verity also
and truth of his humane nature is taken away, Austine says; Take away from
bodies their spaces, and they shall be no where.

5 We abolish not the Doctrine concerning the communicating of properties of
both natures. Answer. Yea but they endeavor it. For they apply those
properties of his divine nature which are affirmed of the whole person in the
concrete, to both natures. J will be with you to the end of the world. This
they understand of both natures: which is all one, as if, when it is said,
Christ God and man was circumcised, one should thus conclude; Therefore the
godhead of Christ was circumcised as well as his flesh. Reply. This only we
add; That those Articles belong to them. Answer. After this sort all sects
may shift off all testimonies of Scriptures. But they belong hither, and that
by a double right. 1. Because they are written of the body of Christ. But the
body of Christ belongs to the supper. Therefore these Articles also belong
hither. For they show, how Christ's body is to be ea^en 2 They belong hither,
because no Article of faith, is at variaunce with another. So belongs hither
also the Doctrine of justification because in the ^upper no other justice or
righteousness must be sought for, but by the blood of Christ.

6 The manner how we eat it, is not to be defined. Answer. They commit a
double fault in so saying. 1. When they deny that the manner is to be defined,
and so contradict and gain say the Scripture which defines it, and shows
that it is spiritual, and that there is wrought an union with Christ by faith
through the holy Ghost. 2. They themselves define the manner, as it clearly
appears by their writings.

7 The saying of Durandus is true: We hear the words; we perceive the
motions; we know not the manner; we believe the presence. Answer. Durandus
makes naught either for you, or against us, or for himself, because he was a
Papist. And again, if his saying be rightly understood, we may admit it. We
hear the words, This is my body; not that we eat with our mouth the body of
Christ in the bread. We perceive the motions; that is, we perceive the bread
to enter into our mouth, not the body of Christ. We know not the manner, that
is, not perfectly, to wit, after what manner the holy Ghost is eueriewhere whole
in Christ and in all the Saints, and how he unites us in Christ. We believe the
presence, namely, such, as is the eating, and as is the union of the members
and the head.

8 We teach this only, That the body and blood of christ is truly,
substantiallie, and naturally exhibited. Answer. We grant that we eat the
true body of Christ. So then is their disputation vain and frivolous. First,
Because they confess that we are made partakers of the true body of christ,
and that we must not question of the manner. For this we grant. Secondly,
Because the reasons and refutations which they bring, are of no weight or
moment.

Certain reasons whereby is proved, That the body of Christ is not present
either in, or under, or at the bread of the Lords Supper, neither is
corporally eaten Under, With, Jn, or At the Bread.
1 BEcause he took a true humane nature. Whereunto we ad also, that we
cannot eat him otherwise than his disciples did in the first Supper. 2. He
truly ascended out of earth into heaven. 3. Such is our eating of him, as his
abiding is in us. 4. All the Saints of the old and new Testament have the same
union with Christ. 5 Christ only is able to offer himself unto his Father.
Now it is necessary in the use of the Supper to crave of God remission of
sins. Wherefore if he be present at the bread, we must crave of him, and so
we offer the bread. But in the New testament it is not lawful to direct our
prayer to any certain place. 6. The blessings which are promised unto the
godly only, are spiritual. Unto these and other fore alleged reasons comes
the consent of the ancient Fathers, Ambrose, Athanasius, Austine, Basil, Bid,
Bertram, Chrysostom, Cleme^s Alexandrinus, the council of Nice, Ciprian,
Cyrill, Denis, Gelasius, Gregory the Great, Gregory Nazianzene, Hezichius,
Hierom, Hilarie, Irenaeus, Justine, Leo, Macharius, Origin, Procopius, Gaza,
Tertullian, and so forth.

THE SECOND APPENDIX OR ADDITION. Arguments, whereby the opinion of
Vbiquitaries is refelled, and the truth of sound doctrine confirmed.
THE FIRST ARGUMENT.
THE Marcionites and Manichees imagined that Christ had not a true and solid
body, but only made show of the shape of a body, so that he seemed only to
have flesh and bones, whereas indeed he had them not: And further that the
very incarnation, and all the motions and operations of christ did but only
seem so in outward appeara^ce, whereas in the truth of the thing there was no
such thing done. Now the opinion of Vbiquitie, and of the real communicating
of the properties of both natures does raise again from Hell that fantastical
dotarie and frenzy of those heretics. Therefore it is no less to be
abandoned and banished out of the church to Hell, than that heresy of the
Manichees. That this opinion of Vbiquitie does give life again to the former,
we prove. The Vbiquitaries are of opinion, and so teach, That all the
properties of the Godhead were presently, from the very point of Christ's
conception, reallie effused from the Godhead of the word into the humane
nature which christ took. Hence these absurdities will follow. 1. Christ shall
not be truly borne of the Virgin, if as touching the nature of his humanity
he was truly and essentiallie without the womb of his mother before he was
borne; and after he was borne he remained no less truly and substantiallie,
as touching his humanity, in that selfsame womb, than before. 2. Christ was
not truly weak in his humane nature and subject to passions, if he were then
also as touching the same nature partaker of the Divine majesty and
omnipotency. 3. He was not truly dead, if also in the time of his death, as
touching his soul and body, he were essentiallie present every where
together with his Godhead. For the soul being every where present could not be
really separated, in distance of places from the body, which also should be
every where present, and so neither could the body die, but only in outward
appearance and imagination. 4. He ascended not truly into heaven: but it
shall be said to have been only a vain and imaginary, and fantastical
spectacle* if he were in his body substantiallie there, before he visiblie
ascended thither: and after he was ascended thither, he remained yet, in the
substantial presence of the same body, no less truly, than before, on the
earth, yea and in the very bodies also of the faithful. If these things so
fell out in the truth of the thing; it will follow that the same body of Christ
was indeed at once and together both weak and omnipotent, base and glorious,
subject to sufferinges, and not subject, dead and alive, limited and unlimited;
which is horrible to affirm For avoiding therefore of these prodigious and
impious absurdities they will except, that he was not as touching his body,
otherwise than limited, weak, subject to passions, and mortal, in the time of
his humiliation: because he had debased himself, and would not show forth that
majesty, communicated unto his body before his resurrection. Answer. They
interpret amiss that debasing of himself, of all the glory and majesty of
his humanity hidden and kept close for a time: whereas it is to be understood
in respect of the divinity of the Word, in that he would take the form of
a servant, that is, the mass of our nature, and become man. Moreover it will
follow, that christ did show forth the communicated power and majesty of his
flesh, even then, when he was indeed weak and limited or circumscribed in
body: as when shedding tears he raised Lazarus from the dead, and when being
apprehended by the Jews he healed Malchus whom Peter wounded. Now what is it
else to raise the Marcionites up again from hell, or in the greatest matter of
all others impiously to blaspheme, if this be not?

THE SECOND ARGUMENT.
THE blasphemy of Samosatenus, Arrius, and the late Antitrinitaries, is this:
That Christ, man, is not properly and by nature God, but only by an
accidental participation of divine properties, majesty, honor, power, and
virtue. The Vbiquitaries also maintain the same consideration of the God-heade
of Christ, man, while they define the personal union by his communicating
alone of properties, whereby the flesh of Christ is made omnipotent and every
where. So that now that man is, and is called God, not that he is properly and
by nature God, but because infinite power, majesty, and glory is given him
from God, and all the gifts of the holy Ghost are bestowed on him without
measure. Now this accidental bestowing of the Godhead and all the properties,
does not make christ to be properly and by nature God, but only by divine
grace, or God improperly so called: Because it is not the very essential
Godhead of the Word, but a certain participation thereof, in virtue and
eff^cacie. And therefore was it objected by the sounder Fathers unto the
Arrians, that they took away the true and eternal Godhead of christ, when
they made him a God not by nature, but by grace, by participation only of
dignity and majesty. Therefore seeing the Vbiquitaries also equalling our
Immanuel with God by participation of properties only, take away his true and
eternal God head: we do discl^me and accurse this their doctrine as
blasphemous and heretical. And that they do this, Brentius in recog. p. 20.
Andrae. These. 20. disp Tubing. and These. 25. and 26. And Apol. Ing. 26.
their own words and opinions witness; as Brentius, and Iacobus Andraeas, and
others of them in their writings. Whence we conclude, that the Vbiquitaries
hold the same opinion with the Arrians and Antitrinitaries, of the Godhead of
Christ, man^ that is, that all these esteem him for God not by nature, but
only by grace of participation, new, temporary, created, adopted. If these
things be true, Christ shall not be God and man, but a divine man, such as
the Vbiquitaries also repute him, who, as Seruetus, Lib. 1. de Trinicate.
hold this opinion: That God can communicate the fulness of his God-heade, give
his divinity, majesty, power and glory unto man. But we execrate and detest
the same blasphemy of both.

THE THIRD ARGUMENT.
NEstorius taught, That the union of God the Word with man was wrought by the
participation only of equality, as touching majesty, honor, power, virtue,
and operation. Neither does he make the difference, of the dwelling of the Word
in man's nature which himself took, and in other Saints, to consist in any
other thing than in those gifts and graces bestowed by God on man. The self
same also do the Vbiquitaries teach, because they cry that there is no
difference between the inhabiting and dwelling of the Godhead in Peter, and
in Christ, except it be taken from the communication of the gifts or
properties of the God-heade. And they contend that by this means this man,
which was taken by the Word, is God, because the Word does nothing without him,
but al things by him. This is nothing else, than to make christ man, only God
by an accident. Wherefore the doctrine of Vbiquitie is altogether the same with
Nestorius heresy. Tertullian says: Tertul. lib. de Trinit. p. 610.
Jf Christ be man only, how then is he present eueriewhere being called upon
and inuocated, seeing this is not the nature of man, but of God, to be able to
be present in all places? By this testimony is refuted the Vbiquity of the human
nature in Christ. Object. But the union of the divine and human nature in
Christ is inseperable. Therefore wheresoever the divine nature is, there is
also the humane nature. Aunsw. It is true which is said, that the union is
inseperable. The Word never forsakes the nature once assumed and taken. But
the Word is not in the humane nature, as the soul is included in my body.
Wheresoever my body is, there must my soul needs be, neither is my soul at
the same time without my body. But the Word is not so in Christ, man: but he
is so unseparably and personally in the humane nature, as that he is together
also without the humane nature in all the parts of the world, as he fills
al, and in holy men and Angels by his special presence. The personal union of
both natures does not euert the general action and woorking of his presence
and majesty, neither does it let or hinder the special woorking of his
presence: because the Word is effectual, and works forcibly in the regenerate.

The general points wherein the churches which profess the Gospel, agree or
disagree in the controversy concerning the Lords Supper. They agree in these
points.
FIRST, that as well the Supper of the Lord as Baptism, is a visible pledge and
testimony annexed by Christ himself to the promise of grace, to this end
chiefly, that our faith in this promise might be confirmed and strengthened.

Secondly, that in the true use of the supper, as well as in all other
sacraments, two things are given by god unto us, and are received of us,
namely, earthly, external, and visible signs, as are bread and wine; and
besides these, also heavenly, internal, and invisible gifts, as are the true
body of Jesus Christ together with all his gifts and benefits, and heavenly
treasures.

Thirdly, that in the supper we are made partakers not only of the spirit of
Christ and his satisfaction, justice, virtue, and operation, but also of the
very substance and essence of his true-bodie and blood, which was given for
us to death on the cross, and which was shed for us; and are truly fed with
the selfsame unto eternal life: and that this very thing christ should teach
us and make known unto us by this visible receiving of this bread and wine in
his supper.

Fourthly, That the bread and wine are not changed into the flesh and blood of
Christ, but remain true and natural bread and wine: that also the body and
blood of christ are not shut up into the bread and wine, and therefore the
bread and wine are called of christ his body and blood, in this sense, for
that his body and blood are not only signified by these, and set before our
eyes, but also because as often as we eat and drink this bread and wine, in the
true and right use, Christ himself gives us his body and blood indeed to be
the meat and drink of eternal life.

Fifthly, That without the right use this receiving of bread and wine is no
sacrament, neither any thing, but an empty and vain ceremony and spectacle,
and such as men abuse to their own damnation.

Sixthly, That there is no other true and lawful use of the supper, besides
that, which Christ himself has instituted, and commanded to be kept, namely
this: that this bread and this wine be eaten and drunken in remembrance of him,
and to show forth his death.

Seventhly, that Christ in his supper does not command and require a
dissembled and hypocritical remembrance of him and publishing of his death:
but such as embraces his passion and death, and all his benefits obtained by
these for us, by a true and lively faith, and with earnest and ardent
thankfulness, and applies them unto those which eat and drink as proper
unto them.

Eighthly, that Christ will dwell in believers only, and in them, who not
through contempt, but through necessity cannot come to the Lords supper, yea
in all believers, eue^ from the beginning of the woorld to all eternity, even
as well and after the same manner, as he will dwell in them, who came unto the
Lords Supper.

They disagree in these points.
FIRST, that one part contendeth, that these words of Christ, This is my
body, must be understood, as the words sound, which yet that part it self
does not: but the other part, that those words must be understood
sacramentallie, according to the declaration of Christ and Paul, according to
the most certain and infallible rule and leuil of the articles of our
christian faith.

Secondly, that one part will have the body and blood of christ to be
essentiallie Jn or With the bread and wine, and so to be eaten, as that
together with the bread and the wine, out of the hand of the minister, it
enters by the mouth of the receivers into their bodies: but the other part
will have the body of christ, which in the first supper sat at the table by the
disciples, now to be and continue, not here on earth, but above in the heavens,
above and without this visible world and heaven, until he descend thence
again to judgment: and yet that we notwithstanding here on earth, as often as
we eat this bread with a true faith, are so fed with his body, and made to
drink of his blood, that not only through his Passion and bloodshed we are
cleansed from our sins, but are also in such sort coupled, knit and
incorporated into his true, essential, humane body, by his spirit dwelling
both in him and us, as that we are flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones,
and are more nearly, and firmlie knit and united with him, than the members of
our body are united with our head, and so we draw and have in him and from
him everlasting life.

Thirdly, That one part will have all whosoever come to the Lords supper and
eat and drink that bread and wine, whether they be believers, or
unbelievers, to eat and drink corporally and with their bodily mouth the
flesh and blood of Christ; believers, to life and salvation; unbelievers to
damnation and death: the other holds, that unbelievers abuse indeed the
outward signs, bread and wine, to their own damnation: but that the faithful
only can eat and drink by a true faith, and the fore alleged working of
^he holy Ghost, the body and blood of Christ unto eternal life.

OF THE KEYS OF THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN, AND OF EXCOMMVNICATION.
SEEING it has been showed in the treatise next going before, who are to be
admitted by the church unto the Lords Supper: very commodiously and fitly shall
this doctrine follow, concerning the power of the keys, wherein besides other
things this chiefly is taught, How they who are not to be admitted, must be
restrained and excluded from the Sacraments, least approaching unto them they
profane them.

The chief questions.

1 What the power is of the keys given unto the church. 2 Unto whom that power
is committed. 3 Why the power of the keys is necessary. 4 What that power of
the keys committed unto the church differs from the civil power. 5 What
order ought to be observed in exercising the power of the keys.
1 WHAT THE POWER OF THE KEYS GIVEN UNTO THE CHVRCH IS.
THE power of the keys of the kingdom of heaven, which CHRIST gave unto his
church, is the office or charge imposed on the church by Christ, of denouncing,
by the preaching of the gospel and church discipline, Gods will; and even of
declaring the grace of God and remission of sins unto the penitent, that is,
to them who live in true faith and repentance: but of denouncing unto the
wicked the wrath of God, and exclusion or banishment from the kingdom of
christ, and of casting such out of the church as long as they shall show
themselves in doctrine and life estranged from christ; and of receiving them
again into the church when afterward they shall repent. Hereby it appears,
that the chief and principal parts of this power of the keys given unto the
Saints are, the preaching of the gospel, or ministry of the word, and
church-iudgement, which is called also spiritual Discipline or jurisdiction.
And verily, necessarily is Ecclesiastical Discipline joined and linked with
the ministry of Gods word. Of the ministry of the word, there is no doubt
but all the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles have preached. Of the
jurisdiction of the church likewise it is not to be doubted: in as much as
Christ himself and the Apostle have both by precepts and practice confirmed
and established it. Now in both is contained that power of shutting and
opening, which the Lord notes out by the name of the keys, saying, J will
give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven; the keys, that is, the office
or power of shutting and opening the kingdom of God. It is a Metaphour or
borrowed speech taken from the stewardes of men's houses; 2. King. 18 18. Esai.
22.22.
because the steward of the house is said to have the keie of it to open and
to shut it.

2 Unto whom the power of the keys is committed.
Unto whom the declaration and denouncing of Gods word is committed, to them
also is committed the power of the keys. The denouncing and publishing of the
anger and favor of god, which is performed in the preaching of the gospel, is
committed unto the Ministers. For the preaching it self also of the gospel is
committed to them alone. But that denouncing which is exercised in church
discipline belongs to the whole church. For unto the whole church does
Discipline and spiritual jurisdiction belong. But the denouncing and
declaration which is used in the ministry of Gods word is done after another
manner, than in church discipline Jn the ministry of the word, the anger of
god, the word going before, is by every Pastor alone or Minister of the word
privately denounced against al ungodly, unbelieving, and vnrepenting persons:
namely that they are exiled from the kingdom of Christ, as long as they repent
not, neither live according to the prescript rule of the Gospel: And again, if
they repent, the grace and favor of God, and remission of sins is by the
same Pastors and Ministers signified and declared out of the word of God unto
them. Objection. Then have men power to condemn. Answer. They have
ministerial power, that is, the charge and-function of denouncing unto men,
according to Gods word, that God remitteth or not remitteth their sins: and
this is done two ways. First, and in general, when in the preaching of the
Gospel they declare, That al believers are saved, and that all unbelievers are
condemned. Secondly, when as they exercise this function of declaring Gods will
priuatlie unto particular men, and toward every one in several: as when
remission of sins is promised to some certain person repenting, and when
likewise the anger and displeasure of God is denounced against any one person
not repenting, as long as he continues in that mind. So was it said to Simon
Magus; Thou have neither part nor fellowship in this business. The same is to
be said in particular to every one, as often as need requires; neither must
we do it at our own pleasure, but according to the word of God. And this is
the power of the keys granted unto Pastors, and annexed to the ministry of
the word. But to execute this sentence declared belongs to God alone. Jn
ecclesiastical jurisdiction, or church-iudgement, the denouncing of the favor
and wrath of God is not done by any one privately, but by the whole church, or
in the name of the whole church, by such as are deputed thereunto by common
consent of all. And this denouncing is used for some certain causes, and
toward some certain persons, having also accompanying it a debarring and
excluding from the use of the sacraments, when need requires.

3 Why the power of the keys is necessary.
THE power of the keys is necessary, 1. In respect of the commandment: If he
refuse to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man, and a
publicane. And unto such a one the Lord will not communicate or impart his
sacraments, which he ordained and instituted for the faithful only. 1. Cor.
5.5. Let such a one be delivered unto Satan, for the destruction of the flesh,
that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. 1. Cor. 11.28. Let
a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread and drink of this
cup. And seeing Christ does not institute his sacraments but for the
faithful; therefore neither can we be partakers of the table of the Lord,
and of Devils. For what concord has christ with Belial? But all those that
profess corrupt doctrine, and persist in wickedness, are at the table of
Devils. Christ therefore wills, Matt. 5.24. That thou leave thine offering
before the altar, and go thy way, and first be reconciled to thy brother, and
then come and offer thy gift. Wherefore he will have them to submit themselves
first unto God, according to all his commandementes, before they approach to any
sacrament For by the name of Altar here are understood any sacraments
whatsoever. Number. 15.31. It is said: Because he has despised the word of the
Lord, and has broken his commandment; that person shall be utterly cut off.
And Deuteronomy. 17.12. That man that will do presumptuouslie, not hearkening unto
the Priest (that stands before the Lord thy God to minister there) or unto
the Judge, that man shall die, and thou shall take away evil from Israel. By
these two places God will have those cut off which are rebellious against this
law, and that even from the civil state and common wealth; neither does he
permit them to be any members of his people: much less then will he have them
to be accounted members of his visible church. The civil or judicial law
indeed is taken away, as also are the ceremonies: but that especial difference
between the citizens of the church and others is not taken away. Whereupon
christ (which place we alleged before) will have no man to offer his gift,
before he be reconciled unto his brother; and so does he manifestly declare
that he will not that they, who repent not, lay hands on those sacraments,
which are appropriated to the penitent and believers only: whereby withal he
puts a great difference between believers and unbelievers, the obstinate,
and repentaunt. So Peter also beholding the hypocrisy and impiety of Simon
the Sorcerer, does openly distinguish and part him from the faithful,
denouncing that he has neither part nor fellowship in this business, that is,
in the doctrine of the gospel, which Peter taught. 2. The power of the keys is
necessary, in respect of gods glory. For God is reproched and despited, if
without difference the wicked and blasphemers go in the number of his
children. 3. It is necessary, least the sacraments be profaned, and that be
given to the wicked in the Supper, which is denied them in the word. 4. It is
necessary, For the safety of the Church, which shall be punished if she
wittingly and willingly profane Christ's sacraments. 5. For the safety of the
sinners, that they being often admonished may return to repentance. 6. For
avoiding of offense in the church that others be not corrupted. 1. Cor. 5.6.
Know ye not that a little leaue^ leaueneth the whole lump? 7. For avoiding of
offense among those that are without; least they who are not as yet members of
the church, come not to it. 8. That the name of God may not be blasphemed and
evil spoken of by others, and his covenant despited and reproched. 9. That from
the sinners themselves punishment may be auerted; because the wicked approaching
unto the Lords table eat their own damnation. Wherefore that this may not come
to pass, the church is bound to provide, that such approach not hither.

10 They who deny the faith and doctrine of christ are to be excluded from the
church, and from the use of the sacraments. For the faithful or christians are
not to be confounded or mingled with those who are not members of the Church;
as with those which are professed ungodly persons, blasphemours, reuolters to
Arrianism, Mahumetisme, and the like. But they that deny and refuse to repent,
deny the faith and doctrine. Tit. 1.6. They profess that they know god, but by
works they deny him. And he that denies the faith is worse then Infidels.
Therefore they who persist in their wickedness, and deny to repent, are to be
shut out of the church, neither are they to be admitted to the use of the
sacraments. And here has place that saying of Christ, Matthew. 7.6. Give not
that which is holy to dogs. Wherefore nether to the sacraments are dogs to be
admitted, namely those which persist in their wickedness, and make a mock of
Gods word. For if Christ speaks this of his audible word, to wit, the word
preached, which yet was instituted for the converted and unconverted, or such
as were yet to be converted; much more shall this be spoken of his visible
word, namely of the sacraments, which were ordained and instituted for the
converted only.

11 Open blasphemers ought not to be baptized. For they ought not to be
baptized, who believe not with their whole heart. Wherefore Philip says to the
Eunuch, If thou beleeuest with all thine heart, thou may be baptized. So John
also Baptized none but such as confessed their sins. Now if blasphemers and
unbelievers are not to be baptized, it follows that they are to be shut out
of the church, and not to be admitted to the receiving of the sacraments They
who ought not to be baptized, neither ought they to be admitted unto he Supper:
For there is one and the same reason in ^oth.

12 They who are not as yet baptized are not to be ^^mitted unto the supper:
but to them who forsake their Baptism, Bap^^^m is no Baptism, according to
that of the Apostle, (...) 2.25. If thou be a transgressor of the Law; thy
circumcision is made uncircumcision. Therefore they who forsake their Baptism,
are not to be admitted unto the Supper. Objection. Then they who forsake their
Baptism, are also to be baptized after their receiving into the church. Answer.
Their receiving into the church by Baptism is firm and in force to them that
repent, without any iteration of the sign. But seeing Baptism is an entrance
into the church, they who forake it, are not in the church; and therefore as
long as they continue such, they are not to be admitted either into the Church,
or unto the supper.

13 Unto whom the promise of grace does not belong, unto the^ the sign of grace
ought to be extended: otherwise the church should deal corruptly, admitting
them whom God excludes, and should be diverse and disagreeing from her self:
for she should absolve them by the visible word, whom she condemned by the
audible word. Wherefore whom God has rejected, and deprived of his grace, they
are not to be admitted unto the sacraments, which are the signs of Gods grace.

14 The institution of the sacraments, or the condition, which must be observed
in coming to the sacraments, requires repentance. Therefore they who show
not repentance, ought not to be admitted. This argument follows, by a
counterpositio^: They which have repentance and faith are to be admitted:
Therefore they which have not repentance and faith are not to be admitted.

4 How the power of the keys differs from the civil power.
1 THE power of the keys committed unto the church, depends on Gods words,
the civil power is armed with the sword.

2 Jn the church, judgment proceeds according to Gods laws: in the civil
state, judgment is exercised according to civil Laws.

3 The church punishes the obstinate with the word of God only; yet so, as
that this punishment pierces even unto their consciences: The civil state
punishes the obstinate only with corporal punishment. The church punishes
with the word when it denounces the anger and wrath of God against infidels,
and unrepentant persons.

4 Oftentimes the Discipline of the church has place where there is no place
for civil judgment; as when the church casts out of her congregation the
impenitent, and accounts them no more for her members. And contrariwise, the
civil government often times has place, where there is no place left for church
Discipline: as when the Magistrate punishes adulterers, robbers, thieves, with
death, and does no more reckon them for members of the common wealth, whether
they repent, or continue obstinate; whom yet the church, as soon as they repent
and she receive them, is bound to hold for her members.

5 The judgment of the church has degrees of admonitions. For first
repentance must be sought for, before they come to punishment: But the civil
judgment proceeds to punishment, whether he, which sinned, promise
repentance, or continue unrepentant.

6 The end and purpose of the church is, that he which has offended should
repent, and be saved for ever: the end and purpose of the Magistrate is, that
the offender be punished, and so peace and external order and Discipline be
maintained in the commonwealth.

7 The church is bound to reuerse and retract her judgment and punishment, if
there come repentance. But the Magistrate is not bound to recall his judgment
and punishment, neither is he able sometimes to recall it. Wherefore the
difference is apparent and manifest of the civil, and Ecclesiastical power, or
the power of the keys delivered by christ unto the church. And this power may
easily stand and consist without that. For the church acknowlegeth him for her
member, whom the Magistrate does not acknowledge, nor suffer.

5 What order is to be observed in exercising the power of the keys.
WHen a man has committed some private trespass, he must first be courteously
admonished by one, according to the commandment of Christ, Mat. 18.15. Jf thy
brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him
alone: Jf he hear thee, thou have won thy brother, Moreover, Jf being
admonished by one, he does not yet repent, he must be again privately
admonished, by thee taking one or two with thee. And such admonitions must be
done according to gods word, and with signification of good will toward the
offender, and that not but for causes just, weighty, and necessary. And if
neither so admonished by one or two he repent; he is to be corrected by the
whole Church. Which also Christ has commanded. Jf he will not vouchsafe to
hear them, tell it unto the Church.

Now if a man transgress publicly by offending of the whole Church, he must
also publicly be corrected by the Church, accordong as his trespass is: if
neither yet he will repent being admonished and chastised by the Church;
whether it be he that committed a private trespass, or he that committed a
public offense; at length excommunication must be inflicted by the church,
as the extrem^ and last remedy to correct men obstinate and impenitent: even
as also Christ himself commands in these words next following the place
before alleged. Jf he refuse to hear the church also, let him be unto thee as
an heathen man, and a publicane: In these words Christ expressly commands
all, whosoever being after this sort admonished by the church will not repent,
to be by the common consent of the church excommunicated, until they repent.

It remains now that we see, what Excommunication is. Excommunication is the
banishing of a grievous transgressour, or an open, ungodly and obstinate
person, from the fellowshippe of the faithful, by the judgment of the Elders,
by the consent of the church, and by the authority of christ, and by the holy
Scripture: When the Church therefore pronounces of any, that they are not
godly, they must be excommunicated, and not admitted unto the sacrament. And
whosoever are excommunicated, they again professing and showing in their
actions amendme^t, ar altogether in like sort received into the church as they
were exiled from it, namely by the iugedme^t of the Elders, by the consent of
the Church, and the authority of Christ and the Scripture. Furthermore the
chief and principal part in excommunication, is denunciation, whereby is
denounced, that he which denies faith and repentance is no member of the
church, as long as he cotinueth such, how ever he make boast of the name of
christians; because the Scripture does not acknowledge him for a christian,
who although he profess himself in word to be a christian, yet in deeds
shows the contrary. And this denunciation, whereby one is excommunicated, is
not in the power of the minister of the Church, but in the power of the Church,
and is done in the name of the Church, because this commandment was given by
christ unto the church. For he says expressly, tell the Church. And verily
this commandment he gave unto the church, not for the destruction of the
sinner which is to be excommunicated, but for his edification o^ salvation.
Neither ought this denunciation of the church to be used without effect, for,
(as was before said) of whom the church denounces that they are not godly,
the church is bound to excommunicate them, and not admit them to the use of
the Sacraments. Now who are to be excommunicated, is known sufficiently by
that which has been said before; namely such, as either deny some article of
faith, or show that they will not repent, or submit not themselves to the
will of God, according to his commandments, neither make any doubt of
persisting stubbornly in manifest wickedness. Al such are not to be admitted
into the Church. or, if they have been admitted into the Church in Baptism,
yet we must not go forward in offering them the Lords sacred Supper: but
contrariwise, such as profess faith and repentance, the church is bound to
admit. There remain objections of the adversaries, whereunto we will in few
words make answer.

1 Objection. The charge and office of the keys, is no where commanded.
Therefore is not to be ordained in the Church, and by consequent, no man ought
to be excluded from the sacraments. Ans. The Antecedent is false; because
frequently in Scripture manifest testimonies of this charge and commission are
extant, Mat. 16.19. J will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven,
and whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth, shall be bound in heaven. Here in
plain words is expressed the power of the keys committed to all ministers of
the word.

Moreover, what this office of charge of the keys committed to the Church is,
and how the Church must discharge this charge and fun^tion, Christ likewise
plainly aduertiseth and declares; Mat. 18.17. and 18. If he will not v^^^safe
to hear them, tell it unto the Church: and if he efuse to hear the Church
also, let him be unto thee as an heathen man, and a publicane, Verily J say
unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in Heaven: and
whatsoever ye loose on earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. These things given
thus in precept by Christ Paul also does in the thing it self confirm. 1.
Cor. 5.5. Let such a one be delivered unto Satan, for the destruction of the
flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. 1. Cor.
11.20. When ye come together into one place, this is not to eat the Lords
Supper* 2. These. 3.14. Jf any man obey not our sayings: note him by a letter,
and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed. 1. Tim. 1.20. Of whom
is Hymenaeus, and Alexander, whom I have delivered unto Satan, that they might
learn not to blaspheme. In the Prophets also are manifest testimonies, in
which this is apparent to have been commanded by God. Isai. 1.11. What have I
to do with the multitude of your sacrifices, says the Lord? I am full of the
burnt offerings of rams, and of the fat of fed beasts: and I desire not the
blood of bullockes, nor of lambs, nor of goats. Isai. 66.3. He that kills a
bullock, is as if he slew a man: he that sacrifices a sheep, as if he cut off
a dogs neck: he that offers an oblation, as if he offered swines blood: he
that remembers incense, as if he blessed an Jdoll. Ier. 7.22. J spoke not unto
your Fathers, nor commanded them, when J brought them out of the land of
Egypt, concerning burnt offerings and sacrifices. Psalm. 50.16. Unto the wicked
said God; What have thou to do, to declare mine ordinances, that thou
should take my covenant in thy mouth? Wherefore Christ also says, Matt.
5.24. Leave there thine offering before the Altar, and go thy way: first be
reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. There are other
places also of Scripture besides these, where it is commanded, that all
professed wicked persons be excluded from the church and the use of the
sacraments: as, wheresoever is reprehended the unlawful use of the sacraments:
Likewise wheresoever the ministers are commanded to receive only such for
members of the church, as profess faith and repentance. Reply. God indeed
forbids the ungodly to come unto the sacraments, but he wills not that
the church should forbid them. Ans. What god forbids to be done in the
church, that will he have to be avoided by the Discipline of the church: and
that God has willed the church to forbid and exclude professed ungodly
persons, is manifestly proved by the fore alleged places.

2 Object. Men are not able to discern the worthy from the unworthy: they
cannot know, who truly repent, and who persist in impiety: neither can they
cast any man into hell fire. Therefore that judgment is not committed unto
the church, whereby the godly may be distinguished from the ungodly.
Answer. The church does not judge of such as are hidden or secret, but of
those that are manifest, namely of those, who show them selves in outward life
and profession; and this she does when concerning such she subscribeth to the
judgment of god, that is, when she judges of them according to the prescript
of Gods word: as when out of the word of God she pronounces the obstinate to
be condemned, as long as they continue such; and when out of the word of God
she absolueth them which show repentance. But to discern from others such as
are close and hidden, as the church is not able, so neither does she take it
upon her.

3 Objection. Christ says in the Parable of the tares, let both grow together
until the harvest. Therefore none ought to be excluded. Answer. 1. Christ
speaks there of hypocrites, who cannot be discerned always from the true
seruers of God. Therefore his meaning is, that hypocrites ought not to be cut
off or separated from the church, as whom we know not to be such: but that the
Angels shall do this at the last day. 2. Christ distinguishes there the
office of the Magistrate, and of ministers, Let them grow, that is, put not to
death any which are estra^ged from the church. For the Ministers may not use
corporal force against any man, as may the Magistrate. Now if this difference
be put, the difference which is between the church, and the kingdom of the
Devil shall not be taken away.

4 Objection. Men are to be forced and compelled unto good works. The use of
the sacraments is a good work. Therefore they are to be forced and compelled
to the use of the sacraments. Answer. 1. The Minor is not true, except it be
understood of that use, which is celebrated by the faithful: otherwise, when
unbelievers use the sacraments, their use is no good work. The use of the
sacraments is a good work, when good moral works go before this use: And then
is it truly called the use of the sacraments; otherwise it is rather an abuse,
and profaning of the sacraments. For when the wicked take the sacraments,
they abuse them; whence it is that Christ expressly dehorteth the wicked, from
this good work, when he says, Leave there thine offering before the Altar, and
go thy way. 2. The Mayor proposition is to be distinguished. Men are to be
compelled unto good works, but in their order, so that there go before an
enforcing to moral woorks, and then follow after an enforcing to ceremonial
works: and so is that to be understood, which Christ says, Luke 14 23. Compel
them to come in.

5 Objection. We have no examples of this excluding. The Prophets, Apostles,
and John excluded none: nay John Baptized a generation of vipers. Answer. The
Prophets albeit they could not exclude the wicked from the sacrifices and
sacraments, yet they condemned that wickedness of theirs in approaching
thither, and made oftentimes long sermons both against the wicked who did
approach, and against the Church, which admitted them unto the sacrifices. But
that the Apostles did exclude, Paul alone does sufficiently show by his
example, as we saw before, and John Baptized them only who promised faith and
repentance: he baptized a generation of vipers, when now they did repent.
Wherefore although they were a vipers brood whom John baptized; yet were they
not any longer vipers, when they were baptized. For John baptized none but such
as confessed their sins: As also he preached the Baptism of repentance for
the remission of sins.

6 Objection. Jf they are to be admitted unto the sacraments which profess
faith and repentance, and the unbelievers and wicked are to be excluded; the
same shall be done after the same manner, as it was done by John. But John by
himself alone admitted them, who professed faith and repentance, unto baptism,
and he alone also rejected he impenite^t: Therefore it shall be lawful for one
minister alone either to admit them who profess the Doctrine and repentance,
or to reject the obstinate. Answer. The reason is not like. For John was
endued with a Prophetical and Apostolic authority. Again at that time the
gathering of the new Church was respected, and not the excluding of them, who
were in the Church, and had revolted from it.

Certain arguments assoiled, whereby some have endeavored to abolish
excommunication.
1 WHERE the word and Sacraments are rightly to be administered, there must
the authorite of discipline be established. But in the primitive Church, and at
this day in well ordered Churches the authority of discipline is not
established: Therefore the word and Sacraments are not rightly there
administered. But absurd were it so to say; therefore absurd also to impose a
necessity of discipline on the Church. Answer. These words, To be rightly
administered, are doubtful and have a diverse meaning. 1. To administer
rightly, signifies, so to administer, as that the administration wholly agree
with the prescript of the Lord. 2 It signifies, to administer, not according
to the right, perfect and exact observing of it; but so, that the
administration be pleasing to God, and profitable for the salvation of the
Church. In this whole world the Sacraments are not rightly administered
according to the former signification: but according to the latter
signification they are. For albeit there be some blemishes, which by reason of
the churches weakness and imbecility cannot be corrected and amended on a
sudden; yet the administration may please God, and profit the Church: Albeit
we are nevertheless to acknowledge and bewail the defects. For blessed are
they which hungre and thirst after righteousness. Except these things be
granted, there will be no pure church in the world. We may seem now to have
sufficiently assoiled this objection; but yet further also we deny the Minor.
For the authority of discipline was, and continued in the Primitive church, and
shall also continu in an il ordered church, but with great abuse, as amongst the
Papists. Reply. Jn our Churches, and in the Heluetian churches Excommunication
is not in force: Therefore the Minor of the former objection is true. Ans.
Although in some Churches it be not exercised, yet is it not then ill
exercised: but the Minor is nevertheless infringed. Because in those churches
the word and the Sacraments are rightly administered, according to the other
signification whereof we spoke before. Chrysostom says, If any wicked person
come unto the Lords table, give not unto him the Lords Sacrament, the body and
blood of the Lord: if he will not believe, signify it unto me: I will rather
leese my life, than I will admit him. Excommunication therefore was in force
many years after Christ.

2 That Doctrine which has neither Gods word nor examples, is not to be
thrust upon the church. But this doctrine has neither of these. Therefore it is
not to be thrust upon the church. Ans. It has the word for it. Mat. 18.17. If
he refuse to hear the church, let him be unto thee as a Heathen man. 1. Cor. 5.
Let such a one be delivered unto Satan. 1. Tim. 1. Whom I have delivered unto
Satan. Reply. Mat. 18. No mention is made of the seniorie or Excommunication.
Therefore that does not prove the word. Ans. I deny the Antecedent. For
although there be not the formal words, yet the thing it self is contained
in them. Reply. To be accounted for an heathen man, and to be Excommunicated,
are not al one. Therefore the word is not contained there in words of like
force. Now the Antecedent is proved thus. Let him be unto thee as an heathen
man and a publican. There he speaks not of the judgment of the Church.
Therefore he is not to be excommunicated by the whole Church, who is accounted
for an Heathen by private men. Auns. Whom each in several account for an Heathen
man, him the whole Church so accounts of. Reply. But it is not said there,
whom the whole Church accounts for an heathen man, but he that hears not
the word, account thou him for an heathen man: Therefore account him not so
according to the churches judgment, but according to thine own judgment.
Answer. Therefore I account him so, because he hears not the Church. But, not
to hear the Church, is, to be a publicane, and estranged from the church. Are
not these all one? But I add an other thing which admits less questioning.
He says not only to every private man, but to the whole Church, for, to thee,
and to the Church, are of like force. For when Christ commands, that I
account a man for a publicane and an heathen, does he therefore will that the
church account him for a Christian? No, because then he would have contrary
judgments to be given of the same man. But, to be accounted of the Church for
a publicane and an Heathen, is to be excommunicated, and to be out of the
communion of the Church. Wherefore this stands still, that mention is made of
excommunication, and that it is commanded, and, That, to be accounted of one
for a publicane, is, so to be a^counted of all. And if that denunciation
should not be done in special and particular, no man could be accounted for a
publicane. As touching the other member, which is the seniorie, I answer,
that it is done by the church.

3 The Church is not the Seniorie: But christ commands that signification be
given to the church, and that admonition be given by the church. Therefore not
by the Seniorie. Answer. I deny the Mayor: albeit the whole reason
notwithstanding may be granted: namely, that christ understands not the
Seniorie, but makes properly the name of the Church, both of the Jewish before
christ, and of the christian after christ. But there must be notwithstanding
some order in the jurisdiction of the church: some must be appointed and
ordained by the church: else will there be a confusion of all things. Therefore
by the church is comprehended the Seniory, and by consequent it is understood
of a council or assembly of governors. We cannot observe that which christ
says, without defining of circumstances. Reply. It is true indeed, that
signification cannot be given to the whole church, but to the council or
assembly of governors, which yet is civil: Tell the church, that is, the
Senate of the city. Answer. Now then they confess that it cannot be
signified to the whole church, but to some council or assembly of governors,
which yet must be civil, not Ecclesiastical. The question then is, whether
christ's words are to be understood of a civil council and assembly. This
must they prove. They prove therefore that this council is civil.

4 Christ commands that it be signified unto the council; which council is
civil. This proposition they prove. That council which punishes with
corporal punishments, is civil. The council, which gave Paul power to put
Christians to death, punishes with corporal punishments: Therefore it was
civil. Answer. We answer unto the Mayor. That council which punishes so,
according to right, is civil. But they, who gave that power to Paul, did it
wrongfully: because they had not that right and authority, but usurped it.
Which also is to be thought of their putting Stephen to death; because it was
done tumultuously: and further the Priests themselves were consenting unto it,
but unjustly. Reply. S. Austine says that the Jews did lie, when they said,
It is not lawful for us to put any ^^en to death. Answer. The words of
Austine are these in his 114. Treatise, upon John, Did they not put him to
death, whom they yielded up to be put to death? By reason of the feast it was
not lawful to put him to death. Reply. S. Chrysostom also. says; It is not
lawful for us, that is, because of the feast approaching. Answer. This is not
true (with the good leave of S. Chrysostom be it spoken): because it is
witnessed by their stories, that their laws were taken from them by Herod the
Great; and Josephus writes that the whole council was put to death by him,
one only excepted. Therefore the Jews in effect say this: Thou have the power
of the sword; it is not lawful for us to put any man to death. Reply, It is
said in the Gospel; Take ye him and judge him after your own Law. Answer.
He means the Law of Moses: which was, That he should be stoned to death,
Pilate granting them the liberty of using their own Law. Reply. Josephus
says, That their Laws were granted unto them by Claudius. Answer. Then
before time they had them not. Moreover Claudius is said in this sense to have
granted them their Laws, because he permitted them to observe their own
Laws and rites in religion. Reply. Their council was taken away by Herod
the Great: Therefore before time they had civil jurisdiction, and at that
time, when Christ commanded to signify it unto the council. Wherefore, by
consequent, it was to be signified to the civil senate: for there was no other
council but the civil. There were in all three councels or assemblies, 1. Of
the whole kingdom, as the high court of parliament in England. 2. A less
council, which was the senate of the city of Jerusalem; and that was both
civil and ecclesiastical. 3. The Triumuiri. Al these were civil. The council
then was civil. Christ sends to the council. Therefore to the civil senate.
Ans. The council was civil, but not only civil: for it had also ecclesiastical
power, because it handled and decided matters of religion: It consisted of
Pharisees and Scribes, of Divines and Lawyers. For they had moral and judicial
Laws.

Now then the question is, Whether Christ commands to tell the council, as it
is civil: or as it is ecclesiastical. That he will have it signified unto the
council, as it is Ecclesiastical, we prove out of the text. 1. Because we are
commanded to account the excommunicated person for an heathen man and
Publicane, that is, for an aliene from Christ's kingdom. Now to pronounce a
man to be a Publicane and an aliene from Christ's kingdom, belongs unto the
Ecclesiastical magistrate, not unto the civil: because a Publican and an
Heathen may be a member of the city, but not of the church of Christ. 2.
Christ adds, Verily, verily, J say unto you, whatsoever ye bind on earth,
shall be bound in heaven. Here Christ meets with an objection: For the
excommuned person may object; what does this touch me? Although the church
account me for an infidel, for an Heathen and Publicane, I will notwithstanding
in the mean season eat and drink. Christ answers therefore, That this
judgment shall not be frustrate or of no effect: for I may self will be the
executour of it. Before, in the 16 Chapter, he said, I will give thee the keys
of the kingdom of heaven: but there he speaks of the common and general
authority of the ministry: here he speaks namely and particularly of the
ministers authority in this cause. To bind and loose therefore is not belonging
unto the Magistrate, but unto the church.

5 The wicked may be accounted for Heathens and Publicanes, without any
excommunication: Therefore a Publicane and an excommunicate are not alone.
Answer. I deny the Antecedent: because to account one out of the communion
of the church, and to excommunicat, are all one. Reply. But they may account
one, that is, think of one in their mind, to be such a person. Answer. If he
hear not the church, thou art to know, not what the church thinks of him in
mind, but what they publicly determine of him, whether thou may account
him for an Heathen and Publicane. And furthermore Paul elsewhere forbids us
to eat or drink with a wicked person. Therefore it is not a knowledge only in
the mind.

Against the Examples.
PAVL wills that the incestuous person be cast out of the Catholic church.
1. Corinthians. 5.13. that is, he will have him pronounced to be no member of the
Church. Therefore this eiection or casting out is not to think only, but to
pronounce also and excommunicate. The adversaries urge the contrary to this, on
this wise.

6 The Apostle expounds himself 2. Corinthians. 2.6. It is sufficient unto the
same man, that he was rebuked of many. Therefore those words, Account him for a
Heathen and a Publicane, and, put him away from among you, signify only a
rebuking. Answer. This reason deceives by a fallacy of consequent: because a
general rule is not builded upon one example. For, because here was need of
rebuking only, seeing the party repented: It does not thereof follow, that
always the same only is required. Reply. What they did, that Paul commanded.
But they did only reprehend and rebuke. Therefore Paul commanded them only
to reprehend him, when he commanded them to put him away from among them. Ans.
Paul commanded that, but not that only: because he commanded also that they
should reject him, if he repented not. But if he repented, it should be
sufficient to reprehend and rebuke him. Wherefore it does not follow: They
only reprehend him: Therefore Paul commanded them only to reprehend him.
This is a true answer unto the former reply; but there is another also clear
and manifest. (...).
For the Greek word (which the Apostle here uses) signifies not only
reprehension and rebuking, but also that excommunication, which is by words
only. And in this sense not only it may, but also must be taken: because
he says, So that now contrariwise ye ought rather to forgive him. Therefore
he was now excommunicated, and not as yet received, but to be received: Neither
was he only reprehended and rebuked, but also cast out and eiected. And when
also he says. Of many, hereby is confirmed, that by the name of the church,
whereof Christ speaks, Matthew. 18. is not understood the common multitude,
but the chief gouerners of the church. Again, For this cause did I write
(says the Apostle) that J might know the proof of you, whether you would be
obedient in all things. He praises them therefore because they obeyed.
Wherefore before repentance he forbids, That they company not together with
the excommunicated person. And further also he says; I pray you that you
would confirm your love toward him. The Greek word, (...) (which we
interpret, to confirm) signifies, by public sentence to speak a thing. So
is it taken, Gal. 3.15. a man's covenant when it is confirmed, that is, ratified
by public authority. The Apostles meaning therefore here is, that they should
declare their love toward man by public testimony. Therefore, to forgive,
was to receive the excommunicated erson into favor, and that does he often
repete. Now, there was also some space between the writing of the former and
the latter Epistle to the Corinthians: Therefore he stood in the mean time
excommuned. In the former Epistle Paul says, that he hears that some wicked
persons were amongst the flock: Them he wills to be exco^muned: And it is
likely that the Corinthians obeyed this his commandment in excommuning them,
and so wrote to Paul, that they had obeyed him therein, because in his 2.
Epistle, Cap. 2. he commends them, and wills them to receive again the
incestuous person, upon repentance.

7 Whom Paul had willed to be noted by a letter, him he wills the
Thessalonians to account of, as of a brother, and therefore will not have him
to be excommunicated. This consequence or sequel is proved thus: Contraries
can-not stand together: But to excommunicate one, and, to account him for a
brother, are contraries: therefore if he be to be accounted for a brother,
he is not to be excommunicated. That these are contraries, is also thus
proved To Excommunicate, is, not to account one for a brother: but, not to
account one for a brother, and to account one for a brother, are contraries:
Therefore also to excommunicate one, and to account him for a brother, are
contraries, and so can not stand together; except, not to account, and, to
account for a brother, should be all one. Answer. There is an ambiguitie
and diverse understanding of these words, to account for a brother. Wherefore
the contrariety is not here of force. For all men are brethren, both
Christians, and Turks. But christians nevertheless, although they account
Turks for their brethren, and neighbors, and desire their salvation: yet do
they not account them for christian brethren. If then they are to account
Turks for their brethren, then much more must they account them, and seek
their salvation, who were before time brethren, that is, christians.

8 What Paul did, that are not we to follow. Paul did excommunicate Hymenaeus
and Alexander without the churches consent, 1. Timot. 1.20. Therefore we must
excommunicate no man. Answer. The Mayor proposition is false, if it be
generally understood. Reply. The Mayor is thus proved. What Paul did by his
Apostolic authority, that are not we to follow. But he did this by his
Apostolic authority. Now this Minor is proved by Paul's words: I have
delivered, says he, Hymenaeus and Alexander unto Satan. But our Ministers and
Pastors of churches cannot do this. Therefore it must needs be that Paul did
it by special authority. Answer. This whole reason I grant. We must not
follow his example, if he did it alone. But hereof it follows not, Therefore
we may not excommunicate. For so more is in the conclusion than in the
premises. And again the Minor may be denied; because in the text alleged
it is reported only, that Paul did it, not in what sort and manner he did it.

THE THIRD PART OF MAN'S THANKFVLNES.
86 Whenas we are delivered from all our sins and miseries, without any
merit of ours, by the mercy of God only for Christ's sake: for what cause are
we to do good-workes?

BEcause, after that Christ has redeemed us with his blood, he renueth us also
by his spirit to the Image of himself: that we receiving so great benefits
should Romans 6.13. and 12.1.2. 1. Pet. 2.5.9.10. 1. Cor. 6.20.
show our selves all our lifetime thankful to God, and Mat. 5.16. 1 Pet.
2.12.
honor him. Secondly, that every of us may be 2. Pet. 1.10. Mat. 7.17.18.
Gal. 5.6.22.
assured of his faith, by his fruit. And lastly, that by our honest and good
conversation we may 1. Pet. 3.1.2. Mat. 5.16. Romans 14.19.
win others unto Christ.

87 Cannot they then be saved which be unthankful, and remain still
carelessly in their sins, and are not converted from their wickedness unto
God?

By no means. For, as the Scripture bears witness, neither unchaste persons,
nor Idolaters, nor adulterers, nor thieves, nor covetous men, nor drunkardes,
nor slaunderers, nor robbers, shall 1. Cor. 6.9.10. Ephesians. 5.5.6. 1. Ioh.
3.14.15.
enter into the kingdom of god.

88 Of what parts consists the conversion of man unto God?

It consists of the Romans 6.4.5.6. Ep. 4.22.23.42. Col. 3.5.6.7.8.9.10. 1.
Cor. 5.7. 2. Cor. 7.11.
mortifieng of the oulde man, and the quickening of the new man.

89 What is the mortifieng of the old man?

To be truly and heartily sorry, that thou have offended god by thy sins,
and daily more and more to hate and Romans 8.13. Joel. 2.13. Ho. 5.15. and 6.1.
eschew them.

90 What is the quickening of the new man?

True joy in God through Romans 5.1. and 14.17. Isa. 57.15.
Christ, and an earnest and ready desire to order thy life according to gods
will, and to Romans 6.10.11. Gal. 2.20.
do all good works.

91 What are good-workes?

Those only which are done, by a true Romans 14.23.
faith, according to 1. Sam. 15.22. Ephesians. 2.10.
gods law, and are 1. Cor. 10.31.
referred only to his glory: and not those which are imagined by us, as
seeming to us to be right and good, or which are Deuteronomy. 11.32. Ezec. 20.18.19.
Js. 29.13. Mat. 15.9.
delivered and commanded by men.

92 Which is the Law of God?

God spoke all Exo. 20. Deu. 5.
these words.

1 I am the Lord thy God, which has brought thee out of Egypt, out of the
house of bondage, Thou shall have no other Gods in my sight.

2 Thou shall make to thee no graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing that
is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, nor in the water under the earth.
Thou shall not bow down to them nor worship them: for I the Lord thy God am a
jealous God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the children unto the third
and fourth generation of the^ that hate me, and show mercy unto thousands of
them that love me and keep my commandementes.

3 Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord
will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

4 Remember thou keep holy the sabbath day, six days shall thou labor and
do all that thou have to do, but the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord
thy God, in it thou shall do no manner of works, thou, and thy son, and thy
daughter, thy man-seruant, and thy maid servant, thy cattle, and the stranger,
that is within thy gate. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the
sea and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord
blessed the seventh day and hallowed it.

5 Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

6 Thou shall do no murder.

7 Thou shall not commit adultery.

8 Thou shall not steal.

9 Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

10 Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, nor his wife, nor his servant,
nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is his.

93 How are these commandments divided?

Into two Exo. 34.28. Deuteronomy. 4.13. and 10.3.4.
tables, whereof the former delivers in four commandments, how we ought to
behave our selves toward God: The latter delivers in six commandments,
what duties we Mat. 22.37.38.39.
owe unto our neighbor.

94 What does God require in the first commandment?

That, as dearly as I tender the salvation of my own soul, so earnestly
should I shun and fly all 1. Cor. 6.9, 10. and 10.7.14.
Idolatry, sorcery, enchantme^ts, Leu. 19 31. Deuteronomy. 18.11.
superstition, praying to Saints, or any other Mat. 4.10. Apoc. 19.10. and
22.8.9.
creatures: and should rightly Joh. 17.3.
acknowledge the only and true god, Ier. 17.5.
trust in him alone, Heb. 10.36. Col. 1.11. Romans 5.3.4.1. Cor. 10.10. Phi. 2.14.
submit and subject my self unto him with all 1. Pet. 5.5.6.
humility and patience, Ps. 104.27.28.29.30. Js. 45.7. Iac. 1.17.
look for all good things from him alone, and lastly with the entire affection
of my heart Deu. 6.5. Mat. 22.37.
love, Deu. 6.2. Ps. 111.10. Prou. 1.7. and 9.10. Mat. 10.28.
reverence, and Mat. 4.20, Deu. 10.20.
worship him: so that I am ready to renounce and forsake al creatures rather,
tha^ to Mat. 5.29.30. and 10.37. Act. 5.29.
commit the least thing that may be against his will.

95 What is Idolatry?

It is, in place of that one God, or besides that one and true God, who has
manifested himself in his word, to make or imagine and account any other thing,
wherein thou reposest thy 1. Para. 16.26. Phi. 3.19. Ephesians. 5.5. Gal. 4.8. Ephesians.
2.12.1. Ioa. 2 23.2. Joan. 9. Jo. 5.23.
hope and confidence.

96 What does the second commandment require?

That we should not Deuteronomy. 4.15. etc. Is. 40.18. etc. Romans 1.23. etc. Act.
17.29.
express or represent god by any image or shape and figure, or worship him
any otherwise than he has commanded in his word himself to be worshipped.

97 May there then at all any images or resemblances of things be made?

God neither ought nor can be represented by any means: and for the creatures,
although it be lawful to expesse them, yet god forbids notwithstanding their
images to be made or had, as thereby to woorship or Exo. 23.24. and 34.13.14.
and 17. Number. 33.52. Deuteronomy. 7.5. and 12.3. and 16.22. 2. Reg. 18.4.
honor either them, or god by them. 1. Sam. 15.23. Deu. 12.30. etc. Mat. 15.9.


98 But may not images be tolerated in Churches, which may serve for books
unto the common people?

No. For it is not seemly that we should be wiser than god, who will have his
church to be 2 Timothy 3.16.17 2. Pet. 1.19.
taught with the lively preaching of his word, and not with dumb Iere. 10 8.
etc. Hab. 2.18 19.
images.

99 What does God decree in the third Commandment?

That not only by cursing, or Leuic. 24.11. etc. Leuit. 19.12.
forswearing, but also by Mat 5 37. Iac. 5.12.
rash swearing we should not use his name despitefully or irreverently:
neither should by silence or conniuence be partakers of these horrible sins
in others: But that we Jes. 45.23.
use the sacred and holy name of God ever with great devotion and reverence:
that he may be 1. Tim. 2.8.
worshipped and honored by us with a true and steadfast Romans 2.24. 1. Tim. 6.1.
Col. 3.16.17.
confession, and Mat. 10.32.
invocation of his name, and lastly in all our words and actions whatsoever.

100 Is it then so grievous a sin by swearing or banning, to take the name of
God in vain: as that God is also angry with them, who, as much as in them
lies, do not forbid or hinder it?

Surely most Leuit. 5.1.
grievous. For neither is there any sin greater, or more offending God, than
the dispiting of his sacred name. Wherefore also he Leuit. 24.15.16.
would have this sin to be punished with death.

101 May a man swear also religiously and lawfully by the name of God?

He may: when as either the magistrate exacteth it, or otherwise necessity
requires by this means the faith and truth of any man or thing to be ratified
and established: whereby both the glory of God may be advanced, and the
safety of others procured. For this kind of swearing is Deuteronomy. 6.13. and
10.20. Is. 48.1. Heb. 6.16.
ordained by Gods word, and therefore was well Genesis 21.24. and 31.53. Jos.
9.15.19. 1. Sam. 24.22. 2. Sam. 3.35. 1. Reg. 1.29. Romans 1.9.
used of the Fathers both in the old, and new Testament.

102 Is it lawful to swear by Saints or other creatures?

No: For a lawefull oath is an invocation of God, whereby we desire, that he, as
the only searcher of hearts, bear witness unto the truth, and punish the
swearer, if he wittingly 2. Cor. 1.23.
swear falsely. But this honor Mat. 5.34.35.36. Iac. 5.12.
agrees to no creature.

103 What does God command in the fourth commandment?

First that the ministry of the gospel, and the schools of learning should be
Tit. 1.5 1. Tim. 3.14.15. 1. Cor. 9.11. and 13.14. 2. Tim. 1.2. and 3.15. 1.
Tim. 4.13.14.15.16 and 5.17.
maintained: and that I, both at other times, and especially on holy days,
should Psalm. 68.26. and 40.9.10. Act. 2.42.46.
frequent studiously divine assemblies, 1. Cor. 14 19.29.31.
hear the word of God diligently, use the 1. Cor. 11.33.
Sacraments, 1. Tim. 2.1.2.3.8.9. 1. Cor. 14.16.
join my prayers with the common prayers of the assembly, and bestow some
thing according to my ability 1. Cor 16.2.
on the poor. And further, that all my lifetime I be free from misdeeds or
evil actions, yielding unto the lord, that he may by his holy spirit work in
me his work: and so I may Js. 66.23.
begin in this life that everlasting Sabbath.

104 What does God inioyne us in the fifth commandment?

That we yield due honor, love, and faithfulness to our Parents, and so to
all, who bear rule over us, and Ephesians. 6.1.2.5. etc. Col. 3.18.20.22.23.24. Ephesians.
5.22. Prou. 1.8.4.1. and 15.20. and 20.20. Exo. 21.17. Romans 13.1.
submit our selves with such obedience, as is meet, to their faithful
commandments and chastisementes: And further also, that by our patience we
Prou. 23.^^. Genesis 9.25. 1. Pet. 2.18.
bear and suffer their vices and manners, ^uer thinking with our selves that
god will Ephesians. 6.4.9. Col. 3.19. and 21. Romans 13. Mat. 22.21.
govern and guide us by their hand.

105 What does God exact in the sixth commandment?

That neither in thought, nor in gesture, muchlesse in deed, I reproach, or
hate, or harm, or Mat. 5.12.22. Genesis 9.6. Mat. 26.52.
kill my neighbor, either by my self or by another: but Ephesians. 4 26. Romans 12.19.
Mat. 5.25. and 18.35.
cast away al desire of revenge. Furthermore, that I hurt not my self, or cast
my self wittinglie into any danger. Wherefore also, that murders might not
be committed, Romans 13.14. Col. 2.23. Syra^. 3.27. Mat. 4.7.
he has Genesis 9.6. Exodus 21.14. Mat. 26.52. Romans 13.4.
armed the Magistrate with the sword.

106 But this commandment seems to forbid murder only.

But in forbidding murder, god does further teach that he hates the root
and cause of murder, to wit, Iac. 1.20. Gal. 5.20.
anger, Romans 1.29.
envy, 1. Joh. 2.9.11.
hatred, and desire of revenge, and does 1. Ioh. 3.15.
account them al for murder.

107 Is it enough then, that we kill no man in such sort, as has been said?

It is not enough: For when god condemns anger, envy, hatred, he requires
that we Mat. 22.39. and 7.12.
love our neighbor as our selves, and that he use Romans 12.10.
humanity, lenity, courtesy, Ephesians. 4.2. Gal. 6.1.2. Mat. 5.5. Romans 12.18. Mat.
57. Luc. 6.3.6.
patience, and Exodus 23.5.
mercy toward him, and Mat. 5.45.
turn away from him, as much as we may, whatsoever may be hurtful unto him.
In a word, that we be so affected in mind, as that we Romans 12.20.2^
stick not to do good also unto our enemies.

108 What is the meaning of the seventh commandment?

That god has in Leu. 18.27.28.
execrational turpitude and, filthiness, and therefore we also must Iud. 22.23.
utterly hate and detest it, and contrariwise live temperately, modestly, and
1. These. 4.3.4.5.
chastely, whether we Heb. 13.4. 1. Cor. 7.4.
live in holy wedlock, or in single life.

109 Forbids God nothing else in this commandment, but adultery, and such
kinds of vnclearnes?

Seeing both our body and soul are the temples of the holy ghost, god will
have us to possess both in purity and holiness. And therefore deeds, gestures,
Ephesians. 5 3. 1. Cor. 6.18.9 20.
words, thoughts, Mat. 5.27.28.
filthy lusts and whatsoever entiseth a man unto these, all that he wholly
Ephesians. 5.18.19. 1. Cor. 15.33.
forbids.

110 What does God forbid in the eight commandment?

Not only those 1. Cor. 6 10.
thefts, and 1. Cor. 5.10.
robberies, which the magistrate punishes: but by the name of theft he
comprehends whatsoever evil crafts, fetches, and devises, whereby we seek
after other men's goods, and endeavor by force or with some show of right to
Luc. 3.14. 1. These. 4 6.
conueie them over unto our selves: of which sort are, false Prou. 11.1. and
16.11.
weightes, false else, uneven Ezech. 45.9. etc. Deu. 25.13. etc.
measures, deceitful merchandise, cou^terfet coin, Psalm. 15.5. Luc. 6.35.
usury, or any other way or means of furthering our estate, which God has
forbidden. To these we may add all 1. Cor. 6.10.
covetousness, and the manifold waste and Prou. 5.16.
abusing of Gods gifts.

111 What are those things, which God here commands?

That to my power I help and further the commodities and profit of my
neighbor: and that I so deal with him, as I would Mat. 7.12.
desire to be dealt with my self: and that I do my own work painefully and
faithfully, that I Ephesians. 4.28.
may thereby help others also who are distressed with any need or calamity.

112 What does the ninth commandment exact?

That I bear no false Prou. 19.5.^. and 21.28.
witness against any man, neither Psalm. 15.3.
falsify any man's words, neither backbite or Romans 1.29.30.
reproach any man, nor Mat. 7.1. etc. Luc. 6.37.
condemn any man rashly or unheard: but avoid and Joh. 8.44.
shun with all carfulness all kind of lies, and deceipts, as the Prou. 12.22.
and 13.5.
proper works of the Devil: except I mean to stir up against me the most
grievous wrath of god: And that in judgments and other affairs I follow the
truth, and freely and constantly 1. Cor. 13.6. Ephesians. 4.25.
profess the matter as it indeed is: And moreover defend and 1. Pet. 4.8.
increase, as much as in me lies, the good name and estimation of others.

113 What does the tenth commandment forbid? That our hearts be not at any
time moved by the least desire, or cogitation, against any commandment of
God: but that continually and from our heart we detest all sin, and
contrarily Romans 7.7. etc.
delight in all righteousness.

114 But can they, who are converted unto God, perfectly observe and keep
these commandments?

No: But even the holiest men as long as they live, have only small beginnings
of this 1.10.1.8. etc. Romans 7.14.15. Eccle. 7.22.
obedience: yet so, that they Romans 7.22. Jac. 2.10.
begin with an earnest and unfeigned desire and endeavor to live not according
to some only, but according to all the commandments of God.

115 Why will God then have his law to be so exactly and severely preached,
seeing there is no man in this life, who is able to keep it?

First, that al our lifetime we more and more Joh. 1.9. Psalm. 22.5.
acknowledge the great pronenes of our nature to sin, and so much the more
greedily Romans 7.24.
desire remission of sins and righteousness in Christ: Secondly, 1. Cor.
9.24. etc. Phi. 3.12.13.14.
that we be doing of this always, and always thinking of that, and implore
and crave of the father the grace of his holy spirit, whereby we may daily
more and more be renewed to the image and likeness of God, until at length
after we are departed out of this life, we may joyfully attain unto the
perfection which is proposed unto us.

OF PRAYER.
116 Wherefore is prayer necessary for Christians?

Because it is the chief part of that Psalm. 50.14.15.
thankfulness, which God requires of us. And also because God gives them
only his grace and holy spirit, who with unfeigned groninges beg them
continually of him, and Mat. 7.7.8. Luc. 11.9.13. Mat. 13.12. Psalm. 50.15.
yield him thanks for them.

117 What is required unto that prayer, which shall please God and be heard of
him?

That we ask of the only true God, who has Joh. 4.22. etc.
manifested himself in his word, all things, which he has commanded to be
Romans 8.26. 1. Ioh. 5.14.
asked of him with a true affection and desire of our heart, and through an
inward Ioh. 4.23.24. Psalm. 145.18.
feeling of our need and misery 2. Par. 20.12.
cast our selves down prostrate in the presence of his divine majesty: and
Psalm. 2.11. and 34.19. Is. 66.2.
build our selves on this sure foundation, that we, though unworthily, yet
for Christ's sake, are certainly Romans 10.14. and 8.15.16. Iac. 1.6. etc.
heard of god, even as he has Io. 14.13. and 15.16. and 16.23. Dan. 9.17.18.
Mat. 7.8. Psalm. 143.1.
promised us in his word.

118 What are those things, which he commands us to ask of him?

All things Iac. 1.17. Mat. 6.33.
necessary both for soul and body: which our Lord Jesus Christ has comprised
in that prayer, which himself has taught us.

119 What prayer is that?

Our Mat. 6.9.10. etc. Luc. 11.2. etc. Mat. 7.9.10.11. Luc. 11.12.13.
Father, which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come; thy will
be done; in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread; And
forgive us our trespasses; as we forgive them, that trespass against us: And
lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil: For thine is the
kingdom, the power, and glory, for ever, and ever,

AMEN.

120 Why does Christ teach us, to call God, our father?

That presently in the very entrance and beginning of the prayer, he might
stir up in us such a reverence and confidence in god, as is meet for the
sons of god; which must be the ground and foundation of our prayer: to wit,
that god through Christ is made our father, and will much less deny unto us
those things, which we ask of him with a true faith, than our earthly
Parents Mat. 7.9.10.11. Luc. 11.11.
deny unto us earthly things.

121 Why is that ad^ed: which art in heaven?

That we Ier. 23.24. Act. 17.24.25.27.
conceive not basely or te^^enely of gods heavenly majesty: And also that we
Romans 10.12.
look for and expect from his omnipotency, whatsoever things are necessary
for our soul and body.

122 What is the first petition?

Hallowed be thy name: that is, grant us first to Ioa. 17.3. Jer. 9.23.24.
and 31.33.34. Mat. 16.17. Iac. 1.5. Psalm. 119.105.
know thee aright, and to worship, praise, and Psalm. 119.137.138. Luc. 1.46.
etc. 68. etc. Psalm. 145.8.9.17. Exodus 34.6.7. Psalm. 143.1.2.5.10.11.12. Ier.
31.3. and 32.18.19.40.41. and 33.11. and 20. Mat. 19.17. Romans 3.3.4. and
11.22.23. 2. Tim. 2.19.
magnify thy almightines, goodness, justice, mercy, and truth shining in all
thy works. And further also, to direct our whole life, thoughts, words, and
works to this end, that thy most holy name be not reproched for us, but
rather be Psalm. 115.1. and 71.8.
renowned with honor and praises.

123 What is the second petition?

Let thy kingdom come: that is, rule us so by thy word, and spirit, that we
may Mat. 6 33. Psalm. 119.5. and 143.10.
humble and submit our selves more and more unto thee: preserve and increase
thy Psalm. 51.20. and 122.6.7.
church, destroy the works of the Diuill, and all power that lifts up it
self against thy Majesty: make al those counsels frustrate and void, which
are 1. Ioh. 3.8. Romans 16.20.
taken against thy word, until at length thou Apoc. 22.17.20. Romans 8.22.23.
reign fully and perfectly, when thou shall be al in 1. Cor. 15.28.
al.

124 What is the third petition?

Thy will be done in earth as it is heaven: that is, Grant that we and al men,
renouncing and Mat. 16.24. Tit. 2.12.
forsaking our own will, may readily and without any grudging Luc. 22.42.
obey thy will, which is only holy: and that so every of us may faithfully and
cheerfully 1. Cor. 7.24.
perform that duty and charge which thou have committed unto us, even as the
blessed Angels do in Psalm. 103.20.21.
heaven.

125 What is the fourth petition?

Give us this day our daily bread: that is, give unto us al things, which are
Psalm. 145.15.16. and 104 27.28. Mat. 6.25. etc.
needeful for this life, that by them we may acknowledge and confess thee to
be the only fountain, from whence all good things Act. 17 27.28. and 14.17.
flow, and al our care and industry, and even thine own gifts to be
unfortunate and 1. Cor. 15.58. Deuteronomy. 8 3. Psalm. 27.16.17.
noisome unto us, except thou bless them. Wherefore grant, that turning our
trust away from all creatures, we Psalm. 62 11. and 55.23.
place and repose it in thee alone.

126 What is the fifth petition?

Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us: that
is, Even for the blood of Christ do not Psalm. 51 1. etc. and 143.2. 1. John.
2.1.2.
impute unto us most miserable and wretched sinners, al our offenses, neither
that corruption, which still cleaves unto us: even as we also feel this
testimony of thy grace in our hearts, that we steadfastly purpose unfeignedly
from our heart to Mat. 6.14.15.
pardon and forgive al those, who have offended us.

127 What is the sixth petition?

Lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil: that is, because we
our selves are so feeble and weak by nature, that we Ioa. 15.5. Psalm. 103.14.
cannot stand so much as one moment or instant; and our most deadly enemies,
1. Pet. 5.8. Ephesians 6.12.
satan the J^h. 15 19.
world, and our own Rom 7.23. Gal 5.17.
flesh, do incessantly oppugn and assault us: uphold thou us, and establish
and strengthen us by the might of they spirit, that we may not in this
spiritual combat Mat. 26.41. Marc. 13.^3.
yield as vanquished, but may so long stoutly withstand them, until at length
we 1. These. 3.13. and 5.23.
get the full and perfect victory.

128 How concludest thou this prayer?

For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever: that is, we
ask and crave al these things of thee, because, seeing both thou art our King,
and art almighty, thou art both willing and able to Romans 10.11.12. ^. Pet. 2.9.
give them al unto us. And these things we therefore ask, that out of them,
not unto us, but unto thy holy name al glory may 10.14.13. Psalm. 115.1. Ier.
33.8.9.
redound.

129 What means this particle, Amen?

That the thing is sure and out of doubt. For my prayer is much more certainly
heard of God, than I feel in my heart, that I unfeignedly 2. Cor. 1.20. ^. Tim.
2.13.
desire the same.

OVT of the diverse and manifold doctrine of the two former parts we have
learned, that we are not thorough any merit of ours, but of Gods mere grace,
by and for Christ, redeemed from sin and death, and even from all the evil
both of crime and pain: whereof it follows that we should be thankful for
this exceeding benefit bestowed by Christ upon us. But we cannot show and
approve our selves thankful to God, except we be truly converted. First
therefore those things which are spoken Of conversion, are in few words to be
expounded. Then ensues the common place Of good works: for by them we declare
our thankfulness toward God; and true conversion cannot stand without good
works. Afterward is adioined the doctrine which entreats Of the Law,
whereby we learn to know good works. For those are truly said to be good
works, by which we worship God aright, and show ourselves to be tha^kful; which
are done by faith according to the rule and prescript only of Gods Law. But
because God will chiefly be worshipped of us, and magnified by invocation, and
for this cause we show our thankfulness most of al by our prayers, and
thanksgiving* at length the common place Of prayer shall be lastly annexed.
These things we purpos^ to declare briefly and in order here following.

OF CONVERSION.
THE chief Questions.

1 What Conversion is. 2 I^ what the conversion of the godly differs from the
repentance of the wicked. 3 What are the parts of conversion. 4 Wh^^ the causes
thereof. 5 What are the effects of ^onversion.
1. WHAT CONVERSION IS.
FIRST we are to speak somewhat of the (...) of Conversion. Conversion is
either a general (...), like as is ^^^^ation; or it is ^^ken more specially.
It signifie^^ the same in Latin, that (...) does in Greek, and T^s^hum in
Hebrew. Moreover the Greek (...) is very well also interpreted in Latin by We
have no one english word to answer^ unto RESIPISCENTIA. For our english,
REP^NTANCE, expresses rather the Latin, PaeNITENTIA, which agrees as well to
the wicked as to the godly.
Resipiscentia, there being the same reason of both names. For as the Latin
Resipiscentia is derived from resipisco, which signifies to wax wise after we
have done a thing: So the Greek (...) comes from (...), which is also to wax
wise after an error or fault committed, to recall or retract our judgment and
opinion, and to alter an evil purpose. Some render (...) by the Latin
Paenitentia, that is, repentance or penitencie: And this Paenitentia is said
to be derived either from Paenites, which signifies to be grieved and to
repent, or from Paena, which signifies pain and punishment: because the
grief which is in repentance, is as it were a punishment. But the name of
paenitentia or repentance, is more obscure than the name of conuersio, or
conversion. For repentance does not comprehend both that from which we
reclaim our selves, and that whereunto we are changed. But conversion
comprehends the whole; because it adds that mutation and change, on which
ensues a beginning of new life. Now repentance signifies only the grief
which is conceived after the fact or sin. Moreover the name of repentance is
of a larger compass, than the name of conversion. For conversion is spoken
only of the godly, who alone are converted unto God: and in like manner is the
Greek (...), and the Latin Resipiscentia spoken of the godly only: because by
these three names is signified the new life of the godly. But repentance is
spoken of the wicked also, as of Iud^s; who indeed repented of his wickedness,
but was not converted: because the wicked when they sorrow or are grieved, are
not afterward converted, or corrected. Whereby also it appears, how
necessary conversion is unto the godly, or those who are to be justified: and
therefore that mo^^ exhortatio^s to amendment of life or conversion, the
foundation or ground is to be laid concerning the absolute and simple necessity
of conversion it self in all those which are to be justified.

Now let us see then what conversion is. Conversion is 1. A grief for sin
known. 2. An hatred and flieng of sin. 3. A joy in respect that God is
pacified and pleased by our Mediator, and an earnest purpose and desire to
obey God in all things. This definition is proposed by his several parts:
and the same is wholly and jointly set down in the Acts of the Apostles, To
open their eyes (says Christ) that they may turn from darkness to light,
Act. 26.18.
and from the power of Satan unto God; that they may receive forgiveness of
sins, and inheritance among them, which are sanctified by faith in me. It
is also defined on this wise; Conversion is a mortifieng of the old man, and a
quickening of the new. Or, It is a change, or mutation of a corrupt mind, life,
and will into a good, stirred up by the holy Ghost through the preaching of the
Gospel in the chosen, on which ensue good works, or a life directed according
to all the commandments of God. This definition contains the very causes
and essence of conversion, and is confirmed by diverse testimonies of
Scripture: As, Isai. 1.16. Wash you, make you clean. 1. Cor. 6.11. But ye are
washed, but ye are sanctified. Psalm. 34.14. Eschew evil, and do good.

2 In what the conversion of the godly differs from the repentance of the
wicked.
THE difference between the conversion of the godly, The wicked and godly
repent after a diverse sort.

1 Their grief diverse.

Genesis 4.13.


and the repentance of the wicked, consists, 1. In their grief. The wicked
are grieved only for the punishment, and torment ensuing, not for that they
offend and displease God. So was Caine grieved only in respect of his torment.
My iniquity (the punishment of my iniquity) is greater, than J can bear.
Behold, thou have cast me out this day from the earth. Now the godly hate
indeed the punishment, but they are grieved especially for that God is
offended, and for their sin. So David, Against thee, Psalm. 51.4.
against thee only have I sinned: my sin is ever before me. The good hate to
sin for the love they bear to virtue; the wicked, for the fear they stand in
of punishment. So in Peter was a sorrow and grief for that he had offended
God: In Judas for his torment ensuing, not for the sin it self.

2 Jn the cause, which breeds repentance in both. 2 The cause of their
grief diverse.
The wicked repent by reason of a despair, distrust, and dissidencie, so that
they run more and more into desperation, murmuring, and hatred against God.
But the godly repent by reason of faith and a confidence which they have of
the grace of God and reconciliation, and so comfort and erect themselves again
in the Mediator: they trust in God, and rely on him with David: Psalm. 51.
Purge me with Hyssope, and J shall be clean.

3 Jn the effect, 3 The effect of their grief diverse.
which their repentance woo^^^eth in them. In the wicked new obedience does
not follow repentance; but they go forward in their sins, they are
mortified indeed themselves and quite destroyed, but the old corruption of
their nature, that is sin, is not mortified in them; and how much the more they
give themselves to repentance, so much the more is in them an hatred of God,
murmuring, flying, and turning away from God, and an approaching unto the Devil:
But in the godly new obedience follows and accompanies repentance; and how
much the more they repent, so much the more dies the old man in them, and the
study and desire of righteousness and living well is in them so much the more
increased. For the conversion of the godly, is a reuersio^ or returning unto
God from the Devil, from sins, and from their old nature.

3 What are the parts of Conversion.
THE parts of Conversion are in number two, The 2. parts of conversion.

1 Mortification. 2 Quickening.

as the Apostle shows; The mortifieng of the old man, and the quickening of
the new man. So speak we better with the Apostle, than if we should follow
them, who make Contrition and Faith, the parts of conversion. Now by
contrition they understand also mortification: by faith they understand the joy
which follows the study of righteousness and new obedience; which are
indeed effects of says, but not faith it self: and co^^ition goes before
conversion, neither is conversion it self, nor any p^rt thereof, but only a
preparing of men unto conversion: and that in the Liect only, not in others.
And this is the reason why they begin the preaching of Repentance from the
Law, and then come unto the gospel, and so come back again unto the Law. The
Old man, which is mortified, is a mere sinner only, namely our corrupt
nature. The New man, which is quickened, is he who begins to cease from
sins, namely, as our nature is regenerated. Mortification.
Mortification contains, 1 A knowledge of sin. 2 A grief for sin, and for
the offending of God. 3 The flieng and shunning of sin. By this appears,
that conversion or mortification is very improperly attributed unto the
wicked, because in them is not any hatred or shunning of sin, neither any
grief for sin, all which mortification does comprehend. Furdermore, The
knowledge of sin goes before that grief which is unfeigned, and proceeding
from the heart, which mortification contains, because the affections of the
heart follow knowledge. Wherefore knowledge, or acknowledgement shall be a part
or at least a cause of the other two parts in both parts of conversion. The
grief which is in the wicked, when they repent, is a grief for the evil
either to come, or present, which is punishment. But the grief which is in the
godly when they repent, is 1. A grief both for sin past and present, which is
called Sorrow; and also for sin to come, which is called Fear. 2. An hatred
of sin committed, both of present sin, and of sin to come. 3. An auerting
from sin committed, both present and future sin. 4. A flying of sin to
come. The grief is in the heart. The flieng is in the will; in that we will not
here after commit sin. The auerting is in the heart and will, and it is an
auerting unto somewhat, to wit, an auerting from evil unto good. This former
part of conversion is called mortification, 1. Because as dead men can not show
forth the actions of one that is living: so our nature, the corruption thereof
being abolished, does no more show forth or exercise her actions, that is,
does no longer bring forth actual sin, original sin being repressed: For
the dead bite not. 2. Because mortification is not wrought without grief and
lamenting. The flesh rebelleth against the spirit: and for this cause
mortification is also called a crucifieng. Qui^^ening.
Quick^^^^g comprehends those things which are contrary unto mortification.
1. The knowledge of Gods mercy, and the applieng thereof in christ. 2. A
ioifulnesse thence arising, which is for that God is pleased, and for that new
obedience is begun and shall be perfected. 3. An ardent or earnest ende^^ur and
purpo^^ to sin no more, arising from thankefulnes, and because we reio^^e
that we have God appeased and pacified toward us, a desire also of
righteousness, and of reteining gods love and favor. That ardent desire both
of not sinning, and also of righteousness, and of reteining Gods love and
favor, is new obedienc^ it self. This latter part of conversion is called
quickening, for a clean contrary respect unto that, for which the former part
was called mortification. 1. Because as a living man does the actions of one
that lives; so quickening is a kindling of new^ faculties and qualities of
working in us. For the love of God is kindled in us, and the holy Ghost is
given us, by whom we do good works. By nature the unregenerate are dead,
astouching good works. The regenerate begin to do good works. 2. In respect
of that joy which the converted have in God: which is a most pleasant thing.
This joy in God, which is the other part of quickening, arises from hence, to
wit, in that we know God now to be pacified toward us, and that we are able
to perform the Law, and be conformed and correspondent unto the Law and God.

4 What are the causes of conversion.
THE principal efficient cause of conversion is the holy Ghost. Convert us and
we shall be converted. The isntrumental causes, or means, are first, the Law,
then the Gospel, and, after the doctrine of the Gospel has been preached,
Lamen. 5.2^.
again the doctrine of the Law. For the preaching of the Law goes before
preparing us to the preaching of the Gospel: because without the Law there is
no knowledge of sin, and therefore no grief or sorrow for sin.
Afterward follows the preaching of the Gospel, because without the Gospel
there is no faith: and after the preaching of the Gospel, again follows, in
the church, the preaching of the Law, that it may be the squire of our
actions. So do the Prophets first accuse, threaten, and exhort, and then
promise: and lastly exhort again. Such was also John Baptistes preaching: And
such is the preaching and doctrine of repentance: which comprehends the Law
and the gospel. The next isntrumental cause is faith; because without faith
there is no love of God: and except we know, what the will of God is, as,
namely, that he will remit unto us our sins by and for Christ: conversion
will never be begun in us, neither in respect of the first part thereof,
which is Mortification: neither in respect of the second part, which is
Quickening. For by faith are the hearts of men purified: without faith there is
no true ioying i^ God: neither can we without faith love god: And whatsoever
is not of faith is sin. All good works flow from faith, as from their
fountain. We being justified by faith, have peace with god. The furthering
causes of conversion are, The cross and chastisementes; as also punishments,
benefits, and examples of others. The subject or matter of conversion, which
belongs to the mind, will, and heart, is, 1. Jn the mind and understanding, a
right judgment concerning god, his will and works. 2. In the will, an earnest
and ready desire and purpose to obey god according to al his commandments.
3. In the heart, a good and reformed affection. The object of conversion, is 1.
Sin, or disobedience, which is the thing from which we are converted. 2.
Righteousness or new obedience, which is the thing whereunto we are converted.
The formal cause of conversion is the conversion it self, and the properties
thereof. The chief final cause of conversion is gods glory. The next and
subordinate end, is our good, even our blessedness, and fruition of everlasting
life. There is another end also of conversion, which is less principal, to
wit, the conversion of others. When thou art converted, confirm thy brethren.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may glorify your heavenly father
which is in heaven.

5 What are the effects of conversion.
THE effects of conversion are all good works, and an earnest desire both to
obey God according to all his commandments without exception, and also to
convert and recall others into the way. The converted or believers, sin
indeed oftentimes, but they defend not their sins, but endeavor more and
more to shun and avoid them.

OF GOOD-WORKES.
THE chief Questions.

1 What good-workes are. 2 How they may be done. 3 Whether the works of Saints
be perfectly good. 4 How our works, though not perfectly good, please God. 5
Why we are to do good-workes. 6 Whether good-woorkes merit any thing in the
sight of God.
1 WHAT GOOD-WORKES ARE.
GOOD works are such as are done according to the prescript rule of Gods Law,
with a true faith, to the glory of God only. Three things are here to be
considered. 1 The conditions and cirumstances required for the making a work
good. 2 The difference between the works of the regenerate, and the
unregenerate. 3 Jn what sort the moral works of the wicked are sins.

1 That a work, which we do, may be good, these conditions are required
necessarily unto it. 1 That it be commanded of God. Matt. 15 9. Jn vain they
woorshippe me, teaching for doctrines men's precepts. No creature has the
right, or wisdom and understanding to institute and ordain the worship of
God. But good works (we speak of moral good) and the worship of God are
all one. Now, Moral good is far differing from natural good, in as much as
al actions, as they are actions, even those of the wicked, are good, that is,
naturally: but all actions are not good morally: that is, agreeing with the
justice of God. And thus is excluded that coined devise of good intentions,
when as namely men do evil things, that good things may come thereof:
likewise when they devise and imagine works, which they thrust upon God
instead of worship. Neither does it suffice if a work be not forbidden, but
it must also be commanded, if it shall serve for Gods worship.

2 That the work have his original from a true faith, which faith must be
grounded and depending on the merit and intercession of the Mediator, and by
which he may know both the person, and the work to be accepted of god for the
mediators sake. For without faith it is impossible for any man to please God.
Neither is such a faith ^^ere sufficient, which assures thee that God will
this, ^r that this work is commanded of God. For then the wicked also should
do that, which God will, but not with a true faith. A true or justifying faith
therefore stretches surder, as both co^prehending historical faith, and also
(which is the chiefest thing) applieng the promise of the gospel unto us. Of
this true faith are these things spoken. Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.
^.
Without faith it is impossible to please God. And the reasons of both these
sayings, are not obscure: because without faith, there is no love of God, and
so consequently no love of our neighbor. And whatsoever work arises not
from the love of God, is hypocrisy.

3 It is required, that this work be referred principally i^ the glory of
God only. Otherwise it shall proceed from the love of thy self, not from the
love of God. Whenas thou do any thing, thou must not heed or care what men
speak, whether they praise thee or no, so that thou know that it pleases
God. But yet true glory we may lawfully desire and seek for, according to
that, Mat. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your
good works.

By these former conditions all these works are excluded, 1 Which are sins in
themselves, and repugnant unto Gods Law, and his will reuelled in the word. 2
Which are not repugnant unto the Law, neither in themselves good or evil, but
which may yet by an accident be made good or evil. Works not repugnant unto
the Law are made evil, or sins, by an accident: when as they being not
commanded of God, but imposed by men, are done with an opinion of worshipping
God therein. 3 Which are good in themselves and commanded by God, but yet are
made sins by an accident, in that they are unlawfully done, as not arising
from those lawful causes by which the doers of them should be moved to do
them, and which in doing them they should respect, that is, they are not done
by faith, neither to this end chiefly, that God might therein be honored.

2 The works of the regenerate, and unregenerate differ, because the works
of the unregenerate, First, Proceed not of faith. Secondly, Are not joined with
an inward obedience, and therefore are done dissemblingly, and are mere
hypocrisy. Thirdly, As they proceed not of the right cause, so are they not
referred to the chief end, which is Gods glory.

3 This difference which appears in the works of the godly, and the wicked,
confirms also that the very moral works of the wicked are sins, though yet
not such sins, as those are, which in their own nature are repugnant unto Gods
Law. For these are sins by themselves, and in their own kind, but those
either are sins only by an accident, namely by reason of defect, because
neither they come of faith, neither are done for Gods glory. Wherefore this
consequence is not of force: All the works of the wicked, and of Paynims are
sins. Therefore they are al to be eschued. For the defects only are to be
eschued, not the work.

2 How good works may be done.
GOod works may be done, through the grace, or assistance of the Holy Ghost
only, and that by the regenerate only, whose heart is regenerated of the holy
ghost by the gospel, and that not only in their first conversion, and
regeneration, but also by the perpetual and continual government of the holy
ghost, who both works in them an acknoweledgement of sin, faith, and new
obedience: and also does daily more and more increase and confirm the same
gifts in them. Unto this doctrine Saint Jerome also consents. Let him be
accursed (says he) who affirms the Law to be possible without the grace of
the holy Ghost. Wherefore out of this doctrine we learn that men not as yet
regenerated are able to do no good, and that even the holi^st men sin also,
except the benefit and blessing of regeneration be continued. This we may
see in Peter, and David. Without regeneration no one part of a good work can
be so much as begun, because All our righteousness is as the cloth of a
menstruous woman. In which saying also the Prophet comprehends himself, and
even the holiest among men. If in the Saints themselves naught else is found
before God, what then in the unregenerate? What these are able to perform,
we see in the Epistle to the Romans, in the two first Chapters. Now as by our
selves we are not able to begin good works: So neither are we our selves
able to accomplish any good work. For it is God which works in you, both
the will and the deed, even of his good pleasure. Without imputed righteousness
we are all in the sight God abomination, filth, and dung. But the righteousness
of christ is not imputed unto us before our conversion. Therefore it is
impossible before our conversion that either our selves or our work should
please God. Faith is the cause of good works. Faith comes from God.
Therefore the effect also shall come from God, neither shall it go before the
cause: and therefore good works cannot be before conversion.

3 Whether the works of the Saints be perfectly good.
THE woorks of the Saints are not perfectly good or pure, 1. Because the
Saints which do good works, do many things which are sins in themselves,
for which they deserve to be cast out into everlasting pains. Cursed be he
that abides not in all. Deuteronomy. 27.26.
Yea, the holiest men do many evil works, commit many sins and acts which are
evil in themselves. Such was the sin of Peter, thrice denying Christ: and of
David murdering Vrias, committing adultery, willing to cover it, and
numbering the people. 2. Because there is not that degree of goodness in those
good works that proceed from the Saints, which ought to be. For their good
works are not so pure and good, as God requires. Yea, when the Saints
perform most holy works, yet are they not perfect, but have always in this
life defectes, and are stained with sins. For faith and the love of God and our
neighbor, whence good works flow, are imperfect in us in this life. The
effect then shall not be perfect, because the cause is not perfect. For we do
not perfectly know and love God and our neighbor: and therefore neither do we
so cheerfullie, and perfectly, as we ought, perform these works unto God
and our neighbor. J see another Law in my members rebelling against the Law
of my mind. And this is the cause why the works of the godly cannot stand in
judgment.

4 How our works, though not perfectly good, please God.
ALbeit our works be not done according unto the Law, but are contrariwise
many ways defiled; they please God notwithstanding through faith, and for the
merit and intercession of Christ our Mediator remaining now also intercessour
for us with his Father. Whence, Christ is called our High Priest, by whom our
woorks are offered: he is called also the Altar, whereon our works being put
are pleasing to God, whereas otherwise they would stincke in the sight of God.
The works of the person which pleases god, so please God, as the person
himself does. Now the person pleases God, by the imputation of the
righteousness and sanctification or satisfaction of Christ, being clad
namely with the righteousness, purity, and sanctification of Christ: that is,
the person pleases God for the Mediators sake; and therefore the woorks also
of the person are for the Mediators sake pleasing and acceptable unto god. God
does not examine our imperfect justice and our works, as they are in
themselves, according to the rigor of the Law, according to which he should
rather condemn them: but he regards and considers them in his son. Whereof
it follows that we do as it were supply and repair our want and defect with
the perfection of Christ's satisfaction.

5 Why we are to do good works.
OVT of the doctrine of free satisfaction, humane reason reasons on this
wise: He is not bound himself to satisfy, for whom another has already
satisfied. Christ has satisfied for us. Therefore there is no need for us to
do good woorks. Answer. There is more in the conclusion of this reason, than
in the premises. For this only should follow and be concluded; Therefore we
our selves are not bound to satisfy: and this we grant, 1 In respect of Gods
justice, which does not exact a double payment. 2 In respect of our own
salvation: which otherwise should be none at all.

Reply. Satisfaction is perfect obedience: we are not bound to satisfaction:
Therefore neither are we bound to perfect obedience, no not in the life to
come. For, who^ another has satisfied for, he himself is not enforced to
satisfy. But the obedience of Christ is not a full satisfaction for our sins.
Therefore the fomer consequence is true. Answer. There is yet more concluded
than the premises would afford: For this should follow, that obedience is
never at any time to be performed of us, as thereby to satisfy for our sins
already committed, or which shall be committed until the end of our life. But
it follows not hereof, that we must not be perfect in the life to come. For
then also we shall be bound to perfect obedience; we shall be like unto the
Angels, and our work shall be perfectly good; although that perfect obedience,
then due, neither shall, nor can be a satisfaction, or ransom for our sins,
to wit, for that obedience which we omitted in this life, and yet was due to be
performed of us. For he that owes twenty florens, does not pay his debt if he
repay ten florens. Wherefore the Mayor proposition has a double meaning, and
is true, if it be taken in this sense: whom an other has satisfied for, he
himself is not bound to satisfy, to wit, for those things, for which
satisfaction was made before. So we are not bound to satisfy for our sins,
which we now commit. For Christ has fully and perfectly satisfied his Father
for all our sins, and has performed perfect obedience unto the Law in our
behalf, which otherwise we should have performed in this life unto the law,
and which we in this life omit, and are no way able to perform. Now for this
end has Christ satisfied for us, and redeemed us by his blood, that at length
we might in the life to come cease from sin, and perform that obedience unto
him, which then we are to perform. Neither does it for all this hereof
follow, that God requires a double obedience or satisfaction of us. For God
excteth obedience hence-forward of us, as thereby to show our thankfulness,
and not to satisfy for those sins which we commit in this life. For we are
never able to satisfy by that obedience, which we owe, for that obedience,
which we do not perform: neither is there any other besides Christ's
satisfaction required for that obedience which is not performed by us in this
life: and this satisfaction of christ is sufficient to expiate and do away all
our sins, God notwithstanding does in this life also require of us this our
obedience, though yet it be but begun and imperfect. For seeing God so greatly
hated sin, that satisfaction could not be made unto him for sin, but by the
death of his only begotten Son; we verily must also hate it; even as
himself also commands us to fly and abhor it from our heart and soul. And
Christ has not therefore freely redeemed us, that it might hence forward be
lawful for us to give our selves over unto sin, but that being freed from
sin we should hereafter begin to live to him only. This end of our
redemption, which Christ himself respected, is cause sufficient, for which al
of us should necessarily do good works; because namely they are testimonies
and effects of that new life which is at length after this life to be
accomplished.

Besides this cause, there are many others also in like sort most weighty,
which we will in few words declare. We are to do good works, in respect of
God, our selves, and our neighbor. In respect of God, 1. Because of the
commandment of God; Let your light so shine before men, that they may see
your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven. God requires
the beginning of obedience in this life, and the perfection thereof in the life
to come. Wherefore we are necessarily to give our selves to good works, that
we may perform due obedience unto God, who requires it of us. Joh. 15^12.
This is my commandment, that ye love one another. Romans 6.18. Being made
free from sin, ye are made the servants of righteousness. 1 Thessalonians. 4.3.
This is the will of God, even your sanctification. 2. For the glory of God. The
setting forth of Gods glory is the chief end why God commands and will
have good works to be don of us: that both by them we may worship and magnify
god, and others seeing the same may glorify our heavenly father; like as that
saying of christ before alleged out of S. Matthew does teach us. 3 Because of
that thankefulnes which the regenerat ow. It is right and just that by whom we
are redeemed, and from whom we receive exceeding great benefits, and those of
al sorts, we should also love, magnify, worship, reverence him, and declare
our love and thankefulnes toward him by our good works and obedience. Romans
12.1. J beseech you brethren by the mercies of God, that ye give up your bodies
a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable serving
of God. 1. Pet. 2.5. Ye are made an holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual
sacrifices acceptable to god by Jesus Christ.

We are to do good works also in respect of our selves, 1. That by our good
works we may be assured of our faith. Mat. 7.17. Every good tree brings
forth good fruit. James 2.20. That faith which is without works is dead.
Phil. 1.11. Filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus
Christ unto the glory and praise of god. Now by our works we must needs
know, that we have faith, because the effect is not without his cause, and we
must know the cause by his proper effect. when as therefore we find not in our
selves good works or new obedience, we are hypocrites, neither have we faith,
but an evil conscience. For true faith only (which never wa^teth al her
fruits) brings forth, as a fruitful tree, good works, obedience,
amendment of life: and these fruits likewise discern and distinguish true
faith from historical, and temporary faith, and so also from hypocrisy. 2.
That we may be assured that we have obtained remission of sins through
Christ; and are for Christ's sake justified before God, for justification and
sanctification are benefits linked together, which so cleave together, and
that necessarily, as they never can be severed or pulled asunder. For Christ
obtained both for us at once; namely both remission of sins, and the holy
Ghost who stirs up in us by faith the study and desire of good works, and
new obedience. 3. That we may be assured of our election and salvation. 2.
Pet. 1.10. Give diligence to make your calling and election sure. These
proceed from the cause next going before. For god has chosen from everlasting
of his free mercy those only which are justified for the merit of his son.
Roman. 8.30. Whom he predestinat, them also he called, and them also he
justified. Now, that we have received from Christ justification, (which is
never given unto the Elect without sanctification) we know by faith. And that
we have faith, we perceive by the works of faith, true obedience and true
conversion. 4. That by good works our faith may be exercised, cherished,
strengthened, and advanced. For they who give themselves over to corrupt lusts
against their conscience, in them faith cannot be, and therefore neither a good
conscience, neither a confidence and trust in god as being appeased and
favorable unto them. For we have through faith only a feeling of gods favor
toward us, and a good conscience. Romans 8.13. Jf ye live after the flesh, ye
shall die. 2. Tim. 1.6. J put thee in remembrance, that thou stir up the gift
of god which is in thee by the putting on of my hands. 5. That by good works we
may show forth and honest our life and calling. Ephesians. 4.1. I pray you that
ye walk worthy of the vocation whereunto ye are called. 6. That we may
escape temporal and eternal punishments. Matthew. 7.19. Every tree that
brings not forth good fruit, is cut off, and cast into the fire. Romans 8.3. If
ye live according to the flesh, ye shall die. 7. That we may obtain corporal
and spiritual rewards; which according unto the promise accompany good
works. 1. Timot. 4.8. Godliness is profitable unto al things, which has the
promise of the life present, and of that that is to come. Except God would
have the hope of rewards, and the fear of punishments to be motive causes unto
good works, he would not use them in admonitions.

We must do good works also in respect of our neighbor, 1. That we may
be profitable unto our neighbors by our good example, and so edify them. 1.
Cor 15. All things are for your sakes, that most plenteous grace by the
thanksgiving of many may redound to the praise of god. Phil. 1.24. That I
abide in the flesh, is more needful for you. 2. That offenses may be
avoided. Matthew. 18.7. Woe be to that man, by whom offenses come. Romans 2.24.
The name of god is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you. 3. That we may
win unbelievers, and by our words and deeds, and example convert them unto
Christ. Luke 22.32. When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren.

We see now then, what are the causes for which we must necessariely do good
works: as also how, or in what sense our works are said to be necessary for
us unto salvation, to wit, not as a cause of our salvation, but as mean or way,
without which we come not unto it. And after the same sort also it may be
said, That good works are necessary unto justice and righteousness, or, unto
justification, or in them that are to be justified, namely as a consequent
following justification, wherewith regeneration is unseparably joined. But yet
I would not use these kinds of speaking, 1. Because they are ambiguous and
doubtful. 2. Because they breed contentio^s, and minister occasion of cauilling
unto the adversaries. 3. Because the Scripture does not use them; which must be
followed of us in speaking.

6 Whether good works merit any thing before God.
THIS sixth question arises out of the fifth, as the fourth did out of the
third. For when men hear that we receive rewards by our works, they
presently conclude that we merit somewhat by them. Wherefore we are to know,
that good works indeed are necessary, and therefore are to be done also
for the rewards ensuing them; but yet that they merit nothing, no not the
least of gods gifts, either corporal, or spiritual. The reasons hereof are
most true, and most evident. 1 Our works are imperfect: wherefore we can
merit nothing by them. Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the
spirit against the flesh: and these are contrary one to the other, so that ye
do not the same things that ye would. 2 The good works, what ever we are
able to do, are all due. Luke 17.10. When ye have done all those things,
which are commanded you, say, we are vnprofit^ble servants. 3 Our works are
impure and vicious, how-euer they seem most good. Isay 64.6. We have all
been as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness is as filthy cloutes.
Phil 3.8. J think all things but loss for the excellent knowledge sake of
Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have counted all things loss, and do judge
them to be dongue, that J might win Christ. 4 If we do any good works,
they are not ours, but are belonging to god only. Phil. 2.13. It is god which
works in you both the will and the deed, even of his good pleasure. 1. Corinthians. 4.7. What have thou which thou have not received? We are evil trees:
if then we do any good, that must needs come from God only. Mat 20.15. Is it
not lawful for me to do as I will with mine own? He must needs be very
impudent, who having received, of gift, an hundred florens of a rich man,
thinks that he deserves a thousand mo, by receiving those hundred; whereas
rather he is by this gift received bound to the rich man; and not the rich man
to him. 5 No creature which does even the most perfect works, can thereby
merit ought at Gods hands, or bind God unto him, to give him any thing
according to order of justice. The reason hereof does the Apostle yield; Who
has given him first? We deserve no more our preservation, than we deserved our
creation. He did owe nothing unto us when he created us, so neither now does
he owe us our preservation, neither is he bound to give us any thing. We can
bestow no benefit upon our Creator: nay, although we should never sin, yet
can we not sufficiently declare and show forth our thankfulness. 6 There is
no proportion between our works which are utterly imperfect, and the
excellency of those great blessings and benefits which the Father gives us
freely in his Son. 7 1. Cor. 1.31. He that reioiceth let him rejoice in the
Lord. But if we merit by our work remission of our sins, man should have in
himself whereof to rejoice, neither should the glory be given to God. Romans
4.2. If Abraham were justified by his works, he has wherein to rejoice, but
not with God. 8 We are just before we do good works. Romans 9.11.12.13. For
yer Esau and Jacob were borne, and when they had neither done good nor evil
(that the purpose of God might remain according to election not by works, but
by him that calls) it was said unto her, The elder shall serve the younger; As
it is written, I have loved Jacob, and have hated Esau. 9 They who will be
justified by works, have no sure and steadefast conscience. Romans 4.16. The
inheritance is by faith, that it might come by grace, and the promise might be
sure to all the seed. 10 If we should obtain righteousness by our own work,
the promises should be made void. For in Abraham shall all the nations be
blessed. And Christ also should have died in vain. 11 There should not be one
and the same reason and cause of our salvation, if this Doctrine of the merit
of works should be admitted. Abraham and the Thief on the Cross should have
bin otherwise justified, than we are justified. But, there is but one way
leading us to salvation. I am the way, the truth, and the life, 1. Tim. 2.5.
There is one Medatour between God and Men. Ephesians. 4 5. There is one Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism, Heb. 13.8. Jesus Christ yesterday and to day, the same is
also for ever. Acts. 4.12. There is given no other name under Heaven, whereby
we must be saved. Therefore we shall not be saved by good works, or for our
good works. 12 Christ should not give us full and perfect salvation, and so
neither should he be a perfect Savior, if some thing were as yet required of
us, whereby we should be made just. But Christ is our perfect Savior. For (as
Paul witnesses) God with his glorious grace has made us accepted in his
beloved. By whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of
sins, according to his rich grace. And Ephesians. 2.8. By grace are ye saved
through faith, and that not of your selves: it is the gift of God.

1 Objection. They which have not good works cannot be saved. Therefore good
works are necessary unto salvation. Ans. That, without which we cannot be
saved, is necessary unto salvation; that is, as a part of salvation, or as an
accident of salvation, not as a cause of salvation. 2 Objection. God calls
those blessings, which he promises to them that do good works, rewards and
meed. Now meede presupposes merit. Therefore good works do merit. Answer.
Amongst creatures sometimes it does, but never with god. But they are called
the rewards or meede of our works in respect of God; forasmuch as he
recompenseth most fully those things which we do; neither yet is that
recompense due. For there can come no commodity unto God by us, and therefore
God is not bound, no not to make the least recompense. For he that stands no
ways in need of our works, and unto whom they can ad or bring nothing at al,
of him doubtless we are not able to merit or deserve any thing. But there
comes good rather unto our selves by good works. For the good works which we
do, are a conformity with God, and therefore are Gods gift, by which gift and
benefit we are bound unto god, but not god unto us. Wherefore it is no less
absurd to say that we merit salvation at gods hands by good works; than if
one should say; Thou have given me an hundred florns: Therefore thou ought
also to give me a thousand florens. Objection. 3. But whereby may we be assured
that we have good works? Answer. 1. By the peace of conscience. 2. By our
conversion. 3. By the fruits of conversion.

OF THE LAW OF GOD, OR, OF THE DECALOG AND TEN COMMANDEMENTES.
THE chief Questions.

1 What the Law is in general. 2 What are the parts of the Law. 3 What is the
use of the Law. 4 Jn what the Law differs from the gospel. 5 How far the
Law is abrogated. 6 How the Decalog is divided. 7 What is the meaning of the
Decalog, and of every commandment thereof.
1 What the Law is in general.
THE Law in general is a sentence or decree commanding things that are
honest, binding creatures endued with reason unto obedience, with a promise of
reward, and a commination or threatening of punishment. It is a sentence
commanding things that are honest: otherwise it is no Law. It binds
creatures endued with reason: for the Law was not made for them who are not
bound to obedience. With a promise of reward: The Law freely promises
blessings unto those who perform obedience: because no obedience can be
meritorious before God. Objection. But the gospel also promises freely good
things and blessings. Therefore the Law differs not from the gospel. Answ.
The Law promises freely after one manner, and the Gospel after another. The law
promises freely with a condition of our obedience. But the gospel promises
freely, without the works of the Law, with a condition of faith, not with a
condition of our obedience. Wherefore the gospel does not promise blessings
freely without al condition, but without such a condition, as wherewith the
Law promises blessings unto us. And with a commination or threatening of
punishment: Otherwise the Law were a vain and empty sound, and should effect
nothing. Moreover the Latin word, Lex, (which signifies the Law) is derived
from Lego, which signifies to read and publish, or from Lego, which
signifies to choose. With the former deriuation agrees the Hebrew word,
with the latter the greek word. For in Greek the Law is called (...), which
comes from a word that signifies to divide and distribute: and therefore the
Law is so called, because it distributeth unto every one proper charges and
functions. In Hebrew the Law is called thorah, that is, doctrine: because Laws
are published unto all, that every one may learn them. And hereof is it, that
the ignorance or not knowing of the Law does not excuse: naie rather they who
are ignorant of those laws which belong unto them, do even in that very respect
sin, because they are ignorant.

2 What are the parts of the Law.
Laws are some divine, and some humane. Humane Laws bind certain men unto
certain external actions, whereof there is no divine commandment or
prohibition expreslie, with a promise of reward, and a commination or
threatening of punishments corporal and temporal. Now all humane Laws ought to
have this their end, even that the Laws of God may be the more readily and
better kept. Further, whereas their causes are altered and changed according
to the state and condition of times, places, persons, and other circumstances:
the Laws also themselves may be changed. Moreover these Humane Laws are
either Civil or Ecclesiastical: Civil Laws are such as are made by
Magistrates, or by some whole body and corporation concerning a certain order
of actions to be observed in civil government, in bargains and contracts, in
judgments, and punishments.

Ecclesiastical or ceremonial Laws are those which are made by the consent of
the church concerning some certain order of actions to be observed in the
ministry of the church, which are the limitations of circumstances serving
for the Law of god.

Divine Laws, that is, the Laws of God, partly belong unto Angels, and partly
unto men. And these do not only bind unto external actions, but require further
internal or inward qualities, actions, and motions; nether propose they
corporal and temporal rewards and punishments only, but eternal also and
spiritual; and they are the ends for which humane Laws are to be made. Divine
Laws, are some external and unchangeable, some changeable, yet so that they
can be changed of none but of god himself, who made them.

By the Law also is oftentimes understood the course and order of nature,
instituted and ardained by god. So the Law, that is, the order of nature
requires, that a tree bring forth fruit. After this sort, is the order of
nature understood by the Law abusiuely: but yet more abusiuely does the
Apostle call Original sin, the Law of sin; because namely it does in
manner of a Law enforce and constrain us to sin.

Now having humane Laws, and other things, which are signified by the name of
Law, we will speak henceforth of the Law of god, as which only has place
here, and is the fountain of all other good Laws, which are worthy of the
name of Laws. The Law of god then is, a doctrine delivered of god at the
creation, by the ministry either of Angels, or of men, and afterward
repeated and renewed of him by Moses and the Prophets, teaching what we ought to
do, and what not to do, binding reasonable creatures, always promising to
perfect perfourmers of obedience, eternal life, condemning eternally them who
perform not this obedience, except remission be granted for the Mediators
sake.

The parts of the Law of god, are in number three, The Moral, Ceremonial, and
civil, or judicial Law.

The Moral Law is a Doctrine agreeing with the eternal and immortal
wisdom and justice which is in god, discerning things honest and dishonest,
known by nature and engendered in reasonable creatures, at the creation, and
afterward repeated again and declared by the voice of god, by the ministry
of Moses, the Prophets, and Apostles, teaching that there is a god, and what he
is, and what we ought to do, and what not to do, binding all the reasonable
creatures to perfect obedience, both internal and external, promising the favor
of god and everlasting life to those which perform perfect obedience, and
denouncing the wrath of god and everlasting pains and punishments unto them who
are not perfectly correspondent thereunto, except there be granted remission
of sins, and reconciliation for the Son of god the Mediators sake.

That in this part of the Law, the nature and righteousness of god is
expressed, the image of god does show; whereunto man was created. For seeing
this image of god consists in true righteousness and holiness, Ephesians. 5.
and that righteousness and holiness is described and comprised in the Law.
Deuteronomy. 12. Ezech. 20. it follows then, that this is the image of god,
whereunto man ought to be conformed, which is expressed in the law. The same is
taught by many testimonies of Scripture, which affirm that god is delighted
with this righteousness, which he commands in the Law, and that he does
such things, as that is, and hates the contrary.

That this law is external, is hereof apparent and manifest, because it
remains from the beginning unto the end of the world one and the same, and we
are redeemed by Christ and regenerated by the holy ghost, to observe and keep
this Law in the life to come. 1. John 2.7. J write no new commandment unto
you, but an old commandment, which ye have had from the beginning. Galat.
5.20. They which do such things, shall not inherit the kingdom of god.

The Moral Laws are so belonging unto the Decalogue, that not only they agree
with the Decalogue, neither are only deduced thence by a necessary
consequence, but also the Decalogue it self is the sum of the Moral Laws;
whence it comes to pass, that he who breaks the Moral Laws, is said to
break the Decalogue. Neither is this which we have said hindered at al, for
that certain special commandments belonging to matters of this life have
ceased. For the general shall notwithstanding still continue. There shall be no
need of the ministry, or of a certain time to be allotted unto the
ministry in the life to come; because there shall be a perpetual Sabbath, that
is, al eternity shall be given for the contemplation and beholding of divine
matters, and for the worship and magnifieng of God. There shall be no need of
Laws concerning marriage, because there shall be no use of marriage: but yet
there shall be an Angelique chastity in men.

This Law is known by nature, and from the creation: because men and Angels
were created according to the image of God. And Paul also says of the
remnauntes of that light, Roman. 2.15. The Gentiles show the effect of the Law
written in their hearts.

This Law also binds the Angels: because they also were created unto the
image of God: and Christ says, Matt. 22. That the Saints in the life to come
shall be as the Angels of God: and he has taught us to pray, Let thy will be done
in earth as it is in heaven. It requires furdermore perfect obedience: Deu. 6.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy soul. Galat. 3.10. Cursed is
every man that continues not in all things, which are written in the book of
the Law, to do them. Now, that the Law does not take away the intercession of
Christ, is apparent out of the gospel, which teaches that it is correspondent
and agreeable unto the justice and Law of God, that sinners should be received
into favor, a sufficient satisfaction and their conversion being interposed
and coming between. For god is not at variance with himself in the doctrine
of the Law and the gospel.

The Ceremonial, or laws delivered of god by Moses concerning Ceremonies,
binding the Jews until the coming of the Messiah, that they should
distinguish this people and the church from others, and should be signs,
symboles, types, or shadows of spiritual things to be fulfilled in the New
Testament by Christ. That this definition may be understood, we must know, what
ceremonies are; to wit, solemn external actions, that is, often to be after
the same manner, and with the same circumstances reiterated, ordained of God, or
of men also, to be used in the service and woorshippe of God, for order, or
signification sake. But the Ceremonies which are ordained of God, are simple
and absolutely divine worship. The ceremonies which are ordained and instituted
of men, if they be good, are a woorship only serving for diuiuine worship.

The Judicial, or Laws concerning the civil order, or civil government, that
is, of the offices of Magistrates, judgments, punishments, contractes, and of
the distinguishing and bounding of dominions, delivered of God by Moses for the
settling and preserving of the Jews common wealth, binding al Abraham's
posterity, until the coming of the Messiah, and further that they should be
the bond of the preservation and government of this Mosaicall common wealth
until the Messiah was manifested, and certain marks, whereby this people,
which was bound unto them, should be discerned from al others, and should
withal be kept in honest discipline and good order: lastly, that they might
be types of that order which should be in Christ's kingdom, that is, of the
spiritual regiment of the Messiah. Ceremonial and civil Laws, whether they
be divine, or humane, (so that they be good) are verily agreeable unto the
Decalogue. But yet are they deduced thence only by a necessary consequence,
and serve thereto, as certain prescriptions of circumstances: Hereby plainly
appears the difference of these Laws; which yet is diverse, because there is
not one and the same government of the commonwealth and of the church:
neither is there the same end of al these Laws: neither are al these Laws
after the same manner abrogated.

But the chief and especial difference of these laws is drawn from the
binding, time, and knowledge, or manifestation. 1. The Moral ordinances are
known by nature: The ceremonial and civil are not known by nature, but are
instituted according to the diversity of causes, and circumstaunces. 2. The
Moral bind al men, and even the Angels also: The ceremonial and civil were
only prescribed unto the people of Israel. And therefore Job, Iethro, Naaman
the Cyrian, and others who are recounted for religious men, that is, such as
were borne of Paynims and lived amongst them, but yet worshipped the God which
was manifested among the people of Israel; they did not observe the Leuiticall
ceremonies, and yet did nevertheless please God. And the very ordinances
themselves, concerning the ceremonies and the form of civil government,
show that they bind Abraham's posterity only, whom God would by this form
of government and worship distinguish from other nations 3. The Laws of the
Decalogue are perpetual in this life, and after this life: The ceremonial and
civil were delivered of God at a certain time, and again abolished. 4. The
Moral Laws speak of both internal and external obedience: The ceremonial and
civil speak of external obedience only: albeit neither does this please God
without the internal and moral obedience. 5. The moral Laws are not limited
by certain circumstances, but are general: as, that there is a time to be
granted for the ministry and service of God, and that the ministry is to be
preserved. that adulterers and thieves are to be punished: But the ceremonial
and civil Laws are special, or a limitation of circumstances, which are to be
observed in external rites or actions both ecclesiastical and civil: as, that
the seventh day is to be allotted for the ministry and service of God: that
the Tenths and first fruits are to be given to the Priests: that adulterers
are to be stoned: that thieves are to be amerced with a fourfold restitution.
6. The ceremonial, and the civil Laws also are types or figures of other
things for whose cause they were ordained: The moral signify or prefigure
nothing, but are signified by the rites and ceremonies. 7. The moral are the
end for which other causes are to be made, or, they are the principal service
and worship of god: The ceremonial and civil serve for the moral ordinances,
that to them obedience might be rightly and duly performed: that a certain
time, and certain rites may be observed in the public ministry of the
church, that the ministry it self may be maintained and preserved. 8. The
ceremonial give place unto the Moral: The Moral give not place unto the
Ceremonial. The Moral Law, the Natural, and the Decalogue differ. The
Decalogue is the sum of the moral Laws, which are scattered throughout the
whole Scripture of the old and new Testament. The Natural law does not
differ from the Moral in nature not corrupted, but in nature corrupted: a good
part of the natural law is darkened by sins, and but a little part only
concerning the obedience due to god was left remaining after the fall: For
which cause also God has in his church repeated again and declared the whole
sentence and doctrine of his Law. The distinctions of these Laws are to be
known, both in respect of the differences of the same, and also in respect of
their aborgating, and lastly for the knowing and understanding of their use.

3 What the use of the Law is.
THE first and principal use of the ceremonial and judicial Laws of Moses
was to serve as a schoolmaster unto Christ and his kingdom, that is, to be a
signification of spiritual and Heavenly things in Christ's kingdom namely the
benefits of Christ toward his Church, and the duty of the Church toward
God and christ. Gal. 3.24. The Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us unto
Christ. This S. Paul prouounceth of the whole Law of Moses. But that it is
true, concerning the form of ceremonial worship and civil government, for
a type and signification of christ's kingdom, the Epistle to the Hebrews does
purposely teach from the beginning of the fourth chapter to the end of the
tenth, and all places of Scripture, which refer the ceremonies and kingdom
of the old people unto Christ, as Coloss. 2.11. We are circumcised with
circumcision made without hands. 1. Cor. 5.7. Christ our passover is
sacrificed for us. Psalm. 110. Thou art a Priest for ever. Dan. 9. The most holy
shall be anointed. And of the civil Laws it is said, Ezech. 44, 24. Jn
controversy shall the Priest stand to judge, and they shall judge it according
to my judgments. Ierem 23.5. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I
will raise unto David a righteous branch, and a king shall reign, and prosper,
and shall execute judgment, and justice in the earth. Wherefore that form of
woorshippe and civil government was ordained of god principally unto this,
that thereby the old people might be advertised of the things signified and to
be performed by the Messiah. Now whereas the allegories or figurative speeches
of all the Laws are not in special expressed and expounded in the word of
god; First, we are to make or receive none, but such as reteineth an analogy
with faith and love: and again these only are to be accounted and held for
true and certain, which can be proved by Scripture. But those which are not
declared either by plain exposition, or by the manners of speaking in the
scripture, the same may be verily tolerated, as orher similitudes which are
brought by way of example, but may not be admitted as certain, and as proofs
of doctrine. And in those, which are not declared in special, it is sufficient
to rest in the general signification.

Secondly, by these as by visible marks, and eminent differences, God would
have his people, with whom the true worship of god and the promise of the
Messiah was left, to be discerned and sorted out from al other nations, and
that both for his own glory, that the true god and true religion might be
discerned from Idols and the inventions of men; and also for men's salvation,
that they seeking after the church in the world, might find and behold it.
Deuteronomy. 4.6. Keep them therefore and do them: for that is your wisdom and
your understanding in the sight of the people etc. And chapter 12.30. Beware
that thou ask not after their gods, saying, How did these nations serve their
gods, that I may do so likewise? Thou shall not do so unto to the Lord thy
God: for all abomination, which the Lord hates, have they done unto their
gods. Ephesians. 2.14. Which has made of both one, and has broken the stop of the
participation wall, In abrogating through his flesh the hatred, that is, the
Law of commandementes which stands in ordinances.

The third use is, obedience, or, the observing and performance of the moral
ordinances For because the moral law requires not only internal obedience, but
also external, whereof the use of the ministry of the church, and civil order
are not the lowest parts: that these two therefore may be maintained and
preserved, a defining or limitation of many circumstances is necessary,
without the equable form and observation whereof order cannot be maintained in
the church and common wealth. As therefore in the new testament god has left
free in the ministry and commonwealth such constitutions and ordinances as may
be necessary for the maintaining of this order: so in the old Testament what
he would have observed, himself did constitute and ordain. For this is Moral,
That there be a public and solemn invocation and serving of God: The
furtherance and form hereof god would have the ceremonies to be which
himself prescribed. Again, this is Moral, that there be a just and upright
ordering of judgments, contractes, punishments, in the common wealth: This
order God prescribed unto the Jews by Judicial Laws. Wherefore the ceremonies
are an adherent of the first table, and the judicial laws are an adherent of
the second: because those inform concerning the outward and external form
of the ministry of the church or divine service and worship; these, concerning
the functions and duties of the Magistrates, and of the citizens of that common
wealth toward their Magistrates, and toward one another.

Fourthly, that manifold observation of rites and ceremonies was also an
exercise, and a testification of their obedience toward God. For he that
does willingly and diligently perform burdensome and unpleasant things, if
he know the same to be pleasing to God: he then does show himself to love God
and to obey him with a ready mind. Therefore says god to Abraham being now
ready to sacrifice his Son; Now I know that thou fear God, seeing for my
sake thou have not spared thine only Son. So the ceremonial and judicial
ordinances of the old Testament are called a yoke, Acts 15. and servitude,
Galat. 4.

Fifthly, unto most of the ceremonies, namely such as signified Christ's
benefits, was proper and peculiar the sealing of Gods covenant, or the
confirmation of faith. For this is meant when they are said, to be the signs
of the covenant, Genesis 17. Romans 4. Exodus 31. Ezech. 20. namely, to signify and
testify, what benefits God would give by the Messiah unto believers.

Sixthly, the judicial or civil Laws, in as much as they were the very form
of the Mosaical common wealth, served for the preservation of that regiment and
kingdom until the coming of the Messiah.

Seventhly, Albeit now the ceremonial and judicial Laws are so abolished, that
the observation of them is not required as concerning the types; yet those
things are perpetual, which are signified by them. And therefore they are a
confirmation of the new Testament, as well as the oracles and prophecies of
the old Testament concerning the Messiah and his kingdom. For types are
visible promises. Wherefore when as we see those things to be fulfilled in
Christ, which were foretold of him by the prophecies and shadowed or prefigured
by the old types: it is also confirmed unto us that both he is exhibited, and
that this Jesus, in whom we believe, is that Messiah which of oulde was
promised. And although also we are not bound to keep and observe the same
rites; yet notwithstanding out of those old pictures we learn and understand
what spiritual obedience, holiness, and worship god continually requires in
his church. Whence it is said, Hosea 14.2. We will render the calves of our
lyps. Hebr. 13.15. Let us by him offer the Sacrifice of praise always to God,
that is, the fruit of the lyps, which confess his name. 1. Pet. 2.5. And ye
as lively stones, be made a spiritual house, and holy Priesthood to offer up
spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. These may suffice for
the refuting of Anabaptists and such like, who shut the old testament out of
the church of Christ.

Furdermore, of the Moral Law there are other and greater uses, because the
worship of God does properly consist therein, and other Laws were made for
this. About these chiefly do men's minds dispute: when they hear mankind so
to be plunged into sin, that the reprobate cannot so much as begin any
obedience acceptable to god; neither the Elect in this life attain by any means
to the perfection thereof; and yet notwithstanding god will have the Law
preached both to the regenerate and unregenerate. For they marvel to what use
or end the Law is urged, when obedience cannot possibly be performed. But here
it is necessary that we distinguish and discern the nature of men corrupted
from it self being uncorrupted. For in nature, being not as yet depraved or
corrupted through sin, there were, and shall be again also in nature
perfectly restored, these two uses of gods law especially. The first is, the
whole and entire conformity of man with god. For there did shine, and again
shall shine in the mind of man, the perfect knowledge of god and his will; and
the same did work, and again shall work the correspondence and congruity of
all our inclinations and motions with this divine order, that is, perfect
justice and righteousness before god. For the mind judging aright, does
rightly also govern and guide the heart and will, not being through stubburnesse
perverted and depraved. Now, that both there was perfect knowledge of the law,
in man's nature not yet fallen, and did work also in it perfect conformity
with god, the doctrine concerning the image of god does testify whereunto man
was created, and which is by Christ in us restored. The other use of the Law in
nature uncorrupted is a good conscience, or a certain persuasion of gods
favor, and a certain hope of eternal life. For when as the Law both
commands perfect obedience, and promises eternal life to those that
perform it: Therefore it works in nature uncorrupted, as perfect obedience,
so also certain expectation of the reward; according as it is said, Leuit.
18. Romans 10. Gal. 3. He that does them, shall live in them. Mat. 19. If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments.

But in nature now corrupted there are other effects or uses of the Law, and
those partly accidental, partly the remains of those proper effects, which it
has in nature uncorrupted; partly in the regenerate, partly in the
unregenerate. As therefore the whole Law is a Schoolmaster to Christ; so
likewise is the Moral, whereof the first use is both in the regenerate and
unregenerate, the preserving and mantaining of discipline both in the church
and without also. For the Law both being by god himself engraven in the
minds of all men, and speaking by the voice of teachers and magistrates, does
by binding of the conscience, and by denouncing and ordaining of punishments,
and by shame bridle and restrain the unregenerate also, so that they shun
open and manifest wickedness, and some order is thereby kept in the world
amiddest the furies of Devils and wicked men, that mankind may be preserved,
and the church thence collected and gathered. 1. Tim. 1.9. The Law is given to
the lawless and disobedient. But albeit this use of the law does chiefly
belong unto the unregenerate, who are not bridled by the love of god and
righteousness, but by the fear of punishment only and shame, not to make
open profession of wickedness: yet has it place also in the godly. For they
indeed have another bridle whereby they are guided, even the holy ghost
illightening and inclining their hearts unto obedience: but yet by reason of the
weakness and corruption of the flesh prone to sin, experience teaches, that
this chain and bond also is profitable and necessary for them, for the
shunning and avoiding of transgressions. Many places also of Scripture witness
this, which threaten even unto the saints, if they run into grievous offenses,
grievous punishments: As, Ezech. 18. If the righteous turn away from his
righteousness, and commit iniquity, he shall die for it: And the examples of
punishments; as of Eli, of David, and many others. For therefore both
threatenings and examples are set before the godly, to keep them in good order.

The second use is, the acknowledgement and accusing of sin in the regenerate
and unregenerate. Romans 3.20. By the Law comes the knowledge of sin. Romans
7.7. J knew nothing but by the Law; for neither had I known lust, except the
Law had said, Thou shall not lust. This use of the Law belongs unto all men:
because all have so much knowledge of the Law as is sufficient to breed in
them a prick and remorse of conscience. But there is a double effect hereof.
For in the unregenerate the knowledge of sin, and of the judgment of God
against sin, engendereth an hatred of god, and an increase of sin. For so
much the more does nature not yet regenerated desire to commit and excuse
sin, and murmureth against gods judgment; how much the more the law urges
and presses the prohibition and condemnation of sin. Romans 4.15. The Law
causes wrath. Romans 7. Sin took an occasion by the commandment, and wrought
in me al manner of concupiscence. Moreover if those unregenerate be also
reprobate, then woorketh it at length in them despair and blasphemy.
Therefore, 2. Cor. 3. it is called the ministry of death. But in the elect the
knowledge of sin is a preparing of them unto conversion. For it woorketh in
them a desire of Gods favor, and of deliverance from sin, and enforces
them, despairing of their own righteousness, to seek for righteousness and
life in Christ their Mediator. And after they are once converted, it
continually instructs them with due contrition, truly to humble themselves
in the sight of God, and makes them to profit and go forward daily in true
conversion unto God, and in the dread and fear of God. Now although many wicked
men being blinded with security, do not acknowledge their sin for a time:
yet the Law accuses all, and the terrors and torments of conscience do at
length oppress them. Unto the regenerate also, although they neither are
subject to damnation, neither live without the acknowledgement and bewailing of
their sin, yet necessary is the preaching and meditation of the Law, that
thereby they more and more knowing the remnants of sin, which are in them,
may continue and go foreward in true repentance and amendment of life. Moreover
concerning both these uses, namely, the maintenance of Discipline, and
acknowledgement of sin, it is said, that the Law is a Schoolmaster unto
Christ. For neither can men be instructed concerning god, neither does the holy
ghost work faith and conversion in their hearts, except open and manifest
transgressions be eschewed, and they persist not in sins against their
conscience. Jsai. 66. J will regard the poor and contrite in spirit. Romans
8.13. If ye mortify the deeds of the body by the spirit, ye shall live:
but if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die. Neither do they indeed seek
for and desire earnestly deliverance from sin and death, who do not truly
know and agnise the greatness of sin. Joh. 9.41. If ye were blind, ye
should not have sin; but now ye say, We see: Therefore your sin remains.

The third use of the moral Law is proper unto the regenerate, to wit, an
instructing and informing of them concerning the true service and woorship of
God. This is done by the doctrine of the Law in teaching and exhorting. For,
seeing there are yet remaining manifold ignora^ces, and doubtfulnesse, and
corrupt inclination in the Saints; they stand in need not only of the
continual conduct of gods word, but also of the spurs and prouokements of
exhortations, and of meditation on gods will; least either they er in their
purpose and counsel, or also seeing that which is good, be nevertheless
carried the quite contrary way. Psalm. 1.2. His delight is in the Law of the
Lord, and in his Law does he meditate day and night. Psalm. 19.7 The Law of the
Lord is perfect, co^uerting the soul: the testimony of the Lord is sure, and
gives wisdom to the simple. The statutes of the Lord are right and rejoice
the heart: the commandment of the Lord is pure, and gives light unto the
eyes. Moreover by them is thy servant made circumspect, and in keepeing of them
there is great reward. Psalm. 119.50. Thy word is a lantern unto my feet,
and a light unto my path. Ier. 31.33. J will put my Law in their inward parts,
and write it in their hearts. Wherefore we see also that Christ and the
Apostles propound the commandments and explication of the law not so much to
profane and wicked men, as to the regenerate and godly. Against this use of
the Law some object that place, Romans 7. Ye are dead to the law by the body of
Christ, that ye should be unto another, even unto him that is raised up from
the dead, that ye should bring forth fruit unto God. And Gal. 2 I through the
law, am dead to the law, and that I might live unto God, I am crucified with
Christ. Thus I live yet; not I now, but Christ lives in me, and in that that J
now live in the flesh, I live by the faith in the Son of God. Hence they
conclude: If we be dead to the law, and are Christ's, who now lives in us; then
is not our life now schooled and ruled by the direction of the law, but by
Christ only. But seeing the Apostle himself says, Romans 3.31. That the law is
not made void, but established by faith; this phrase, to die unto the law,
does not signify to be exempted from the obedience of the Law, but to be
freed from condemnation, and from the prouokement of sin, which the Law
works in the unregenerate, whereas we being engraffed into Christ, enjoy in
him both a full satisfaction for our sins, for which the Law condemned us,
and the spirit of regeneration bending and inclining our hearts, not to an
hatred of the Law, wherewith they first did burn, but to the study and
desire of obedience and righteousness. Therefore he adds, Romans 7.4. That ye
should be unto another, who is raised up from the dead, that we should bring
forth fruit unto God. Again, we are delivered from the Law, being dead unto
it, wherein we were holden, that we should serve in newness of spirit, and not
in the oldnesse of the letter. In the other place, Gal. 2. this is the Apostles
meaning, J through the Law, to wit, which accuses sins, and terrifieth the
consciences of men, am dead to the Law, that is, cease to seek for
righteousness in the Law, and begin to seek for it in Christ. For this is it
which he adds, J am crucified with Christ, namely, by the participation of
Christ's merit, and the mortification of sin, that J might live to God,
according to the will of God expressed in the Law. For he lives to God, who
obeieth God, and honoreth him through his obedience. But this the doctrine of
the Law, does not work in nature now corrupted, except we pass from the
Law to Christ by faith, that he may live in us, and we in him, that is,
that he may be effectual in us through the working of his holy spirit; first,
by suggesting and speaking comfort in our hearts, of the remission of our sins,
then, by making us like unto himself by regeneration, that the Law may no
longer condemn us and cause wrath; but we may dilight in the law of God,
concerning the inner man; Romans 7. So then are we delivered from the Law, and
die to the Law, so Christ lives in us, that we begin to delight in the Law,
and to order our life according to the prescript thereof. For Christ does not
restore any other righteousness, or any other image of God in us by his
spirit, than which was created by our nature, darkened and ecclipsed by sin,
and described in the law: neither is there another spirit, author of Gods
law, and worker of our conformity with God in our nature uncorrupted and
restored.

They allege also that which is said, Ier. 31.31. I will make a new covenant
with the house of Israel, not according to the covenant, that I made with
their Fathers. Here they say, That God promises not to renew the old
covenant, which is the Law, but to make a new, which is the gospel. Wherefore
not the Law, but the gospel only is to be taught in the church of Christ. But
it is manifest, that the new covenant is not diverse from the old, as touching
the substantial, but only as touching the accidental parts or conditions,
and circumstances thereof. For although the old shadows and dark types are
taken away, and a most clear Doctrine, of the prophecy and figures fulfilled
by Christ, has succeeded; and the grace of the holy ghost is shed more
plentifully on men in the new Testament than in the old: yet notwithstanding
there was one and the same manner and way both of obtaining salvation, and of
gods spiritual worship, in times past, that now is. Unto this bear witness
the words themselves of the Prophet Ier: I will write in their hearts my Law,
he says not another Law, but the same which in times past I gave them: I will
be their God, and they shall be my people: J will forgive their iniquity, and
will remember their sins no more. For these conditions of the covenant are
found as well in the old as in the new. The difference only is, that these are
not the proper benefits of the Law, but of the gospel, which two parts of the
old and new Testament the Prophet here opposes one to the other, calling the
law the oulde covenant, and the Gospel, the new covenant, as being the
principal part of the covenant: and therefore he ascribes these blessings unto
the new covenant, because thereon depended whatsoever grace of God befell unto
the old church, and therein are those things more fully manifested and
exhibited by Christ, which were also promised and granted in the old for
Christ. If then God will write the Law, which was first written in tables of
stone, in the hearts of men in his new covenant: he does not abolish, but
establish the Law by the preaching of the Gospel, whereby the hearts of men are
regenerated, that they may begin to obey the Law: and therefore he delivering
here a difference between the Law and the Gospel, does so substitute the new
covenant unto the old, as that he says, that that part of the covenant, which
is the Moral Law, must be retained and written in our hearts. Now if they urge
those words, which the prophet adds: They shall teach no more every man his
neighbor, for they shall al know me: That hereby they may conclude, That men
are not in the new Testament to be willed to know God, for that they shall of
themselves know him and obey him: they er too grossly, going above to remove
the isntrumental cause, by reason that the effect in the new Testament is
greater and more plentiful. For, that men may know God and of their own accord
obey him, the holy Ghost works by the doctrine of the Law and the Gospel.
Neither does it follow, that they are not bound, neither are to be urged by
incitements of exhortation, because they do their duty of themselves: For
binding and exhorting is a far other thing, than constraining. Wherefore in two
respects has the law place in instructing the regenerate, namely, that they
may learn of the Law the will of God, and may also by the Law be more and
more incited willingly to obey God.

4 The Moral Law is a testimony of God, that there is a god, and likewise who
and what he is. This is a less principal use of the Law, as also those that
follow: but the former are principal uses of the Law. 5. It is a testimony
of the church. For seeing in the Church only the doctrine of the Law has
been preserved pure and vncorrupt, which all other sects have, by assenting to
manifest errors and impieties, diversely corrupted: the voice of the Law
which sounds in the church, is an evident testimony, disciphring and
declaring which is the people of God, and which is true religion in the world.
6. It is a testimony of the excellency of man's nature which was before the
fall, and which shall be in the life to come, that is, it remembers us of the
Image of god in man, which was created in him, and which is restored in him by
Christ. 7. It is a testimony of eternal life. For the Law must be observed by
us, because it was not in vain given us. And seeing in this life the Law has
not his end in us; there must needs be therefore remaining yet another life,
wherein we are to live according to the prescript of the law, that so at length
the Law may be fulfilled of us. Wherefore in respect of al these causes and
uses, let us conclude and resolve, that the Law of god is to be inculcated in
the church of Christ, both after and before the doctrine of the gospel, and is
continually and diligently to be meditated on by all men; according to the
doctrine delivered in the first Psalm; His delight is in the Law of God, and in
his Law does he meditate both day and night.

4 Jn what the Law differs from the Gospel.
THIS question has been already handled in the second part, Of man's delivery;
Page 264.
and therefore needs here no long discourse. The Law differs from the
Gospel, 1. Jn the manner of their manifestation: The Law is known, by
nature; the gospel was manifested from above. 2. Jn their matter or doctrine.
The Law teaches what we ought to be, and what to perform: The gospel
teaches how we may be such, namely, in Christ. 3. In their promises. The Law
promises eternal life and al good things, with a condition of our own proper
and perfect righteousness and obedience remaining in us: The gospel promises
the same with a condition of faith and belief in christ, whereby we embrace an
others obedience performed for us, to wit, the obedience of Christ. Now with
this condition of faith is joined by an indissoluble knot and bond the
condition of new obedience.

5 How far the Law is abrogated.
THE whole Law is abrogated unto believers, 1. As touching justification:
because judgment is not given according to the Law (for that judgment would
condemn and cast us away) but according to the gospel. 2. As touching
constraint. We are under grace; and therefore are we stirred up by the spirit
of Christ to yield voluntary obedience unto the Law. For seeing the whole Law
is abrogated unto believers, then verily the Moral Law is also abrogated unto
them, and in the same respect, namely, as touching justification, or
condemnation, and as touching violent constraint. For now the Law does not any
more express and wrest obedience from us as a tyrant, or as a master enforcing
and constraining a lewd servant unto obedience. The reason is, because Christ
begins voluntary and free obedience in us by his spirit. Objection. The Law
and the Prophets continue until John the Baptist came. If therefore then first
the Moral Law was abrogated, as touching condemnation, when Christ was
manifested in the flesh: it follows, that those were under condemnation, who
lived before the coming of Christ. Answer. The Law was abrogated, as touching
condemnation, as well unto the believers in the old Testament, as to them, who
are believers in the new. To them who lived in the old, as touching the power
and efficacy of Christ: to these in the new as touching his fulfilling and
exhibiting.

The Ceremonial and civil or Judicial Laws are wholly abrogated, as touching
obedience, so that there is no necessity any more of observing them, 1.
Because they were to continue only unto the coming of the Messiah. Genesis
49.10. The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his
feet, until Siloh come. And Dan. 9.26. After threescore and two weeks shall
Messiah be slain, and shall have nothing: and the people of the prince that shall
come, shall destroy the city and the Sanctuary, and the end thereof shall
be with a floode: and unto the end of the battle it shall be destroyed by
desolations. Ephesians. 2.14. He is our peace, which has made of both one, and
has broken the stop of the partition wall, Jn abrogating through his flesh the
hatred, that is, the Law of commandments which stands in ordinances. The
Ceremonial Laws then are taken away by Christ, a type of whom they were,
that which also Stephen declares in his Sermon, Acts 7.7. Likewise the author
of the Epistle to the Hebrews. 2. Because the Messiah being exhibited, the
types cease, such as were the ceremonial Laws. Coloss. 2.17. which are but a
shadow of things to come: but the body is in Christ. But the Ceremonial are
said nevertheless to be perpetual, because they were to last until the
coming of the Messiah; As also because the things signified by them are
eternal. Against the abrogating of the civil or judicial laws, this is
objected: The best and most just form of government is to be followed. But
there can be none better or iuster than that, which God himself settled among
his people: Therefore that is to be followed, and retained. Answer. Either
the Mayor of this reason may be distinguished, or the Minor denied with an
exposition. For that which in positive laws, (that is, such as define the
circumstances: of the duty of magistrates and subjects and citizens one
toward another) is in every place and at all times most just, the same are
lawmakers to follow. But in that form of the Mosaicall government many things
are applied to the state and condition of that nation, region, time, and
ceremonial woorship, the observation whereof would now be neither just, nor
profitable; because the causes, for which those laws should be given to the
Jews, are taken away or changed, as, of giving a bill of divorce, of marrieng
the widows of their kinsemen. Wherefore God will not that all nations and ages
be tied unto those Laws. An argument whereof is, that even at that very time,
when he commanded these Laws to be observed, he bound not all nations but
only Abraham's posterity unto them; and yet some that lived according to such
civil Laws of other nations as were not wicked and ungodly, did please him; as
Naaman the Syrian, and whosoever of the Gentiles were converted, who yet
notwithstanding did not observe the ceremonies and civil Laws of the Jews.
And Paul, Romans 13. says, we must obey not only those which govern according to
Moses laws, but also other Magistrates, as the ordinance of god; as long as
they command nothing contrary to the commandments of God. And himself also
submitted himself unto the Roman Laws, when he appealed unto Caesar, and
when he said, It was unlawful to bind one uncondemned which was a Roman.

Furdermore if any man will hence conclude, That seeing it is lawful to use
the Laws of other common-weals as the Athenian, Roman, and such like; it is
therefore much more lawful and beseeming to imitate and follow the form of
that commonwealth, which was immediately ordered and constituted by God
himself: We easily grant, that wise and discreet magistrates and law-giuers
may take as well thence as out of other gouernmentes, if there be any thing
convenient and agreeing with their subjects, with whom, and the times wherein
they live, so that all opinion of necessity be taken away, that is, so that it
be not therefore commanded, or retained, because it was prescribed by Moses
to the Jews; but because there are good reasons, wherefore now also it
should be done so, and if the causes be changed, then that the liberty also
of changing these laws by public authority be retained.

Moreover, although ceremonial and civil laws are wholly abrogated as
touching obedience also; yet is not the Moral law in like manner abrogated.
For this, after Christ was exhibited, ceased indeed as touching the curse and
constraint, but not as touching obedience. The reasons hereof are strong and
clear. First, The Son of god was not therefore made Mediator, took the
form of a servant, became obedidient unto his Father, even unto the death of
the Cross, and redeemed us from the curse of the Law, that we should continue
and persist in sins and enmity with God; but that he might deliver us from
sin, reconcile us unto God, and make us again like unto god, and the temple
of god. If then he had this end, for which he did deliver us from the curse of
the Law, he did not withal take away the bond of our obedience. For this is
the Mediators office, to expiate and do away sins, and to bring to pass, that
hereafter the party offended be no more offended by that party which had
offended.

Secondly, how much the more and greater Gods benefits are toward us, so
much the more are we bound to yield thankefulnes unto him, that is, to live
according to his will and Law. But they who are justified and regenerated by
faith in Christ, have received more and greater benefits than others. For these
are ouermore added unto their creation, and preservation, and other benefits
common to the wicked with the godly. Therefore we are more bound after, than
before regeneration and justification, to yield and perform obedience to Gods
Law. Many testimonies confirm the same; as, Mat. 5.17. Think not that I am
come to destroy the Law, or the Prophets: J am not come to destroy them, but to
fulfill them. This is meant of all the parts of the Law, but especially of the
moral Law. For Christ fulfilleth the Law four ways. First, by his own
righteousness. For Christ only has perfectly performed such obedience as the
Law requires: both because he was the son of God and conceived by the holy
Ghost, and also because he could not have satisfied for us, except himself
were free from all spot or stain of sin. Heb 7 26. Such a high Priest it
became us to have, which is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners.
Secondly, by paying sufficient punishment for our sins. Romans 8.3. For (that
that was impossible to the Law, in as much as it was weak, because of the
flesh) god sending his own Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, and
for sin, condemned sin in the flesh, that the righteousenesse of the Law
might be fulfilled in us, which walk not after the flesh, but after the
spirit. 2. Cor. 5.21. He made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin,
that we should be made the righteousness of God. And this fulfilling of the
types of the law, and the paying of that punishment which we did owe, is that
very abrogating of the Law, whereof we have spoken. Thirdly, Christ
fulfilleth the Law in us by his spirit, reforming us by him unto the image of
God, that we also may in this life begin internal and external obedience
which the law requires of us, and may perform the same whole and entire in
the life to come. Now both these, to wit, punishment paid for us by Christ,
and righteousness begun in us, are comprehended and understood by S. Paul, when
he says, That the righteousness of the law is fulfilled in us, which walk
after the spirit: And of the giving of the Holy Ghost and of regeneration,
which is wrought for and by Christ, S. Paul purposely entreats. Romans 6. and
7. Fourthly, Christ fulfilleth the law by teaching it, that is, by repurging
and purifying it from errors and corruptions, and by restoring the true
doctrine and understanding thereof; which he does, Matthew. 5.6. and 7. If then
Christ both teaches and restores the obedience of the law in us; he does not
abolish the law, as concerning obedience. The same does Paul teach, Romans 3.31.
Do we then make the law of none effect through faith? God forbid: yea we
establish the law. Now by faith, or by the righteousness and justice of faith
the Law is established, not only in confessing or approving the judgment and
accusation of the Law against us, as, that we do not yield due obedience unto
the Law, for as much as we seek for righteousness without our selves in
Christ; and in satisfieng, because through faith is applied unto us christ's
satisfaction, equivalent to eternal punishment, which the Law required of us
not performing perfect obedience: by this faith then it is wrought, that
without the Law indeed, that is, not by our own obedience, but yet not against
the Law, that is, not without another perfect satisfaction for us, we are
justified before God: but the Law is also established by faith through the
beginning of new obedience in this life, and the acomplishing of the same in
the life to come. Acts. 15. Purifieng their hearts by faith. Gal. 5.5. We
through the spirit wait for the hope of righteousness through faith. These
and the like asseuerations, that the Decalogue is to be taught in the new
Testament, and the commandments of christ and the Apostles agreeing with the
Decalogue, do most evidently refute the impiety of Antinomies, Libertines, and
such like, who contend that the law is not to be taught in the church of
christ. The same also may be gathered out of the use of Gods Law, which use
thereof seeing it must be continual in the church; it follows that the Law
it self also must be perpetual. Which that it may be the more manifest, let
the chief objections opposed against it be considered.

1 Objection. Christ is not the Lawgiver, as it is said, The Law was given by
Moses: but grace and truth came by Christ. Therefore neither he, nor the
ministers of the Gospel should teach the Law. Answer. Christ is not the
Lawgiver, as concerning the chief and principal function and office of the
Mediator. For that is, to bring forth the gospel out of the bosom of his
father, to make request and intercession to be made a sacrifice for us, and by
the gift of the Holy Ghost to reconcile us unto God. But a part notwithstanding
of this office is, to show and take away those errors, wherewith the Law is
corrupted, and to propound the pure Doctrine thereof to this end, that the
minds of men may thereby be prepared to hear the preaching of the gospel,
which is proper unto the Messiah, and that they being converted may be
instructed, what thankefulnes God requires of the^ for the benefit of their
redemption. Christ then is the Lawgiver, as he is God, and author of the law
together with the father: but as he is Mediator, he is not indeed the
lawgiver, because he publishes not the Law, as it is said, 1. John. 2. but
yet notwithstanding he is the purger, repairer, and restorer of the law from
corruptions; and this, not principally; but that he might perform the
principal function of his Mediatourship, to wit, our reconcilement and
salvation. The same answer we make also concerning the ministers of the
gospel: in as much as they are to propound no other Doctrine unto the Church,
than Christ has delivered.

2 Object. He that has satisfied the Law by punishment is not bound to
obedience: because the Law binds either to punishment or to obedience, but
not unto both together. But we have satisfied the Law by Christ's punishment.
Therefore we stand not bound to perfourm obedience. Answer. We distinguish
the Mayor. First, he that has suffered a sufficient punishment is not bound to
obedience, to wit, not to the same obedience for the omitting whereof he
suffered punishment: but after that satisfaction has been made by punishment
for sin committed; he is bound notwithstanding hence forward to obey the
law, or to suffer new punishment, if through new disobedience he break the
law. Secondly, he that has satisfied not by his own punishment but by
another, and is received into favor without his own satisfaction, ought to
obey the law, though not as thereby to satisfy for sins, yet to show his
thankefulnes, that is, he ought to order and direct his life according to his
will by whom he is redeemed, and of whom he is received into favor. For no man
is therefore punished for sin committed, or delivered from the crime thereof,
that he should persist in it, but that he should leave off hence forward to
commit sin any more, and to offend him, unto whom he is reconciled. Wherefore
in like manner we also, because Christ has satisfied for our sins, stand
bound to perform the obedience not of the time past, but of the time to come:
and this also are we bound to perform, not for any expiation or recompense of
those sins, which either we have committed, or do commit, or hereafter shall
commit, but for the showing of our thankfulness for the benefit of Christ,
whereby we are delivered from sin and death. This does S. Paul teach, Romans
6. He that is dead, is free from sin. Again: Likewise think ye also that
ye are dead to sin, but are alive to god in Jesus Christ our Lord.

3 Objection. Christians are not ruled by the Law, but by the spirit of
regeneration, according as it is said, ye are not under the law, but under
grace. Again, The law is not given unto the righteous man. Therefore it is
not to be taught in the Church of Christ. Answer. Christians are not ruled,
that is, are not compelled and constrained by the law and fear of punishment
unto whatsoever discipline or order, like as are the wicked: but yet they are
taught and instructed by the law of God, what worship is pleasing unto god, and
the holy Ghost uses the voice of the Law to teach and incline them to an
obedience not constrained or hypocritical, but true and voluntary, so that not
only the Law commands them what to do, but the spirit also of grace does
give them ability to obey. For this is, not to be under the Law, and the Law
not to be given unto the righteous. So then the bond and Doctrine remains,
albeit the condemnation and constraint is taken away. For unto this are we
bound, that our obedience be most free and voluntary. Romans 8.12. We are
debtors, not to the flesh, to live after the flesh.

4 Objection. The Law is not necessary unto salvation. Therefore it is not to
be taught in the Church. Answer. This reason is a fallacy reasoning that not
to be simply so, which is not in some respect so. For albeit the Law is not
necessary to this, that we should through our obedience unto it be saved:
yet is it necessary unto other things, as has been taught already in the
doctrine concerning the use of the Law.

5 Objection. Coloss 2.3. Jn Christ are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge. Again, Ye are complete in him. Therefore there is no need of the
Law in the Church of Christ. Answer. This reason deceives by inferring a
false consequent, because it proceeds from the putting of the whole, to the
denial of a part. The whole wisdom and knowledge, that is, the Doctrine of
Christ delivered by him unto us, is sufficient and necessary for the Church:
But a part of that Doctrine is the Moral Law also: because Christ commanded
not faith only, but repentance also and amendment of life to be preached in his
name; and he himself delivered and declared the Law. The compleatnesse
therefore and perfection of our wisdom and salvation, which we have in
Christ, does not exclude, but include rather and comprehend the Doctrine of the
Law.

6 How the Decalogue is divided.
THE division of the Decalogue is to be observed and retained, because it
makes to the understanding of the commandments themselves. For first, it
shows that in some commandments is prescribed mediate worship, in some
immeditat. Secondly, it aduertiseth us of the degrees of obedience, and shows
that the woorshippe of the first table is the chief and principal. Now, the
Decalogue is divided after a threefolde manner.

First, the Decalog is divided by Moses and Christ into two tables: The former
whereof compriseth our duties toward God immediately: The second, our duties
toward God mediatelie. This division is grounded on this, that Christ and Paul
refer the whole Law to the love of God and our neighbor. Mat. 22.37. Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, with all thy soul, and withal
thy mind. This is the first and great commandment; and the second is like unto
this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

Secondly, the Decalog is divided into ten commandments, whereof four are
ascribed unto the first, and the six other unto the second table. This
division is oppugned by them, who go about to contract and draw the first and
the second commandment unto one, and contrariwise to divide the tenth into
two. Now for the refutall of these men's error, we will bring forth the special
reasons, whereby this division is confirmed. Those are distinct commandments
which are distinguished in the matter which they deliver, or whose matter is
distinct and diverse. The first and second commandment differ or are
distinguished in matter. Therefore they are diverse and distinct
commandments. The first teaches, who is to be worshipped, namely the alone
true god. The second shows how God is to be worshipped, namely not by the
inventions of men. So of the contrary, the tenth commandment cannot be divided
into two commandments. For those things that are there spoken concerning
concupiscence, have one and the same meaning and sense, and therefore the
scripture also compriseth them under one name. Thou shall not covet or lust. I
had not known lust, except the law had said, thou shall not lust. But if
therefore yet the tenth commandment must be cut into two diverse
commandments, because it makes me^tio^ of diverse things not to be coueted or
lusted after; it shall thereof follow, that so many commandments must be
numbered, as there are recited kinds of things in every commandment. 2.
Those commandments which differ one from another in verses and periodes or
sentences, are different in themselves also and are distinguished by Moses. The
first commandment then differs from the second, because Moses has
distinguished these two commandments in diverse verses and periodes.
Contrariwise, those things which are delivered by Moses in the tenth
commandment, are comprehended all in one periode or sentence: Wherefore al of
them are to be referred jointly also unto one commandment. 3. Moses
transposeth the words of the tenth commandment (which the adversaries
attempt to divide into two commandments, the ninth and tenth) in Exodus and
Deutronomy. For in Exodus is placed first, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors
house, Exodus 20.17.
and then follows that which is placed first in Deutronomie, Thou shall not
covet thy neighbors wife. Deuteronomy. 5.21.
If then our adversaries will needs divide this tenth into two commandmentes,
they shall not be able to know which must be the ninth, and which the tenth:
yea by this means they shall accuse Moses, and God himself speaking by Moses
of lightness, as if he were contrary unto himself. By this transposing
therefore and displacing of the words, the holy ghost does sufficiently
declare, that he would have al to be but one commandment, whatsoever is read
in the tenth commandment jointly comprehended and contained in one periode or
sentence. 4. There is very great and weighty authority, whereby this
division of the Decalogue is confirmed. For the most learned of the Jews,
Philo and Josephus, do thus divide the Decalogue. In like sort do the greek
Ecclesiastical writers divide the Decalogue: As Zonarus, Origin, Athanasius,
Gregory Nazianzene, Chrysostom, and Nicephorus. And unto this opinion and
sentence subscribe also the latin Ecclesiastical writers, as Hierome, Ambrose,
Sulpitius Seuerus, and Austine. We have therefore restored, not changed or
altered the Decalogue.

Thirdly, The Decalogue is divided according to the things themselves, which
are commanded or forbidden in the Decalogue. Now generally in the Decalogue is
commanded the worship of God: that which is contrary to Gods worship is
forbidden. The worship of God is either immediate, when Moral woorks are
immediately performed unto God: or mediate, when Moral works are performed
unto our neighbor in respect of God. The immediate worship is either internal
or external. The internal consists in this, partly that we worship the
true god, and that that be performed unto the true God, which is commanded in
the first commandment; partly that the manner or form of worship be right
and lawful, whether it be internal worship, or external. This form, which is
to be observed in Gods worship, is taught in the second commandment. The
external worship, is either private or public. The private contains the
private Moral works of every one, which are always to be of every man in
particular performed: and this private worship is delivered in the third
commandment. The public worship consists in sanctifieng of the Sabbath,
and is delivered in the fourth commandment. The mediate worship of God, which
contains our duties toward men, or our neighbors, is delivered in the
second table: and this likewise is either external or internal. The mediate
external worship consists partly in the duties of superiors toward their
inferiors, and so of the contrary: of which duties (as also of civil order
comprised under them) is spoken in the fifth commandment: partly in the
duties of one neighbor toward another, which are ratified in the rest of the
commandments; and those are either the preserving of men's life and safety,
which is in the sixth commandment; or the preserving of chastity and
wedlock, which is in the seventh commandment; or the preserving of goods or
possessions, which is in the eight; or of the preserving of the truth, which is
contained in the ninth commandment. The mediate internal worship, or the
internal and inward duties of mediate worship consist in the internal
affection of the heart: for they are the very uprightness of men's affections
toward their neighbor, which is to be included and understood in all the
former commandments: and is prescribed in the tenth and last commandment.

7 What is the substance or meaning of the Decalogue, and of every commandment
thereof.
THIS question contains in it two diverse parts to be handled. 1 Of the
substance and meaning of the Decalogue in general. 2 Of the meaning of every
commandment in special or particular.

Certain rules concerning the substance and meaning of the Decalogue in
general.

1 The Moral Law or Decalogue is to be understood according to the
interpretation of the Scripture, that is, according to the exposition and
declaration of the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles: and not according to the
sense and judgment of man only, or Philosophy. We must join together the
explication scattered every where thoroughout the Scriptures, and not stick
only upon those short commandementes. Neither does Moral Philosophy suffice
for interpretation thereof; because it contains but a little part of the
Law: and this is one difference between Philosophy and the doctrine of the
gospel which is delivered in the church.

2 The Decalog requires in all the commandments obedience both external and
internal, perfect, not in parts only, but also in degrees, that is, that we
obey God not only in all the duties prescribed, but in the degrees also of
those duties. Cursed be he that abides not in all.

3 The first commandment must be included and understood in all the rest, that
is, the obedience of the first commandment must be the motive and final cause
of our obedience toward the rest of the commandments: otherwise it is not
the worship of God, but hypocrisy, whatsoever we do. For we must do al
things, which are delivered and prescribed in the other commandments, even
for the love we bear to God, and for the desire we have to woorship him. For
except we so do them, we do them not according to the sentence and prescript
of the Law, neither do we please God therein. Wherefore the first
commandment of the Decalogue must sin before and give light as it were unto
all the other commandments both of the second and the first table, and be
included in them. This rule is delivered by the Apostle, 1. Corinthians. 10.31.
Whether therefore ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do al to the
glory of God. By these two former rules many things are made more clear and
manifest: namely, That no man in this life perfourmeth entire and perfect
obedience unto the Law: that the virtues of the unregenerate are sins in the
sight of God; because they are neither joined with inward obedience, nor come
from the obedience of the first commandment, neither are referred unto it,
seeing they do not know the true God, and therefore they are but a shadow of
obedience, and are hypocrisy, which God most severely condemns. Isai. 29.13.
Because this people come near unto me with their mouth, and honor me with
their lips, but have removed their heart far from me, J will again do a
marvelous work in this people. Roman. 14. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin.
Moreover by the these rules it is manifest, that true obedience cannot be
begun but by faith, through the knowledge of the Mediator and the gift of
the holy Ghost. Acts. 15. Purifieng their hearts by faith. Galat 2. In that
that I now live in the flesh, I live by faith in the Son of God. For God is
not truly known or loved without faith in Christ. Joh. 5. He that honors
not the Son, honors not the Father, which has sent him. Again, by these
rules it is declared, that our obedience in this life, seeing it is but begun
only, cannot please God, but through and for the satisfaction of Christ
imputed unto us. Ephesians. 1. He has freely made us accepted in his beloved.
Lastly, by them it is manifest, that in true conversion obedience is begun
according to all the commandments. For who truly loves god, he submits
himself without exception to al his commandments. 1. Joh. 3.9. He that is
born of God sins not.

4 That we may judge aright of the meaning of every commandment, or Law,
we must above al things consider the drift or end thereof. For the end of the
Law shows the meaning thereof: and by the end we shall judge aright and
easily of the means. This rule also is of force in humane Laws. But we are
to understand it of the next and nearest end of the Law. For not those things
which are necessary to the attaining of such ends as are removed and a far
off, but those which are necessary to the attaining of the nearest and
subordinate ends, are to be comprised in the sentence and prescript of one Law,
which except it be observed, the sentence and substance of al, or many Laws,
will be brought al into one. The furthest end, and therefore the end of the
whole Law, is the worship of god: It requires therefore the whole obedience
of the Law. The end of the second table, is the preservation of the society of
mankind: this requires all the duties of the second table. The end of the fifth
commandment is, the preservation of civil order; it compriseth therefore the
duties of superiors toward inferiors, and of inferiors toward superiors:
because without these civil order cannot be preserved.

5 The same virtue is often in a diverse respect commanded in diverse
commandementes, that is, the same virtue is required for the performing of
obedience unto many commandementes. This we are to know, least we in vain
trouble and vex our selves in distinguishing and placing the virtues: As
fortitude, is a virtue both of the sixth and fifth commandment; because it is
required in a Magistrate who is to take upon him the defense of others.

6 The Lawe-giuer does in an affirmative commandment comprehend the
negative, and contrariwise, in a negative he comprehends the affirmative:
that is, in the commanding of virtues, the forbidding of the contrary vices is
contained; and so contrariwise.

7 We must take heed that we restrain not the commandementes too much, and
take them too streitlie. For they are so to be taken and understood, as that
in the general all the specials be contained: and in the chief special the
next allied specials: and in the effect the causes; and in one of the
correlatiues the other also. So when chastity is commanded, temperancy is also
commanded, without which this effect is not. When subjection, which is the one
relative, is commanded, Magistracy also, which is his correlatiue, is
commanded.

8 The obedience or commandments of the second table yield unto the
obedience or commandments of the first table. Objection. But the second
commandment is like unto the first. Ans. It is like 1. as concerning the kind
of Moral worship. 2. As concerning the kind of punishment, to wit, everlasting
punishment, whereunto they are subject who break the second, as well as they
who break the first, 1. Ioh. 3. Lastly, they are like as concerning their
coherence and connection, because neither can be kept without other. For God is
not loved, except our neighbor be loved; neither is our neighbor truly
loved, except God be loved; 1. Joh. 4. Hence also answer may be made to this
objection: The second table must yield unto the first: Therefore ceremonies
which are duties of the first table, must be preferred before the duties of
love and charity toward our neighbor; For the second table yields unto
the first in moral duties, not in ceremonial. If therefore the necessity and
safety of our neighbor require the omitting of a ceremony, the ceremony is
rather to be omitted, than the safety of our neighbor to be neglected. Hosea
6. Matthew. 9. I will have mercy, and not sacrifice. Mat. 15.4. God has
commanded saying, Honor thy Father and Mother: and he that curses Father or
Mother, let him die the death: But ye say, whosoever shall say to Father or
Mother, By the gift that is offered by me, thou may have profit, Though he
honor not his Father, or his Mother, shall be free: Thus have ye made the
commandment of God of no authority by your tradition. Offeringes and
sacrifices were commanded by God: but if they be don with the neglect of the
necessities of our parents and kindred, Christ says that they are not an
observing, but a breach of Gods commandment. So is that which David did,
commended by Christ, who did rather eat the shewbread against the ceremonial
Law, than endanger the safety of himself and his, by famine, against the
Moral law. Wherefore this rule is also necessary for the right understanding
of the Law.

CERTAIN CONCLVSIONS OF THE DECALOGVE.
1 THE first table commands the duties toward God. The second commands
the duties toward man: But yet so notwithstanding, as that the first is
immediately, this mediatelie referred unto God.

2. The first commandment, when as it commands us to hold and repute the
only true God, and GOD that is manifested in the Church, for our GOD,
comprehends chiefly the inward worship of god, which consists in the mind,
will, and heart.

3 The chief parts or points of this woorshippe are, the true knowledge of
god, faith, hope, love of god, fear of god, humility and lowliness in the
sight of god, and patience.

4 God may be known of reasonable creatures, so far forth as he will manifest
himself unto every one.

5 The knowledge of god is either simply and absolutely perfect, whereby god
only knows himself, thas is, the Eternal father, son, and holy ghost
know themselves in several and each other mutuallie, and understand wholly and
most perfectly their own infinite essence, and the manner of each persons
existing and being. For unto the perfect knowledge of an infinite thing, none
but an infinite understanding can attoine. Or there is a knowledge of god
belonging unto reasonable creatures, whereby Angels and men know indeed the
whole and entire nature and Majesty of god as being most simple, but they
know it not wholly; that is, they so far only understand it, as he
reueileth it unto them.

6 That knowledge of god which is in creatures, if it be compared with that
whereby god understands and knows himself, is to be accounted imperfect.
But if the degrees thereof in it self be considered, it is also either
perfect or imperfect, yet not simply, but in comparison, that is, in respect
of the inferior and superior degree. The perfect knowledge of god in
creatures is that, whereby Angels and men in the celestial life know god by a
most clear and bright beholding of the mind, so much as suffices for the
conformity of the reasonable creature with god. The imperfect is that, whereby
men in this life know god not so much as they could at first by the benefit of
their creation, and therefore were notwithstanding bound unto it still by gods
commandment.

7 The imperfect knowledge of god which men have in this life is of two sorts:
One Christian or Theological; the other Philosophical. That is received from
the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles. This, from the principles and
general rules naturally known unto men, and from the beholding of the
works of god in the nature of things.

8 The Christian knowledge of god is also of two sorts: the one spiritual or
true, lively, effectual, saving: the other Literal. The spiritual, is that
knowledge of god and his will which is kindled by the holy ghost in our minds
according to the word and by the word, woorking in the will and heart an
inclination and desire more and more to know and do those things, which god
commands so to be done. The Literal, is that knowledge of god, which either
has been in men from the creation, or is wrought in their minds of the holy
ghost by the word, which has not accompanieng it an endeavor and desire of
framing and conforming themselves unto the commandments.

9 Both the spiritual and literal knowledge, are also immediate, or mediate.
Immediate, which is wrought by the instinct of the holy Ghost without ordinary
means. Mediate, which is wrought of the holy ghost by the voice of heavenly
doctrine, heard, read, and meditated.

10 The ordinary means to know God, and which is prescribed unto us by God
himself, is by the study and meditation of heavenly doctrine. Wherefore we
must strive this way unto the knowledge of God, neither require or look for
from god any extraordinary and immediate illumination, except he of himself
offer it, and confirm it also unto us by certain and evident testimonies.

11 Now albeit so much as god would have known of himself unto us in this
life he has sufficiently declared in his word: yet notwithstanding those
natural testimonies of god are not superfluous, because they convince and
reprove the impiety of the reprobate, and confirm the godliness of the Elect
and chosen, and therefore are by God himself often commended in Scripture, and
are of us to be considered.

12 But yet concerning them this we must hold and know; that they are true
indeed, and agreeing with gods word, but not sufficing for the true
knowledge of god.

13 Moreover, although natural testimonies teach nothing that is false of god,
yet men, except the light of gods word come thereto, gather and conceive out
of them naught else but false and erroneous opinions concerning god: both
because these testimonies show not so much, as is delivered in the word, and
also because even those things which may be perceived and understood by
natural judgment, men notwithstanding, by reason of that blindness and
corruption which is engendered in them, take and interpret amiss, and diversely
deprave and corrupt.

14 Wherefore in the first commandment of the Decalogue the ignorance of
those things is forbidden and condemned, which god has proposed unto the
Church, to be known of us concerning him in his word and in his works both
of our creation and redemption. Likewise all errors are condemned of such as
imagine, either that there is no god, as the Epicures; or mo gods, as the
Ethniches, Manichees, and those that pray unto Angels, dead men, and other
creatures: and the vanity of superstitious men which put their trust in other
creatures or things diverse from him who has manifested himself in the
church, as Jews, Mahumetistes, Sabellius, Samosatenus, Arrius, Pneumato
machists, and such like, who acknowledge not god to be the eternal Father with
the Son and holy ghost coeternall.

Now are we to speak of the sentence and meaning of the Decalogue in
special, that is, of the meaning of every particular commandment.

THE FIRST COMMANDMENT.
I AM Iehoua, (the Lord) thy god, which have brought thee out of the land of
Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shall have no other gods before me.

This commandment has two parts a preface and a commandment. The preface
goes before being comprehended in these words, I am Jehovah the Lord thy god,
which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.
This preface belongs unto the whole Decalogue: because it describes and
discerns God the Lawe-giuer from all creatures, Law-giuers, and false gods;
and farther, it contains three several reasons, why the obedience both of
this first commandment, and of the rest which follow is to be performed
unto God. First, he says that he is Jehovah, whereby he distinguishes
himself the true god from all creatures, that he may show himself to have the
chief right of ruling. I am Jehovah; That is, I, whom thou hear speaking,
and giving this Law unto thee, am the true God, who is and existeth from
himself and by himself, and gives unto other things their being, Creator of
al things, eternal, omnipotent, author and preserver of all that are good.
Therefore obey me. Secondly he says, that he is the god of his people, that
through the promise of his bountifulness he might allure us to obey him. God
verily is the God of all creatures, as touching both the creating, and
preserving, and the governing of them al; but he is the God of his Church, by
the participation and manifestation of himself. God then is our God, when we
acknowledge him to be such, as he has manifested himself in his word: namely,
who emploieth his omnipotency, justice, wisdom, and mercy unto our salvation;
or, who tendereth us with an especial and peculiar favor in his Son. For God
is said to be their god, whom he loves and favors above al others. Psalm.
33.12.
Whereupon also the Prophet David affirms that nation to be blessed, whose
God is the Lord: even the people that he has chosen for his inheritance.
Thirdly, he says, Which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt: as if he
should say, I am he, who have manifested my self unto thee, and bestowed all
these blessings upon thee. This he adds, that by the mentioning of his late
and notable benefit he might declare unto them and admonish them that they were
bound therefore to show thankfulness and obedience unto him. This also
belongs unto us, because it does figuratiuelie comprehend and implie all the
deliueraunces of the church, by the mentioning of so famous and noble a
benefit. And further also, this was a type of our woonderful deliverance
achieved by Christ. Now when he says, that he Iehoua is this god and
deliverer of the Church, he opposes himself both to all creatures and to
Idols, challenging all divine honor and obedience unto himself alone:
according to the exposition hereof delivered, Deuteronomy. 6. Jsa. 43. and in other
places. Wherefore it follows, not only that this Iehoua is to be worshipped,
but that he alone is to be worshipped and to be accounted for our God.

Next enseweth the commandment, Thou shall have none other Gods before me.
The end of this commandment is the inward or internal woorship of God, that
is, that due honor may be given unto God in the mind, will, and heart of
man. Moreover this commandment is in such wise a negative and denies others,
as that it contains also an affirmation. Thou shall have none other gods.
Therefore thou shall have me, that Jehoua, which have manifested my self in my
Church thy god alone. Now to have god is, 1. To know and acknowledge God,
namely, that there is a god; that he is one god; that he is such, a god as
he has manifested himself, first in himself, and then toward us. 2. To
trust in god only. 3. With great humility and patience to subject and submit
our selves unto god. 4. To expect and look for all good things from god
only. 5. To love god. 6. To reverence and worship god.

Thou shall then have none other gods, that is, besides me the only true god:
And thou shall not have them before me, that is, in my sight; and therefore
neither shall thou have strange gods in the closet of thy heart, which is not
close or hidden in my sight, but lies wholly open, and is altogether manifest
unto me, the searcher of the hearts and reins.

The most ready and easy way of explicating each commandment, is to
distribute the obedience of every commandment into his virtues as parts,
adioining afterward those vices, which are opposite unto the same virtues.
Here then in the first commandment are signified seven virtues; The knowledge
of god, Faith, Humility, Patience, Hope, the love of god, the fear of god.
These virtues, as being the parts of the obedience of the first
commandment, we will briefly and in few words unfold and declare.

1 The knowledge of god, is, so to judge of God, as he has manifested
himself in his word and works, and to be moved and stirred up by that
knowledge to a confidence, love, fear, and woorship of the true God. Romans
10.14. How shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? Ioh. 17.3.
This is life eternal, that they know thee to be the only very god, and whom
thou have sent, Jesus Christ.

2 Faith is a sure and certain persuasion, whereby we assent unto every
word of God delivered unto us, and whereby we are resolved that the promise
of the free mercy of God for Christ's sake does belong unto us, and further
also it is a confidence receiving this benefit of God and resting therein,
being kindled of the hole ghost by the word in our minds, will, and hearts,
and working in them a reioicing in God, invocation and praying unto God, and
obedience according to all his commandments. 2. Chron. 20.20. Put your trust
in the Lord your god, and ye shallbe assured.

3 Humility is, to acknowledge all those good things, which are in us and are
done by us, not to come from any worthiness or ability of our own, but from
the free goodness of god: and so by the acknowledging of gods divine Majesty
and our infirmity and unworthiness, to subject and submit our selves unto god,
to give the glory of all good things, which are in us, to him alone, truly
to fear god, and to acknowledge and bewail our own defects and vices, not to
covet any higher place or condition, neither trusting in our own gifts, but in
the help and assistance of God, to hold our selves contented with our own
vocation and calling, not to despise others in comparison of our selves,
neither to let or hinder them in the discharging of their duty, but to
acknowledge that others also are and may be made profitable instruments of
god, and therefore to give place and honor unto them; not to attribute unto
our selves things above our force and power, not to affect an excellency
above others: but to be well contented with those gifts which God has given
us, and to employ all our gifts and studies to the glory of God, and the
safety of our neighbors, even those which are of the baser and vnwoorthier
sort; neither at any time to murmour against GOD, if we fail of our hope, or
if we be despised, but in all things to ascribe the praise of wisdom and
justice unto God. 1. Cor 4.6. These things I have figuratiuelie applied unto
mine own self, and Apollos, for your sakes, that ye might learn by us, that
no man presume above that which is written, that one swell not against another
for any man's cause. For who separateth thee? And what have thou that thou have
not received? 1. Pet. 5.5. God resists the proud, and gives grace to the
humble. Humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of god, that he may
exalt you in due time. Matthew. 18.4. Whosoever shall humble himself as this
title child, the same is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven. Phil. 2.3. Do
nothing through contention, or vain glory, but in meekness of mind every
man esteem other better than himself.

4 Patience is the knowledge and agnising of Gods Majesty, wisdom, justice,
and goodness, resolving through a confidence in gods promises, and so in hope
of gods assistance and delivering, to obey god in suffering those evils, and
adversities, which he sends on us, and wills us to suffer, neither in
respect of the grief which they bring to murmur against God, or to do any
thing against his commandments, but in our dolor and grief to retain still
the confidence and hope of gods assistaunce, and to ask deliverance of him,
and by this knowledge and full persuasion of Gods will to mitigate and assuage
our grief and pains. Humility and Patience belong unto the first
commandment, not only because they are parts of that internal obedience,
which god requires immediately to be performed unto him: but also, because
they follow and accompany the true knowledge, confidence, love and fear of god,
as necessary effects of the same.

5 Hope is a sure and certain expectation of everlasting life freely to be
given for Christ's sake, and of a mitigation or assuagement of present evils,
and of a deliverance from the same evils of this life, and lastly an expecting
and looking for all blessings necessary unto salvation, according to the
counsel and will of God. Now hope springs from faith: Because he that is
certain of the present will of God toward him, has also certain and assured
promises of the time to come, For God is not changed; and the gifts and
calling of God are without repentance. Moreover Faith and Hope differ in these
considerations. Faith embraces the present benefits of god, and his will
toward us. Hope embraces the effects and fruits which are to come of this
present and perpetual will of god. Heb. 11.1.
Faith is that which makes those things to be which are hoped for, and which
shows those things, which are not seen. Hope that is seen is not hope: for
how can a man hope for that which he sees?

6 The love of god, is to acknowledge God to be exceeding good, and exceeding
bountiful and merciful not only in himself, but also in us and toward us,
and that therefore he does employ his power, wisdom, justice, mercy, goodness
to our salvation: and so through the acknowledging of this his infinite goodness
toward us to love God, as that we more covet and desire our conioyning and
conformity with him, and the execution of his will, than all other things
whatsoever; and further had rather leave and relinquish all things, than be
bereaved of his communion and fellowship, or offend him in any thing: and are
ready to part with all other things which we love for his sake: and nothing
is more cared for of us, than how we may do things acceptable and grateful
unto him.

7 The fear of God, is, to acknowledge the infinite anger of God toward sin,
his great power to punish sin, his wisdom and justice, and that right and
dominion which he has over al creatures, and of the contrary, to acknowledge
our own corruption and infirmity: and therefore to submit our selves to god
according to all his commandments, and to account for the greatest evil, our
offending of God and estranging from him, and in respect thereof highly to hate
and detest al sin, and to be ready rather to suffer al other evils
whatsoever, than that we will offend god in any thing. Leuit. 14 19. Thou shall
fear the Lord thy god, because J am the Lord. Ier. 10.7. Who would not fear
thee O King of nations? For to thee appertains the dominion; for among all the
wise men of the Gentiles, and in all their kingdoms there is none like thee.

The fear and love of god differ. For the love of god arises from a knowledge
of gods goodness: The fear of god arises from a knowledge of gods justice,
and of his power to punish sins, and of that right which he has over al
creatures. Again, Love pursues good, to wit, god and our conjunction with
him: wherefore the love of god is, not to abide to be bereaved of god, who is
the chief good. But fear flies evil, to wit, the displeasure and wrath of
god, and our separation from him. Wherefore also the fear of god is, to beware
that we offend not god. Moreover the fear of god which was in the nature of man
vncorrupt, differs from that, which is now in the regenerate in this life,
and which is in the blessed Angels and Saints in the celestial life. The fear
of god which is in the blessed in everlasting life, is a high detestation of
sin and punishments, without grief, because neither any sin is in them,
or any punishment of sin, and they are assured that they shall never sin or
be punished. Jsa. 25.8. He will destroy death for ever, and the Lord God will
wipe away the tears from al faces. The fear of god, which is in the
regenerate in this life, is an acknowledging of sin and the wrath of god, and
an earnest grief for the sins committed, for the offending of god, and for
those calamities which by reason of sins both we and others sustain, and a
fear of future sins and punishments, and an earnest desire of flying and
shunning these evils by reason of the knowledge of that mercy which is showed
unto us through Christ. Matthew. 10.28. Fear ye not them which kill the body,
but are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him, which is able to
destroy both soul, and body in hell. Luke 23.40. Fear thou not god,
seeing that thou art in the same condemnation? This fear is commonly called
Sonne-like fear, because it is such as Sons bear toward their parents,
who are sorry for the anger and displeasure of their father, and yet
notwithstanding are always persuaded of the love and mind of their father
toward them; and therefore they love him, and for this love of him whom they
have offended, they are the more grieuouslie sorry. So is it said of Peter,
Matthew. 26 75. So he went out and wept bitterly. This Sonne-like fear differs
from a servile or slavish fear: because this son-like fear arises from a
confidence and love of god, and therefore principally it shunneth the
displeasing and offending of God, and is certain of everlasting life. Servile
fear arises from a knowledge, and an accusing of sin, and from a feeling of
gods judgment and anger against sin, and is a shunning and hatred of God,
and punishment, not of sin, and is so much the greater, how much the more
certain expectation there is of everlasting damnation, and how much the
greater despair there is of the grace and mercy of God. This fear of God is
in devils, and in the wicked, and is that beginning of everlasting death, which
the wicked feel in this life. Genesis 3.10. J heard thy voice in the garden, and
was afraid. James, 2. The Devils believe and tremble. Isai. 57. There is no
peace unto the wicked. Wherefore seeing it is an hatred and shunning, not of
sin, but of God, and is repugnant to the faith and love of God, it is not
commanded, but forbiddden in this commandment. 1 John. 4.18. There is no
fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear: for fear has painfulnesse:
and he that fears is not perfect in love. Now, because in the Saints, in
this life, neither faith nor love are perfect, but are often shaken with many
tentations and doubts, therefore, albeit this Sonne-like fear is begun in
them, yet is it never in that purity, but that some servile fear is mingled
with it. Examples hereof are rise and frequent in the Psalms, and in the book
of Job. Psalm. 32.3. When J held my tongue my bones consumed, when J roared all the day. Psalm. 38.4. Mine iniquities are gone over mine head, and as a
weighty burden they are too heavy for me: Mine heart pants: my strength
fails me. Job. 13.24. Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and take me for thine
enemy?

We are further hereto observe, that oftentimes in scripture the love of god
and the fear of god is taken for the whole worship of god, or for the general
obedience, according to all Gods commandments: As Prou. 1.7. The fear of
the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. 1. Timot. 1.5. The end of the
commandment is love out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of
faith unfeigned. 1. John. 5.2. In this we know that we love the childen of
god, when we love god and keep his commandments. The reason hereof is, because
the knowledge of God, the fear and love of God, and faith, are causes of our
whole obedience, and they who truly love and fear God, will not offend him in
any thing, but endeavor to do al things pleasing unto him and acceptable.

The vices, which are opposite or contrary to the virtues of this first
commandment.
NOT to have the true god, is either to have no god, or to have more gods, or
another than the known god, or not to acknowledge god to be such unto us as
he is manifested: Likewise, not to trust in god, not to subject and submit our
selves unto God in true humility and patience, not to hope for all good
things from him alone, not to love, and fear him. The parts of this impiety
are those vices, which are contrary unto those virtues which were before
recited.

Unto the knowledge of God is repugnaunt, 1. The ignorance or not knowing of
the true God, and his will, which is, not to know those things of God, or to
doubt of them, which we ought to know by the benefit of our creation and by his
manifestations. This ignorance is either natural or engendered in men, which
is, of those things which we are ignorant of, or cannot understand thorough the
corruption of our nature: or else it is a purposed or endeavored ignorance,
which is of those things that our conscience tells us must be inquired
after, neither yet do we inquire after them with an earnest desire, namely
with a desire of learning them, and of obeying God. Of this ignorance it is
said, Psalm. 14.2. There is none that does understand, and seek God.

2 Errors conceived, or false imaginations and opinions of him: as when some
imagine there is no God, some faigne that there are more Gods; or if they
profess it not in words, yet indeed they make Gods, while they ascribe those
things to creatures which are proper to God only: as they who make their
prayers unto Angels, and to men departed. For prayer and invocation attributes
unto him who is inuocated, infinite wisdom and power. Wherefore Paul says,
that they who pray unto creatures, Romans 1.23.
Turn the glory of the incorruptible god to the similitude of the image of a
corruptible man, and of birds, and of foure-footed beasts, Apoc. 19.10.
and of creeping things. So neither will the Angel suffer John to worship him,
and adds this reason; J am thy fellow servant, and one of thy brethren,
which have the testimony of Jesus: worship God. In like manner also they
imagine false opinions of God, who know God to be but one, but know not the
true god, as Mahumets Sectaries. And so they also, who know that one and true
God, but neglect him, and are not moved to worship him, to trust in him, and to
love him. For the knowledge of good doctrine does not suffice alone; because,
then the Devil also should have this virtue: but there must also accompany it
an inward motion of the mind to embrace and follow the same.

3 Magike, Sorcery and Witchcraft, which is most repugnaunt and contrary to the
knowledge of God. For it is a league, or covenant with the Devil the enemy of
God, with certain words or ceremonies adioined, that they doing and saying
this or that, shall receive things promised of the Devil, and such things
which are to be asked and received of god alone: as, that by his aid and
assistaunce they shall know, or work things not necessary tending either to
the fulfilling of their evil lusts, or to ostentation, or to the commodities of
this life. Now in these ceremonies and words, which they use, there is no
efficacy or force, but the Devil himself accomplisheth those things, which he
has promised, to this end, that they may reuoult from God to the Devil. Magus,
(as also Magia, that is, Magike) is a Persian word signifieng a Philosopher or
a teacher. But men perceiving their own ignorance sought for the Devils help,
Leuit 20 6. Deuteronomy. 18.10.
and so the names grue infamous. Now, as Magicians, so they also are condemned
by this commandment, whosoever use the help of Magicians. Unto Magike belong
enchauntments, which are the using of certain words or ceremonies, according
to a covenant before entered with the Devil, which being done and spoken, the
Devil should perform that, which the enchanters request.

4 Superstition, which is to attribute such effects to certain things or
observations of gestures or words, as depend not either on natural, or moral
reason, or on the word of God, and either do not at all follow and fall out,
or are wrought by the Devils, and other causes, than those whereby they were
thought to have bin done. Under this vice of superstition are comprehended
South-saieng, Leuit. 19.26. Isay. 44.25. and 47 13.
observations of dreams, diuinations, signs, and predictions or foretellings
of Wyzardes, all which are by express words condemned in the Scriptures.

5 Al trust and confidence, which is reposed in creatures. For this is
manifestly repugnant to the true knowledge of one god; and to faith, and hope.
For trust and confidence is an honor due unto god alone, which who so
translateth unto creatures, does in very deed imagine more gods. Wherefore god
in his word does utterly condemn those, Psalm. 46.2. Ier 17 5. Mat. 6.24. Ephesians.
5 5.
who repose trust and confidence in things created, as in men. And also he
condemns those which put their trust in their own works, and in riches:
which al covetous men do; and so under the name of this vice is covetousness
also comprehended.

6 Jdolatrie, which is most of all repugnaunt unto the true knowledge of god,
and to faith. Now there are two kinds of Jdolatrie. 1. When another is
woorshipped, than that one true God. This kind of Idolatry does properly
belong unto the first commandment. 2. When albeit the true God is worshipped,
yet nevertheless he is worshipped after another manner, than God himself has
in the second commandment, and also commonly in his word prescribed, either
by internal worship, or by external worship, or external rites and ceremonies.
This other kind of Idolatry is forbidden in the second commandment.

7 The contempt of God; which is to know those things of God which are true,
but not to be moved thereby to love him.

Unto faith are repugnaunt, of one side which offends in the defect of faith,
1. Unbelief, which assenteth to such doctrine as is heard and known concerning
God. 2. Doutfulnes, which neither assenteth steadfastly to the doctrine of God,
neither does altogether gainsay it, but being floting and wavering, has a
weak inclination now to one part, and now to another. 3. Distrust, which
applies not unto it self the knowledge which it has of God and his promises,
and does through fear of Gods forsaking us surcease the doing of that it
should do. 4. A dissembling or hypocritical faith. 5. Temporary faith, or a
reuolting from faith: which is, to yield an assent to the doctrine of the
Church, and to rejoice in the knowledge thereof, and to embrace it for a
season, but without any applying or full persuasion of the promise of Gods
grace, and without regeneration; and therefore to be overcome through
temptations, or other causes, and so to cast away again that assent and
profession of godliness. Mat. 13.20. He that received seed in the stony ground
is he which hears the word, and incontinently with joy receives it: Yet
has he no root in himself, and dureth but a season: for as soon as
tribulation or persecution comes because of the word, by and by he is
offended. Acts. 8. Simon also believed and was baptized. Heb. 6.4. It is
impossible, that they which were once lightened, and and have tasted of the
heavenly gift etc.

Now amongst those which are repugnaunt unto faith of the other side, which
offends in the excess, are, 1. Tempting of God, which is through an
unbelief, or distrust, or contempt of God, and a trust or love of our own
wisdom, justice, or power, and glory, to depart from gods word or order,
and so to make trial of gods truth or power, and stubbornly, and proudly to
provoke god unto anger. Deuteronomy. 6 Mat 4. Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy god.
Exodus 17.2. Moses said unto them, why contend ye with me? Wherefore do ye
tempt the Lord? 1. Cor. 10.22. Do we provoke the Lord to anger? 2. Carnal
security, which is, to live without thinking of god and his will, or of our
own infirmity, and dangers, and without acknowledging or bewailing of our
sins, and without the fear of god, and yet to promise unto our selves an
indemnitie from the anger of god and from punishment without faith or
repentance. This is often, and most grievously accused in the scripture. Mat.
24. Christ speaks of that security and carelesnes which shall be at his
second coming. Psalm. 36. Wickedness says unto the wicked man, even in mine
heart, that there is no fear of god before his eyes. For he flattereth
himself in his own eyes. Psalm. 94.7. They say, the Lord shall not see;
neither will the god of Jacob regard it. But this carnal security differs
from spiritual security, because the carnal persisteth in sins and fears
not the anger of god and punishment; because either it knows not man's
weakness and sin, and gods wrath, or contemns it: But the spiritual
security, is a faith and hope, which being joined with true repentance,
without sin and in fear of gods chastisements, does not yet fear gods
forsaking, because it is assured of gods unchangeable favor toward it.
Whereof it is spoken, Romans 8.31. Jf god be on our side, who can be against us?

Unto Humility is opposed, in the extremity of excess, Pride, or arrogancy,
which is, to ascribe his gifts not to god, but to his own worthiness or
ability, and therefore to stand in admiration of himself, and his gifts, not
truly to fear god, neither to acknowledge and bewail his defects, and so
further to be aspiring to higher place and calling, and standing not upon god,
but upon his own gifts, to attribute also to himself those things which he
has not, to attempt things above his power, and not belonging unto his
calling; to contemn and debase others in respect of himself, to believe none,
but to covet to excel, and be eminent above others, to refer his gifts and
counsels principally to his own glory, to be angry with god and men, to
fret and sum against god, when his desires and counsels are hindered, and also
to accuse God of error and injustice, if Gods counsels agree not with the
judgments and affections of men.

Unto humility is opposed, in the extremity of defect, A feigned modesty or
humility, which is a double pride; and it is, to hunt after the praise and
commendation of humility by denying of those things outwardly which yet a man
does in his mind attribute unto himself, either truly, or falsely, and by
refusing of those things, which he most of all desires, and covertly laboreth
to compass.

Unto patience, in the extremity of defect, impatience is contrary, which is
through the not knowing, and distrust of Gods wisdom, providence, justice,
and goodness, not to be willing to obey God in suffering such adversity, as he
wills us to suffer, and through grief to fret against God, or to do somewhat
against his commandment, neither to desire or expect from god any help and
deliverance, neither by the knowledge and trust or persuasion of gods will to
moderate the grief, but to yield unto it, and being broken therewith to be
driven and solicited unto despair.

Unto Patience, in the excess, Temeritie, or rashenesse is opposed which is
through foolishness not knowing, or not considering the dangers, or his own
calling, or the will of God, or else through a confidence in himself, to
adventure dangers without any need or necessity. He that loves danger shall
perish therein.

Unto hope is opposed, 1 Despair, which is to esteem his sins to be greater
than the merit of the Son of God, and to refuse the mercy of God offered in
his Son the Mediator: and therefore not to look for those blessings which
are promised unto the godly, but to be tormented with an horrible sense and
feeling of gods wrath, and with a fear of being hereafter cast away into
everlasting pains, and to stand in horror of God, and to hate him as being
cruel, and a tyrant. 2. A doubting of the blessings to come, which are
expressed in the word, as of everlasting life, and of final perseverance.
These two vices are contrary to hope, in the defect. But the doubting of the
present blessings of God, is contrary unto faith. 3 Unto hope also, as before
unto faith, is Carnal security opposed.

Unto the love of God are repugnant, 1 The casting away of gods love, or, the
contempt and hatred of God, which is through the alienation of our nature from
God and Gods justice, and by reason of an inclination thereof to sin,
therefore to flee and shun God accusing and punishng sin. 2 Inordinate love
of himself and of other creatures, which is, to prefer his lusts or
pleasures, or life, or glory, or any other thing before God, and his will, and
glory, and to be willing rather to neglect and offend him, than to part from
those things, which we love. 3 A fained love of God, whereby also we may
here offend. But here we cannot offend in the excess; because we never love
God so much as we should.

Unto the fear of God are repugnant, 1 In the defect Prophanenes Carnal
security, Not to fear God. 2 In the excess, Servile fear, which is to shun
punishment without faith, and without a desire of changing and amending his
life, with a despair and shunning of God, and with a separation from him.

Here is to be noted and observed, that oftentimes the same vices are opposed
to sundry and diverse virtues. So unto faith, hope, and the fear of God, is
opposed carnal security; unto hope, patience; and to the love, and fear of
God is opposed despair. The same may be seen also in the virtues and vices of
other commandments: and in like manner also in this commandment, unto faith,
hope, the love of God, humility, and patience, is opposed the Tempting of god,
which was before numbered among the particular vices opposite unto faith.

THE SECOND COMMANDMENT.
THOU shall make to thee no graven Jmage, nor the likeness of any thing that
is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water under the earth.
Thou shall not bow down to them, nor woorship them. For I the Lord thy God,
am a mighty and ielous God, and visit the sins of the Fathers upon the
children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show
mercy unto thousands in them that love me and keep, my commandments.

Two things are here contained, a Commandment, and an Exhortation to
obedience. The Exhortation which is annexed unto the commandment, consists
of five properties of God, which ought to stir us up to obey GOD. 1 He calls
himself our God., that is, our maker and Savior, and the author of all good
things. Hereby then he aduertiseth us what execrable unthankfulness it is,
to revolt from the true worshipping of him unto Idolatry. 2 He calls himself
a mighty God, that is, who is mighty in power as well to punish the obstinate,
as to reward the obedient. 3 He terms himself a ielous God, that is a most
sharp defender of his own honor; woonderfully displeased with such as revolt
from him, or violate and impair his honor and worship. Now seeing jealousy or
indignation conceived for any injury, or dishonesty, arises from his love
which is hurt, God does hereby withal signify that he does ardently and
entirely love those who are his. 4 He calls himself a god, which visits
the sins of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth
generation of them that hate him. Whereby he exaggerateth or increases the
grieuousnesse of his anger and their punishments, when he threatens also and
denounces unto the children, and to the childrens children, and to the
childrens childrens children of his enemies, even to the fourth degree and
descent, to take vengeance on the sins of their ancestors in them, if
namely they also partake with the sins of their ancestors.

But to this co^mination or denouncement the saying of Ezechiel, cap. 18.
seems to be repugnaunt. The soul that sins, it shall die. The Son shall
not bear the iniquity of the Father, neither shall the Father bear the
iniquity of the Son. But in the same place is added a reconcilement of these
two places of Scripture: Jf a wicked man beget a Son, that sees al his
fathers sins, which he has done and fears, neither does the like, he shall
not die in the iniquity of his father, but shall surely live. He threatens
then, that he will punish the sins of the ancestors in their posterity, that
is, such as persist in the sins of their ancestors, whom it is meet and
just to be partakers also of their punishments.

If any man reply; That by this means the posterity rue only their own
sins, and not the sins also of their ancestors: this reply is false and
of no consequence. For there may be, and are oftentimes more impellent and
motive causes of one effect, and the cause of one punishment are mo sins as
well of diverse, as of the same men. If further it be urged; that vengeance is
not taken on the ancestors sins in the posterity because the sense and
feeling of those pains, which the posterity suffer, reaches not to the
ancestors: we answer first, that the posterity are a part of their
ancestors, of whom they came: And therefore that is felt of them, as it were
in some part of them, which their posterity suffer. Secondly, we say that the
ancestors are tormented and vexed, when they understand or see their offspring
in this life and in the life to come to be afflicted. Thirdly, we say, that
besides the feeling or fellowship of grief, the punishment of their posterity
does belong unto them by a relation: in as much as god pronounces that he
therefore does inflict this on the posterity, that thereby he may testify,
how greatly he is angry and offended both with the^ sins, and with the
sins of their ancestors. 5. He says that he is a god, which shows mercy
unto thousands in them that love him and keep his commandments. And here
he extends his punishment unto the fourth generation, but his mercy unto
thousands, thereby to signify, that he had rather show mercy than anger: and
so by this means to allure us the more to love him.

But unto this promise are opposed many examples of the godly, whose children
and posterity have perished. Whereunto god himself answers, Eze. 18. That he
will bless the posterity of the godly if they continue in the good conversation
and godliness of their ancestors: but will punish them, if they depart from it.
If here it be demanded, why he does not convert their posterity, seeing
without his mercy they are not able to follow the godliness of their parents.
We answer first, Because this promise is not universal but indefinite, and
therefore God does not therein bind his mercy unto every particular one of
the godlies posterity, but reserueth his Election free unto himself: So that
as of the posterity of the wicked he conuerteth and saves some, in like
manner also he leaves of the posterity of the godly some in their natural
corruption, and in destruction, which all by nature deserve: and this he does,
to show, that his mercy is free, as well in choosing the posterity of the godly,
as of the wicked. Secondly, because he binds not himself to perform the
same benefits or all the benefits unto all the posterity of the godly.
Wherefore he satisfies this promise, when he does even vouchsafe of corporal
benefits the wicked and reprobate posterity of the godly. Thirdly, because he
promises this felicity of the posterity unto them that love him, and keep
his commandmentes, that is, to those which are indeed godly, and of good
conversation. But because the love of God and obedience is even in the holiest
Saints in this life imperfect: therefore the reward also promised unto them is
imperfect and joined with the cross and chastisements, among which the
wickedness and unhappiness of their posterity is not the last; as may
appear in David, Solomon, and Josias.

Objection. They who keep Gods commandments, obtain mercy. Therefore we
merit somewhat of God. Answer. God says, J will show the mercy Therefore it
is not of merit or desert. Therefore the objection is a fallacy, putting that
for a cause which is no cause. For when God adds this promise, that he will
show mercy unto the thousand generation of them that love him and keep his
commandments, he shows that he had rather show mercy, than anger, thereby
to allure us to love him.

This promise and commination is belonging verily to the obedience of the whole
Decalogue, but is therefore especially annexed unto this commandment, both
that we might know the first and second commandment, to be the foundation of
all the rest, and also that God might show that he is especially angry with the
deprauers and corrupters of his worship, and punishes this kind of sin both
in them and in their posterity; and contrarily does bless also the posterity
of them which diligently regard and keep pure religion, or the true service
and worship of God. By this declaration and exposition of the words of this
commandment, it appears that by the naming of one kind, al false worships of
God are condemned: and contrariwise, is commanded the observation of the true
and vncorrupt worship, which is every internal or external work, commanded
of God, done in faith, which is persuaded that both the person and the woork
please God for the Mediators sake; the chief end where of is, that due honor
may be given unto god, whereby we may show, that we acknowledge him alone for
the true god, who has willed this worship to be thus done to him. And then is
this worship done unto him, when he is so worshipped, as himself has
manifested in his word that he will be worshipped. And these may suffice as
touching the exhortation which is adioined to the commandment; now will we
declare those things which belong unto the commandment it self.

In this second commandment is forbidden, all false worship; and the true
worship of God is commanded. And this is the end or scope of this
commandment, that the true god alone, who commands himself to be
worshipped in the first commandment, be rightly worshipped of us, namely
with such worship, wherewith it is right and meet he should be worshipped of
intelligent or understanding creatures, and such as pleases him. God therefore
in this commandment prescribes the rule of true divine worships. He
forbids not only that creatures or Images be not reputed or woorshipped for
God, but also that himself be worshipped by Images, and at Images* and when he
condemns the chief, and grossest, and most evident kind of false
woorshippes, namely the woorshipping of God at or by Images, it is manifest
that he forbideth also the other kinds of false woorshippes, seeing this is
the head and fountain of all the rest. Wherefore all woorshippes, whatsoever
are instituted by men, not by God, and in which the same cause of prohibiting
or forbidding appears, are forbidden by the forbidding of this the grossest
kind of the rest, and withal a rule is given, that we holily and religiously
contain and hold our selves within the lists and tarriers prescribed by God,
neither ad ought to that woorshippe which God himself has instituted, Ios.
1.7. Prouer. 30.6. Revel. 32.1.
nor maime the same so much as in the least point; which also we are in other
places expresselie enjoined by the Lord.

This commandment is different from others, for that in others the parts of
themselves or specialties of divine woorship are rehearsed: but in this al
adding, maiming and altering of them is forbidden, and a rule prescribed, that
we keep our selves within the bonds by god appointed. And this study,
endeavor, and care to worship God after that manner, which himself has
commanded, is the poper and peculiar obedience of this commandment; Which is
also required in these sayings, Deuteronomy. 4 Ye shall put nothing to the word which I
command you, neither shall ye take ought therefrom; that ye may keep the
commandments of the Lord your God which I command you. Deutr. 12.
Whatsoever J command you, take heed you do it: thou shall put nothing thereto,
nor take ought therefrom.

Now as concerning the words of the commandment, we are to observe that
there are two parts of this Second commandment. The former part forbids
Jmages to be made; The second part forbideth to woorshippe them, with divine
honor. Of the first part, we will first speak.

The first part of the second commandment, where is entreated of Images.
The chief Questions concerning Images.
1 How far Images may be allowed to be made. 2 Why they are to be abolished in
Christian Churches. 3 How they are to be abolished.
1 HOW FAR IMAGES MAYBE ALLOWED TO BE MADE.
IMAGES or Pictures are not here simply forbidden, because the science of
casting, caruing, and painting is reckoned among those arts and crafts which
are profitable for man's life, Exodus 31.3. and 35.30. etc. Syrac. 38.28.
and are the gifts of god. Neither is the reason hereof hard or obscure:
because writing and painting are profitable for the memorial of things done,
for ornaments, and for an ingenuous and liberal delight of man's life.
Wherefore the Law forbids not the use of Images, but the abuse: namely it
forbids that Images be made, as by them to represent or woorship god. For we
ought not, neither can we any way paint, or grave, or represent god, and much
less must we tie gods woorshippe unto carved or graven Images. This Doctrine
does the end and scope of the commandment declare, which is the observation of
the vncorrupt worship of god. And because god is incorporeall, and infinite,
impossible is it that he should be expressed or represented by any corporeal
or finite image, without an impairing of his divine majesty. Esaias. 40.18. Rom 1
23. Deuteronomy. 4.15.
To whom will ye liken God? Or what similitude will ye set up unto him?
Moreover, as god will not have himself to be engraven, or painted, or any
Image or semblance of him to be c^^ued and framed: so also does it not at all
profit or avail us, as being a cause and an occasion of Idolatry.

2 Why Images are to be abolished in the Churches of Christians.
Exodus 23.24. and 34.13. Numb. 33 25. Deuteronomy 7.5. 1. Reg. 15.13. 2. Reg 10.30. 2.
Reg. 18.4. Deuteronomy. 17 23. etc. 1. Cor. 10.20.
1 THey are to be abolished because of the commandment of god, who will have
Idols to be abolished, and all the corruptions of the true worship of god,
and of true doctrine, as his wrath and anger against Idolatry does testify.
And hereof is it, that for the taking away and abolishing of Idols, Iehu,
Ezechias, and Josias are praised in Scripture. Jn respect of our confession, of
the sincere worship of god, and of our hatred against Idolatry. 1. John. 5.21.
This confession whereby we profess our selves not to be Idolaters, consists
not only in words, but also in actions, and in outward show and signs.

3 They are to be abolished, for avoiding of offense and superstition, least by
retaining of ancient Images, or by substituting and adding new, the same danger
come to the church, and to the ignorant people thereby, which in times past we
see to have issued hence; and so the enemies of the Church be by this
spectacle, having so great a show of Idolatry, the more alienated from the
Church, so that they despite and reproach therefore the truth of god. So the
Jews, because they see Images in the Churches of those which profess
Christianity, are greatly offended. And we see that Images never brought any
good to them, which had them; but even gods own people was seduced thereby, as
we may see often in the sacred story, especially in the book of Judges, and
the Kings, and in the Prophets. So prone and ready is our nature unto this
evil, which has after ensuing it most grievous punishments, as are those
which the Lord recites by Moses, besides many others: I will destroy, says he,
your high places, and cut away your Jmages, and cast your carcasses upon the
bodies of your Idols, and my soul shall abhor you. In like manner also the
Angel of the Lord vpbraiding the Israelites that they had made a league with
the Idolatrous Cananites, says; Wherefore I will not cast them out before you,
but they shall be as thorns unto your sides, and their gods shall be your
destruction. It is no ceremony therefore to abolish Images; seeing they are the
instruments, signs, causes, and occasions of Idolatry. Neither are the causes
of this commandment any way changed or diminished, as namely that the glory
of god be maintained against Idolaters and the enemies of the church, and that
god be not tempted through offering an occasion of superstition, and of
conceiving false and corrupt opinions of gods worship, unto men, which are of
their own accord inclining and prone unto idolatry. Wherefore this
commandment of taking away and abolishing images made for the representing of
god, or for divine worship, is Moral, and dureth perpetually.

3 How images are to be abolished.
IN abolishing and banishing Images, two things are to be observed. 1. That the
doctrine concerning the true woorship of God be preached before the abolishing
of Idols. So we read that Josias did. Let the word therefore go before, and
the idols will fall to the ground. 2. The images, and their altars and the like
instruments of idolatry must be taken away, not by private men, but by public
authority. For so has god commanded the Israelites: and so likewise has godly
Kings put it in practice: and so also Paul disliking the Idols of the
Athenians and Ephesians, did not yet pull them down, or abolish them.

Certain objections of the Papists.
1 WE worship not the Jmages, but God, of whom those are signs and tokens.
Wherefore there is no cause, why images should be abolished, and taken out of
churches. Answer. It is impiety to place and ordain such signs, as whereby
God neither can be truly signified, neither at all ought to be signified. And
albeit they were such signs, as whereby God might be truly signified, yet is
it not in the power of any creature to ordain or establish them, but only in
the will and pleasure of God.

2 The books of Lai-men or the unlearned are profitable. Jmages are the books
of the unlearned. Therefore they are profitable. Answer. 1. Such books of
Laymen are profitable, as are delivered unto them by God. 2. The Minor is
false. For the Prophets teach far otherwise: as, Haba 2.18. An image is a
teacher of lies. Zacha. 10.2. The Jdoles have spoken vanity. Whence we may
thus reason. We ought not to speak vain things, or to lie of God either in
words or in gestures. But wood or graven Jmages are lies of God, because they
cannot represent God, yea, because they swerve so far and carry us with them
from God, at their figure and shape is unlike god: and so consequently they
cause us also to lie of God. If then we will not lie of god, we must needs
neither make nor have any Images or graven semblances. For as Jeremy says,
10.8. The stock is a doctrine of vanity. Now in this sense we grant Images
to be the books of the unlearned: to wit, because partly they teach and
signify false things of God; and partly because through the reverence of the
thing signified and the place, when as they stand to the open view in churches
and elsewhere, they easily draw away others unto superstition, and teach the
people Idolatry, as experience, sufficiently bears witness. 3. It follows
not, if it were so that Images did teach the unlearned, that therefore they
should be retained in the church, as profitable books. For God will not have his
church to be taught by these, but by his word and sacraments.

3 The Scripture attributing the parts of man's body unto God does signify
thereby his nature and property. Therefore it is lawful also to signify the
nature and property of God by Jmages, Answer. 1 There is a dissimilitude
between metaphors or translations of words, and Images: because unto them is
annexed an exposition of them in the word, which hinders and stops al
error. 2. When by an anthropopathy, that is, when the Scripture, applieng it
self to speak unto men after the manner of men, does attribute the parts of
man's body unto God, the worship of God is not at all wont to be tied unto
them. 3 Lastly God spoke these things after the manner of men to help our
infirmity, but he for-bad Images.

4 God of oulde presented himself to be seen in man's shape: Therefore we may
also follow the like signs and semblances. Auns. God indeed moved by certain
reasons thereunto did so, but he has forbid us to follow it. For it is
lawful for God to manifest himself what way soever he will; but it is not
lawful for any creature to represent god by any such sign, as himself has
not commanded. And those visible shapes had god present with them, to
command, promise, and hear them, unto whom he manifested himself: which
cannot be said of such Images as imitate those shapes, without flat Idolatry:
and therefore the saints did well in adoring god at them or in them, as being
after a special manner there present: which to do in these, is impious and
Idolatrous; because it is done through the boldness and vanity of man without
any commandment or promise from god. Lastly, those visible shapes continued
so long, as it pleased the Lord to use them for to manifest and show himself;
and therefore could they not be drawn to Idolatry; But Images and pictures,
which men make to represent the manifestations of god, were neither ordained to
manifest god, nor to represent or resemble those ancient manifestations of
god; and therefore are they an object and an occasion of Idolatry.

5 It was lawful for the Israelites to have resemblances and figures,
Cherubin, Seraphin, Palm Trees and diverse pictures in Salomons Temple.
Therefore it is lawful also for Christians to have Images in their Temples.
Answer. The figures and resemblances of diverse things and living creatures,
as Oxen, Lions, Palm Trees, Cherubins, and such like painted in the temple of
Solomon, were warranted by the word of god. But the word of god is flat against
those Images, which the Papists have in their Churches. 2 The Images which
were painted in Salomons temple were such, as could not easily be drawn by
any man into abuse. 3. God had this cause, for which he would have those
Images to be painted in the temple, that namely they should be types of
spiritual things: but this cause is now taken away by Christ.

THE SECOND PART OF THE SECOND COMMANDMENT.
THIS part forbids any worship to be given unto Images, not only that
which is given thereby or referred to creatures, but that also which is
referred unto god himself. Objection. 1. The honor which is given unto the
sign is the honor of the thing signified: Images are a sign of God. Therefore
the honor which is given unto Images is also given unto God. Ans. The honor of
the sign is also the honor of the thing signified, namely when the sign is a
true sign, that is, ordained by him who has authority to ordain it, and when
also that honor is given unto the sign, which the right and lawful author of
it wills to be done unto the sign. For not the will of him that honors,
but of him that is honored is the rule which must prescribe the due honor.
Now God has forbidden any Images to be erected unto him: and therefore Images
are no true signs of god.

2 Objection. Whatsoever contumely is done unto the sign, that redoundeth on
God, although the sign be not instituted by his commandment. Therefore the
honor also that is given to the sign redoundeth on God, although that honor
be not commanded to be given unto the sign. Answer. This reason does not
follow, because then are contrary things rightly attributed unto contraries,
when the contrariety of the attributes depends of that, according to which
the subject is opposed, and not of some other thing. So we grant that contumely
against God follows indeed the contumely against the sign, albeit the sign
were not instituted by God; but not simply, in respect of the sign it self
unto which that contumely was done, but in respect of his corrupt and bad will,
who by showing contumely against the sign, which is thought to represent God,
purposes himself and is minded to despite with contumely and reproach God
himself. For to the showing of despite and contumely against god it suffices
if there be any intent or purpose of departing from his commandment. But if
through a desire that we have to avoid Idolatry we detest Images, and other
false reputed signs of god, by this contumely done unto the signs, we rather
promote further and advance gods glory. But the honor of god does not follow
the honor of the sign, except both the honor and the sign be ordained by God.

3 Objection. Jf it be lawful to have the Jmages of noble and renowned men,
much more is it lawful to have the Jmages of Angels and Saints. Answer. 1.
The lawful having of the Images of noble and worthy men, and the giving of
honor unto them, must be warily and rightly understood. 2. The Images or
monuments of notable men must be such, as may not be drawn into Idolatry.
3. Where the antecedent proposition is taken in this sense in which it may be
grounded, the consequent also may be granted of the like monuments or the like
honor. But if in the sequel or consequent that be transferred to Images and
superstitious honor, which might have been granted in the antecede^t being
rightly understood; the consequence is to be denied in respect of that
ambiguity and diversity of meanings, and in respect of the dissimilitude and
unlikeness of the honor and monuments. That honor of monuments is lawful,
which is a grateful and honorable memory of those, whose monuments they are;
and also that, which is applied to that use which themselves would have it, and
not to the worship of them, or to the woorshippe of God by their monuments. And
such lawful monuments, which cannot be drawn into Idolatry, we must not
deface, through a desire of despiting or reproching them whose monuments they
are.

The obedience of this second commandment consists, as we have seen, in
the true woorship of God.

The vices which are repugnant unto this second commandment are, 1 Jdolatrie,
which is a false or superstitious worship of God. Idolatry is of two sorts. 1
When a false God is worshipped, that is, when in place of the true god, or
besides him, that honor or worship is given to some either imaginary or
existent thing, which is agreeing unto the true god only. This kind of Idolatry
is especially forbidden in the first commandment; and further also, in some
part, in the third commandment. 2 When me^ er in the kind of woorshippe, that
is, when worship or honor is imagined to be done unto the true god by some
such work, which himself has not commanded. This kind is properly condemned
in this second commandment, and is called will-worshippe or superstition. They
are said to be superstitious, whosoever ad humane inue^tions to the
commandments of God.

2 Hypocrisy, which is a pretending or faining true godliness and worship of
God, doing the external works commanded by god, whether moral, or
ceremonial, without true faith and conversion. This vice is depainted and
described in these words by the Prophet Isaias: This people come near unto
me with their mouth, and honor me with their lips, but have removed their
heart far from me, and their fear toward me was taught by the precepts of men.
In the same words, and those that follow, and also every where thoroughout the
whole Scripture, is hypocrisy condemned of the Lord.

3 Prophanenes: which is a voluntary letting go or contempt of all religion,
and of the whole worship of God both internal and external, or else of some
part of divine worship. This prophanenes is repugnant also to the whole worship
of God in the first and second table.

Now let us entreat a little more at large, of superstition. That Will Worship,
whereof we before made mention, is reprehended of the Lord in many places of
holy Scripture. So by Moses it is forbidden, Deuteronomy. 12.8. Ye shall not do
after al these things that we do here this day: that is, every man whatsoever
seeemeth good in his own eyes. And in the end of the same chapter he says,
Whatsoever I command you, take heed you do it: thou shall put nothing
thereto, nor take ought therefrom. It is also reprehended by Isaias, whose
words before recited are alleged by Christ himself, Matthew. 15.8. for the
condemning of superstition, or Wil-woorshippe. The same is condemned also by
Paul, Col. 2.8. Beware least there be any man that spoil you through
Philosophy, and vain deceit, through the traditions of men, according to the
rudimentes of the world, and not after Christ. Objection. Such places and
saiengs speak of the wicked and ungodly commandments of men, and of
Mosaical and Jewish ceremonies. Answer. That this is false, which is replied,
some demonstrances, which are added unto certain places, declare, which also
reject those humane Laws and ordinances, that command any thing in regard of
divine worship, which is not commanded by God, although the same be a thing
in his own kind not forbidden of God. So Christ rejects the Jews tradition,
of washing of hands, whereof he says, Matthew. 15.11. That which goes into the
mouth defiles not the man, but that which comes out of the mouth, that
defiles the man. Hither also may that be referred, which Christ speaks.
23.25. Woe be to you, Scribes, and Pharisees, Hypocrites: for ye make clean the
utter side of the cup, and of the platter; but within they are full of briberie
and excess. Now that these and the like things are lawful, setting aside of
an opinion of superstition in them, the Apostle in sundry places does show.
Roman. 14.6. He that observes the day, observes it to the Lord: and he that
observes not the day, observes it not to the Lord: He that eats, eats
to the Lord; for he gives god thanks: and he that eats not, eats not to
the Lord, and gives God thanks. Again, 1. Corinthians. 10.25. Whatsoever is sold
in the shamble, eat ye, and ask no question for conscience sake. For the
earth is the Lords, and all that therein is. Wherefore they are not simply so
condemned, but only so far as they are prescribed for divine worship. In the
same respect is single life also condemned, especially seeing the same is not a
thing indifferent, but to those only who have the gift of contine^cy; according
as it is said of Christ, Matthew. 19, 12. He that is able to receive this, let
him receive it: For all men (as in the same place Christ says) cannot receive
this thing, save they to whom it is given.

And this is the difference between things indifferent or of middle quality,
and those things which are properly the worship of god. Which difference we
must diligently observe. 1. Because when men faigne other worships of god, in
them they faigne another will of god, which is to faigne another god. 2. Because
by confounding of the true worship with false worships, the true god is
confounded with Idols, Romans 14.23.
which are worshipped with those worships inverted by men. 3. Because
whatsoever is not of faith is sin. And when any man does a thing as thereby
to worship God, his conscience not knowing whether God will be worshipped after
this manner or no, he does it not of faith, but is ignorant and doubts
whether God be pleased or displeased with his work: and therefore he presumes
to do that, albeit it may displease god: Wherefore he does not thereby
worship, but contemn god.

OF TRADITIONS.
Moreover that we may make that difference of divine worship, and of things
indifferent, fully and wholly manifest: and answer to an objection of theirs
who defend worshippes invented by men, with such places of Scripture, as where
god wills us to obey the commandments of me^: we will note and observe that
there are four sorts of those things, which men command. 1. The ordinances
of god, which god will that men propose unto others to be observed: but not in
their own name, but in the name of god himself, as being themselves the
ministers, and messengers, not the autors thereof. So the ministers of the
church propound the heavenly doctrine of god to the church: parents to their
children, and Masters to their scholars: so Magistrates propound the
commandments of the Decalogue unto their subects. The obedince of these
commandments is and is called Gods woorship: because they are not humane
ordinances, but divine, which are necessarily to be obeyed, although no
authority or commandment of any creature came thereto, yea although all
creatures should command the contrary. Hither appertain many places of
Scripture. As, Prouer. 6.20. My Son, keep thy Fathers commandment, and
forsake not thy Mothers instruction. 1. Thessal. 4.2. Ye know what
commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus. He therefore that despises
these, despises not man, but god. Matthew. 23.2. The Scribes and Pharisees sit
in Moses seat. Al therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and
do. These and the like sayings will us to obey men as the ministers of god,
in these things which belong unto the ministry, that is, which god by
express commandment has testified that he will have published and
commanded by them, but they grant not authority unto any to institute new
worshippes of god at their own pleasure, according as it is said, Prouer. 36.
Put nothing unto his words, least he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar.
And 1. Timoth. 1. Command some that they teach none other doctrine.

2 The civil ordinances of men, which are determinations and prescriptions of
circumstances necessary and profitable to the keeping of the moral
commandments of the second Table. Such are the positive Laws of magistrates,
parents, masters, and of al who bear rule over others in the civil state. The
obedience of these Laws, as touching the general, is the worship of God;
because the general thereof is moral, and commanded by God himself, namely
obedience toward magistrates, and others which bear rule in the
commonwealth. But as concerning the special of the action, or as touching the
circumstances, it is no divine worship; because those works are divine
woorshippe, which must necessarily be done in respect of Gods commandment,
although no commandment or respect of any creature were adioined: but these,
except they were commanded by the magistrates, might be done or omitted without
any offense against god: but yet notwithstanding such civil ordinances of
magistrates and other governors bind the consciences of men; that is, we must
necessarily perform them; neither are they neglected without the displeasing
of God: and therefore by reason of these commandments of Magistrates we are
bound also to perform the works enioined us by these commandments, even
although we could omit them without giving any offense; if we mean to
retain our obedience pure and sound. So to carry weapons or not to carry
weapons; to pay a lesser or greater tribute or subsidy, is not in it self the
worship of God; but the obedience which is in these and the like matters due to
be rendered unto the Magistrate, is Gods worship. Therefore if the
Magistrate neither command nor forbid either, it is free to be either: but if
he command any one thing, he sins whosoever does the contrary, although he
could keep it never so close, neither offend any man thereby. The reason is,
because the general, namely obedience toward the Magistrate, which is gods
worship, is violated. Wherefore these specials and particulars are by an
accident made the worship of god, to wit, by the commandment of the
Magistrate.

3 The Ecclesiastical or Ceremonial ordinances of men, which are determinations
or prescriptions of circumstances necessary, or profitable for the keeping of
the commandments of the first table. For they belong either to the keeping
and maintaining of order and comelines in Church Assemblies and in the
Ecclesiastical administration of the ministry; or to external exercises of
godliness, both public and private, or to avoid the giving of offense unto
the weaker, and to bring them unto the Church and knowledge of the truth: Of
which kind are, the time, place, form, and course of sermons, and prayers, and
readings in the Church, likewise fastes, the manner of proceeding in election
of ministers, in gathering and distributing alms, and such like, whereof god
has commanded nothing in special. The general also of these Laws, as of
the civil, is moral, if they be rightly and profitably made, and therefore is
it the worship of God: as it is gods worship, to hear the word of god, to
pray unto god as well publicly with the company of the faithful, as
privately, to bestow alms upon our poor brethren, to receive the
sacraments. But the Ceremonies themselves are not only no worship of God,
but neither do they bind men's consciences, neither is the observation of them
necessary, except the omitting of them breed offense. So it is no worship of
god, but a thing indifferent, and not binding men's conscience, to use this or
that form of prayer, at this or that time, at this or that hour, in this or
that place to hear the word of god, to pray, to receive the sacraments.
Neither has the Church only this right and power to constitute or abrogate or
alter by her own authority these ordinances, as she judges it to be most
expedient for her common edification: but the consciences also of particular
men retain this liberty, so that they may either omit these or do otherwise
without any offense against god, if there arise no scandal or offense thereby
among men, that is, if they do it neither of contempt, or neglect of the
ministry, nor of wantonness, or ambition, or of a desire of contention and
novelty, nor with the offending of weak ones. The reason is, because then
laws are rightly observed, when they are observed according to the mind and
purpose of the lawgiver. But the Church ought to will that such ordinances and
statutes as are made concerning things indifferent be observed, not in
respect of her own authority or commandment, but only for the maintenance
of order and comeliness, and for the avoiding of scandals and offenses.
Wherefore as long as comeliness or order is not violated, neither offense
given, it leaves every man's conscience free to himself. For not in respect
of the Churches or ministers commandment, but in respect of the just causes of
commanding, things indifferent are necessarily sometimes to be done, or to
be omitted; and the conscience is hurt not by the neglect of any humane
commandment, as in civil matters, but by the neglect of the causes for which
they are commanded. Hither belongs the precept of Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 10.27.
Jf any of them which believe not, call you unto a feast, and if ye will go,
whatsoever is set before you eat, asking no question for conscience sake. But
if any man say unto you, this is sacrificed unto Jdoles, eat it not, because
of him that showed it, and for the conscience (for the earth is the Lords, and
all that therein is) And the conscience I say, not thine, but of that other:
For why should my liberty be condemned of another man's conscience? For if J
thorough Gods benefit be partaker, why am I evil spoken of, for that
wherefore J give thanks? Likewise, the Decree of the council of the Apostles,
Acts. 15. Of things sacrificed to Jdols, of blood, and that which was
strangled. Likewise, the precept given concerning women to be covered. 1. Cor.
11. Likewise, the Lords day substituted by the Church in place of the Sabbath
for the exercise of the ministry, etc.

Reply. If the edictes of Magistrates bind men's consciences, why then do not
the traditions of the Church bind them also? Answer. God gave this power and
authority of making civil laws unto the Magistrate, and has strengthened it
with this band, in that he threatens and denounces his anger against them
which break these laws: but unto the Church and to his Ministers he has not
given any such authority; but yet notwithstanding he would have these laws
and constitutions to be observed, which the Ministers and the Church of their
own authority command, not for any necessity that there is of obeying these
laws commanded by the Church, but according to the rule of charity, that is,
for a desire of avoiding offense. This answer is delivered in these places of
scripture. Matthew. 20.25. Ye know that the Lords of the Gentiles have
domination over them, and they that are great, exercise authority over them:
But it shall not be so among you; but whosoever will be great among you, let
him be your servant. 1. Pet. 5.3. Not as if ye were Lords over Gods heritage,
but that ye may be ensamples to the flock. Colos. 2.16. Let no man condemn
you in meat and drink, or in respect of an Holie-daie, or of the new Moon,
or of the Sabbath days. Gal. 5.1. Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ
has made us free. Neither are the causes obscure or hard to come by, for
which God made this difference: namely, that there might be an evident
difference between the civil Magistrate, unto whom it belongs to bear rule
over his subjects, and to constrain by corporal force such as obeie not; and
the Ministers of the Church, unto whom no such rule and power is granted; but
unto them is committed the charge and office of teaching and instructing men
concerning the will of GOD. Again, because by the breach of Ecclesiastical
laws, if it be done without giving of offense, the first table of the
Decalogue, for which they are to serve, is not broken: but by the breach of
civil laws, albeit no offense be given thereby, the second table is broken, in
as much as either some thing is taken from the common wealth, or some occasion
is given of iniurying it. Neither is this reply of force; That unto the
greater and worthier office greater obedience is due: And therefore the
constitutions of the Ministers of the Church are no less necessarily to be
kept, than the laws of the civil Magistrate. For unto the worthier greater
obedience is due in those things which are properly belonging unto his office.
Now the proper office of the civil Magistrate is, to make laws which are for
the commandment it self to be observed: but the proper office of the
ministry of the Church is, to sound forth Gods commandments: And the
proper office of the Church is, to ordain Ceremonial decrees, which must be
kept, not for the commandment of man, but for avoiding of offenses.

4 Humane ordinances, which are repugnant unto the ordinances of God. These God
forbids us to obey, whether the civil Magistrate command them, or the
Church, or the Ministers of the Church. Acts. 5.29. We ought rather to obey God
than Men. Matthew. 15.3. Why transgress ye the commandment of god by your
tradition?

Having now considered these four kinds of ordinances delivered by men, it is
easy to make answer unto that first objection; God commands us to obey
the commandementes of men. He does so, first, Such as be good, that is, not
repugnant unto his word. Secondly, such as he himself has commanded by
men, that worship may be given him. Thirdly, Civil ordinances which depend on
the authority of men, not obeiing them for divine worship, but for
conscience, sake: Fourthly, Ecclesiastical or Ceremonial ordinances, obeying
them, but not respecting therein any divine worship, or conscience, (neither
of which they import) but only the avoiding of offense.

2 Obie. What things the church commands by the instinct of the holy ghost,
those are divine ordinances belonging to the worship of god. But the church
decrees good and profitable constitutions, being guided by the guiding of the
holy ghost: Therefore good constitutio^s decreed by the church appertain to
the worship of god. Answer. The general indeed of those commandments, which
the church prescribes by the instinct of the holy Ghost, appertains to the
worship of God. This general compriseth the divine Laws of God, of not
breaking charity, and of avoiding offense, of keeping order and comeliness in
the church. And in respect of this general, the constitutions, which the church
decrees by the instinct and motion of the holy Ghost, are also divine, or the
constitutions of God, as namely they are a part of these divine Laws, the care
and keeping whereof is commended unto us by god himself in his word. But those
good constitutions of the church are humane, or the constitutions of men as
they do in special design that which was in general by these divine Laws
signified rather than expounded. Wherefore those ordinances are no worship of
god, which the church advises, decrees, receives or commands for the
countenance of mutual charity among us, and for the preservation of order and
comeliness, or for the avoiding of offenses, albeit in the choosing and
constituting of these she be directed by the instinct of the holy ghost. For
the holy ghost declares both unto the church; both what is profitable for the
avoiding of offenses, and also that those things, which are commanded for the
avoiding of offenses, are neither the worship of god, nor necessary to be
observed, but in case of avoiding offense, and therefore that the church
reteineth her liberty of deliberating of them, or of changing of them, or of
omitting them, if there be no fear of offense. This does Saint Paul manifestly
declare, when as, 1. Corinthians. 7. counselling them to single life, which have
the gift of continency, yet he adds further: But I speak this by permission,
not by commandment. Again, This J speak for your own commodity, not to
tangle you in a snare, but that ye follow that which is honest, and that ye
cleave fast unto the Lord without separation. Here he affirms both; both that
he wishes them, that are continent, to lead a single life, that so they may
the more fitly serve god; and that also he leaves it free unto them to
marry, and he speaks both by the instinct of the holy ghost.

3 Objection. God is worshipped by those things, which are done to Gods glory.
The things that the Church does decree are don to Gods glory. Therefore these
also are the worship of God. Answer. Those things, that are done to the
glory of god, by themselves, that is, which are commanded by god, to this end,
as that by these works we should declare our obedience toward him, they are
the worship of god: but not those things which serve for the glory of god
but by an accident, that is, which serve sometimes for the perfourming of those
things, which are commanded by god, upon some accidental respects and causes,
which if they do not concur, god yet may be honored both of those that do the^,
and of those that do them not, so that they be done, or left undone, of
faith, which is assured and resolves, that the person is not reconciled unto
god, and that the action, or omitting of the action does agree with the word of
god.

4 Objection. The examples of those who have worshipped God without his direct
commandment, confirm that it is permitted to men to worship God with that
worship which themselves ordain. Auns. The example of Samuel sacrificing in
Ramoth cannot at al establish Will Worship. For as touching the sacrifices, they
were the worship of god, because they were commanded by god: and as concerning
the places appointed for sacrifices, they were free, when as yet there was no
appointed place for the arc of the covenant. Wherefore Samuel did appoint
that town for sacrifices, where he dwelt, as being most fit and commodious.
Very well knew the holy Prophet that the woorship of God did not consist in
this circumstaunce of place, which was left free unto the godly before the
temple was built of Solomon. Lastly as concerning the person, although the
Prophets were not of Aarons family, yet had they by reason of their
extraordinary function authority to sacrifice. This also may be said as touching
Elias sacrificing in the mount Carmel. Now as for Manoah who is said to
sacrifice in Zorah, either he did not himself sacrifice, but delivered the
sacrifice to be offered of the Angel, whom he took to be a Prophet, or he
himself offered it being commanded by the Angel, and so did nothing besides
the divine Law of god.

In like manner is the answer easy to other examples which they heap
together and bring in. Abel and Noah, Genesis 4. and 8. offer sacrifice: but not
without the commandment of god, because they did it with faith, Heb. 11. But
no faith can be without the word of god, Roman. 10. The Rechabites, Ier. 35.
refrain from wine and husbandry according to their father Ionadabs
commandment, and are therefore by God commended: But Ionadab meant not to
institute any new worship of god, but by this civil ordinance to banish from
his posterity riot and such sins and punishments as accompany riot. So also
Daniels fasting, Dan. 10. and the Nineuits fasting, Ion. 3. was no worship of
god, but an exercise, serving for the stirring up of prayer and repentance,
which were that worship of God which is in those places commended, Now in John
Baptist (Matthew. 3.) not his kind of living, food, and apparel, but his
sobriety, and temperancy is commended, and is the worship of god. And, Hebr.
11. not the raiment made of sheep and goats skins, neither the wandering in
mountains, caves, and dens, but faith and patience in calamities is set forth
and commended as the worship of god.

5 Objection. Whatsoever is done of faith, and pleases god, is Gods worship:
These works, albeit they are undertaken by men voluntarily, yet are done of
faith, and please God. Therefore these works undertaken by men voluntarily,
are the worship of God. Answer. This does not suffice for the defining gods
worship: for after a diverse sort is the worship or god, and indifferent
actions pleasing unto god. The worship of god does so please god, that the
contrary there to displeases god: and therefore cannot be done of faith. But
those things which are in themselves indifferent, are so liked of god, that
their contraries also are not of him disliked or disalowed.

THE THIRD COMMAVNDEMENT.
THOU shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will
not hold him guiltles that takes his name in vain.

In the first and second commandment god framed our minds and hearts, now he
frames also our outward actions, and that in this and the fourth
commandment.

There are two parts of this third commandment. A Prohibition, and a
Commination. There is prohibited the vain usage of gods name, that is, in
whatsoever false, vain, or light and trifling thing, which tends either to
the disgrace, or at leastwise not to the glory of God.

The name of God signifies, 1. The Attributes or properties of god; that is,
those things, which are affirmed of god. As Genesis 32.29. Wherefore do thou
ask my name? Exodus 3.15. Thus shall thou say unto the children of Israel, The
Lord god of your fathers, the god of Abraham, the god of Isaac, and the god of
Jacob has sent me unto you: this is my name for ever, and this is my memorial
unto all ages. Exodus 15.3. The Lord is a man of war, his name is Jehovah. 2.
It signifies god himself: As Psalm. 116.43. I will take the cup of salvation,
and call upon the name of the Lord; that is, I will call upon the Lord. Psalm.
5.11. They that love thy name, that is, they that love thee. Psalm. 7. J will
sing praise to the name of the Lord most high. Deuteronomy. 16.2. Thou shall offer
the Passover unto the Lord thy god, of sheep and Bullocks in the place where
the Lord shall choose to cause his name to dwell. 1. King. 5.5. I purpose to
build an house unto the name of the Lord my god. 3. It signifies the will or
cammaundment of god, and that either reueiled and true, or imagined and feigned
by men. 1. Sam. 17.45. J come unto thee in the name of the Lord of Hosts. 4.
It signifies the worship of God, trust, invocation, praise, profession.
Micah. 4.5. We will walk in the name of the Lord our god. Mat. 28.19.
Baptizing them in the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy ghost. Acts.
21.13. I am ready not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for
the name of the Lord Jesus.

To take the name of the Lord, or to name or use the name of the Lord, God
verily does not forbid; but he forbids to use it falsely or vainly. The
prohibition then in this commandment is, Thou shall not take the name of god
in vain: that is, thou shall not only not forswear, but neither shall thou
make any vnhonorable mention of God: as, neither against nor besides that
honor which is due unto him, neither yet lightly, neither without just cause.
Now as in this commandment is prohibited the abusing of gods name; so in the
same contrariwise is commanded the lawful and right using of his name. The
commandment then of this ordinance is, Thou shall honorably use the name of
the Lord; by which commandment he wills that we make no mention of him but
such as is honorable and worthy his divine Majesty: and as in the first
commandment he requires his internal worship to be done and given to him
alone, so here he requires his external worship, which consists in the true
confession and magnifieng of his name, to be performed of every of us both
publicly, whenever it is exacted for the illustrating and setting forth of
his glory, and privately.

Unto the Prohibition is annexed a Commination, whereby god might show that
this part also of doctrine is one of those, the breach whereof he chiefly
detesteth and punishes. For seeing the praise and magnifieng of god is the
last and principal end for which man was created, and seeing the chief good
and felicity in man is the praise and worship of god; it follows the chief
evil and misery is to despite and reproach god, and therefore that the chief
and greatest punishment is due for this evil.

The virtue of this Commandment consists in the right and honorable usage
and taking of the name of God: the parts whereof are these. 1. The propagation
and spreading abroad of gods true doctrine, not that propagatio^, which is don
publicly by the ministry, and which is belonging unto the office and function
of teaching in the church, and whereof mention also is made in the fourth
commandment: but this propagation of true doctrine is that instituting and
instructing which appertains to every one, because every one privately in his
place, is bound to bring others to the knowledge and worship of God. Deu. 4.9.
Teach them thy Sons, and thy Sons Sons. Deuteronomy. 6 20. When thy Son shall
ask thee in time to come saying, what mean these testimonies, and
ordinances, and Laws, which the Lord our God has commanded you? Then shall
thou say unto thy Son, we were Pharaohs bondmen in Egypt; but the Lord
brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand. Deuteronomy. 11.19. Ye shall teach them
your children, speaking of them when thou sit in thine house, and when thou
walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. Luke.
22.32. When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethen. Coloss. 3.16. Let the
word of Christ dwell in you plenteouslie in all wisdom, teaching, and
admonishing your own selves in Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs. 1 Thessalonians.
5.11. Exhort one another, and edify one another.

2 The celebration, lauding, or magnifieng of God, which is a commemoration and
recounting of Gods works, and properties, joined with a liking and admiration
of them before God and his creatures to this end, that we may signify and
declare our liking or approbation, and reverence toward God, that God may
excel above all things, and that so our subjection unto him may appear and
be manifested. They therefore which ban and curse, sin against this
commandment, because they sin against the praising and magnifieng of God,
when they speak impious things of God, as if he forsooth were their executioner
to revenge their quarrel, and they sin against prayer and invocation, when
they crave of god those things which are flat against his word. Some man will
here reply; Unto who^ God does imprecate and wish evil, to the^ we may also
wish evil. Unto this we answer: 1. All imprecations or euil-wishinges which are
made absolutely without some prophecy or special revelation, are sins. 2. They
must be done without private hatred and desire of revenge. 3. They must be done
in respect of gods glory only, and the preservation of the true church. 4.
We must not imprecate or wish evil, as it is an evil, that is, as it is the
destruction of them, against whom we wish it.

3 The confession of the truth which we know concerning GOD, which is the
showing of our judgment and opinion concerning god and his will certainly
known out of gods word: because according as our duty binds us we signify
and declare our mind and knowledge, for the setting forth of gods glory, and
for the furthering of the salvation of others. Romans 10.10. With the heart man
believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth man confesses to salvation.
1. Pet. 3.15. Be ready always to give an answer to every man that asks
you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meeknes and reverence. And hence
it appears, that they who lead a vicious and bad life, sin against this
commandment, because they sin against the confession of the truth; when as
they boast themselves to be Christians, and show the contrary in their life
and manners. These three parts, or virtues of the right and lawful usage of the
name of god, which have bin now proposed, agree in this, that they are a
commemoration of the truth concerning god: again they differ in this, that the
doctrine, or propagation of true doctrine tends to the instruction of others;
The celebration of God respects our liking and subjection; The confession of
the known truth betokens the certainty of our opinion and judgment.

4 The zeal of god, which is an ardent love of god, and a grief for any
reproach or contempt which is done to god, and an endeavor to put away that
reproach from the name of god, and to avoid sins our selves, and to banish
them from others. This zeal is required of every one, that every one according
to his place and calling, and as he is in duty bound, do vindicate and
maintain the glory of God.

5 Jnuocation, which is prayer, whereby we crave of the true God none other
blessings, than God has commanded us to ask of him only: which prayer and
petition proceeds from a desire in us of gods bountifulness and liberality,
and is made in true conversion, and in a full persuasion of gods promises for
the Mediators sake. Psalm 105.1. Praise the Lord and call upon his name. Matthew.
7.7. Ask and it shall be given you: seek and ye shall find: knock and it
shall be opened unto you. 1. John 5.14. This is the assurance that we have in
him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us.

6 Thanksgiving, which is to acknowledge and confess, what and how great
benefits and blessings we have received of god, and unto what obedience
toward god we are in respect of them bound and ready, or prepared; and that
therefore we will yield unfeigned obedience unto him, to the utmost of our
power. Colos 3.17. Whatsoever ye shall do, in word, or deed, do all in the
name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to god even the father by him. 1 Thessalonians.
5.18. In all things give thanks: for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus
toward you. Psalm. 107.1. Praise the Lord because he is good, for his mercy
endures for ever.

7 Right and lawful swearing, which is comprehended under Invocation, as a
special under the general.

The chief questions concerning an oath or swearing.
1 What an oath is. 2 By whom we are to swear. 3 Of what things we must
swear. 4 Whether al oaths are to be kept. 5 Whether a christian may take a
right and lawful oath.
1 WHAT AN OATH IS.
AN oath is an inuocating on god, whereby is desired that god, who is the
viewer of the hearts, would be a witness unto him that swears, that he will
not lie or deceive in that matter, whereof he swears, and that God would
punish him that swears, if he do lie or deceive. In this definition are the
other four questions also comprehended. Furthermore an oath was ordained by
God, that it might be the bond of truth between men, and a testimony or
record, that god is the author and defender of the truth. An oath is
oftentimes understood and taken for the whole worship of God, because by whom
a man swears, the same himself professes to account for god.

2 By whom we must swear.
WE must swear by god only. 1. Because god has commanded us to swear by him
only, as he alone is to be feared and worshipped. 2. God will have invocation
to be used unto himself only: Therefore he will have us to swear also by
himself only, because an oath is an inuocating on god. 3. An oath does give
and ascribe unto him, by whom we swear, the inspection and viewing of men's
hearts, the hearing of them, and infinite wisdom and knowledge. But God only
is the viewer of our hearts. John. 2.25. He knew what was in man. 4. By whom
we swear, unto him we give and ascribe the executing of punishment, and
omnipotency, as whereby he must maintain the truth, and punish him that
lies: But God alone is omnipotent and executour of punishment. Matthew. 10.28.
Fear ye not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but
rather fear him, which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.
Wherefore we may not swear by any but only by God, and therefore such oaths
as are sworn by Saints are idolatrous, and forbidden of God.

Objection. But Joseph swear by the life of Pharaoh: Therefore it is lawful to
swear also by men or creatures. Answer. Some grant that he sinned in so
doing, namely that he erred following the custom of the gentiles, who were
wont to swear by Kings, that thereby he might keep close from his brethren who
he was: but we may make answer otherwise also; namely, that it was not
properly an oath, but only an asseueration made for to show the evidence of
the thing, comparing it with a thing which was certain and evident; so that
the tenure and meaning of such asseuerations is, that those things which are
avouched are as certain, as that man certainly lives whom he that swears,
names, as being known and yet living; or so certain, as he that swears
certainly wishes that man to live, whom he names. So also shall the meaning
of Joseph's asseueration be, as Pharao lives, that is, as truly as Pharaoh
lives, or is in safety, or as truly as I wish him to live, and to be in
safety, so truly say I these things. The same sense and meaning is to be
rendered of the like.

3 Of what things we are to swear.
WE must swear, 1. Of such things as are true, because he that swears of
things that are false, makes God witness of a lie. 2. Of things that are
certain: for he that swears of uncertain things, swears with an evil
conscience, and with a contempt of God, when as he dares to make God a witness
of that thing which he knows not, whether it be a truth, or a lie: and he
that so swears, it is all one to him whether he make God witness of a lie,
or of a truth; and withal he desires that either God will bear witness unto
a lie, or if he will not be accounted the witness of a lie, that then he will
punish him that swears. 3. Of lawful things: for he that swears of
unlawful things, makes God both a favorer and an approuer of that which he
has forbidden in his law, and so he makes God contrary unto himself;
because he desires god to punish him, if he do that which god commands:
and furthermore, either he has a purpose to do against gods commandment;
or if he swear not in earnest, he alleges god for a witness of a lie.
Whatsoever things we ought not to do, god forbidding them, the same neither
ought any man also to swear. 4. Of possible things: because he that swears
of impossible things, either is mad, or swears hypocritically, and so
swears of a lie: namely, he swears that he will do that, which neither he
will do, neither shall at all be done. 5. Of things weighty, necessary,
profitable, worthy of such and so great a confirmation, and which require that
confirmation by oath, for the glory of god, and safety of our neighbor.
Because he that swears lightly, shows no reverence that he has of god,
and he that does easily swear, does easily also forswear. But the principal
and chief cause of an oath ought to be the glory of god first, and then the
safety and welfare as well private, as public, of our neighbors. Objection.
Things to come are uncertain: therefore we must not swear of things to
come. Answer. We must not indeed swear of the event, as which is not at
all in our power; but of our own present will of doing, either now, or
hereafter, that which is just and lawful, and of the present and future binding
of our selves to do it; whereof every, man may and ought to be certain. And
so swear Abraham, Isaac, Abimelech, David, Ionathas, Booz, and others, binding
themselves to a future performance of certain duties.

4 Whether all oaths are to be kept.
OATHS conceived or made rightly of things lawful, true, certain,
weighty, and possible, are to be kept. For if once thou have acknowledged and
testified thy self to be justly bound to keep thy promise, and have called
god to record hereof, when as afterward thou wittingly and willingly breakest
thine oath, thou do violate and break a just bond, and do either accuse
god, the witness and maintainer of this bond, of vanity and lightness, or provoke
him to punish thee. Psalm. 15.4.5. He that swears to his own hinderance and
changes not, shall never be moved. Numb. 30.3. Whosoever voweth a vow unto
the Lord, or swears an oath to bind himself by bond, he shall not break
his promise, but shall do according to all that proceeds out of his mouth.

But oaths that are male of unlawful things, either by an error, or by
ignorance, or through infirmity, or against the conscience, it is sin to
keep them. And therefore such oaths are to be retracted and recalled, least we
add thereby sins unto sins. For he that keeps an oath made of unlawful
things, heapeth sin upon sin, both in that he swear, and so has a will to
sin, and also in that he endeavors to do that which he swear, and so
confirms that will of sinning by an oath. For what things GOD forbids,
those things he will not have men either sworn or unsworn to perform: and
what he forbids us to will, or promise, or swear, so much the more does
he forbid us to do the same, how much the more grievous a thing it is to
do them, than to will or promise them. They therefore who keep that which they
have ill sworn, heap sin unto sin; as did Herod putting John Baptist to
death by pretense of keeping his oath: and likewise such as keep monastical
vows, whereby they have sworn Idolatry, and impious single living. Neither
is this argument of any force: An oath is necessarily to be kept, but they
have sworn these things: therefore they must needs keep them. For the Mayor
is true of a lawful oath. But an oath, which is made of a thing forbidden by
god, is not to be kept: because it is not a lawful oath; which also is amended
and corrected by repenting thereof, and by desisting from an evil purpose, not
by persisting therein, or by perfourming it: according as it is said, Ephesians.
4.28. Let him that stole, steal no more; and according to the example and
doctrine of David, 1. Sam. 25. who swears that he will destroy Nabal
together with his family, Saying: So and more also do God unto the enemies of
David; for surely J will not leave of all that he has, by the dawning of the
day, any that pisseth against the wall: But after he had heard Abigail
speak, he gives thanks to god, that the executing and fulfilling of his oath
was hindered by her, and confirms by a new oath, that this is gods blessing
and benefit, saying: Blessed be the Lord God of Jsraell which sent thee this
day to meet me; and blessed be thy counsels, and blessed be thou, which have
kept me this day from coming to shed blood, and that mine hand has not saved
me. For indeed, as the Lord God of Israel lives, who has kept me back from
hurting thee etc. Objection. 1. He that swears to do a thing, which is in
his power to do, and yet does it not, makes God witness of a lie. Answer. He
that swears indeed ought that is lawful and is in his power, and does it
not, makes god witness of a lie: but if it be an evil thing which he swears,
the recalling thereof is better than the keeping. Objection 2. The oath of
peace which was made to the Gibeonites, John. 9. was against the commandment
of God. It is lawful therefore to keep an oath made of things unlawful.
Answer. 1. They were not excluded from peace if any of those Nations, which
God has commanded to be destroyed, did ask peace of the Israelites, and did
embrace their religion. Now the Gibeonites desire peace, and are adjudged to
serve the tabernacle for woodcleauers and drawers of water perpetually.
Therefore the peace which was promised them, albeit it was obtained by fraud
and guile, yet was it not repugnant to Gods commaundment. 2. The Israelites do
not therefore keep this oath, as that they were bound thereby, because they
swear it being deceived, and thinking the Gibeonites to have been of another
country: but first for avoiding of offense, whereby the name of God might be
disgraced among the Heathen, if the Jews had not kept their oath. and then,
because it was lawful and just to save them, which desired peace, and embraced
their religion, although no oath had been made at all.

Out of those things which have been spoken concerning the keeping of lawful
oaths, answer is made unto this question, Whether oaths extorted from men
against their wills are to be kept. Extorted oaths are to be kept, if they
contain nothing in them that is unlawful, or if they have the forealleaged
conditions, although they be unprofitable and hurtful to us. But unto wicked
oaths no man ought to be forced: neither verily should wicked oaths be
extorted by any tortures from us, but we must choose to die rather. But if
any wicked and impious oaths be made, through fear or infirmity, against
our conscience, those do not bind, and are to be recalled; because what is
impious to be done, that is impious to be sworn; neither is one sin to be
heaped on another. Now extorted oaths, that are not impious, which are made of
things lawful and possible, though hurtful and hard, are doubtless to be
kept, because thou art bound by Gods Law to choose the lesser evil. If it be
just to do, which thou through constraint have promised, it is just also for
thee to promise by oath to do it. For what we may lawfully do, the same also
we may lawfully promise by an oath to do. As, if a man falling into the hands
of a thief, should be required by the thief to give a piece of money for the
redeeming of his life; verily he not only may, but also ought, if he be able,
to perform that which the thief requires. And if this be lawfully performed
unto a thief, it is lawfully also performed unto him by an oath. Likewise, it
is lawful also to promise by oath silence unto the thief, and such an oath
made for the keeping of silence promised unto the thief, both may, and ought
to be kept.

Objection. That which is hurtful unto the common wealth, is not to be
promised, or if it have been promised, it is not to be kept: Such silence
promised unto the thief is hurtful to the common wealth: therefore it is not
to be promised, or if it have been promised, it is not to be kept. Answer.
1. That which is hurtful to the common wealth is not to be promised, that is,
if we may do it without the hazard and danger of our life; And further, if at
that instant, when a man is in such danger of his life, he be not rather to
provide for his own safety, than to reueile such a thing. 2. It is rather
profitable than hurtful unto the common wealth to promise silence unto the
thief, and to keep promise. For he, which has promised silence by oath unto
the thief, is by this means saved. Moreover if he should not promise by oath
silence unto the thief threatening him death, he should thereby neither profit
the common wealth, nor himself. Wherefore to promise silence by oath unto the
thief, and to keep it, seeing it is the lesser evil, is of the two rather to
be chosen.

3 Whether a Christian may take a right and lawful oath.
THat a Christian may take an oath, besides that it is necessariely gathered
out of that, which has been already spoken of an oath, Exodus 22.12. Heb. 6.16.
it is also confirmed by diverse reasons. The first reason is drawn from the
end of an oath. For an oath is a confirmation of faith, and truth, a deciding
of debates, a bond of civil order, and gives and ascribes the praise and
mainteinaunce of the truth to God. Wherefore an oath is lawful and necessary
for christians, because the confirming of faith and truth, and the deciding of
debates is profitable, lawful, and necessary for all, and glorious unto God. The
second reason is drawn from the definition or nature of an oath; because an
oath is a testification of the truth, and an invocation of God, whereby we
desire of God such things as are agreeable unto his nature and will manifested
in his word, to wit, that he will bear record unto the truth. But this
invocation of God is lawful: therefore an oath is lawful. Invocation is the
worship of God: Therefore an oath also must necessarily be judged to be the
worship of God. The third reason is drawn from gods commandment, Deuteronomy.
6.13. and 10.20. Thou shall fear the Lord thy GOD, and serve him, and shall
swear by his name. Isai. 65.16. He that swears in the earth, shall swear by
the true God. Ier. 12.16. And if they will learn the ways of my people, to
swear by my name, The Lord lives. Hither are referred especially Isai. 45.23.
and 48.1. Psalm 63.10. Iere. 42. Genesis 21.23. etc.
those places of Scripture, where an oath is taken for the true worship of
God. The fourth is drawn from the examples and practice of the Saints, whose
oaths are in Scripture approved. Neither only the example of the godly
Patriarchs and Apostles, prove that the godly may take a just and lawful oath:
but the Apostles also by their example confirm the same, and especially Saint
Paul, who in many places proves those things which he utters to be most
true, by interposing of an oath. As when, besides many other places, he says,
Roman. 9.1. J say the truth in Christ, J lie not, my conscience bearing me
witness in the holy Ghost. Roman. 19. For God is my witness whom J serve in
my spirit, in the Gospel of his Son, that etc. 2. Cor. 1.23. J call God for
a record upon my soul, that is, I call God upon my head, or with the danger
of my life, as a revenger revenging this injury, if I lie. Phil. 1.8. For God
is my record, how J long after you all. 1. These. 2.10. Ye are witnesses, and
God also, how holilie, and justly, and vnblameablie we behaved our selves
among you.

These and the like examples do sufficiently show, that it is granted
doubtless unto Christians to take a just oath in lawful matters. Wherefore all
those places of Scripture, which seem to forbid oaths, forbid rash oaths,
or such as have not those lawful causes and conditions of an oath: Which also
is apparent by comparing the places of the old and new testament, and by the
end and drift of Christ, who went about to free the law from the corruptions
of the Pharisees. Whereupon in S. Matthew. cap. 5. rash and unnecessary oaths
are forbidden: and this to be so, is manifest both by conference of other
places, and also by the purpose and scope of Christ, who (as it was said)
freeing the true meaning and sentence of the law from the corruptions of the
Pharisees, shows that by the third commandment are condemned all oaths,
superfluous, and unnecessary: and in them not only those that are direct
oaths, in which the name it self of God is expressed, but also indirect or
oblique oaths, in which the name of God is understood being dissembled and
cloaked by uttering in place thereof the names of creatures. And so he taxes
the hypocrisy of the Pharisees, who did exercise those indirect or oblique
forms of swearing, as if they did not seem by rash swearing to profane the
name of God, if they expressed not the name of god in their oath; and as if
they were not perjured and forsworn, if when they expressed not the name of
God in their oath, they afterward break their faith and oath given in that
indirect form of swearing. But Christ shows, that even then also the name of
GOD is sworn by, when heaven and earth is named, because there is no part of
the world, wherein God has not engraven a mark of his glory. And when men
swear by heaven and earth, in the sight and hearing of the framer of them
both, the religion of the oath is not in the creatures by whom they swear, but
God himself only is called to record, and for a witness, by the citing of
these symboles and badges of his glory. Neither does God stick in the words;
but in the sentence and meaning rather, than in the signs and symboles does
the honor or dishonor of Gods name consist: like as Christ also teaches the
same in express words, Matthew. 23. which words are to be inferred with this
place which now we have expounded. Objection. But Christ says, swear not at
all. Ans. That, At all, is referred to the diverse forms of swearing, not to
the very word of swearing it self: as if they should say, swear not falsely or
rashly at al, to wit, neither directly, nor indirectly. For he that swears by
the Temple, by Heaven, by Earth, affirms those things which he avouches, to
be as true, as the temple is truly Gods house, heaven Gods seat, and earth
his footstool. And this is all one, as if he should swear by the life of god.
For he provoke God to defend and maintain his honor, in punishing him that
swears, if he deceive and speak falsely. Objection. The taking of an oath
belongs only to a public oath, not to a private oath. Answer. 1. This is
a false restraint, because those things which the Scripture delivers
concerning an oath, are not restrained to a public oath only, yea a great
part of them prove and convince, that a right and just oath is no less
allowable in Christians privately, than publickelie, as by the very
testimonies themselves of sacred Scripture is sufficiently declared. 2. The
examples of holy men, affirming the truth by private oath, and giving their
faith priuatlie unto others, do likewise manifestly declare that a private oath
also being rightly made and conceived is allowable in Christians. 3 The same is
proved also, by the end of an oath: for the end thereof is the confirming of
faith and truth, and the deciding of debates belongs privately also to all
Christians, and therefore so does an oath it self also, whereby we confirm
and establish faith and truth.

Unto the parts of the obedience of this commandment are opposed those sins,
whereby either the right taking and using of Gods name is omitted, or the ill
and vain using and taking thereof committed.

Unto the propagation of the doctrine concerning God is opposed, an omission or
neglect of occasions and ability to instruct others, and to bring them unto
the knowledge of the truth, especially our children, or others, who are
committed unto our trust and charge. Hither belongs Christ's parable of the
Servants employing their Masters talentes in trafique, Matthew. 25. Unto this
is also opposed A lothing or shunning of such talk and speech as is had of God
and divine matters. Ps. 119. I will delight in thy statutes, and will not forget
thy words. And in the same Psalm: Salvation is far from the wicked, because
they seek not after thy Laws. Unto this also are opposed the corruptions of
religion and of heavenly doctrine, whereby some false thing is avouched or
spread abroad concerning God, and his will or works. Ierem. 14. The Prophets
prophecy lies in my name. By sword and famine shall those Prophets be consumed.

Unto the celebration or magnifieng of God are repugnaunt 1. Contempt of God,
and the omitting of his praise. 2. Contumely against god, or blasphemy, which
is to speak of god such things as are contrary to his nature, properties, and
will, either of ignorance, or through an hatred of the truth, and of God
himself. Now the Scripture distinguishes the blasphemy against God, that is,
whatsoever is spoken contumeliously or reprochfully against God, either of
ignorance, or against the conscience, (As, 1. Timot. 1.13. When J before was a
blasphemer, and a persecuter, and an oppresser: but J was received to mercy:
for I did it ignorauntly through unbelief) from the blesphemie against the
holy Ghost, which is, against their conscience to strive against the known
truth of god, whereof their minds are convicted by the testimony of the holy
Ghost: which sin who commit are punished by God with a blindness, so that they
never repent, nor obtain remission. Matthew. 12.31. Every sin and blasphemy
shall be forgiven unto men: but the blasphemy against the holy Ghost shall not
be forgiven unto men. Whence it appears, seeing Paul says he was a
blasphemer, and yet obtained pardon; and seeing likewise christ affirms that
some blasphemy is forgiven, and some is not forgiven: that the name of
blasphemy is taken in diverse senses.

Unto the confession of the truth is repugnaunt first, The denial of the truth
for fear of hatred, or persequution, or ignominy. This denial is of two
sorts: The first is, an universal and general defection from true religion,
which is to cast away the profession of the truth, either certainly or
doubtfullie known and received, with a certain and purposed advise, and with
the whole hearts desire of resisting God, and without any grief or remorse of
flying and shunning this casting away of the truth, and without any purpose of
obeying God in applying unto himself the promise of grace and in showing
repentance. This denial is proper to reprobats and hypocrites. Whereof is
spoken Matt. 13. and Luke 8. and 1. Joh. 2. And this defection, if it be don
against the truth certainly known, is sin against the holy Ghost, whereof
none repent.

The other denial is special and particular, which is the denial of weaklings,
and is committed either through error not voluntary, neither purposed, or
through fear of affliction, when as notwithstanding there remains still in
the heart an inclination and grief detesting that weakness, and denial, and
some purpose also to struggle out of it, and to obey God, by applying unto
himself the promise of grace, and by giving himself unto repentance. Into
this denial may the elect and regenerate fall, but they get out of it again,
and return unto the confession of the truth in this life, as it is showed and
exemplied in Peter, Matthew. 26. Secondly, Unto confession is also opposed
dissimulation, or dissembling and hiding of the truth, when as Gods glory and
our neighbors safety requires a confession of the truth: which then
requires it, when false opinions concerning God, and his will, or word, or
concerning the church, seem to be confirmed and strengthened by our silence in
the minds of men: or when those things remain secret and hidden which God
will have known and manifest for the maintenance of his glory against the
reproaches of the wicked, for the conuincing of the obstinate, and for the
instructing of those which are desirous to learn: or lastly, when our silence
makes us suspected to be approuers and abetters of the wicked. Thirdly unto
the right and lawful confession of truth, is opposed an unseasonable and
untimely confession, that is, whereby without any advancing of Gods glory, and
without the furtherance of any ones safety, and without any necessity of
discharging his calling or duty, there is stirred up either a derision and
evil entertainment of the truth, or the fierceness and cruelty of the enemies
against the godly. Such a confession, whereas it does rather darken than set
forth the glory of God, and rather hinders than furthereth the safety of the
Church, swarueth plainly from the scope and end of true and lawful confession,
and therefore is not a right using but an abusing of Gods name. Therefore
Christ forbids it, Mat. 7. Give not that which is holy to dogs. And Paul,
Tit. 3.10. Reject him that is an heretic, after once or twice admonition,
knowing that he that is such is perverted, and sins being damned of his own
self. Neither does that cross this, which is said, 1. Pet. 3.15. Be ready
always to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope
that is in you, with meekness and reverence. For Peter wills us to be
always in a readiness or furnished to make answer concerning the sum and
grounds of Christian doctrine: yet so, as that it is not necessary to utter
and expound all unto every one, but unto all those, which require a reason and
an account of our faith, thereby either to learn it, or to know it. But whom we
see once to scoff at the true doctrine which has been expounded and
confirmed unto them, if they again require a reason and account of our faith,
we are not to make further answer. For so Christ himself after he had
sufficiently confessed and confirmed his doctrine by testimonies, answers
nothing unto the High Priest and Pilate touching the false witnesses, and, Luk
22. himself rendereth this reason of his silence: If J shall tell you, you will
not believe me. Another reason is given by Isaiah cap. 53. He was oppressed and
was afflicted, and did not open his mouth, that is, because Christ knew he was
now to suffer according to his fathers will, after his cause was sufficiently
defended, he is not careful of delivering his person from injuries, contumelies
and punishments. For he knew that this obedience did tend to his fathers
glory. But contrariwise, when the High Priest adiureth him, he confesses
himself to be Christ, because then his silence would have given suspicion of
contempt of the name of god, whereby he was adjured Objection. We do not
perceive who are swine and dogs: wherefore we are to render a reason of our
faith to al without putting any difference. Answer. Christ does not call al
wicked men swine or dogs, but those only, who contemn and make a mock of the
doctrine confirmed, which they have heard and which has been expounded unto
them. 2. Christ wills not us to judge of dogs and swine by the secrets of
their hearts, but by their present words and deeds.

If again it be replied, In matters of difficulty, and such as are hard to be
judged, except there be delivered some certain and exact rule how to judge and
deal, men's consciences are left wavering and in doubt. 1. But if also we are
to judge of the outward show of swine and dogs, it is hard to pronounce, who
are to be accounted for swine and dogs; Therefore men's consciences are left in
doubt, unto whom, and when confession must be made: The Minor is false. For
Christ will have none to be counted for dogs and swine, but such as show
manifest stubburnes and obstinacy in their words and deeds, of whom it is no
hard thing to judge out of the word of God. And further the holy Ghost is
promised unto all that ask him, by whom their judgments and actions may be
directed, that they er not. And lastly, seeing in this life we attain not unto
the perfection of Gods Law, neither in other things, neither in this point;
they who join the desire of Gods direction with an earnest care of Gods glory,
and love of their neighbor, may and ought to be certain and assured, either
that their counsels are so ruled by the holy Ghost, that they err not, or, if
they er, that yet their error is pardoned and forgiven them. And this certainty
suffices for the reteining of a good conscience.

If lastly it be objected, That tyrants and many Magistrates which persecute
the church are swine and dogs, And therefore we according to Christ's
commaundment are not to make answer unto them if they demand our religion:
we answer that this reason is a fallacy of the accident. For if the
Magistrates demand our religion, or any other by their commission and in their
name, we are necessarily to make answer of our confession unto them, both in
respect of their office, whereunto we owe obedience, and also in respect of gods
glory; according as it is said of Christ, Mark 8.38. Whosoever shall be ashamed
of me, and of my words among this adulterous and sinful generation, of him
shall the Son of man be ashamed also, when he comes in the glory of his
Father with the holy Angels. And Mat. 10. and Luke 12. When they shall bring
you unto the Synagogs, and unto the rulers, and Princes, take no thought how
or what thing ye shall answer, or what ye shall speak. For the holy Ghost
shall teach you in the same hour, what ye ought to say.

Fourthlie, unto lawful confession is opposed the abusing of christian
liberty, or giving of offense in things indifferent, which is, by the using of
things indifferent, to confirm errors in the minds of the adversaries, or
in their minds that are weak, or to alienate them from true religion, or by
our example to provoke them to an imitation accompanied with an evil
conscience, Romans 14.15. Jf thy brother be grieved for the meat, now walk
thou not charitablie; destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ died. 21.
Cor. 8.9. Take heed least by any means this power of yours be an occasion of
falling to them that are weak. And, Acts. 24. Paul makes a vow, that he might
free himself from the suspicion of reuolting from Moses.

Fifthly, unto true confession are opposed all scandals and offenses given in
manners, when as namely they which profess true religion, lead a lewd and
wicked life. For thereby they give occasion unto the adversaries and those that
are weak, to judge and speak ill of that religion, whose followers they see
to live ill: and therefore this is reputed and numbered among the chief
contumelies and abuses of Gods name. Romans 2.24. The name of God is blasphemed
among the Gentiles through you. Psalm. 50.16. Unto the wicked said god, What
have thou to do, to declare mine ordinances, that thou should take my
covenant in thy mouth? 2. Tim. 3.5. Having a show of godliness, but have
denied the power thereof.

Unto zeal for the glory of God is opposed, 1 In the defect, Cowardnesse, or
lithernesse in maintaining Gods glory, which is, either not to be stricken with
a grief when god is reproched, and so neglect gods glory; or not to have and
show in words and deeds a desire to hinder, according to his place and calling,
the reproching of gods name, or to faigne and pretend zeal for gods glory.
They run into this vice, who forbid not rash oaths and blasphemies,
because they are not led with a zeal for the glory of God, whereby they
should be moved to reprove and forbid (yet so, as it be according to their
degrees and callinges) that which God reprooueth and forbids. 2. In the
excess is opposed, an erring and ignorant zeal, or a zeal of error which
Paul, Romans 10. calls a zeal not according to knowledge, which is to be
displeased with words and deeds, whereby Gods glory is falsely thought to be
impaired. Now this is done when as either we take that to be the glory of
God, and endeavor to defend it, which is not the glory of God, neither ought
to be defended: or when we take that to be an impairing or defacing of gods
glory, and labor to repel it, which is no impairing of gods glory, neither
ought by any means to be repelled: and again, when either gods glory is
otherwise defended, than it ought to be defended, or the impairing of gods
glory is prevented and repelled otherwise then it ought to be repelled.

Unto giving of thanks is opposed, 1. The omitting of thanksgiving or
ingratitude, which does either never or seldom times think of and magnify Gods
benefits, or if he think of them, he does it coldly. 2. Hypocritical
thankefulnes, whereby we dissemble the greatness of Gods benefits, neither
esteem them to be so great, as they indeed are. 3. A denial, or extenuating
and lessening of gods benefits, or to make himself, and others authors
thereof. 1. Corinthians. 4.7. What have thou that thou have not received? If thou
have received it, why gloriest thou, as though thou had not received it? 4.
The neglect of Gods gifts, when as they are employed not to gods glory, but
unto abuses and the reproach of God.

Unto right and lawful swearing is opposed, 1. The refusing of a lawful oath,
when one auoideth to take an oath, which tends to gods glory and to the
safety of his neighbor. 2. Forswearing, when wittinglie and willingly a man
deceives by an oath either in bearing witness, or in promise made concerning
his own will and purpose. 3. An idolatrous oath, which is taken by another,
besides the true God. 4. An oath made of an unlawful thing: as was Herodes, to
perform whatsoeeuer Herodias daughter should ask. 5. A rash oath, made of a
lightness, that is, without any necessity, or upon no great cause. Hither belong
those places which forbid swearing Mat. 5. and 23. and James. 5.

Unto invocation is opposed first, a neglect or omitting of invocation, which
is required as being the fountain of al ungodliness. This is, neither to crave
of God, nor to wish for benefits and blessings necessary for us. Ps. 14. They
call not upon the Lord. Hither belong those places which forbid us to give over
or be weary of praieng, if we have not help at the same time, and after the
same manner, which we would, as Luke 18. The parable of the widow and the
wicked judge. Romans 12. Continuing in prayer. 1. These. 5.17. Pray continually.

Secondly, unto vocation is opposed all unlawful invocation, that is, wherein
is wanting some necessary circumstance of those, which are required to the
lawful and true invocation of God. The chief kinds of this unlawful
invocation are, idle babbling and vain repetitions, and praieng unto God for
such things, as are repugnaunt unto his will and Law. Thirdly, Liplabour, or
prayers made without any true motion of the heart, without a desire of Gods
bountifulness, only in words, or outward motion of the body, or without a
submitting of our will unto Gods will, without true repentance, without faith
believing to be heard, without the knowledge of gods promises, without
confidence and trust in the Mediator only, and without acknowledgement of our
own weakness and infirmity. Fourthly, Jdolatrous invocation, which either is
directed unto false Gods, or creatures, or tieth Gods hearing of us and his
presence to a certain place or thing, that is, without the commandment or
promise of God. For as in the first commandment God forbids that honor
which is due unto him alone, to be translated unto others; and in the second
commandment forbids any other worship of his name and Godhead to be used,
besides that which himself ordained: So in this third commandment he
forbids the profession of both (namely both of the worshipping of any other
besides the true God, and of any other worship, besides the true worship of
God) and therefore condemns al such adoration and worship. For invocation
ascribes unto him, unto whom it is made, infinite wisdom, and power, as who
in all places and at all times understands, and hears even the secret
groans of them that call and invoke on his name, and is able to help and
preserve al, even besides and against the order of second causes, and to give
them those good things, which can be given only of him who is the Almighty
creator, governor, and Lord of al things. Wherefore idolatrous and vain is
the invocation of Pagans, Turks, Jews, and of all who imagine and make unto
themselves another God, besides him which has manifested himself in his word
by Prophets and Apostles, through the sending of his Son, and his holy
spirit: likewise idolatrous is their ^nuocation that invoke on Angels or on
the Saints departed: because they attribute and give unto them the honor which
is due to God alone. Matthew. 4. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him
only shall thou serve. Revel. 19.10. I fell before the Angels feet to worship
him: but he said unto me, See thou do it not: I am thy fellow servant, and
one of thy brethren, which have the testimony of Jesus. Worship God. So,
Acts 14. Paul and Barnabas refuse divine honors to be done unto them by the
men of Lystra.

The objections of the Papists which use invocation and prayer, unto the Saints
departed.
1 Unto God only is due (...), that is, adoration, which gives unto God an
universal and general power, providence and dominion: but (...), that is,
veneration and honor, is due unto Saints, wherewith we venerate and worship
the Saints for their holiness and merits. Answer. This is but a frivolous
shifting. For we detract not, neither take away from Saints, either living,
or departed, such honor and woorship, as is an agnising and celebrating of
that faith, holiness, and gifts, which God has bestowed on them; and an
obeying of that doctrine which they have delivered unto us from God; and an
imitating and following of their life and godliness. But this honor, that they
understand and hear in every place and time the groans, thoughts and wishes
or desires of them that invoke, and relieve their necessities, is due unto
God only; and likewise, that through their intercession and merits is given
unto us remission of sins, eternal life, and other blessings from God, this
honor is due unto Christ only; and therefore cannot be translated unto
Saints without manifest sacrilege and idolatry, whether it be called by the
name of (...), or by any other name whatsoever.

2 Whom god honors, the same must we also honor. God honors the Saints.
Therefore we also must honor them. Answer. We grant this concerning that
honor, which god gives unto the Saints: for therein invocation is not
comprehended, as being an honor due unto God alone, who says, Jsai. 42.8.
That he will not give his glory to another.

3 God hears us by his own power and virtue; the Saints hear us by grace,
or by the virtue of God. Answer. God does not communicate these properties
unto others, whereby he will be discerned from others. 2. Chro. 6.30. Thou only
know the hearts of the children of men. And Acts 1. and 15. It is ascribed
unto God, as proper unto him, to be the searcher and beholder of hearts.

4 The Saints have by the grace of God wrought miracles, whereby also God is
discerned from creatures. Therefore God has communicated some of his
prerogatives and properties unto the Saints, and by consequent the knowledge
of the thoughts and affections of all that pray unto them. Answer. This reason
is doubly faulty. First, the consequence is not of force from a general
particularly, put unto a certain special. Wherefore it follows not, that God
has communicated with his Saints a knowledge of hearts universally, or of the
hearts of all that make invocation, albeit it were true (which yet we grant
not to be true) that he did communicate some of his prerogatives or essential
properties with the Saints: except it may be proved by certain testimony of
Scripture, that amongst those some communicated prerogatives this is also
contained. But the contrary hereof has been already proved. Secondly, the
proof of the Antecedent drawn from the example of miracles, is of no force.
For there is not any power of working miracles transfused by god into the
Saints, neither do the Saints work these by their own virtue, or by any
virtue communicated unto them by God, but are only ministers of the external
works, that is, of foretellinges, or tokens, which when the Saints do, god does
manifest unto them, that he will by his own virtue, not transfused into them,
nor by the like virtue created in them, but by his own proper virtue being
and remaining in himself alone, work those wonderful woorks and proper unto
an omnipotent nature; and if we speak truly and properly, he it is alone that
works them. The Saints are said to work them, by a (...)
figure of speech, as being the ministers of the outward work, which god adds
unto the working of the miracle as a sign of his presence, power; and will.
Wherefore it does not hereof follow, that either the infinite wisdom and
universal knowledge of hearts, or other essential properties and prerogatives
of god are communicated with the Saints.

5 Ahijah knew the thoughts of Jeroboams wife, 1. King. 14. Eliseus knew the
thoughts of the King of Syria, 2. King. 6. Peter knew the coosinage and fraud
of Ananias and Sapphyra, Acts. 5. Therefore God has communicated the
knowledge of minds and hearts unto Saints. Answer. A few extraordinary
examples make not a general rule. They knew these things by the gift of
prophecy, wherewith they were endued by reason of their office and calling,
which they had and bare for the edifieng of the Church: neither yet did they
know always, neither the thoughts of al, neither by any power within them to
behold hearts and minds, but through a divine revelation from god they knew
only at such a time, and such things, as was requisite for the profit and
utility of the church to be reueiled unto them. But hereof it does not follow,
that the Saints departed also are endued with the gift of Prophecy; because
there is no need thereof in the life to come, and they bear no longer that
office, which they bare in this life: neither does it follow, that they behold
the minds and hearts of men, or understand from god the thoughts, affections
and necessities of al men.

6 Christ says, Luke 15.10. That the Angels of God rejoice for one sinner that
conuerteth. Therefore the Angels behold the hearts of men. The same is
likewise proved of the Angels out of Daniel, cap. 9. and 10. Therefore the
Angels being in heaven, behold repentance in men's hearts which are on
earth. Answer. A cause is ill gathered and concluded of an effect, when that
effect may come of other causes. For it is not necessary that Angels should
know those things by the beholding of men's hearts, which they may know either by
effects, or by signs and tokens, or by divine testimony and revelation. For it
agrees not to the Angels only, but unto all the godly also on earth, to
rejoice for the conversion of one sinner; neither yet do they behold the hearts
of men.

7 The soul of the rich glutton saw from hell Abraham and Lazarus being in
heaven, implored Abraham's help, and knew the state of his brethren in this
life; and Abraham's soul likewise did hear and see the soul of the rich man.
Therefore the souls of the Saints in heaven see and hear the state and
prayers of them that converse here on earth. Ans. First, they do amiss to take
that properly, which Christ spoke allegoricallie and by way of parable, in
translating his speech from corporal things, unto spiritual things, not
thereby to show that these are like unto them, but by applying his speech as
might best fit our capacity, to advertise us of the state of the godly and
wicked after this life. For souls have not either bosoms wherein to receive
one another, or eyes to lift up, or tongues to be dried with thirst, or fingers
to dip into water, neither do they use any mutual parley or conference from
hell and heaven. Christ's purpose therefore is by these figures of words to
express the thoughts, affections, torments, and state of the wicked abiding in
pains after this life. Moreover, were it so, that these things had been in
such wise done, as they are reported, (against which yet the very words
themselves are) yet could naught be hence proved for the beholding of minds,
neither yet for the knowledge of all external things. For neither Abraham, nor
the glutton is said to have understood the secret thoughts and cogitations of
each other, but to have knowledge of them by speech. And Stephen also being on
earth saw Christ being in heaven; and Paul heard Christ speaking from heaven;
neither yet do all the Saints see or hear, what is done in heaven, neither did
Stephen and Paul see or hear these things at al times.

8 Christ according to his humanity makes request unto the Father for us all,
and therefore according to his humanity he knows the desire and necessities
of them that call upon him in all places and at al times. Wherefore the saints
also have communicated unto them from God the beholding of hearts, and the
hearing of prayers. Ans. The example is unlike. For the humane understanding
and mind of Christ understands and knows, and his bodily ears and eyes
also hear and see al things, whatsoever according to his humane nature he
should or would behold either with his mind or with his outward senses, by
reason of his godhead, which shows them unto his humanity united thereunto,
or also gives unto his senses a virtue and force of perceiving of things
which are fardest distant. Neither yet is the force or wisdom of his humane
nature infinite, as is the power and wisdom of the Godhead, neither does he
know by any transfused virtue into him the thoughts of minds and hearts. For
of the measure of knowledge convenient for his manhood it is said, Mar. 13.32.
Of that day and hour knows no man, no, not the Angels, which are in heaven,
neither the Son himself, save the Father. Of the reueiling of the secrets of
men unto him by his divinity, it is said, Mar. 2.8. When Jesus perceived in his
spirit, that thus they thought with themselves, etc. But now, that all things
are reueiled unto Angels and Saints, which are reueiled unto the humane
understanding of Christ by his Godhead, they will never be able to prove out
of the Scripture. For Christ's humane nature does excel and surpass in
wisdom all Angels and men, both in respect of the personal union thereof,
because it is united to his Godhead, and also by reason of his Mediatourship,
which office his humanity bears and executes together with his divinity; yet
so, that there is still kept in the administration thereof the difference of
both natures. Wherefore this example of Christ does not prove that the Saints
know al things, either by beholding the things themselves, or by divine
revelation from God.

9 Jn the divine essence shine all the Jmages and forms of things. But the
Angels and Saints departed behold the essence of God. Mat. 5 and 18. Therefore
they behold in God al things, which we do, suffer, and think. Answer.
First, the Mayor proposition, which they put, is doubtful and uncertain. For
it is manifest that God knows all things, and does in his wisdom
comprehend the most perfect and perpetual knowledge of all things: but
whether that understanding of things does so shine in God, that it may be also
beheld of creatures, this verily they have not as yet proved out of
Scripture. Secondly, neither is the Minor true, namely, That the blessed behold
the essence of God, whereof it is said, No man has seen God at any time.
John 1.
Lastly, albeit there is no doubt but the holy Angels and men in the heavenly
life enjoy a clear knowledge and an immediate manifestation of God, whatsoever
it is: yet we are not to imagine, that they naturally know all things, that
are in God. For then should their wisdom be infinite, that is, equal unto
Gods wisdom, which is absurd and flat against the testimonies of Scripture,
whereas Angels also are said not to know the day of judgment. Likewise, 1.
Pet. 1. Jnto which the Angels desire to look. And Ephesians. 3.10. To the intent,
that now unto principalities and powers in heavenly places might be known by
the Church the manifold wisdom of God. They profit therefore and increase in
the knowledge of wisdom, and of the counsels of God, by the very exequution
and contemplation of Gods works. Now seeing that which they speak of, is no
natural, but a voluntary glass, or rather a divine manifestation or
illightening; that is, the Angels and blessed men have not this in their own
nature to view and see in God his whole wisdom, but God according to his good
will and pleasure, does manifest and communicate unto every one such a part
thereof as seems good unto him, as it is said, No man knows the Father but
the Son, Mat. 11.27:
and he to whom the Son will reueile him; we affirm therefore the invocation
of Saints so long to want a ground and foundation, and so to be superstitious
and idolatrous; until they show out of the Scripture, that God would reueile
unto the Saints the knowledge of the thoughts and affections of them which call
upon them. For that invocation which is not grounded on the certane and
express word of God, is idolatry.

10 The friendship and fellowship of the Saints with God and Christ is so great
and so near, that he cannot deny them this manifestation. Ioh. 15.15.
Henceforth call I you not servants; for the servant knows not what his
master does; but J have called you friends; for all things that J have heard
of my Father, have I made known to you. Much more then does Christ this in the
heavenly life. Revel. 14. These follow the lamb whither soever he goes.
Answer. This cause is insufficient. For this friendship and fellowship
continues, although god reueile not unto them all things, or whatsoever they
will, but only those things, which for them to know, is behouefull for
their own salvation and happiness, and for his glory.

11 Christ is the only Mediator of redemption, or the Mediator redeeming us
by his satisfaction, as being God and man: but the Saints are also mediators
of intercession praying for us. Hence we thus reason: Mo intercessors hinder
not the being of one only Mediator. But the Saints are only intercessours or
requestours. Therefore their intercession hinders not, but that Christ may
be the only Mediator. Answer. We deny the Mayor or distinction of
mediation and intercession, because the Scripture teaches, that Christ our
Mediator did not only by once dying redeem us, and was in the time of his
humiliation suppliant unto the Father for us. Hebr. 5.7.9. and 10. Ioh. 7. but
that also he continually appears and makes intercession for us in the
presence of his father, Romans 8.34. who is also at the right hand of God, and
makes request for us. Hebr. 7.24. But this man, because he endures ever,
has an euer-lasting Priesthood: wherefore, he is able also perfectly to save
them that come unto GOD by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for
them. 1. Ioh. 2.1. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ, the just. Wherefore both the merit or satisfaction, and the
intercession is Christ's alone, and by our confidence in him alone we are to
approach unto god, that is, we are to ask and expect his promised blessings.
For the satisfaction and intercession of Christ only is of that price and
worthiness with god, that for his merit only god is gracious and favorable
unto us.

12 Against the former answer they reply with another distinction. Christ is
the only Mediator and intercessor by the worthiness and virtue of his own merit
and intercession; but the Saints are intercessors by the worthiness and virtue
of Christ's merit and intercession: that is, their intercession prevails with
god for us, thorough the merit and intercession of Christ. Therefore that is not
translated unto them, which is proper unto Christ. Ans. They cannot escape or
avoid by this means, but that they must needs be injurious unto christ. For the
Antecedent proposition has no sufficient enumeration of those ways, whereby
Christ's honor is translated unto others. For not only they which by their own
proper virtue and worthiness, but also they which by Christ's virtue merit of god
those blessings that are promised for the merit of Christ only, are put in the
place and office of Christ. For no man besides Christ is able to merit of god
any thing, not so much as for himself, muchlesse for others, by his own
obedience and intercession: wherefore our adversaries by this reply ouerturn
their own Doctrine. For if the prayers of the Saints are acceptable unto god
and are heard of him, through the force and virtue of Christ's merit and
intercession, they cannot be accepted, nor obtain any thing for us, for their
own holiness and merits, as the papists have hitherto taught us. For he that
stands in need of a Mediator and intercessor himself, cannot be the
intercessour for other men, albeit he may pray for others. For he is here
called an intercessour, who by the worthiness and glory of his own
satisfaction and petition, obtains grace and favor for others.

13 Here they reply. The saints pray for us in heaven; because in this life
they pray one for another, and in Heaven their love is more fervent toward us
than in this life; and this may be done without any injury unto Christ our
Mediator, and with an assured persuasion of being heard either for their
merits, or for the merit of Christ. Therefore we are to pray unto them.
Answer. The consequence of this reason holds not. Because the praying of
one for another is no sufficient cause, for which he should be called upon or
prayed unto, who does pray. We gladly yield and grant, that the Saints in
heaven do most earnestly desire of god the defense and deliverance of their
brethren, namely, of the church militant on earth, and that their prayers are
heard according to the will and counsel of God, whereunto they submit
themselves. And that this is the meaning and opinion of the ancient doctors,
when they speak of the prayers of the blessed for the Church, the considering
and conference of the places themselves does show. But that the saints
understand and pray against the evils and dangers of every one, and hear our
petitions and requests, we deny. Wherefore neither living in that heavenly
fellowship and society, neither conuersing in this life, are they to be called
upon or prayed unto without manifest Idolatry.

14 God says, Ierem. 15.1. Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet mine
affection could not be toward this people. Therefore the Saints departed pray
for us. Answer. This is a figure of speech representative, bringing in the
dead praying, as if they were yet living; so that the meaning and sense is:
Though Moses and Samuel were now living, and should pray for this wicked and
reprobate people, they should not obtain grace and pardon. The like place is
in Ezechiel. cap. 14.20. Though Noah, Daniel, and Job were in the midst of
it, As I live, says the Lord God, they shall deliver but their own souls by
their righteousness. Here Daniel, which was yet living, and Noah, and Job,
which were long since departed, are placed by the Prophet in the midst of the
wicked, praying for them.

15 The Lord says by Isaiah, 2. King. 19.34. I will defend the City to save
it for mine own sake, and for David my servant sake, therefore we are heard
also through the merit and intercession of the Saints. Answer. This
protection and preserving of the City is not promised in respect of David's
merit, but in respect of gods promise of the Messiah which should be born of
David's posterity. Reply. The delivery of the City from the seege of the
Assyrians is not promised and performed in respect of the promise of the
Messiah, because this promise might have been fulfilled without that benefit of
delivery, as also it was fulfilled after the taking and overthrow of the City.
Answer. They er, that restrain Christ's benefit to those things or promises
only, without the performance whereof the promise made unto David concerning
the Messiah could not have been kept. For all the benefits and blessings of
god both corporal, and spiritual, both before and after the Messiah was
exhibited, as well those without which the promise of the Messiah could, as
those without which it could not be fulfilled, are all performed unto the
Church for the Messiah sake. 2. Cor. 1.20. For all the promises of god in him
are Yea, and are in him Amen. And so does the Scripture expound the like kinds
of speaking, as 2. Kings. 13. and Deuteronomy. 7. Lastly, the benefits, which god also
performs unto the wicked posterity of the godly are attributed unto the
godliness of their godly parents, not of merit, but of mercy: and for the
truth of gods promises. As, Exodus 20. and 32. and Deuteronomy. 4.16. Genesis 48.16. Jacob
says of Joseph's sons, Let my name be named upon them, and the name of my
fathers Abraham and Jsaacke. Here Jacob wills himself and his fathers to be
called upon after his death. Therefore it is lawful to call upon the Saints
departed. Aunsw. It is an Hebrew phrase, which signifies an adopting of Sons;
so that the sense is, let them be called by my name, or let them take their
name from me, that is, let them be called my Sons, having the dignity and
title of Patriarks, that two tribes of Israel may come therein The like phrase
is in Isaiah. Cap. 4.1. In that day shall seven weomen say to one man;
According to the old Latin LET THY NAME BE CALLED UPON US.
Let us be called by thy name; that is, let us be called thy wives.

17 Job 5. Call now, if any will answer thee, and to which of the Saints
will thou turn? Here Elephas exhorts Job to crave the aid of some Saint.
Answer. The words which go before do show, that these words belong to a
comparison of men with Angels, whom he says so far to excel men in purity,
that they do not so much as make answer or appear being called by men.
Wherefore this place does more make against than plead for the invocation of
Angels.

18 This is translated according to the old Latin translation, the words
whereof the Papists urge.
Job 33. Jf there be an Angel, one of a thousand to speak for him, to declare
man's righteousness, He will have mercy upon him, and will say, Deliver him
that he go not down into the pit: J have found one in whom I am reconciled
unto him. Ans. Here the old translation speaks improperly. For the words
are thus; Jf there be an Angel with him, or an interpreter one of a thousand,
to declare unto man his righteousness; Then will he have mercy upon him, and
will say, Deliver him, that he go not down into the pit; for I have found a
reconciliation. Now then albeit this were the sense, that Angels pray for men
distressed and in affliction; yet this made nothing for their invocation. But
it is manifest that this is the sense; If a man diseased or afflicted, be in
his calamity instructed of the will, justice and goodness of god, either by
an Angel, or by a Prophet, or by some teacher (for these also are called
Angels) and repents him of his sins, and assenteth unto the Doctrine and
comfort ministered unto him; him will God deliver by their ministry, by whom
he does instruct him.

19 Matthew. 25.40. Jn as much as (says Christ) ye have done it unto one of the
least of these my brethren, ye have done it to me. Therefore what honor of
invocation we give unto the Saints, the same is also given unto Christ
himself. Answer. That honor of the creature may and ought to be referred
unto God, which God wills to be done unto him: but that honor of the
creature which God forbids to be given unto the creature, is not honorable
but reprochful and contumelious unto god. Now the reason is sottish, whereas
they will seem to draw it from the words of Christ; when Christ speaks of the
duties of charity, which god wills us to perform in this life toward
those, that stand in need of our aid and help.

20 Jf the Angels understanding our necessities pray for us, and so are to be
prayed unto, it is lawful also to pray unto Saints: But that the Angels pray
for us, is confirmed by the words of Zachary. 1.12. The Angel of the Lord
answered and said, O Lord of hosts, how long will thou be unmerciful to
Jerusalem, and to the cities of Judah? Answer. The Mayor is not wholly to be
granted, namely, that all the Angels understand all the wantes and necessities
of al men. For the calamities of Jury were open not only to the sight of
Angels, but also to the sight of men. 2. We deny the consequence, which they
frame from the Angels unto the Saints departed. For unto the Angels god
commits the care and protection of his Church in this life. Therefore they
being also here on earth see and know our miseries, which the Saints see not,
unto whom this charge is not committed; and they pray particularly for many,
which we cannot affirm of the Saints by any testimonies of Scripture. 3. There
is another fault in the consequence, in concluding that we must pray to them,
because they pray for us: because not every one who prays for us, is
straight ways to be inuocated, as was before declared. The same is to be
answered of the dream of Judas Maccabeus, 2. Macab. 15. Wherein he saw Onias
the High Priest, and Ieremias the Prophet praying for the people. As for that
which is said in the book of Baruch, cap. 3.4. Hear now the prayer of the dead
Israelites; the Israelites are there said to be dead, which were yet living and
inuocating on god in this life, but by reason of their calamities, like unto
those that are dead. Wherefore this sentence stands true and certain, that
the invocation of whatsoever thing, besides the true God manifested in the
church, is idolatrous, and is repugnaunt unto the honor of Gods name, which
God in true invocation will have exhibited and done unto him.

THE FOVRTH COMMANDMENT.
REmember thou keep holy the sabbath day: six days shall thou labor, and do
all that thou have to do, but the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy
God, in it shall thou do no manner of work, thou, and thy Son, and thy
daughter, thy man-seruaunt, and thy maideseruaunt, thy cattle, and the
stranger that is within thy gate. For in six days the Lord made heaven and
earth, the sea and all that is in them, and rested the seventh day: wherefore
the Lord blessed the seventh day and hallowed it.

The parts of this fourth commandment are in number two, A commandment, and
a reason of the commandment. The parts of the commandment are also two: The
first is Moral: That the sabbath be sanctified, that is, that some certain
time be allotted to the ministry of the Church, or to the public service of
God. The other part is Ceremonial and Temporary, namely, that that time be
the seventh day, and that therein be kept the Leuitical ceremonies. That this
part be temporary and the other perpetual, is understood by the end of the
commandment, and by the causes of both parts, whereof more shall be spoken
afterward. Now we will in few words expound the words both of the
commandment, and of the reason adioined unto the commandment. Which being
once known, so much the easier shall be understood those things which are
afterward to be spoken concerning the sabbath.

Remember thou keep holy the sabbath day, that is, with great care and
religion keep holy the sabbath day. Not without cause does God so severely
command the keeping of the sabbath, 1. Because the breach and violating of the
sabbath, is the breach and violating of the whole worship of God. For the
neglect of the ministry does easily corrupt the doctrine and worship of God.
2. Because by the exacting of the ceremonial or typical sabbath, God would
signify the greatness and necessity of the spiritual sabbath. 3. Because god
will have the external sabbath to serve for the beginning and perfecting of the
spiritual sabbath in us. 4. Because he wills the sabbath to be kept holy and
to be sanctified, that is, that sins should be eschued and avoided therein,
and good works done, and that it should not be spent in slothful idleness. Now
god is otherwise said to sanctify the sabbath, than are men: God is said to
sanctify the sabbath, because he appoints it for divine worship: men are
said to sanctify it, when they refer it to that use unto which god has
appointed it.

Thou and thy son, and thy daughter, etc. He will have also our children and
family to cease from their labors for two causes. 1. Principally, that these
also may be brought up by their parents and masters in the service of God, and
may be admitted unto the ministry of the Church. For God will have these also
to be members of his Church. 2. Because he will have, especially on the
Sabbath day, love and bountifulness toward our neighbor to be showed and
seen in the Church.

The strainger etc. He wills also straingers to intermit their labors, and
that, if they were converted unto true religion, because they were of the
household of the Church if they were infidels, he commands it the^, not in
respect of themselves, but in respect of the Israelites; 1. Least by their
example they should give offense unto the Church. 2. Least their liberty might
be an occasion unto the Jews to accomplish by them those labors, which it
was not lawful for them to work by them selves, and so the law of God
should be deluded. Hereby is answer made unto three questions, 1. Whether
other nations were also bound to the Mosaical ceremonies, if any of them lived
among the Jews. 2. Whether they which are aliens from the church may or ought
to be forced to religion. 3. Whether the sacraments, among which was also the
Sabbath, ought to be common unto Infidels with the Church. Unto these questions
we thus answer. As concerning binding and constraint, the strangers which
conuersed among the Jews, were not forced either to al ceremonies, or to
religion, but to external discipline, which was necessary for the avoiding of
breeding offenses in the Church, wherein they lived. For a Magistrate ought to
be a maintainer of discipline and order, according to both tables of the
Decalogue, amongst his subjects, and to forbid manifest idolatry and
blasphemies.

Moreover, as concerning the binding there was a peculiar consideration and
respect of the sabbath, which was not then first by Moses prescribed unto the
Israelits, but commanded by God from the beginning of the world unto all men,
and so did bind all men until the coming of the Messiah. Although indeed this
commandment and ordinance was so grown out of use among other nations, that
they accounted it among the number of the chief reproaches, wherewith they
derided, and scoffed at the Jews. Furdermore the sabbath was no sacrament unto
Jnfidels, because neither did the promises belong unto them, that God would be
their sanctifier; neither were they therefore constrained to cease from their
daily labors, as for a testification or confession of this promise, but only
for avoiding of offense, and for preventing of such occasion of breaking the
sabbath, as might be given by them unto gods people. These things are also
the better understood by this, that their cattle also are commanded to rest,
whose rest had no respect or consideration either of Gods woorshippe, or of a
Sacrament, but was commanded only in respect of men: 1 That all occasion of
laboring might be cut off by forbidding the labor, or use of their beasts. 2
That also they sparing brute beasts, might learn how greatly God will have
regard to be had of mercy and fauourablenesse toward men.

For in six days. This reason which is annexed unto the commandment is
drawn from Gods rest, and appertains to the ceremonial commandment
concerning the Seventh day.

And rested on the seventh day. That is, he ceased to create any new parts
of the world, as being now perfect, and such as god would have it to be. This
seventh day he consecrated to divine service, 1. That by the example of his
own rest, as a most forcible and effectual argument he might exhort men to
the imitation thereof. And so the imitation of this rest is double; Ceremonial
or signifieng; and Moral or spiritual, or signified. 2. That this rest of the
seventh day might be a monument of the creation then finished and absolved by
God, and of his perpetual preservation and governing of his work ever since
that day, unto his own glory, and the safety of his chosen: and that so it
might be a prick to stir us up to the consideration and magnifieng of Gods
works toward mankind. Furdermore, God did not therefore grant six days unto
labor, and the seventh to divine woorship, that on other days the worship
of God should be omitted; but he requires these two things; 1 That on the
sabbath day, there be not only a private serving of God, as on other days,
but also a public serving of him in the Church. 2 That on that day all other
labors should give place both to the private and public service of God,
which on other days every one does exercise according to his vocation.

We are further to beware of a Jewish superstition, which Christ also does once
and again refute in the Gospel, namely, to think it unlawful to perform on
the sabbath day whatsoever works belonging to the necessity either of his
own life, or of another. For by the end of the commandment it appears
that only servile works, or such as hinder the exercise of the ministry are
forbidden of God, but not those which hinder not the public service of God,
but rather further, foster, and advance the same. So, Matthew. 12. Christ
defends his Disciples, pulling the ears of Corn on the sabbath day, to drive
away hunger; and himself heals a man having a dried hand. Luke 14. Christ
says, that an Ox or any beast falling into a pit on the sabbath may be drawn
out thence, without any sin. Macchabaeus fights on the sabbath day, that
there might be some preserved which should keep the sabbath. 2. Mac. 15. And of
the like actions there are two reasons given. 1. Mac. 2.40. Jf we all do, as
our brethren have done, and fight not against the Heathen for our lives, and
for our Laws, then shall they incontinently destroy us out of the earth.
Therefore they concluded at the same time saying; whosoever shall come to make
battle with us upon the Sabbath day, we will fight against him. For the
maintenance of their life and religion, they say it is lawful to fight even on
the Sabbath day. By the same reasons does Christ defend his Disciples and
himself, Mat. 12. citing a place of Hosea, cap. 6. If ye knew what this is, J
will have mercy and not sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the innocent.
And Mar. 2. The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath; that is,
ceremonial woorks must give place to moral works, so that rather the
ceremonies must be omitted, than such woorks of charity, as our necessity or
the necessity of our neighbor requires. And Mat. 12.5. Have ye not read in
the Law how tha^ on the sabbath days the Priests in the Temple break the
Sabbath, and are blameless? But I say unto you, here is one greater than the
Temple. Also, Ioh. 7.22. Ye on the Sabbath day circumcise a man. If a man on
the Sabbath receive circumcision, that the Law of Moses should not be ye
broken; be angry with me, because J have made a man every whit whole on the
Sabbath day? By which words he shows that such works as hinder not the use
of the Sabbath, but rather further and establish it, (such as are the works
which appertain so to the service of god or sacred ceremonies, or to charity
and love toward our neighbor, as that present necessity will not suffer them
to be differred until another time) do not break or violate the Sabbath, but
are most of all required to the right and lawful observation and keeping of
the Sabbath.

Now we are further here to observe that there is a threefold difference of
forbidding works and sins. 1. Labors are forbidden but in a respect only, to
wit, as they hinder the ministry of the Church, or as they give offense to our
neighbor. But sins are simply forbidden. 2. Labors are forbidden only to
be used on the sabbath day, sins are forbidden at al times. 3. The ceasing
from labors is a type of ceasing from sins, which is the thing signified by
that type.

What things are remaining to be known concerning the sabbath, we will now
consequently go forward to declare. And because one part of this commandment
is ceremonial, we shall not unfitly afterward adioine the common place
concerning ceremonies. Lastly we will annex in brief wise unto these the common
place concerning the ministry of the church, because by this commaundment is
the external public service of god enacted; and therefore also the ministry
it self of the church, and the use and honor thereof.

OF THE SABBATH. The chief Questions.
1 How manifold the sabbath is. 2 The causes for which the sabbath was
instituted. 3 How the sabbath is sanctified, or kept holy. 4 How the sabbath is
broken or profaned. 5 How the sabbath belongs unto us.
1 HOW MANIFOLD THE SABBATH IS.
THE sabbath signifies a quietness, or rest, or ceasing from labors. 1.
Because god rested on that day, namely, from making any new or more kinds of
creatures, though not from preserving of the same which he had made, or from
continuing the generation of the singulars of every kind. 2. Because the
sabbath is an image of the spiritual rest to come. 3. Because we also and our
families, and our cattle are to rest and cease from our works on that day;
not from al works, but from household and civil works, and from others of the
like kind, that god may then show and exercise in us his works. And this
concerning the name of the sabbath.

Furthermore, the sabbath is of two sorts: Internal, and external. The
Jnternal, or Moral or spiritual, is the study of the knowledge of God and his
works, of avoiding sins and of worshipping God by confession and obedience.
To be short; The spiritual sabbath, or spiritual rest is a ceasing from sins,
and an exercising of the works of God. This sabbath, although it be
continual and perpetual with the godly, yet is it begun in them in this life,
and is called the sabbath, both because this is that true rest from labors and
miseries, and the consecration of us to gods worship, and also because it was
in times past signified by the ceremonial sabbath. And this spritual Sabbath
shall be perfectly and perpetually continued in the life to come, wherein is a
perpetual worshipping and magnifieng of God, al those labors being left and
surceased, wherein we are now busied and occupied. The external or ceremonial
sabbath is a certain time ordained and instituted by god in the church,
dedicated to a ceasing from works and labors, and given to the ministry of
gods word, and to the administration of the sacraments, or to the external
public worship of god. This ceremonial sabbath was necessary, in the old
Testament, to be the seventh day, and that on that day (as also on other holy
days) the Leuitical ceremonies should be observed. This selfsame ceremonial
sabbath is a thing Indifferent in the New Testament.

This External sabbath is also of two sorts: Immediate, and Mediate.
Immediate is that which was immediately instituted by god himself: and this
was diversely taken in the old Testament. Namely, 1. It signified days, as
every seventh day which was in a more peculiar sense called the sabbath, both
in respect of Gods rest from the creation of the world, and in respect of that
rest which was commanded the people of God to be kept on that day. It
signified also other festiual days wherein the people were to rest, as on the
seventh day. So it is the first day of the Paschal feast called the sabbath,
Leuit. 23 and in the same place the feast of Trumpets is called a sabbath;
likewise, the feast of Tabernacles. 2 It signified also the whole seven days,
or, the whole week was called, by the name of the chief day, the sabbath.
Matthew 28. Now in the end of the sabbath, when the first day of the sabbath,
that is, of the week, began to dawne. 3. It was taken for every seventh
year, wherein the Jews were commanded to intermit the tillage of their
fields. The commandment is given them, in Leuit. 25 4 26.35. And hereof also
the whole seven years were called sabbothes. Leuit. 25.8. Thou shall number
seven sabbothes of years unto thee, even seven times seven years. The Mediate
external Sabbath is that, which God does mediatelie constitute by his church,
such as is in the New Testament the first day of the week, to wit sundaie, or
rather The Lords day, which was instituted for the seventh day, or sabbath
day, in respect of Christ's resurrection.

2 The causes for which the sabbath day was instituted.
THE final causes or ends for which the sabbath day was instituted are these.
1. The public service and worship of god in the church, exercise of prayers,
confession and obedience, in which consists the study of the knowledge of
GOD, of good works, and thankfulness. God will, and therefore does he
especially ordain the sabbath, that he be worshipped and inuocated of us in
this life, not only privately, but also by the public voice of the Church. 2.
The mainteinance and preservation of the ministry of the church, which is an
office and function instituted by God to teach and instruct the Church
concerning God and his will, out of the word of God delivered by the Prophets
and Apostles, and to administer the sacraments according to Gods holy
institution. This is not the least end, for which the sabbath was ordained. For
this ordinance and public preaching of the doctrine being joined with prayer
and thanksgiving, and with the use of holy rites, is a public exercise
stirring and cherishing faith and repentance. 3. It was instituted, that it
might be in the old testament a type signifieng the spiritual and everlasting
sabbath. Ezech. 20.12. Moreover J gave them also my sabbothes to be a sign
between me and them, that they might know that J am the Lord, that sanctify
them. 4. It was instituted for a circumstaunce of the seventh day, that namely
the seventh day might advertise me^ of the creation of the world, of the
ordering and menaging of things to be done, and of that meditation which they
are to use in considering gods works which he in six days created and
accomplished. 5. That on that day the works of charity, bountifulness, and
liberality should be exercised. 6. For the bodily rest both of men and
beasts, but of beasts in respect of man. 7. That men should provoke one
another by their example to godliness and to the praising and honoring of
god. Ps. 22.22. J will declare thy Name unto my brethren; in the midst of the
congregation will I praise thee. 8. That the church may be seen and heard among
men, and be discerned from the other blasphemous and idolatrous multitude of
men, and that they may join themselves thereto, who are as yet separated from
it. So was in the old Testament also the sabbath a mark distinguishing the
people of Israel from all other nations.

3 How the sabbath is sanctified or kept holy.
THE works which are to be done on the sabbath day, or the parts of the
sanctifieng of the sabbath day are comprehended in the word Sanctifieng, which
parts we will briefly expound.

The parts then of the sanctifieng of the sabbath are, 1. Rightly and truly to
teach and instruct the church concerning god, and his will. The teaching which
is here commanded is of another kind from that, which was mentioned in the
third commandment. For there it belongs to every private person to teach:
here the function of teaching is enioined as proper unto certain persons, and
that unto such persons as being furnished from above with necessary gifts are
lawfully called by the church unto this function; and unto them is it enioined
in this commandment, that they propound and deliver found doctrine to al men,
both in public assemblies, and in private instruction.

2 Rightly to administer the sacraments according to Gods divine institution.
This likewise must be performed by the ministers of the Church lawfully
called to discharge this function. And as the doctrine, so also this
administration of the sacraments is not tied to certain days, but it
suffices if the administration be public, and be done by the ministers, (who
bear a public person, and represent in the ministry the person of god
himself talking with men) and if also in the assemblies of the Church those
things be done by the^, which god has tied and annexed unto the ministers. So
circumcision was administered on any day, which fell out to be the eighth from
the Infants nativity. So Baptism also may be administered at any time, Act. 8.
and 10. But the administration of the sacraments ought chiefly to be exercised
on the Sabbath day. Therefore, Number. 28. and 29. besides daily sacrifices
there are certain sacrifices appointed, which were to be performed on the
Sabbath and on festiual days. Furdermore this administration must be in
public assemblies. For so Christ also instituted his supper (as which amongst
other ends, must be also a bo^d of church assemblies) to be administered in the
assembly of the church, be it great or be it small. Mat. 26. Drink ye all of
this. Unto the right administration also of the sacraments belongs the
excluding and debarring of those, whom God has commanded to be excluded from
them. Like as it was not lawful for those that were aliens from the Country and
religion of the Jews, neither for any of the uncircumcised to eat of the
Paschal Lamb, Exo. 12. So neither ought the church to admit unto the Lords
supper those that are not baptized, or those that are baptized, but yet are
aliens in their Doctrine and manners from Christianity. 1. Cor. 10 and 11.

3 Diligently and daily to frequent the public assemblies of the Church,
and there attentively to give ear unto the Heavenly Doctrine plainly opened
and delivered, and diligently to meditate after thereon, and examine it; but
especially to spend those days, which are deputed unto the ministry and
service of God, in reading, meditation, and in discoursing of divine matters.
These things are made manifest by the nature and necessary dependancie of
Correlatiues. For if god will have some to be teachers, he will also have some
to be hearers and learners of this Doctrine. And the study of learning is not
without private Meditation. Therefore have the men of Beraea their
commendation, Acts. 17.11. Thus they received the word with all readiness, and
searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so. But unto them
especially is the study of knowing the Doctrine of god enjoined, who either
serve or hereafter are to serve and minister unto the Church. 1. Tim. 4.13.
Give attendance to reading, to exhortation, and to doctrine. And 1. Tim. 3. and
2. Tim. 2. Paul will have the minister of the Church to be fit and able to
instruct, and to refute the adversaries.

4 To use the sacraments according to gods Jnstitution. So god commanded the
Passover to be celebrated in a solemn assembly of the people, and unto other
holy days and sabbothes he assigned certain sacrifices. And in like manner
god will that, as his Doctrine should be heard, so also the right and lawful
use of his sacraments should be seen and behold in the public meetings and
assemblies of the Church: because god will have both these to be marks
whereby his Church may be known and discerned from other sects and peoples.
Again, as the word, so also the sacraments are an instrument or exercise to
stir and maintain in us faith and godliness. They are also a public
profession of our faith and thankfulness toward God, and a part of Gods
public worship in the Church. Therefore the use of them is most agreeable and
fit for the Sabbath day.

5 Public Jnuocation of God, whereby we join our confession, thanksgiving,
prayers, and desires with the Church. For god will be inuocated not only
privately by every one, but also publickely by the whole Church, for his own
glory, and our comfort, that so we may the less doubt that God will hear us,
seeing he has promised to hear, not only us, but also others, and the whole
Church praying for us together with us. For therefore has God annexed a
special promise unto public prayers. Mat. 18.19. If two of you shall agree
on earth upon any thing, whatsoever they shall desire, it shall be given them of
my Father which is in Heaven. For where two or three are gathered together in
my name, there am I in the midst of them. And giving of thanks, and praise
unto God, is promised unto God as a special woorship, Ps. 22. Jn the middst of
the congregation will I praise thee: And the same is commanded, 1. Cor. 14.
When thou blessest with the spirit, how shall he that occupies the room of
the unlearned, say Amen, at thy giving of thanks, seeing he knows not what
thou say? And, 1. Tim. 2. I exhort, that first of al supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men. Now whereas Christ
else where commands that when a man prays, Mat. 6.6.
he enter into his chamber, and when he has shut his door, pray unto his
Father which is in secret: he by these words does not condemn and forbid
public prayers, but hypocrisy and ostentation, and fained godliness: which
the words testify that go before. When thou praiest, be not as the
Hypocrites. Now hypocrisy is a faigning and an ostentation or show of
Godliness. We are here further to observe, that in this commandment is
prescribed the public invocation of the Church, but that which was in the
former commandment prescribed, is the private invocation, which concerns
every particular man.

6 To bestow alms, that is, to perform the duties of love and charity,
thereby to sanctify the Sabbath, in showing our obedience, which we yield
unto the Doctrine. Hither appertains the sermon of Christ concerning the
sabbath, wherein he declares against the Jews whether it be lawful to do
good on the sabbath day. And whereas God will have this Sabbath to be kept all
our life time, yet will he have examples and testimonies thereof to be showed
especially on the external or ceremonial Sabbath day, that is, at those times
which are allotted to the teaching and learning of Gods word. For if neither
at that time any man show his desire of obaying God, when Gods Doctrine
sounds in his ears, and when God wills us, surceasing and omitting all
other cares, to meditate on Godliness and amendment of life; he gives a token
that he will far less do it at an other time. Therefore has it been
always the custom in the Church, to bestow alms on the Sabbath day, and to
perform the works of charity toward those that are in want. Nehem 8.10.
Send part unto them, for whom none is prepared, for this day is holy unto our
Lord.

7 The honor of the ministry of the Church, or our obedience toward the
whole ministry in life, and manners; and this is the moral Sabbath. Now
that obedience toward the ministry comprehends many things, First,
reverence, that is, an acknowledging of Gods order and will in the ordeining
and maintaining of the Ministry, and in the gathering of his Church by it:
that is, a declaration both in words and deeds of this our acknowledgement and
judgment of the Ministry. 1. Cor. 4.7. Let a man so think of us, as of the
Ministers of christ, and disposers of the secrets of God, Secondly, love,
whereby we gladly both frequent divine assemblies, and hear and learn the
Doctrine of the church, and wish well unto the faithful Ministers of the
Church, not only in respect of that duty of charity which we owe, but also in
respect of the ministry, which they discharge. Psalm. 84. How amiable are thy
Tabernacles? My soul longs, yea and faints for the courts of the Lord.
Thirdly, obedience in those things which are belonging unto the Ministry.
Hither belong the works of love toward God and our neighbor, even the whole
life of a Christian, which is that spiritual or moral Sabbath. For to hold
and celebrate that spiritual Sabbath, is, in the direction and ordering of our
life to obey the voice of God, speaking by the ministry of the Church. For
God will therefore have the true doctrine to be learned of us, that we may obey
it, Iam. 1. Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your
own selves. Fourthly, Thankfulness, that is, such duties as tend to the
preservation and mainteinance of the ministry, Ministers, and Schools. For if
God will have ministers to be in his church, he will also that every one
according to his ability help forward and further the maintenance of the
Ministry, and Schools of learning, and do his endeavor that the ministers,
teachers, and schoolmasters be honestly provided for. Hither appertain Moses
Laws of the firstborn, of first fruits, of tithes, and such like offerings,
which were allotted to the Priests and Levites by way of stipend, whereby they
might sustain their own life and their household, that so they might wholly
be employed in the ministry. And albeit the circumstances of these laws are
abolished, yet the general remains for ever; because God will have his
ministry to be maintained to the end of the world. Fifthly and lastly,
Lenity and moderation in bearing with such infirmities of the ministers, as
do not enormously or manifestly corrupt or hinder the ministry, and hurt the
church by offense. 1. Tim. 5.19. Against an Elder receive none accusation, but
under two or three witnesses. Seeing then this is the sanctifieng and keeping
holy of the Sabbath, it follows that those works must needs be contrary to
these, whereby the Sabbath is broken and profaned.

6 How the sabbath is broken or profaned.
THE sabbath is profaned when either it is not at al sanctified, or is not
sanctified aright, but such works are done as hinder the ministry, or are
contrary unto those woorks which belong to the sanctifieng of the sabbath, and
were even now rehearsed. Wherefore the parts of the profaning of the sabbath
shall be those, which are opposed unto the parts of sanctifieng of the sabbath.
We will shortly propound them on this wise.

1 Unto the delivering and teaching of the doctrine, is opposed the omitting,
or neglect of teaching; As also a corrupting or mai^ing of the doctrine, or a
fitting of it unto the opinions, affections, lusts, or commodities of the
Magistrates or others. 2. Corint. 2.17. For we are not as many which make
merchaundize of the word of God: but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the
sight of God, speak we of Christ.

2 Unto the right and due administration of the Sacraments, is opposed an
omitting or neglect in the Church of exhortation to the receiving of the
sacraments: as also a corrupt and unlawful administration of the sacraments,
when somewhat is either taken from, or added to the ceremonies instituted of
God, or is altered and changed in them, or when some are excluded from the
Sacraments, which should be admitted, or are admitted, which should by Gods
ordinance be driven from them, or when the people is not instructed concerning
the right and lawful use of them.

3 Unto the study of learning the doctrine, is repugnaunt, 1. A contempt and
neglect of the doctrine; that is, either not to afford our presence in sacred
assemblies, when there is no just cause to hinder us, and to busy our selves
in such works on the sabbath day, as might have been differred; or not to give
ear and attendaunce to Sermons and the preaching of Gods word, or not to
meditate, consider and examine the doctrine of the Church. 2. Curiosity, which
is a desire and study of knowing those things which God has not reueiled,
unnecessary, strange, and vain.

4 Unto the right use of the sacraments is contrary, the omitting and
contempt thereof: as also a profaning of them, when they are not received as
God has commanded, neither by them for whom they were ordained. Likewise also
contrary thereto is all superstitious using of them, when as salvation and the
grace of God is tied to the observation of the rites and ceremonies, or when
they are used to such ends as God has not appointed.

5 Unto public prayers is opposed the neglect of them, and an hypocritical
presence at them, without any attention and inward devotion: Likewise such
reading or praieng as serves not for any edifieng of the Church. 1. Cor.
14.16. When thou blessest with the spirit, how shall he that occupies the room
of the unlearned, say Amen, at thy giving of thanks? For he knows not what
thou say. For thou verily give thanks well; but the other is not edified.

6 To the bestowing of Alms, is repugnant a neglect of the works of charity:
as when we do not according to our power succor the poor that stand in need
of our help.

7 To the honor of the ministry of the church is opposed the contempt of the
ministry: as when either the ministry of the Church is abolished or
committed to men unworthy and unable, or is denied to be the means and
instrument which God will use for the gathering of his Church: likewise when
the ministers are reproched, when their doctrine is heard and not obeyed in the
ordering of our life, when the works of charity are neglected, when necessary
mainteinaunce is not allowed the Ministers, when the defense and protection of
them, and other duties of thankfulness are not performed toward them, when
the mainteinance of Schools and studies and learning is neglected, when the
tolerable defectes of the Ministers are not borne with, and when for such the
ministry suffers reproach and contumely. In like manner also is it against the
use of the whole ministry, not only when some one privately neglects or
omitteth the use of the ministry, but also when one by his commandment and
persuasion, or example, or by some other hinderance, calls away his children,
family, or any other from the use of the ministry.

5 How the sabbath belongs unto us.
THE seventh day was even from the beginning of the world designed by God to
signify, that men should after the example of God himself rest from their
labors, and (...) from sins And afterward in Moses Law this commandment
was again repeated, and then withal was the ceremony of ceasing from labor on
the seventh day ordained, to be a sacrament, that is, a sign and token of that
signifieng, whereby god signified himself to be the sanctifier of his church,
that is, to pardon her al her sins and offenses, ^o receive her into favor, to
endue and rule her with his holy spirit, for the beginning of new and
everlasting life in her in this life, which afterward should be accomplished
and perfected for and by the Messiah promised to the fathers. And this is the
reason; why the ceremonial sabbath of the seventh day is now to be abolished;
namely, because it was typical admonishing the people of their own duty toward
god, and of gods benefits toward them, which was to be performed by christ:
for which selfsame cause also all the other sacraments and sacrifices, and
ceremonies made before and after the Law, were abolished by the coming of
Christ, by whom that was fulfilled which they signified.

But although the ceremonial sabbath is abrogated and disanulled in the new
testament; yet the moral sabbath continues still, and belongs unto us, and
even the very general of the ceremonial sabbath belongs unto us, and does
still remain, which is, that some time is to be allotted for the ministry of
the Church. For we must ever have some day, wherein the word of god may be
taught in the Church, and the Sacraments administered. But nevertheless we are
not restrained or tied, to have either saturday, or wednesday, or any other
certain day, and therefore the sabbath does not belong unto us ceremonially in
special and particular, albeit it does belong un- us, and so to al men, and
ever continues both morallie and ceremonially in general.

Objections against the abrogating of the ceremonial sabbath.
THE Decalogue is a perpetual Law: The commandment of the sabbath is a part
of the Decalogue: therefore it is a perpetual Law, and not to be abolished.
Answer. The Decalogue is a perpetual Law; as it is a Moral Law. But the
additions, or circumstances and limitations of the Moral precepts, annexed by
way of signification, were to be kept until the coming of the Messiah.

2. The commaundments of the Dacalogue belong unto us. This is a commandment
of the Decalogue. Therefore it belongs unto us. Answer. The commandments
of the Decalogue which are Moral belong unto us. But this commandment is in
part ceremonial, and so as it is ceremonial, it belongs not unto us, albeit
the general belong unto us. The reasons, why the ceremonial Law belongs not
unto us, are especially these. 1. One part of this Law of sanctifieng the
sabbath is ceremonial. 2. Paul says Coloss. 2.16. Let no man condemn you in
respect of an holy day. 3. The Apostles themselves did change the sabbath. 4.
From the end or purpose of the Law. It was a type of things that were to be
fulfilled by Christ, namely of sanctification; and every type must give place
to the thing thereby signified. Likewise it was a seuering or distinguishing of
the Jews from other nations: but this seuering and distinction was taken away
by christ.

3 The Lord says of the sabbath day: It is a sign between me and the
children of Jsrael for ever, and an everlasting covenant. Answer. 1. The
ceremonial sabbath was perpetual until Christ's coming, who is the end of
ceremonies. 2. The sabbath is eternal, as concerning the thing signified, which
is a ceasing from sins, and a rest in God: for in this sense are all the types
of the old testament eternal; even the kingdom of David also; which yet was to
be ouerthrown before the coming of the Messiah.

4 We grant the Mosaicall ceremonies to be changeable; yet it follows not
thereof, that the Laws which were made before Moses time are changeable, in
the number whereof also is the keeping of the Sabbath day. Answer. The
ceremonies, which were ordained by God before Moses, are also changeable;
because they were types of the benefits of the Messiah to come, and therefore
are by his coming abolished, as circumcision which was given unto Abraham, as
also the sacrifices which were prescribed unto our first Parents.

5 The laws which were given of God before the fall, are not types of the
benefits of the Messiah, and bind all mankind for ever: for then was not
given as yet the promise of the Messiah, and there was one and the same
condition of all mankind: But the Sabbath of the seventh day was ordained by
God, as soon as the creation of the world was finished, before the fall of
mankind. Therefore it is universal and perpetual. Answer. The Mayor
proposition is true concerning the moral law, the notions whereof were
imprinted in man's mind at the first creation: but it is not true, as touching
the ceremony or observing of the seventh day, as which after the fall was made
a type of the benefits of the Messiah in the Mosaicall law, and therefore in
like manner as other ceremonies which were either then, or before instituted, it
became subject to mutation and change by the coming of the Messiah. For god
would not have the shadows of things to continue or remain, the things
themselves being once come and exhibited. Wherefore albeit we grant that the
exercises of divine woorship were to have been kept on the seventh day
according to the commandment and prescript of the Decalogue, as well if men
had never sinned, as now after they sinned: yet notwithstanding seeing god
has enrolled this ceremony amongst the shadows of the Messiah to come, he
has, by this new law enacted by Moses, made it changeable together with other
ceremonies.

6 The cause of a law being perpetual does make the law it self also
perpetual. The memory and celebration of the creation, and the meditation on
the works of God is a perpetual cause of the Sabbath. Therefore the Sabbath is
perpetual. Answer. A law is made perpetual or unchangeable by reason of an
unchangeable cause, that is, if that cause it and do necessarily or
perpetually require this law as an effect or mean: but not, if at other
times, that end may be there come unto by other means, or if the Lawgiver
may as well obtain the same end by another Law. In like manner, seeing also,
this Law of sanctifieng the Sabbath of the seventh day being repealed and
abolished, we may nevertheless godlily and holily by other means meditate on
gods works, it follows not that this law of the ceremonial Sabbath is
perpetual, although the memory and celebration of Gods creation and works
ought to be perpetual; and therefore has the Church by common consent
according to Christian liberty well changed this ceremony of observing the
seventh day being taken away by Christ, and has substituted in the place of
the seventh day the first day of the week; yet so, that there is observed no
difference of days, which is utterly forbid in the Church, seeing one day is
not holier than another: Wherefore also great difference is there between the
Christian observing of the Lords day, and the Jewish observing of the seventh
day. For, 1 It was not lawful for the Jews to change the saboth, or to omit
it, as being a part of ceremonial woorship. The christian church retaining
still her liberty alotteth the first day unto the Ministry, without
adjoining any opinion of necessity, or woorship. 2 The old ceremonial
Sabbath was a type of things to be fulfilled in the new Testament by christ's
but in the new Testament that signification cease, and there is had regard
only of order and comeliness, without which there could be either no
ministry, or at at leastwise no well ordered ministry in the church.

OF CEREMONIES.
The special Questions.
1 What Ceremonies are. 2 How the Ceremonial Laws differ from the Moral
Laws. 3 How many sorts of Ceremonies there are. 4 Whether the Church may
ordain Ceremonies.
1 WHAT CEREMONIES ARE.
CEremonies are external and solemn actions ordained in the Ministry of the
Church, either for order sake or for signification.

2 How the ceremonial Laws differ from the Moral.
1 CEremonies are temporary, the Moral are perpetual.

2 The Ceremonies are done all alike; The Moral are not done always alike. 3
The Ceremonies signify; The Moral are signified. 4 The Moral are as the
general: The Ceremonial are restrained in special. 5 The Ceremonial serve
for the Moral; The Moral are the end or scope of the Ceremonial.

3 How many sorts of Ceremonies there are.
CEremonies are of two sorts; some commanded by God; some ordained by men.
Those that are commanded by god, cannot be changed but by God only; and those
are either sacrifices or Sacraments: A sacrifice is an obedience, which we
perform to God. A Sacrament is a token, whereby God testifies somewhat to us.
Those ceremonies which are ordained by me^, may be changed by the advice of the
church, if there be good causes for the changing and alteration of them.

4 Whether the church may ordain ceremonies.
THE church may and ought to ordain ceremonies; because without defining and
determining of circumstaunces the Moral cannot be kept. There are
notwithstanding certain conditions to be observed by the Church in ordaining
ceremonies, namely, They must be such ceremonies as are not impious, but
agreeable to the word of the Lord. Secondly, they must not be superstitious, so
that we must not think them necessary to be done: nether must they be done
with offense. Thirdly, they must not be too many. 4. They must not be idle and
unprofitable, but must al tend to edifieng.

OF THE MINISTRY. The chief Questions.
1 What the Ministry is. 2 What are the degrees of Ministers. 3 For what end
and purpose the Ministry was instituted. 4 Unto whom the Ministry is
committed. 5 What are the duties and functions of Ministers.
1 WHAT THE MINISTRY IS.
THE Ministry is a function by God ordained, of teaching Gods word and
administering his Sacraments according to his divine ordinance. The parts then
of the Ministry of the Church are two. 1 To preach Gods word. 2 Rightly to
administer the Sacraments.

2 What are the degrees of Ministers.
OF Ministers some are immediately called of God, some mediatelie by the
Church. Jmmediatelie were called the Prophets and Apostles. The Prophets were
Ministers immediately called of God to teach and open the doctrine of Moses
and of the promise the Messiah to come, as also to correct their manners in the
Church and commonwealth of Moses, and to utter prophecies of euentes in and
without the Church, having a testimony and warraunt that they could not err
in doctrine. The Apostles were Ministers immediately called by Christ to
preach the doctrine concerning the Messiah now exhibited, and to spread it
throughout the whole world, having a testimony and warrant that they could not
err in doctrine. Mediatelie were called, 1. The Evangelists, who were helpers
of the Apostles in their labor, and were sent of the Apostles to teach diverse
Churches. 2. Bishops or Pastors, which are ministers called by the Church to
teach the word of God, and to administer the Sacraments in some one certain
Church. 3. Doctors, who are ministers called by the church to teach in some
certain church. 4. Governors, who are ministers chosen by the judgment of the
church to administer discipline, and to ordain things necessary. 5. Deacons,
who are ministers chosen by the church to take care for the poor, and to
distribute Alms.

3 For what end and purpose the ministry was instituted.
GOD would that in all ages of the world there should be public assemblies of
the church, in which the true doctrine concerning God and his will might be
heard, chiefly for these causes. 1. That God may be magnified and inuocated
in this life by mankind not only privately, but also by the public voice
of the church. Psalm. 68. Give thanks unto God in the congregations. 2. That
the public and ordinary preaching of the doctrine, the pouring out of
prayers, and giving of thanks, and the use of the sacraments may be an
exercise to stir up and cherish faith and godliness, as which without
exercises does easily through our infirmity wax cold. Ephesians. 4. He gave
some Apostles, some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and
Doctors for the gathering together of the Saints, for the work of the
ministry, and for the edification of the body of Christ. 3. That men may
provoke one another by their example unto godliness and to the magnifieng and
praise of God. Psalm. 22.22. I will declare thy name unto my brethren: in the
midst of the congregation will J praise thee. 4. That there may be
preserved and maintained a consent and agreement in the church in the doctrine
and worship of God. Ephesians. 4. He gave Pastors and Doctors for the gathering
together of the Saints, till we all meet together in the unity of faith. 5.
That the church may be seen and heard among men, and may be discerned from
the other blasphemous and Idolatrous multitude of men. And he will have the
church to be seen and beheld, that the elect may be gathered unto it, and that
the reprobate may be made more excuseles while they contemn, and endeavor to
repress the voice and calling of God which they have heard. Romans 10.18. But,
have they not heard? No doubt their sound went out through all the earth, and
their words into the ends of the world. 2. Cor. 2.14. Now thanks be unto
God, which always makes us to triumph in Christ, and makes manifest the
favor of his knowledge by us in every place: for we are unto God the sweet
savor of Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that perish: to the one
we are the savor of death unto death, and to the other the savor of life unto
life. 6. That God may apply himself unto our infirmity, in teaching men by
men. 7. That he may show his love toward man, in that he will have men to
be ministers of that great work, which also the son of God did administer.
Now these causes belong not to any one certain time, but to all times and
ages of the Church and world. Wherefore god will always have the ministry of
his Church preserved, and the use thereof frequented, and therefore the
general and ground of this commandment, or the moral part thereof does bind
all men even from the beginning of the woorld unto the end: namely, that some
Sabbath be kept by them, that is, that some time be allotted unto public
sermons, and prayers, and to the administration of the sacraments.

4 Unto whom the ministry is to be committed.
UNTO whom the ministry of the Church ought to be committed, Saint Paul
plainly delivers in his Epistles to Timothy, and to Titus. And, briefly to
comprise them; The ministry of the Church is to be committed, 1. Unto men,
2. having a good testimony in and without the church, 3. able to teach, that
is, Rightly understanding the doctrine, and having gifts in some measure
rightly to propound the same.

5 What are the duties and functions of Ministers.
THE duties and functions of Ministers are. 1. Faithfully to propound and
deliver the true and sound doctrine of God, that the church may know and
understand it. 2. Rightly to administer the sacraments. 3. To go before and
shine unto the church by their example of Christian life and conversation. 4.
To give diligent attendaunce unto their flock. 5. To yield their service in
such judgments as are exercised by the church. 6. To take care that regard
and respect be had of the poor.

THE FIFTH COMMANDMENT.
HONOR thy Father, and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the land,
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

Now follows the Laws of the second table of the Decalogue, the obedience
whereof does as well verily respect God, as the commandments of the first
table; but the works are immediately exercised toward men: For the subject
of the second table, is our neighbor. Of which subject this is affirmed, Thou
shall love him as thy self: like as Christ also briefly comprised the sum of
the second table, saying, Matt. 22.39. And the second is like unto this; Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self. He says that the second commandment
is like unto the first or great commandment, or, the second table is like
unto the first table, which is thus to be understood. 1. As touching the kind
of the chief worship of God, the second table is like unto the first; and so
is the second said to be like unto the first, in respect of the ceremonial,
which are not the chief worship. 2. As touching the kinds of eternal
punishment, because the transgression of both tables meriteth eternal
punishment. 3. As touching the inseperable coherence of the love of God and our
neighbor. For our neighbor cannot be loved without the love of God: and the
love of God is declared and exercised by the love of our neighbor. Whence also
we may gather the causes, for which obedience is to be yielded unto the
second table, namely, 1. That in this obedience God himself may be worshipped,
and our love toward him showed and declared, by our love toward our
neighbor for his sake. 2. That by the love of our neighbor our conformity
with God may appear. 3. That the society of mankind may be preserved, which
was ordained of God for the celebration and magnifieng of his name.

Moreover this fifth commandment is placed first in the second table, 1.
Because this is the cause, the bond, and ground of the obedience of the rest of
the commandments following. For if this obedience stand which is of the
inferiors toward the superiors, who are those which command the obedience
of the commandments that follow, then must the obedience toward the rest of
the commandments necessarily follow. 2. Because the Lord annexed a special
promise, and a singular blessing unto this commandment, to wit, length of
life; and these two, namely the commandment and the promise, does this fifth
commandment contain. Now the end of the commandment is, the preservation
of civil order, which is the order decreed and appointed by God in the mutual
duties of superiors and inferiors. The superiors are al such* whom God has
set over others to rule and defend them. The inferiors are those, whom he has
submitted to the power of others to be ruled and defended by them The duties
of superiors are comprehended by the name of Father and Mother.

Now Parents rather than other governors are named, and commanded to be
honored, 1. Because the father-like power and government was the first among
men. 2. Because this is as it were a rule, according to which others are to be
composed and framed. 3. Because it is most beloved of men. 4. Because seeing
the bond of duty toward Parents is the greatest, the contempt of them is the
more heinous and grievous, which therefore also is with greater severity
condemned by god. 5. Because god will have superiors to bear a father-like
mind and affection toward their inferiors. By the name therefore of Parents
are understood all superiors, or whosoever rule over us. For these does God
give us in steed of Parents, and they discharge the duty of Parents, and are
as it were gods vicegerents in ruling and governing us: and then first were
Magistrates substituted by God for Parents unto us. when the malice of men
began to increase.

Our superiors are, 1. Parents themselves. 2. Schoolemasters, Teachers,
Ministers. 3. Masters or Lords. 4. Magistrates. 5. Our Elders. Unto all these
are prescribed in this fifth commandment their duties toward their
inferiors, and those that are under them: and first, the common duties to
all, then, such as are peculiar and proper unto some. For when God commands
the duties of inferiors toward superiors, he does also of the contrary
command the duties of superiors toward inferiors. And when he commands
us to honor our Parents, he will withal that both they be as Parents unto
us, and also behave themselves as worthy of honor. Now amongst these degrees
of the duties of superiors, the first is the chief and principal of all the
rest; 1 Because the rest serve for that, and help to further it. 2 Because
this was the first in mankind. Objection. God in this commandment wills
only our parents to be worshipped, which is the duty of inferiors. Therefore
he commands nothing here unto superiors. Answer. I deny the consequence
of this reason. 1 Because, when he gives the names unto the superiors, he
gives them also the thing it self, or that from whence they have the name. 2
If God will have them to be honored, he will also have them to do those things
that are worthy of honor. And albeit sometimes wicked men bear rule, and
therefore are unworthy of honor; yet the office is to be distinguished from
the persons, and whose vice we ought to detest, their office we must honor,
because it is Gods ordinance. Seeing then the superiors are to be honored
in respect of their office, it is manifest that so far forth only we must
yield obedience unto them, as they pass not the bonds of their office. God
annexeth a promise to this commandment. First, To signify how greatly he
esteems that obedience, and how grievously he will punish those which do
against this obedience. Secondly, To signify how necessary this obedience is,
and so much the more to inuit us to the observing and keeping thereof. For
this obedience toward parents, is a preparing and a motive cause to the whole
obedience of the Laws which follow. S. Paul alleging this promise, Ephesians.
6.2. says, That this fifth commandment, is the first commandment with
promise, that is, with special promise, or of a certain particular blessing,
which God promises to them that perform obedience. And the blessing or benefit
which he promises, is long life. Object. But long life seems not to be any
blessing or benefit by reason of the miseries of this life. Answer. This
comes but by an accident: for long-life is a blessing by it self, though it
be joined with misery. Reply. That blessing by reason of these accidents
seems rather worthy to be wished away from us, than to be wished to come
unto us. Answer. A good thing is to be wished away from us, if it have
accompanieng it greater evils. But god promises unto the godly together with
long life a mitigation of calamities, and a long fruition of Gods blessing.
Moreover the worship and celebrating of God in this life is so great a good,
that the calamities of this life ought not to enter the balance with it. If
further it be demanded; Why then are the wicked also and disobedient
long-liued. One answer hereto, is, That a general rule is not overthrown by
the varying of a few examples. For the disobedient, for the most part, perish
after an evil manner and untimely. Proverb. 30.17. The eye that mocketh his
Father, let the ravens of the vallie pick it out. Another answer is, That
corporal benefits are bestowed on the Godly for their safety and salvation,
and therefore are tokens and arguments unto them of Gods good will towades
them: but on the wicked such are bestowed, partly that they being thereby
called and invited to repentance may become more excuselesse in gods
judgment; partly, that the godly and elect, which are mingled among the
wicked, may enjoy these blessings. And again, that all godly and obedient
children, are not long-liued; that crosses not this promise, because unto them
their translating into a better life, is a most ample and large recompense of
long life.

The parts of this commandment are of two sorts. The one are virtues proper
either to superiors, or to inferiors. The others are common to both.

The proper or peculiar virtues of this fifth commandment.
THE proper parts of the superiors obedience, or the proper virtues of the
superiors, are distinguished according to their duties and functions.

The duties and functions of parents are, 1 To cherish and nourish their
children. 2 To defend and protect the^ from injuries. 3 To instruct them, or to
commit them to be instructed of others. 4 To rule and govern them by
domestical discipline. For the parents must not only instruct their children,
but also preserve instruction and knowledge in them, not Scholastical knowledge
and instruction, but domestical nurture. The duties of Schoolemasters or
teachers, are, 1 To teach faithfully, seeing they are in the place of parents.
2 To rule and govern by Scholasticall discipline. The duties of Magistrates may
be brought and reduced to these heads. To command the observing and keeping
of the Decalogue, to wit, that their subjects live according to both tables of
the Decalogue, that is, according to the whole Decalogue, as concerning
external Discipline. 2 To exequute the Decalogue, or the commandments of the
Decalogue, that is, to observe and maintain the obedience thereof, by punishing
them that transgress against discipline, other in goods, or in name, or in
body, or in life. 3 To enact some positive Laws for maintenance of civil
order, which otherwise would not stand. Now positive laws are a determining
and defining of such circumstances as are necessary, or as serve for the
keeping, or obedience of the Decalogue. 4 To put also these their own Laws in
execution.

The duties of Masters and Lords, are, 1 To command such things unto their
family as are just and possible: to prescribe just and lawful labors, not
unlawful, not impossible, not too burdensome, and unnecessary. 2 To give them
their wages for their labors. 3 To govern them by domestical Discipline. Syra.
33.23. The fodder, the whip, and the burden belong unto the Ass; and meat,
correction, and work unto the servant.

The duty of Elders is, who are superior in age, wisdom, and authority, to
govern and further others by the example of their life, by their counsels, and
admonitions.

The proper duties of inferiors are expressed by the name of Honor. For
Honor signifies and comprehends, first the Reverence of the inferiors
toward the superiors; which is, 1 An acknowledgement of Gods will* who will
have such an order to be in the calling and degree of superiors, and does
ordain the same and adorn and furnish it with gifts necessary. 2 An
approbation of this order, and these gifts of god. For if we do not know and
acknowledge this order to be good, we will not honor it. 3 A subjection and
submission unto this order, even for the will and pleasure of God. 4 An outward
declaration of this their judgment and mind in words and deeds, and in
ceremonies and gestures, which differ according to places. But Reverence is
also in the mind; and does not consist only in outward gestures. And
Subjection here comprehends such obedience as is not constrained, but ready
and willing. Secondly, Honor signifies a Love which we must bear unto them
in respect of their calling and office; and this cannot be severed from
reverence. For whom we love not, them we cannot reverence. Thirdly, Honor
signifies obedience, in all things lawful and possible, which the Superiors
according to their office and calling command; and this obedience must be
voluntary, even as children rejoice to do those things which are grateful
and acceptable unto their parents. Fourthlie, it signifies Thankfulness
toward Superiors; which requires that every one according to his calling,
and ability, and as occasion serves, aid and further them. Fiftlie, it
signifies lenity and equabilitie toward Superiors; which is, to bear with
those vices of Parents and Superiors, which may be borne with and tolerated
without any reproach unto gods name, or which are not f^at repugnant unto his
Law. Hereby is easily gathered what duties are enjoined to inferiors, and
what things agreeable to their duties and callings they owe to every sort and
order of Superiors.

The vices contrary to the peculiar and proper virtues of this fifth
commandment.
THE first, are those sins which are repugnaunt to those parts or virtues of
that obedience which is proper to superiors. Unto the duty of Parents is
opposed. 1. Not to provide and minister necessary susteinaunce unto the
children, or to bring them up in riot. 2. Not to defend their children against
injuries: or to offend through a foolish ouer-render love, for some small or no
injuries done unto them. 3. Not to accustom their children to patience and
gentleness, or to bring them up in idleness and licentiousness of sinning. 4.
Not to instruct their children according to their ability, or to corrupt them
by their evil examples. 5. Not to chastise their children, as necessity
requires, or to be too fierce and cruel unto them, beyond their duty, or the
degree of the fault committed.

Unto the Schoolmasters and teachers instruction and discipline, the same
vices are contrary, which are unto Parents.

Unto the Magistrates duty two extremes are opposed, slacknesse, and tyranny.
Slacknes or slothfulnes in the Magistrate is either not to require of his
subjects the discipline of the whole Decalogue: or, not to ordain those
things, which are required to the preservation and order of civil society:
or, not to defend the innocent against injury; or, not to restrain, or, to
punish too lightly such as offend against the discipline of the Decalogue, or
against the positive Laws. Tyranny, is, either to command his subjects
things that are unjust, or, to punish that which is no sin, or, to punish
more grieuouslie, than the degree of the fault does deserve.

Likewise Lords and Masters may transgress, either by permitting of idle
slothfulness and licentiousness, or, by unjust commandments and exactions,
or, by defrauding their servants of their wages, or, through too much rigor and
severity.

Now they that are superiors in age, or in any other authority, transgress
against their duty and calling, through folly or corrupt counsel, or through
lightness of manners, and by their evil examples, or by neglect of the younger
sort, or other inferiors, whom they see to offend, and might by their counsel
and authority correct and amend. The inferiors sin and transgress against
that honor, which they owe unto their superiors, either not accounting of
them, as being in that place, where God has placed them; or yielding more
unto them than may agree unto men; or, loving them more than God: or, denying
obedience to their just and lawful commandments; or, obeying them in show,
or when they command things unjust and impious: or, harming them with
injuries: or, not aiding them in what things and by what means they may: or,
gratifieng them flatteringlie and vnrighteouslie: or, exagitating their
infirmities: or, by flattery commending their errors and vices; or, not
aduising them according to their place with due reverence, of enormous and
pernicious faults committed by them.

The common virtues of this fifth commandment.
THE common duties unto all, or those virtues, which are prescribed to al
degrees both of superiors, and inferiors, are, 1. That general justice, which
is obedience according to al Laws that appertain unto al, in respect of every
ones vocation and calling. That this is here commanded, is manifest, because
the superiors must require this of their inferiors, and incite them by their
example to obey; and inferiors are commanded to obey al just ordinances and
commandments. Neither does it hinder, that the honor of the ministry also
does comprehend the whole obedience of the Law. For there, it is exacted as
obedience unto the voice of god himself, here as obedience toward men that
bear rule over us.

2 The second common virtue to both is the particular distributive justice,
which keeps a proportion in distributing of offices and rewards, or which is
a virtue giving to every one his own. Now every man's own is such an office,
or honor, or reward, as is convenient and fit for him, or belongs unto him.
Roman. 13.7. Give to all men their duty, tribute to whom ye owe tribute;
custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom ye owe honor.

3 Sedulitie, (or diligence, or fidelity) which is a virtue in a man well
knowing and understanding those parts which belong properly unto his own duty
and office, examining them, and doing according to Gods commandment those
things that belong unto him, constantly, continually, studiously, willingly,
and cheerfully; likewise containing himself, with this endeavor of well doing,
within the bonds of his own duty and calling, letting pass things that
appertain not to his vocation, and such as are unnecessary: and al to this end
principally, as thereby to serve god, and his neighbor, and to do those
things which are pleasing to God, and profitable unto men. 1 Thessalonians. 4.11.
Study to be quiet, and to meddle with your own business. Roman. 12.8. He that
rules, let him do it with diligence. Ephesians. 6.6, Serve as the servants of
Christ, doing the will of God from the heart. Eccle. 9.10. All that thine hand
shall find to do, do it with all thy power. But it is to be observed, that this
virtue is not only to understand what are the parts of a man's duty, but also
to examine and search, if yet there be ought remaining which he knows not to
belong unto his duty. For he that knows not, must seek and search:
otherwise he shall nevertheless render an account of neglecting his duty,
because his ignorance was purposed and voluntary.

4 Gravity, which is a virtue that observes that which becomes a man's
person, and shows a constancy and squarenesse in words, deeds, and gestures,
that thereby we may maintain our good estimation or authority, that our
calling be not reproched. For, because God will have superiors to be honored, he
will also that they themselves maintain their own honor. Now true glory,
which is an approbation yielded us both of our own conscience and of the
conscience of others judging aright, seeing it is a virtue necessary both for
the glory of God, and for the safety and welfare of men, is without question
to be desired, so that these ends be withal respected. Prou. 22.1. A good name
is to be chosen above great riches. Eccles. 7.3. A good name is better than a
good ointment. Eccles. 41.12. Have regard to thy name, for that shall continue
with thee above a thousand treasures of gold. Gal. 6.4. Let every man prove
his own work, and then shall he have reioicing in himself only, and not in
another. Tit. 2.7. Above all things show thy self an example of good woorks,
with vncorrupt doctrine, with gravity, integrity.

5 Modesty is a virtue which has near affinity with gravity, whereby a man
knowing his own imbecility, and considering his place and office, wherein he
is placed by God, keeps a mean and conueniency of person in opinions and in
speech of himself, and in actions, and in behavior, to this end; that we give
no more to our selves than becomes us, that we show no more glitter or
gorgiousnesse in our apparel, in our behavior, in our talk, and life, than is
needful; that we set not our selves before others, or oppress others, but
behave our selves according to our ability, and capacity, with an
acknowledgement of Gods gifts in others, and of our own defectes. Now, as it
was said, modesty has an affinity with gravity. For if gravity be not
joined with modesty, it degenerateth into ambition and swelling. Humility and
Modesty differ in their end: and Modesty is toward, men acknowledging their
own vices, and the gifts that are in others: Humility is toward God. Galat.
6.3. Jf any seem to himself that he is somewhat, when he is nothing, he
deceives himself in his imagination.

6 Love, or tender affection toward our kindred and near of blood, as
toward our Parents children, and other kinsfolks. For when God wills us
to honor our Parents, he will also that we love them, and that as our Parents:
and when he will have them to be Parents, he will have also their children to
be loved of them, and that not only as strangers, but as their children. For
seeing God ordains the bonds of conjunction between men; he also allows
the degrees of love and duties. 1. Timot. 5.8. If there be any that provides
not for his own, and namely for them of his household, he denies the faith,
and is worse than an infidel.

7 Thankefulnes, which is a virtue consisting of truth and justice,
acknowledging from whom, what, and how great benefits we have received, and
having a desire or willingness to perform and return for them mutual
labor, or mutual duties, such as are honest, and possible. Prou. 17.13. He
that rewards evil for good, evil shall not depart from his house.

8 Aequitie, which is a virtue mitigating upon good cause the rigor of strict
justice in punishing and taxing others offenses, patiently bearing with some
such errors and defects, as do not enormously harm the public safety of the
private welfare of our neighbors, and covering and correcting such vices of
others, or endeavoring to heal and cure them. For, this by reason of men's
manifold infirmity is so necessary both in superiors toward inferiors, and
in inferiors toward superiors, that without it civil society cannot consist.
1. Pet. 2.18. Be subject to your Masters with all fear, not only to the good
and courteous, but also to the froward. Hither appertains the example of the
Sons of Noah, Genesis 9. Likewise the commandment of the moderation and
gentleness of Parents toward their children in exercising correction and
discipline. Ephesians. 6 4. Fathers, provoke not your children to wrath, but bring
them up in instruction, and information of the Lord. Col. 3.21. Provoke not
your children to anger, least they be discouraged. And, cap 4.1. Ye Masters
do unto your servants that which is just and equal, knowing that ye also
have a Master in heaven.

The vices contrary to these common virtues of this fifth commandment.
1 UNTO the general justice are opposed, 1. All neglectes of such duty, as just
Laws require of every one, either of superiors, or of inferiors. 2. Al
stubburnes, and disobedience, and cruelty. 3. Making show and semblance of
observing our duty, and hypocrisy.

2 Unto particular distributive justice are opposed, 1. Error, which takes
away an office from him unto whom it is du, and gives it unto another, who
should not administer it, or unto whom it does not agree. 2. Rashness, or
accepting of persons and partiality, in distributing offices, or in giving
honors, or in bestowing rewards.

3 Unto sedulitie, is opposed, 1. Negligence or slothfulness, which either
does not look after matters, or does willingly let them pass, and perfourmeth
the parts of his duty either not willingly, or not entirely, or not
diligently. 2. A show of diligence, which does his duty chiefly for his own
glory and commodity sake. 3. Curiosity, which intrudeth and insinuates
himself into other men's duties. 4. Arrogancy, which gives that unto himself
which he has not, or bosteth of that which he has.

4 Unto gravity are contrary, 1. Leuitie not observing seemlinesse or
conueniencie, or constancy, or not having a desire of reteining his good name
and estimation. 2. Swelling or ambition, which is to lift up himself in
respect of his own calling or gifts, and to contemn and neglect others, and
to be aspiring to higher places, and to seek the applause and approbation of
man, not for any desire of Gods glory or of his neighbors safety, but only
for an ambitious humor and desire of preeminence.

5 Unto Modesty are repugnaunt, 1. Jmmodestie, which reteineth not a seemlie
conueniencie in words, deeds, behavior, and apparel. 2. Arrogancy, which in
opinion and speech challenges more unto himself than his strength will
bear, or does either admire his own gifts, or vaunt of them without need. 3.
Show of modesty, which is in his admiration of himself yet to extenuate and
debase himself, and to be backwards in receiving of honors or offices which a
man desires, to hunt after his own praise or an opinion of modesty.

6 Unto love are repugnant, 1 Unnaturalness, which either hates, or does not
affection and love those which are near of blood unto him; neither is careful
of others safety. 2 Jndulgentnesse or cockering, which for the love of any
either winketh at their sins being pernicious either to themselves or others,
or does gratify them in things forbidden.

7 Unto Thankfulness are repugnant, 1 Unthankfulness, which does not
acknowledge, or does not profess the author and greatness of the benefit
received, or does not endeavor to perform mutual duties. 2 Unlawful
gratifieng, or parasite-like flattering.

8 Unto Aequitie are repugnant, 1 Jmmoderate and unlawful rigor, in censuring
of those that sin through infirmity without any enormous harming either of
their own safety, or others. 2 Slackenesse not punishing or reprehending
according to his place, enormous faults. 3 Flattery, which for to currie
favor, and for commodities sake praises that which is not to be praised, or
attributes greater things unto one, than are beseeming for him.

THE SIXTH COMMANDMENT.
THOU shall do no murder.

The scope or end of this commandment is, the preservation of the life and
safety of men's bodies, and of the welfare both of our selves and others. Here
are forbidden al those things which tend to the destruction of our life or the
life of others. Now in this prohibition is named murder, thereby to take away
together with the effect the proper causes thereof, and under the name of
murder, are all sins which accompany it comprehended, that by signifieng
thus the heinousnes and grieuousnes thereof, we may be the more effectually
withdrawn ad deterred from committing the^. And contrarily here are commanded
all those things which tend to the safety of our life and others. The
substance and sum of the commandment is, that we neither harm by any
external work either our own life, or the life of any other, or any man's
safety and welfare of body, either by force or by deceit; neither wish in
affection or will an impairing thereof, or signify by any tokens any such
affection or will, but of the contrary endeavor to defend and preserve the same
to the utmost of our power.

Here is to be proved, 1. That internal things are also commanded and
forbidden by this commandment. 2. That the defense of our neighbor is
commanded. 3. That the hurting either of our selves or others is forbidden.

1 Internal things are commanded and forbidden, 1. Because when the effect
is commanded or forbidden, the cause is also commanded or forbidden. 2. From
the scope and end of the commandment: God will not have us to hurt any:
Therefore he forbids the means also, whereby we may hurt. 3 Whosoever is
angry with his brother unadvisedly, shall be culpable of judgment.

2 The defense of our neighbor is commanded: Because negative commandments
include affirmatiues. Thou shall do no murder; Therefore thou shall help and
aid thy neighbor.

3 The hurting as well of our selves, as of others, is forbidden, because the
causes why God commands us to have regard of another life, are the same in
us. 1 The Jmage of God in man. 2. The similitude and likeness of nature, and our
original from our first Parents. We may not be cruel against our own flesh:
but as all have issued from the same, namely from our first Parents, and are
our flesh, so are we our selves especially: Therefore we less ought to hurt
our selves than others. 3. The greatness of the price and ransom wherewith
Christ purchased all the members of the Church. 4. The conjunction of Christ's
members. And seeing these causes are found in our selves also, it follows
that by this law every one is forbidden to hurt or neglect his own life or
body.

Wherefore, Thou shall do no murder, signifies, 1 Thou shall not desire to
murder either thy self, or others. For what God will have not to be done of
us, that does he not grant to be wished or desired. 2 Neither shall thou
intimate or signify any desire of murdering either thy self or others. For,
the desire and wishing whereof God forbids, he forbids also any inckling
or signification thereof to be given either in words, or behavior, or
countenance. 3. Neither shall thou put this desire in execution. For, the
desire and signification whereof God forbids, he verily much more
forbids the practice and execution thereof. The contrary then is: Thou shall
love thy self and others, 1. In heart and desire. 2. Jn signification. 3. In
practice and execution. Hence spring and arise all the virtues of this
commandment, and likewise the contrary vices unto them.

The virtues of this sixth commandment.
THOSE things that are here commanded, tend (as it has been said) to the
preservation of the life or safety of men. And the safety of men is
preserved, either by not hurting, or by helping them. Whereby are made two
diverse kinds of virtues of this commandment; the former whereof contains
the virtues which tend to the not hurting of man's safety; the other compriseth
the virtues which tend to the helping and furthering of men's safety.

The virtues not hurting the safety of men.
THESE are of three sorts. For we are said not to hurt three ways: to wit,
either being not hurt or provoked, or being provoked, or both ways. In the
first manner of not hurting consists Particular justice, hurting no man. This
particular justice not hurting any man, is a virtue shunning all harmings,
which are done either by violence, or by deceit, or by neglect of our own and
others safety: and so neither by endeavor, nor by neglect hurting the life or
body of any of whom we are not hurt, except God command it. This is
expressed in the words, Thou shall do no murder.

In the second manner of not hurting consist Mildnes and Equabilitie. For unto
these virtues is it proper, not to hurt, albeit we be provoked. Mildnes or
placabilitie, or easiness in forgiving, is a virtue moderatresse and
gouernesse of anger, which shunneth al just anger, so that a mild man will
neither be angry for no cause, neither upon a light cause; and where there is
cause of just anger, he does then also so moderat that just anger, as that he
is not angry beyond measure, or passes the bounds and limits by God
prescribed: that is, he does not wish the destruction of the person that hurt
him, nether burns with a desire of revenge, but pardons offenses, and also
grievous injuries; and is displeased only at the reproach of Gods name, or for
injustice, or for the hurt of his neighbor, admitting not into his mind the
desire of revenging any injury, be it never so great; and wishing also from his
heart the safety and good estate of his enemies, and such as have ill deserved
of him; and endeavoring to maintain the same, according to his ability, and
their necessity. Matt. 5.5. Blessed are the meek: for thy shall inherit the
earth. Equabilitie or equity, is a virtue of near affinity with mildness;
which is a moderatresse of strict justice (which equalleth punishments with the
faults) upon good and reasonable cause: as when in respect of the public
safety or private safety of them which transgress, or for the avoiding of
offense, or for any other good cause, we yield somewhat of our right, in
punishing offenses, or in pursuing injuries. Gal. 6. Brethren, if a man be
fallen by occasion into any fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such a one
with the spirit of meeknes, considering thy self least thou also be tempted.

In the third manner of not hurting consists peaceablenesse, which is a virtue
shunning al offenses, and occasions of enmities and discords, and endeavoring
to take them away, if any do arise. Briefly, It is a study of peace and
concord, that is, a diligence both in avoiding causes and occasions of
offenses, discords, contentions, and hatreds: and also in reconciling those
which are offended either with us or with others, and lastly in reteining and
keeping of peace, for the reteining whereof not to refuse troubles and the
dissembling and forbearing of injuries, whereby we have bin harmed, so as it
be without the reproach of Gods name, and any grievous impairing either of our
own or others safety.

The virtues helping and furthering men's safety.
GOD will not only that we hurt no man, but also that we help both our selves
and others according to our power. And we are said to help two ways. 1. By
repelling evils, dangers, and injuries. 2. By doing good, or by benefiting our
selves or others. Of Helping virtues then there are two sorts, namely,
virtues repelling evils, and virtues benefiting and doing good.

The virtues repelling evils, which namely are exercised in driving away evils
and injuries, are these: Commutatiue justice in punishments, fortitude, and
indignation. Commutatiue justice in punishments, is a virtue observing
equality of offenses and punishments, inflicting either equal punishments
unto the faults, or lesser, being induced thereto upon good cause, according
to the respect and consideration to be had of circumstaunces in civil
judgment, for the mainteinaunce of Gods glory, and for the preservation of
men's society. For when God forbids the society of men to be harmed or
impaired, and will have the Magistrate to be the maintainer of discipline
according to the whole decalogue, he will also have them with just punishments
restrained that make any grievous breach of this order. Wherefore a Magistrate
may offend not only in cruelty, or unjust severity, but also in lenity or
remisnes, and in licencing men to hurt and injury others. 1. King. 20.42.
Because thou have let go out of thine hands a man, whom I appointed to die, thy
life shall go for his life, and thy people for his people. Leuit. 24.17. He
that kills any man, he shall be put to death. Number. 35.31. Ye shall take no
recompense for the life of the murderer, which is worthy to die: but he shall
be put to death. Exodus 21.23. Life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth,
Deuteronomy. 24.16. The fathers shall not be put to death for the children, nor the
children put to death for the fathers, but every man shall be put to death for
his own sin. Deuteronomy. 19. Thou shall make cities of refuge, that innocent
blood be not shed within thy land. Here therefore is commanded, for the
defense and safeguard of men's safety, severe justice, which remitteth not
punishment without good cause, and observes equality of the offense and
punishment. Whereof it is manifest, that this commandment does not take away,
but ordain and establish the office of the Magistrate in punishing
transgressors. For when God commands a man to be slain, not men now, but
God himself puts him to death by them, unto who^ he gives this in charge.
And that the licentiousness of doing violence or outrage might not grow strong
and increase, he would have transgressors to be curbed and kept short by
punishments. Wherefore the revenge due to Magistrates is comprehended in that
saying, Roman. 13.19. Vengeance is mine, J will repaie, says the Lord. And
hereby is answer made unto this objection: It is said here, Thou shall do no
murder: Therefore we must not at al put any man to death, and by consequent,
this justice does not appertain to this commandment, as which cannot be kept,
except many be put to death. Unto which we answer, 1. We must therefore put
some to death, least the society of men be destroyed by thieves and robbers. 2.
It is said, Thou shall do no murder, that is, not according to thy own
pleasure and lust. For God punishes, when the Magistrate punishes.

Fortitude is a virtue which aduentureth dangers according to the rule of well
informed reason, that is, such dangers as right and ruled reason wills to
adventure, and that for the glory of God, the safety of his Church, the defense
and preservation either of our selves, or ours, or others against grievous
injuries. Now this Fortitude of Gods Saints arises from faith, and hope, and
the love of God and their neighbor. But that heroical fortitude, which is a
special gift of god, as in Joshua, Sampson, Gideon, David, is to be
distinguished from that presentnes of mind and courage, which through a
cogitation and thinking on Gods will ought to be raised and stirred up in all,
especially in governors. 1. King. 2.2. Be strong and show thy self a man.
Hither appertains the example of the spies of the land of Canaan, and of the
people being out of heart and despairing for ever compassing and possessing of
it. Numb. 13. and. 14. Like unto this virtue is warlike fortitude, which is a
defendres of justice, and an undertaking of the just defense of our selves or
others, albeit it be not without peril and danger. War, is either a necessary
defense against those that exercise robbery, and outrages or cruelty against
the people, or a just punishment for grievous injuries sustained, which is
undertaken by force of arms.

Jndignation or zeal is a virtue justly offended, and wrath for the reproach of
Gods name, the unjust hurting of our neighbor, and for some grievous injury,
which is done either against God, or our innocent neighbor, having moreover a
desire, as ability and strength affords, to repel and revenge the injury done
against God or our neighbors, according to Gods commandment. Judge. 8. Gideon
said to Zebah, and Zalmunna: The men that ye slew at Tabor, were my brethren,
even my Mothers children: as the Lord lives, if ye had saved their lives, I
would not slaie you. And Iud. cap. 20. The Israelites wage war against the
Beniamites for the wickedness committed against the Levites wife. As therefore
unjust wars are forbidden by this commandment, so just war is allowed, in
the fifth commandment, as a part of the Magistrates duty toward his
subjects, and in this commandment, as a defense both of his own and others
safety and life, and consists partly in justice not hurting and punishing,
partly in fortitude and indignation. For either it is, as before was said, a
necessary defense against those that exercise robbery, and violence, or cruelty
against the people, or a just punishment for grievous injuries, which is
undertaken by ordinary authority with force of arms. 1. Sam. 25.28. My Lord
fights the battles of the Lord. Hither also belongs the defense of their
own life and their neighbors, which private men use against unjust force and
violence when necessity suffers not the Magistrates aid to be required. For
when the Laws and the Magistrate arm a private man against a robber or
adulterer, he uses then the sword, not unadvisedly taken, but justly delivered
into his hand by the Magistrate, as being the Magistrates deputy and minister.
So Moses slew the Egyptian in defense of the Israelite.

The virtues benefiting or doing good, which namely consist in doing good
turns, are these; Humanity, and Mercy, and Amity. Humanity or the love of man,
is a true and sincere good will both in mind, and will, and heart, toward
others, and a declaration thereof in words, behavior, and duties convenient
and possible. This self same virtue in the Scriptures is called the love of
our neighbor, which in Philosophy is termed Humanity: for by this virtue all
men perform that unto others which they would have to be done unto
themselves. Roman. 12.10. Be affectioned to love one another with brotherly
love. Galath. 6.10. Let us do good unto all men, but especially unto them
which are of the house-holde of faith.

Mercy is a virtue, which has a fellow-feeling, and takes compassion of the
calamities of good men, or of those, who sin through ignorance or infirmity,
and endeuoreth to take the^ away or to assuage them, as much as equity and
gods glory permits, neither reioiceth at the calamities of the very enemies
themselves. Or, it is sorrow for the calamities of innocent men, or such as fall
through ignorance, or infirmity, and a desire to assuage or take away their
calamities by honest means. Amity, is a virtue comprehended under humanity as a
special under his general, and it is a mutual and sincere good will between good
men well known one to another, performing mutual and possible duties: or, It is
a virtue rendering mutual and sincere good will, and perfourming mutual duties,
such as are just, lawful, and possible: kindled by the knowledge of virtue,
and by communication in both parties. It is different from love; in that love
stretches both to the known and unknown, but amity or frindship extends
only unto those that are known one to another, and that for some virtues
appearing in them. The parts then of all that which is commanded us in this
commandment are, 1. That our neighbor live. 2. That he live well, by our
assistaunce and endeavor unto the utmost of our power.

The vices contrary to the virtues of this sixth commandment.
UNTO particular justice hurting no man, is opposed, 1. Injustice hurting men,
namely a will to hurt men, and al unjust endammaging, hurting, or iniuring. 2.
Remissness, when they are not hurt, who are to be hurt, by them unto whom the
execution thereof belongs.

Unto mildness is repugnaunt, 1. Unjust anger, hastiness, grudging,
immoderate revenge, hatred, and spite. Anger is a short madness: Hastiness is
angrinesse or a readiness unto anger. 2. Remisnes, when a man is not moved for
grievous injuries.

Unto equabilitie or equity is repugnant, 1. Jmmoderate Rigor, when there is
had no regard of circumstances: whereof it is said, Extreme right is extreme
wrong, likewise, cruelty, and unjust severity. 2. Remissness, that is, not to
be moved at such things, whereat we ought to be moved, and when god commands.
Likewise partiality and accepting of persons.

Unto peaceablenesse is opposed, 1. Jn the excess, Remissness, when as thou so
couetest to keep peace, that thou do not respect Gods glory, neither thine
own and thy neighbors safety. This is an unjust gratifieng. 2. Jn the defect,
al unjust or unnecessary speeches; Contentions, backbitinges, slanders,
whisperings.

Unto justice commutatiue in punishments, is contrary, 1. In the defect
remissness, when that is not punished, which ought to be punished. 2. Jn the
excess, cruelty, and unjust and ouer-great severity, private revenge, false
pretending of strict justice. Briefly, unto punishing justice, is repugnaunt
injustice, which either does not at al punish, or does unjustly punish.

Unto fortitude is opposed, In the defect, timerousnesse, and the betraying of
another safety, when thou art able to undertake his defense: likewise a
shunning of such dangers as God has commanded us to undergo. 2. In the
excess, rashness, or fool-hardinesse, which is, to undertake things
unnecessary, or impossible.

Unto indignation are contrary, 1. Unjust anger. 2. Remissness and slownesse,
when there is no sharpness or earnestnes showed in being justly offended with
injuries, and in revenging them. Likewise unto this are the same repugnaunt
which are unto peaceablenes.

Unto humanity are opposed, 1. Self-love, with a neglect of others. 2.
Jnhumanitie. 3. Spitefulnes or hatred against others, or a show hereof. 4.
Unjust pleasurings and gratifiengs.

Unto mercy, are contrary, 1. In the defect, unmercifulness, cruelty,
hard-heartednesse, not to have compassion of those, of whom we are to have
compassion: Likewise Reioicing at another man's harm, and vncompassionatenesse
void of al grief. In the excess, Remissness, when they are spared whom God
will not have spared, which is cruel pity, whereby the whole society of men is
hurt, yea and he himself also who is spared.

Unto Amity or Frindship, are opposed, 1. Jn the defect, al injustice and
treachery, whereby frindship is violated, enmity, neglect of frindes, denial
of good will and mutual duties, a feigned show of frindship. 2. Jn the excess,
flattery, or unjust gratifieng, likewise lightness in ioining, and loosing
friendship.

THE SEVENTH COMMANDMENT.
THOU shall not commit adultery.

The end of this commandment is, The preservation of chastity and wed-locke.
Now when God names adultery, he does not forbid that only, as being the most
gross vice of all those which are repugnaunt to chastity, but also al vices
that are contrary to chastity, and such as are of near affinity unto them;
likewise their causes, occasions, effects, antecedentes, consequents; and of
the contrary he commands al things, which make for the preservation of
chastity. The reasons are these. 1. By one special the rest, that are of near
affinity with that, are understood. So when adultery is forbidden, other
special vices of lusts are condemned, and Adultery is mentioned, because it
is reckoned amongst the grossest vices of lusts. 2. Where the cause is
condemned, there also the effect is condemned, and so of the contrary. So here
are commanded or forbidden, as well the antecedentes, as the consequentes. 3.
The end and scope of this commandment is, the preserving of chastity, and
protecting of wedlock among men. Whatsoever therefore makes for the
preserving of chastity, and for the protecting of wedlock, is commanded in
this Law: and the contrary is withal forbidden. The virtues of the seventh
commandment are in number three, Chastity, Shamefastnes, Temperancy.

Chastity is a virtue preseruiug cleannes of mind and body, agreeing with the
will of God, and avoiding all lusts forbidden by God, all unlawful companings,
and inordinate copulation, and all the desires, occasions, causes and effects
either in single life, or in wedlock. Chastity has his first original from a
(...).
Greek word, which signifies to adorn; because it is an ornament not only
of the whole man, but also of all the rest of the virtues. Wherefore that name
was given by special regard and preeminence to this virtue, because it is one
of those principal virtues that make the Image of god. Now there is a double
chastity, one of single life; an other of marriage. Chastity of single life is
a virtue, avoiding al lusts, remaining in a sole state without marriage,

Chastity of marriage is to observe in marriage the order instituted by the
woonderful counsel of God. The causes of chastity are, 1. The commandment
of GOD. 2. The preservation of Gods Image. 3. A study and desire to avoid the
defacing of Gods image, and the conjunction that is between God and the
Church. 4. Rewards and punishments. The extremities of chastity are, All
lusts, their causes, occasions, and effects: all unlawful conjunctions, all
corrupt desires that violate and hurt the conscience also in marriage. For, by
reason of the corruption of our nature, all sins are not taken away by
marriage; as when the chief and principal end of marriage is not respected.

Shamefastnes, is a virtue abhorring all filthiness, joined with a shame,
grief, and sadness, either for some former uncleanness, or for fear of falling
into any hereafter, and having a purpose and desire to fly not only
uncleanness it self, but also the occasions, and tokens, and signs of
uncleanness. Shamefastnes is required unto chastity, as a furtheraunce and
cause of chastity; and also as an effect consequent, and sign thereof. The
extremities or vices contrary to shamefastnes are, 1. Shamelesnes or
impudency, which makes light of uncleanness. 2. A rude and vplandish
bashfulnes, or an uncivil and perverse bashfulnes, when a man is ashamed of
that, whereof he ought not to be ashamed, as of a thing which is good and
honest, and requires not any bashfulnes to be showed therein.

Temperancie is a virtue observing the mean agreeable to nature, honesty,
mediocritie, and order of persons, places, and times, according to the law and
rule of nature, in things concerning the body, as in meat and drink.
Temperancie is required unto chastity, as a cause without which we cannot be
chaste. The extremities of temperancie are, Jntemperancie in meat and quaffings
of drink: Likewise an hurtful te^perancie, or too great abstinence and
hypocritical, not greeable to nature, such as is the abstinencie of E^emites.

Whereas all sorts of lusts are repugnant unto chastity, and to the drift and
scope of this commandment, the same are to be noted and observed. They may
be referred unto three several kinds: Of the first kind are those which are
contrary to nature, and from the Devil, namely, such as are even against this
our corrupt nature, not only because they corrupt it, and bereave it of that
conformity with God, but also because this our corrupt nature abhors them:
of this kind are those, which are recited by the Apostle, Romans 1. as
confounding of kinds and sexes, likewise the unnatural abusage of womankind.
These heinous sins and horrible trespasses are to be punished by the
magistrate with extraordinary punishments. Incest has for a great part, a
repugnancie with this our nature, albeit there were examples of incests in our
first parents, because those were done but of necessity, and by dispensation
from God himself. Therefore this was an exception from the general rule.

Of the second kind are those which proceed from this our corrupt nature, as
fornications amongst those that are free from marriage, adulteries between
persons that are both married, companings of married persons with others that
are unmarried. If a married person have company with another married person,
it is a double adultery; for he violateth both his own wedlock, and the
others. If a married man have to do with an unmarried woman, it is simple
adultery. Simple fornication is of those that are unmarried. Magistrates are by
duty bound severely to punish incestes and adulteries. For they are much more
heinous than thefts and robberies. God appoints death for adulteries. Now
although God did not ordain that simple-fornication also should be punished
with death, yet when he says after, Let there not be a whore among you, he
signifies that it is to be punished in his kind. There are other things
also, which are committed of this our corrupt nature with an evil conscience,
as lusts and evil desires, unto which we yield, or wherewith we are
delighted, neither endeavor to avoid them. Such vicious and lewd desires, and
the like, although they be not punished in the civil court, yet are they
joined with an evil conscience, and are punished of God.

Of the third kind are corrupt inclinations, unto which yet good men do not
yield, but with-stand them, and take away from them all occasions, and their
conscience is not troubled, because God is inuocated and called upon, and the
grace of resistance is desired, and there is remaining in their hearts a
testimony of the remission of their sins. And for a remedy for these
sins, after the fall was marriage appointed. Therefore against these
inclinations is it to be said, It is better to marry, than to burn. But yet
S. Paul nevertheless by those words does not allow such marriages as are
untimely, hurtful to the common wealth, entered into before a lawful age, or
dishonest, that is, against good orders and manners.

The special Questions of Marriage.

1 What Marriage is. 2 What are the causes of the institution of Marriage. 3
Whether it be a thing indifferent. 4 What are the duties of married persons. 5
What things are contrary to Marriage.
1 WHAT MARRIAGE IS.
MArriage is a lawful and indissoluble conjunction of one man and one woman,
instituted by God, that we might know him to be chaste, and to detest all lust:
that also we might therein chastely serve the Lord, and that especially it might
be a means whereby mankind might be multiplied, and God gather thence
afterward unto himself a Church; Lastly, that it might be a society and
fellowship of labors, cares, and prayer. That marriage may be a lawful
conjunction, these things are thereto required: 1 That matrimony be
contracted by the consent of both parties. 2 That there be adioined also the
consent of others, whose consent is required, as namely Parents, or those who
are in the place of Parents. 3 That honest conditions be observed. 4 That there
be no error committed in the persons. 5 That Matrimony be contracted between
such persons as are not forbidden by Gods Law, as between them, unto whom
the degrees of consanguinitie may be no hinderance. The degree of consanguinity
is the distance of kinsfolk in descent. Concerning those degrees this rule is
to be observed: How many persons there are from the stock so many degrees
there are. Now the stock is the person from whom the rest are derived. The
Line is either of ascendents, or descendents, or collaterals. The Ascendents
are all the ancestors and progenitors. The Descendents are all the posterity or
progeny. The Line of Collaterals is either equal, or unequal; It is Equal,
when there is equal distance from the common stock. Unequal, when the
distance is unequal. Those prohibitions of degrees of consanguinitie from
marriage, which are expressed and set down, Leuit. 18. are Moral, 1 Because
the Gentiles are said to be cast out for these abominations. But the Gentiles
had no ceremonial Law. 2 Paul does most sharply reprove him, who married
his fathers wife. 1. Cor. 5. John Baptist says unto Herod, Mar. 6.18. It is
not lawful for thee to have thy brothers wife. From the end, because the end,
that is, the prohibition of incest in reverence of Blood was made universal,
perpetual, and moral. 4 It is the Law of nature. 5 The conjunction shall be
lawful, or the marriage lawful, if such persons be joined in matrimony, as
are fit to be joined. 6 If this conjunction be in the Lord, that is, that a
believer marry not with an unbeliever, but with a believer, and that
religiously in the fear of God. 7 If Matrimony be contracted between two
persons. For they shall be two in one flesh. Objection. The Fathers had more
wives. Answer. We must judge not according to examples, but according to
Laws.

2 What are the causes of marriage.
THE author of marriage is God himself. For marriage is no invention of Man,
but instituted by God in Paradise. Now the causes for which marriage was
instituted are, as we may learn out of the definition of marriage, 1 The
means of multiplieng mankind. 2 The gathering of the Church. 3 The image and
resemblance of the conjunction between God and the Church. 4 That loose and
wandering lusts might be avoided. 5 That there might be a society and
fellowshippe of labors and prayer. That fellowship is more near and strait,
and therefore sends out more ardent and earnest prayers: because we do more
ardently and earnestly help them, by our prayers, unto whom we are joined in
labor and affection. As, the Parents pray more earnestly for the children,
than the children for their Parents; because love does descend, not ascend.

3 Whether marriage be a thing indifferent.
MArriage is a thing indifferent unto them, who have the gift of continency.
But whosoever are not endewed with this gift of continency, unto all them
marriage is not a thing indifferent, but commanded unto them as necessary from
God himself. And as marriage is a thing indifferent to all those that are
endued with the gift of continency, so the same is granted unto all persons
that are fit and meet for it. But when a just and lawful time of
contracting marriage is not observed, then is that thing a cause of many evils
and troubles in civil and Ecclesiastical affairs. But notwithstanding
whosoever have once lawfully and in the Lord contracted Matrimony, it is never
permitted or lawful for them to dissolve or loose the bond of Matrimony once
contracted, except it be for adultery.

4 What are the duties of married persons.
THE duties of married persons, are, 1 Mutual Love, 2 Spousall faith and
troth, as each to love the other only, continually and constantly. 3 Community
of goods, and a Sympathy or fellow-feeling in evils and calamities. 4 The
bringing forth, and bringing up of children. 5 Bearing with infirmities, with
a desire to cure them. The proper duty of the husband is, 1 To nourish his
wise, and children. 2 To govern them. 3 To defend them. The proper duty of
the wife is, 1 To be a helper unto her husband in maintaining and preserving
their household substance. 2 To obey and reverence her husband. When these
things are neglected, they grieuouslie trespass against the lawful use of
marriage.

5 What things are contrary to matrimony.
UNTO matrimony are contrary, fornications, adulteries, incests, unlawful
copulation, abuses of marriage, and divorces not in case of adultery. But the
person that is forsaken, or is solicited to admit a forsaking, does not cause
the divorce, but the other.

THE EIGHT COMMAVNDEMENT.
THOU shall not steal.

By this commandment is enacted and decreed a distinction of possessions. For
the end of this commandment is, The preservation of goods, or possessions,
which God gives to every one for the maintenance of their life. Thou shall not
steal, that is, Thou shall not cover, or attempt by guile to conueigh thy
neighbors goods unto thee. Therefore defend, preserve, increase them, and give
thy neighbor his own. Now theft is only named, as being the grossest kind
of defrauding, that by it the rest of the like quality might be understood,
and that for the same, as the scope or end, other vices or sins of like
nature, and their antecedents and consequentes might be prohibited and
forbidden.

The virtues of this eight commandment, together with their extremes or
contrary vices.
1 COmmutatiue Justice, which is a virtue in purchasing of goods, not coveting
after an other man's goods, and keeping an equality by number in bargains, and
in the common trade of life, in the purchasing and exchaunging of things,
according to just laws between the ware and the price, the desert and the
reward, whether it be in purchase and buying, or in exchange of things. All
things either are no man's, or some man's. Therefore those things are translated
to another Owner, which are either no man's, or are belonging to other men:
Those things that are no man's, become theirs who get them: And if thou sease
upon that which is no man's, thou shall injury no man. Those things that
belong to another man, are passed from him, either by violence, the Owner
being unwilling thereto; or by grant, according to the Owners will and liking.
Those things are passed from the Owner against his will, which are either by
right of war, or by captivity taken away from an enemy. Those things are
passed away with the owners liking, which are passed unto another either by
enheritance, or by contract and bargain. By inheritance things are passed over
to another, either by Testament, or without any Testament. A contract or
bargain is a consent and agreement between any of passing over any things, or
of the communicating or exchanging of them, according to just and honest Laws.
Al contractes are comprehended under commutatiue justice.

Now there are ten sorts of contractes. 1. Bying and selling; when a thing
is passed from the buier unto the seller, so that the buier pay the seller a
just equivalent price for it. This is sometimes either with a condition of
selling it again, or with a condition of not selling it again, so that the
buier cannot sell that, which he bought, unto others. Unto buying belongs
the buying of reuennues; for that is no usury; as neither is the setting out of
ground to farm at a certainey rate yearly to be paed. 2. Loan, which is a
contract, wherein the use of a thing is passed to another, so that there be
repaired as much again. In loan a thing is given, not that the same thing
should be restored, but the like, or that which is of the same value. 3.
There is another loan, which is called Commodation, when the use of a thing is
granted a man for a certain time, so that without any price or valuation the
self same thing be preciselie restored whole and sound. 4. Donation, or by
deed of gift, when a thing is passed from the right owner, who has the right
of giving it, by free grant and will unto another, without any recompense
conditioned. Objection. Justice requires that we give like for like: but this
is not done in donation: Therefore this is repugnaunt unto justice. Answer.
Justice requires it, if they be given with that mind and purpose, as to have
recompense. 5. Exchange, when a thing is exchaunged by the lawefull owners
consent, or when one thing of like value is given for another. 6. A letting to
hire, which is a contract, whereby the use, not the right or possession, of a
thing, is passed by the right owners to another upon a certain price, and for
a certain time, so that the same thing be restored safe and sound. 7. Pledging
or gaging, when a thing passed to another, as being bound to be his for use,
till such time as other things which are owed him, are repaied unto him: or
when a thing is delivered a man for a certain time, that if in the mean
season it be not redeemed, the other may have the right of using it at his
pleasure. 8. Committing on trust, when a thing is delivered to another to
keep, so that neither the use, nor the possession, but only the keeping and
custody of the thing is committed unto him. 9. Partnership, which is a
certain contract used by them who trafique together, wherein one emploieth his
money, the other his work, or labor with this condition, that part of the
gain may come to each of them. 10. A certain contract, wherein the use of a
ground, or the possession of a ground to use is passed by the owner unto an
husbandman, with a certain condition, as namely, that he til and labor the
ground delivered unto him, and be bound unto the Master to perform certain
duty, or some certain service. These diverse kinds of contracts are to be
observed, for the better understanding of commutatiue justice.

The extremes or vices contrary to commutatiue justice are these, 1. Unto
commutatiue justice are repugnaunt all unlawful conueiaunces of things, which
are done either by violence, as robberies; or by guile and deceit, as thefts.
Theft is the taking away of that which belongs unto another besides the
owners knowledge, and will, with mind and purpose to deprive him thereof. The
special sorts of theft are, Robbery of a common treasury: Counterfeiting of
merchandise, when one uses sleights and guiles in contractes: Sacrilege,
cousinages, and al corruptions of contractes, among which usury has not the
lowest place. Usury is that which is taken above the principal in regard of
the loan only. From usury are exempted just contracts, Partnership, Buying,
contractes of paying rents, just recompense of any damage or loss. There are
many Questions of usury concerning which we may judge according to that
saying; Do as thou will be done unto, and what thou will not have done unto
thee, that do not thou unto another.

2 Autarchie, or Contentedness, which is a virtue whereby we are contented
with those things which we presently enjoy, and have justly gotten, and
meeklie suffer poverty and other discommodities, neither are broken through
want and penury, nor gape after other men's goods or substance, nor covet things
needless and unnecessary. The extremes of this virtue, In the defect, are
Theft and Covetousness; In the Excess, a feigned refusal, when one makes wise
as if he were unwilling to receive such things, which yet he could and greatly
would receive. Likewise, Inhumanitie, which is, to refuse all things.

3 Fidelity or faithfulness, which is a virtue that heedeth another harms,
and endeavors to auert them, and gladly and diligently perfourmeth all the
parts of his calling in doing his duty, to this end, that God may be honored,
and we sustain our life, and that there may be sufficient of things
necessary for us, and ours, and also that we may yield succor and make supply
of necessaries unto others. He that undergoes not those labors, which he is
able and ought to undergo, commits theft. Objection. There is mention made
of fidelity in the fifth commandment; Therefore it has no place here.
Answer. It is no absurd thing, that one and the same virtue should be placed
in diverse commandments for diverse ends and respects. For the ends of
actions make the actions differ. Fidelity is placed in this commandment, as
it is a diligence and endeavor employed in the with-standing of others
discommodities, and in doing such works and labousr, whereby we may get us
food, raiment, and things necessary. Fidelity is placed in the fifth
commandment, as it is an obedience showed in doing our duty. The extremes
hereof are, Unfaithfulness, not respecting or heeding any harms and damages,
neither diligently performing the duties of his calling and vocation,
Likewise, Rechlesnes and Slothfulnes, which only takes part and fruition of
public commodities, but it self conferreth nothing to the common society of
men.

4 Liberality, which is a virtue giving to them that want, according to the
rule of upright reason: that is, which imparteth unto others his own goods,
not by any due bond or obligation, but according to the law of God and nature,
or for godliness and charity sake, with a liberal heart, according to his own
ability, and the necessity of others; as well knowing where, when, to whom, and
how much he may give, and observing a mediocritie and mean between base
niggardliness and riotous prodigality. The Extremes hereof in the defect are,
Illiberalitie, Covetousness, Baseness. Covetousness is a desire of
increasing our substance by right and wrong, and a restraint of just and
lawful giving. In the Excess, Ouerlashing, Prodigality, which gives beyond
reason, and without need, with a rejoicing in such excessive largis. Of this
vice it is said, Sick art thou who take delight in lauishing.

5 Hospitality, which is one kind of liberality, namely liberality and
bountfulnesse toward trauailers and strangers, especially toward those that
are exiles for the profession of the gospel, entertaining them with all duties
of hospitality, and Christian charity. The Extremes are, Inhospitalitie, and
prodigality toward strangers.

6 Parsimonie, which is a virtue eschewing and shunning riot, and all
unnecessary expenses or gifts, keeping those things which are his own and
well gotten, and profitably employing them to his own use and theirs, that
belong unto him, neither spending more, than he sees to be needful. This
virtue is referred to this commandment; because, if in this commandment
Liberality be commanded, the contrary thereof then is also here forbidden,
namely Ouerlashing, whereunto is opposed Sparingnesse and Parsimonie.
Liberality has Parsimonie accompanying it; and they both are two means
between the same extremes; that is between Covetousness and Prodigality;
because Liberality without Parsimonie degenerateth into Prodigality; and
Parsimonie without Liberality degenerateth into Covetousness and Baseness.
And therefore he is not liberal, who is not sparing; neither is he sparing,
who is not liberal; Liberality enlarges our giving according to ruled
reason. Parsimonie restrains the same according to ruled reason, and spares
so much, as is requisite for necessary uses. So then these two virtues are
exercised in the same matter, and between the same extremes, and therefore the
same vices which are contrary to Liberality, are repugnaunt also to Parsimony.

7 Frugality, which is an oecumenicall, or household virtue, disposing of
things well gotten, honestly, wisely, and profitably, for matters profitable and
necessary, or defraying charges upon such things ever as are necessary, and
fruitful. This virtue is of near affinity with parsimony. Frugalitie or
thriftinesse consists and depends on ruled reason. The extremes are the
same both of frugality, and of parsimony, to wit, Prodigality and covetousness,
or niggardliness.

Certain objections against the former distinction of Rightes and Possessions.
1 IN the Apostles time all things were common. Therefore now also al goods
ought to be common. Answer. There is a dissimilitude and a far different
reason in these examples. For they were induced upon good causes, why they
should the^ bring in community of goods. 2. It was then to be feared, least if
they did not sell their possessions, they should be violently deprived of them.
3. They did it not being enforced thereto by any Law, but freely. For their
parting with their goods in common was voluntary; none was compelled unto it.
And therefore Peter says to Ananias, whiles it remained, appertained it not
unto thee? And after it was sold, was it not in thine own power? 4. This
custom was of force only at that time. 5. This community of goods was not in
all churches; because in Macedony collection was made of alms, which were sent
to Jerusalem.

2 Natural things are unchangeable. Community of goods is natural. Therefore
community of goods is unchangeable, and therefore is now also to be observed.
Answer. Natural things are unchangeable, in respect of the Moral law, but not
in respect of natural profit and vtility.

3 Christ says unto the young man, Jf thou will be perfect, sell al, and give
it to the power. Answer. The examples have a diverse reason: because this was
a special calling of a Disciple, belonging to an Apostle-ship. Again, Christ
would thereby signify, how far off he was from the perfection of the Law,
whereof he gloried.

4 All things are Christ's, therefore all things are Christians. Answer. Al
things are Christians, or ours, as concerning the right to the thing, but not
as concerning the right in the thing. All things are due unto us, but we may
not lay hands of any thing before the time.

5 Al things between frindes are common. Answer. All things between frinds
are common, as touching the use of them, and as touching the duties and parts
of honesty and commodity, or as touching necessary use being leuiled by the
rule of reason. For we are to ask things of our frindes, which we would
have them ask of us. But al things among frindes are not common as concerning
the possession and right: because unto every one belongs a distinct
possession and right of his own goods. This possession of goods, or distinction
of rights is enacted (as we have said) by this commandme^t: because if we may
not steal, we must then possess our own: and that for these causes. 1. To
maintain our selves. 2. To yield something for the mainteinance of the
ministry. 3. For the mainteinaunce of the common wealth. 4. For the
mainteinaunce of our frindes.

THE NINTH COMMANDMENT.
THOU shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

The drift or end of this commandment is the ordinance and maintenunce of
the truth among men. Neither is in this commandment only bearing of false
witness forbidden, but all those things which are of near affinity therewith,
the general whereof is lying. Thou shall not bear false witness of thy
neighbor, or against thy neighbor. In this negative commandment is
comprehended an affirmative, which is: Bear therefore true witness of or for
thy neighbor, that is, be true, and desirous of learning and knowing the
truth. The name of Truth here is taken for truenes or truth-speaking, that is,
for the agreement or correspondence of our knowledge or speech with the thing,
whereof our speech is. True we term the speech it self agreeing with the
thing.

The virtues of this ninth commandment, together with their vices.
THE chief and principal virtue, which is here commanded, is truth. 1. Truth
or truenes, is a virtue, whereby we love true opinions and speeches, and seek
after them, and receive them, and gladly profess and defend them, according as
both our duty, and persons, places, times, and other circumstances require,
unto the glory of God, and the safety of our neighbor. This end makes that the
Devil cannot be said to be true, although he sometimes speak that which is true.
For his is true, who speaks and loves the truth, and does affection it for
the glory of God, and the safety of his neighbor. Truth may also be defined on
this wise: Truth is a firm election in the will, whereby we constantly embrace
true sentences and opinions, speak that which is true, keep covenants and
promises, and avoid al deceitful dissemblings both in speech and outward
gesture. True confession is commanded both in this, and in the third
commandment: as often times the same virtue is required to the obedience of
diverse commandments. But in the third commandment true confession is
required, as it is the honor and worship of God, immediately respecting God:
and here it is commanded, as there is a will in us not to deceive our
neighbor, but to wish his safety and welfare. Under the name of truth we
comprise liberty of speech, which is a virtue whereby, as much as the time,
place, and necessity requires, we profess the truth freely, and boldly, and
are not withdrawn through the fear of dangers.

Unto truth, in the defect, are repugnant, 1. Al lies, unto which appertain al
guiles, dissemblings, negligence in understanding the truth of things, lies of
courtesy; likewise slanders, backbitings, evil speakinges, which kinds of
lying are repugnaunt also unto Fairness of manners and conditions. Lying, is,
to speak otherwise, or to signify otherwise by outward gestures, than thou
think, and than the thing it self is. So then in this commandment
principally is lying forbidden. Unto lying is referred also wilful ignorance,
which is a lying in the mind. Officious lies, or lies of courtesy are to be
avoided, because evil is not to be done, that good may come of it. And al
lying that does expressly dissemble the truth, is condemned. But a truth which
is uttered by a figure, is no ly whether he understand it or no, with whom we
deal. This is to be observed that we be not too rigorous in examining the
actions of the Saints; and also, that we excuse not those things which have no
need to be excused. 1. Object. That which profits another, and hurts no
man, is not sin. A dutiful lie is of such quality. Therefore it is no sin.
Answer. The Minor is false. Reply. But yet the truth is often not to be
spoken. Answer. We must not put a difference between the hiding of the truth
and lying. Object. God blesses the midwiues, because thy told a lie. Therefore
God allows and likes of lies. Answer. God therefore blesses the
mid-wiues, because they feared God, and slew not the infantes of the
Israelites. 2. Unto truth, in the defect, is repugnaunt vanity or leuitie,
which is a readiness to lieng. He is vain, who lies much, often, and easily,
and that without any shame. A lier is he, who has a desire to lie. Unto
truth, in the excess, is repugnant, 1. Untimely professing of the truth, which
is to cast pearls to swine, and to give that which is holy unto dogs, as
Christ says, who by these words does wholly forbid unnecessary and untimely
professing of the truth. For, as the verse has it in the Poet, He that warns
out of time, does harm. 2. Curiosity, which is to search after things
unnecessary, or impossible. These things may suffice for this chief and
principal virtue of this ninth commandment. The virtues which follow, wait
upon truth, and they all are as it were of truths retinue.

2 Fairness of mind is a virtue, which takes well things well or doubtfully
spoken or done, and interprets them in the better part, to wit, as far as
there are any reasonable causes to induce thereto, and does not easily conceive
suspicions, neither sticks upon suspicions, though they be such as are just,
and have reasonable causes: he does not ground thereon, neither directs his
actions accordingly, neither decrees or determines ought by them. It is
defined after this manner, Faiernesse of mind is a neighbour-vertue* unto
truth, allowing of others wills upon probable reason, and hating all
euil-mindednesse, and drawing also some things that are doubtful to the better
part; and hopeing in deed that which is good, but yet as touching mutable
things thinking that the wills of men may change, and that a man may err
concerning another will, seeing the infoldings and secret places of man's mind
are not beheld. The Extremes of this virtue, in the defect, are, Slaundering
and Suspiciousnesse. Slaundering, is, not only falsely to criminate and attach
the innocent, but also to interpret things indifferently spoken in the worser
part, or also to interlace and coin some falshoode. Suspiciousnes, is, to take
things well or ambiguously spoken in the worser part, to suspect evil things
of those that are good, or to suspect without cause; or also to make to much of
true suspicions. It is lawful for us sometimes to suspect, except we will be
fools. Mat. 10.16.17. Beware of men: be ye wise as serpents, and innocent as
doves. In the excess, foolish Credulity, and foolish flattery. Credulity,
is, hastily or unadvisedly to interpret any thing, or to assent to one without
just and probable cause: Or, to believe a thing of another, when there are
manifest or probable reasons to the contrary. Flattery or assentation, is, to
praise or like things not to be praised, thereby to get either the goods or
favor of another man. Fairness of mind, is, an assistant or special kind of
truth. Therefore it is also here together with truth commanded.

3 Simplicity, which is open truth without wrinkles or fetches and
compassings: or, it is a virtue which does properly and plainly speak and do
such things as are true, right and declared in arts and common life. Truth
is tempered with simplicity and fairness of mind or conditions. The extremes
of simplicity are, Fained simplicity, and Doubleness in manners and
conversation.

4 Constancy, which is a virtue not departing from the known truth, neither
altering his purpose without good and necessary causes, but constantly speaking
and doing such things as are true, just, and necessary. Or, it is a virtue
persisting in the truth once found, known, and approved, and in the like
manner professing and defending the same. Constancy is necessary for the
preservation and maintenance of the truth. Therefore it is here also
commanded. The extremes hereof in the defect, are Inconstancy, or Lightness,
which is to alter true purposes and opinions without reason. In the excess the
extremes are, Pertinacie or stoicall stiffness and rigor, which is a vice
arising from a confidence in his own wit, or from pride and ostentation,
refusing to yield or depart from his opinion, albeit it be such as he sees
by strong reasons to be false, but persisting in false opinions, or unjust and
unprofitable actions.

5 Docilitie, or a readiness to learn, which is a virtue searching after the
reasons of true opinions, easily believing, and yielding to those that teach or
show better things, and that upon certain reason, and framing his will ready
to assent unto true or probable reasons, and to leave those things which
before he held and embraced. The same are the extremes of Docilitie, which are
of consta^cie, whereunto also this Docilitie is necessary. For Constancy
without Docilitie degenerateth into Pertinacie; and Docilitie without
Constancy degenerateth into Leuitie. Now al these virtues which have been
numbered agree and are linked very well one with another. For Truth must be
tempered with Fairness of mind and Simplicity, perceived and known by
Docilitie, preserved and maintained by Constancy. And so these former virtues
are required to the being of truth. Now the three virtues following are
required to the profitable being of the truth in the world.

6 Taciturnitie or silentnesse, which is a virtue withholding in silence
things secret and unnecessary to be spoken, where, when, and as far as is
needful; and avoiding overmuch babbling and talkatiuenes. Or, it is such a
manner of professing the truth, whereby secret things, whether true, or false,
are kept close; and speeches unnecessary and unprofitable are avoided;
especially untimely, and pernicious speeches, and such as give offense. The
extremes hereof, in the defect, are Prattling, foolish prating, and treachery.
Prattling, is, not to be able to keep close any thing. Foolish Prating, or
futilitie and folly of speech, is to speak unseasonably, immoderatelie, and
foolishly. In the excess, Haughtiness, Peevishness, and dissembling of the
truth, where are necessary, or probable causes. Peevishness, or morositie,
is an overmuch silentnesse and burying of the truth, where gods glory and the
safety of our neighbor, or our own or others cause, or the love of our
friends requires us to speak. Silentnesse without affability becomes
Morositie or peevishness, and Affability without Silentnesse becomes
prattling, and foolish prating, babbling out things hurtful, unnecessary,
vain, or secret.

7 Affability or readiness of speaking, which is a virtue gladly, and with
signification of good will hearing, answering, speaking where need is upon a
necessary and probable cause; or it is a virtue easily entertaining the
mutual talks of others, and giving signification of the good will in
conferences, speech, and gestures. Or, Gentleness, facility, affability,
consist in giving care and making answer unto others, with some signification
of good will. The same are the extremes of Affability, which are of
Taciturnitie, or Silentnesse: likewise leuitie, Assentation, or affectated and
labored affability.

8 Vrbanitie or pleasantness, which is a virtue of speaking the truth with a
certain grace and elegancie, to teach, comfort, exhilarate, and nip or touch:
or, it is a certain sauce of truth and speech, to wit, the truth figuratively
uttered, either to move or delight others, without bitternesses, and keeping
the circumstances of place, time and persons. The Extremes are, 1 Scurrilitie,
and Dicacitie. Scurrilitie is obscene and homly jesting, especially in serious
matters. Scurra (that is a scurrulous person) is so called from the Greek
word (...), which signifies dung: because he speaks filthiness and dung.
Dicacitie or scoffing is a vice of i^sting bitterly, and of deriding, bourding
and exagitating others, but especially such as are miserable. 2 Stoliditie or
Foolishness, and Sottishness or vnsauorinesse. Foolishinesse is an untimely
affectation of vrbanitie. Sottishness is an absurd and unsavory affectation
of vrbanitie. Now Vrbanitie is an especial gift of the wit, but may
notwithstanding be gotten by experience in matters. 3 Backbyting, which
spreads false slanders of others, constereth doubtful speeches in the worse
part, with a desire of revenge, and an endeavor to hurt, or to raise envy.

THE TENTH COMMANDMENT.
THOU shall not covet thy neighbors house, nor his wife, nor his servant, nor
his maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, not any thing that is his.

The scope and end of this commandment is a rightnesse and inward obedience
of all our Affections toward God and our neighbor, which must also be
observed in the other commandments. Neither yet is this commandment
superfluous: because it is added to the former commandments, to be a
declaration of them, and that universal, because this is spoken of the whole
in general: and further, it is also added, to be as a rule and leuill,
according to which we must take and measure the inward obedience of all the
other commandments. For in this commandment is commanded original justice
or righteousness toward God and our neighbor, which is the true knowledge
of God in our mind, and a power, inclination, and desire in our will, and
heart, and in all our parts, to obey God, and his known will, and to perform
unto our neighbor for gods sake al duties required, and to regard and
maintain his safety and welfare.

Unto orinall justice, original sin, or concupiscence is repugnaunt, which
is an inordinate appetite, or a corrupt inclination and pronenesse, in the
mind, will, and heart, contrary to God, and desiring those things, that God
forbids in his Law; which ensued upon the fall of our first parents, and was
from the^ derived to all their posterity, so deprauing and corrupting their
whole nature, that all by reason of this corruption are become obnoxious to the
everlasting wrath of God, neither are able to do ought that is pleasing to
God, except pardon be granted for the son of God, the Mediator, and our
nature be renewed by the holy Ghost.

Of original justice toward our neighbor there are two extremes: 1. In the
defect, Original sin toward our neighbor, which is a desire and wishing of
those things, which hurt our neighbor. 2. In the excess, Jnordinate love of
our neighbor, when for his sake we neglect God. We are here to observe, that
not only corrupt inclinations are sins, but also the thinking of evil is
sin, to wit, as the thinking of evil joined with a desire of doing it. Now
that concupiscence is evil and sin, albeit it be borne with us, there is no
doubt. For, we are not to judge according to nature, but according to the law,
whether a thing be sin or no, be it or be it not borne with us.

The Pelagians denied concupiscence to be sin. But Paul says the contrary,
Roman. 7.7. J had not known concupiscence (or lust) except the law had said,
Thou shall not lust. Their objections are these.

1 Object. Natural things are not sins. Concupiscence is a natural thing.
Therefore it is no sin. Ans. There is a fallacy of the accident in the Minor.
For concupiscence was not before the fall, but ensued after the fall. Again,
this word Natural, has a diverse construction. For in the Mayor it signifies
a good thing created of God in nature, to wit, man's appetite before the fall,
which was not contrary to the Law. In the Minor it signifies a thing, which
we have not of nature, but which we purchased unto us after the fall. Reply.
An affection or appetite, even in nature now corrupted, to desire good things,
and eschew hurtful things is not sin. But such is concupiscence. Therefore it
is no sin. Answer. An Inclination whether it be according to Gods law, or
inordinate, which is moved toward such things as displease God, is sin.
To desire the fruit of a tree, is natural: but as it was desired of Eve,
being forbidden of God, it was sin. But original sin and concupiscence
differ. For concupiscence is a propension to those things which are forbidden
by the law. Original sin is the guilt of all mankind, the want of the
knowledge and will of God.

2 Objection. That which is not in our power to cause either to be in us, or
not to be in us, is no sin. Concupiscence is not in our power. Therefore it
is no sin. Answer. The Mayor is true; except we have lost that power
through our own fault: otherwise it is false. For God requiring of us
impossible things, does not injury us, because he commanded them, when they
were possible. Neither has he now lost his right of requiring that of us
which he left with us.

3 Objection. In Baptism sin is taken away. Therefore concupiscence is not
sin in those that are baptized. Answer. The guilt of sin is taken away
in baptism, but not the corruption or inclination to sin.

4 Objection. Sin makes men obnoxious to the wrath of God. Concupiscence
does not make the regenerate obnoxious to Gods wrath. Therefore concupiscence
is no sin. Answer. Concupiscence does not make the regenerate obnoxious to
the wrath of God, that is, by reason of the grace of God: but this comes not
thereof, as if concupiscence were no sin. For neither do other sins
condemn the regenerate. And this is it that the Schoolmen say: The Formal of
sin is taken away, and the Material remains.

5 Object. Where the formal of sin is taken away, there also the thing it
self is taken away, that is, the material of sin, or sin it self: But in
baptism the formal of sin is taken away. Therefore sin it self is taken
away in Baptism. Answer. There is a double formal of sin. 1. The guilt,
that is, the appointing of it to punishment, which guilt is taken away. 2. The
repugnancie with the Law, and an inclination to sin, which abides.

NOW we have expounded the Decalogue or Ten commandments, there are two
Questions as yet remaining concerning the Law, which have been heretofore
handled, and now are briefly to be run over again. 1. How the Law is
possible, or, How men may keep it. 2. What is the use of the Law, since in
this life we are not able to fulfill it. S. Jerome says: Let him be accursed
who says the Law is impossible; to wit, with grace in Christ. And again, Let
him be accursed, who says the Law is possible, that is, without grace.

1 How the Law is possible.
THAT this Question may the better be understood, we are to distinguish the
nature of man, as it was first entire and vncorrupt, and afterward fallen,
and again restored. Unto nature entire and vncorrupt the whole Law, as
touching al parts and degrees thereof, is possible, as unto Angels. Unto the
regenerate who have nature restored again, the Law is possible. 1. As
concerning outward order and discipline. 2. By the benefit of justification
and regeneration, both which benefits we obtain by faith. 3. As touching the
beginning of inward and outward obedience in this life, 1. Ioh. 5.3. Likewise
as concerning the imputation of Christ's justice, in whom is our victory. He
that without the beginning of obedience, that is, without regeneration,
glories that he knows and worshippeth God, is a lier. But the Law is
impossible to the regenerate, in respect of God, that is, as touching the
perfect inward and outward obedience of the Law. For they fulfill not the Law
perfectly, because they do many things contrary to the Law. And those things
also, which they do according to the Law, are imperfect. For in the regenerate
are many sins yet remaining, as original sin, many actual sins,
ignoraunces, omissions, infirmities: which their sins themselves
notwithstanding acknowledge and bewail. Therefore regenerate sinners differ
much from unregenerate sinners. And this difference is threefolde. 1. The
purpose in God himself of saving the regenerat. 2. The certain final
repentance of the regenerat. 3. Even in the very sins of the regenerate
there remains some beginning of true faith and conversion. The wicked and
unregenerate, in whom is nature fallen, but not restored, have neither whole
obedience, nor the beginning of obedience.

2 What is the use of the Law.
SAINT Paul teaches two uses of the Law, in his Epistle to the Galathians. 1.
The knowledge of sin. 2. That it is a Schoolmasters unto Christ. In nature
uncorrupted the uses of the Law were, 1. Conformity with God. 2. A good
conscience. In nature corrupted the uses or ends of the Law are, 1.
Mainteinaunce of order and discipline as well in the regenerate, as
unregenerate. 2. That we may know that God is, and what he is. 3. The
knowledge of sin. 4. A preparing to despair in the reprobate. 5. A mean,
whereby repentance may be kindled and increased in Gods chosen. 6. A leuil or
rule of living unto the faithful, and that whereunto we must tend and shoot, as
unto our mark. The Law then has his use both before and after conversion. It
is profitable for the acknowledgement of sin and repentance; because it is a
rule unto us, whereunto we are to frame our life and thankefulnes. Likewise, it
is a glass unto us, wherein we may see our wantes, that so our renewing
increasing, our praieng also may increase, whereby we desire more and more to
be conformed unto God and his Law.

The objections, whereby the adversaries endeavor to prove that there is no use
of the law unto christians, are these. 1 That which cannot be kept, ought not
to be taught, because it profits nothing. The Law cannot be kept; Therefore
the Law ought not to be taught. Answer. The Mayor is false. For the Law is
to be taught, that we may strive and endeavor to come as near as we can unto
it. Objection. 2. He that commands impossible things, commands
unprofitable things; God commands the Law, which is impossible; Therefore
God commands unprofitable things. Answer. He commands unprofitable
things, who commands impossible things, that is, 1. Jf they be simply
impossible. 2. Jf they be always impossible. 3. If there be no other uses of
this commanding, but that those things be done which are commanded. Now we
have heard before which are the ends of the Law; for which ends of the law
before declared, God will have both the Law to be commanded, and us to be taught
the same. Objection. 3. What God will not give us, and so what we are not able
to attain unto, that we may not desire. God will not give us perfect
fulfilling of the Law in this life. Therefore we ought not to desire perfectly
to fulfill the Law. Answer. We ought not to crave or desire that which God
will not give us; that is, except God will us to desire it. But God wills us
to crave in this life, and to desire the perfect fulfilling of the Law, 1.
Because he will at length effectuate it in those that desire it: and therefore
he will give it us after this life, if we desire the same here truly and from
our heart. 2. That we may now go forward in godliness, and that the study of
living according to the prescript of Gods law may be daiely more and more
kindled and confirmed in us. 3. That by this desire of fulfilling the Law, God
may exercise us in repentance and obedience.

OF PRAYER.
THE chief Questions hereof are.

1 What prayer is, and how many sorts there are of prayer. 2 Why prayer is
necessary. 3 What is required to true prayer. 4 What is the form of prayer by
Christ prescribed.
1 WHAT PRAYER IS, AND HOW MANY SORTS OF PRAYER THERE ARE.
Prayer is a petition joined with an ardent and earnest desire, whether uttered
in words or not uttered; whereby we ask of the true god reueiled in the word
those things which he has commanded to be asked of him; proceeding from an
acknowledgement of our necessity and need, with humility, and repentance,
and confession of our own unworthiness; made in true conversion unto God and
in a confidence and sure trust in gods promises, for christ's sake our
Mediator.

Saint Paul makes mention of three sorts of prayer. 1. Petitions for good
things. 2. Deprecations against evil things. 3. Jntercessions and requests
for others. The General of these specials is Prayer; Likewise Jnuocation, and
Adoration. But prayer differs notwithstanding from Invocation and Adoration.
For Adoration is often times taken for the whole worship of god; because who^
we woorship, him we account for the true God. But prayer is a part of
Invocation: for Jnuocation compriseth these two, as a general his specials,
namely Petition or prayer, and thanksgiving. For Invocation, or, to Invoke
on God is to crave of the true God any thing that is necessary, both for the
soul and body, and to give thanks for benefits received of him. Thankefulnes,
or Thanksgiving is an acknowledgement of a benefit received, and a voluntary
binding to the performaunce of duties mutual, possible, and lawful.
Thankefulnes contains two things, to wit, truth, and justice.

2 Why Prayer is necessary.
THE causes, for which prayer is necessary, are these.

1 The commandment of God; because God has commanded that we call upon him,
and will this way chiefly and principally be worshipped and magnified by us.
Psa. 50.16. Call upon me in the day of trouble. Luke 11.2. When ye pray, say,
Our Father, etc. By these words of Christ it further appears that the tongue
also is required to prayer: which we may prove also by other reasons. 1 God will
have himself magnified with the tongue which he created chiefly to this end.
2. Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. 3 We are to do it,
that others may follow our example.

2 Our Necessity and Want: For we receive not of God those blessings which
are necessary for our safety and salvation, except we ask them of him. For
God has promised them to such only as ask them. Now, what we speak of the
necessity of prayer, the same is also to be said of the necessity of
Thanksgiving. For without giving of thanks we leese those things that are
given, and receive not such things as are to be given and are necessary. The
necessity of both will easily appear, whether we consider the effects of
faith, or the cause of faith, and so also faith it self. Faith is kindled or
increased in no man, who does not ask it: no man has faith, who gives not
thanks for it: and they which are endued with true faith, ask the grace of
God: and they who have tasted of gods grace, show themselves thankful unto God
for it, and do more and more crave and desire it. Romans 5.5. The love of God is
shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost, which is given unto us. And the
holy ghost himself also is obtained by petition or prayers. For the holy
Ghost is given to none but to him that desires him.

1 Objection. But we see the wicked also to receive the gifts of the holy
Ghost. Therefore not only they that desire him receive him. Answer. The
wicked verily receive many gifts, but not those principal gifts, neither
those that are proper to the Elect, such as are faith, repentance, remission of
sins, regeneration; and further what gifts the wicked receive, those are not
available unto them, neither do they receive them to salvation. Reply.
Jnfants crave not the holy ghost; and yet they receive him. Answer. The holy
ghost is not given but to those that ask him, that is, to those of years and
understanding, who are able to ask him. But even Infants also ask and crave
the holy ghost after their manner, having, to wit, in possibility an
inclination to faith: and therefore potentially they ask the holy Ghost, or
have an inclination to ask him.

2 Objection. The Effect is not before his cause. But prayers are the effects
of the holy Ghost, in as much as no man can ask the Holy Ghost, who has not
the holy Ghost, and he alone woorketh prayer in us: Therefore the Holy Ghost
is not received by prayer, but is in us before prayer; and so by consequent he
is not given to them only that ask him. 1 Answer. Whosoever has not the
holy ghost, cannot ask him, that is, as concerning the increase of him. 2 The
Effect is not before his cause, that is, in order and nature; but in time they
are both together. For the holy Ghost is in us according to nature before
prayer* because we then first begin to desire him, and to ask him of God, when
he is given unto us. But albeit the Holy Ghost is according to nature or order
first in us, yet he is not first in us according to time. For as soon as the
holy Ghost is given, we begin to desire his presence. When God gives his
spirit, at the same time they ask him, unto whom he is given. And the Holy
Ghost is given to none, but to him that desires him: for no man desires him,
but he who has in himself the beginning of him. Whereas then it is said of
Christ, Luke 11.13. How much more shall your Heavenly Father give the holy
Ghost to them that desire him; this must not be understood of the increase
only, but also of the beginning of his gifts and graces,

3 What is required to true prayer.
THE conditions and circumstaunces of true prayer are,

1 A direction of it unto the true God, that we make our prayer unto the true
God manifested in the Church by his Prophetical and Apostolic word, by his
works of creation, preservation, and redemption of the Church. As we have
received, so are we baptized; and as we are baptized, so we believe; and as we
believe, so we adore and worship the father, the son and the holy ghost.

2 The knowledge of Gods commandment. For without Gods commandment we doubt
of being heard Wherefore when we pray, we ought thus to resolve: I call upon
thee, because thou have commanded me. When we know that it is the
commandment of God, that we should pray unto him, then we know also that our
prayers are acceptable unto God, which he requires of us in his word.

3 The knowledge of those things which are to be asked. God will not only
have our affection and devotion to be directed unto him, but he will also that
we consider, and know such things as we are to ask of him: otherwise it is
not praying, but mocking of God; and therefore has Christ prescribed a form
of prayer, out of which we may learn what things we are to ask of god. We
are to ask (that I may summarily comprise them) things both certain, and
allowed and permitted by God. These are of two sorts, Spiritual and corporal.
God will have us ask both of him; and those spiritual things, which are
necessary to salvation, we must ask without condition; but corporal things,
with a condition. Object. He that asks doubtfullie, asks not according to
faith: We ask corporal blessings doubtfullie: therefore not according to
faith. Answer. The Mayor is either particular, or false. For the nature of
faith requires, that we be certain, not of all corporal benefits, but only
of such spiritual blessings as are necessary to salvation, as of remission of
sins, and of life everlasting. Moreover, albeit we ask corporal blessings
with a condition; yet do we not simply doubt of obtaining them. For we
believe that we shall receive those corporal blessings which we ask of
god, so that they be expedient for us unto salvation, and after this sort are
they always to be desired conditionally. For they differ very much from those
benefits which are necessary to salvation, and likewise are to be desired
after another manner. Such gifts as are necessary to salvation, are simply to
be desired, with a trust and full persuasion of being heard; even that we
shall receive them as we desire, that is, in special. But gifts, which are
not necessary to salvation, whether they be corporal, or else such
spiritual, as without which we may be saved; these are to be desired verily,
but with a condition of gods will and pleasure, that he will give them us, if
they serve for his glory, and be profitable for us; or that he will give us,
other of better quality, either at this, or some other time. We must follow in
asking these benefits the Leper which said, Lord, if thou will, Mat. 8.2.
thou can make me clean For neither do the Elect, when they ask such
things, desire simply to be heard. For oftentimes we ask things not knowing
what and what manner of things they be, and so neither know we whether the
obtaining of them in special will profit us, or be pernicious and hurtful
unto us. God notwithstanding will have us to ask of him corporal things and
others that are not necessary to salvation, 1. That the desire of corporal
things may be an exercise of our faith, and confirm our trust and confidence
of obtaining things spiritual, and available to salvation. The reason is,
because no man can look for good and saving things at gods hands, except he
have God reconciled unto him. 2. That we may consider and profess his
providence, that neither those unnecessary and corporal things befall us by
chance or fortune.

4 A true desire of those things which are to be asked. God will not have our
petition to be hypocritical or feigned, nor bredde in our mouth, but in our
heart: he will have us to pray with a true affection and desire of the heart.
Therefore an ardent desire is to be made the general of all prayer. So the Lord
said to Moses, Why do thou cry unto me? when yet Moses spoke nothing.

5 A sense and feeling of our own want. The acknowledgement and feeling of our
own want is the fountain from whence our desire arises. For what thou
think not thy self greatly to want, that do thou not earnestly desire:
Pray: for all stand in need of God.

6 Humiliation, that is, true repentance. We must needs have also true
humility, true acknowledgement of our own unworthiness, or true repentance
and conversion; and so prostrate our selves in suppliaunt manner before his
divine Majesty; 1. Because God owes us nothing. 2. Because we are his enemies
before our conversion. God does not hear sinners, that is, proud sinners, such
as was that Pharisee. And how greatly true humiliation, repentance, or
conversion is required to prayer, even that does sufficiently show, in that
the promises of God belong only to such as are converted. Wherefore without
conversion no man can pray according to faith: And without faith no man can be
assured that he shall be heard.

7 A confidence or full persuasion of being heard, for the Mediators sake: That
we may resolve that both our person and our prayers please God for the
Mediators sake, and that they are heard of him for christ's merit. We must pray
in christ's name with a true faith, our prayers are to be put on our altar
Christ: so shall we be assured to be heard. For if with a true faith we
believe that Christ is that only altar, whereon our prayers being offered
ascend into the sight of God, we must also with full confidence resolve, that
we are thorough Christ's merit just before God; and that god is reconciled
unto us by Christ: and that through the intercession of Christ our prayers are
heard of god. Galat. 6. Because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the spirit
of his son into your hearts, which cries Abba, father. But here in this full
persuasion of being hard we are to observe that difference of such things as
are to be desired, which was not long since declared.

8 A confidence and trust in Gods promise, that we know and think that god
has promised to hear as many as shall call upon him, with those conditions
before alleged. Without this promise of hearing there is no faith, without
faith prayer is but vain, and the promise is required for faith. But faith, or
this confidence is required to prayer; because except we give faith and credit
to gods promises, and think of them while we are praying, they avail us
nothing, neither can we desire ought with a good conscience: but rather, when
after this sort we know not what we ask, doubting of gods hearing of our
petition, we do not pray but mock god. Now the confidence which we have of
gods promise in hearing us, breeds in us a certainty of his hearing and our
salvation: and this certainty kindles in us a study of invocation and of
making supplications unto god. By these conditions and circumstances of sincere
and true prayer easily does it appear, how much the praying of the godly and
the wicked differ. The godly endeavor to observe al these conditions in their
praying: the wicked contrarily either omit and neglect them all, or keeping
one or two conditions, err in the rest. Some er in the knowledge of the nature
and will of God, therein omitting the first condition: some err in the things
which are to be asked, when they ask either evil things, or uncertain, or
not approved by god. Some ask these hypocriticallie: some without a feeling
of their want: some not with a confidence in the Mediator: some persisting in
their wickedness, think yet that God hears them: some desire things
necessary to salvation, with a distrust and diffidence: some lastly ask, not
thinking of Gods promise, and therefore not according to faith.

4 What is the form of prayer by Christ prescribed.
THE form of prayer prescribed by Christ unto us is recited by the two
Evangelists, Matthewe, and Luke. Which form Christ delivered unto us, not that
we should be tied to these words; but that we might know both how and what to
ask. Objection. We may not be wiser than Christ. Therefore seeing he has
appointed us a certain form of prayer, we must hold us contented therewith:
and therefore we do amiss when we use other forms of prayers. Answer. We
may not depart from that form, if Christ will have us tied unto it: but he
will not have us tied to these words, because his purpose was, when he taught
his disciples to pray, to deliver a brief sum of those things, which we are
to ask of God. Reply. That is to be retained, than which no better can be
invented: We cannot invent a better form, and better words, than are these
of Christ himself. Therefore we must retain also the form and words.
Answer. We can not invent better words, neither a better form, that is,
to express this sum of such things as are to be desired, which is as it
were the general of al things that are to be desired. These generals of gods
benefits, which Christ in this form has prescribed unto us to be desired,
cannot be proposed in a better form: but Christ will have us also to descend
to the specials, and to ask particular benefits according to our necessity.
For that form prescribed by Christ is nothing else but a set or course of
certain heads, or generals, whereunto al benefits as well corporal as
spiritual may be referred. And when christ wills us to desire the generals,
he wills us also to desire the specials. And further also those things which
are here put in general, we are in like manner for this cause, to declare in
special; that we may be lead into a consideration of our necessity, and to a
desire of making our petition unto God, to help our necessity. Now that we may
do this, we have need also of special forms of praieng. For to the
explication of generals by their specials we have need of another form. But yet
al other forms of prayer must agree with this form prescribed by christ;
although we be not tied unto this form of Christ, as being a thing altogether
indifferent, as appears by these places of Scripture: Ioh. 14.13. Whatsoever
ye ask of the father in my name (whether ye ask it in general or in special)
he will give you. Wherefore Christ has not tied us to a certain form. Jam.
1.5. Jf any of you lack wisdom, let him ask, and it shall be given him.
Likewise, Matt. 20.24. Pray that your flight be not in the winter. But this as
touching the words is not in the prayer prescribed by Christ. There are also
examples of prayers both in the New and old Testament. Wherefore the form of
prayer delivered unto us by Christ, is wholly a thing indifferent.

Now this prayer of christ has three parts, a Proeme, a Petition, and a
Conclusion.

The Proeme is, Our Father which art in heaven. The Proeme has two parts, 1.
Our Father. 2. which art in heaven. And the Lord used this kind of Proeme,
because he will be called upon with due honor. This honor consists, 1. In true
knowledge. 2. Jn true confidence. 3. Jn obedience. Obedience compriseth, 1 True
love. 2. True fear. 3. Hope. 4. Humiliation. 5. Patience.

The first part of the Proeme, Our Father. God is called Our Father, 1. Jn
respect of our creation. Luke 3.38. The son of Adam, the son of God. 2. In
respect of our redemption, and receiving into favor by his son our
Mediator. Christ is the only begotten son of god; we are not his sons by our
own nature, but are adopted for christ's sake. 3. In respect of our
sanctification, or regeneration by the holy Ghost in Christ Object. 1. We
Jnuocate the Father according to the prescript of his own son: Therefore we
must not invoke the son and the holy Ghost. Answer. The consequence of this
reason is denied; because the consequence holds not from the attributing of
some property unto one person of the godhead to the removing of the same from
another person of the godhead. Again, the name of Father (as also the name of
god) when it is opposed to all the creatures, is taken essentially, not
personally: but when it is put with another person of the God-heade, it is
taken personally. Wherefore in this place the name of Father is taken
essentially, and the reasons hereof are manifest: 1. Because the name of Father
is not here put with another person of the Godhead, but with the creature, of
whom he is inuocated. So also by the Prophet Isaiah, cap. 9.6. Christ is called
The everlasting father. 2. The Jnuocating of one person, does not exclude the
others, when mention is made of their external and outward works. 3. We cannot
consider God the father but in the son, the Mediator. And the Son has made
us Sons by the holy ghost, who is called the spirit of adoption. 4. Christ
teaches us that we must invoke him also, saying, Verily, verily, I say to
you, whatsoever ye shall ask of the father in my name, he shall give you. 5.
Christ gives the holy Ghost: Therefore it is he himself of whom we ask
him. Object. 2. Christ is called, and is our brother: Therefore he is not our
father. Answer. He is our brother, in respect of his humane nature: But he
is our father in respect of his divine nature. Ob. 3. If he be called the
father, who has received us into favor for Christ's sake, then is not Christ
understood by the name of father, because he that receives us into favor for
christ's sake, is not Christ himself. But the father, who^ we here so call,
receives us into favor for christ's sake: Wherefore he is not christ. Answ. He
that receives us into favor for Christ's sake, is not Christ himself, that
is, not in the same sense and respect. Christ as he is our Mediator, is he
through whom we are received; but as he is god, he is he that receives us.

Christ will have us to call God, Father, and so to invoke him, 1. In regard
of the true invocation of God, who is the father of our Lord Jesus Christ. 2.
In regard of the true knowledge of him, that we may know him to be our father,
who through and for his Son the Mediator has adopted us to be his Sons, when
otherwise we were his enemies; I go unto my father, and to your father: and
further also for his Sons sake he regenerateth us by the holy Ghost, and
endoweth us with all gifts and graces necessary. 3. In regard of reverence,
namely that in us may be stirred up and raised true reverence toward him;
that seeing he is our father, we therefore behave our selves, as becomes
Sons, and be affected with such reverence toward him, as it becomes children
to be affected toward their father, especially being adopted children, and
unworthy of Gods blessings and benefits. 4. In regard of confidence, that the
same be raised in us, whereby we may be assured that we shall be heard. For
seeing god is our father, and even so loving a father unto us, that he has
given his only begotten Son for us to death: how then shall he not give us
together with him all things necessary to our salvation? 5. For a memorial of
our creation. Now God will hear those only, that so pray; because in them he
obtains the end of his blessings and benefits. Objection. It is the part of
a father to deny nothing unto his children. But God denies many things to us.
Therefore he is not our father. Answer. It is the part of a father to deny
nothing unto his children, that is, which is necessary for them.

Christ wills us to call God our Father, not my Father. 1 Thereby to raise in
us a confidence and full persuasion that we shall he heard. For because the
whole church does with one consent pray unto him, he does not reject her, but
hears her prayers, according to this promise of our Lord: Where two or three
are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. Objection.
But oftentimes thou praiest at home, the Church not being privy thereunto.
Answer. The Godly, and the whole Church pray for themselves, and all the
members, with an affection and desire. Love and desire is an habitual quality
of the soul, remaining also when thou sleep; it is not a passion quickly
fleeting or passing a way. And this also makes much for the enge^dring of
confidence in us; because, as has been said, God does not reject the whole
Church. 2 To admonish us of mutual love, wherewith Christians being endued must
pray one for another. And therefore does he by this word, in the very proeme
and entrance of the prayer, admonish us of mutual love, wherewith we must be
affected toward our neighbor. 1 Because there is no true praying without the
true love of our neighbor: neither can we be persuaded that God hears us. For
if we approach unto God, not accounting the sons of God for our breethren;
neither will he then account us for his sons. 2 Because without the love of
our neighbor there is no true faith, and without faith there is no true
prayer. For whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

The second part of the proeme is, Which art in Heaven, that is, Heavenly.
Heaven here signifies the habitation of God, and the holy Angels, and blessed
men. And God is said to dwell there, because there God is more glorious, than
in this world, and does also there immediately show and manifest himself.

Now the Lord wills us to call him our Father, which is in Heaven, 1 Thereby
to show the opposition and contrariety of earthly fathers, and this Father:
that so we should think that God reigns in Heavenly glory and Majesty, and
is a Father, not earthly, but Heavenly, even he, 1 Who sits in heaven. 2 Who
rules, and governs there by his providence the whole world by him created. 3
Who is void of all corruption and change. 4 Who also does there especially
manifest himself before the Angels; and does there show what a Father he is,
how good, and how mighty and rich.

2 To raise up in us a confidence that God hears us; for if he be our Father,
and one that is endued with exceeding goodness, which he especially
manifests and declares in Heaven: Then will he also give us all things
necessary to salvation. If this our Father be Lord in Heaven, and so
omnipotent, whereby he is able to help us: then is he able most easily to
give us those good things which we ask of him. 3 To raise a reverence of him
in us; seeing this our father is so great a Lord, that is, heavenly, who
reigns euerie-where, who is able to cast both body and soul into Hell fire:
let us then reverence such a Lord, and approach unto him with exceeding
submission both of mind and body. 4 That we call on him in feruencie of
spirit. 5 That the mind of him that worshippeth be lifted up to heavenly
things. 6 That heavenly things be desired. 7 That the error of Ethnikes
might be met withal, who think that they may adore and worship God in
creatures. 8 To admonish us, that we are not to direct our prayers unto a
certain place, as in the old Testament.

Let these things suffice for the first part of Christ's prayer. Now follows
the second part of the prayer, namely the petition, which compriseth six
petitions.

THE FIRST PETITION.
HALLOWED be thy name.

This petition is set in the first place, because it is the end and scope of
all the other petitions, or rather, because the end of all things must be gods
glory. Now the end is the first thing which is intended, and the last thing
which is performed and exequuted: like as also the end of the other petitions
is first to be desired, if we will desire the rest aright. Mat 6.33. Seek ye
first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things shall
be ministered unto you.

We are here to consider 1 What is called the name of God. 2 What is Holy. 3
What, to hallowe or sanctify.

1 The name of God signifies, 1 God himself. Ps. 116.13. J will call upon the
name of the Lord. 2 Gods commandment and charge, his divine will and
authority. Mat. 28.19. Baptize them in the name of the Father, etc. 3 The
properties and works of God, in which signification the name of God is here
taken, to wit, for his divine works, and all those things, which may be
attributed unto God.

2 Holy, signifies, 1 All the properties of God. For all the virtues in God
are Gods holiness. So the Angels call god Holy. Isa. 6 3. Holy, Holy,
Holy, Lord God of hosts. 2 That holiness which is in creatures, that is,
their conformity with God, which is begun in the godly, and is perfect in
the Angels. 3 The ordeining or appointing of things to holy uses. In this
sense that is called holy, which is destined to some holy use, as the Temple of
Jerusalem. The word of Hallowing is here taken in all three senses, as a
little after we shall understand.

3 To hallow or sanctify, is in Scripture used after three ways. 1 Of us. 2
Of God. 3 Of Christ. 1 Of us it is affirmed after a double manner: first, when
we hallow and sanctify our selves and others. And we sanctify our selves and
others, when (as touching external and outward things) we prepare our selves
and others to glorify God. For there comes some holiness unto us by
glorifieng of God, but none to God. Secondly, When we hallowe and sanctify
God. Now we sanctify God, 1 When we acknowledge god to be holy: or when we
acknowledge God to be such, as he has declared himself in his word and
works; that is, when we know and think the same of Gods Essence, of his will,
and works, of his omnipotency, goodness, wisdom, and other his properties,
which God in his word has commanded and reueiled that we should know and
think of them. Secondly, When we profess God to be holy, and so magnify him
according to his will, that is, when our confession, whereby we confess god to
be holy, is agreeing with his divine will. And then is it agreeing with his
divine will, when we profess the Holiness of God both in mind, and word, and
also in deed and works. Thirdly, When we refer the true doctrine,
knowledge, and profession of Gods holiness, and likewise our prayers and
actions, and even our whole life unto that end, whereunto we ought, and
whither God has commanded it to be referred, namely, to the glory and
woorship of God himself. And so we are said to sanctify God after the
selfsame three ways, after which a thing is said to be holy. Wherefore, when
we desire that the name of God may be hallowed or sanctified, we desire, 1
That God would illighten us with the knowledge of his holiness. 2 That he
would give us a mind to profess the same in words and deeds, or, that he
would give us faith and repentance, whereby we may glorify him, and whereby
we may sever him from Idols and profane things: or lastly, that he would
regenerate us; and this, first by knowledge, then by profession, and lastly, by
conformity, according to this his commandment. Be ye holy, even as I also
am holy. 3 That he would give us a mind to profess that holiness of his
divine Name to his own praise and glory. Hither may be referred that of
Austen: Give what thou commaundest, and command what thou will, and then shall
thou not command in vain.

Objection. God is holy enough, there is no cause therefore why we should
desire that he be hallowed or sanctified. Answer. God is holy in himself.
But we desire, that we may acknowledge him to be holy, and so magnify him.
He sanctifies us by making us holy, we sanctify and hallow God himself,
when we speak that of him, which he will have us to speak and know of him.
Objection 2. What belongs unto us to do, that should we not desire another to
do. But it belongs to us to hallow and sanctify the name of God. Answ. What
belongs unto us to do, that we ought not to desire another to do, if so we
be able by our selves, and by our own strength to perform it. But we are not
able to do this. Therefore we must desire of God, that he will give us
strength, whereby his divine name may be of us hallowed and sanctified.

The word hallowing is affirmed of God, not that he halloweth himself, or
that another halloweth him, seeing he has none above him, but because he
halloweth and sanctifies others. And others he sanctifies inwardly, and
outwardly. Jnwardly by his holy spirit. Outwardly by his word. Which he
effectuateth, 1 By separating them from their sins. 2 By reviving and
quickening them by his holy spirit. 3 By the continuing of both.

3 The same word is affirmed of Christ, two ways. Namely, both passiuely, and
actiuelie. Passiuelie, 1 Because the Word was ordained and consecrated by the
father to the office of the Mediator. 2 Because the humane nature of Christ
was cansecrated out of that whole lump or mass, that is, was selected from
among all creatures to the union with the Word. 3 Because his humane nature
was preserved from sin for the perfourmance of the Mediatourship. The same is
also affirmed of him passiuelie, because Christ is hallowed and sanctified of
us. Now it is used of him actiuely, because Christ sanctifies both himself
and others. He sanctifies and halloweth himself, as he is the Word and
Mediator. The Word did sanctify with his Father that flesh, which he took, by
preserving the same from sin, and by endowing it with all gifts, and this so,
as the Father also himself preserved it from sin, and would that christ
should become our Ransom. As he is Mediator, he sanctified himself, by his
voluntary obedience toward his father, in offering himself a sacrifice for
us. He sanctifies us, 1 By imputing his own righteousness. 2 By a real
communicating of his holiness, which is wrought by the holy ghost. Concerning
all these, read Zanch. de trib. Eloh. lib. 4. cap. 10. The same Zanchius in the
same book, cap. 3. page 89. and cap. 10. page 154. sets down three ways,
whereby Christ sanctifies us. 1 The Jmputation of his righteousness, which is
considered in his whole humiliation, and obedience unto death. 2 The Jmputation
of his most perfect holiness; for which he alleges the place of Paul, 1.
Cor. 1.30. 3 The real communicating thereof. But notwithstanding it is to be
observed, that Zanchius, when he expounds the place of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, makes that holiness of Christ to consist in his voluntary passion;
in which sense if we take it, it seems not much to differ from the imputation
of his justice and righteousness, which consists in obedience.

THE SECOND PETITION.
THY kingdom come.

Thy kingdom come, that is, let it by continual increases be augmented, and
always by a new enlargement, and accession let thy kingdom be extended and
multiplied, which thou O god in thy Church do hold and possess.

The special Questions concerning the kingdom of god.

1 What the kingdom of god is.
A Kingdom, in general, is a certain form of civil government, wherein the
sovereignty of rule belongs to some one person, who is furnished with gifts
and virtues above the rest, and rules over al, according to just, honest, and
certain Laws, in requiring obedience, making Laws, defending the good, and
punishing the bad. The kingdom of God, is the sending of the Son from the
father, even from the beginning of the world, who should ordain and maintain a
ministry, and should by the same be effectual and forcible in working, should
gather a Church by the word and the holy ghost, out of all mankind, rule and
preserve the same, raise it from death, adorn it with heavenly glory, that so
God may be all in all, and may be magnified by the Church of Angels and men
for ever. Out of this definition we may gather and make these parts the
kingdom of God. 1. The sending of the Son our Mediator. 2. The ordaining
and maintaining of the ministry by Christ. 3. The gathering of the church by
Christ out of mankind by the voice of the gospel, and the efficacy of the
holy Ghost, beginning in us true faith and repentance. 4. The perpetual
government of the church. 5. The preservation thereof in this life, and
protection against her enemies. 6. The casting away of her enemies, into
eternal pains. 7. The raising of the church unto eternal life. 8. The
glorifieng of the church in eternal life, when god shall be al in all.

Now then, seeing we understand what the kingdom of God is, it is known also
unto us, what is contained in this petition. Here therefore we desire, that God
will by his Son our Mediator sent from the very beginning into the woorlde, 1.
Preserve the ministry which he has ordained. 2. Gather his church by the
ministry of his word, and the woorking of the holy Ghost. 3. Rule his church
gathered, and us the members thereof with his holy spirit, who may conform us
unto him, soften our hearts, regenerate our wills. 4. Defend us and his whole
church against our enemies and tyrants. 5. Cast away his and our enemies into
eternal pains, wherewith he may punish them for ever. 6. And at length deliver
his church, and glorify it in the world to come.

By all this it appears, That this kingdom, which we desire may come, is a
spiritual kingdom: which also the lord himself shows by diverse parables in
the Evangelist; and unto Pilate he answers; My Kingdom is not of this
woorlde. Of the kingdom of Christ is it said, Psalm. 110.2. Be thou ruler in
the mids of thine enemies. And furthermore, seeing we must desire, that this
kingdom may come, and therefore must withal desire our full delivery; hereby it
is evident, how impious a thing it is to be afraid of the judgment of God,
and the last day of doom: because such as do this, show themselves not to be
godly, neither to desire their full deliverance, and glorifieng. Objection.
But terrible will the day of judgment be: Therefore we are not to desire it.
Answer. It will be terrible, but to the wicked only. For unto the godly it is
said, Lift up your heads. Therefore Christ will have them to rejoice, and to
wish for the approaching of that day. For what thou reioicest in, that also thou
wishest. Come Lord Jesus. Objection. That which comes neither sooner nor
later for our prayers, is in vain desired of us, and therefore we are not to
desire it. But the kingdom of god, that is, the delivery of the church from
all evils and miseries shall come neither sooner nor later, for our prayers,
than god has decreed it. Therefore we are not to desire the delivery of the
church. Answer. The Mayor is false. For so then may we conclude or reason of
al those benefits which remain in the counsel and purpose of God. Reply. But
god has promised other benefits with this condition, that we must ask and
desire them. Answer. So also does full delivery from al evils befall to them
only in that day, who in their affliction and cross wish for and desire that
delivery, and pray that this delivery may come speedily, according to the
decree of God, and that no one elect may be excluded. Reply. But we must not
desire that god would hasten the delivery of his church: because that would be
done with loss of many of the Elect, who are not as yet borne. Answer. When
we desire that God would hasten the delivery of his church, we desire also,
that whosoever of the Elect are as yet remaining, may be al speedily gathered,
not one of them being excluded. This delivery of us and the whole church we
must crave of the Lord with daily prayers: if so we will be our selves also at
length delivered together with the Church. And moreover, for this cause also
must we desire this delivery, that then that judgment may be of a saving
force unto us, wherein the Lord will fully deliver his Elect and chosen. God
will also therefore have us desire an hastening and speeding of this day, that
there may be an end of wickedness and impieties: and that all the godly may
rest from their labors. But so notwithstanding must we desire and crave all
these things, that we subject and submit our will to the commandment of the
Lord, or his divine will. It is our part, to observe, what God commands, not
what shall fall out or come to pass: but the event we must leave and commit
to God himself.

2 How manifold the kingdom of God is.
THIS kingdom is but one indeed, but it differs in the manner of governing
and administration. For it is diversely administered here, and in heaven. Hereby
is that Question assoiled out of the place of Paul, 1. Cor. 15.24. He shall
deliver up the kingdom to God, even the Father. Wherefore as concerning the
form and manner of administration, he shall deliver the kingdom after our
glorification, that is, he shall cease to discharge the office of a mediator.
There shall be then no need of conversion, of purging out of sin, of
protecting of us against our enemies; he shall not gather, he shall not raise
the dead, he shall not glorify, nor perfect them, because then they shall be
perfect: He shall not 'teach them: tongues shall cease. There shall be no need
of these instruments any longer. The kingdom of god then is of two sorts: one
begun in this life, another consummated after this life. We desire both in
this petition, to wit, both the constitution of this kingdom of God, and the
consummation thereof. In the consummated and perfect kingdom of god there
shall be no need of any means or instruments: because in that the
glorification of the Church shall be more perfect, as being without evil both
of crime and pain. God shall be all in all, that is, shall manifest himself
immediately unto the blessed Saints. Revel. 21.22. Jn that City (which is that
kingdom) J saw no temple: for the Lord god almighty and the Lamb are the
temple of it. And the City has no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to
shine in it: for the glory of god did light it: and the Lamb is the light of
it.

3 Who is king in gods kingdom.
THE head or King of this kingdom, is god the father, the son, and the holy
ghost. There is but one King, because there is but one god. Now the father is
King, and rules by the son, and the holy ghost. The son is King, 1.
Because he sits god at the right hand of god; and rules with equal power
with the father. 2. Because he is Mediator, that is, because he is that
person, by which god works immediately, and gives the holy Ghost. John.
15.26. J will send him unto you from the father. And after a special and
peculiar manner is Christ said to be the king of that kingdom, as he is
Mediator.

4 Who are the Citizens or Subjects of gods kingdom.
THE citizens of this kingdom are, 1. The Angels in heaven confirmed and
established in grace. 2. The blessed Saints in Heaven, who are called the
Church triumphant. 3. The Godly, or converted in this life, who have as yet
certain remains of sin, and are called the Church militant. 4. Hypocrites,
namely the Called of the visible Church only, but not Elected. These are
counterfeit and apparaunt citizens to the outward show, who indeed are not
the citizens of Christ's kingdom, but only in name, but are in truth the
bondslaues of the Devil. Hypocrites notwithstanding are called the citizens of
this kingdom, as the Jews are termed by Christ the sons and children of the
kingdom. Of these is it said, The First shall be last: that is, they who will
be accounted first, and yet are not, shall be last.

5 What are the Laws of this kingdom.
THE Laws whereby this kingdom is administered, and governed, are, 1. The
word of god, or the doctrine of the Law and Gospel. 2. The efficacy of the
holy ghost in our hearts.

6 What benefits are bestowed on the subjects of this kingdom.
THERE is no kingdom which has not regard unto the commodities of the
subjects. And Aristotle writes to Alexander, A kingdom is not Jniurie, but
bountifulnes. Wherefore this kingdom has also his proper goods and
commodities. Those are the spiritual and eternal benefits of Christ, as true
faith, conversion, remission of sins, righteousness, preservation therein, and
the continuance of the holy ghost, glorification, and life everlasting. Ioh.
8.36. Jf the Son shall make ye free, ye shall be free indeed.

7 Who are the enemies and foes of this kingdom.
THE enemies of this kingdom are the Devils and wicked men. Now of wicked men,
some are in the church, as hypocrites, who challenge to themselves the name and
title of the kindgdome, when as they are nothing less: others are without the
church and professed enemies, as Turks, Jews, Samosatenians, Arrians, and
whosoever defend errors against the grounds and foundations of religion.

8 Jn what place this kingdom is administered.
THIS kingdom, as concerning the beginning or gathering thereof, is
administered here on earth: yet so, that it is not in any one certain place,
Island, Province, but is spread through the whole world. 1. Timo. 2.8. J will that
the men pray every where. Matthew. 18.20. Where two or three are gathered
together in my name, there am J in the midst of them. We never go out of this
kingdom, if we abide in true faith. This kingdom, as touching the
consummation or perfection thereof, is administered in heaven. Ioh. 14.3. And
although I go to prepare a place for you, J will come again, and receive you
unto my self, that where I am, there may ye be also. Ioh. 12.26. Where I
am, there shall also my servant be. Ioh. 17.24. Father, I will that they which
thou have given me, be with me, even where I am. 1. These. 4.17. We shall be
caught up to meet the Lord.

9 What is the time of the durance and continuance of this kingdom.
THE beginning and gathering of this kingdom dureth from the worlds beginning
unto the end thereof, because there are always in this world some members of
the Church, whether few, or many. The consummation, or perfection of this
kingdom shall endure from the glorifieng of the godly unto al eternity. 1.
Corint. 15.24. Then shall be the end, when he has delivered up the kingdom
to god, even the father, which is to be understood (as was before observed) as
touching this form of administration of that kingdom.

10 How this kingdom comes.
THIS kingdom comes to us four wais. 1. By the preaching of the gospel,
whereby is reueiled the light of the true and heavenly doctrine. 2. By
conversion, when some are converted, and are endued with faith and repentance.
3. By making progress, or increase, when the godly receive increase, or when
the proper gifts and blessings of the faithful are augmented with perpetual
increase in the godly or converted. Reuelat. 22.11. He that is righteous, let
him be righteous still: and he that is holy, let him be holy still. 4. By
consummation, and full accomplishment, when the godly shall be glorified in the
second coming of our Lord. Revel. 22.20. Even so come Lord Jesus.

11 Why we are to desire that the kingdom of god come.
WE ought to desire, that the kingdom of god come, 1. For the glory of god,
or in respect of the first petition; because that we may sanctify and hallow
his name it is required that he rule us by his word and spirit. For except god
erect in us this his kingdom, and deliver us out of the kingdom of the
devil, we shall never hallowe and sanctify his name, but rather shall defile
and pollute it. 2 Because god will give this kingdom only to those that ask
it, like as he gives the holy ghost unto them only, that ask him.

THE THIRD PETITION.
THY will be done in earth as it is in heaven.

The will of god, signifies, 1 The commandment of god. Psalm. 103.21. Ye his
servants that do his will. 2 It signifies events, or rather gods decree
concerning future events, Mat. 26.39. Not as J will, but as thou will. Isa.
46.10. My counsel shall stand, And I will do whatsoever I will. Thy will be
done; that is, Cause that we men may do thy will, and obey thee.

The special Questions in this petition.

1 What we here desire.
WE desire here, 1 A denial of our selves; which consists of two parts. The
first is, That we may be ready to renounce all our own affections which are
disagreeing from the law of god; and that God will give us his grace, whereby
we may be able to deny our own corrupt will, and deny all things which are
repugnaunt to the will of God. The second is, That we may be ready to execute
the will of God, and to undergo our Cross, and to subscribe and submit our
selves willingly unto god in all things.

2 We desire the performance of the deity and calling, both of all in
general, and of each in several: that namely we may rightly and duly
perform the duty committed unto us, whether common, or proper, that every
one may cheerfully serve god in his calling, and execute his will. Unto god be
committed the care concerning our events: but let us care to do those labors
which properly belong unto us.

3 We desire Events, such as are not contrary to gods will, that is, that such
things may come to pass which so please god. 4 We desire a blessing and
prospering of our actions and counsels. For god will have us also to desire of
him, that he will vouchsafe to prosper well our actions, counsels, studies,
labors, and endeavors; that he will for his exceeding goodness so direct our
labors, that no other events may follow them, but such as himself knows may
most serve for his glory and our salvation. We in the mean season must do our
duty, and leave the events to God.

Every one has a double vocation and calling. The one is common, which
compriseth those virtues that are common to all Christians. The other is
particular, which belongs to every ones proper calling. We ask for both
callings and vocations in this petition; namely, that every one (as was a
little before said) may abide in their proper and common calling committed
unto them, and do their duty. Objection. But the former petition does desire
also, that we may rightly perform our duty. Therefore this petition is
superfluous. Answer. In the former we desire that God will begin his
kingdom in us, by ruling us by his spirit, who regenerateth our will, that, so
hence forward we rightly perfourming our duty, may yield all obedience to our
King, as becomes the subjects of that kingdom. But in this petition we
desire, that in perfourming rightly and faithfully our duty, we may execute
the vvil of god.

2 Wherefore we desire, that gods will be done.
THIS petition is necessary, 1. That the kingdom of god may come, whereof
we spoke in the second petition. For except god himself bring to pass, that
every one in his calling and duty do diligently his will, this kingdom
cannot be settled, flourish, and be preserved. 2. That we may be in this
kingdom. For except we do the will of god, we cannot be citizens of his
kingdom. And we are not able of our selves, by reason of the corruption of
our nature, to do his will. Therefore we must desire of him that we may
do it.

3 Of whom Gods will is done in Heaven.
IN Heaven the will of God is done, 1. Of the son him self, who does all
the will of his Father. 2. Of the Angels, and blessed men. Of the Angels the
will of God is so done in Heaven, as that every Angel stands in the presence
of God being ready to do whatsoever God commands. They do both his
general, and his special will: none seaseth upon that which belongs to
another; none is ashamed to serve, although we anoy them with the noisome
savor of our sins, and offend God. They are ministering spirits, Hebr. 1.14.
Now Christ adds here, as in Heaven, 1. To prescribe and draw us a pattern
and example of perfection, whereunto we must strive. 2. That by this desire of
perfection, we may be assured that God will give us here the beginning, and
the perfection in the life come. Objection. That which is always done, and
shall certainly come to pass, though we desire it not; the same is not to be
desired. The will of God is done always, and shall certainly be done, though
we desire it not. Therefore it is not to be desired. Aunsvvere. The Minor of
this reason we deny. For it is false, 1. As concerning the calling and
vocation of every man; because they that desire not, that they may be able in
their vocation to do their duty rightly, faithfully, and happily, the same
shall never do it. 2. It is false also, as concerning gods decrees: because god
has decreed many events, but yet so, as that he has also decreed the means
of coming thereunto. There is also a fallacy in the Mayor proposition, putting
that for a cause which is no cause; because we do not therefore desire that
gods will be done, as if it should not be done if we should not desire it: but
we desire it for other causes, namely, that all events may be good and
prosperous unto us. For eue^ts shall not be good unto us, neither tending to our
safety, except we submit them to the will of god; so that we desire that
only to be done, which he has decreed and will have done. Reply. The decrees
of god are unchangeable. Answer. The Decrees of god, not only as touching the
events or ends, but also as touching the means, are unchangeable. He has
decreed to give the end, but by the mean, which is of this condition, that
we desire it and pray for it.

Objection. God will have our Parents to die; Therefore we must desire that
they may die. Answer. I deny the consequent of this reason: for we must
subject our selves to the will of god, and desire that which he commands
us to desire. So neither does this follovv: The church shall be subject unto
the cross: Therefore J will pray for affliction. Neither yet hereof may it be
concluded, that our vvil disagreeth from gods will: because thou desire with
that end, whereby thou must desire her delivery. God will have our parents to
die, and yet vvil he not have us to vvish their death: god will have his church
to be under the cross, and yet he will not have us to desire her cross, but to
pray for her delivery, and patie^tly to bear it, if it afflict her. In like
manner, God will not in this life give us perfect deliverance from sin, and yet
will he have us to vvish it, and every moment to desire that we may be wholly
delivered from sin. Wherefore some things are to be desired, which God will not
do, and some things, which he will do, are not to be desired, but patie^tly
to be suffered. But nevertheless it belongs nothing at al unto us to search,
what things God has decreed, seeing we have this prescribed us for a rule,
that we ask and desire, but with a condition of gods will.

Objection. Impossible things are not to be desired: for he that desires
things impossible, desires in vain. But to desire that Gods will be done in
earth, as it is in heaven, or that we may do our duty, like as do the Angels
in heaven; is, to desire a thing impossible; yea it is, to desire that which is
contrary to Gods decree: Therefore that is not to be desired, seeing God will
have this to be our state in the life to come, not in this life. Answer 1.
The Mayor is to be distinguished. Impossible things are not to be desired,
except God will at length grant them to those that desire them: but God will
give the performance of his will to those that desire it, and that in this life
as concerning the beginning thereof, and in the life to come as concerning the
consummation and full accomplishment. Wherefore this consummation is to be
desired, and the impossibility is patiently to be suffered in this life. And
the consummation is therefore to be desired in this life, that we may at
length obtain it; because he that does not now desire it, shall doubtless at
no time obtain it. It is one thing not to be able to attain unto this
consummation; and another thing not to desire it. 2. We deny the Minor: wherein
is a fallacy, putting that for a cause, which is no cause. For neither do we
desire that in this life the consummation or perfection of our obedience
toward God may be accomplished, but that here may be wrought the beginning,
and continuance, and increase thereof, and after this life our obedience being
here augmented with continual increases, may be at length perfected, and
consummated, that so we then may no less do the will of God, than it is
always done of the Angels in heaven. When therefore we pray, That Gods will
be done in earth, as it is in heaven, this particle, as, does not betoken
the degree, but the kind of doing it, which is the beginning of performing Gods
will. And for these causes also does Christ ad these words, as in heaven, that
it may be as it were an example of patience, which we ought to follow: and that
he might propose a goal and mark unto us, whereunto we ought to strive. We are
to observe here the difference which is between these three former petitions.
In the first we desire sanctification, or the true knowledge, and worship of
god. Jn the second, the gathering, preservation, and government of the church:
that God would rule us by his spirit, defend and protect us, and deliver us
from al evils both of crime and pain. Jn the third, that every one
particularly in their vocation may obey god, that is, that every man be with
diligence occupied in his proper duty and function, and direct al things to the
glory of God, and take well in worth whatsoever God sends on him. Moreover,
these three petitions are so linked together, that one consists not without
the other; and like as the third petition serves for the second, so does the
second for the first. For the name of the Lord is not hallowed or sanctified,
except his kingdom come; and the kingdom of God does not come, except those
means be put whereby it is advanced. And those means are the duties of every
particular man's calling and vocation. Wherefore we desire that God will bury in
us evil lusts and desires, and that himself alone will work in us by his
spirit: that so we being furnished and vphelde with this his divine grace, may
fulfill our duty, and be answerable unto our calling.

THE FOVRTH PETITION.
GIVE us this day our daily bread.

In this petition we desire corporal blessings, concerning which we are to
observe these questions.

1 Why corporal blessings are to be desired. 2 How they are to be desired. 3
Why Christ comprised corporal blessings under the name of Bread. 4 Why he
calls it our bread. 5 Why he calls it daiely bread. 6 Why he adds, This
day. 7 Whether it be lawful to desire riches. 8 Whether it be lawful to
treasure up any thing for the time to come.
1 Why we are to desire corporal blessings.
WE must desire corporal blessings, 1. In respect of Gods commandment, which
may suffice us, albeit there were no other cause. And we have a commandme^t
hereof from God, both general, and special. For christ says in general,
Matthew. 7 7. Ask, and ye shall receive. And a special commandment he sets
down before this form of prayer which himself prescribed unto us, Mat. 6.9.
After this manner therefore pray ye: by which commandment Christ also wills
us to desire Bread, or corporal blessings. Now whereas Christ says: Seek
first the kingdom of god. and again, Take no thought, what ye shall eat: he
does not therein forbid us to desire corporal blessings, but he forbids this
distrustfulnes. 2. In respect of Gods promise: because God has promised that
he will give us things necessary for our life: and he promised these to no
other end, than that we should desire them of him: and he promised the^, that
we should thereby have a spiritual, not a fleshly security. Mat. 6.32. Your
father knows what ye have need of. 3. In respect of gods glory; that namely
there may be a knowledge and profession of gods providence, especially
toward his church. God will have us to ascribe this praise unto him, because
he is the fountain of al blessings and benefits, and that we may not deem these
things to come by chance to us. 4. Because the desiring and expecting of these
blessings, is the exercise of our confidence in the promise of grace, or it is
the exercise of our Jnuocatio^, faith, and hope. For we cannot promise unto our
selves corporal blessings, nor desire them, except we resolve that we be in
favor, and except we be assured of spiritual blessings, and of gods will toward
us. For these corporal blessings God promises to the godly only; and
therefore we must be persuaded that we are of the number of them, to whom god
has promised to give them. 5. That we may do the will of god here on earth:
which without daily bread we cannot here do. Ps. 115.18. The dead praise not
the Lord. 6. That the desire of these blessings may be a co^firmatio^ in our
minds, and a profession before the world, that God is he who gives even the
least benefits. 7. For our comfort. That we may know that the church shall ever
be preserved, when god hears us, according to his promise. Wherefore we reap
great comfort by the desire of corporal blessings: because we so acknowledge,
and certainly persuade our selves that these corporal blessings are tokens to
us of gods fatherly good will toward us.

2 How corporal blessings are to be desired.
COrporal blessings are to be desired, 1. with a confidence and full persuasio^
of gods favor: because otherwise god might answer, that we are not of them,
unto whom he has promised these things. 2. With a condition of gods will and
pleasure, that is, with a submitting of our will to gods will: because god
has promised these blessings not with any determined or definit
circumstances. 3. With faith and belief of gods hearing us, so that we
certainly believe that God will give us so much as suffices. 4 To this end, as
thereby to serve god, and our neighbor. They who desire the^ not after this
sort, are not heard, that is, such things are not given them as may tend to
their safety, and albeit they receive that which they desire, yet are they not
indeed heard of god, because those things which they receive are not good and
profitable unto their salvation. We are here to observe, that the Lord
commanded us in general to pray for corporal blessings, neither has defined
in his word, what corporal blessings he will give us, and has with this
condition promised to give them us, namely, as the saftie and salvation of
every one, and the manifestation of his glory requires. The reasons hereof
are these. 1 Because we oftentimes know not what we ask, and what is expedient
for us: And often we ask things neither profitable to us, nor serving for Gods
glory, or the salvation of others. But God knows best, what is convenient
and meet for us for the manifesting of his glory, and for the furdering of our
own salvation. Seeing then we often err in desiring corporal blessings, God
gives none other unto us, than such as he knows to be meet and profitable
for us. But spiritual blessings god has promised not in general only, but
both specially, and simply, without any condition annexed. For they are
simply profitable unto us, and god himself has prescribed the manner and way
which we are to follow in them; so that in desiring them we cannot err. For
what things god has simply promised us, the same we ought simply to desire:
and what things he has specially and absolutely promised us, the same must
we in like manner absolutely ask and desire. So must we simply desire the
holy ghost, because god has simply and expressly promised that he will give
the holy ghost to every one that desires him. 2 That we may learn to be
content with those things which we have received of the Lord, and submit
always our will to his pleasure and purpose. So god also for this cause has
commanded us in general to desire corporal bessings, that such a desiring of
those blessings, may be an exercise of our faith and of the subjection and
submitting of our will, to the will of god.

3 Why Christ comprised corporal blessings under the name of Bread.
Under the name of bread, by a Synecdoche, which is an usual figure of speech
unto the Hebrews, Christ comprised al corporal blessings, and such as are
necessary for this life, as are al food, victuals, raiment, health, civil
peace. This is apparaunt by the end and scope of the petition. For we desire
Bread for our necessity. But many other things are necessary for us. Therefore
we desire them also under the name of Bread. And this Hebrewe Synecdoche is
found often in the sacred Bible, as, Genesis 3.19. Jn the sweat of thy face shall
thou eat bread. Psalm. 41.9. He which did eat of my bread has lifted up the
heel against me. Furdermore christ did not only comprise things necessary
themselves under the name of Bread, but also the profitable use of them. And
therefore comprehended he all these things under the name of Bread, 1 To bridle
and rain our desires, that so we should ask only things necessary for us
to sustain our life, and to serve God and our neighbor both in our common,
and proper vocation and calling. 2 That bread might be profitable unto our
salvation, that is, that those corporal blessings might tend to our
salvation, or that the use of those corporal blessings might be good and
saving unto us. For bread without this good and saving use, is a stone. Now
Bread is made good and saving unto us, 1 Jf we receive it with faith, and with
that mind, and after that manner, and to that end, which GOD requires, to
wit, if we stick not in the creatures, but pierce with our mind unto God
himself the Creator of all things, and the fountain of al benefits or gifts.
2. Jf we desire that he will give to the Bread obtained and received from him a
force and virtue of nourishing and susteining our bodies. Hereby now is it
plainly clear, what we desire when we desire bread: namely, 1. Not great
riches, but only things necessary. 2. That they may be bread unto us,
that is, that they may be good and saving unto us thorough Gods benediction
and blessing, wherewith if they be not accompanied, the Bread shall not be
Bread.

4 Wherefore Christ calls it our Bread.
CHRIST wills us to desire our Bread, not mine, thine, or another man's Bread;
1 That we should desire those things, which god gives us. For the Bread is
made ours, which is given us of God necessary for the sustainance of our life.
Therefore give us our bread, signifies, Give us Bread, O God, assigned unto us
by thee, which thou will have to be ours. God as an Householder does distribute
to every one his portion, which we desire for our selves of him. 2 That we
should desire things necessary, gotten of us by lawful labor, in a kind and
trade of life pleasing to God, and honest, and profitable to the common
society, that is, which we may receive through ordinary means, and by
lawful ways, the hand of god from heaven reaching the^ out unto us. 2. These.
3.10. He that will not work, let him not eat. 3 That we may use them with a
good conscience.

5 Wherefore Christ calls it Daily Bread.
CHRIST calls the Bread, which we must desire of god, Daily, 1 Because he
will have us daily to desire as much as may for every day suffice us. 2
Because he will bridle our raging and endless lusts and desires. Mat. 6.32.
Your Father knows what ye have need of. Psalm. 37.16. A small thing unto the
just man is better, than great riches to the wicked, and mighty. Psalm. 34.9.
Nothing wants to them that fear the Lord, that is, no profitable and
necessary thing: Therefore, Give us daily Bread, that is, give us Bread
sufficient, give us so much of things necessary for our life, as shall be
needful for every of us in his vocation and calling to serve god and our
neighbor.

6 Why Christ adds, This day,
CHRIST adds, This day, 1 To meet with our distrustfulnesse and
covetousness, and to reclaim us from both these vices. 2 That we should
depend on him only, as yesterday, so this day, and to morrow: that namely we
look for the necessaries of this life at the hands of god, that we know them
to be given us of god, not to be gotten by our own hands, or labors, or
diligence; that also we know that they being received profit not our body
except gods blessing does accompany them. 3 That the exercise of faith and
prayer may always be continued in us. For as long as it is said, This day, so
long will he have prayer to be continued, that so we may yield due obedience
to that Commandment, Pray always.

7 Whether it be lawful to desire riches.
THIS question together with the next ensuing, arises out of the former
questions. For when we are willed to desire only daily Bread, and that this
day, it seems at the first sight, that it is not lawful either to desire
riches, or to put up any thing for the morrow. But it is verily lawful to
desire riches, if, taking away all ambiguity and doubtfulnesse of the word,
we understand by the name of riches things necessary for the susteina^ce of
life: As the Epicure defined riches, To be a poverty agreeable to the Law of
nature. This definition is good. And if we so take the name of riches, riches
are doubtless to be desired of god, in as much as we ought to desire such things
as are necessary for nature, and our place, and function whereunto god has
called us. The reason hereof is, because these necessary things, or riches,
are daily Bread, which we ought to desire. They are also otherwise defined, To
be an abundance and plenty over and above things necessary. So Crassus
(surnamed the Rich) said that no man was rich, but he who was able to maintain
an army with his revenues. If we take riches in this sense, riches are not at
all to be desired of God; because Solomon in the person of all the godly says,
Proverb. 30.8. Give me not poverty, nor riches: by which words the spirit of
god also by Solomon teaches us to pray against riches, that is, abundance
above things necessary. Hither belongs also that of Paul, 1. Tim 6.9. They
that will be rich, fall into tentations and snares, and into many foolish, and
noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and destruction, for which cause
riches are called Thorns, by Christ. But contrariwise; Godliness is great
gain, if a man be content with that he has. But notwithstanding, if god has
given us any thing, beside those things which are necessary for us, let us do
our diligence to use them well. And to this end, first, we must take heed that
we repose not our confidence in them. Secondly, We must consider that we are
Gods stewards, who has committed these riches unto us to employ and bestow
well, and that by this means he has laid a burden upon us, and therefore
shall we one day render an account to god of our stewardship, and
administration.

8 Whether it be lawful to put up any thing for hereafter.
IT is doubtless lawful for to put up some thing for time to come, according to
this commandment of Christ, Gather up the broken meat which remains, that
nothing be lost. Hither belong all such precepts and commandments as speak of
parsimony and frugalitie. And here further we are to observe these three
things. 1 That those things which are stored up be lawfully gotten, purchased
by lawful and honest labor and industry. 2 That we repose no confidence in
them. 3 That they may be employed on lawful and necessary uses, both of our
own and others: as to the maintenance either of our life, or of our family, or
of our friends. Likewise, to the preservation of the Church, to aid the
common wealth when need shall require, and to bestow somewhat on the poor and
our needy brethren. Hereof says Paul, Ephesians. 4.28. Let him that stole, steal
no more* but let him rather labor, and work with his hands, the thing which
is good, that he may have to give unto him which needs.

Now shall answer easily be made to such objections as may be opposed against
this petition. 1 Objection. That which we desire, is not ours. Bread is ours.
Wherefore we need not to desire bread. Answer. There is a diverse
signification in the word (ours.) For in the Mayor proposition it signifies
a thing which we have in our own power: but after a far other manner is Bread
ours, as has bin before declared. 2 Objection. Christ wills us to desire
Daily Bread; Therefore it is not lawful to put up any thing against the Morrow,
but we are to care only for the present day. Again, he wills us, not to
desire Bread against the morrow, but to desire Bread for This day: therefore
they do ill, who gather any thing for future uses. Answer. This is a
fallacy putting that for a cause, which is no cause. Christ wills us to
desire daily bread, and This day; and therefore we must also desire things
necessary of him for our life for every day, this day, to morrow, and so long
as we live: but he means not hereby as if he would not have us labor for
the morrow, or not to put up any thing for the morrow, or to cast away those
blessings which he has already given us sufficing for the morrow. Christ
indeed otherwhere commands, That we care not for the morrow, but so he
forbids us to think of the morrow with distrustfulnesse, but not with
prayers and labors. Wherefore the Lord will not that we put up nothing for
hereafter, but first, that we be content with things present, all distrust,
covetousness, unlawful getting and disobedience being set apart and banished.
2 That we place not our trust in things necessary given us of God: but know
and certainly persuade our selves that those benefits which have been and are
given, come unto us from the hand of God, and that they are not otherwise good
and profitable unto us, except his blessing come to them. 3 That we consider
our selves always to stand in need of Gods blessing. And we must withal
beware, that we prescribe not to god, what he is to give us.

THE FIFTH PETITION.
AND forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.

This petition is a notable confession of the church, wherein she acknowledges
and bewaileth her sins: and it is withal a consolation, that the Church shall
receive remission of sins, according to Christ's promise. Now Christ in this
petition, will, 1 That we acknowledge our sin. 2 That we thirst after
remission of our sins, because it is granted to them only that desire it,
and who do not tread under foot the blood of the Son of god. 3. That our faith
be exercised: because this petition confirms our faith, and again this
petition flows from faith. For faith is the cause of prayer: and prayer is
the cause of faith, as concerning the increasing of faith.

The special Questions.

1 What Christ here calls debts. 2 What is remission of sins. 3 Why we are
to desire remission of sins. 4 How sins are remitted unto us.
1 WHAT CHRIST HERE CALLS DEBTS.
CHrist calls al our sins debtes, both original and actual, and those both
of fact, and omission. And they are called debts, because they make us debtors
to god either of obedience or punishment which we are to pay. For when we sin,
we do not give, nor perform unto god, what we owe unto him: and as long as
we give not this unto him, so long we remain debtors.

2 What is remission of sins.
THE creditor is said to Remit the debtor, when he neither requires the debt
of him, nor punishes him. Remission of sins, is, That god will not impute any
sin unto us, but does receive us into favor, pronounces us just and
righteous, and accounts us for his sons, of his mere and free mercy, for
Christ's satisfaction performed by him for us, imputed unto us, and apprehended
of us by faith: And that therefore he will not punish us for our sin, but
endoweth us with justice, and everlasting life, because the remission of sin
takes away the punishment thereof. For sin and punishment, are correlatiues:
put sin, and you put punishment; take away sin, and punishment is also taken
away. Objection. When we desire, that god will remit us our sins, we desire
that god will inuert the order of his justice. Answer. The consequence of this
reason is false. For we desire remission of sins, for the satisfaction of
Christ, for which they are remitted unto us, and therefore our sins are not
remitted us with any breach of gods justice, because they are remitted us with
recompense made for them. Reply. If they be remitted with recompense made for
them, Then god does not remit us our sins freely. Answer. They are remitted
with recompense, and therefore not freely, in respect of Christ: but they are
remitted freely, in respect of us: because he receives not satisfaction of us
but of Christ, who has fully satisfied him for us. Reply. Then is not yet this
freely, because we have merited it in Christ. Answer. That merit is not our
merit, because the father gave us his son freely, who meriteth without any
merit of ours coming between: and that merit of Christ is imputed unto us
through grace: therefore freely for that merit are our sins remitted us:
whereupon also it is truly and well added, that for Christ's satisfaction our
sins are not imputed to us. For we desire not, that god would do contrary unto
his justice, and would not account us in mind for sinners; but that he would
impute unto us another righteousness, that is, the righteousness of Christ,
wherewith we being clothed, our sins also may be covered.

3 Why we are to desire remission of sins.
WE are to desire remission of sins, 1. That we may be saved, because
without remission of sins we cannot be saved. And this benefit God gives
not but only to those that desire it. 2. That we may be put in mind of the
remnauntes of sins, which are even in the holiest men; and that to this end,
that repentance may evermore increase. Wherefore we are daily also to beg
and desire remission of sins. 3. That we may desire and receive the former
blessings, because without remission of sins, those blessings either are at al
not given, or are given to our destruction. So the wicked do indeed often
receive them, but not for their salvation, as turning rather to their
condemnation. Objection. What we have, that we need not desire. But the godly
have remission of sins: Therefore the godly have no need to desire it. Ans.
The godly indeed have remission; but not wholly, neither also as concerning
continuance, but only as touching the beginning thereof. This remission must
verily be continued; and God also does continue it to them, unto whom he
remitteth their sins in his son: yet with this condition, that they daily
pray for and desire that continuance. Although then god has remitted unto us
our sins; yet he will notwithstanding that we ask and desire pardon for
them, and therefore we desire, that, what sins we commit or shall commit, the
same god would remit unto us.

4 How our sins are remitted unto us.
OUR sins are so remitted unto us as we forgive and remit our debtors. And
this Christ added, 1. That we may rightly desire remission of sins, and so
that we may come to pray with true faith and repentance, a sign and token
whereof is the love of our neighbor. 2. That when we find in our selves true
faith and repentance, we may so have a certain argument and comfort in us, that
we are of the number of them, unto whom remission is promised, and that
therefore we shall doubtless obtain remission of sins: when as we may be
certainly assured by this, that we our selves remit unto others from our heart
their trespasses against us, that we please God, albeit many remnaunts of sin
are dwelling as yet within us. Objection. 1. He that remitteth not, is not
remitted. We remit not. Therefore we are not remitted. Answer. He that
remitteth not fully and perfectly, is notwithstanding remitted, so that he
remitte truly and sincerely. Objection. 2. Christ willed us to desire, that
God will so remitte us our sins, as we remitte our debtors. But we do not
perfectly remit our debtors. Therefore he willed us to desire, that god will
not perfectly remitte us our sins. Ans. This is a fallacy of speech deceiving
by misco^string a word. For the particle (as) in this petition does not
signify the degree of remission, or a comparison of our remission with that
remission, wherewith God remitteth us our sins, but it signifies the kind
of remission, namely the truth and sincerity of our remission, whereby we
forgive others from our heart, and with a ready will of forgiving them: or, (to
speak shorter) here is not made a comparison according to degrees, but
according to the truth of the thing, or according to the truth of remission:
so that the meaning is, so perfectly God remitteth us our sins, as we truly
and certainly remitte and forgive our neighbor: or, Forgive us our debts,
because we forgive our debtors. Reply. Then is our remission of others the
cause why God remitteth us. Answer. This a fallacy putting that for a cause,
which is no cause. For our remission, wherewith we forgive others, though not
perfectly, yet sincerely, is only an argument and testimony unto us, that god
will remit us our sins. For our remission and forgiving of others cannot
merit. 1. Because it is imperfect. 2. Albeit it were perfect, yet should it not
merit, because what we now perform, that we owe unto god. For were it so that
we did now perform perfect obedience to god, yet were we bound of duty to
perform it. Reply. But nevertheless yet here is betokened an equality of
remission in us and god. Answer Not an equality, but a likeness and
similitude of the kind of remission. Objection. 3. He that remembers
injuries, and is desirous of revenge, does not truly remit and forgive. But we
all remember injuries, and are desirous of revenge. Therefore we do not truly
remit and forgive. Answer. They that remember injuries, that is, without a
resistance and dislike of this remembrance, or with a yielding thereto, do
not truly remit. If then we withstand and resist the remnauntes of sins,
which as yet cleave fast unto us, and do not yield unto them, nothing
hinders why we may not be said to remitte others truly and from our
heart, and so also to attain unto that, in regard where-of this particle (as)
was added of Christ, to wit, (which before also we mentioned) to desire and
pray rightly. Now we rightly pray and desire in faith and repentance, both
which this petition confirms. Faith is confirmed and strengthened by this
petition, because when we truly remit our neighbor, we may and ought
certainly to resolve, that our sins are also remitted us, and so have we a good
conscience, and are assured that we are heard, according to this promise of
Christ, Math. 6.14. Jf ye do forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly
father will also forgive you. True repentance also is confirmed and increased
in us by this petition. For by this petition we are provoked and incited to
true repentance, the chief part whereof is the love of our neighbor. For if
we will be forgiven, we must forgive others. Both causes are contained in the
word of Christ before alleged out of Matthewe; as also in the rest which are
presently added in the same place in Matthewe, by way of opposition. If ye do
forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly father will also forgive you; that
is, assure your selves also that your heavenly father hears you. In which
word is comprehended the confirmation of our faith. But if ye do not forgive
men their trespasses, no more will your father forgive you your trespasses. In
these words is added a spur to repentance. Objection. 4. Paul obtained
remission, neither yet did he forgive al of them their trespasser; because he
says, 2. Tim. 4.14. Alexander the Coppersmith has done me much evil: the Lord
reward him according to his works. Therefore it is not necessary that we
should forgive. Answer. There is a threefold remission or forgiving* 1. Of
revenge. This belongs to all men: because all men ought to remit and forgive
revenge. Hereof speaks this petition, and this Paul did forgive Alexander. 2.
Of punishment. This, as all can not inflict, so neither can all remit; but
neither they also, unto whom yet the same otherwise is committed, ought always
to remit this, but only for certain causes. For God will have the execution
of his justice and Law. But Paul forgave Alexander the punishment also, as
much as concerned himself, yet he will notwithstanding have him punished of
God, but with a condition, that is, if he persist in sin. 3. Of judgment.
This is not always remitted: because it is written, Mat. 10.16. Be ye
simple, as Doves; and wise, as Serpents: that is, let us not call him good, who
is evil, or contrarily. Wherefore we are also to retain a true judgment
concerning others. For God who forbids lying, will not have us to judge of
knaves that they are honest men: but he will have us to discern the good from
the bad.

THE SIXTH PETITION.
AND lead us not into temptation: But deliver us from evil.

Here some make one, some two petitions: but we are not to strive, so that
nothing of the doctrine be taken away, but that this be made plain. Now they
are rather two parts of one petition. Lead us not into temptation, is a
petition of delivery from future evil: Deliver us from evil, is a petition of
delivery from present evil.

The special questions.

1 What temptation is.
THERE are two causes of temptations. The one is from God: the other from the
Devil and the flesh. The temptation, whereby God tempts us, is a trial of our
faith, godliness, and obedience by the Cross, and other encumbrances, which are
opposed to every one, that our faith, patience, and constancy may be
manifested and made known both to our selves and others. So God is said to
have tempted Abraham, Joseph, Job, David. The temptation, whereby the Devil,
and our flesh, and the wicked also tempt us, is every soliciting to sin,
which soliciting it self also is sin. So the Devil tempted Job, that he
might seduce and withdraw him from God, whom he had before loved, and served:
albeit the matter fell out otherwise than the Devil would have it. Here is
understood by the name of temptation that temptation of God, that is, the trial
of our faith, godliness, and patience, which God works by whatsoever lets or
hindrances of our salvation, as by all evils, by the Devil, the flesh, our
lusts, the world, afflictions, calamities, the cross, that our faith,
constancy, and hope may be made known unto our selves and others. Objection.
But God tempts no man. Answer. God tempts no man, that is, by soliciting
him to sin, or evil: but he tempts by proouing and trying us. The Devils,
the woorld, our flesh tempt us, that is, solicit us to evils, and withdraw us
from God. But God as he tempts no man, and yet is said to have tempted
Abraham, Job, David, that is, to have tried their faith and consta^^ie by
afflictions, and the cross: so by the same he tries our faith, hope,
patience, love, invocation, constancy, whether we will or no worship and serve
him also in afflictions.

Hereby we easily understand, seeing temptation is attributed unto the Devil,
and to the corrupt lusts and inclinations of men, in what sense God may be
said to tempt, or not to tempt men. For Satan tempts, both offering
occasions of sinning without, and instigating within to sin, thereby to draw
men headlong into destruction, and to reproach God. Corrupt inclinations tempt:
because they bend and are prone to actions by god forbidden. But god tempts
not to destroy us, nor to cause us to sin, but to try and exercise us, when
either he sends calamity upon us, or permits the Devil, or men, or our
flesh, to provoke and inuit us to sin, hiding for a while his grace, and
efficacy in preserving and ruling us, that our faith and consta^cy may be made
more known and apparent, not verily unto god himself (as who from everlasting
knows what and how much it is, and how much also hereafter it shall be by
his favor and blessing) but unto our selves and others, that so also a trust
and full persuasion of gods presence and protection, may be confirmed in us by
the examples of our deliverance, and in others a desire of following our
example may be kindled, through the beholding of our perseverance, and that in all of us may be raised and stirred up true gratitude and thankefulnes toward
god, who delivers his out of temptations. So Genesis 22. God tempts Abraham
commanding him to sacrifice his son Jsaack. Exodus 15. He is said to have
tempted the people with want of water. Exodus 16. He commands Manna to be
gathered, as much as was sufficient for every day, that he might tempt, or
prove the people, whether they would walk according to his Law, or no.
Deutr. 13. He is said to tempt the people by false Prophets, that he might
know, whether they loved him with all their heart, and with all their soul. 2.
Chron. 32. Jn the embassage of the Princes of Babel, god left Hezechia to
tempt, or try him, and to know all that was in his heart. Wherefore this prayer,
which christ taught us, Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil,
speaks not simply of al trial and manifestation of our faith and godliness,
unto which also David offers himself of his own accord, Psalm. 26. saying,
Prove me O Lord, and try me: examine my reins and mine heart. And Saint James
speaks not of our trial, but of our incitement to sin, cap. 1.13. Let no
man say when he is tempted, J am tempted of God: for God cannot be tempted
with evil, neither tempts he any man. But every man is tempted when he is
drawn away by his own concupiscense and is entised. Then when lust has
conceived, it brings forth sin: and sin when it is finished, brings
forth death.

It is also hereby manifest, how god punishes the wicked, or chastises or
tempts the godly by evil spirits, neither yet is he the cause or partaker
of those sins, which the devils commit. For, that by the wicked the wicked
are punished, or the good chastised, or exercised, it is the righteous and holy
work of Gods divine will: but that the wicked execute the judgment of God by
sinning, that comes not so to pass by any fault of god himself, but through
the proper corruption of the wicked, and such as themselves have purchased, god
neither willing, nor allowing, nor working, nor furthering their sin, but in
his most just judgment only permitting it, when exequuting and accomplishing
by them his own work and counsel, either he reueileth not at al his will unto
them, or moves not their will, to have his reueiled will as the end and
leuill of their action. This difference of the works of God, and the devil, and
even Gods working of his just work by the Devil, but permitting only the sin
of the Devil, is evidently confirmed by the story of Job, cap. 1. and 2. where
God purposes to try Job, but the Devil to destroy him. The same is likewise
confirmed by the story of Achab 1. King. 22. and by that prophecy of the
Apostle concerning Antichrist. 2. Thessal. 2. where the Devil seduceth men to
destroy them, and God will have them to be seduced thereby to punish them, and
suffers the Devil by sinning to execute and fulfill his will.

2 What is, To lead into temptation.
WHEN god is said to lead us into temptation, it is meant, that God according
to his most just will and judgment tries us. Now, to lead us into temptation,
wherewith the Devil tempts us, is, that God permits the devil to solicit
us. Lead us not into temptation, that is, Suffer us not to be tempted above our
power: neither suffer the devil so to tempt us, that either we sin, or wholly
reuoult from thee. Objection. Temptations which are good in respect of god, are
evil in respect of the devil, and yet notwithstanding into them does god lead
us: Therefore god is the cause of sin. Answer. This reason contains a
fallacy of the accident. They are sins in respect of the devil, because he
will thereby allure us to sins: in respect of God they are not sins, because
they are a trial, and a reclaiming of us from sins; as also, because they are
a confirmation and strengthening of our faith. Wherefore as temptations are
trials, chastisementes, martyrdomes, they are sent of God: but as they are
evil, and sins, God will them not, because, to will them, is, to approve and
work them. Now we here in this petition pray against both, (which also we
briefly touched before) namely our trial, and allurement or soliciting to
sin. For we desire first, that God will not tempt us to try us, but yet with a
condition of his will and pleasure, and if he do tempt us, yet that he will not
tempt us above our strength: and that also he will give us strength. Secondly,
we desire, that he will not suffer the Devil, or the world, or our own flesh to
solicit us to sin; or if he suffer them, that yet himself will be present
with us, that we fall not wholly into sins.

3 What is, To deliver us from evil.
BY the name of Evil some understand here the Devil, some sin, some death:
but the best is to comprehend in it al evils both of crime and pain, whether
they be present, or to come. When as then we desire that God will deliver us
from evil, we desire, 1. That he will send no evil on us, but deliver us from al
evils present and to come, both of crime, and pain. 2. That if he send on us
any evils, that he would mitigate them in this life, and turn them unto our
salvation, that they may be good and profitable unto us. 3. That he will at
length in the life to come, fully and perfectly deliver us, and wipe away
every tear from our eyes. We must observe that this petition is so the last
of all the rest, as that from this we return to the former from whence we began.
He is our perfect Savior; but he shall not be a perfect Savior, without this
petition. The later part of this petition being opposed by way of contrariety
to the former part, shows how the former part is to be understood. For when
he says, But deliver us from evil, it shows that we shall be lead into
temptations, and evils, and that therefore we must subject our will unto the
will of God, and pray that we fall not into evils, if it be his will, or that he
will deliver us, if we be fallen into evils.

4 Why this petition is necessary.
THIS petition is necessary, 1. In respect of the multitude and power of our
enemies, and the greatness of evils, and our own weakness and infirmity. 2. In
respect of the former petition, for the obteining thereof: because our sins
are not remitted, except we persist in faith and repentance. If then we will
that God remit and pardon us our sins, we must stand steadfast in faith and
repentance: but steadfast we shall not stand, if we be tempted above our
strength, if we fall into sins, if lastly we reuoult from God himself.
Objection. We are not to pray against such things as are good, and profitable
for us. The temptations of god, as trials, diseases, poverty, sending of false
Prophets, are good things, and profitable unto us: we are not therefore to
pray against the temptations of god. Answer. The Minor contains a fallacy
of the accident. We are not to pray against such things as are good and
profitable, that is, which are by themselves profitable or good. But
afflictions, trials, crosses, and other temptations are by themselves evil and
unprofitable, and not good. But yet they are good, and profit us only by an
accident: which accident is the mercy of God accompaning them, without which
they are not only not profitable, but also a part of death, and a most present
way to death both temporal, and eternal. Wherefore as afflictions and crosses
are evil by themselves, so far forth we pray against them; but as they are
good and profitable unto us that believe, so we pray not against them; or, we
pray not against that good which concurreth with afflictions and the cross,
but against the cross it self, and afflictions, which are by themselves evil,
because they destroy nature. So also we pray against death, as being evil by
it self; and christ himself also prayed against it, Matthew. 26.39. Let this
cup pass from me; nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will. As then death
was a destruction, a torment, and evil, so Christ prayed against it, and
would it not; yea neither would the Father himself it, as it is so
considered. But as Christ's death was a Ransom on the cross, so both Christ,
and the Father would the same.

2 Objection. What things God will, those things ought we not to refuse: But God
will our temptations: Therefore we may not refuse them. Answer. What things
God will, those we ought not to refuse, that is, in such respect, as he will that
we suffer them, with a submitting of our will unto his divine will; or such
things, as he simply will. But God will not simply temptations, nether in this
respect, as they are a destruction, but as they are exercises of faith and
prayer, or martyrdomes, or a trial of our conscience: and in this respect and
so far we ought also to wish them but not simply. And that we are not simply
to will or wish temptations, or afflictions, it hereby easily appears, because
it is patience, to suffer them: which it should not be, but rather our duty, if
we ought simply to wish them, neither might we pray against them. God will
not therefore that we wish for evils, as evils, but as evils are good, so will
he have us to bear them patiently.

3 Objection. What thou shall not obtain, that thou desire in vain. But we
shall not obtain, never to fall into temptation. Wherefore in vain do we
desire it. For all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer
persequutions. Answer. This is a fallacy putting that for a cause, which is
no cause. For therefore desire we that we be not lead into temptation, not
because we are wholly to be delivered, but, 1. Because we are delivered from
many things, in which we should perish, if we should not request
deliverance. This is a cause sufficient. 2. That those evils also into which
we fall, may be good and profitable unto us. And to those which desire in
general deliverance will God grant these two so great blessings. But yet
notwithstanding by reason of the remains of sin in us he will have this
benefit to be imperfect, which nevertheless we are to ask wholy with
submitting of our will unto the will of God, and with full persuasion, that in
the, life to come we shall wholly attain unto it.

Now we are to observe the order, and coherence of these petitions. 1. The Lord
commanded us to desire the true knoweledge of God, and his promise, which is
the cause of al other his blessings. 2. He wills us to desire, that god
would govern us by his spirit, and so continually preserve, and confirm us
in this knowledge. 3. That every of us may do and fulfill thereby his duty in
his vocation and calling. 4. That he would give us those things whereby every
one may do his duty, namely corporal blessings. The fourth petition then
agrees with the former: because, if we must at al be in our own vocation and
calling, we must live, and have things necessary for the mainteinaunce of our
life. 5. He adioineth next after the petition of spiritual and corporal
blessings, a very fit objection of our vnwoorthines: That thou may give us
spiritual and corporal blessings, forgive us our debts. Wherefore the fifth
petition is the ground and foundation of the rest, which being ouerthrown, the
rest fall to ground. For if thou resolve not, that thou have god gracious and
favorable unto thee, how shall thou have him to be merciful? how shall thou
continu in that knowledge, which thou have not? how shall thou do thy duty, and
the will of God, seeing thou art his enemy, and endeuourest the contrary? how
shall thou ascribe al things to god? how shall they turn to thy salvation? 6.
After the petition of spiritual and corporal blessings, there follows
lastly the petition of our deliverance from evils both present and to come.
And from this last petition we return again to the first: Deliver us from all
evils both of crime and pain, both present and to come, that we may know thee
to be our perfect savior, and so thy name may be hallowed and sanctified of us.

THE CONCLUSION OR LAST CLAVSE OF THE LORDS PRAYER. For thine is the kingdom,
the power and the glory, for ever and ever, AMEN.
THIS last clause of the prayer serves to confirm our faith and belief, or
confidence of being heard, and obtaining our desire, to wit, that God will and
is able to give us those things which we desire. Thine is the kingdom. The
first reason is drawn, From the duty of a king, which is, to hear his
subjects, to defend, and preserve them. Therefore thou, O God, seeing thou art
our king, mightier than al our enemies, having al things in thy power, good and
evil: evil, so that thou art able to repress them: good, so that there is no
good so great, which thou can not give, as is agreeing and standing with thy
nature; and seeing we are thy subjects, be present and assist us with thy
power, and save us, as who art loving unto thy subjects, and thy protection
and safeguard is alone saving and preserving. He is called a King, 1. Because he
has power over all creatures. 2. Because he is the peculiar King of the Church.

And the power. The second reason is drawn from the power of God. Hear us O
God, and give us what we desire: because thou art mightier than all our
enemies, thou art able to give us all things, and thou only art able, in thee
alone rests this power joined with exceeding goodness.

And the glory. The third reason is taken from the end or final cause. We
desire these things for thy glory. Of thee alone the true God and soueraign
King we desire and expect all good things, and so we yield unto thee this thy
glory, and this thine honor, and profess thee to be the autour and fountain
of all good things. And verily because this glory is due unto thee, therefore
also do we desire the^ of thee. Hear us therefore for thy glory; and especially,
because thou will also for thy glory sake give us those things which we
desire. For what things serve for thy glory, the same will thou perform and
do: but those things, which we desire serve for thy glory: therefore thou will give them us. Give us therefore these things, that we desire, and the
glory shall return and redound unto thee, if thou deliver us. For so shall thy
kindome, and power, and glory be manifested.

Objection. We seem to bring persuasiue and moving arguments unto God,
whereby we may move him to do what we desire. But in vain are reasons used
to him, who is unchangeable: God is unchangeable. Therefore in vain use we
these reasons unto him. Answer. This is a fallacy, putting that for a cause,
which is no cause. For we grant this argument, in respect of God, but not in
respect of us. For we do not, when we thus speak, use reasons to move God,
or persuade him to do it, but to persuade our selves that God will do this,
and to confirm and assure us that we shall be heard, and to acknowledge our
necessity, and the goodness and truth of god. Wherefore these reasons are not
adioined to our prayers, as thereby to move god, but only to confirm and
assure us, that god will do, what we desire, because these are the causes why
he does it: It shall be for thy glory: therefore thou will do it, because
thou have care of thy glory: Thou art a most good King: therefore thou will
give these things to thy subjects: Thou art most powerful and mighty:
therefore thou will show thy power in giving these gifts, which are most
great, and which can be given of none other but of thee alone.

Amen. This is added, not as a part of the prayer, but, 1. Because this
particle notes a true and sincere desire and wish, wherewith we wish that we
may be heard. 2. Because this selfsame particle betokens a certainty or
confirmation of our faith, whereby we trust that we shall be heard. Wherefore,
Amen, signifies, 1. So be it, and sure and certain be that which we desire,
and let God condescend and answer unto our request. 2. So God, being not
unmindful of his promise, truly and certainly hear us.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE COMMON PLACES, AND PRINCIPAL QVESTIONS, HANDLED IN THIS SVMME
OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION.
THE PREAMBLE.
A THREEFOLD order, or three parts of the study of Divinity. 2 Of a Catechism
or Catechizing doctrine. What a Catechism is. 2 In the Primitive Church two
sorts of Catechumeny. 3 Catechizing, as the Doctrine of Baptism and of laying
on of hands, ever has been used in the Church, and the reasons why still it
ought. 3. 4
Of the holy Scriptures.
Two opinions of religion, but one alone true. 5 What the holy Scripture
teaches, or how Christian religion is divided. 6. 7 True religion ought to be
discerned from others, and why. 8 The difference of the true Doctrine of the
Scriptures from others. 10 The difference of true Doctrine from Philosophy. 11
Certain notes, whereby the true church is distinguished from others. 12 Whence
it may appear that this religion was once delivered from god which is
contained in the Scriptures. 12 The authority of the Scriptures does not
depend of the Church; with reasons for proof, and aunsweres to the contrary
objections. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17 Reasons for proof of the certainty and truth
of the holy Scriptures. 20. 21 The difference between the prophecies of the
heathen, and them contained in the holy Scriptures. 23 The spirit of Christ a
sufficient witness of his Doctrine. 27 No doctrine besides the holy Scripture,
is to be received into the church, and the reasons why, with answers to the
contrary objections. 28. 29. 30 The observing of the Lords day left arbitrary
to the Church. 36 How controversies and doubtful places are to be decided. 46
Of the true comfort of the Godly.
The way to attain to this comfort, and the parts thereof. 53 Why the
knowledge of our misery, delivery, and thankfulness, is necessary to this
comfort. 55. 56. 57
THE FIRST PART, OF THE MISERY OF MAN.
HOW a man comes to the knowledge of his misery. 60
Of Sin.
Whether sin be, or whence it appears to be in us. 63 What sin is. 65 How
many kinds of sin there are. 67
Of Orginall sin.
Whether there be Original sin. 6^ What Original sin is. 68 Whether the
souls of the children be derived from the souls of the Parents. 71 What
Actual sin is. 78 Reigning sin. 78 Sin not reigning or venial. 79 Sin
against the conscience, and not against the conscience. 86 Sin pardonable and
unpardonable. 87 Sin of itself, and sin by an accident. 94 The works of the
regenerate and unregenerate differ seven manner of ways. 98 What are the causes
of Sin. 99 What are the effects of sin. 115
Of the creation of man.
What, man was created of God. 124 For what, man was created. 125
Of the image of God in man.
What the image of God in man is. 128 How far forth the image of God was lost,
and how far it remains. 130 How it is repaired in us. 131 How the image of
God is in Christ, and how in us. 132
Of the first sin.
What that first sin of Adam and Eve was. 134 What were the causes of the
first sin. 135 What are the effects of the first sin. 135 Why GOD permitted
the first sin. 136
Of free will.
The causes of diverse controversies risen about free will. 138 Of the word
Liberty. 140 What is the Liberty of will. 141 What is like or common, and what
is different in the liberty of will, which is in God, in Angels, and men. 144
Whether there be any liberty in us, and what it is. 157 There are four degrees
of freewill. 159
Of evils of punishment.
Of the evils of punishment. 192. How many kinds of afflictions there be. 194
What be the causes of them. 198 What are the comforts, that are to be opposed
against them. 200
THE SECOND PART OF MAN'S DELIVERY.
WHAT man's delivery is. 226 Whether any delivery might be wrought after the
fall. 227 Whether delivery be necessary and certain. 231 What manner of
delivery this is. 231 By what means man's delivery may be wrought. 233
Of the Mediator.
What a Mediator is. 238 For what cause a Mediator is necessary. 239 What is
the office of a Mediator. 241 What manner of Mediator ours ought to be. 243 Who
is and may be that Mediator. 250 That there is but one Mediator. 252
Of the covenant.
What a covenant is. 253 How a covenant may be made between God and men.
255 whether there be but one covenant 255 In what the old and new covenant
agree, and in what they differ. 256
Of the Gospel.
What the Gospel is. 159 Whether the Gospel has bin always known. 261 How
the Gospel differs from the Law. 264 What are the proper effects of the
Gospel. 267 Whence the truth and certainty of the Gospel may appear. 267
Of faith.
The necessity of the true doctrine of faith. 268 What faith is in general.
270 What are the kinds of faith. 272 How those kinds differ. 275 How faith and
hope differ and agree. 278 What are the causes of faith. 276 What are the
effects of faith. 280 Unto whom faith is given. 281 Conclusions comprising the
sum of faith. 285
Of the Creed or Symbol of the Apostles.
What a Symbol is. 287 What are the parts of the Apostolic Symbol. 288
The first part of the Creed, of God the Father, Creator.
The sense and meaning of the words, I believe in God the father Almighty,
Creator. 291
Of God.
Whether there be a God. 294 Who, and what God is. 301 An explication of the
description of God delivered by the church. 305 Whence it may appear that
there is but one God. 336 What these words Essence, Person, and Trinity
betoken and signify. 340 What difference between Essence and Person. 341
Whether these names are to be used in the church. 345 How many persons there
be of the Divinity or Godhead. 347 How the three persons of the godhead are
distinguished. 349 Wherefore this doctrine is to be held and maintained in the
church. 351
Of Creation.
Whether the woorld were created of God. 355 How God made the world. 362 For
what cause god created the world. 367
Of Angels,
What good Angels are. 369 Of evil spirits or Angels. 375
Of Gods providence.
Errors concerning Gods providence. 379 Whether there be any providence of
God. 380 What the providence of God is. 385 A confutation of certain
Sophismes or cauils, which are wont to be objected against the providence of
God moving and governing, all and every particular, whether good or bad, great
or small, most justly. 405 Why the knowledge of this doctrine concerning Gods
providence is necessary. 426
The second part of the Creed, of God the redeemer.
What is signified by the word Jesus 430 From what evils he saves us, 433 How
he saves, 434 Whom he saves, 437
Of Christ.
What is signified by the name of christ 437 What Christ's unction or
anointing is, 438 What his Prophetical function, 444 What his Priesthood. 448
What his kingdom. 451
Of the communion of the faithful with Christ.
what the Anointing of Christians is. 452 In what sense christians are called
prophets. 456 what is the Priesthood of christians. 456 what is the kingdom
of christians 458
Of Christ the Son of God.
How many ways men are called sons 461 How christ is the son of God 463 why
christ is called the only begotten and first begotten son of God, 464
Of Christ's Divinity.
The son of God is a subsistent in the flesh, borne of the virgin, and before
the flesh, 467 The son of God Christ, is a person reallie distinct from the
Father and the holy Ghost, 498 The Word is equal and consubstantial with the
Father, 500, 503 Other rules whereby the objections of the Arrians are
dissolved. 507 The principal arguments against the Divinity of the Son and
the Holy Ghost, with the answers unto them, 509
Of Christ our Lord.
In what sense christ is called Lord, 514 For what causes he is our Lord, 515
Of christ's conception by the holy ghost, and birth of the Virgin Marie. 518
The common place of the two natures in Christ.
whether there be two natures in christ our Mediator. 520 whether christ be
one person or more 525 what manner of union this is of the two natures in
christ, and how made 529 A rule to be observed touching the proprieties of
both natures in christ. 536 A rule to be observed touching the proprieties of
christ the Mediator. 544 why it was necessary, that two natures should be
united in the person or subsistence of the son of God 550
Of Christ's humiliation, that is, of his Passion.
what Christ suffered. 554 According to which nature christ suffered. 556 The
causes impellent, or motives of christ's Passion. 55^. The final causes o^ ends
of his Passion, 558
Of Christ's death.
How christ is said to have been dead 561 whether it was requisite and
necessary that christ should die, 562 The fruit of christ's death, 564 His
burial. 566 His descension into hell, 567
Of Christ's glorification, that is, of his Resurrection.
whether christ rose again, 571 How christ rose. 571 For what cause he rose.
572 what are the fruits of christ's Resurrection. 576
Of Christ's Ascension into heaven.
vvhither christ ascended, 580 How, and wherefore christ ascended into heaven,
582, 587 what is the difference between christ's Ascension and our, 588 what
are the fruits of christ's Ascensio^ 589,
Of Christ's sitting at the right hand of GOD.
what the right hand of God signifies 591 what is to sit at Gods right hand,
591 whether christ did always fit at the right hand of God 595 what are
the fruits of christ's sitting at the right hand of the father, 597
Of Christ's coming to judgment.
whether there shall be any judgment 599 what the last judgment is, 601 who
shall judge. 603 whence and whither christ shall come, 604 How christ shall
come to judgment, 605 whom christ shall judge, 605 what shall be the sentence
and execution, 606 For what cause that judgment shall be, 607 when it shall be.
608 wherefore God would have us certain of the last judgment, 608 For what
causes God would not have us certain of the time of judgment 609 For what
cause GOD differreth that judgment. 609 Whether the last judgment be to be
wished for. 610
The third part of the Creed, of the Holy Ghost the sanctifier.
What the name spirit signifies. 610 Who and what the holy Ghost is. 611
What the office of the holy ghost is. 617 Of whom the holy Ghost is given, and
wherefore. 621 To whom the holy Ghost is given. 622 How he is given and
received. 624 How the holy Ghost is retained. 625 Whether and how the holy
ghost may be lost. 625 wherefore the Holy Ghost is necessary. 626 How we
may know that the holy ghost dwells in us. 627
Of the Church.
What the Church is. 627 How many ways the Church is taken. 629 What are the
tokens and marks of the church. 631 Why the church is called Holy, and
Catholic. 633 In what the church differs from the common weal. 634 Whence
arises the difference of the church from the rest of mankind. 635 Whether any
one may be saved out of the church. 636
Of Predestination.
Whether there be Predestination. 636 What Predestin^tion is. 641 What are the
causes of Predestination or Election, and of Reprobation. 642 What are the
effects of Predestination. 644 Whether Predestination be unchangeable. 645 How
far forth Predestination, Election, and Reprobation are known unto us. 645
Whether the elect be always members of the church, and the reprobate never.
646 Whether the elect may fall from the church, and the reprobate abide always
in the church. 648 What is the use of this doctrine. 649 Of the communion of
Saints. 649
Of the remission of sins.
What remission of sins is 651 Who gives remission of sins. 652 For what
remission of sins is granted. 653 Whether remission of sins agrees with
Gods justice. 653 Whether remission of sins be freely given. 654 To whom
remission of sins is given, and how. 655
Of the Resurrection of the flesh.
What the Resurrection is. 656 The Errors concerning the Resurrection. 656
Whence it may appear that the Resurrection shall certainly be. 657 For what
end the Resurrection shall be 659 By whom the Resurrection shall be. 660 How the
Resurrection shall be. 660 When the Resurrection shall be. 661 What bodies shall
rise. 661 Whether the soul be immortal. 662
Of everlasting life.
What everlasting life is. 670 Who gives everlasting life. 672 To whom
everlasting life is given. 673 For what cause everlasting life is given. 673
When and how everlasting life is given unto us 674, 675 Whether we can be
assured in this life of everlasting life. 675
Of Justification.
What justice or righteousness is in general, and how manifold it is. 677. 678
In what justice differs from justification. 679 What is our justice. 680 How
Christ's satisfaction is made our justice and righteousness. 681 Why Christ's
satisfaction is made ours. 683 Why Christ's satisfaction is made ours by faith
only. 684 Objections against this doctrine of justification answered. 685
Of Sacraments.
What sacraments are. 694 What are the ends of sacraments. 697 In what
sacraments differ from sacrifices 699 In what sacraments agree with the word,
and in what they differ from it. 700 How the sacraments of the old and new
Testament agree, and how they differ. 702 What the sacramental union is. 703
In what the things differ from the signs. 704 What phrases and forms of
speaking of the sacraments are usual unto the church and scripture. 705 What
is the right and lawful use of sacraments. 705 What the wicked receive in the
use and administration of the sacraments. 706 How many Sacraments there are
of the new Testament. 707 Certain conclusions of the sacraments in general.
708 The confirmation of such of the former conclusions as most require it. 711
Of Baptism.
What Baptism is. 717 What are the ends of Baptism. 719 What is the sense
and meaning of the words of the institution of Baptism, 722 what are the
forms and manners of speaking of Baptism 724 Who are to be baptized. 725
Certain objections against the Baptism of Infants refuted. 727 What is the
right and lawful use of Baptism. 730 In place whereof Baptism succeeded. 730
How Baptism agrees with circumcision, and wherein it differs from it. 731
Certain conclusions of Baptism. 732
Of Circumcision.
What circumcision is. 735 what are the ends of circumcision. 736 why
circumcision is abolished. 736 why Christ was circumcised. 737
Of the Lords Supper.
what the supper of the Lord is. 737 what are the ends of the Lords supper.
739 what the supper differs from Baptism. 741 what is the sense or meaning
of the institution of the Lords supper, 743 Against the Transubstantiation of
the Papists. 755 A refutation of objections framed to confirm
consubstantiation, 757 what is the difference between the Lords Supper and
the Popish Mass. 761 what is the right and lawful use of the supper. 766
what the wicked receive in the Lords supper, 767 Who ought to approach to the
Lords Supper. 768 Who ought to be admitted to the lords Supper 769 Certain
conclusions of the Supper. 771 The first appendix or addition unto the former
treatise of the Supper, containing certain principal arguments of the
Consubstantiaries against the sincere doctrine of the Lords Supper, and the
Sacramentaries, as they call them: together with a refutation of them. 777
Certain arguments of the Consubstantiaries, whereby they go about to
overthrow the doctrine of the Lords Supper, together with the refutation of
them. 777 The shifts of the Consubstantiaries, whereby they go about to elude
and shift off certain of our objections, not al, for mo are objected against
them. 783 Certain reasons whereby it is proved, that the body of Christ is
not present either In, or Under, or At the bread of the Lords Supper, neither
is corporally eaten Under, With, In, or At the Bread. 786 The second appendix
or addition, containing arguments, whereby the opinion of the Vbiquitaries is
refelled, and the truth of sound doctrine confirmed. 786 The general points
wherein the Churches which profess the gospel, agree or disagree in the
controversy concerning the Lords Supper. 790. 791
Of the power of the keys of the kingdom of Heaven, and of Excommunication.
What the power is, of the keys given unto the Church. 792 Unto whom the power
of the keys is committed. 793 Why the power of the keys is necessary. 794
How the power of the keys differs from civil power. 797 What order ought to
be observed in exercising the power of the keys. 798 Certain arguments
assoiled, whereby some have endeavored to abolish excommunication. 804
THE THIRD PART, OF MAN'S THANKFVLNES.
Of Conversion.
WHAT conversion is. 825 In what the conversion of the godly differs from
the repentance of the wicked. 826 What are the parts of conversion. 827 What
are the causes of conversion. 829 What are the effects of conversion. 830
Of good-workes.
What good works are. 831 How good works may be done. 833 whether the
works of the Saints be perfectly good, 834 How our works, though not
perfectly good, please God. 834 why we are to do good works. whether good
works merit any thing before God, 839
Of the Law of God, or, Of the Decalog.
what the Law is in general, 852 what the use of the law is. 849 In what
the law differs from the Gospel. 859 How far the law is abrogated, 859
How the Decalogue is divided. 867 what is the substance and meaning of the
Decalogue, and of every commandment thereof. 870 Certain conclusions of the
Decalogue, 873 The first commandment. 876 The second commandment, 886
Of Jmages.
How far Images may be allowed to be made. 894 why Images are to be
abolished in the churches of christians. 894 How they are to be abolished. 896
Certain objections of the Papists in defense of Images. 896 Of Superstiton.
900. 901. 902 Of Traditions, 902, 903, etc. The third commandment, 910
Of an oath or swearing.
what an oath is, 914 By whom we must swear. 915 Of what things we are to
swear. 916 whether all oaths are to be kept, 917 whether a christian may
take a right and lawful oath, 920 The objections of the Papists praying unto
Saints departed, 930 The fourth commandment, 941
Of the Sabbath.
How manifold the Sabbath is. 945 The causes for which the Sabbath day was
instituted. 947 How the Sabbath is sanctified or kept holy, and how broken or
profaned 948. 953 How the Sabbath belongs unto us. 954 Objections against the
abrogating of the ceremonial Sabbath, 955
Of Ceremonies.
what ceremonies are, 958 How the ceremonial laws differ from the Moral, 958
How many sorts of ceremonies there are. 958 whether the church may ordain
ceremonies, 959
Of the Ministry.
what the ministry is. 959 what are the degrees of Ministers 959 For what
end and purpose the ministry was instituted. 960 Unto whom the ministry is
to be committed. 961 what are the duties and functions of ministers. 961 The
fifth commandment. 962 The sixth commandment. 973 The seventh commandment,
981
Of Marriage.
what marriage is, 984 what are the cause of marriage. 985 whether marriage be
a thing indifferent. 986 what are the (...) of married persons, 986 The Eight
commandment, 987 The Ninth commandment, 993 The Tenth commandment, 998 How
the Law is possible, 100^ what is the use of the law. 1002
Of Prayer.
what prayer is, and how many sorts of prayer there are, 1003 why prayer is
necessary. 1004 what is required to true prayer, 1005 what is the form of
prayer by Christ prescribed. 1009 The proeme of the Lords prayer, 1010 The
first petition. 1014 The second petition. 1017 what, and how manifold the
kingdom of God is. 1017. 1019 who is King, and who subjects in Gods kingdom.
102^ The Laws, benefits, and blessings (...) this kingdom. 1021 In what
place it to administered 1022 The time of durau^ce of this kingdom* 10^^ How
this kingdom comes, and why (...) are to desire the coming thereof 10^^ The
third petition. (...) what we ^e^^e, (...) wherefore we desire that God (...)
done; and of whom it is done in (...) The fourth petition 1027 why we are (...)
corporal blessings 1028 How they are to be desired, 1029 why Christ comprised
them under the name of Bread, 1030 wherefore christ calls it, Our Bread.
also, Daily Bread, and adds, This Day, 1031 whether it be lawful to desire
riches, 10^2 whether it be lawefull to put up any thing for hereafter, 1033
The fifth petition. 1034 what christ calls Debtes, and what Remission of
sins. 1035 why we are to desire remission of sins, and how they are remitted
unto us, 1036 The sixth petition, what Temptation is, (...) 1039 that is, To
lead into Temptation, 1041 what is, To deliver us from evil. 1042 ^hy thy this
petition is necessary, 1042 The conclusion of the Lords prayer 1046 Amen 1047
FINIS.

