THE Honorable Prentice: OR, This Tailor is a man.

Showed in the life and death of Sir John Hawkewood, sometime Prentice of
London: interlaced with the famous History of the noble Fitzwalter, Lord of
Woodham in Essex, and of the poisoning of his fair Daughter: Also of the merry
customs of Dunmow, where any one may freely have a Gammon of Bacon, that
repents not marriage in a year and a day.

Whereunto is annexed the most lamentable murder of Robert Hall at the High
Altar in Westminster Abbey.

Printed at London for Henry Gosson, and are to be sold in Pannier alley. 1615.

TO MY MOST loving and respected friend Master Robert Valens, health, and all
happiness.
SVch is now, and evermore has been, the inconstant, and interchangeable
estate of humane affairs (good Sir) that nothing has bee^ which has not had
his increase, his hight, as also his declining: and albeit, it may be said
that among the rest, martial discipline was never in any age neglected, or
unregarded: Yet can it not be denied, but that in former ages the same has
been managed with much more honorable regard and reward, then now it is.
Witness the many honors, which the Greeks, and Romans allowed to Soldiers,
and men of high desert. And in especial, the stately and costly Triumphs which
were allowed to their Consuls or Generals, that were Victors; and had
conquered, or subdued any Nation or Country to their obeysence. Neither have
writers left their atchiuements or worthy designs vnrecouered, and smothered
in oblivion: which benefit many worthy Commanders of our Nation have wanted.
Among which, John Hawkewood, whose honor and memoriable exploits, acted in
Foreign Countries had been forgotten, had not Paulus Iouius, and some few
others rather remembered them, then expressed them according to their worth.
This moved me some few years since, for my own recreation, to collect these
Histories ensuing: hoping that some one or other, better furnished then my
self, would have undertaken to deliver them to the world in more ample manner,
and more plausible terms: which not falling out according to my expectation,
but being put to the Press, I being most assured of your generous and worthy
disposition, have imbouldened my self in this to make tender of that love
which I bear and owe to your virtues: wishing to you all that happiness which
may equal your godly and virtuous intendments,

Yours in all W. U.

The Introduction
IT is observed that the Almighty Creator and Governor of this great and large
universe, the world; without diminishing his own ininfinite, and
uncircumcised power, or neglect of his protection and government: has yet
appointed the supe-, rior seven planets, by terms to govern the world under
him: each for the space of three hundred fifty and odd years: who according
to their several honors and influences, impart their several natures and
properties to mortal men. Which is the cause that some ages are given to peace
and quiet, some to war, some to study, and invention of sciences, some to
travail, and search strange and unknown lands to plant inhabitants, some to
propagate religion, etc. But if any age or time has had Mars for governor, I
doubt not but about the days of King Edward the third, and his Father, and his
son, this Government must be. All Christian Princes, yea, and the heathen
intending nothing but wars, bloodshed, stratagems, and conquests. In these
times valor, and magnanimity was esteemed, had in price, and bountifully
rewarded. Honor, and promotion attending on such as could, and had means to
deserve it. In these times men from mean estates arise to high promotion, and
dignities: honor, fame, and renoune attending on such, as could with wisdom
and courage follow the wars.

THE Famous History of Sir John Hawkewood: sometimes PRENTICE of LONDON.
ABout the beginning of the reign of King Edward the third, there lived in the
county of Essex, in the town of Henningham Syble, a man of honest report and
reputation; named, Gilbert Hawkewood, by his trade and profession, a Tanner,
who among other children had a son named John, a youth forward, and apt for any
good impression, or matter which might be imposed on him: Him he brought up,
in such learning, as might after stand him in steed, and such as those times
affoorded, which he diligently applied, insomuch as in writing, reading, and
casting accounts, and other rudiments of great scollership he exceeded his
equals. So soon as he came to reasonable years, and was fit for the City,
his Father brought him to London, and bound him apprentize to a Tailor, who
were not then called Merchant Tailors, but Tailors, and linen Armorers: with
this Tailor he remained, performing all such duties as others that were his
fellow prentises used to do unto, and for their Masters, until the King
having employed many thousands of men in his conquest of France, and forced to
plant and man many Garrisons, in Cities, Castles, and towns, which he had
won and taken, sent yet again into England, for new supply of Soldiers,
pressing many house-holders, and servants to supply his Armies, and to manage
his intended conquest of France. Then was John Hawkhood, albeit young, thought
meet and able to serve. Himself rather willing to be so employed, then to sit
all day on a shop board making trusses, sowing stockins, or fashioning, or
shaping of Garments. His spirit and Genius leading him rather to follow Arms
after the sound of trumpet and drum, then be at the hand, at the call of his
master or mistres. To France he went, as also many other prentises of his
acquaintance and familiars, He served an Archer, with his bow and shafts, in
no better place then a common Sentinel, or of the still watch, as it then was
termed, and in short space, (such was his carriage, valor, and courage) that he
was promoted to be a commander, or Corporal, after a Sergeant, then Ancient,
after that Liuetenaunt, and last of all Captain, and served with his company of
two hundred and fifty men, all Archers, with such good and happy success, as
that he was evermore preferred to the best and most dangerous oppositions of
the enemy. The black Prince his general, having a watchful eye of his
behavior, and his valor, loving him, and esteeming him more then ordinary,
oftentimes called him to council in weighty affairs, and found him to be of
an excellent sharp, and deep judgment; and often preferred his advise before
others, who were esteemed much more worthy, and were become famous for their
council: neither was his estimation only for council, but for execution, he
surpassed in speed and forwardness his fellow Captains. The particulars of
his services are not recorded, but lie unknown, and covered in the names of
chief Commannders and Generals. Let this sufice, that for his valiant exploits
and hardiness he was dignified with the honor of Knighthood. Albeit he was
thought the poorest Knight in the Army. He was in possibility of great
preferment, and of great riches, if those wars of France had continued: but the
French ouerwearied, and driven to narrow straights, were right glad to conclude
a peace, which was concluded and made in Britain, at or near* Chartires, in
thee year of our Lord 1360.

The black Prince with the chiefest of his Soldiers, were after employed in
the wars of Spain, many returned for England, and others could not by any
means be drawn from out of France: and from such places and preferments, as
with their swords they had purchased. But John Hawkewood joining himself and
his company with such as were called the new men, or late comers, determined,
to seek better fortunes, and raise his estate with the spoil of his enemies,
and so with a settled resolution to pass through the East parts of France unto
Italy, to follow the wars there. He took his journey in despite of any
powers that could be made to resist him, through Champaigne, Burgundy, and
Daulphine, and came into Province, even to the very gates of Auignion, where
the Pope keeps his Court, and residence of Cardinals: Great and exceeding
rich were the spoils which he and his Followers gat in this journey: but much
more was the honor, fame, and renoune which he purchased. He never attempted,
but he conquered, nor never skermished, or fought battle, but evermore he
bare away the victory. He was the sole and general Commander of all which
followed him, which of their apparel, which he newly made for them, were
called the white band, which consisted of five thousand horse, and one thousand
and five hundred foot, whereof the most part were English, and Archers.

Thus entered he into Lumberdy, and was entertained by the Marquis of
Mountferratto, a great Prince, who made unto him large payment, and royal pay,
to the full content of himself, his Captains, and Soldiers: besides, rich
spoils, which they obtained and gat of the Marquis enemies. In these wars he
spent some time, to the great honor and fame of our English Nation.

At this time Lionell the Duke of Clarence, third son to King Edward, arrived
in Italy, with an honorable company, to marry the Lady Violetta, daughter to
Uicount Galeasius, Duke of Millan, which gave unto Sir John Hawkewood occasion
to take leave of the Marquis, and become a follower of the Duke of Clarence to
the marriage: where, more^ like a Courtier, then a Soldier (trained up as he
was) he behaved himself with such commendable and heroyicke carriage, as that
he deserved to be beloved both of the Duke, and of his Father-in law
Galeasius: but most of all, Barnabe, brother of Galeasius, a warlike Prince,
admired his virtues, and knowing of his valor and resolution, never rested to
entreat the Duke of Clarence, till he had obtained license of him that Sir
John Hawkewood might with his companies serve him in his wars against the
state of Mantua, which wars he managed in behalf of Barnaby, in such sort,
as that he in sundry ^ighte, and skirmishes overthrew his enemies, making
himself, and the English men so famous* and renowned, that all Italy seared
them, and accounted Barnaby happy in his entertainment, who on the other side,
admired the discipline, and valiant demeanor of our Nation: and so entirely
loved and honored this Giouanno Acutho, for so the Italians called him, that
he gave unto him in marriage his daughter Dominia, which he had by a Lady of
high birth and nobility, named, Porra, and with her 10000 Florences of yeeraly
revenue. Thus was his glory, honor, and name more spread, and admired, his
riches increased, and the more for that Barnaby was esteemed and accounted the
most valiant and the worthyest Soldier of his time.

But to the great wonder of all men, when the Duke of Clarence died at Alba,
the English men revolted from the friendship of Galesius, and Barnaby, and Sir
John Hawkewood with his Army, joined with their enemies. By means of such
alteration and change of affections (grounded upon what occasions I do not
read) I find that many towns and Cities of Lumbardy, were spoiled and
wasted by his power: all Italy feared him, and well was that Prince which might
give him entertainment. But being yet out of pay, his order was to take one
City or other, and with the spoil thereof pay his Soldiers, and men of
war. But if they would save themseluos from spoil and ruin he ransomed
them, and would sometimes sell them to such as were enemies to the owners of
them. At these times he took the Towns of Faensa, and Bagnacauallo: the one
he sold to the Marquis of East, for two hundred thousand Crowns. That of
Bagnacauallo, he kept and held as his own a long time; yet at last, Astrogian
Manfredy gat it from him by treason. Being weary of being out of pay and wages,
he was sent unto Pope Gregory the twelueth, whose Cities in Province revolted
from him, whereupon he entertained Sir John Hawkewood, and made him his
General: For whom he recovered all those Cities and towns, which refused his
obedience. For which service he was besides his ordinary pay, well rewarded,
and by the Popes appointment, made Governor of five great towns. In these
wars I read that he by mischance was once taken prisoner, but by the great
valor and worthiness of his Captains and Soldiers, recovered from out the
hands of his enemies, with whom he was most honorably used and entreated.
Having ended the wars for the B. of Rome, and utterly refusing to be idle and
out of pay, he was solicited by many free Cities, and states of Italy to
serve. Amongst whom the City and State of Florence proffered him most, and
them he served, with great commendation and honor. From them he went to the
Pysans, with whom when he had served a space, he was again solicited by the
Florentines, who increasing his pay, and allowing better means to his
Soldiers, and followers, obtained his good will again: with whom he served a
long time after, with such success, and increase of his commendation, and
glorious renown, that he was held and esteemed to be the only, absolute,
and the best Soldier that then lived: For having an exceeding sharp. ripe, and
quick conceit, he had learned by long experience in the wars. he had
learned to force occasions, and politiquely to frame his resolutions. He was
also speedy in execution, and whenever occasion required, he was as hot in
fight, as notable in delays. So that sundry great Captains who after were
most highly renouned, proceeded from his school, as from an exact Master of
martial discipline. The exploits which he achieved with good success, were
accounted as sure grounds and principles of warlike discipline, as well amongst
his enemies, as amongst his own followers. Thus waxed he old in the wars,
and after an incomparable renown amongst all men for his virtues and true
valor, he departed this mortal life at Florence, and like a soldier was
most honorably buried in their Cathedral Church: and in regard that he had in
his life been a notable defender of their Common wealth. The Senate and
Citizens in reward thereof, erected a stately Tomb and Monument, with the
image of a man on horseback, as great as a mighty pillar, for a Monument and
testimony of his prowes in war, and his fidelity to them and their state.

A great part of his riches and wealth was converted into England, where also
his executors, or otherwise his friends at Hunningham Syble where he was borne,
erected for him a tomb or Monument, arched over, and engraued the likeness of
Hawks in a wood flying. This was done in the Parish Church by Robert Rokeden
Senior, and Robert Rokeden Junior, and John Cooe: and to the memory of so
worthy a man they builded and founded a Chauntry, whith with the rest is
dissolved.

He was by some called Gyouanno Agutho, by some Acutho: for that the Italians
could not well pronounce his name in English. I have read him called in English
Sir John Sharp, Sir John Acton: and Sir John Hawkewood, which was indeed his
name.

The Chronicles of Italy do make often and honorable mention of him, and our
Histories do also re member him: amongst which I have thought good to set
down the words of Thomas of Walsingham in Lattin as I find them, as also of
Paulus Iouius and others.

Thomas Walsingham.
Per idem tempus Papa fouebat Guerram contra dominos mediolanenses quia ipsi
tirannice and unjust, ^erras, redditus, and castella de patrimonio beati Petri
longo tempore detinebant. Pro papa vero militabat dominus de Spencer qui
laudabiliter se gessit ibidem post mortem ducis Clarentiae cum quo peruenit ad
parts illas.

Eodem tempore Floriut miles ille egregius and famosus Johannes Hawkewood,
Anglicus natione, habens secum albam illam comitiuam pertactam superius qui
nunc contra papam* nunc contra dominos, mediolanenses bella gerebat, cuius pars
quocunque vertebat semper vincebat. Multa itaque facta egregia ibidem operatus
est cum suis Imo mirabilia, and Inauditasi quis vellet singula eius gesta
enarrare.

Paulus Iouius,
Anglorum egressus patrijs Acuthus ab oris
Italiae primum climata laetus adit
Militiae fuerat, quascunque edoctus and arts
Ausonia exeruit non semel ipse plagas,
Vt donaretur Statuae defunctus equestri
Debita nam virtus praemia semper habet.
Nicholaus Machiavell.
Quo vero ab externis insidijs munitiores essent Ioannem Aguthu^^ Anglum belli
ducem celeberrimum, quod antea papa aliisque Italis egregie operam suam
nauasset, ad stipendia sera vocarunt.

Julius Feroldus.
Hawkewood Anglorum decus, and decus addite genti
Italicae, Italico praesidiumque solo
Vt tumuli quondam Florentia sic simulacri,
Virtutem Iouius donat Honor tuam.
His Picture may be seen in the Book of Paulus Iouius de Eulogiis.

The Preface or Introduction.
IT has ever been held a most commendable thing to recount the Acts of
ancient Nobility: but much more laudable to recover them from the devouring
jaws of all-eating time, which commonly does swallow the best actions, and
adventures of elder ages, and retains only the memory of such exploits and
adventures as the later age* namely what their Grandfathers have by hand
delivered, and by tradition left to posterity. The ancient Britains or the
Welshmen, had their Barths or Bardi; as also their Druydes, the last attentive
on their religion and sacrifices: the first, wholly busied and respective about
the recording and repeating, or rather singing the adventures of their
Ancestors, delivering from one to another, as it were an exact Chronicle, of
the most notable adventures of their Nobility; and have not only amongst
them, but the like amongst the Galls and Cimbrians (from whom the best learned
suppose the Britains do proceed) been had in reverend estimation and
credit: but as concerning the ensuing history, which I purpose to write; we
need no tradition to help us, since there yet remains large and ample
records: both Chronicles and histories printed, and written manuscripts which
bear testimony of that which is hereafter delivered: Records in the Town,
and several Stories and Registers belonging to such houses as were by them
builded; or such as they have new founded: And these remain in the hands and
private custody of particular men: but what I shall here deliver, I have found
both in old written histories, in common Chronicles, as also out of Records
remaining, as I said in the Tower of London: being the adventures of Robert
Fitzwalter, who lived in the days of King John, and suffered the variable
changes of his fortunes, as by that which follows shall appear. Whatsoever
error I shall commit, shall not be of purpose, but for want of sufficient
instructions, which whosoever can or will take pains to correct and amend, I
will hold my self exceedingly well pleased, and be content that first I have
adventured to entreat of them. So read and use them at your pleasure.

W. V.

The famous history of Robert Fitz-walter.
Of Robert Fitz-walter his Ancestors.
THat this Family of Fitzwalters, has of long time been of honorable
reputation and account, need not many proofs: the same not contradicted but by
a general consent, known to descend from Gislebert, or Gilbert Lord of Clare
and Tonbridge, and also from Waltheof Earl of Northumberland which lived in
William the Conquerors time, and Judith Countess of Huntington, who was niece
to the Conqueror.

It is not amiss to note that our English nation used no Surnames till after
the conquest, but took names either of the Christian name of their parents or
of the place where they were borne, or of some other accident, as their trade,
occupation, or of some quality of body or mind, wherewith they were endowed.

The first of this family of Fitzwalters that descended from the house of
Clare, was Robert Fitz Richard being indeed one of the younger sons of
Richard Fitz-Gilbert Lord of Clare. This Robert had a son called Walter,
surnamed after his fathers Christian name: Fitz-Robert and he had a son
called Robert Fitz walter being the son of Walter, after whom this name of
Fitz-walter was settled in this family, whereof I entreat: This Robert lived in
the time of King John, and died Anno 1^ 34. 19. H 3 and that Robert who is
mentioned in this Book, was his grandchild, and lived long after in the time
of K. Edw. 1.

Walter Fitz-walter, father of this Robert was first married to Matild or Maud
de Beecham, and secondly to Mauld de ^ucy, mother to Robert of whom I entreat,
whose father died An. Dom. 1198. and was buried at Dunmow, where he founded a
priory, leaving Robert his son to succe^d him, called Robert Fitz-walter Lord
of Woodham, a Town in Essex, of which name there are also two other Towns,
namely Woodham Ferrers, and Woodham Mortimer as also this Woodham Walters,
whereof the Fitz walters were Lords.

Of his marriage, and of his fair daughter Mauld or Matild.
I Wishingly omit his bringing up, which could not be but according to the
estate of his nobility, and birth: but his forwardnes and readiness to conceive
and learn whatsoever was taught him, erceeded the common sort of his equals:
but chiefly he excelled in exercise of Arms, wherein he wholly delighted and
over went the rest of his familiars, and such as were brought up with him. When
he came to man's estate, he betook himself to marriage, and by his wife, who
lived not long with him, who also may seem not to have lived with him so
contentedly as was to be required, he had one only daughter whom he loved
most entirely, and caused her to be brought up in virtue and learning, wherein
she prospered to the great contentment and joy of her Father, and comfort of
her mother, who notwithstanding shortly after died, and left her sole governor
of her Fathers house, which was great consisting of many people, seruingmen,
and household servants: all which she governed, and under her father ruled,
with such discreet and modest behavior, as was of all people wondered at, in
respect of her tender age and youth: besides she was of such excellent and
surpassing beauty, as allured the eyes of all sorts of people to gaze and
wonder at it, nature having wrought in her mind an example of all womanhood,
and in her body and countenance, a pattern and moddell of all perfection,
which being known at the Court, as also throughout the land: she was
commanded to attend the Court amongst Ladies of her regard and equal
estimation: being at Court and daily attendant on the Queen. The King himself
(I mean King John) still respecting and gazing at her exquisite carriage, and
the perfection of her bewty, fell so far from himself, and that which became
his person and estate, that he bent all his ende^ors to solicit her of love,
which she as fully resolute most constantly denied. The repulsed King left not
so his unlawful suit for all her denial, but practiced to procure her father
to be a means for his unlawful and ungodly request: a matter so far from
Kingly dignity, a thing so dishonorable for him to attempt or undergo, as that
for it, he ever after (how ever for the time he bare fair weather) persecuted
and hated the King most deadly: and it seemed to him being a man of high
courage and resolution, so profane and so heinous a request, as was from his
very soul to be abhorred and detested: nature not brooking the father to
become a Pandor to his child: but such was the love or rather lust of this
lascivious King, that the poor virgin not other wise able to avoid his
importunate cute, besough her father that she might be professed a Nun or
votary at Dunmow, whereunto her father consented, trusting that her absence
would alay and assuage his lust, and cause him to leave his unhallowed suit:
but it prevailed not, but as a Lion bereft of his pray grew more curaged then
before, appointing a messenger which he procured and hired of purpose, whose
arrand was either to persuade her to consent to the Kings request, or by poison
to take away her life: in the end when nothing could persuade her* he according
to his direction poisoned her. I have read that it was secretly done with a
poatched egg, the sault being poisoned which was for her sauce: Others say
with (...) mat (...) Mi^ ^raiton (...) ^ers (...) ^^tten
a cup of poison which he enforced her to drink: but howsoever great mischief
befell after this lamentable Tragedy, which well near had overthrown the
Kingdom and Country. This was about the year of our Lord 1213.

Of the Barrons war, and the banishment of this Robert Fitz-walter.
FOr this occasion and many other grieuances, the Barrons together with this
Robert arose, and made war against the King, driving him to such extremity,
that he was forced to deliver the City to the Barons, and the Tower of London
to the Archbishop of Canterbury on certain conditions, whereof I have seen
the coppie of a Charter or deed remaining in the Tower of London to this
purpose.

The agreement between King John of the one part, and Robert Fitz-walter,
Marshall for the army of God and the Church of England, Richard Earl of
Clare, Geffrey Earl of Essex, and Gloucester Roger Bygot, Earl of N^rfolke and
Suffolk, Sa^r Earl of Winchester, Robert Earl of Oxford, Henry Earl of
Hereford, and the Barrons underwritten, that is to say William Marshall the
younger, Eustace de vescie, William de Mowbray, John Fitz-roberts, Roger de
Mountbegon, William de Lannauaile, and other Earls and Barrons with those
above wr^tten together, with the freemen of the whole kingdom, that they
aforesaid shall hold the City of London, of the Kings deliverance, saving to
the King, in the mean time, all farms, rents, and his clear debts, until
the ascension of the Uirgin Marie, which shall be in the 17. year of his
reign: and the Lord of Canterbury shall likewise hold of the Kings deliverance
the tower of London, unto the foresaid term, saving to the City of London,
their liberties and the customs, and to every man his right in the custody or
keeping of the Tower of London: and if so be that some things named in that
Grant be performed by the King: or that they be not hindered to be by him
performed within the said term: that then the said City shall be delivered to
the King, within the said term, saving the liberty and customs of the said
City: and if they be not performed, but hindered by the King: Then the said
Barrons to hold the said City, and the Lord Archbishop the Tower until they
be performed. And in the mean time all men on either side, to receive the
Lands, Castles, and Towns which they had, the beginning of the war between
the King and the Barons, etc.

Hereby appears that the people of England had great affiance in the wisdom
and valor of this Robert: for they chose him for their chief commander, and
General of their Host, by the name of Marshall.

The King after this agreement found means to banish Robert, and diverse others
of the Barons, whereof some fled into Scotland, some into France: Thither also
fled Robert Fitz-walter: The king considering what damage his own subjects
and people might do unto him in France: prepared an Army and sailed over and
met the French king, where each army being prepared, and articles of peace and
truce proposed, they agreed upon a truce for five years. Whilst both the hosts
lay still about this composition. There was an English knight which made offer
to Just with any knight of the French host, which challenge Robert Fitz-walter,
obtained to answer on behalf of the French: So he ferryed over on horsebarke
to the English Host, there being a small River betwixt them, and in fight of
both kings and armies Robert over threw and unhorsed the English challenger or
champion, whereat king John was wroth, and swore by Gods tooth which was his
usual oath, that he were a king indeed that had such a knight: Some of Roberrs
friends informed him and said it is your own knight Robert Fitz-walter, and
humbly be sought his pardon, which the king granted, and so his lands were
restored: and his Castle at London which was defaced and taken from him, called
Bainards Castle, was with license of the king repaired and reedified, of which
Castle and the custom belonging thereunto, I have read in a very ancient
written Book of the customs of London, that which follows, which also is
remembered by John Stow in his Annals.

The ceremonys and rights which belong to Robert Fitzwalter, Chasteline of
London, and Lord of Woodham; that is, he ought to be chief Bannerer, or
Bauner-bearer of London, as in fee, which belongs to his Castle Bainard,
which services he ought to perform in time of war.
THe said Robert as his Ancestors have done, and Vide Io. St^w in Sutuay of
London.
his heirs ought to do, when there is preparation for war, he ought to come
upon his steed, covered, he being the twentieth man of Arms, his caparisons of
cloth, or iron, unto the great door of the Minster, or Cathedral Church of
Saint Paul, with his Banner displaid, with his Arms in it; and when he is come
to the great door of the Church, mounted, and apparrelled as before. The Mayor
with the Shereffes and Aldermen armed, shall come forth to the door of the
said Church or Minster on foot, the Mayor having a Banner of Saint Paul in his
hands, which Banner shall be of vermaile, with an Image of Saint Paul of gold,
with feet, head, and hands of silver; with a sword of silver in the hand of
the said Image: and when the said Robert shall see him come forthwith such a
banner, he shall alight from his horse, and salute the Mayor as his fellow and
compauion, and shall say, Sir Mayor I am come to do my service which I owe
unto the City* and they shall say, we give to you as to our Bannerer, in see,
this Banner of this town, to bear and govern to the honor and profit of
this City to your power. And the said Robert and his heirs shall receive the
said Banner in his hands. and go on foot out of the gate or door, with the
Banner in his hands, and be Mayor and Sheriffs shall fellow him to the door,
and present unto him twenty pound sterling in money, and deliver it to his
Chamberlain for his expenses that day: Also a horse worth twenty pounds, with
a Saddle with the Arms of the said Robert on it engraven, the saddle shall be
covered with Sl^ndall, and his Arms also embrothered. And the said Robert
shall mount upon the said horse, with the Banner in his hand, and when he is
up, he shall say to the Mayor, that he cause a Marshall to be chosen for the
host, one of the City; and when the Marshall is chosen, the said Robert shall
command the Mayor that he assemble the Burgeses, and Commoners of the City,
and they shall all go under the Banner of Saint Paul; and the said Robert
shall bear it himself unto Algate: being com there, the said Kobert and the
Mayor shall deliver it over to whom they shall think good, and if they have
cause to go forth, Robert shall cause them to meet at the Priory of the
Trinity: and the said Robert shall chose two forth of every ward, the most
sage persons, to foresee that the City be safely kept, if the Host of London
do besiedge any town, or Castle. If the siedge continue long, as a whole
year, he is to receive for every siedge of the Comminalty of London five pounds
for his travail and no more.

His Rights in time of Peace.
THe said Robert has a Sokne in the City, that is a wall in the Channonry of
Saint Paul, as a man goes down the street, before the brame of S. Paul, unto
the Thames, and so to the side of the mill which is in the water, which comes
down from Fleet bridge, and goes so by London wall, betwixt the Friars
Preachers, and Ludgate, and so returning back to the house of the said Friars,
until the said comen of the wall of the said Channonry of S. Paul that is, all
the parish of Saint Andrew, which is in the gift of his Ancestors, by the said
signiortty and so the said Robert has Appendant to the said Sokue, all these
things here under written, videlicet.

That he ought to have Sokeman, and to place what Sokeman he will, so that he
be of Sokemanrie.

And if any of the Sokemanry be impleaded in the Guild Hall of any thing which
touches not the body of the Mayor for the time being, or that touches not the
body of no Sheriff; it is lawful for the Sokeman of the said Robert
Fitswalter, to demand a Court of the said Fitzwalter; and the Mayor, and
Citizens ought to grant him to have his Court, and in that Court, he ought
to bring his Judgment, as it is assented, and given in the Guild Hall.

If any therefore be taken in his Sokne he ought to have his stocks, and his
imprisonment in his Sokne, and he shall be brought from thence to the Guyld
Hall before the Mayor, and there they shall provide him his judgment, such as
ought to be given him, but his judgment shall not be published, until he
come in to the Court of the said Robert, and in his Frauncheese, And the
Judgment shall be such.

If he has deserved death by treason, then to be tied to a pillar, which
stands in the Thames at Wood wharfe, where Boats are fastened, two ebbings,
and two flowings of the water. And if he be condemned for a common thief, he
ought to be led to the Elmes, and there suffer his judgment, as other common
thieues.

And thus the said Robert, and his heirs have agrert honor, which he holds
for a great Frauncheese within the City, that the Mayor and the Citizens are
bound to do him of right; that is to say, when the Mayor will hold a great
Council, he ought to call the said Robert and his heirs to be with him in
Council, and of Council with the City, And he ought to be sworn to be of
Council to the City, against all people, saving the King, and his heirs. And
when he comes to the Hustings in Guild Hall, the Mayor, or his Liuetenaunt
ought to rise against him, and set him down near unto him, and so long as he
is in Guild Hall, all the judgments ought to be given by his mouth, according
to the record of y^ Records of the same Guild Hal. And so many weyfes as come
so long as he is there, he ought to give them to the Bayliues of the City, or
to who^ he will, by the Counce l of the Mayor for the time be

How this custom took b^ginning, or how it ended, I have not yet read, yet I
thought good to repeat it, for that it belonged to his Castle, which honors
were again restored and possessed by his successors. For I read that in Anno
Dom. 1303. upon Saint Gregory's day, or the twelueth of March the thirty one
year of King Edward, before John Le-Bloud then Mayor, William de Leyr, Thomas
Romain, William de Bleton, Walter de Finchingfield, Henry de Gloucester, Salamon
de Coetellier, John de Wengraue, John Darments, Hugh Pourt, and Simon de Paris,
the Sheriffs, and Aldermen of London, and before six men every ward of London,
Robert Fitzwalter came, and acknowledged service, and swear upon the Evangelist
to be true to the City, and that he would uphold and maintain them to his
power, and that he shall keep the counsel of the said City of London.

The King notwithstanding these compositions, and agreements with his Barons,
when all was thought to have been amended, did yet again urge his Nobles and
Barons to rise in Arms against him. Insomuch as they sent for Lewis the French
Kings son, promising to deliver the Crown and Kingdom unto him. Of those
which sent for him, I have read the chiefest were Robert Fitzwalter, and Fulke
Fitzwarrine, which two men he most had wronged and endamaged, the one for his
daughters death: the other for taking from him his Lordship of Whittington in
Shropshire, and giving it away to the Prince of Wales, then called Lewis. Also
Roger Bigot, and many others, who after King John his death, compounded with
the French Kings son, and sent him away out of England, as one that without
their aid could not have what he desired.

Of the Bacon at Dunmow Pryory.
RObert Fitzwalter lived long after this beloved of King Henry, the son of
King John, as also of all the Realm: He betook himself at his latter time to
prayer, gave great and bountiful alms to tht poor, kept great hospitallity,
and reedified the decayed Priory of Dunmow, which one Iuga, a most devout and
religious woman (in her kind) being his Ancestor, had builded. In which Priory
arose a custom, began, and instituted either by him, or some of his
successors, which is verified by a common proverb or saying, videl. That he
which repents him not of his marriage in a year and a day either sleeping, or
waking, may lawiully go to Dunmowe, and fetch a Gammon of Bacon.

It is most assured that such a custom there was, and that this Bacon was
deliuerd with such solemnity, and triumph, as they or the Pryorie, and the
Townsmen could make. I have enquired of the manner of it, and can learn no
more, but that it continued until the dissolution of the house, as also all
the Abbeyes.

That the party or Pilgrim for Bacon, was to take his oath before the Prior,
the Covent, and the whole town, humbly acknowledging in the Churchyard, upon
two hard pointed stones: which s^ones some say are yet to be seen in the
Priory Churchyard. His oath was ministered with such long process, and such
solemn s^nging over him, as doubtless must make his pilgrimage, as I may term
it, painful: after he was taken up, upon men's shoulders, and carried,

First, about the Priory Churchyard, and after through the town, with all the
Friars and brethren, and all the towns folk, young, and old, following him
with shouts and acclamations, with his Bacon borne before him, and in such
manner (as I have heard) he was sent home with his Bacon: of which, I find,
some had a gammon, and others had a fleeke, or flych. For proof whereof, I
have from out the Records of the house, found the names of three several
persons, that at several times had it.

Memorandum quod quidam Stevanus Samuel de Aston parua, in Com. Essex, etc.
Which being in Lattin entered into the book, which belongs to the House, I
have thus Englished.

Be it remembered, that one Stephen Samuel of little As^on in the County of
Essex husbandman, came to the Priory of Dunmow, on our Lady day in Lent, in the
seventh year of King Edward the fourth* and required a Gammon of Bacon, and was
sworn before Roger Rulcot then Pryor, and the Covent of this place, as also
before a multitude of other neighbors: And there was delivered unto him a
Gammon of Bacon.

Also, Be it remembered that one Richard Wright of Badeourgh, near the City
of Norwich, in the County of Norfolk, came and required of the Bacon of
Dunmow, namely, the seventeenth day of April, in the twenty three year of the
reign of Henry the siixth, and according to the form of the Charter was
sworn before John Cannon, Pryor of this place, and the eduent, and many other
neighbors, And there was delivered unto the said Richard, one sleech of Bacon.

Again, Memorandum, that in the year of our Lord 1510. Thomas Le Fuller of
Coggeshall, in the County of Essex, came to the Pryorie of Dunmowe, and
required to have some of the Bacon of Dunmow, and on the eighth day of September
being Sunday, in the second year of King Henry the eighth, he was according to
the form of the Charter sworn before John Tailor, then Pryor of the house,
and the Covent: as also before a multitude of neighbors, and there was
delivered to the said Thomas a Gammon of Bacon.

Hereby appears that it was given according to a Charter, or donation, given
by some conceipted Benefactor to the house: and it is not to be doubted but
that at such a time, the bordering Towns and Uillages, would resort, and be
partakers of their pastime: and laugh to scorn the poor man's pains.

The order of the Oath.
YOu shall swear by custom of confession,
If ever you made nuptial transgression:
Be you either married man or wife,
By house hold brawles, or contentious strife,
Or otherwise in bed, or at board,
Offend each other in deed, or word;
Or since the parish clarke said Amen,
You wished your selves unmarried again:
Or in a tweluemoneths time and a day,
Repented not in thought any way:
But continued true, and just in desire,
As when you ioind hands in the holy quire.
If to these conditions without all fear,
Of your own accord, you will freely swear,
A whole Gammon of Bacon you shall receive,
And bear it hence with love and good leave.
For this is our custom a Dunmow well known;
Though the pleasure be ours, the Bacons your own.
The manner of the murder of Robert Hall in the Abbey of Westminster at the
High Alter.
THe most renowned, valient, and victorious King Edward the third, making
claim to the Kingdom and Crown of France, as his proper right and
inheritance lawfully descended unto him, by right and title of the Queen his
mother, made such hot and sharp wars upon the then living King of France: That
being seconded by his thrice valient and worthy sons, especially his eldest,
surnamed the black Prince, he drove the French into such a narrow strait and
exigent, as that they feared the utter conquest and overthrow of their Kingdom
and State.

Never was King more fortunate or happy in his children, nor never did age
breed more valient captains, and chief commanders then this, the ch^efest
whereof, besides the King, and his valient sons and the Nobility, were Robert
Knols, Hugh Cauerley, of Cheshire, Croker of Oxfordshire, Shandoys, etc.
Besides John Hawkewood, (never to be forgotten) who after the end of these
wars in France, took with him his companies both horse and foot, which were
at his command. And in Italy acted wonders, was most highly esteemed and
honored, of whose adventures and worthy deeds, the Histories of Italys make
large report, who at last there died, and in Pauia (as I remember has a most
worthy monument erected for him: of these captains Hawkewood amongst the
Italians was called Io. Acuth.

These captains as also many others (according to the use of conquerors) had
given unto them lands, offices, and preferments, as keeping of Eastles, Cities,
Towns, and countries, which in the behalf and right of King Edward, they with
great and stout resolution held and maintained, in despite of all the French,
or any power they could make: who being wearied and outworne with the terror of
these wars, (their estate still waxing worse and worse) solicited the Pope,
and all the Princes of Christendom, to be a means unto King Edward of their
peace, which was at last granted, and the English forces abated and
withdrawn: But the chiefest could not so easily be with drawn from such
places, as with their swords they had conquered: nor from those honors and
preferments, which with expense of their blood, were in reward of their valor
and service given unto them, until occasion presented a fit means of policy,
wherein the French exceed the English (as Comineus witnesses) as in field or
battle the English exceed the French.

It happened at the same very time, that Peter the lawful King of Castile, or
Spain, was expulsed his kingdom by his bastard brother Henry, and in the
year 1380. came to Bordeaux to the black Prince, craving aid and succor
against his usurping brother. This matter was furthered by the French, who were
most desirous of his absence* well knowing that the English Captains and
soldiers would follow him as the Flower of Chiualry: and the honor and glory
of his time.

The Prince accepted of Peter's request, and forthwith obtained license of his
Father, to transport or rather lead his Army into Spain: where in a maine
battle fought at Nazers, Henry the Fastard was defeated, overcome, his Army
dispersed, and 6000: slain, and 200. taken prisoners, amongst which the Earl
of Deue and Bertrand Clakyn, were most remarkable, and men of special note.
By this means King Peter was restored, whose daughter and heir John of Gaunt
third son of King Edward, and brother to the black Prince married, and in her
right entitled and called himself King of Castile, Leon, and Aragon, which
now is call^^ Spain: of which matter the Chronicles make large report, and
therefore needless to be repeated and new written: but to our purpose.

Amongst these prisonors the Earl of Dene, being (as I said) the most
remarkable and of chiefest note albeit he was challenged by sundry men,
whereof some were of the Nobility: yet this just and wise Prince, who never
used to suffer virtue and valor unrewarded, nor would not for either favor or
fear do a mean and private soldier any wrong, adjudged the said Earl to be
the lawful prisoner of two valiant Esquires, Soldiers and men of worth and
reputation, named Robert Hall and John Shakerley, and thereof they obtained his
Charter against all others that pretended claim or interest in him.

The Earl not willing to go with them into England, made request to be
ransomed, which was grau^ced unto him, and the sum agreed upon, which he
affirmed he was not able presently to pay: For that those wars had so
impouerished both himself, and his country, and people that all their money and
goods were wasted and consumed: notwithstanding he would give unto them his
eldest son and heir as a pledge, and hostage of the performance of such
payment as he promised, and they were contented to accept of. So remained he
still in Spain, and the youth who (as I can gather) was not then above 8. or
nine years of age came with these two Esquires into England, and in short
space he learned the ready pronouncing of the English tongue or language; and
likewise prospered in all virtue and good quallities, that he was so well
beloved of his said Gaurdians or masters, as if he had been their own child:
He on the other part behaved himself houestly, lovingly, and most kindly
toward them, with such faith and fidelity in their manifold trobles, which for
his cause they sustained as was most admirable, and hereafter shall be
declared. His unkind Father neither regard ng his promis, his oath, nor his
bonds; nor having any care or father-like affection to his engaged son, never
sent the ran some, nor any part thereof, but most unnaturally left him in their
hands, at the will of his two masters, where I will leave him, and return to
King Edward.

The black Prince the comfort of his Father, and joy of England, shortly after
this, departed this life, The good King his Father not able to sustain the
burden of so great sorrow, lived not long after, but left the son of Prince
Edward his Nephew to succeed him in his Kingdoms and Crowns, by the name of
King Richard the second. In which space, King Peter of Spain was also slain
by his brother, and the bastard Henry again, repossessed the Crown, and dignity.

John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, Earl of Darby, etc. after the death of King
Peter, called himself* (in right of Beatrix his wife) King of Castile, Leon,
and Aragon, and obtained license of the King to transport an Army at his own
proper charge into Spain for the recovery of his Kingdom. And for that purpose
made great and long provision. And knowing well that the Earl of D^ane was in
the hands of Hall, and Shakerley, solicited them to have him: but they utterly
refused to part with him, without ready payment of the money for his ransom:
whereupon he be sought the King to deal with them on his behalf. The king
pretending y^ his purpose was to make a marriage between the said Earl: and
his sister, a gallant Lady, and rich widow, late wife to Peter Cortney: But
this devise, nor nothing else prouailed to obtain the Dukes* purpose: so that
they were both committed to the Tower of London, from whence (I know not by
what means) they escaped: and after for their further safety, they betook
themselves to the Sanctuary at Westminster, and enrolled themselves and their
goods in the protection and privilege of that place: which was at that time so
strong and so reverend, as it was not thought that any man how cruel, or
tirannous so ever durst once infringe, violate, or break it.

The Duke having staid so long in making provision for his journey, that diverse
of his chiefest, Followers grew weary of their charges and expenses, and
knowing that the matter of this Earl bred his discontent, and was a special
let and hinderance to his further proceedings, determined to set aside all
religion and conscience, and make hreach of the sanctuary, he wholly soever, and
take from them their prisoner, or bring them back to the Tower: whereupon fifty
or sixty chosen men were armed, and secretly placed to break into the Abbay at
service time and if no persuasions could prevail, then with violence to set
upon them. The chiefest of these were Raph de Ferres, the Lord Latimer, Alan
Buxhull, and others, who at that time of Mass gat into the Church, and by
craft drew Shakerley forth of the libertyes of the Sanctuary, by a posterne,
or small door, leading to the Ducens bridge through the old Pailace. But as
for Hall when they saw they could not entreat nor persuade him, they began to
bend their weapons toward him: but he having a short sword drew it, and
valiantly defended their assaults, coursing about the Abbey, yet found no
rescue, or help, but acompany of Monks and Priests, naked as it were, and
unarmed, who cried to God for vengeance of this horrible sacriliedge. I have
been showed a great notch which remains in a marble pillar. reported to be
made with a blow which one of them struck at him, and yet mist him* Also the
stones where he was first deadly wounded, retain yet (as is said) his blood,
whether it be so or be the natural color of the stone, let Philosophers
dispute, he feeling himself so wounded, ra^ up to the high Altar, where the
(...) Priests stood amazed at this deathfull accident. Due of the Lay brethren
a servant of the house, ^^^osing himself for rescue was slain, as also Hall
himself. The murderers made away and fled.

This being performed, and they nothing the nearer for their purpose of the
Earl of Deane, it followed that the Church was suspended, the divine services
ceased: the Quiristers, Chorists, bells, and Organs became mute: the Church
doors were dammed and (...) up with thorns and bushes, at least sixty (...)
(as I have read) And the Authors and doers thereof cursed with Bell, Book, and
Candle: for they were all well known, this was not only don in London, but in
every Cathedral Church and parish Church throughout all England a^nd Wales.
This severe censure of the Church, this curse or ban was denounced: ueyther did
the Duke himself escape it, although he feign would have excused it, as
neither knowing of it, nor consenting to it: but he prevailed not, and was
also punished by this heavy curse. This continued for the space of certain
weeks, in which time the King so wrought with the Duke, that he fell to
composition with Shakerley: who for the some of five hundred marks of present
money, and a hundred marks by the year, was cont^nted to ^art with his
prisoner. Also that the Duke at his own charges should build a Chantrey, and
find five priests forever to sing for the soul of Robert Hall. The money being
paid, and security put in for performance of the rest, the Church, the Bells
and Church ornaments, were new hallowed, the services again restored: But that
which was most to be admirev, was, that when the prisoner, or Earl was
demanded, he delivered his Page, who they all knew in all his troubles had
most faithfully served him and his companion. All sorts of people wondering at
the great fidelity of this stranger, who albeit he well knew that he was
sought for his preferment, that his Father was dead: yet detesting the
unkindness of his father and friends, chose rather to be pertaker of his
masters troubles, than to falsify the faith, oath, and promis which he had
made unto them. A most rare and memorable example.

Hall lies buried in the Abbey at Westminster, not far from Cha^sers Tomb,
under a fair monument of a flat Marble stone, with his image of brass in his
armor: and about the same certain verses in Lattin, which (though much
defaced with treading, and near worn out, may be found in a book called the
Remains of a greater Work. set forth by Mr. Camden, al. Clareceaulx King at
Arms.

The Duke of Lancaster with a great Power went into Spain, where after sundry
victories, and variable fortunes, a great sickness attached his people: by
means whereof his success was not answerable to his expectation, nor the
height of his mind, whereby he yielded to a composition with Henry the King,
and received of him eight Charriots, laden with Gold and Silver: and a yearly
tribute of a thousand Marks: with these conditions he departed out of Spain,
and returned into England: dyed, and lies buried in Paul's, with his wife and
Daughter of King Peter, whose style and titles of Honor and Dignity, were
written and set up by it, at the cost and charges of one master Robert Hare,
late one of the Council to Queen Mary, and late Treasurer, and writer of the
Erchequer Rolls.

FINIS.

