Enchiridion Medicum: CONTAINING, AN EPITOME OF THE WHOLE COURSE of Physic:
WITH THE EXAMINATIon of a Surgeon, by way of Dialogue between the Doctor
and the Student.

WITH A TREATISE CONtaining a Definition of all those Diseases that do chiefly
affect the body of man: AND AN ANTIDOTARY OF many excellent, and approved
remedies for all Diseases.

Published for the benefit of young Students in Physic, Chirurgions, and
Apothecaries.

Herophilus. Morborum remedia si ab indoctis, vsurpentur veuena, si vero a
doctis and exercitatis, Deorum auxillaces manus. LONDON, Printed by Henry
Ballard for George Potter, and are to be sold at his shop at the North door: of
Paul's.

Faults escaped in the first Book.
Fol. 7. linea vlt. read distributiuum f. 38. l. 10. r. Auicen. f. 40. l. 22.
r. Animi. f. 54. l. 3. r. volet. f. 57. l. 17. r. Drag. ij. half Rhubard. f.
58. l. 9. r. tragea. f. 63. rea pull. holand. Drag. half. f. 66. l. 8. r.
Astringents. f. 71. l. 10 r. vein. f. 87. l. 6. r. drithe. f. 92. l. 6. r.
Valescus. f. 93. vlt r. neruos. f. 98. l. 25. r. the right. f. 99. l. 19. r.
aliquo. f. 101. l. 25. r. tapsus barbatus. f. 101. l. 16. r. follioru, cod. l.
22. r. priuatiuely. f 102. l. 13. r. af fect. f. 104. l. 4. r. nympheae. cad.
l. r. alimentary. f. 107. l. 4. r Zedoaria. f. 109. l. 21. r. strife. f. 118.
l. 13. 1. course. f. 124. l. 12. r. sambuci.

In the Discourse of Chirurgerie.
Fol. 25. l. 1. read virga. f. eod. l. 11. summitatum. f. 27. l. 12. r.
Diachilon. f. 44. l. 13. r. alcacengi. f. 46. l. 12. r. altheae. f. eod. r.
minij. f. 51. from sense to Cephalalgia supersluous.

In the Antidotarie.
Fol. 4. Lin. 2. r. enulae. f. 12. l. 16. r. citrinorum. f. 23. l. 2. r.
betonicae. f. 35. l. r. galangae, f. 41, l 21. r. amili.

AD ZOILVM.
De^te Theonino quid carpis Zoile? nostra Si tibi displiceant, fac meliora
precor.

ORNATISSIMIS VIRIS GHORGIO BAKERO ARmigero, Thomae Thorney, Iohanni Gerardo,
Christophero Frederico, Iosepho Fentonio, Richardo Maps Chirug. peruiss.
Londinens. caeterisque eiusdem artis in eadem ciuitate professoribus
Dignissimis.
CVm huic dear medica libello (qualiscunque tandem iste siet) mei excercendi
gratia colophonem addidissem (viri dignissimi) non deerant ex interioribus meis
nonnulli qui a me haud ignaue contendebant hunc prelo committere: quorum
petitiones cum a me minime frustratas iri denique curassem, mihi mecum
consulenti, quem patronum huic libellulo deligerem, ecce, vos ipsioccurristis:
quorum patrocinio eum statim dicare decretum habui. Illudque ipsum lubens ago,
in vestramque tutelam hune accipi co magis postulo, quod vnius eiusque (ni
fallor) anti quissimae medicinae partis vos professores estis long dignissimi.
Nec me fugit vobis pernotum esse, ad exercendam praeclaram illam Chirurgiae
artem neminem aptum fore, qui ad hanc medicinae partem aliquandiu non
instructus fuerit. Quocirca vobis ipsis, caeterisque condignis rei Chirurgicae
alumnis, inclytae ciuitatis huius incolis has meas exercitatiunculas deuouere
operaepretium existimani. A vobis iterum contendens, eas a vestro patrocinio
protectas iri: quas si been consultas grateque habitas intellexero, ad maius
aggrediendum opus, vtilitatis vestrae gratia animum certe mihi dederitis. Quos
interim cum pijs vestris conatibus, omnipotentis dei tutelae commendare non
desistam.

AN EPITOME of the whole course of Physic.
PARS I.
Doctor. SEeing you are desirous to be admitted to the practice of physic;
let me hear how you know your self fit and able to practice in so noble an
Art; for every man is not sit to be a Physician, according to the proverb,
Ex quolibet ligno non fit Mercurius: therefore tell me first, what manner of
man a Physician must be.


Student. A Physician must be learned, Medici Doors.
judicial, sober, of honest conversation, not full of words, but secret,
chaste, truly Religious, not covetous, or given to wine; and finally, he must
be a Philosopher, according to the saying, vbi desinit Philosophus, incipit
Medicus.


Doct. It is most true, and that is it which Hippocrates cries out on, when
he did perceive how hard a matter it was to be a perfect, Physician: vitae
breuis, ars longa, occasio praeceps, experimentum periculosum, iudicium
difficile. As if he should have said, the whole life of man will not suffice to
attain unto a full knowledge of the Art of Physic; for it spreads it self
so large, that if it be compared with the course of man's life, the life is so
short, that it is not sufficient to attain to a full knowledge of the whole
Art. And Galen himself affirms, in Libro De pulsibus, that he had spent
many years in the practice thereof, and yet could not attain to a perfect
knowledge of the same. If then this happened unto the Prince of Physicians
(Hippocrates excepted) what may we think our selves able to attain unto? If,
I say, he spent so much time and labor in one part of physic, how much time
and labor may be required to attain to a fulll knowledge of the whole art?
And therefore it is a great error in such men, that do dream that the art of
physic may be easily attined unto: so that if they have gotten two or three
Chimical medicines, without any other grounds; they profess themselves to be
great Doctors and cunning Physicians. But to let that pass; let me hear your
definition of physic: tell me, what is physic?


Stud. Physic is an art that does preserve the body of man in health; and
being sick, cures the diseases of the same.

Or physic, according to Hippocrates, is adiection, and subtraction: or
according to Galen in his Art paerua; It is the knowledge of things
healthful, of things unhealthful, and of neither.


Doct. Show me how that may be.


Stud. It may be three ways, as the body, the cause, and the sign: as that
is a healthful body which enjoys health; a healthful cause which works or
conserueth health: that is an healthful sign which does demonstrate health to
be present: and that is said to be an unhealthful body which is sickely: and
unhealthful cause, which works the disease: an vnhealthful sign, which
shows the kind and greatness of the disease, or does premonstrate the event
thereof. We call that a neuter, that neither enjoys health nor sickness,
which is not perfectly sound, nor yet sick.

Or physic is the study of things natural, of things not natural, and of
things against nature.


Doct. Into how many parts is physic divided?


Stud. There ^re in general fine parts of physic: the 1. is Physiologia, and
searches out the whole nature and constitution of man: the 2 is Hugiena, and
does study in the preservation of the health of man: the 3. is Pathologia, and
is exerc^^ed in searching out the sickn^^^ and the cause: the 4 is Semcou^^e,
and is exercised in hewing the sign either o^ ^ife or death: the 5. is
Therapeutica, and that teaches the order of curing, affects besides nature:
and under this last part is comprehended three other parts, Dieta, compositio
medicamentorum, and Chirurgia.


Doct. I see you are reasonably well acquainted with the definition, and
division of the art. But you told me but now that physic was the study of
things natural, of things not natural, and of things against nature: tell me,
what are those things that you term natural?


Stud. Those things that are termed Res naturales.
natural are seven: Elements, temperaments, humors, spirits, parts,
faculties, and functions: in the knowledge of which Physiologia, or the
knowledge of natural things is exercised.


Doct. Tell me then, what is an Element?


Stud. Element is a body most pure, and simple, and the least part of the same
wherein Elementum quid.
it is: which c^^ not be divided into any other kind, and of it all things
natural have their original beginning. This definition is taken out of Galen
and Aristotle, and therefore cannot be denied.


Doct. How many Elements are there?


Stud. There are are four Elements: viz. the fire, which is extreme hot and
moderately dry: the air extreme moist and moderately hot: the water extreme
cold and moderately moist: the earth extreme dry and moderately cold. In heat
the fire with the air, and in drines with the earth, in moisture the air,
with the water, and in heat with the fire; in coldness the water with the
earth, and in moisture with the air; the earth in drines with the fire, and in
coldness with the water, do all consent and agree. And as the water to the
fire is extreme contrary, so is the air to the earth: of the mixture of these
Elements all natural bodies have their composition. And yet it is nothing
necessary that they be equally mingled in the body, but according to that that
has dominion, the body is named choleric, sanguin, phlegmatic, or
melancholic; and have their denomination of the four natural humors: viz.
choler, blood, phlegm, and melancholy, which take their qualities of the
Elements: for choler is hot and dry according to the nature of the fire, and
blood is hot and moist according to the nature of the air, phlegm is cold and
moist according to the water, and melancholy in no point does disagree from the
earth.


Doct. You have well declared how natural bodies are framed by the mixture of
the Elements: let me hear how briefly you can show me the differences of
temperatures.


Stud. Temperatures are in number Temperamentum.
nine, whereof there are eight do exceed; and therefore they may be better
called distemperatures, then temperatures: the ninth is temperate, for it does
exceed in no quality. Of distemperatures there be four simple, and four
compound: the simple are heat, cold, drines, and moisture, of the which joined
together distemperatures are made. The ninth is neither hot, cold, dry, nor
moist, and it is framed of them all: and that is it which the Grecians do call
(...), that is, Been temperatu^, or according to the Arithmeticians, (...).
Te^peramentu^ ad pondus, a complexion measured by weight; because there are as
many degrees of heat as there are of cold, of drines as there are of moisture:
the other which be distemperatures, be not measured by weight, but by dignity;
as in the heart well tempered, heat does exceed; in the brain well tempered,
moisture does exceed; in the fat well tempered, cold; in Temperamentum secund.
iustitiam distributiuam.
the bones well tempered, drines: and this is called temperamentum secundum
iustitiam distributiuam, a temperature rightly measured or disposed with
equality.


Doct. But is it possible to find a body so complexioned that we may say, here
is a body framed of the four Elements, ad po^dus, that is, to a just and equal
proportion?


Stud. I am persuaded that it is altogether impossible for any man to find such
a body, that the sour Elements may be said to be equally proportioned in him:
for either heat or moisture has still the predomination, or coldness and
drines. And yet I think it not to be impossible, but that there may be such a
body. but hard to be found, as hard to come by as Quintilians Orator, or the
wise man which the Stoics defined: a man harder to come by then the rich
Jewel, the Philosophers stone, which although diverse brag that it may be
framed, yet it can never be attained unto: so we may imagine such a man to be,
as by the consent of nature was never framed, nor is ever like to be. But if
there be any that can find a man that is neither too gross nor Definition of a
temperate man.
too slender nor very full of hair, nor yet smoth and without hair, nor soft,
nor yet hard, black nor white, hot nor cold, dry nor moist: and to be brief,
such a one that keeps a mean without al excess, if, I say, we can find such
a one, then are we sure we have a body complexioned ad pondus, and to just
proportion.


Doct. Then you conclude there can be found no body so framed, that it may be
termed Corpus temperatum an pondus


Stud. It is very true. Read fernel. L^onar. Tuc. and John Rolanus.



Doct. Then show me the judgment and signs of Temperaments.


Stud. That was I minded to perform if you had not spoken thereof: for it is
to no end to know the differences of temperatures if we know not the signs of
the same also. First then we know by the touching, heat from cold, moisture
from drithe: and those that are of a soft disposition of body, the flesh being
laxe and thin, them we judge to be moist: those that have a thick and a
hard skin, them we judge to be dry. Then we proceed as well to physical
actions, as to moral, neither do we account physical only natural, but
vital, and the animal also. Moral actions are assects of a body
concupiscible, angry, and rational: for Galen in one book does teach that
Animimores sequuntur temperamentu^ corporis: that the disposition of the mind
does follow the temperature of the body. In men that by nature are hot, the
heart, and the Artiers beat vehemently: but in men of a cold disposition, the
heart and pulse beat remisly and slowly: men of an hot disposition, are very
much inclined to lust and venerie; the cold disposition is for the most part
very flow or unable: notwithstanding it sometimes does happen, that the hot
complexion proves unfit for Venus, because the members of generation are over
cold.

The hot complexion is prone unto anger, they are of a proud and hautie
stomach, but the cold are fearful, sober, and of an abject mind: the hot
complexion is crafty, subtle, and ingenious, but the cold is dull, slow and
obtuse in understanding: the hot complexion has swift motions of the mind, but
the cold is of a slow and dull spirit: In like manner in hot complexions, the
teeth do sooner grow and increase, then in the cold.

We must also consider the form and shape of the body, whether it be fat or
lean, because that leauenes does argue an hot body, and the fatnes a cold
body: which is to be understood by nature, not by disease, or by custom, as
in extraordinary cares, immoderate use of Venus, too vehement and often
exercise, and long fasting, all these cause a lean and a thin body: so in like
manner idleness, much banqueting, and delicious living, does sometimes cause,
that a body naturally given to be lean, may grow fat: And so also a cold
disposition may grow lean, by grief, by cares, by hunger, and such like, for
the body may be so macerated, that it may wax lean contrary to nature.

Besides, the cold complexion is not so hairy as the hot, as may be perceived
by Eunuchs and women which are of a glaber and smooth skin. The sign that is
taken from the color of the hair is deceitful, because that the color of the
hair is changed with the age by the dominion of a red, yellow, black, or white
humor: for in the first age the hairs that Calidi sunt vilosi et birsuti.
are yellow, heat increasing through age, they wax black at the length, the
same hear vanishing, and much slegme increasing, they wax white. In like
manner, by things received into the body, the constitution is discerned: for
the hot complexion is offended with hot things, as wine not delayed, vehement
exercise, meats with hot spices, and they fall quickly into hot diseases, as
into Fevers, and other choleric diseases; but those hot things are beneficial
unto cold complexions. Moreover the temperatures of the principal parts, as of
the heart, the liver, the brain, and the testicles, and of those necessary
parts of life, as the stomach, and the lungs are known by their proper signs,
as Galen teaches in his Arteparua, of which, for the most part Oribasius, and
Paulus, have written and set forth in their Synopses.


Doct. Well, I would have you as Def. hum. Humor esl succus naturalis guo
corpus totum nutritur, souetur et conseruatur.
briesly discourse of humors, to the intent we may not stand over long about
this first part, which is called Physiologia.


Stud. I have already said that there are four principal humors, blood,
choler, slegme, and melancholy, and these are called Primogeniti filij quatuor
eleme^toruin: for choler is of the nature of the fire, Omne liquidum and
fluxile corpus humidum.
phlegm of the water, the melancholic humor of the earth, blood of the air,
for blood is hot and moist, as is the air.


Doct. We will not stand long to discourse of humors, because I am persuaded
that you are sufficiently studied therein: but tell me your opinion, is blood
the only nourishment of the body or no?


Stud. It is the opinion of Aristotle, that Sanguiaem solum my^^ire.
blood is the only nourishment of the body, and preserver thereof. Although some
are of opinion, that because some parts are spermatick, and other fleshie, that
therefore the fleshie parts are nourished with the blond, and the spermarick
parts with the seed, and the bones with the marrow, and the stomach with that
which is called Chilus, that therefore blood is not the only nourisher. To
which I answer, that al those parts are nourished with the blood, some
immediately, as the sleshie parts, some mediatly, as the solid parts: for the
seminal liquor is nothing but blood, made white by the coctio^ alteratiue of
the solid parts. The marrow also is framed of the blood, and therefore
according to the Logicians, Causa causae sit causa causati: for the blood is
the material cause both of Causa causae sit causae causati.
the marrow and the seed, and therefore it is not to be doubted but that all
the parts are nourished with the blood; but the stomach to be nourished with
Chilus, is affirmed by Galen terti^o de naturalibus facultatibus: But there it
is abused by the name of Nutrition: for it satisfies the animal appetite by
his quality, that is to say by his sweetness: but not the natural quality by his
substance. And it may very well be perceived by the infant in the mothers
womb, whose stomach is nourished and does grow, not by Chilus, because he
receives no such nourishment by the mouth, but materno sanguine, which the
liver draws by the veins of the navel: and therefore the stomach is
nourished with that blood, which it does contain in his veins, and not by
Chilus.


Doct. I am also of your opinion, but I pray you go forwards, and declare unto
me the differences of humors.


Stud. I will in no wise omit the differences of humors, which be in number
eight, four natural, and four unnatural: I have already showed that the
natural is blood, phlegm, choler, and melancholy, the unnatural is the same,
turned by putrefaction, or else some otherwise from their natural qualities;
but as for the generation of them, it is by the virtue of the liver, working
upon the matter and substance of food received into the stomach for the
nourishment of Generatio humorum.
the body: And even as there is perceived in new wine, four differences of
humors, viz. the flower or boiling of the wine, secondly the watery substance
of the wine, thirdly the feces or dregs thereof, and lastly the pure and
sincere wine: so of Chilus in the liver part is made blood, part watrish
phlegm, part yellow choler, and part gross or black choler.


Doct. What is blood?


Stud. Blood is a temperate humor, hot, and moist, sweet, the apt and
convenient nourishment of the body.


Doct. What is phlegm?


Stud. Phlegm is a cold humor, moist and without savor, as it were blood
(...).
crude, somewhat white, which is carried about with the blood, to the end to
mitigate the heat of the same, and that it may be converted into blood, by
the last digesture it helps the distribution of the humors, and does nourish
those parts that are agreeable or like unto it self.


Doct. What is choler?


Stud. Choler is an humor hot, dry, and bitter, which as it were the froth of
the blood, is carried together with the same, that it may nourish the like
members unto the same: it opens the Meatus, and penetrateth: it is prositable
to the nourishment of those parts, that have the like temperament.


Doct. What is melancholy, or black choler?


Stud. Melancholy or black choler is a natural humor, cold, and dry, thick,
Melancholy.
gross, black, and sharp part of which is carried with the blood, to the end
to make the same the thicker, and to nourish the bones and the spleen, and it
is as it were the dregs and sediment of the blood. All these four humors, as
I have said, being made unnatural, they turn to the hurt of the body, as when
melancholy is burned, it becomes vicious, and causes madness: when it is
mingled with too much phlegm, it causes a doltish disposition, and works
cold diseases. When blood becomes unnatural, it is made wheyish and watrish,
and is very hurtful, as in the hydropsic: when red choler is burned, it
becomes vicious and biting: when phlegm is made unnatural through a weak
digesture, it is made a watrish humor, and so hurtful to the body.

There is also another natural humor, and is Primogenius, the first and chief
humor, called Humidum radicale, which is Humidum radicale.
engendered in the similer parts or insited in nature: for from the first
beginning the members of the whole body are filled with a certain dewie humor,
or only moistness: truly the first thing that is engendered, having its
beginning from the blood monstruall. This humor yields nourishment to the
natural heat; and therefore by the same it is consumed, and needs
restoration; which is performed by the accession of nourishment. Galen terms
this humor the solid substance of the similer parts.


Doct. Now it rests that you show me the seat or place of every one of these
humors.


Stud. These 4. humors which are inge^dred in our bodies, being mixed, they are
contained in unamassa sanguinis: that is, in the fountain of blood which is
said to be the better part of it self; and being exactly confused, they rest
in the veins; which the Physicians do consider as it were the chief Elements
of the body: but those humors which are by nature derived without the veins,
whether it be yellow choler in the gaul, or melancholy which the spleen
draws, or phlegm which is engendered in the stomach through crudities, or the
matter which distilleth from the brain to the nostrils, and such like, they
are in no wise to be accounted elements of our body, and therefore they be not
humors but excrements, and so they are called: which nature, whiles it is in
strength does expel as unprofitable unto places convenient and the
excramentall seat of yellow choler is the gaul, from whence it is purged by
urine and the stool: the receptacle of the melancholic humor is the spleen,
by which being drawn, it is spartly co^ncertd into the nature thereof, and
partly it is dejected to the stomach.


Doct. Proceed now to spirits, and let me know what a spirit is. Despiritibus.
Spiritus definitio.



Stud. A spirit is a subtle flame, or rather an airy substance, giving
strength and power to exercise proper actions in every member.

Spirits be two fold, the one vital, the other animal; the vital spirit is a
subtle flame engendered from the blood, and is dispersed by virtue of the heart
into all the body, to give unto the same lively heat, and a power of motion and
action. The efficient cause is a natural power in the heart; the matter from
whence it proceeds is blood, for it is engendered of the blood, which is in
the left ventricle of the heart: the form is the flame it self, flying
through all the Artiers.

The final causes are two: the first is that it might give lively heat unto
the body: the second is, that it may be the instrument of action and motion in
the whole body.

The animal spirit is as it were a starrebeame which is sent from the brain by
the Nerves into all the body, to give motion, and sense, and all other animal
actions unto the same.


Doct. From whence is the Animal spirit engendered?


Stud. It is engendered of the vital spirits, by the virtue of the brain
elaborating and concocting the same. There are some that adioyne a third kind
of spirit: that is Spiritus naturalis, in gendred in the liver; which is the
thin substance of the blood, and is like unto a vapor: this spirit is carried
by the hollow vein, together with the blood into the heart; where it is
wrought by the natural strength of the heart, and so is made a vital spirit;
and so the natural spirit is as it were the matter of the vital spirit, and
the vital spirit is the matter of the animal spirit.


De partibus.
Doct. Go forward unto the parts of man's body, and tell me first what a part
De partibus.
is.


Stud. Every member of the body is accounted for a part of the body: and
Membra principalia.
they are of two sorts; some principal, and some official: the brain, the
heart, and the liver are accounted principal members; some also account the
testicles amongst the principal members.

The official members are the sinews, and they do serve to the brain: the
arteries Membra officialia.
which do serve to the heart; the veins which do serve to the liver; the
spermaticke vessels, which be inseruient to the stones. There be also some
parts that be called parts similares, or Homogenae; and some Dissimilares, or
Heterogenae. The Similar parts are so called, for being divided, they remain
in themselves such as they were before; and those are the bones, cartilagies,
ligaments, tendons, fibers, membrans, the skin, and the flesh, with the
fat, and such like. The members or parts Dissimilar, are the contrary. Some
members are called isntrumental, as the stomach, the reins, the bowels, with
all the great sinews.


Doct. It follows that we speak of De faculta. tibus and potentijs.
faculties, or powers. Tell me therefore how many sorts of faculties or powers
are there?


Stud. There are three sorts of powers, that is to say, Animal, Spiritual, and
Natural: the Animal faculty (according to Plato, whom the Physicians do
follow) is placed in the brain: the vital or spiritual is placed in the
heart; the natural in the liver. Aristotle in secundo De Anima, rehearses five
faculties or powers of the soul: viz. Potentiam vegetatiuam, sentientem,
Appetitiuam, loco motuam, and Rationalem.


Doct. What is that vegetative power?


Stud. The vegetative power is that which does nourish, increase, and
strengthen the body; and therefore it does contain these four faculties;
that is, facultatem nutritiuam, auctricem, generatricem, and formatricem.


Doct. What is that nutrition or nourishment?


Stud. It is the conversion of meat and drink into a spiritual substance,
performed by the force of heat, that there may be a restoring of the same,
which began to be decayed.

The efficient cause of nourishment is natural heat. Materia ex qua, or the
matter from whence it springs, is the meat and drink received into the body.

Materia in qua, or the subject, is man's living body. The formal cause is the
same Assimilation or conversion of meat and drink into the similitude of
enerie member to be nourished: for one part is turned into the substance of the
bone, another into the substance of the flesh, etc. The end, is the restoring
of the same which began to be consumed: for when the natural heat does
consume any thing, that same must be restored again by nutrition: even as in a
Lamp, the oil being consumed, the same must be again increased. Therefore the
final cause is Conseruatio indiuidui.
the co^seruation of that thing, which can not be divided: that is, of a man,
or of any other living creature.


Doct. What are the Organs of Nutrition?


Stud. It is the mouth which receives and cheweth the nourishment: the
Oesophage, that conueieth it: the stomach turning it into Chylus, by the work
of the liver: to which are admixed the rest of the humors, the veins carrying
and conueying the blood to every member, in which there is made Assimilation,
and application of nourishment.


Doct. Let me know the faculties and powers of every member.


Student The common Faculties which rests in every member, are said 4.
Facultates in singulis membris, Attractrix Retentrix, Concoctrix, Expultrix.
to befoure: viz. the attractiue, the retentiue, the concoctiue, and the
expulsive; for every member has a faculty to draw, to retain, to alter, and
expel.

As for example: the stomach does first draw the meat: secondly, it retains
it: thirdly, it does alter it, that is, it turns it in to Chilus: and
fourthly, it does expel it.


Doct. What is hunger and thirst?


Stud. Hunger is a desire of meat, when as the veins Mesariaces being Fames.
empty of nourishment, do draw from the stomach by a kind of sucking, and
haling; the stomach is as it were Culina communis totius corporis, a common
Kitchen of the whole body.


Doct. What is thirst?


Stud. Thirstines is an appetite of humectation, and cooling in drithe or heat:
Sitis.
the Organ of hunger and thirst is the mouth of the stomach, in which the same
irritation or provoking is felt.


Doct. Now show me how nourishment is made.


Stud. The stomach does concoct the meat, and turns it into Chilus; the same
Chilus, is sent per (...) in to the intestins, Duodenum, and Ieiunum; from
thence the veins Mesaraices plucketh it, and turning it into a more pure and
liquid mass, sends it unto the liver, but the excrements slip down to the
inferior intestins: the liver turns the Chilus into the mass of blood,
which consists of the four humors, blood, choler, phlegm and melancholy. And
the blood is sent by the veins, from the liver part upwards, and part into the
right ventricles of the heart, to nourish the heart and the lungs, and to
engender vital spirits; part discendeth downwards, to nourish the inferior
members: but the other humors which are separated from the blood, part flows
into the gall; as yellow choler; part into the spleen, as black choler: the
watery Aquosa supersluitas
or wheyish matter slippeth to the reins and bladder, and so becomes vrin, or
else it does transpire by sweat. These be the excrements of the second
decoction or digestion, which are made in the liver and the veins.

Last of all, the third Decoction is made in those parts, to the which
excrements do flow: which, as I say, do pass by insensible transpiration of
the skin, and part with the vrin and excrements. The blood does nourish the
members by apposition, and assimilation that is, when it sticks to the
members, and is adglutinated and waxes warm, and so at the length, after many
changes, it is made like unto the part, and is as it were turned into the same
substance, and then it is called the second humidity: the Arabians do call it
Cambium.

From hence the digestions, or concoctions are numbered to be three, the first
is performed in the stomach and intestins, the second in the liver and veins,
the third in all the members and solid parts; and the rule is, Vitium prioris
concoctionis, non potest corrigi per sequentes.


Doct. I see you do briefly run over this first part of physic concerning
things natural: let me hear you deliver the rest in as short a manner; and
let me know how many things there be that are called not natural?


The second part of things not natural, called Hugiene, and does respect the
conserua tion of man's health. PARS 2.
Stud. THere are six things necessary to the nourishment and preservation of
man's life, and are called, not natural.

1 The Air.

2 Meat and Drink.

3 Sleep and watchfulnes.

4 Exercise and rest.

5 Emptines and repletion.

6 The affects of the mind.


Doct. Why are they called things not natural?


Stud. Because they are not natural parts of a man, they are not within, but
without the man, they are a necessary matter, and help for the preservation
and keeping of the body of man, they are called non naturales, viz. such things
as are not borne with us.


Doct. What does the Air concern the health of our bodies?


Of the Air.
Stud. THe Air by it self is hot and moist, and the Attraction thereof is so
necessary to all living creatures, that to whatsoever thing the way of
respiration is wanting, it presently dies: and experience teaches us, that
the temperature, or distemperature thereof, does change the constitution of the
body; the air being sweet and wholesome, does refresh and nourish the spirits.

A gross Air makes the body fat and strong, but the wit dull, and slow, such
as Cicero writes the Thebans to be: but a pure clear air, such as was at
Athens, makes men lively, and sharp witted.

That is the best Air, that is pure, clear and thin, not gross, troublesome
or cloudy.

Hip. in lib. de flatibus, affirms that the air is not only the author of
life unto mortal men, but also the author of diseases, and death.

Galen in Art medicinale, says, Ab Air afficitur, mutatur corpus, quia aut
caelefit, aut frigesit, aut exucatur, aut humectatur.


Doct. What say you to meat and drink?


Of meat and drink.
Stud. Our bodies are nourished and refreshed with meat and drink, even as
the lamp with oil, or wax: but in the use thereof there are two things to be
observed, the first, that meat and drink be received at accustomed and
convenient times: for whereit is too long deferred, the stomach being empty,
is filled with evil humors: for the stomach does not suspend, or intermit his
natural action, wherefore, where it wants meat, there it falls back
again upon excrements.

The second observation is, that we take so much meat and drink as may
refresh the natural strength of the body, and not oppress it: for as Cicero in
Catone Maiore says: Nam cibi and potionis nimia copia menti and corpori obest.
And how can a man have a good disposition of mind, whose body is overmuch
filled with meat and drink? For which cause temperance does very much avail
for the garnishing both of the mind and of the body; for it is a mother and a
sweet nurse both of health, wisdom, and many other virtues.

Hippocrates says, that abstinence is Matter sanitatis, the mother of health,
and that labor and exercise does cause a strong body.

Syracke says in Cap. 17. that abundance of meat beggetteth diseases, and that
gluttony does fill the body with vicious humors.

Plato in his second Book De legibus does forbid the use of wine, and
especially unto children, until they be eighteen years of age, and gives a
reason, that, Non decetignem, igni adijoere. And these verses are worthy the
consideration:

Immodici sensus perturbat copia bacchi:
Inde quis enumeret quot mala proueniant?
Corporis exhaurit succos, animique vigorena
Opprimit, ingemum strangulat, atque necat.

Doct. That is very true: for we see what drowsy sots those common tospots,
and tavern haunters are, and how unfit to every good action, subject to every
kind of disease, as Palsies, Apoplexies, Hydropsies, Epelipsies, gouts, and
such like besides they are turned for the most part from men to monsters, and
their minds are as full of filthy disires, as their bodies of soul diseases.
But I pray you proceed unto the next, which is sleep and watchfulnes: let me
know how you do define the same.


Of Sleep and Watchfulnes.
Stud. Sleep is a rest and quietness of De sonnio.
the virtue animal, which happens when the profitable vapors of the
nourishment do ascend up into the brain, where they do sweetly moysten, and
every where flowing in the brain, do obstruct the Meatus and passages of the
senses and moving Nerves, through which the virtue of the seness do by little
and little fail.

The Efficent cause is heat, which as Hip. says, in sleep it flies more
inwards, to the end to help concoction, from whence it happens that the
outward members do easily wax cold in sleep, and do require to be more
warmer covered.

The Material cause is a sweet vapor ascending from the nourishment into the
brain, and stopping the Meatus of the senses and spirits, that the members
forsake their motion.

The Formal cause is the rest of the outward senses, that is, hearing, and
seeing, in like manner local moving, as neither the hands, nor the feet do
move any more, or perform their office.

The Final causes are first a moystning and a recreation of the brain, and of
the heart. According to Virgil: Fessos Virgilius.
soporirrigat artus.

Secondly, that the action of the stomach, and of the liver in concoction may
be the stronger; drawing inwards the heat and the spirits: for to that end does
the animal faculties rest in sleep, to the end the natural may more stronger
perform their office.

Thirdly, that it may be the image of death, according to Ovid:

Stulte quid est somnus, gelidae nisi mortis imago?

Galen calls it frater mortis, the brother of death: for as in sleep the
body takes its rest, and the soul watches; so also in death the body
rests, but the soul and spirit lives.

As concerning the order and length of sleep; we must consider how much and
how long is convenient to every body: for long sleep is more convenient for
them, that as yet have not attained to a perfect digestion; whether it
happens through the eating of evil meats, or through the wrakenes of the
virtue digestive.

And forasmuch as sleep does slacken, and make laxe the animal powers, it is
not so necessary for those that be fasting, or to such as do suffer much
hunger; for thereby the head is filled with fuines and euaporations elevated
from the feces, and supersluities retained in the stomach. But on the contrary,
too much watching is hurthfull to the brain: it does debilitate and weaken the
senses: it does burn the humors, and is the cause of sharp diseases:
sometimes of frensies, of madness, melancholy, and deliriums. In this
therefore we must be careful to consider how much is sufficient: for as
Hippocrates says, both sleep and watchfulnes, which soever it be, if they be
immoderate, are hurtful. For the length of sleep, the most part of Physicians
do agree, Length of sleep.
that to strong bodies seven hours in the night is sufficient (for in the day
time it is generally disallowed) and to those that are weaker eight hours at
the most.

Plato in Timaeo says, when the world shuts up hereie, we also should shut
Plato.
up our cies: the eye of the world is the sun: therefore sleep is not long
to be deferred after the setting of the sun, neither presently after supper can
sleep be wholesome: for, as Galen says, Lib. 4. Abhorismorum, Commentario 67.
a cibis ad somnum connersis, caput impletur. A certain great man was wont to
say, that he found nothing better for the preservation of his health then to
read nothing after supper, to write nothing, nor to be long out of his bed:
so, said he, I am very well able to arise in the morning, and with
cheerfulness to follow my business.

He that has a strong stomach, let him lie first upon the right side; but he
that has a weak digestive faculty, should first lie upon the left side; and
afterward upon the right; for to lie upon the left side, does better help
digestion, and upon the right side it helps better for the distribution of
the meat.


Doct. The next thing not natural, is exercise and rest: how may that avail
Motus and quies.
for the benefit and health of the body?


Of exercise and rest.
Stud. A Great part of the preservation of the health of man's body does consist
in due exercise and rest; for both these are necessary both to the body and the
mind; of which Ovid says:

Cernis vt ignauum corrumpant ocia corpus,
Vt capiunt vitium nimoue antur aqua.
In these verses the similitude is of the body and the water. For as water that
does not move does easily putrify; so the body also grows to corruption
without exercise.

In like manner of the mind and vnstanding, Outd. V. Trist. Elegia 12. says:

Add quod ingenium long a rubigine laesum,
Torpet, and est multo, quam fuit ame munus.
Where he calls it Longam rubiginem, and otium ignauum, he means that,
whereby the whole force of the wit and understanding is overthrown; or at the
least does languish and is diminished: even as by the contrary it is refreshed
and made sharp.

There are three profits and commodities that arises by motion and exercise:
the first is, it makes the body strong.

Secondly, it does excite and increase natural heat.

Thirdly, the spirits and the senses are thereby made more stronger and sharper.

As concerning the times of exercise, the Aphorism of Hippocrates does teach
Lib. 6. Epi. Sect. 4. Aphoris. vlt.
us (...) labors before meat, he calls motion or exercise of the body,
labors. Therefore before meat, and not after, the body must be exercised;
for quietness after feeding, or very little exercise is to be used: lest that the
natural heat which should be exercised about concoction and digesture, should
be dispersed and so made weaker. Of Rest the same Ovid says:

Quod caret alt erna requie, durabile non est,
Haec reparat vires. fessaque membra leuat.
And in his first book De Ponto:

Ocia corpus alunt, animus quoque pascitur illis:
Immodious contra carpit vtrumque labor.
Here is to be understood rest, that is fit and convenient, both to the body
and mind; whether it be by relaxation and recreation, liberal or mean: for
there is no man of so great strength, that he is able to endure continual
stirrings, watchings, cares, and labors: but at the last both body and mind
is dried and wearied, unless there be remission used. Of the manner of using
exercise and rest, Cicero speaks in the first book of his offices: Ludo, and
Ioco, vti quidem licet, sed sicut somno and quietibus caeteris tum, cum
grauibus serijsque rebus satisfecerimus.

It is a true saying, that confecto labor, dulce est quiescere. And Auicem
says, that whosoever he be that is of an hot and dry complexion, and by
exercise is fallen into any notable disease, he is forth with recovered with
rest.


Doct. The next in order is, Emptines Inanitio and Repletio.
and Repletion.


Stud. It is true, and look how much we may offend to defraud an hungry
stomach; so much shall we offend to offer meat unto a full stomach; as Auicen
says in primo Can. sen. 3. Cap. De regimine Auicen.
cibi and potus. For as the want of meat does fill the stomach with evil
humors; so that same plethoria and continual fullness causes opilations,
putrefaction, apostumes, leprosy, and fevers.

But this is to be observed, that if the Attractiue faculty, and the Retentiue
do remain in their natural strength; that then repletion cannot by any
means be hurtful: especially if a right order of meats and drinks be
observed. And so in like manner, if the virtue digestive and expulsive be
strong, emptiness cannot be hurtful; for thereby the body is avoided of his
burdensome and hurtful humors, of which it is requisite that it should be
cleansed and purged.

But when these faculties are hurt and become weak, so that an emptiness
cannot be suffered, and a repletion cannot nourish or profit the body: we
must then take heed how we use the one or the other.


Doct. But how are diseases proceeding of fulness remedied?


Stud. By vomit, by flux of the belly, by flux of blood, at the nose, by vrin,
by spittle, by sweat, by insensible transpirations; which being unfelt by us,
does happen through the strength of nature. Moreover, sometimes there must be
used the incision of a vein, scarification, the application of leeches, of
cupping glasses and vesecatories.

But sometimes it happens that none of these aforesaid euacuations may be
used; then must be supplied exercise, labor, srication and rubbings, baths,
abstinence, sleep, and such like (especially in the times of famine:) but in
every of these there must be had a due consideration how much and how little is
convenient, according to the state of every body.


Doct. Now proceed unto the last of Animi Affectus.
things not natural: which you say is Animi Affectus, the perturbations and
affections of the mind.


Of Affections of the mind.
Stud. AFfects are the motions of the mind, by which it is either exhilarated,
or disquieted for sorrow and anguish, with such like; are as it were
Carnifices, and tortores annimi and corporis, the very torturers and murderers
of the mind and body: but on the contrary, joy, hope, and a good conscience,
are the sweet nurces of life and health, as Plato speaks in 1. De Repub.

Therefore it very much avails both to the health of the body, and of the
mind, to be able to moderate these affects in that order, that nature may not
be hurt: for we have read of some, that with sudden joy have suddenly died, as
Valerius reports of two women in Rome.

And what affects arise by anger, may easily be perceived, when that some by
extraordinary fury and rage do fall into the Apoplexy, the palsy, spasms,
and conuulsions, with diseases of the joints, and sometimes into a trembling of
the whole body; nether does there happen less evil unto bodies through
terror or fear, as the syncop, and fallingsicknes: even as on the contrary in
some kinds of diseases, it is profitable to be terrified and made afraid.

Sadness and anguish of mind work no small affects, and especially weighty
cogitations, for it induces unquietness, and watchfulnes, which hurts the
senses, and diminishes the strength of the whole body: wherefore as Hip.
says, a moderation in all those affects is very healthful and profitable.


Pars 3.
Doct. YOu told me in the beginning, that the Art of physic Pathologia
was concluded under three things, which you termed natural, not natural and
against nature: of the two first we have briesly spoken; let us proceed unto
the third in like manner: and let me know of you what those things are, which
are against nature.


Stud. Those things that are said to be against nature, are in number three,
viz. Sickness, the Cause of sickness, and Accidents that do follow sickness.

And generally every disease is either of an evil complexion, an evil
composition, or a solution of the continuitie, which happens either in the
similer members, or in the isntrumental, or in both.

And first a disease of an evil complexion happens sometimes from the excess
or defect alone of some quality, as if either heat or cold does abound in the
body, then there is wanting the more of moisture and drithe.

Sometimes also a disease happens from the abundance or defect of some humor:
as if the body do abound with melancholy, or slegme, it has the less of
choler and blood, and so on the contrary.

Secondly, a disease rising through an evil composition, is either from the
form and figure of the parts of the body, from the quantity, from the number
and situation of the same parts.

Thirdly, the solution of the continnitie happens through some Apostume, wound,
dislocation, rupture, fracture, conuulsion, or excoriation.

Furthermore, every disease is either Morbi acuti atque chronici. 2. Aph. 23.
acute, or chronical.

Al acute diseases are hot, and are judged in 14. days, as Hip. does testify.

The latter sort of Physicians do call those acute diseases that have their
termination in fourteen days, and those peracute which have their
termination in 7. and those perperacute, which have their termination in four.

Chronicall diseases are cold and dull, and are of longer continuance. In like
Hip. 6. epid. li. partic. 1. Aph. 7.
manner acute diseases are termed (...), and sometimes they are changed into a
Chronicall disease, as the Plurisie, into the Gout, the Cholick into the Palsy.

And Chronicall diseases for the most part are determined with a daily
consumption.


Doct. What is Crisis?


Stud. Crisis is a swift and vehement (...) quid
motion of a disease, either to life or death: and it happens about the
supreme intention of a disease, that is, the Akmin or state.

And we must observe that there are 4. Tempora morborum.
four times of diseases, that is, the beginning, the increase, the Akmin or
state, and the declination.

The which times are so distributed of Hip. that if the increase be in the
fourth day, the change happens in the seventh; but if the increase be in the
filt, and seeuenth, the Crisis happens in the ninth or the eleventh day: but
if the disease do increase in the tenth day, the deliverance happens in the
foureteenth day.

In like manner says the same Hip. the Physician should not be ignorant of the
day that the Patient fell sick, nor of the hour in the which the body fell
into an heat, or to wax cold etc. From whence it does manifestly appear,
that other times also are not to be neglected: for a little after, he says,
For this cause, says he, shall thou reckon the days unto thee, in which thou
shall expect eruptions, or apostums, in those times prescribed. 3. Prog. 3. and
4. Aphor.
There is also a quaternall number of days to be observed in all diseases,
which does promise an end either to life or death, as the same Author
witnesses.

Moreover, every disease is either in the superior or inferior venture, or in
the veins, whose Crisis happens by spittle, by vomit, by flux of blood at the
nose, by Apostu^s, by seege, by haemorrhods, by menstrous, and by vrin.

And sometimes also a Crisis does happen by sweat: and many diseases do
transpire by insensible euaporation. 1. Of the knowledge of the disease. 1



Doct. How shall we come to the knowledge of the disease?


Stud. Every disease is known either from things substantially inhering, as in
the composition of members, what does abound, or what does want, or whether it
be not sited in his right place.

2. From the operation of the member being hurt.

3. From the quality changed.

4. From things going out of the body.

5. From the times of the year.

We must know also that every disease is either by essence, or by colligance
and consent. Morous per essentiam and per consensum.


It is by essence if the disease be of it self in some member.

It is by consent, if it be derived from some member into another, by reason of
the vicinitie and colligance of the same; as the affect of the head from some
vapor arising from the stomach: neither must we be ignorant, that sometimes a
disease is not only essential, but accidental also, and a companion of other
diseases, so sometimes a fever is an accident of A fever an accidens of a
disease.
many diseases, and of it self no disease: and so often times there happens
Apostums, and Tumors.


Doct. How shall we know the cause of the disease?


Stud. Hip. affirms that there are three causes and beginnings of all
diseases: for every disease springs either from repleton, or from the
intemperature of the heanens, or through some externe violence happening unto
the body.


Doct. What must we do, when we know the cause of the disease?


Stud. The cause being known, we must proceed to medicines, and diet, and if
need be to topicall means and surgery, providing always a contrary
medicine to the cause of the discase.

We must therefore at the beginning use universal remedies, then we must
proceed to particular, as the discase shall require; and the Physician must
remember, that contraria contrarijs curantur: and similia similibus sibi
Contraria contrarijs carantur.
praebere adiumentum: so any kind of disease that does proceed of repletion,
will require emptines, and so on the contrary: and a disease that does proceed
of dryness will require humectation and moystning: even as that same which
does proceed of heat will require refrigeration and cooling etc.

Notwithstanding, we must take heed Repercussiua vitanda.
that we do not apply any thing that is extreme contrary, especially
Repercioussius, lest we cause hurt to some principal member.


PARS 4.
Doct. WHen we have found out a fit remedy for the disease, how must we
proceed to the cure?


Stud. It is to no end to find out a remedy, unless the same be used and
applied wisely: for we may find some Physicians that are furnished with a
world of remedies, and yet apply them without either wit or reason: there be
others that be of good judgment, and yet notwithstanding are very barraine of
helps, but those which they have are very choice and good: and truly I know
not how it does happen, that there are so few sound and judicial Physicians in
this our age. But to let that pass, in the administration of physic, these
three circumstances are to be considered, viz. Quantum, Quando, Quomodo. For
suppose Quanto, Quando, Quomodo.
the remedy be hot or cold, a purger of phlegm, melancholy, or choler: it is
the work of invention, the cause and kind of the disease being considered, to
dispose the remedy in a just quantity: to prescribe the same in a convenient
form, and when it becomes to offer the same according to judgment and reason.

And surely, there is nothing so hard, or so obscure in the practice of
physic, as to deliver a just dose of medicine: neither can the quantity of a
remedy be defined, except we take the indication from things natural, as from
the strength, nature, and temperature of the sick, the habit of the body, as
fatness, leanenesse, thinnes, fleshines, age, sex, and custom; Consuetudo,
altera Natura.
for that is another nature. In like manner from things not natural; as the
time, the air, the region: from things avoided, and from things retained; and
those things which are praeter naturam, against nature; as sickness, the cause,
and the symptoms. For what wise man will give one and the same medicine to a
weak man and to a strong, to a woman and to a man, to a child and to a young
man, to an Englishman and to a Moore? The time of the year is also to be
regarded, the month, the disease, the Paroxisme; the cause also is to be
considered; besides the vehemence and violence of the symptoms; and according
to the same, the dose of the remedy is to be increased or diminished; for great
diseases require remedies in a greater dose. But commonly unto an Infant ij
drag of Cassia is sufficient, of Manna iij. drag. of Rhubarbe infused ij
scruples; but to those that be of strength may be given j ounce of Cassia; and
of Manna an ounce and a half: and of Rhubarb ij. dra will scarcely suffice. But
as I have said, these things can hardly be defined by art, but must be referred
to the judgment and discretion of the learned Physician.


Doct. Let me now know your medicines that you have to purge choler. Chologogon.



Stud. I have to purge choler, Rhubarb, Cassia, Manna, Myrabalans Citrine,
Aloes and such like.


Doct. These are simple medicines; let me know your compounds.


Stud. Then I have Diaprunum simplex, and Solutiuum, Elect. de succo ros. hiera
piera Galeni, etc.


Doct. What purgers of phlegm have you?


Stud. I have Agaricke, Turbith, Colocinthis, Phlegmegogon.
Carthamus, etc. Of compounds I have Benedictalax, hiera Ruffi, hiera picra,
hiera logadij, Diacarthanni, Diaturpeti, Electuarum decitro, Diaphoenicon,
Indum Maius, and Minus, etc.


Doct. What Pills have you for that purpose?


Stud. I have pilulas exagarico, cochiae, Pills.
Lucis, Arthreticae, ex hermodactilis, ex cupatorio, e hiera, Alephanginae, ex
euphorbio e castorio, e quinque myrobolanis, ex mezerco, etc


Doct. Now proceed to your purgers of melancholy. Melanagogon.



Stud. Sonaorientalis, Epithymus, Eleborus niger, Lapis Lazuls, and Lapis
Armeniacus, do purge melancholy.

The compounds are Diasena, Diacatholici, hiera Ruffi, and trifera sarasenica.
And it is to be observed, that hiera Ruffi does purge the head, the stomach,
and the whole body from gross and viscid humors, and withal black choler:
wherefore it is given in Mania, in Epilepsia, in oris tortura, paralyss, and
melancholia, flatus discutit, stomachi concoctionem innat, and est medicamentum
conferens fistuiis, vlceribus cancrosis, and Lepra.


Doct. What pills have you to purge melancholy?


Stud. Pilulae e fumo-terrae, ex ellebero, ex Lapide Lazuli, ex epithymo, pil.
foetidae. All these purge melancholy.


Doct. Tell me now the just dose of every one of these medicines.


Stud. I have said already that that can hardly be declared, but must be
referred to the discretion of the Physician: which for the most part do not
exceed six drammes of purging Electuaries; in which is no Scamony, nor above
four drammes of those Electuaries, in which is Scamony. As for pills, they
never give more then a dram or four scruples.

But we must note, that the colder the Region, the greater may the dose of
purging medicines be.


Doct. Does not Confectio hamech purge melancholy?


Stud. I must confess that Confect. humech, is good against sicknesses
proceeding from black choler, and humors adusted, as in mania, melancholia,
vertigine, obliuione, and in aegritudinibus cutanijs, as Scabbes, Morphue,
Leprosy, and such like.


Doct. With what waters must we give those Electuaries that do purge
melancholy?


Stud. We give them in aqua fumo-terrae, and in aqua lupulorum; both which
does respect the melancholicke humor.


Doct. With what pills do you purge mixed humors from the stomach?


Stud. To purge mixed humous from the stomach, I use:

Pil. De tribus fernelij.
Pil ex hilicacabo, etc.
And when I purge generally all humors, I use Pil. Aggregatinae, and
Panchimagogon, etc.


Doct. Let me know your remedies that you give in a liquid form: as Apozems,
Syrups, Iulips, Potions, and infusions.


Stud. You shall, and first it is to be obserned: that the Arabicks did invent
Medicamenta liquida.
those kind of remedies, rather to open then to purge. And this is the counsel
of Hippoorates, Corpora cum quis purgare vole, toportet fluida reddere. And if
the disease be not too acute, and the humor do not abound, it is then the
work of Physic to purge that which is digested and concocted; and not that
which is crude, tough, and raw. The body is made fluxible by opening of the
meatus and passages; by which the hurtful humors are drawn, and those gross
humors are incided and made thin: for otherwise the expelling of crude and
undigested humors, might cause a fretting and erosion of the intestines and
bowels, and sometimes bloody fluxes: neither is any thing sent forth to any
purpose; for when as all the humors are crude and dull, and unfit to be moved,
by reason of the thickenes and coldness thereof; it happens that all the
narrow passages descending unto the belly, remain obstructed and stopped:
neither is the gross matter it self avoided, but it is also an hinderance
unto that which is attenuated and made fluxible: for which cause, as I have
said, these kind of medicines were first invented. An Apozem may be made with
roots, herbs, seeds, fruits, and flowrs, with water and honey or sugar boiled
together: or in this order, which is easy: Rec. Guaiacilib. ss Coquatur lento
igne in vj. libris aquae ad tertias, Colaturae add Si vis parum Sacchari, ad
gratiam and hydroticum Apozema feceris.

For some inward grief, of which there is no manifest cause. Rec. Florum
Chamomeli Apos^matis exemplum.
P^ij more or less Coquantur, Colaturae iij you may ad if you will Sacchari j.
Anodmum crit Apozema. And this is the difference between a syrup, and an
Apozem; that the syrup is more gross in consistence, then an Apozem, for that
is more clear and liquid: for syrups are made with more honey or sugar, and so
boiled together, until it be brought into a light body, that it may hang upon
the nail; or stick being dropped upon a marble stone. An Apozem is made by
adding of lesser sugar honey, or syrups to a decoction; for they must not be
boiled together, but to the intent it may be the cleerer, and more grateful to
sight: it is to be clarified with the white of an egg.

In Su^mer time who^ plants and herbs are in their strength and green, we use
Apozoms: In the winter time we use Syrups, and therefore it is the duty of the
Apothecary to prepare Syrups in the Summer time, against the Winter season. And
the dose of an Apozem is four of decoction, adding thereunto j. ss of Syrup.

In framing of Syrups we ad as much Sugar as Ioyces, and boil it to a
consistance, as before.

There is no great difference between a Iulep, and an Apozem; for unto ij, or
iij. of distilled water or decoction, we dissolve j. of Syrup, and so make a
Iulep. As for example, if I do prescribe Syrupus.
a Iulep, or an Apozem, in an hot cause, I say,

R. Rad.
Graminis and acetosae ana ij. Cichorij totius an M. ss Scariolae. an M. ss
Endiuiae. an M. ss Lactucae. an M. ss 4. Sem. frigid mayor. an ij. Floru^
violarum and nympheae an p. j.


Fiat decoctio in colaturae iiij. Dissolve Syrupi de Cichortosimpl. j. ss siat
Apozema.

Potus does not differ from the same in matter, nor form, but in the end,
because Potus.
it is prepared to purge humors, but the Apozems and Iuleps to prepare them: as
for example, if to the former decoction against choler, in the place of the
syrup of Cichorie, we dissolve half an ounce of Daiprunum solut. or so much
of Electuarie de succo rosaru^, we have made a potion to purge choler.

Infusion is when diverse medicines are beaten to powder, or whole, are laid
Infiasio.
to steep a certain space in some kind of liquor, or decoction: as for
example in. iij. of the decoction of Cichorie; or if you had rather in Sero
Lactis, macerate for an whole night,. ij. ss of Rhubarbe, in the morning it is
to be strained, and to the strayning may be added if you please a little
sugar, or syrup of violets, and so there is a sit potion to purge choler.

Again, if you dissolve any purging electuary, in any kind of liquor, as barley
water, broth, decoction of pruins, or some distilled water: we may make a
purging potion; as for example: (potus. Re. Catholici X. dr. Dissolve in
ptizanafiat Or Rec. Diaphoenici ss dissolve it in byaromel, or in the decoction
of some other convenient herbs, as cephalicis, or spleniticis, fiat potus to
purge phlegm.

And after the same order, we frame potions to purge melancholy.

Rec. Confectionis hamech Dr. ij.

Dissolve in Dococto polypodij, in quo Dr. iij. fol. sennae hullierine cum
Drageta cummuni. addendo Syrups de Epithymo, velde fumaria. j. fiat potus.

Of medecines given in a dry form, viz. in powder, Trochisks, Lozengies and
pills.


Doct. LEt me know what those medicines are, that are given in a dry form.


Stud. Those are pouders, Trochisks, Lozenges and pills; as for powder, it is
the common matter of all dry medicines, and of a mean consistence, and thereof
are made Electuaries, as well solid, as liquid; Trochicks, and pills: as for
example, if you will have a powder to stay euaporations and ascensions into the
brain, A powder against the theume.
I say

Rec.
Coriandr. praep. an. Dr. j. Coralli. rhub. an. Dr. j. Cornu Cerui vsti. an.
Dr. j. Sacchari ros. tabulat. j ss. Misce and fiat pull. subt.


This powder is to be taken presently after meat.

In like manner, a powder for to break wind is prepared in this order.

Rec.
Anisi cond. iij. Feniculli. ss Coriand. praep. ss A powder against wind.
Cumini Carui. Sesel. in vino gene. mace. an. j. Cort. Citri Sicc. Cinamom.
Crassian. Scr. iiij. Sacchariros. tabulat. ad pondus omntum. Miss, fiat
puluis.


Let the Patient take a spoonefull after meals.

But the Apothecaries should be very careful of those powders which they
reserve in their shoppes, as well for their own profit, as their patients: for
it is manifest, that the air does diminish and decay the virtue and strength
thereof, if it be of long continuance, or not close and warm kept, for which
cause it is thought far better to preserve the Species, in the form of
Trochisks and solid electuaries, as the speceis of Dia margariton frigid.
diarrhodon Abbatis, trian Santalorum, Aromatici ros. and such like which may
be better preserved in trochisks, then by any other ways, as some very good
Apothecaries at this time do use, or taking. dr. j. of the species to an ounce
of sugar, with some convenient liquor or distilled water, they frame a solid
Electuarie, dividing the same in Tabellis, Rotulis, Lozengis, or in the form
of Manus Christi. In like manner may be framed solid Electuaries, to purge, as
a drag. of the species of Diacarthamum, to purge slogme, de succo Rosarum to
purge choler. etc.


Doct. How must we administer these medicines being thus prepared?


Stud. We give trian santal for a hot liver, Diarrhodon to strengthen the
stomach: and if we purge as aforesaid, then we say, Rec. Electuarij
Diacarthami, cabellam. j. pondore. ss. more or less as it shall seem good to
tho Physician; let it be taken in the morning, being dissolved in some Ptisan
or broth. In like manner,

Rec.
Pulueris Diamargarits frigd. dr. ij. Trochiscor. De camphura scr. j. Lozenges
in an hot distemperature.
conseruaviolarum.. j.


With sugar dissolved in aqua buglossae, make an Electuary solid in Lozenges,
of the weight of j. Dragm. a piece.

In like manner, we may take species, or any kind of powder, and with some
juice, syrup, liquor, or distilled water, make a mass to be formed in to pills,
whose dose at the uttermost does not exceed above ser. iiij: as for example, if
you take powder of Rhubarbe or Agarick, the weight of a dragm. with syrup of
violets, you may make it into six pills. But our Physicians in these days do
use pills ready prepared P. b. Agar. purges gross and phlegmatic humors.
and corrected in the Apothecaries shops, which they prescribe after this
manner:

Rec. Massae pill De agarico vel de Rhabarb. scr. iiij. De Rhaharb obstructions
of the liver, and contrahydropem.


Malax it with syrup of violets, and make V. pills.

Rondoletius does prefer water, before either inyces, or syrups, because that
by the two latter, the quantity is increased, which grows loathsome to the
Patient.


Of those things that are taken in a mean form, and consistance.
Doct. PRoceed to those medicines that are taken in a mean form.


Stud. Those medicines that are given Electuaries and Opiats.
in a mean form, are Electuaries liquid, which are commoly called Opiats: not
because they consist of opium, but because they have that body that Opiats
have, and they are prepared partly for purging, and partly for alteration of
humors. And such Electuaries are Diaprunum simplex, and solutiuum,
Diaphaenicon, confectio hamech Catholicon, which does purge putrisied and
rotten humors, even as Mithridat and Treacle which are great opiats, not only
for their consistence, but also because it is confected with opium, and have a
property to resist venom and putrefaction.


Doct. How may these Electuaries be prepared?


Stud. Upon necessity they may be prepared, taking some powder or species
with some kind of syrup, as of conserues and Tabels, Trochisks, and such like;
as for example:

Rec.
Conseruae Anthos j. Opiata ad frig dam intemperiem vertriculi.
Corticis catri condit. ss Spec. Aromatici. ros. Spec. Diagalangaean Dr. ij.
Cum syrupo conseruationis citri q. S. Ficut optata ad frigida intemperie^
ventriculi.


To this kind also appertains those Bolus ad renes.
Medicame^ta mollia, which are given in the form of Bolus: as cassia, and
Catholicon.

As Rec.
Cassiae j add si vis Rhubarbari Dr. j. Cum saccharo q. S. fiat bolus.


Which tender bodies may take out of a spoone with some syrup of violets,
nenuphar, Aithaea and such like or

Rec.
Cassiae nouiter tract. ss Bolus ad gouorrheam
Pull holand. ss Tereb. ven. lot. in aquae plant. Sor. j. Cum sacchar. q. S.
fiat bolus.



Of Clysters and their administration.

Doct. THere remains that you De Clysteribus.
show me the order of Clysters and their administration: what is a Clyster?
Stu. A Ciyster is a certain liquor, injected into the belly for the remedy of
some kind of disease: and this kind of medicine is not a particular, but a
common remedy, not only for the diseases of the bowels, but it draws from all
other parts, as from the hollowes of the liver, it draws per vonam portam, it
draws mela^ choly from the spleen by his branches. In like manner it does
dinert, and draw from the upper parts; it cleanses and scoureth the
intestines, it is the best and safest medicine that can be given, especially
being well appointed, for it purges without any trouble.


Doct. How is that medecin to be prepared?


Stud. In time past, they would take one pound of liquor, as hydromel to
scour, milk, or the decoction of camomell to cease pain: in this age they
prepare their cly sters of roots, herbs, and seeds, being artificially
boiled, which they call decoction: in a pound of which decoction, they put one
ounce of honey, of rose. to cleanse, of red sugar, to stir up excretion, with a
dram of common salt, besides iij ounces of some kind of oil, to make it more
lubrick and stipperie, and with all some cathartick medicine to purge: as for
example, if you will purge the belly: we say

Rec.
Decoctionis clyster is commin. or remodientis. lib j. Dissolve mellis and
Sacchar. rub. an j. Catholici. j. ss Olei communis. iij. Fiat clyster.


This I declare for examples sake, not to the intent that the matter should be
followed but the manner; for sometimes we add in stead of the purging
medicines those that be astringent, as Continodium, Plantago, Tapsi barbat an M
j. and so make a decoction. In one pound of the strayning you may ad some oil,
juice: or if the patient be rich, some a stringent syrup, as of Myttels or
Quinces, iij, ounces: and so make an astringent clyster, contrary to the former.

And we must observe, that sometimes the liquor is to be increased or
diminished, according to the discretion of the Physician; as when the bowels
are oppressed, as in the dropsy, and in women great with child: also when they
are extended with wind; as in the Colic, and Enterocele, etc. Also when we
would have the patient to retain the matter longer then ordinary, we diminish
the quantity. When we would have the clyster to ascend, as in the ulcers of the
Ilions, and pain of the reins; also in the Apoplexy, lethargic, the quantity
is to be increased, and to be made more sharper. Sometimes also oil is
hurtful: as Disenteria.
in Dysenteria, where it makes the ulcers soul and filthy; for then
astringents, as oil of roses or quinces, ought to be added to comfort and
strengthen.


Doct. It has been thought of some that clysters may be administered for
nourishment; especially being made of broth, milk, eggs, wine, and other
comfortable things, when as the patient is not able through weakness or some
other accident to swallow: let me hear what your opinion is in that point.


Stud. It seems that Galen was of the contrary opinion, when he denied that
the substance of the clyster was not carried beyond the intestinum Ieiunum,
from whence some have supposed that the ficke patient has been refreshed with
the vapor only. It is true indeed, that the animal appetite may be satisfied
with the vapor of the nourishment, but the natural, will not be so satisfied,
which delights only with substance, and not with vapors, which suddenly and
speedily perish, and waste: but it is manifestly proved that the matter of the
clyster to transcend the Iemnum intestinum, even to the stomach, from whence
the Mezerdicall veins do draw nourishment: and in thacapassio it has bin
seen that oftentimes the clyster has been cast up by vomit: who is he then
that will deny that clysters nourish not, or come unto the stomach?

Matthaeus Grad. an interpreter of Anicen does affirm, that he had seen a
maid, that had taken Suppositories, and forth with with the violent attraction
of the stomach, fell into exceeding vomitings; whereby they were compelled to
minister unto her fat broths and juyces to dull the attractiue faculty,
whereby she was recovered.


Doct. I am of your opinion, that clysters may be given to nourish, and have
observed in diverse patients; who through weakness could take no nourishment
by the mouth, yet by Clysters nature has been well refreshed, and the Patient
in the end as well recovered. But I would now know of you the order that must
be observed as well by the Physician in the administering of the clyster, as by
the patient in receiving of the same.


Stud. You shall, and first for the time; it is thought that in the morning
between Clysteria quomodo adnunistranda.
seven and eight of the clock, the stomach being fasting, or in the
afternoon about five of the clock, as the Physician shall think convenient,
is the fittest time; having a great care that it be not administered too hot
for the sensibilitie of the intestines. I have known some that have brought
great torments to the patient, by ministering of a scalding clyster. But after
the patient has received the clyster let him by little and little turn
himself upon either side; and if the affect be in the head or upper parts,
let the patient lie upon his back; if in the right side, let the patient lie
so much the longer upon the same, and so in like manner upon the left;
retaining the clyster if it be possible the space of an hour.

Afterward when the clyster shall be sent forth with the excrements; let the
patient refrain meat the space of an hour, that so by that time the vapors
dispersed through the body may be settled; otherwise, the fumes of the
excrements may be hurtful, etc.


Doct. Proceed now to the choice of De remedij delectu.
the Remedy.


Stud. The end of preparing physic is two fold: the first is, to preserve the
present health of the body: the second, to reduce that which is lost. Health is
preserved by a good diet, and sickness is recovered by physic: diet supplieth
that which is wanting by the use of like things; and Physic being the curer,
does remove those things that are hurtful unto the faculties, by remedies that
are contrary. There are three things Triasent quae actionem laedunt.
that does hurt the action that is, the cause, sickness, and the symptoms,
or accidents that does follow sickness. The cause do precede the disease, even
as the shadow does the body: the symptoms does follow the disease; therefore
the Physician must first endeavor to remove the cause, for otherwise there is
little hope to cure the disease: and the outward cause does profit very much to
the knowledge of the inward: and as I have already said, the scope of the
Physician must be only to remove the same. And this cause is twofold, either
coniunct or remote; which is commonly called antecedent and consequent: we call
that coniunct which imediatly and forth with causes the disease; as some humor
praetor natura affixed to the part, either by fluxion of congestion: we call
that remote and antecedent, from whence the same coniunct cause springs, and
is nourished: that is to say, Plethoria or Cacochymian.


Doct. What is that Plethoria or Cacochymian?


Stud. We call that Plethoria when there is an imoderate fulness, through
abu^da^re of blood, or of the 4. humors: the cure whereof does consist in
cuacuation; Vt enim duae, sant prima and communes causae morborum: plethea, and
cacochymia, sicremedia, sum m^ssio Sanguinis, and purgatio
either by opening of a vein or purgatio^.

Cacochymia is a vicious quality of all the four humors, or of some one of
them: for either blood is distempered, or choler, or phlegm, or melancholy; and
that body which is so distempered, is called corpus cachochymicum, a body of an
evil complexion, juice or disposition.

First therefore in the choice of the remedy, we must first be careful to
deal with the cause, before the disease, or the symptom: the antecedent before
the coniunct: the antecede^t cause, as I have said, springs from plethoria,
or cacochymian: and the former is removed by phlebotomi, and the latter by
purgation.

In the choice of the remedy also we must consider in opening of a vein, what
Remedy (...)
weine must be opened, as the Cephalica for the head; the Basilica for the
natural parts; the Epalica, for the middle parts, and the diseases of the
stomach and the spleen. In the choice of the remedy, we must also diligently
consider the seat of that cacochymia, and whether it may be removed with Aloes
and Cassia, or with some common Clyster, for to purge from the first region as
from the stomach, from the lutestims, from the hollows of the liver, from the
Mesenterio, and the spleen, it is sufficient oftentimes to use Rhubarb, Senna,
and Agarick, with such like: but where it rests in the parts more remote, we
are then to use a stronger means, as Scammomack medicines, coloquintiaa,
hermodactils, black helebor, and others of the same kind.

In the choice of the remedy we must also consider the greatness of the disease:
for a great disease does require a great remedy; and a lighter, the lighter
remedy: sometimes a small disease is cured only by abstinence, frication,
exercise, and with light remedies. In the administration of a remedy, we must
also consider the strength of the sick, and so dispose the medicine
accordingly. And this is an observation, that the remedy must be alwares
greater then the disease; and before the opening of any vein a clyster must
precede, lest the crude humor which for the most part is contained in the first
region, be carried into the places that are empty of blood.


Doct. You have satisfied me well in the Theorick part: let us now come to the
practice. Show me your method in the Therapeuticke, part: let me know how you
will remedy diseases that proceed of blood; which we will comprehend under
Synochus, or a continual fever. Go to, let me know your method for the
curation of a continual fever.


Stud. That shall I most willingly perform, and I hope to your full
satisfaction and contentment.


General remedies against diseases proceeding of blood under the example of a
continual Fever.
SYnochus is a continual Fever proceeding Signa.
from blood: the signs are an inseperable rednes in the face, an inflation or
puffing up of the veins, artires, and temples, with lassitude and wearisomnes
of the whole body, with a sleepy disposition; the vrin is red and gross, the
patient has a difficulty of breathing, a full pulse, high and swift.

The cause and the kind of the Fever being perspected, the cure will easily
follow. Purgatio.
The first intention is with a clyster, or some gentle purgation: only I except
cassia, partly because of his humectation it increases the putrefaction, and
partly because headache is familiar to this Fever, and by the use of cassia is
increased, by reason of the abundance of vapors that arises from the same.

Secondly, I open the basilica of the right arm, and according to the counsel
Venae sectio.
of Galen, I draw blood even to the fainting of the patient. And because it
sometimes happens that in a full body, a vein is hard to be found, and
therefore blood cannot be drawn: I then cause your sanguisugae to be applied
to the thighs, legs, and shoulders, or otherwise I provoke the Hemrrhods, the
Menstrus, or bleeding at the nose. Then to resist putrification, I give syrupus
de acetositaet. citri, De limonibus, De granatis, Oxysacharum simplex, with the
waters of roses, sorrel gramen, and Cichory: Or,

Rec.
Syrupi de acetositate Curi. ij. Aquae graminis. viij. Fiat Iulep: which must
be given inter pastu.


The Syrups of Buglosse, De lupulis, De fumaria, given in the waters aforesaid
does cleanse the blood. And forbeause the thinner blood by heat is apt to be
turned in to choler, and the grosser into melancholy; we purge with Cholagogo,
as Rhubarb, and with Melanagogo, as Sena with some refrigerant decoction, which
does also open and cleanse the blood; as for example:

Rec.
Radicum graminis. Acetosaean. Drag. iij. Cichorij totius. Endiuiae. Scariolae
an. M. j. 4. Sem. frigid. malor. an. Drij. (sunt Diuretica.) Florum cordialium
an. (...). j. Fol. Sennae mundat.. j. Fiat decoctio.


In colaturae. viij. infunde Rhabarbari Drag. iij. in lein expressione dissolve
syrupi De Cichorio simplicis syrupi de fumaria compos. an. j. ss. fiat apozema
in duas Doses.

In the whole course of the cure must be repeated clysters that have a cooling
faculty; as for example:

Rec.
Lactucae. Endiuiae. Scariolae. Portulacaean. M. j.


Fiat decoctio in collaturae lib. j. dissolve mellis and sacchari violati an..
j. Diapruni solut. Drag. vj. or confectio hamech.. ss. velvtriusq Drag. ij.
olci violati iij. fiat clyster.

And because the blood in the great veins does putrify, and is wont to move
great heat and pain about the loins: we do apply ceratum refrigerans Gaseni,
or that which is prescribed against the hot distemperature of the reins.

The diet of the Patient must be thin, ^^ctus.
and such as may not increase blood, for bodies that are full and impure, by
how much the more they are nourished, by so much the more are they hurt: in
stead of wine, he must use aqua horaij, or aqua graminis: and if the patient
have difficulty of breathing, you may ad thereunto liquorish, iniubes, or the
root of vngula cabalina, to strengthen the heart, buglosse, burrage; for the
heat of the liver cichorie, lettice, purslan; for the heat of the reins, the
cold seeds and Alcecengi, for costiuenes, violets, pruna acida, Tanarinds. He
must obstaine from eggs, wine, and if it possible may be from flesh, because
it does increase the blood, and so consequently the cause of the disease.

Of diseases proceeding of choler, with their cure, under the example of a
Fever tertian.
Doct. PRoceed now to the cure of choleric diseases, which we Febristertiana.
will comprehend under a tertian Fever. Tell me how will you cure a tertian Fever?


Stud. As there is a common cause of all diseases, so for the most part there
are common remedies: the heat of choler is first to al to be assuaged by the
use of cooling medicines, as syrups of Cichorie, De endiuia, De granatis,
violarum Rosa. De lymomb. De nymphaa: and if the heat be great, we give the^
with the water of Lectis, Purssan Pla^tine, Cuscuta, Sorrel, and such like:
Afterward we purge with Rhubarb, infused in a decoction that does both cool
and open, as

Rec.
Rad. graminis. Acetosae an. dra. ij. Cichorij. Fndiute. Cuscutaean. M. ss. 4.
Sem frigid mayor. an. dra. j. Florum viol., rum and Nenupharis an. P j.


Fiat decoctio: in collaturae. iiij. infunde Rhubarb. dra. ij. an leui
expressione dissolve syrupirosarum solut j. ss. fiat polus. In a tertian, we
administer opening medicines rather cold then hot: Galen commends the
decoction of Pulegium, and origanum Ad Glauconem.
And toward the end it shall be profitable to use Syrupus de quinque radioibus
cum aquacichorij, or the syrup of cichory, with the decoction of the opening
roots (and if you would temperate the heat) they must first be macerated in
viniger.

Clysters must be prepared ex sero Lactis, Clysters.
in which is boiled Letice, purslan, and violets: in the strayning we dissolve
Diapruni solutini, Drag vj. mellis and sacchari violati, an.. j olei violacet
and nenupharis, an.. j. ss. if the heat be great; otherwise oyse of violets.
iij. will serve.

Galen in the most hottest fevers gives counsel to draw blood even ad
lypothimiam; Venae Seclio.
because there is no better remedy for cooling. Howbeit, it is not expedient to
open a vein before the third sit be past: and then if the vrin appear red,
high colored, and gross, we shall commit no error to open the Basilica of the
right arm: whereby the blood commixed with choler and putrefaction may be
avoided: and although the vrin be not gross and, yet high, it shall be
necessary to draw bood, to avoid choler, and to cool the ebullition thereof.
But this must be observed in bood-letting that at the first opening of the
vein we may draw more blood then at the second; for the first is for
euacuation: and the latter but for refrigeration and cooling. And this
blood-letting is most fittest for young persons, such as have plethoricke and
full bodies, and strong; in whom this feruor and ebullition, by this means is
easily assuaged. We must observe also, that vomiting, being not provoked, does
very much profit in the beginning of the Vomitus spontaneus.
fit; neither is to be restrained, unless the patient be debilitated and made
weak thereby: and if it happen at sometimes that nature is flow to expel by
vomit; the Physician is then to help nature, by administering of some medicine
that may procure the same: which must be (as I Vomitus prouocandus in varum
simi pr^mipro Vomitus.
have said) in the beginning of the sit; as for example:

Rec.
Aquae communis.. iiij. Aceti and sacchaeran.. j. Alisce.


Mix it, and give it being warm unto Oximel.
the patient. Some give unto the patient Oximell. iij. somewhat warm. But
sometimes it happens that the patient does vomit too much; that nature is
thereby very much weakened: against which, we must give such things as may
corroborate, and strengthen the stomach: As

Rec. Syrup. de agresta. vj. Syrupus.


Which shall be given by little and little to the patient in a spoone ij. hours
before meat: but if that stay not the vomiting, prepare this powder:

Rec.
Puluis.
Corallij rubei. Drag. iij. Zacchar. Drag ij. Canamomi. Scr. ss Misce.


Of which powder let the patient take Drag. j. mixed with two spoonefuls of the
foresaid Syrup.

A Sacculus may also be prepared to Sacculus contra vomitum.
apply unto the stomach after this manner:

Rec.
Rosarum rubearum. Drag. iij. Coriandri praeparat. Menthaean. Drag. ij. ss
Coraliijrubei. Balanstiorum an. Drag. j. Conquassentur, and fiat sacculus.


In like manner we take for the same Emplastrum ad stomach.
matter bread tosted and infused in rose vinegar, beaten in a mortar; to which
may be added of myrtels and read corrall ana Drag. j. of Cinnamon Drag. ss and
so applied like a plaster upon the stomach. It is the duty of a careful
Physician to observe diligently the motion of nature and to follow it as a
guide, as Naturae motus.
if it will help it self by vomit, by the stool, by vrin, or by sweat; yea
sometimes by haemorhogia to assist nature in her work. In the mean time we
must regard the liver, for now he is in himself altogether hot, the gaul in
its vessel is fried and adured, so that we must apply an Epethem ex aqua
cichorij. iiij. cum eelectuarij triv Santali drag. ij.


Doct. But sometimes it falls out, that with all this labor, the Fever
cease not: what must we do then?


Stud. Then we give this Apozem or the like, twice a day, in the morning and
evening.. xij.

Rec.
Tamarindorum subt. incis. ij. Hordei contus. Passularum mund. an. P. iiij.
Pruna incisa and contus. number xv. Conseruae nenusaris. Conseruae viotrae. ana
ij. Fiat Decoctio S. A. In libris. xij. aquae quoad lib. octo reliquae ficte


Let it be strayned, to which strayning add of syrup of violets, and
oxysacchari solut. and syrupi de auabus radicibus ana iij. fiat Apozema.

Afterward we administer this clyster Clyster.
following, or the like:

Rec.
Succi becae lib. j. Oletros. ij. Salis drag. j. Sacchar. rub. ij. Cassiae
sistulae j. misce and fiat enema.


Also if the Patient he dry or thirsty, Ad Ariditatem linguae.
you may suffer him to bold in his mouth Electuarium Diadr agacanthi frigidi,
or Damask pruins, or a cold apple, or to gargarise with rosewater and vinegar
mixed together, or to lick some syrup of limons of the citren, violets, or such
like.

In the Patient be grieved through the heat of the summer, or because the
fumes of choler do offend the heart, we may give him some cordial confectio^:
as

Rec.
Conseruae rosaeros. rub. j. Conseruae borrag. Confectio cordialis.
Buglossae, Violarum an. ss Dioscordij drag. j. Boti or rentalis drag. ss
Syrupi acetocuatis citriq. S. fiat in forma opitae.


Or for the richer sort:

Rec.
Diamargarit. frigid. drag. j. ss Sem. citri, Sem. acetosi and bombacis ad
drag. ij. Cum syrupo buglossi fiat confectio.


Or Rec. confectionis hyacinthorum drag. j. ss specier. Diamargarit. frigid.
drag. iij. misce cum syrupo violarum fiat confectio. Of which you shall give
unto the sick a spoonful, with water of buglosse and roses

Sometimes it happens that the Patient is affected with exceeding headache, by
reason of the sumes that do arise from the stomach; wherefore the foresaid
clysters must be often repeated, and frication and rubbings of the legs must be
used: besides the feet must be often washed before sleep with this lotion
following: Pedum lotio.


Rec.
Florum ros. rubrarum, Foliorum vitis and Camomillae an. M. ij. Florum
chamomelae and. Meliloti, an. P. j.


Let al boil in common water, wherewith let the Patients feet be washed every
night, the thighs, and hips, are also to be bound, to the intent the sumes may
be retracted and so the pain of the head eased.

The feet may also be rubed with some piece of course li^ning cloth, which may
be moystned in some vinegar and salt.

Also for watchfulnes we may apply this unguent.

Rec.
Vnguenti populeonis ss. Contrae Vigilam.
Requies Galeni. drag. iij. Misce and anoint the temples.


But if the Patient sleep not with this means, you may administer this
potion, two hours before midnight.

Rec.
Syrupi papauoris an.. j. Syrup. nenufaris Aquae Lactucae.. ij. Misce, and
bibat.


Also may be administered this Nasale.

Rec.
Aquaenenufaris ss. Nasale Somniserum.
Requiem Galenigran. iij. Opij gran. iiij. Acctimodicum.


This being mixed together, wet cotton or bumbast, and put them into the nostrels

It often times happens, that in this tertian Fever, the reins to be inflamed,
to amend which, we use this unguent.

Rec.
Ole rosati magistri Arnoldi. j. Aceti modicum. Vnguentum prorenbus.
Misce.


Or we may use vngue^to rosato santalato.

And thus by the help of Almighty God, and the due administation of these
medicines, the cure of a cholorick or tertian Fever shall be effected.


Doct. I like this method very well, let me see how you will proceed in the
cure of diseases proceeding of slegme, which we will comprehend under a
quotidian Fever: let me know your method for the cure of a quotidian Fever?


General remedies for diseases proceeding from phlegm under the example of a
quotidian Fever.
Stud. EVery Fever that repeatith it self every day, may not be termed a
quotidian, for duplex tertiana, and triplex quartana, does return daily, but
the tertian with rigor, and exceeding cold, the quartan with horror, shaking,
and shiuering, and the quotidian with cold of the extreme parts. The quotidian
does not end in (...) neither does the fit of the quotidian end with sweat,
as that of the tertain, because that slegme is hardly resolved into sweats, but
choler is very easily and quickly: also the access of the quotidian is wont to
be longer then that of the tertian.

The cause and kind of the Fever is chiesly to be judged from things
antecedent, as if the sick were given to gluttony, of a slegmatick
constitution, and such a one that has lead an idle life; whether it takes him
in the winter, or whether he lives in a cold and moist air, or if he be a
child or an old man; if it be a woman, or a fat man; for children through much
feeding, old men, women, and fat men, through the defect of nature, do gather
much phlegm. Also the Fever is to be adjudged from the adjuncts: as if the Ab
adiunctis. A consequentibus.
heat be felt with moisture, although through putrefaction it be some what
sharp: also from the consequence, as the hurt action: if the pulse be small,
phlegm oppressing the heat, both in quantity and quality. The Fever is also
to be adjudged by its excrements: as if the vrin be thin (for so it happens
through obstructio^, because the thin matter does only pass away) also if it
be white through rawnes and cruditie, or at the length turbuse^t, through the
permixture of some gross humor The stools are also to be considered, whether
they be liquid, crude, and fleg matick: no thirst, because the stomach
abounding in phlegm does repress heat and dirthe, which are the causes of
thirst, unless it happen the slegme to be salt with putrefaction or admixion of
choler. And as the cure does proceed from Art, so we must be careful to
distinguish the Spocies of the phlegm from the effects; as if it be sharp it
provoke hunger; if it be salt, thirst; if it be sweet, drowsimes, quia acida
coquenda salsa mox vacuanda, dulcis naturae committenda.

Therefore when we perceive that the Fever does proceed from the dominatio^ of
flog me, the first intention for the cure, is to prepare a clyster fit to draw
the same from the stomach and intestins, the form whereof is in this order:

Rec.
Parietariae Enemae ad pituitam.
Mercurialis Chamomeli Meluloti Puleqij an. M. ss add sivistantundem Hyssopi
Thymi Origani Calamenthae Sem. anisi Sem. femiculian. drag. ij. Fiat decoctio,
in colaturae libra vna dissolu mellis anthosati, and Sacchari rubri an. j.
Diaphaenici aut Hiaerae aut Benedictae laxatiuae drag. vj. Ole chamomeli and
Anethiniana. j. ss.


The humor is to be prepared with syrups de hyssopo, de marrubio, de absynthio,
de duabus de quinque radicibus, de Staechade, oxemebte composito, Scillitico
cum decocto radicum. Aperientium, or with the waters Apij. saemiculi, Asparagi,
petrosilins, Absintbij, menthae, salutae, afterward must be administered such
things as do purge slegme, as Agaric. Diaphaenicon, Diacarthani^s, or if you
please, we may prepare an Apoze^ purging gross slegme, as

Rec.
Radicum aperientium, or Apzema purgans pituitam.
Rad. enulae campanae Rad peoniae an. drag. ij. Ilissopi Thimi Absynthij.
Gentianae. Chamedrios. Chamepitios an. M. ss Seminum anisi. Sem feniculi an.
Drag. iij. Florum anthos and Staechados an. P j. siat decoctio.


In colature. viij. infunde and bulliant agarici Drag. iiij. in expressione
dissolve Diaphaenici Drag. vj. oximelitis aut cuiusuis dictorum syrup.. ij fiat
Apozema in ducas doses.

But because it happens sometimes that the patient cannot take a potion, but
Pil. purgantes puuitam.
had rather take pills: then for that purpose may be given Pil. Aureae, cochiae,
de agarico, aggregatiuae; of those that are less purging, as hierae,
stomachicae, and Alephanginae, which may be prescribed by themselves or which
the others, whose dose is Drag. j. Or,

Rec. Massae pil. aurearum an. Sor. ij.

Pil. de hiera.

Cum syrupo de absynthio siant pillulae molles number. vj. Or,

Rec. Agaricitrochiscati Sor. iiij. or of the Mass of pillulae de agarico
Drag. j. cum syrupo De menthae vel De hyssopo siant vj. pil. molles.

About the beginning of the cold the fit approaching, it shall not be amisle to
provoke vomit, to euacuace the phlegm which is contained in the stomach;
especially if nature shall seem to require the same. To which purpose:

Rec. Syrupi acctosi aut oxymelitis simpl.. ij. Vomitus.


Cum decocto corticis raphani and seminis

Atriplaces rapham, in quo dra. ss. agarici bullierit, Fiat potio, Detur tepide.

Hippocrates does very much commend vomit in this fever and writes in
Epidenijs, that the wife of one Theotimus was perfectly cured by the same.

Also it is profitable to anoint the back with oil of flowerdeluce or Dil: the
patie^t may also use hydromel in the decocti on whereof shall be boiled a little
hyslop, as

Rec. Hyssoppi P. ss. bulliat in tribus libris aquae ad perfectam
despumatienem, seu consumptioneni tertie partis, audendo mellis. j. ss. cuius
quantitas mir uatur siatque mulsa dilutior sicalor in praecordijs auctus
videatur, ne bilescat.

In the whole progress of the disease, our cheifest care must be for the
stomach, that it may be strengthened by taking of some tables of Aromaticum
rosatum, or Electuary of Diarrhodon, applying upon the the same Emplastru^
stomachicu^, with oil of nutmegs, Chimical oil of wormwood, and such like:
also to give inwards is very much commended syrup of mints or syrup of worm
wood. Some do affirm, that the juice of Gentian with warm wine taken before the
fit, does cure the fever: but it is most certain, that a Dr. of old treacle, or
mithridate (the body purged) given in white wine one hour before the fit to
cure the same.

There be some that have sworn that only with the instilling of 3. drops of
the juice of Mercury into the right ear, or nostrill, to have done the same:
but as it is an indifferent medicine, so those that are disposed may prove it;
so that they neglect not other means: some others will, upon the drawing on of
the fit to hold the feet in hot water, wherein have bin boiled herbs of an hot
quality. To a quotidia^ appertains that fever which is called Epiala,
contrary to Lypiria, for Epiala Lypriiam.
when the inward parts wax cold, the outward do burn, because the vitrios and
glass sie phlegm in what part it does putrisie, is incended, but the other gross
sort does wax cold, which requires to be well prepared by such medicines as
do vehemently incide and attenuate before it be purged. Gordomius counsels
in fevers proceeding of slegme, to give the patient wine diluted: for, says
he, if Valesius do allow of opening roots, if of peper, if syrups, De mentha,
and De absynthio may be allowed, why not wine?

And this is the method which I have observed for the cure of a quotidian
fever; by which method I suppose all phlegmatic diseases of what kind soever,
may be removed and perfectly cured.


Doct. Tell me what difference there is between a quotidian, and an
haemitritaeon, or half a certian.


Of an Haemitritaeon or Semitertian.
Stud. HIppocrates, primo Epidenion, De semetertiana.
does call a semitertian, horrisicam; not only because it does invade with
horror, but also because in the whole course of the disease the sick does
altogether tremble and shake: this fever is framem of a continual quotidian,
and of an intermittent tertian. Phlegm putrified in the greater vessels,
causes a quotidian, and choler putrisied in habitu, causes a tertian; but it
troubles daily: besides also the third day the sick co^plaineth himself to be
tormented for certain hours with watchings, unquietness, with thirst, with
bitterness of mouth, with a feeling of lassitude, and wearisomenes: therefore
from phlegm proceeds the cold, and from choler a light succession, or shaking
of the extern parts; but from both of them trembling: It is called a
semitertian, not because we say he is half putrified; but he is far more
grievous then a tertian. Hippocrates says, that this disease is deadly, for
many causes: first, for the diverse conflict of contraries: secondly, because it
leaves no time to nature to nourish the body, to concoct hurtful humors, and
to repair the strength; by which cause it must needs heap up a great heap
of excrements: thirdly, because it is twofold, and is framed from contrary
causes: lastly, because it exercises the stomach and the Nerves parts; from
whence arise often syncops, and soundings: notwithstanding, the remedies must
be mixed against choler, and phlegm; the stomach must be strengthened with
inward and outward means: the liver must also be cooled: for I know not how it
happens that it takes one heat from another, and the lesser is drawn from
the greater.


Doct. So, now you have satisfied my desire, proceed to diseases arising from
melancholy, which we will comprehend under a fever quartan: let me know your
method you have for the cure of the same Of diseases proceeding of melancholy,
with their remedies, under the example of a quartan fever


Stud. AFeuer proceeding from melancholy is called a quartan, Do morbis
melancholicis.
because that mela^choly moves every 4. day, as choler does every 3. day, and
slegm daily. That quartan is the safest, which does invade of itself, and does
not proceed from some other disease. For those fevers that degenerate into a
quartan, do sometimes continue for many years. Valescus reports, that he saw
a man that had a fever every 30. day, and that fever did continue for the space
of 30 years.

The fever is chiefly to be known from things antecedent; as if the sick were
Digmtio.
melancholy, and in his declining age, and whether it took hold of him in
Autumn; although that Hippocrates in libro De hebdomadibus writes, that that
fever does chiefly invade in the flower of age: that is to say, from 25. unto
45. but he has written many other things of a quartan, which daily experience
does show to be contrary. But to proceed: if the fit does begin with trembling
and shaking, and that his bones seem to be bruised, and feels pain in his
lower parts, because the humor is cold, dry, and gross and therefore cannot
be thrust out to the skin.

Also from the adjuncts, as by the heat which does not appear sharp and biting
except the humor be of burnt choler.

From the consequents, as the hurt action, a small pulse by reason of cold; and
Actiu lesa.
slow by reason of the grossness of the humor. The fever is also to be
adjudged from the excrements, as by little sweat, because the humor being
earthy is very hardly resolved into sweats: the urine is thin and watrish,
and the stools and dry.

We must proceed in this fever as in others, in concocting the matter
offending, and in purging; because he is of the kind of putrified fevers;
therefore we must begin with euacuation of common superfluities; and if the
belly be bound, we give this or the like glyster:

Rec.
Fol. Maluae. M. j. Polypod quer. j. ss. Epithimi. Apozem. Contra melancholiam.
Carthami an.. ss. Sen alex.. j. Sem. anisi. Femculi an. P. j.


Bulliant in sero Lactis adlib j. in colat. dissolve mollis ros.. j. ss. olei
violarum. iij. and fiat enema.

Also we may administer this Apozem.

Rec.
Radicum capparis. Tamaricis an. Drag. iij. Polypodij. ss. Lupuli, cuscutae,
melissae, buglossae. Borraginisan. M. j Some. anisi, feniculi an Drag. ij.
Florum genistae. P. j.


Fiat decoctio, in colat. viij. Dissolve Syrupi Defumaria simplicis vel
compositi, syrup. de pomis aut regis sabor an j. ss. fiat Apozema clarum in
duas doses.

In the same decoction may bec boiled Foliorum Sennae drag. iij in collatura
iiij. dissolve catholici duplati, syrupy de Epithymo compsoti an. j. fiat potus.

The humor being prepared, ought to be purged with light and familiar
medicines often repeated, for strong medicines do rather exasperate the humor,
being before stubberne, then otherwise anoyd it, but for poor men, and strong
bodies, may be given this medicine.

Rec. confectionis hanicch. Drag. iij.

Dissolve in decocto lupuli and scabiosae in quo ss foliorum sennae buluerint,
Addendo oxymelitis Galeni j. fiat potus.

The powder of Sennae oriental, or of Epithymum cretensis Drag. ij. drunck in
white wine, may suffice, or Drag. vj. thereof infused in sero lactis, or aqua
violarum, if the humor be of black choler. Atrabil trius.


If the body be full, the vrin appearing red, we may open the basilica of the
left arm, which if the blood flow clean and red, shall be forth with stayed,
but if it appear black, we may draw in more abundance: in women we are to
move the monstrus, and in men the haemorods, if it may possible be done: some
there be that give council to open the saluatella (which is a vein between
the little finger, and the next adjoining to the right hand, but in this case
it must be opned in the left) in the paroxisme it self. Calen giucth us
warning to look unto the spleen, as well by things in ward as outward, the
remedies whereof he sets forth in capite de obstructione Genis: for in the
spleen says he is the seat of melancholy, which is indeed focus febris. But
Trallianus and Aetius ex Ruffo: says that in a quartan proceeding of black
choler we ought to have regard to the liver, rather then the spleen, which
being obstructed, and by long heat of a cholorick Fever, is grown into a
scirrhus hardness, which may be perceived when the hypocondre of the right side
by the very touch it self is perceived to be stretched out and very hard.

Vomit does avail very much to avoid Vomitus.
the humor offe^ding, if it be provoked by fit medicines, two hours before the
sit. White wine being given luke warm in the beginning of the sit, does
procure vomit, and in the declination sweat.

There be many that do commend bathing, because that the skin astricted and dry
may be relaxed: but this I think not to be good in a cold quarta^ but in a hot.

There be some also that do give counsel, a little before the sit, to anoint
the spine of the back, and the feet (because from thence begins this fit)
with the oil of juniper, of Scorpions, of Cost, of Castoreum, cum vngue^to
Arragonio, or with that wherein has bin boiled green frogs, for that is an
alexteriu^ of a malign humor so^e also prefer this medicine following.

Rec. Theriacae arag. j Nardi and caryophilloru^ an. Scr j. cum aliquo ex
dictis oleis aut cum vino generoso fiat lin mentum pro spina dorsi, for so the
tre^bling which is the forerunner of the quartan is diminished, because that by
heat nature is strengthened, and better able to resist cold, and also sometimes
sweat follows, whereby the access is diminished, and aportio^ of matter of
the disease avoided Confectio alcermes, being given one hour before the
access the body being before purged, does profit very much. In like manner,
the decoction of Agrimony, to which is added a little white wine, at the end of
the decoction, is given in the access itself.

I wonder of Rondoletius which does so often persuade us that the use of white
wine wherein sage is steeped for a night, to cure the quartan, and to be a
certain remedy for all diseases which proceed of melancholy.

But that is more wonderful, that Trallianus does affirm, that a line Bitle
hung Scarabcus.
about the neck in a piece of linen tincted with saffron, should be a sure
experiment to take away a quartan: some there are that do commend the worm
that is found in the thistle called Labrum veneris, to be very good against a
quartan, being hanged about the neck, of which you may read more in Trallianus.
Trallianus.


Valescus does write, that the juice of Tapsus Harbatus being given three times
an hour before the fit, to remove the Quartan.

There are certain that do use this secret. Take the heart of an Hare,
prepared as the lungs of a Fox, let it be divided into three equal parts,
whereof give one part unto the sick, with wine, before the fit, and by the
fourth fit he shall be cured.

Things that do heat very much, as Diospoliticon, pepper, mustard, Diatrion
piperion, and such like, must be avoided in a hot quartan, in a cold also they
must be carefully and warily used. For those that use these remedies, as Aetius
does affirm, does increase the force of the disease, for they make of a simple
quartan, a double, but in the state before the fit may be given this medicine.
Rec. Myrrhae piperis, and felliorum rutae viridum an. parts aequaies cum
melle, fiant pill. quarn^ Scr. j. detur ante accessionem.


Of diseases of Inanition or emptines, under the example of a Fever hectic.
A Fever Hectic is an equal distemperature, and therefore without Febris
Hectica.
pain, for he that is hectic does not feel the disease but privately: quia
solitas actiones obire non potest: besides the alteration grows by little and
little, neither has it any essence in motion: when this disease does begin, a
fenerous heat does invade the dewy or almentary humor, called Cambium, and it
is said to be confirmed when it has consumed the natural moisture, and the
fixed spirits.

This Fever hectic, follows very often burning Fevers, colliquations, great
euacuations, as aimorragia^. Diarrhaea^, lienteria^, and also Empiomae, and
Pthisis: that is less dangerous, which does succeed some effect of the
stomach, the liver, the spleen, the mother, and the reins.

This disease is known by his heat, Dignotio.
the vrin is thin, crude, white, and at the last oily, from the colliquation;
there is a dry cough, the pulse slack, hard, and it is called hectic by
reason of the dry artery: they feel presently after dinner heat, especially
in the hands and feet, because the dry heat is perfused in the nourishing
humor, even as lime in water. The stomach almost sticks to the ribs the face
is leddy, because of the smalnes of heat, and spirits; at the last he grows
like a ghost, the eyes hollow, the nose sharp, and then when the hairs do
fall, the legs swell, and a slux of the belly happens: then judge that death
is nic. The cure rather consists in diet, then in Curatio fere tota
analeptica.
Physic, but if the belly be bound, there may be administered a gentle
clyster, or some calsia newly drawn, his meat should be hens fed with
frogs, or with barley boiled with frogs, of which being beaten together, may
be made a paste, and so cast unto the hens. Some there are that do very much
commend the yelks of eggs poched, and coxe-stones boiled in milk, but that is
more fitter for the cause which is emptines) then to the Fever, the Patient
must use decoctions of french barley, a young cock stusfed with barley, cleansed
and boiled, for broth is very good, if he shall be weary of the use of
pusans, he may use white wine being made thin by delution. The Patient must
avoid watchfulnes, venery, and all other perturbations of the mind, which does
dry and attenuate, as anger, sorrow: bathing is thought to be good lukewarm so
that it has a cooling faculty, especially before the disease be confirmed, he
may tarry in this bath 3. or 4. hours giving unto him therein Asses milk
tempered cum saccharo, violato, or rosato, after he is out of his bath, he may
be anointed with cerato refrigirante galeni, or vnguento rosato, mesue oil of
roses, violets, or Mympheae. Marasmus is not to be cured, and those that make
their Marasmus.
brags that they cure consumptions, doc much mistake: for it is rather leannes,
and thinnes of body, then any Hectic passion: for even as to pour oil into a
lamp where is no week nor match, is nothing else but oleum and operam
perdere, even so in vain do we strive to restore to nature that solid
substance, being by heat consumed and taken away, because that through
nourishment, a watery humor, and not an angry is rather supplied to the sick
Patient.

Common remedies for malign diseases, and contagious under the example of the
Pestilence.
THe Pestilence is a disease which De Tesie.
does happen unto many, and has his beginning from a pernicious and unusual
putrifactio^, which does very much exceed the condition of vulgar putrefaction.
Sometimes this pernicious quality has it beginning in our selves, for it
happens that sometimes the humors I could wish that our common Gardeners
about London might be inhibited from planting such multituds of Cabbages, or at
the least might be compelled to bury deep under ground their rotten stalks and
leaves from whence arises a pestilent vapor and unusual putrefaction at the
latter end of the year
of our body does so much degenerate from the natural temperature, that at the
length it takes unto it self a pernitios and venemos quality, and so is
constrained to strive with deadly venoms. Sometimes it arises from outward
means, as malign and putrified exhalations which are communicated to the air;
sometimes from dead fennes, pooles, and standing waters corrupted, such as is
the waters in Moore fields at London, where no man was wont to walk in the
euenings for stench, stinking channels, venomous dens, and mettalin spirits
arising out of the earth: often times also it happens from the variable
commistion of the Planets; and then it is the hidden and admirable scourge of
the most just God for our sins; and then it is properly called the
pestilence: but when it has hit beginning from other causes, it is called
Morbus malignus, or Febris maligna: those fevers that have their original from
Venom are for the most part deadly, but not pestilential, because they are not
contagious.

The part affected is the heart, by Pars affect.
means of the pestilent air which creeps unto the same by the lungs;
through necessity of respiration, whereby the vital spirits are assailed; and
the humidum radicale, and solid substance clean over thrown.

We must in the beginning resist the external cause; the air is to be purged
by fire, both abroad and in the house, for that does separate and remove the
putrefaction many ways: if it be prepared of sweet woods, as of Juniper, it
is more better and does more refresh the vital spirits. The vital faculty it
self is to be strengthened by cordials, as well inward as outward, the better
to resist venom.

Rec.
Conseruae buglos. and borrag. an.. j. Corticis, and semenis citri, an. Dr. ij.
Diamargirits frioidi. Alexiphar macon.
Troch scoru^de Camphora, an. dr. j


Add si vis. boli armeni terrae sigillatae, tantunde^, Rasurae Vnicornis
smaragdt, ambrae an. gran. ss. cum syrupo conseruationis citri fiat opiata, vel
cum saccharo in aqua violarum Buglos. scabiosae, cardut benedicti soluto fiat
electuarum per tabellas: but if these things shail seem too hot for the
summer; they may be temperated with adding of Roses, violets, and sanders; for
the poorer sort may suffice the rines and seeds of the citren, cornu, cerui
zedoaria dictaminus, angelica, tormentill, gentian, taken the quantity of Drag.
j. in aquae cardui or borragini To the heart must be applied Sacculus, fotus,
Epithemita; the sacculus may be prepared with red roses, violets, flowers of
buglosse, and the citren rine, and of their decoction or distilled waters, may
be made fotus: and with adding of cordial powders may be framed an Epithema.

There are always ready in the Apothecaries shops two Alexiteria^s against al
venoms and venomous diseases: that is, treacle, and mithridate, the which our
ancients have used with great profit, as well for preservative, as for expelling
present sickness: they were wont to give one Dr. by it self, or else in some
cordial water, and also to apply it outwardly in the form of a Linament upon
the region of the heart, with some mice of Lymons, or mixed with some Cordial
conserues, in the form of an Emplaster. Some learned men do agree that the
same cacochymia is to be diminished by some gentle purge, which must be used
with some cordial decoction; as for example: if choler be accended, and a
poison may seem to possess all the humors, the signs show presently a
choleric fever, although by reason of the same cacoethes and conjoined poison,
it be increased: we may say,

Rec.
Radicis acetosae.. ss. Scabiosae. Cichorij. Pimpinellae an. M. j. Decoctio
cordialis.
Sem. citri and Cardui benedictian. Drag ij. Flor. cordialium an. P. j.


Fiat decoctio, in colaturae. iiij. infunde Rhabarbari Dra. ij. ss. in
expressione leui dissolve syrup. rosarum Solutiui. j. ss. add Camphorae grana
quatuor and fiat potus: I dare not use any stronger purge as Diaprunum
solutinum, and Electuarium, Desucco rosarum; least nature should be disturbed:
and therefore we must far less use Diacrydium, or Antimoni. Yet there be
some Physicians that do affirm, that iiij. or v. grains of Antimoni being
infufed in some cordial waters, to have been given with good success.

In all Epidimicall diseases one does administer this medicine:

Rec.
Diascordij. Drag. j. Syrup. Delymonibus. ss. Aquae cardui benedict, ij.
Spirit. vitrioli gut. 4. Misce and fiat haustus.


Capiat and fudet. and so let him take ij. Nota.
or iij. of the same draughts: if the fever seem to be a synochus, and the
patient have a plethoricke body, a vein may safely be opened, but if it be but
an Ephemera or hecticke, then at no hand must it be enterprised. From hence
aririseth that great complaint of letting of blood in a pestilent fever: one
defending one way, and another, another way; and all strive by probable
reasons: some do affirm, that no man does escape that has a vein opened:
another says, that very few die that do bleed, and that there is no more
present remedy, then the same; but this first is to be ended by the distinction
of fevers.

Celsus does commend bathing, and hydrotick means, that the Venum may have
its passage through the skin: and therefore they hold it good to anoint the
groine and arm holes, with the other Emunctuaris, with oil of Scorpions, that
thereby the venom may be drawn forth.

De Lue Venerea, or the Pox.
Doct. PRocced now and tell me, what disease is the Pox?


Stud The Pox is a contagious evil, which for the most part is gotten by the
use of veneric. In times past we had no knowledge of that disease, but now it
is grown to be the most commonst that reigns; and it brings with it many
detestable cuils, and trouble some accidents. In the beginning it is but small,
but in time, it grows to that greatness, that it does not only corrupt the
humors and spirits, but also it does offend the nerves, membrans, tendons, the
flesh and bones: and at last it does overthrow and consume all the other parts
of the body, and peruerteth the tempeature and whole substance thereof: from
whence proceeds diverse and many kinds of excrements: it may well be called
the plague of Venus, because that for the most part it is not gotten but by the
use Let venerians look to themselves.
of unclean bodies. This disease has been known to lurk in the body many
months together before it has been mistrusted, and sometimes a whole year
together.


Doct. What part is there affected in the Pox?


Stud. In this disease the part affected Pars affect.
principally is the liver, as does appear by the naturell actions hurt; for in
the stomach there is evil concoction, whence arises a great alteration of
color, and dullness of the whole body: the appetite of venerie is clean
overthrown; and it is a disease perverting the whole substance, with the
temperature; and by that means there arises diverse kinds of excrements: it
has an analogy to the whole substance of the liver, rather then to the heart
or brain; for it does oppugn rather the natural spirits then the vital or
animal; which being corrupted, must needs infect the Liver: from whence
arises that same Pilorum Deflautum, or shedding of hair; and also sometimes
there arises itchings about the privy parts, vlcerations, virulent Gonorrheas,
and such like.


Doct. What are the signs of this disease?


Stud. In the beginning of the disease there does appear those venerious bubos
Signa. Bubones venerei.
in the groine, and malign pustuls in the yard, and vlceration of the vrinarie
passages; which after a time does yield a kind of light sanies, and causes a
kind of distilling, and burning of urine: and withal there is adjoined a
gonorrhea, and shedding of seed. Sometimes there does appear certain small
spots over the whole body, now yellow, now read, and filthy; and as it were
warts, which will not a way til the disease be cured.

Finally, pain of the nerves, headache, pain of the shoulders, and the neck
are common companions. Sometimes also those spots do vanish, and after a time
do rise again, and in time do prove to be virulent, and do erode and eat
the skin; so that there does arise many foul fordid, and virulent ulcers
and pustles, and they do very often grow in the pallat of the mouth, and in
the jaws, and the nose, and in time does exulcerate the tongue, and the
nostrils, because those parts are more tender then others.

Often times in this disease also the Desantium pilorum capitty atque barbs.
hair of the head and beard do fall away, the Patient cannot sleep by reason of
exceeding pain, for this disease does torment more in the night, then in the
day. There does also appear in the ioints, and upon the shin bone, certain
tophies, and tumors, hardly to be dissolved, and especially in the forehead,
and other parts of the head, and sometimes also upon the shoulders, from whence
arise vleers, of very hard curatio^, which in time does erode and corrupt the
bone, bringing to the Patient in tolerable pain, especially in the night
time, as I have before said. And these are the common sigues of this disease of
the pox, which in some bodies do appear after one manner, and in others
after another, more or less, and not in every body alike.


Doct. Tell me, what is the cause of this disease?


Stud. The cause of this disease is a Causa.
fordid and malign quality, containing in it self, a very deep contagion,
communicated from one infected body unto an other, by unclean touching, whereby
for the most part, the parts of generation are affected, by reason of their
rare and tender substance. In like manner this malign quality is communicated
to the apparel, to the mouth, and also to the skin: and sometimes it does so
much the sooner infect, by how much the natural virtues and faculties of the
liver are the weaker. From thence also it does sometimes happen, that many using
one unclean woman, are in a manner al infected, but those that have their
natural faculties strong, are very seldom infected. As in the pestilence,
although the pestilent air be communicated to al, yet all are not alike
infected, and the reason is, because some men have their vital spirits more
stronger then others.


Doct. What prognostics have you upon this disease?


Stud. This disease being but newly taken, does admit an easy cure, but being
Prognest.
old and confirmed, is very seldom or never cured, and the disease is
contagious and infectious, to which women are more apter then men: and in this
evil it happens that the infected cannot sleep, and they are troubled with
continual sorrow and grief, and in the end do perish with a Fever. This
disease also is transferred from the parents to the children, and brings with
it often times, phtisis, the dropsy, asthma, and such like.


Doct. Let us now hear what cure you have for this disease?


Stud. I have said, that if the disease be Luis vene. reae cura.
not very old, that then the cure is very easy: and therefore first of all I
open a vein, afterward I attenuat the gross humors with medicines appropriate
for that purpose, especially such as may reserate and open the meatus and
passages.

Then I do purge the body, as necessity shall require, either with pills, or
potions, afterward I expel the reliquis of the disease, with such things as
may procure Diaphoretica.
sweat, and when the sick does begin to sweat, he must cleanse and wipe
himself with clean clothes, and before he enters into his sweat, he must
drink a draught of some decoction that has property to open the passages of
the neruos parts, in which the matter of the disease does chiesly lurk, and so
drive the matter from the inward to the outward and to that purpose we may use
Decocto radicum feniculi, enulae campanae, lentium, vuaru^, passarum sicuum. To
this decoction may be added treacle, or mithridate: as if we take iiij. ounces
of decoction we may add Scr. ij of mithridat, or treacle, with two drops of
spirit of vitrioll, and so may he sweat the space of iij. hours together:
afterward the sweat being clean wiped, he may commit himself to his bed,
in which he may more pleasantly sweat at his pleasure: and this order of
sweating is often to be repeated.


Doct. But what if these courses taken bring no profit to the patient?


Stud. Then we proceed to a more stronger kind of cure, as after bloodletting,
to use the decoction of Guiacum, or of sarsaparilia, or of the roots of China:
always provided, that the body be first well purged: and this decoction must
be given hot, and the Patient well and closely covered with clothes, that he
may the better sweat: after his sweat, he may rise and walk in his chamber,
so that he keep himself from the injury of theaire: he may also 4. or 5. hours
after the receiving of the medicine dine and sup, either with a chickin, or a
little roasted mutton. But if for business or poverty the Patient may not use the
decoction, we may in the place use the unction of mercury, and that with very
good success, and also sometimes after the use of the decoction with great
profit, for thereby shall the relics of the disease be thoroughly expelled,
and we continue the decoction for the space of 30. days together. This evil
also will require sometimes stronger engines, as suffumigijs of Cinabrium, which
may be performed every third or fourth day: but this medicine is never to be
put in use, unless we have in vain assaied all the former means:
notwithstanding in the arms and legs it may safely be performed if there be
either pain, aches, nodes, tophies, or ulcers: and for those which by reason of
their business cannot keep home, we may use emplasters spread upon leather or
upon new linen cloth, and place them upon the ioints, which implaster may be
removed twice a week.


Doct. Show me what plaster it is that may be applied for that purpose?


Stud. Rec. Emplastri de meliloto pro spleen lib. ss. Argentiviui ij. olei
laurini, petrolei, terebinthinae an. Q. S. fiat cerotum.

For the hard tumors, you may take the roots of Althea, figs, and fenugreeke,
which being boiled in wine, with capo^s grease make an emplaster, and so apply
it.

And this may suffice for a discreet student, as concerning the cure of that
foul contagious disease called the French pox.


Doct. There is one disease more, which we call Scorbutus: let us finish our
discomse with that disease: tell me, what is that Scorbutus?


Of the Scorbie.
Stud. Scorbutus is a disease obstructing De Scorbuto.
the spleen, whereby the course and passage of melancholy is hindered: which
being mingled with the rest of the blood, infecteth all the body with vild
wastings and corruption, the groster part whereof falling down, staineth the
legs with spots, like unto the color of pomgranets, and the thinner patt
being carried up, does desile the gummes with sharp fretting, and loathsome
ouergrowing of the flesh. This disease is thought to be that which Pliny
makes mention of in lib. 25. of his natural history calling it 25. Lib. hist.
naturalium.
Stomocace and Sccletyrbe.


Doct. What is the cause of this disease?


Stud. The chief cause of this disease, is gross and corrupt diet, as may be
perceived cap. 3. Strabo geograph lib. 16. Gross diet the cause of the Scorby.
by those that travel by sea, by long voyages; and our fishers that travel to
the Newfound-lands, wanting fresh and sweet waters, and using corrupt and
stinking waters, and especially in an hot air, in which the waters will most
speedely corrupt: in like manner, flesh tainted, and stinking, lard putrified,
and mouldie, venson tainted, fish of gross substance, bread twice baked and
sub mucid, garlic, drinks ingendring cuill juice, bacon, martlemas beef,
fish dried in the smoke, being ouer-salted, and such like. But above al
things, a full diet, and delicate, using no exercise is the cause of this
disease; and sometimes this disease does follow the quartan Fever.


Doct. What are the certain signs of this disease?


Stud. The signs of this disease, is first Signa Sborbuti.
an evil savor of the mouth, swelling and bleeding in the gummes, loosnes of
the teeth, black and leadie spots of the legs, and sometimes in the face, also
weakness of the joints, and disability to walk; difficulty of breathing, and
chiefly when they move or stir, and when they offer to rise, or set up right,
they are ready to die, and their spirits fail them, but when they lie down
they are refreshed and breath more freely. In like manner the sick for the
most part are greedy of meat, and do desire to eat often, and for the most
part their stomach never fail them, also the belly for the most part is bound
and the patient goes hardly to stool, and yet there are some that are subject
to a continual slux. Moreover, the spots of the legs do sometimes swell and
tumisie, in some the legs are so vlserated, that the shinbone does often lie
bare. And in a word, this disease in some bodies does turn into a kind of
leprosy, for the spots resolve into a black kind of scales, as is wont to be
in the morphue, and leprosy of the Greeks: although in other some, it is but
light, equal and shining.

Lastly, those that die of this disease, are sound to be spotted over all the
body, and veins of the legs, and about the tongue are filled and swolen with
melancholy blod: and these are propper signs of this disease.


Doct. Let me now know the manner of of your cure of this disease?


Stu. Letting pass general remedies I will show you the particular cure of this
disease, which must if there be Plethoria Cura.
and fulness be begun with blood-letling, if strength, age, and other things
permit: but it is not thought good to draw blood in abundance; but if it be
possible to draw blood from the haemorrhodial veins, it is more convenient;
and if the spleen be particularly affected, the vein called Lienaris or middle
vein of the left arm is to be opened: but if the liver be more affected, and
that the body is perceived to abound with blood, then we must open the liver
vein of the right arm, or the Basilica or middle vein.

But where the Physician is never or seldom called, until the disease has
Nota.
taken deep root, and is become desperate: that is, when it has spread it
self into the legs, and other parts of the body; we must then altogether
abstain from blood-letting.


Doct. What course must we then take?


Stud. Then we must purge the body lightly with sena, and such like; as for
example:

Rec.
Senea Alex. Drag. iiij. Epithymi cretens. Drag. iij. Passular. Corinth.. ss.
Some. feniculi. Zuinziberian. dr. ss. Fiat infusio in. viij.


Seri lactis per noctem super cineres calid and mane fiat colat. and capiat.

In like manner may be given half an ounce of this powder following: being
infused as aforesaid. Rec. Senae. j. Epithymi, tartarivini albi an.. ss.
Cinamomi, Gariophil. galangae, sem. anisi an. Drag j. ss. fiat puluis subt. and
seruatur advsum.

In like manner pills De fumoterra, and Diasena, are also profitable in this
disease. Some use pills ex Lapide Lazuli, and Armeno: but they are not thought
to be so good. Some give Confectio hamech, but with good caution: for this
disease does not admit any vehement purgations; for thereby the heart is easily
affected and hurt.

The body being lightly purged, we give the patient twice a day: viz. in the
morning, and at iiij. of the clock in the afternoon, the quantity of iiij.
ounces of these juices following: Rec. Chochleariae, menthae aquat. Cardamines,
sysimbriae, ^an. parts aequales: Bechabungae partem semis.

These herbs being green, let them be beaten in a stone mortar with a pestle
of wood, and then strained, and to every dose may be added a quantity of sugar
to make it pleasant: and if it be possible let the patient sweat after the
taking thereof Doct. How may this profit in this disease?


Stud. The Chocheleria, water-mints, and Cardamines, does divide and extenuate
and also purge by vrin, and the Cresses does moderate the strength of the rest:
and these herbs may be diminished or increased, as the Physician shall think
good according to the disease and body of the patient: It may be given also in
goats milk, or for want thereof in Cow-milke, so that every day it be made
fresh. It is approved to be very good when the herbs have been boiled in
whey, and also in whit wine; but yet the ioyces being given, is much to be
preferred above the rest.

There may also be added amongst the said herbs, of our common wormwood, and
sometimes fumoterra, and Germander: also to strengthen the bowels and the
joints may be admixed Numularia.

If the Physician will, he may make a greater mixture: they may make their
choice of these things following:

Myrobalan: Indorum: cort. radicis capparis corticis fraxinae: Cuscutae, Asari,
Thymi: Epithymi, Capilli veneris, Matricaricae, Chelidoniae, Betonicae,
Hyssopi, Agrimoniae, Scabiosae, Pimpinellae, Phyllitis, Cetrarchae, Tamarisci,
acetosae, Radicum Valerianae, Bistortae, Enulae Campanae, Polypodij, Lapathi
acuti, Peniculi, Petrosilini, Cichoriae, Borraginis, Buglossae, Rhapontic.
Aristolochiae rotund. Lequiritiae, passularum florum genistae, florum sambuci,
Anisi. sem. feniculi, 4. sem. frigid. viticis, and such like. Also diverse have
been cured by this remedy following:

Rec. Fol. absint hij siccats gran. Iunip. an. M. j. Lactis Caprini lib. iiij.
Let al boil until the third part be consumed, then strain it, and mix with
the strayning of Saffron one Drag. then let it boil over the fire for ij. or
iij. walmes, and again strain it: of this decoction you shall give three
times in a day warm: viz. in the morning, and at three of the clock in the
afternoon, and at the entrance into bed.

In like manner Syrupus Sceletyrbicus described by Forestus shall much avail
in this disease. Rec. Succichochleariae succi Becabungea an. lib. iij. sacchar.
albis. lib. ij. clarificetur succus cum albumine oui, and then boiled to the
form of a syrup, and so let the patient receive thereof in a spoone every day
thrice.

And thus have we finished our discourse of the scuruy; of which disease if any
man desire more knowledge, let him read Forestus his observations in diseases
of the Spleen.


FINIS.
THE EXAMINATION OF A CHI rurgion, wherein is handled the whole course of
Chirurgerie by way of Dialogue between the Doctor and the Student.

By S. H.

Imprinted at London by H. B. for George Potrer.

THE DISCOVRSE of Chirurgerie.
Doctor. AS I have dealt with you in phy sick, so now I will examine you in
Chirurgerie: toll me, what gifts must he be endued with, that will take upon
him to practice as a Surgeon?


Student. He that will take upon him to practice as a Surgeon, must be of
honest and virtuous manners: he must be faithful and secret: he must be a wise
man: and he must have a perfect knowledge of the figure, the situation, and
connection of all the parts of man's body, by knowledge in Anatomy: he must be
well experienced in the Art, and such an one as has gotten experience as well
by the works of others as of himself.


Doct. You have truly said: for such an one is indeed a fit man to be admitted
to the practice of the art, that is endued with all those qualities: and I
would to God that this city of London were altogether furnished with such
Chirurgions; then should there not be so many ignorant and unskillful suffered
to abuse so noble an art, and withal the Kings liege people; in taking upon
them the profession of that wherein they have no knowledge at all: but I leave
that to them that have and onty to amend it. And as you have told me the inward
qualities of a true Surgeon, so tell me how his body must be framed to be
fit for the same profession.


Stud. As concerning his body; it must be comely, well proportioned, and
strong, his hand must be steady, not shaking; and be as ready with the left
hand as the right; he must not want any of his senses, and especially his
sight, that must be quick, for otherwise he shall be accounted but a blind
Surgeon, and not able to judge aright of his Patients grief.


Doct. What other things shall a Surgeon have need of in his practice?


Stud There are many things which belong to a good Surgeon, as instruments
of all sorts, medicines, a fit place to perform his works, light, apparel,
servants, and some other assistants as necessity shall require.


Doct. What instruments shall a Surgeon need?


Stud. Those instruments that a Surgeon may not want, but must have always
in a readiness, are these:

Nonacula. Scalpellum. Forfices. Volsetla. Specicium. Latum specillum. Stylus.
Acus. Canalicula forata. Habena ad membra laqueo intercipienda. Fascia.
Pannicuh lmei ad vnlnera a abliganda. Lintea concerpta. Auriscalpium. Forcipes
ad dentes euellendos. Ferramemtum quo erosi dentes. eradun tur. Vncinus, or (as
Colsus calls it) Hamulum retusum.



Doct. What Medicines must the Surgeon have always in a readiness?


Stud. A good Surgeon must have in a readiness Powders, Unguents, and
Emplasters; they serve to stop bleeding, or to conglutinate wounds, or to
cleanse foul and rotten ulcers, to mollisie hardness, to produce a cicatrix,
and skin, to remove away excrescent and corrupt flesh, to cease pain, to
strengthen Fractures and Luxations.

As for powders which he ought to have in a readiness, they are of three
sorts: one to stay bleeding, as that which is framed of

Bolus Armeniae, Rosis. Mastiches, and Pollin.


The second is for fractures of the scull, and hurts of other bones, and is
called iuluis cephalicus and is framed ex

Radicibus ireos, Ar sto lichae. Ex myrrha. Atoe, and such like.


The third powder is to remove away excrescent, and corrupt flesh: as Alumen
vstum. Pull. praecipit. Mercury, and such like.


Doct. Well, go forward, and tell me, what be the unguents proper to a
Chirurgior?


Stud. The Unguents that a Chirorgion ought always to have about him, are
these:

Vnguentum Basilicon, which does humect, digest, and cease pain. Vnguentum
Aurcum, called of some Regis, which does incarnate and conglutinat wounds to
either. Vnguentum Dtaithea simplex, which does calesie, soften, humect, and also
cease pain. Vnguentum album Rhasis, which does refrigerate, cool, and dry.
Vnguentum apostolorum, which does deterge, mollify, dry and remove away
corrupt and superfluous flesh: and of that faculty almost is Mundificatinum ex
apio, and Aegyptiacum.



Doct. Proceed, and tell me what the Emplasters are that are fit and necessary
to a good Chururgion.


Stud. The humplasters are these following: Diachilon composium, which does
ripen Apostumes, and does mollify and resolve hardness, and does digest, and
also absterge.

Diacalciteos commonly called Diapalma, which does conglutinate ulcers,
produces cicatrix, and skin, and according to the opinion of Galen, is very
sit in the curing of Phlegmon.

Emplastrum de betonica, which is also called De lanua it does unit and join
together the fractures of the skull; it covers the bones with flesh, it
draws out spleets and splinters of bones, it does absterge, digest, and dry,
with such like.


Doct. You must tell me now what Surgery is; and afterward your method that
you have for the curing of wounds and ulcers: go to, tell me, what is
Chirurgerie?

Chiturgerie is an art which does remove and cure diseases, by the artificall
work of the hand, which is called Chirurgicall operation. Or Chirurgerie is a
right orderly taking away of affects besides nature, with the work of the hand.


Doct. How many parts has Chirurgerie?


Stu. Chirurgerie has two parts: that is, Synthesis and analysis, composition
and resolution: by composition things that were separated and disioyned against
nature, are conjoined again and sited in their natural places, as happens in
wounds, fractures, dislocations, and ruptures. By resolution, things that were
conjoined and vnired together, are separated and divided; either for preserving
of health, or for the recovery of the same: and the species thereof are,
fection, punction, dimulsion, and vstion.

There are some that add a third part of Chirurgerie, which they call
Fxaeresis; and that is exercised in extracting and drawing forth of such things
as are sent into the body, as bullets, darts, arrows, and other warlike
engines; of which parts it shall not be needful to make repetition at this
time.


Doct. Tell me, what is an wound?


Stud. An wound is a solution of the continuity, newly made, fresh, and
bleeding; and of wounds there are two sorts, simple, and compound.


Doct. What is a simple wound?


Stud. A simple wound is that which is made with some kind of weapon. only in
the flesh, without either cutting of bones, sinews, muscles, or veins.


Doct. What is a compound wound?


Stud. A compound wound is a solution of the continuity, dividing or cutting
the bones, sinews, muscles, veins, or Artiers: in which happens for the most
part dolor inflammation, tumor, and oftentimes Apostomation.


Doct. Let me know your method for the curing of a green wound.


Stud. Every good Surgeon does set down a fiuefold scope or intention for
the curing of wounds.

The first is, to draw out that which is sent into the body, whether ballet,
wood, bone, or stone, arrows, darts, and such like. The second is a
conjunction, and uniting of parts divided. The third is a retaining of those
parts united in their proper seat. The fourth is a conservation of the parts
of the substance. The fifth is a prohibition and mitigation of accidents.



Doct. How is the first intention performed?


Stud. The first intention is performed, either with instruments of iron, or
attractine medicines, where by things that are infixed are drawn out. A wise
Surgeon will consider the form and difference of things infixed, and the
nature of the parts affected: of which matters Taugatius has written at large,
and many others. The medicines attractiue are:

Radix aristolochiae. Arundinis. Anagallis. Thapsia. Ammoniacum. Saga penum.
Liclamnum. Ranae combustae. Or, Emplastrum Auicennae, so much commended by
Guydo.



Doct. How is the second and third intention performed?


Stud. The second and third intention is performed by binding and ligature, if
the wound be simple and small, and in a place where it may sitly be performed,
yea, although it be large so it may be easily bound, as in the museles of the
arm, and such like; but if it happen that ligature will not serve, then must
be added the help of the needle, being careful to handle the party gently,
and to place it in his due seat.


Doct. How is the fourth intention performed?


Stud. The 4. intention is accomplished by appointing of a sit and convenient
diet, according to the strength of the patient and greatness of the affect and
disposition of the whole body: for a thin diet and cold, does very much ar aile
in resisting of Sypmto^s, we also ad blood letting and purging of humors to
avoid accidents; also the part is to be contained in this due place, and a
cataplaesme framed with the whites of eggs, and other cooling things are to be
applied, and sometimes to be fomented with astringent wine.


Doct. How do you finish the fifth intention?


Stud. The fifth intention is in the correcting of accidents, which is flux of
blood, dolor, tumor, paralysis, conuulsion, fever syncope, delirium, and
itching.

But this is to be observed in the flux of blood: whether it has flowne
sufficiently or no; if otherwise, the flux is to be suffered; for after a
sufficient flux, the wound does remain dry, and is so much the nerer cured
and the less symptoms follow, as phlegmon and such like: and if the wound
bleed not sufficient, we must open a vein for reuulsion, according to the
greatness of the affect, and the nature of the wound: especially when through
pain or other cause we fear inflammation or a Fever.


Doct. So, you have now satisfied me reasonably in wounds: let me know your
method in ulcers: tell me first what is an ulcer?


Stud An ulcer is a solution of continuitie, yielding forth sanies, pus, and
matter.


Doct. How many sorts of ulcers be there?


Stud. As there are of wounds two sorts, so there are two sorts of ulcers,
simple and compound.


Doct. What is your method and intention of curing of an ulcer?


Stud. The common indicanon and intention of curing of all ulcers, if only we
consider, the ulcer, is exiccation; but if we consider the cause from which it
is engendered or nourished, and symptoms, without removing of which it cannot be
cured, it has four intentions of curing.

The first, that we prescribe a fit diet. The second, that we intercept the
matter antecedent. The third, that we remove the symptoms, and dispositions
joined with the ulcer. The fourth, that we dry the thin recrement of the
ulcer, and deterge the gross.



Doct. How will you perform your first intention, as concerning a sit and
connenient diet?


S. I prescribe a diet to the patie^t either small or large, according to the
strength of the patient or abundance, or fewnes of humors; in the quality of
meats I have consideration, of the temperament and humors redounding as well in
the whole body, as the part affected: as if the humors be sharp and hot those
we alter unto coldness, and with all correcting the Acrimony and sharpnes.


Doct. How do you finish the second?


Stu. The 2 scope I also perform when I consider as wet the quality as the
quantity of humors offending, as well in the whole body as flowing to the part
affected, and so by euacuation and imersion, partly by purging medicines,
partly by blood letting, if strength, age, and other things do agree: partly
by binding, frictions, and fomenting of the parts opposite to the ulcer: partly
by repellent medicines to intercept the flux, such as is vnguentum ex boro and
such like.


Doct. How is the third scope finished?


Stud. We perform the third intention when we remove, as I said, the
manifold, and diverse Symptoms, and evil dispotisions joined with the Ulcer:
for sometimes there is joined distemperature, sometimes pain, sometimes tumor,
and swelling, and sometimes contusion, often times Hypersareosin, but more often
thicknes of lips corruption of bone, virulent excrement, foul matter,
hollownes, crooked windings, as in Fistulaes with cacoethia and evil
disposition, all which have diuet scure.


Doct. What is the difference between a Fistula and an Ulcer?


Stud. A Fistula is a deep and hallow Ulcer, indurated with a strict and
narrow orifice, which does require handie operation as the common Ulcer does;
and the difference is, that the ore has callositie and induration, and the
other has not.


Doct. Well, now we must proceed to tumors against nature: tell me, how many
tumors be there against nature?


Stud. The Physicians prescribe four kinds of tumors against nature, according
to the four humors; the first is called Phlegmone, and is an inflammation, or
collection of blood, and as Galen says, is a simple tumor, and an affect of
the fleshie parts, proceeding of a flux, which sweateth through the coats of
the veins like unto a dew, wherein they gather together to themselves a tumor
with heat, redness, stretching, pulsatine, or beating pain, which is proper
to great inslammations.

The second is called Erysipilas, and is properly an affect of the Skin, and
does proceed of pure choler, and is much hotter then phlegmon, and therefore is
of some Physicians called ignis sa. or ignis S. Anthonij, and of some ignis
Persicus, which names may also be applied unto or to his kinds.

The third is called Oedema, and is soft, loose, and without pain, springing
of thin slegme or vaporous spirits.

The fourth is called Scirrhoi, or Scirrhus, that is induration or hardness,
and is a tumor proceeding of a gross melancholic humor, and is hard without
pain, and sometimes without sense, and sometimes also it happens of gross
and tough slegme, and of the dregs of blood, sometimes also slegmon is turned
into scirrhus by the application of medicines that do vehemently cool and
bind.


Doctor Let me know your method for the curing of flegmon.


Student The curing of Flegmon, does consist in a fourefold intention: the
first does consist in prescribing of fit and convenient diet, which is in the
due use of those six things that be called not natural: In this affect
therefore we must be very careful to make choice of a pure, clear, and
cold air: also the diet must be cold, and a little drying, and that which
does procure and engender little blood; and therefore wine, eggs, and
nourishing brothes must be refrained, or very little used: the part affected
must in no case be exercised: and there must also a mean be kept and
observed in sleep and watchings; sleeping in the day time, and after meals
must be avoided, the belly must be kept loose, either by clyster, or otherwise,
the patient must avoid anger, clamor, and contention, and withal, he must fly
from venery, and the use of women, as from a most deadly enemy.

The second scope is in the restraining of the Flux of humors, which is
performed as well by reuulsion, as by medicines repelling: therefore presently
in the beginning we must open a vein in the beginning we must open a vein in
the opposite part, so that the Patient have a plethorick and a full body; but
where there is no fulness of body, and yet notwithstanding we fear the
vehemence of the disease, through the greatness of the cause, and that withal
the disease is in his augmentation, then for reuulsion we cuta vein not far
from the affect: so likewise when the disease draws to his state, if it be
possible we open a vein near the effect. But this we must be careful of,
that before phlebotomy the belly must be emptied, and the common excrements
avoided, either by clyster, or some bole of Cassia, or otherwise.

The third scope is in curing of the matter, now coniunct and impacted
together, for that must be avoided. Therefore in the increase we have a twofold
scope of curing: the one in repelling of the matter flowing, the other in
discussing of the matter inhering unto the part.


Doct. What medicines have you that do discusle and resolve?


Stud. Medicines that do discuss which be of the gentler sort, are:
Aqua calida, Vinum giluum ac tenue, Panis furfuraceus fermentatus, Adeps
suillus, gallinaceus, anserinus, Anatinus, Oleum vetus, Oleu^ chamoemeli Oleum
anethinum, Lana sordida, butyrnm, Furfur, hordeum, Lentes, althea, Malua
agrestis, chamoemeli, meliloti, Parietaria, Absynthium, brassica, Caricae
pingues,


The stronger medicines are:
Farinae seminis lini: faenegraeca, lupinorum, Orobi; adipes, taurinus,
vrsinus, Leoninus; Olea larinum, Rutaceum, irinum, sicynium Nucum, Radices
Ireos, aristolochiaerotund. Bryoniae gentianae, follia Hyssopi, Marioranae,
Saluiae, Rutae, obrotan. pulegij, calameti, Origani, sem anisi, faeniculi,
anethi, Dauci, carui, flores, sambuci and Anthos, Gummi, Ammoniacum, B dellium,
galbanum. Opoponax.


But in all hot tumors we are to use the gentler remedies beforesaid, and
in the increase we mix discussiue medicines with those that be astringent.

As for example: in a cataplasme we say:

Rec. Farina seminis lini.. j. ss. Far. hordij.. ij. Flor. cham. P. j. Rostrub.
Drag. iij. Fol. and bacchar. myrti. an. Dr. j. ss.


Let al be boiled in vinegar to the consumption thereof; then adding thereunto
Pinguedinis gal.. iiij. olei rosacei and chamaem. an.. ij. fiat cataplasma.


Doct. But what if the tumor will not give place to resolving medicines? what
must we do then?


Stud. Then we apply medicines to bring the tumor to suppuration, such as are
framed with aqua calens. oleum dulce, butyrum recens; adipes, Medulla oesypus,
pix sicca, resina, colophonia, thus, cera, Ladanum, styrax pinguis galbanum,
crocus, farina triticea, viscum, caricae pingues, cepe coctum, radix lilij
althea, malua, branca ursina, tetrapharmacon ex farma triticea, oleo, and aqua
mediocriter coctis cum tantillo croci. In like manner Vnguentum de althea, de
meliloto, basilicum, Diachilon simplex, and such like. Or for examples sake:
Rec. Rad. lil. bryoniae, lapathi acutt, sub cineribus coctarum singulquartum
ss. Bruise them, and mix them with the muscelage of Althea, malua, and Figs
an.. j

Farinae triticeae, hordij, and linian. ss.

Auxungiae suillae sas^ expertis. Q. S.

Fiat cataplasma, and apply it.


Doct. When it is come to suppuration and matter, what must we do afterward?


Stud. When the abscessus or tumor is come to suppuration, we then apply in
the most convenient place some actual cauterize; or else we open it with a
penknife: or this medicine following, although it were safer to use the cauterie.

Rec.
Fermenti acris.. ss. Cepae sub prunis coctae.. ij. Stercoris columbim. Seminis
canabis an. Drag. j. Limaces number. iij. Saponis nigri. Auxung. suillae singul.
Q. S.


Make a plaster of the breadth of a groat, which must be applied upon the most
eminent and softest place of the Apostume.


Doct. After the Apostume is opened, how must we proceed?


Stu. The Apostume being opned, we use a digestive framed ex olco ros. and
vitellis ouorum, for three whole days together; for that asswageth pain, and
helps to bring the residue to matter: afterward we use medicines detergent
and mundificatiue.


Doct. Go now to the fourth intention, which is to remove accidence; and
especially dolor and pain: how shall we do when the patient cries out for
exceeding pain?


Stud. Then we apply whites of eggs, or the whites and yelks together, being
well wrought together with oil of Roses: or else we take

Mieae panis triticei aqua calenti macerati and expressi lib. j. vitellos
ouorum number. ij. Lactis caprini. iij. misce and fiat cataps.

Doct. But what if the natural heat be extinct by application of narcoticke
and stupefactiue medicines? what must we do in that case?


Stud. Then we presently scarifie the place, and wash it with salt water;
afterward applying a cataplasme framed cum farine fabarum, and orobian.. ij.
boiled in Oximel.


Doct. Go now to the cure of Erysipelas: what is your method for the same?


St. Erysipelas has a fourfold scope of curing: the first is in a cold order
of diet, moist and in grossing: all fat things, sweet, sharp, and hot must
be avoided, because they easily turn into choler. The patie^t may use in his
broths, lettice, purslan, sorrel, and such like, ptisans, made with the
decoctions of barlie, and cremor hordij is good to be taken in drink for
cooling: rice may also be given to ingrosse the blood: exercise watchings,
anger, noise, and such like affects, and venery must be avoided.

The second scope is in turning back of the matter; wherein we must
diligently consider where the affect be small or great: for if it be small, and
the body not very choleric, it shall not be amiss to open a vein; but if
choler do much abound, it shall be far better to avoid it per secessum, then by
cutting a vein.

And before the vein be opened, we must minister some Lenitine Cly sler;
wherein I would wish the Surgeon to use the advice of the learned Physician.

The third scope is in the application of topical medicines; as in the
beginning, semperuiuum, portulaca, lactuca, lenticul. palustris, vmbilicus
veneris, psyllium, glaucium, crassula solnnu^: of which we take the juices or
distilled waters, and there with mix opium, or the juice of poppy, or henbane,
or of mandragora, and such like; especially in the summer time. In like manner
Galen and Auicen does approve cold water and Oxycratum. We may also add to
those juices the flower of barley or lentils, with some vinegar, and so make a
cataplasme: or else Vnguentum Rosaceum. j. aquae ros. abluto: adding thereunto
whites of eggs, for it hinders inflammation, and is one of the best remedies.

We may also mix with the same unguent, muccag seminis psyllis and cydo^. cum
succo in frigidante.


Doct. What if Erysipilas should possess the face? what may we then do


Stud. Then we are wont to take aquarum vel succorum plantaginis, rosarum,
Iactucae, semperuiui, of every one equal parts: mixing therewith a little wine
vinegar, and so wetting linen clothes therein, apply them to the part
affected; oftentimes moistning the^ that they dry not with the heat of the
disease.


Doct. But what if it will not give place to so easy medicines?


Stud. Then we add to one pound of the waters or juices aforesaid, v. grains
of opium, and of saffron vj. grains; or in the place of the opium, of the
juice of henbane. j. And if it chance the head to be affected, we use Unguent.
rosarum, with oil of violets, and such like.


Doct. What if the pain be so vehement that the patient cannot endure the same?


Stud. Then we take roots or leaves of henbane, being roasted under the hot
embers, and mixed with Unguent. populion, or else we take sem. hyosciams Drag.
j. sem. pap. albi Drag. ij. cum unguent. popul. with the juice of henbaue, or
semperuitsum, or of Virgo Pastoris.


Doct. Sometimes it happens, that by applying of ouer-cooling medicines the
life of the part is extincted: what course must we take then?


Stud. Then we scarifie the place, and wash it with Seawater or salt water.


Doct. But what if Ery sipalas do excoriate and turn into ulcers?


Stud. Then we make a linament after this form: we take Sunimitatum Rubi, and
solani an.. j. olei ros.. iij. cerusae and Lithargirijan.. ss. aceti paurum,
and so make a linament. Or else we take Trochis. albar. Rasis Drag. j. ss
plumbi vsti, and loti Drag. j. caph (if there be any great inflammation) Ser.
ss. olei rosarum. iij. cerae quantum sufficit: and so make a linament.

The last scope is in the correction of symptoms, which arise through the
disease, as a fever, and through a fever, headache, watchfulnes, and thirst: of
all which the remedy is to be sought for from the learned Physician.


Of Oedema.
Doct. The next of tumors against nature is Oedema: let me know your method in
curing of the same.


Stud. The method in curing of Oedema is performed first by a dry order of
diet, a little hot, and something attenuating; the air must be clear and dry,
either naturally, or so framed by Art: no sleeping by day is allowed, and at
night as little as may be: exercise before meat is commendable, and frications
of the parts opposite to the part affected; the belly must be kept laxe and
soluble. As concerning topicall means, in the beginning we may use those
things that do meanly repel: for the humor for the most part being gross
and thick by medicines that do overmuch repel, is made more thicker and
grosser, and therefore we must mix with repercussiue medicines, discussiues:
as when we apply to strong bodies, Oxicratum of two parts of vinegre, and one
of water, moistning therein some new sponge, or prepared with Aphronitro; or
some kind of salt; for the vinegre does not only repel by his coldness, but
it does incide and attenuate, and by his drines does resolve: the sponge also
either new, or prepared does resolve.

There be some that do apply bolarmonick, nuts of Cypres, and Alum: which they
ought not to do without discussiues, for the cause aforesaid. The same
consideration is to be had of other Astringents, in the cold gout, which is an
Oedomatous tumor. Wormwood boiled and heaten into the form of a cataplasm, is
found to do very much good.

The tumor is resolved cum oleo Irino, succo Ebuse, Diacholon by itself or
mixed: Emp. de melitoto malaxed with the oil of camomel. You may ad if you will
Storax, or Ammoniacum dissolved in vinegre.

If need require we may make a fotus ex hyssopo, thymo, pulegio, origano,
calamentha, Ebulo, seminibus anisi, faeniculs, faemagraeci: fiat decoctio
profotu The reside^ce may be bruised, and there may be added unto it olcum
chamomelinu^, Irinu^, Anethinum, or ex farina fabarum, orobi, lolij: with the
juice of Ebulus sambucus, brassica, or with the foresaid oils, and so make a
cataplasme.

Stercus vaccae with butter or oil fried together, adding a 4. part of
sulphur of slercu caprarum, columbaru^, with vinegre and the lees of wine,
does very well,


Doct. What if the tumor will not be discussed, but grow into abscessus, what
must we do then?


Stud Then as much as we may, procure it to suppuration, taking Rad. altheae
iiij. Rad. lil. ij, caricarum par v. florum chamomels, and meliloti, sing. P.
j. farinae hord. and faenugraeci sing. j. coquantur, terantur, addendo
pinguedints, gal. butyri recent. olei lil. and chamo. sing. j. make a
cataplasme and apply it. When the abscessus is opned, we may give inwardly
treacle cum aquis cardiacis, by which the heart is strengthened, and does repel
from it self the hurtful humor.

When this tumor is a Symptom of an other disease, as of the dropsy, the
phtisick, cacexia, it has then no proper cure, for it is impossible to cure
the same, unless the affect from whence it springs be first cured.


Doct. Go now to the last of those tumors against nature, which is called
Scirrhus, and be as brief therein as the former: well, how will, you deal
against that gross, hard, and melancolick tumor?


Of the true Scirrhus.
Stud. The first intention for the cure of Scirrhus is referred to a due order
of diet, which must be but little, attenuating and somewhat hot and moist. The
nourishment must be such as may breed pure and good blood, such as the
Grecians call Euchyma. The bread must be of pure wheat, not too stale or hard
baked. Wine that is thin and pure, such as Gascoigne or white wine, may be
allowed. New laid eggs, chickins, capons, cockrels, partridge, veale, and lamb
may be eaten: also broth may be made with spinach, beets, borrage, and
buglosse. Al goats flesh, beef, bulls flesh, hares flesh, brawne, bacon, and
all salt fish must be avoided. In like manner, colworts, cabbage, beans, and
peason, and such like pulse; old cheese, salt meats, and sharp with pepper,
mustard, garlic, and onions must be refused: so the Patient must avoid anger,
grief, vehement cares, with immoderate exercise, and watchings, for those are
exceeding driers of the body; the belly must be always kept laxe and soluble.

The second intention is to purge the matter antecedent, to perform which may
be prescribed some emollient clyster, or some bolus of cassia, and catholicon:
also a vein may be opened, especially if the body be altogether melancholik,
taking heed that the melancholic humor be not altogether alienated from the
nature of the blood, for then we must abstain from blood-letting, and minister
purging medicines.


Doct. What medicines are fit to purge melancholy?


Stud. To purge melancholy, Thymus, Epithym. Senna oriantalis, polypodium,
quercinum, lapis lazuli, veratrum nigrum, catholicon, Diasenna, triphera,
persica, confectio hamech, and hiera Ruffi, and such like, as we have before
declared.


Doct. Well, we will leave out the purging medicines, and in the mean time
proceed to your topicall medicines: tell me, what is your first intention or
application?


Stud. At the first application, I do not as some common Chirurginos do, to
use repellent medicines, and so make that which is of it self cold, and
gross, to be more cold and grosser, but I apply mollients and resolutiues,
and such things as may discuss and incide, by which the part is made strong
and comforted: nevertheless, I do avoid those medicines that do too much
mollify, lest the tumor thereby be turned into a cancrous ulcer. We must
also beware of immoderate discussiues, lest we discuss the thin matter, and
leave only the grosser substance of the humor remaining, and so the tumor
become incurable.


Doct. Tell me then, with what medicines that tumor is mollified?


Stu. Mollifying medicines are Oesypus, lana succida, butyrum, oleum
Amigdalarum, oleum chamomels, anethinum, liliorum, adeps Gallinaceus, ansermus,
anatinus, suillus, ursi, medullae vituli, cerui, and the fats of other living
creatures. Muccagines, propolis, cera, malua, althea, hlu^s, bra^ca ursina,
caricae pingues


Doct. Give me a stronger sort.


Stu. The stronger sort is Ammoniacum dissolved in vinegre, bdellium, molle and
pingue. styrax liquida, galbanum, and such like: to which may be added semen
apij, cumini, radix ireos, anethum, ruta slos genistae, etc.


Doct. Give me a composition or two, fit for that purpose.


Stud. I will give you a plaster.

Rec. Caricas pingues 12. coquantur and terantur, ammoniaci, bdellij galbani in
aceto dissolut. sing. ij. styracis liquid j. muccag. althea sem. lins and
faenugr. sing. ij. aesypi and butyrirecentis sing. j. olci recint, vel de lilio
iij. cerae Q. S. make an Emplaster.

Or this ointment following.

Rec. Rad. genistae, hyperici fol. cupressi, and scrophul. siccor. sing. Drag.
v.

Litharg. auri, j. muccaginis sem. lini, and saenugraecae. sing. ij. olei vulp.
and de lilio sing. iiij. cerae Q. S. fiat unguentum, adding thereunto a little
vinegre.

Also vnguentum de althea, to which may be added of the gummes aforesaid, is
very convenient.


Doct. You have satisfied me reasonable well as concerning tumors against
nature: I will now examine you in some particular cures, and then I will leave
off to trouble you any farther. I am now to deal with you about the pu^cture
of a nerve: what are your intentions in the same cure?


Of the puncture of a nerve or sinew.
Stud. There is a twofold scope in the curing of a puncture of a nerve, the
first that we prevent phlegmon, or infla^mation: for which purpose I prescribe
to the sick a thin diet, cold, and dry; yet notwithstanding the air must
be hot and moist, for a cold air is very hurtful to the sinews, and an over
hot air may cause phlegmon. I cause him also to lie in a soft bed, placing the
part softly and fitly, that the body may be quiet: also if need be, I open a
vein, I cause him to go freely to the stool, either by giving a clyster, or
some other laxatiue medicine, sit for the nature of the humors resting in the
body.

Then I proceed to topical medicines, in which I do observe the largenes of the
orifice, which if I perceive to be but little and small, I delate and enlarge,
to the intent the matter may more freely avoid out: if any thing remain
therein, that I draw forth; then I remove accidents and especial dolor and
pain, which I perform with somentations of wine and water, wherein is boiled
some flowers of comomell: also I apply unto the wound and round about, oleum
terebinth. or oleum hypericon, as hot as the patient may endure: al which do
remove the pain, and avoid the matter.

In the beginning also it is very good to apply Emplast. Auicennae, framed ex
farina horaij fabarum, orobi, of either equal parts boiled together with
syrup of vinegre and sixinium, or in stead thereof new wine. In like manner
oleum Rutaceum parts 5. terebinth. partem unam and dimidiam. Or this medicine
following: Rec. Musci quercini M. ij furfuris M. j. Oubani. j. Let them be
boiled in a little wine with half so much vinegre, to the form of a pultisse,
and so applied to the place.


Doct. Oftentimes there follows Great dolor and pain, what must be done then?


Stud. Then we apply fitly oleum de uitellis Ouorum, or oleum terebinthmae,
mixed with oil of Roses, or with oleum Lumbricorum terrest. Or else a
cataplasme framed of crumbs of bread, and milk with oil of Roses, Camomell,
yelks of eggs and a little saffron.


Doct. But sometimes all these means will not serve to cease the exceeding
pain: what shift will you use then?


Stud. Then if there be no remedy, we fly to stupefactines, as a pultisse
framed with the crumbs of bread and papauere alb. yea and if need be cum opio.
Or,

Rec. Farinae tritici ij. succi foliorum hyos. iij fiat pulls quaecalens
applicetur.


Doct. What if conuulsion should follow? what must be done then?


Stud. If the patient be in danger of conuulsion, or that there be conuulsion:
then presently we foment or anoint the head, the neck, the spine of the back,
the shoulders, and arm holes if the wound be in the hand; or if the wound be in
the foot, we anoint the slanckes priuities, and the knees with hot oil of
lillies; or cum oleo Laurino, vel costino, vecspicato, vd oleo ex pulegio, or
with common oil wherein is decocted some Castoreum, or Euphorbium.


Doct. But what if there be inflammation? how shall we remove that?


Stud. In that case Guydo teaches us to make an Emplaster ex farina orobi,
fabarum, and hordij cum Lyxiuio and syrupo acetoso, coctis, or with wine and a
little vinegre: or to make a cataplasme ex lumbricoru^ ij. porrorum tritorum.
j. and olei sufficienti quantitate. Which must be applied hot.


Doct. After the generation of matter, what must be then done?


Stud. Then to cleanse the wound we use this unguent following:

Rec. Farinae hordij and fabarum an. ss farinae lupinorum and orobi an ss ij.
pui. lumbricorum Dra. j. vinidecoctions. caudae equina and prassiac matricariae
Q. S. Let all boil together, and then ad of melrosarum ij. sarcocol, sagap. in
praedict. vino dissol. fing. Dra. j. and so make an ointment.

Sometimes it happens that through these punctures of the nerves there
proceeds exceeding putrefaction; so that we are driven to apply caustic
medicines; as vnguentum Aegyptiacum forrum candens, and such like.


Of wounds in the head.
Doct. I will now proceed to wounds of the head: tell me your method to cure
those wounds.


Stud. For the curing of wounds in the head, we prescribe to the patient a thin
diet, until such time that we be safe from inflammation and other accidents:
and if necessity be, we open the Cephalica vein, if strength may suffer it;
so that a gentle clyster be first iniected. We are always careful to keep the
belly loose: we also forbid the patient such meats as do cause fumes and
vapors; and while we are curing the wound we cause the air to be warm;
neither do we suffer the patient to lie upon that side of the head that is
wounded, until such time as there flow sufficient matter.

Digested, then we admit him to lie on that side; for by that means shall the
matter avoid more easily.


Doct. What if the scull be fracturde? how shall we perceive that?


Stud. To try that, if the wound be not large enough, we open it with a raser
or fit knif for that purpose, in the form of the letter X. and being
discovered, we apply stuphs moistened in vinegre to stay bleeding; then we
search diligently where the rift or scissure be there or no; which being
doubted of, we frame a linament with the white of an egg, and mastich, which
we do apply; and at the next dressing we observe diligently whether the
linament be drier in one place then in another; which if we find so to be, then
we judge undoubtedly that there is some rift, or scissure in the skull. In like
manner in a confusion without a wound, the head being first shaued, we apply
the same medicine: which if we perceive to be drier in one place then in
another, we may then suppose that there is some fracture. Or, Rec. Cerae,
thuris, Ladani, an.. ij. terebinth. farinae fabarum, acetising.. j. and so make
a cataplasme, which must be applied to the part that is shaued, and there will
appear the same signs as before.


Doct. What must be done when the skull is fracturde?


Stud. Then if the fracture be large enough that the matter may avoid, we have
no need to apply the trepan, or other instument to make it larger. But if it be
so small that the matter cannot flow out fitly, then we must make passage by
some instrument, and so provide that the rough fragments of the bone may not
hurt the crassa meninx, we may make way in the form of the letter X. or in the
form of a cross; which being performed, and the scull discovered, we apply
stuphs moistened in the white of an egg, and so let them rest for a day: the
next day following we apply the trepa^; declaring first, the danger and perall
of the patient. Neither do we unadvisedly apply the trepan, in the full of the
moon, nor upon the commissures; and we open the scull in the most decliningst
place, if there be nothing that may hinder it. If the fracture be great, we do
not disseuer al, but as the matter may flow out; we draw forth by degrees the
fragments of the bones that are likely to hurt the meninx, and that we do with
as much speed as possibly may be; neither must we defer that business beyond the
3. or 4. day, lest we be intercepted with a fever and other symptoms.


Doct. When these fragments are removed, how must we proceed?


Stud. That work, as I have said, being performed, we dip a piece of red
sarsnat in honey of roses, made hot, and we apply it between the meniux and the
craniu^, Guydo in the beginning does admixe one part of honey of roses, with 3.
parts of oil of roses; but that is in great pain: but being free from pain,
he uses honey as aforesaid. Johan. De Vigo, in strong bodies does mix in the
beginning honey with aqua vitae, for neither oil nor any other humecting thing
is convenient to the head, as Hip. does witness. Afterward we apply over the
rest, stuphs moistened in melie rosaru^, and to the other parts of the wou^d we
apply liname^ts framed ex vitello oui and olio rosaceo to digest the wou^d: and
if perhaps some spel or fragment of the bone stick, so that it cannot be drawn
out with ease, then we perfuse oil of roses, the more easier to draw it out.


Doct. Must not the head be kept exceeding warm during the cure?


Stud. There be many that bind the head with the application of many clothe,
which is nothing else but a burden and load to the head, which does increase
the heat, and hinder transpiration: but it is sufficient to apply so much
warmth as may keep the brain from the injury of the air; and the ouerwarme
keeping of the head was found fault with by Hip.


Doct. This is the first intention of the cure: how must we proceed to finish
it?


Stud. After the first two or three days as aforesaid, we leave our digestiues
(unless there be great pain and dolor) and proceed to other medicines, and so
apply this unguent: Rec. Vngnent. Regis iij. mellis rosacei. j. terehinthiuae
lotae ss Pulueris myrrhae, corticis thuris, sacocoilae, ireos singul. Drag. ss
olei hiperici aliquantum, fiat unguent. With which we must dress the wound:
always provided, that we apply a piece of red sarsnat between the Crassa
meninx and the Cranium: but when the mennix shall be covered, we may use the
powder of myrrh, Aloes, thus, mastich, and sarcocol mixed together; as for
example: Rec. Kad aristoloch iridi, slorent. corticis thuris, sarcocol. sangu.
Draconis sing. Drag. j. Nucis cupressi, myrti sing. Dra. ss centaurij minoris
Scr j. coralli Scr. ij farinae orobs Dra. j fiat puiuis tenuissimus: which must
be applied with the linaments and Emplast. de betonica laid over, or else
Emplostrum de caprifol. of which I will speak afterward.


Doct. But what if the crassa meninx tumisie and swell, and arise through the
passage made by the trepan? what remedy have we for that?


Stud. Then we apply oleum de uiteslis auorum, and a piece of linen or a
sponge dipped in a decoction of roses, camomel, and melilot: but if there be an
excresence of flesh, then we apply upon the same Alumen vstum, or puluis
mercury praecip or hermodact. or else unguentum apostotorum; but the best
medicine to cleanse the wounds of the head, is mell rosarium mixed with
aquavitae, terebinthin, or the oil thereof, with the powder of sarcocol, and
gran. tinctorum, as much as shall be thought meet; but that which is more
gentle is framed of melros. ij farinae hordei j sarcocol. drag. ij vitello oui,
and oleorosato. But when there is but a small contufion without a wound and the
scul not fractured, the head is first to be shaven, and then fomented with
oil of roses warmed, upon which shall be sprinkled the powder of mirtles, and
so remain for that day, and the next day shall be applied this cataplasme
following:

Rec. pulueris myrti j. nucum cupressi, sumach Balanst. rossing. drag. ij. olei
ros. vel camon, quantu^ sufficit: make a cataplasme which is also profitable to
a contusion, with a small fracture in the scull, or where the same is suspected.
It shall be sufficient to resolve and discuss, if in the end we add
squinantium, absynthium, lentium, farinam fabar. for then we have an excellent
medicine, both to discuss and strengthen: neither in the mean time must be
pretermitted. Reuulsions and Diriuations, with the opening of a vein, and
applying of cuppings if need shall require. Sometimes also through a co^tusion,
the scull is rather depressed then fracture, as may be often seen in children
by reason of their tenderness.


Doct. How do you proceed then?


Stu. Then we do apply this Emplaster.

Rec. Cerce nouaesordidae and mellis communisan. iij. lapidis magnetis ss.
lapidis pumicis drag. iij. absinthij. cumlui^, sulpher. sing. Drag. salis j.
furfur's P. j. vin^ optimi iiij. mix them and make an emplaster which shall be
applied hot, the head being shaven in that place where the depression is, and
so let it rest for 15. days. It has a marvelous virtue in raising up, and
reducing the scull that is depressed: or else this emplaster following:

Rec. Mellis communis lib. ss fermenti lib. j. furfuris drag. ij. salis ss
cuniut, absinthij sing. iiij. fiat Emplastrum, which must be applied as
aforesaid.


Doct. But sometimes it happens that the head is grown very weak, by reason
of the wound, so that it receives many excrements, and sometimes 40. days
after there happens inflammations, and other symptoms, yea and death also:
what shall be done in that case.


Stud. Then toward the end of the cure (not in the beginning) we administer
this decoction following, which makes the humor thin, and auoideth it by vrin.

Rec. Raa Graminis Rusct, Asparagi, and feniculi, sing. ij. fol. beton.
scorphil. philipend pilosel, sing. M. j. Rad. ireos and aristoloch an.. j
chamed. M. ss sem. halicacabi, aloecengi nu^cupant ss sem. milij solis drag.
ij. seminis anisi j. quatuor sem. frigid. maioru^ sing. drag. vj. florum
stachaa. and ros. sing. P. j. macerontur diem and noctem in libris iiij. vini
albi and aquae, and coquantur, addendo mellis lib. v. then strain it, and let
it be aromatized with cinamo^, and let the Patient take thereof iiij. in the
morning, and so much at the entrance into bed for the space of 9. days.

And here I cannot but reprehend the error of some Chirurgions, which in a small
sissure or rifit in the scul, although it does not penetrate, will presently
apply the trepa^, and look how much of the scul he does take away, so much the
more he glories, as if he had performed some great and excellent matter.

The most part are so blind and ignorant in their operations, that they
perceive not that they protract the cure by the same application; and withal,
they bring to the sick manifold symptoms, by reason of the air offending the
brain, and finally they bring death to the Patient. But as I have said before,
when the wou^d is large enough, so that the matter may be freely avoided, there
shall be no other need of section, but to remove the sharp spells, and splinters
of bones, and other things which are against nature.


Doct. I will now end my discourse with you in fractures and dislocations: tell
me how many intentions be there in the curing of a fracture?


Stud. There be four scopes or intentions in the curing of a fracture: the
first is, that we reduce the parts of the bone fractured into its natural
form: the second is, that being so reduced, they may so remain, being laid
straight without removing: the third is, that the broken bone being reunited,
may be adglutinated with Callos: the fourth is, that we defend the part from
symptoms, and accidents which do usually happen.


Doct. When the bones are reduced into their form, what must we do first?


Stud. Then we apply a defensive for certain days, of oil of roses, and
mirtles, of each a like, with the white of an egg.


Doct. What afterward?


Stud. Then we comfort the member with that cerot described by Vigo, whose
description is as follows. Rec. Olei myrtini, olei rosati, omphacini an. lib.
ss succi radicis althoae lib. ij. Rad. fraxini and foliorum eius, Rad. Zymphiti
minoris and fol. mirthi. fol. salicis an. M. i. j. bulliant omnia aliquantulum
contusa in vini nigri, and aquae aequals mensura ad medias, cum mirrhae, thuris
ana Drag. ss colaturae add seu^ hircini liquefacti lib. j. ss terebinthin: ij.
mastiohis drag. j. bulliant ad consumptionem decoctionis. Colaturae add
lithargirij auri and argenti an. iij. boli Armeni triti terrae sigillat. an. ij
nonis drag. X. coquantur lento igne and conunuo agitentur spatula, and fiat
cerotum cum cera.


Doct. It is very good; I have known that cerot to have helped many: but is
this all the order that is to be observed in fractures?


Stud. I truly, so that first we be careful in placing and reducing the bones
into their right seat: secondly, that we defend the member from defluxtion of
humors and infla^mation: and thirdly, as I have said, that we comfort the same
part fractured.


Doct. Are there any herbs that have an hidden property to cure Fractures?


Stud. Sophia, as well crude as decocted does that, so does Radix Symphiti
boiled in wine, and applied, cause a callos, and Aristolochia and Serpentaria.


FINIS.
A Definition of all those Diseases that do chiefly affect the body of man. And
first of the head, De Apopiexia.
APoplexia, is a disease, wherein the fountain and original of all the
sinews are affected, whereby every part of the body does suddenly lose both
moving and sense. It is caused of a phlegmatic humor that is cold, gross, and
tough; which does at one time abundantly fill the ventricles of the brain;
which humor overmuch crudittie and drunkenness does engender: somrimes it is
caused by a fall or a blow, which does shake and bruise the brain, and so
causes humors to flow thither. Also a very cold air, which does thicken and
congeale the humidities and excrements of the brain: it may come also of a
grosle melancholic humor.

Paralysis, or Resolutio, in English the Palsy, it is a disease wherein the one
half of the body, either the right side, or the left does lose both sense and
moving, and then it is called general: also sometime the palsy chances in
one member only, as in the hand, the leg, or the tongue, and such like, and
then it is particular: but we must note, that whereas in the Palsy sometimes
sense only is lost, and sometimes moving alone, and sometimes both sense and
moving, it is especially called Resolution of the sinews or palsy: this
disease is caused through abundance of gross and clammy humors which stop the
sinews, and hunder the animal faculty, that it cannot come from the
fountain of the members. It may also be caused through immoderate cold. It may
be caused also by an inflammation, or some scirrbus chauncing in the back
bone, or in parts nigh adjoining, or in other sinew parts whereby the sinews
are crushed and pressed, and so stopped that the animal faculty cannot pass:
sometimes it is caused through a Fever, and is chiefly engendered of melancholy
occupying the mind, and changing the temperature of it. It is caused three kind
of ways, for sometimes it is caused of melancholy it self, sometimes by the
alteration of the blood in the brain, and lastly it may spring through
insla^mation and evil affect about the stomach and sides; as for the signs
they are many, as fearefulnes, sadness, hatred, strange imaginations, and such
like.

Vertigo or Scotoma, is a disease wherein the Patient does imagine that his
head is turned round about. There is another disease not much unlike unto the
same, which is called tenebricosa vertigo, and then the Patient does think,
that all that he sees turns round, and so dainly his sight does fail him,
supposing that he is encompassed about with mist and darkness, and that is it
which the Physicians do call Scotoma. It is caused through the brain it self,
being either distempered or evil affected, or of the mouth of the stomach,
offending the brain.

Ephialtes, or incubus, it is a disease, whereas one thinks himself in the
night to be oppressed with a great weight, and does believe that something
does come upon him, and lying heavy upon his stomach, so that the Patient does
think himself strangled: it is called in English the Mare; and is caused of
excess of drinking, and evil diet, by which proceeds cruditie, and rawnesse
of the stomach, from whence do ascend gross vapors, and cold, filling the
ventricles of the brain, and so do let the faculties of the brain to be
dispersed by the sinews.

Epilepsia, called also morbus comitialis, morbus sacer, morbus herculens, and
morbus lunaticus: it is a conuulsion, drawing and stretching all the whole
parts of the body, with hurt of the mind and sense.

There be three differences in this sickness or disease, the first is, when
it is caused from cephalalgia, as an vninersall pain of the head; the Arabicks
do call it soda, and it does contain under it as well cephalia as hemicrania.
It proceeds either of the primary affect of the head, or by the consent of
some other member, or by both; but the matter of the disease, is either blood,
choler, phlegm, or melancholy, or else sometimes vapors arising from the same.

Achor, or Furfur, it is a kind of vlceration of the head like a scurffe, or
dandruffe and is like unto branne or oatmeale. It springs through too much
humiditie and moistnes of the brain, and sometimes through melancholy, or some
salt humor: it is not much different from Fauus, which is also a kind of scaly
matter in the head.

Phrenitis, or Frenisis, is the Frenzy or madness: some affirm that it is bred
in the pellicles of the brain, called Pia matter, either by inflammation, or
impostumation: it causes alienation of the mind, and loss of memory. There
is an other kind of Frenzy, which does follow as accidents of some disease, as
with a Fever, the Plurifie, and such like.

Lethargus, (...), an other disease which does take his name from the
forgetfulness of all things. It happens with the alienation of the mind, and a
sleepines not to be resisted. It is caused of phlegm which cools the brain
overmuch, and moistneth it, and thereby does provoke sleep: it is derived of
Lethe oblivion, and of argos hebetudo, that is, dull oblivion.

Caros, or subeth is a deprivation of a man's sense and motion. It does differ
from Lethargus, because that those that be affected with the Lethargre will
answer to a question demanded; but those that are affected with this disease,
are occupied with a deep sleep; and if they be stirred or pricked, although
they feel, yet they will say nothing, nor once open their eyes. It is caused
of a cold gross and viscous phlegmatic humor, filling the brain.

Melancholia, and mania, is an alienation of the mind, troubling reason, and
waxing foolish, so that the Patient is almost besides himself. It does come
without a wound, or an ulcer, either in the brain, or in the marrow of the
back, or in any particular sinews.

Torturaoris, called of Almansor contractio: it is untruly named the palsy,
for it is more nearer a crampe, for because it does contract the sinews of
those parts. The chief cause of this disease springs as of that of the
Palsy, or else of cold, or some angry passion.

Spasmus, or conuulsio, in English the Crampe, it is a disease in the which the
sinews are drawn and plucked up against ones will: there be of it three
kinds; the first is called by the Latins Distentio, and is when the neck does
remain altogether immovable, and cannot be turned any way, but must be
holden right forth: the second is called in Latin Tensio ad anteriora; in this
disease, the head and the neck be drawn down to the breast: the third is
called tensio ad posterioria; in this disease the head is drawn down backward
to the back and the shoulders.

The causes by Hippocrates are said to be two, that is, fulness and emptines of
the sinews in the body, and sometimes it does come with the biting or stinging
of some venomous beast: some are also of opinion, that the extraordinary use of
Venerie, and used upon a full stomach may cause this desease: also debilitie
and weakness, and the want of blood, may be an occasion of this disease.

Catarrhus, is a distillation of some rheumatick matter, unto the lower parts;
as when it does descend to the nostrels, and cause oppilation, it is called
Coryza; or when it does descend to the parts of the throat, it is called
Branchus; or when it does descend unto the breast, or to the lungs, then it is
called the catarrh: from whence this verse does arise:

Si fluit ad pectus Rheuma, tuicc dico catarrhu^: Ad fances, branchon, ad nares
dico coryzam.

The catarrh is also caused either through some outward coldness, or heat,
sometimes by euaporation of meats, sometimes by the smell and odor of hot and
cold things, by the immoderate use of Venerie, oucrmuch sleep, violent
exercise, or too much rest or repletion.

There are many other diseases which do spring from the brain, as palpitatio
membrorum, tremor, and stnpor, with such other like, which for breuities sake I
do omit.

CHAP. II.
Of the affects of the eyes.

THe affects of the eyes are opthalmia, the cataract, lippitudo, leucoma,
glaucoma, Aegilops, suffusiones, and such like.

The opthalmia is an inflammation, or an hot impostume in the eye. It is caused
of some distillation from the brain, or else of the corruption of blood mixed
with choler, and sometimes accidentally by a stripe, or blow, the smoke, dust,
the sun, etc,

The cataract, of some called suffusio, is a disease in which the Patient does
imagine oftentimes that he sees black things: it is a corrupt water, congealed
like a curd, engendered of the humors of the eye, distempered betwixt the
tunicles, and set before the sight of the eye, and the Crystaline humor.

The causes hereof may be a fall, stroke, heat, cold, pain, by whose means
the humor is drawn and gathered together; or the cause may be vapors, and
humors ascending to the brain, and from thence discending to the eyes, which
in process of time, and by reason of cold are changed into water, and in the
end is become thick and congealed.

Lippitudo, bleare-eyes, it is when the under lidde of the eye is subverted.

Rasis does affirm that to be lipitudo when the white of the eye is turned to
redness. It is caused of some salt humor, or of superabundance of rheum, with
corruption of blood.

Leucoma, a kind of web, the which is rooted in and upon the eyes. The cause
is a viscous humor, or some rheumatick matter: sometimes also it may come of a
stripe or bruise.

Glaucoma is used in two senses: for it is taken improperly for a web,
cataracte or spot which is gathered and dried round about the apple of the eye:
but there is a difference between the cataract and Glaucoma; for the cataract
is a collection and an heap of other humors then of those which are natural in
the eye, slowing unto it from some other place: but Glaucoma is properly used
when the crystaline humor is dry and thick, and the color of it is green,
whereupon the eyes seem green or pale.

Aegilops, is a little fistula in the corner of the eye near unto the nose,
out of the which does issue continually phlegm or a thin humor arising of
some former disease, as of anchilops suppurated, but either not speedily
opened, or negligently dressed; or rather it does arise of some slimie matter,
or moist medicines, or the air which has altered and rotted the bone in that
part.

CHAP. III.
Of the diseases of the ears.

DOlor aurium, pain in the ears, is caused of some, through cold taken in
iournying by cold winds: sometimes it is caused of cold bathes, and medicinal
waters; also it does chance to many through hot distemper: sometimes through
inflammation: sometimes sharp and biting humors do cause pain in the ears.

Sovitus aurium, sound and noise of the cares, is for the most part engendered
of a windy vapor, or of gross and clammy humors: sometimes it is caused
through weakness of the members. When it does chance in the recovery of a
disease, some humor is taken into the sinews of the cares; it may be caused
also of outward things, as of cold, heat, or a blow on the head.

Surditas and grauis auditus, deafnes and slow hearing: it does begin sometimes
at ones birth, and sometimes afterward, which does chance either through
choleric humors flying upwards, or through crude and gross humors stopping
the hearing.

Parotides, be inflammations which are wont to issue out in the kernels which
be by the ears. It is caused of abundance of hot blood, which is either mixed
with choler, or phlegm, or melancholy: and sometimes it is caused of humors
compact in the head; and sometimes of the rest of the body by sickness, and
especially by fevers.

CHAP. IIII.
Of diseases of the nose.

OZenae, are certain ulcers in the nose that be deep and rotten, out of the
which does breath a loathsome and stinking savor: the cause is sharp and
rotten humors, which flow to the nostrils.

Profluuio sanguinis ex naribus, flux of blood at the nose is caused by a two
fold means, as internal and external: external as some fall, a stripe,
vehement exercise and tarying in the sun. Inward causes, as plenty of blood,
or thinnes of the same, and sometimes great drinking of wine.

Polypus, is a fleshie matter growing in the nostrils, like unto a kind of
caruncle. Hippocrates does affirm, that it is incurable: sometimes it is
caused through gross humors descending to the nostrils, and sometimes it
arises through a melancholicke humor.

Coryza. Read before in the description of Catarrhus.

CHAP. V.
Of the affects of the mouth and teeth.

Foetor oris, stinking of the mouth: it is caused for the most part through
putrefaction of the gummes or teeth, or through meat sticking still in the
teeth: many times it comes through hot distemper of the skin of the
mouth: sometimes also through corrupt and rotten humors sticking in the mouth
of the stomach: sometimes vlceration of the mouth or lungs, is the occasion of
the stinking of the breath.

Acola, and apthe, are certain ulcers bredde in the uppermost part of the
mouth, and have a certain burning heat: some are whitish, and some are of a red
color, and some are black, and they are the most perilous: they engender for
the most part in infants and sucking children, when either the nurses milk is
naught, or the child cannot well digest it. These ulcers sometimes chance to
them that be of perfect age, as well through great flux of vicious and corrupt
humors to the mouth, as also through sharpnes of those things that are eaten
and drunk.

Dolor Dentium, the toothache: it is caused sometimes through hot or cold
distemper: sometimes through flowing, of humors out of the head unto the
roots of the teeth; which through their sharpenes either do gnaw about them,
or else with their abundance they engender grief in the teeth: as if
inflammation be about the fleshy parts. Pain in the teeth is sometimes without
inflammation of the gummes: sometimes in the sinew wherein the roots be
planted.

Dentes denigrati and molles: teeth that be black and loose, happen through the
flowing of vicious humors, and sometimes through a stripe or fall: sometimes
through flowing of moisture, which does loose the sinews and ligaments, and so
does make the teeth loose; or else gnawing and weakness of the gummes in which
the teeth are set, are the cause of loosenes.

There are many other infirmities of the teeth and mouth; as Apostumes in the
tongue, inflammations, chaps, and such like, ulcers of the gummes, with the
excrescence of flesh: all which I ouerpasse for breuities sake.

CHAP. VI.
Of the affects of those parts that serve to the voice.

TVmer vnulae, the swelling of the vuula: sometimes the vuula is inflamed, and
sometimes it falls down. It is caused either of rheum, or else of some hot
humor; but if the vuula do fall, it does proceed either through great labor,
or heat, or else through great sickness or weakness.

Squinantia or angina, it is an Apostume of the throat. Hippocrates in 3. prog.
17. describes four kinds, and Celsus does approve but three kinds; and the
first kind does seldom appear outward, and for the most part is mortal: the
three other be not so dangerous. It is caused through some flux of humors that
do descend from the head to the throat; and sometimes it does come through
euaporations, ascending from the stomach to the throat.

Bocium, the Greeks call it Bronchocelen, the Latins call it Hernia gutturis:
it is a great round tumor in the throat: it setleth it self between the skin
and the sharp Artery, in the which sometimes gross flesh is included, as it
were a kind of humor like unto honey, fatness, or like to cheese and eggs
sodden together.

Tonsillarum inflammatio, the inflammation of the Tonsils: some do call them
amygdalae, the Almonds; they are often times inflamed, for their places are
hot and moist. Those which are most vexed with this evil, have abundance of
blood, and children and infants which do suck, through the drawing of the
milk: sometimes it happens to men and women by the drinking of strong wines,
and through greedy devouring of meat; especially if they be eager or sharp:
sometimes there are vlcerations of the Tonsils, which happens unto those that
do abound with vicious humors.

CHAP. VII.
Of the affects which are incident unto the breast and lungs.

OF the Catarrhe we have already spoken of, in the infirmities of the head.

Tussis, the cough: Galen in lib. 1. cap. 2. de symptomatum causis, does
affirm, that a cold distemper of the instrument of breathing, to be the cause
of the cough. Also a humor distilling from the head to the trachoea arteria,
and sharpnes only of the upper skin of trachaea arteria going about within,
does provoke the cough: sometimes it is caused through cold or phlegm,
descending upon the lungs: sometimes it happens through heat, dissoluing the
superfluous matter of the brain and so through a catarrhall distillation the
cough is excited.

Asthma, is a disease in the which the patient has difficulty of breathing;
and it is caused when as gross and clammie humors in abundance be gotten into
the gristles and lappats of the lungs; or when as there is some swelling, like
unto a botch: sometimes a pestilent air, and the fumes of quick silver may be
the cause.

The disease has a threefold division; for first when it is but small, and
that there is no danger of suffocation, at is called Dyspnaea: secondly, when
it does grow more vehement, and that the patient cannot breath without
wheesing or difficulty, it is called Asthma: thirdly, when the patient is not
able to lie in his bed for fear of swounding, or suffocating, it is then
called Orthopnaae.

Pleuritis, the Plurisie, or Laterau dolor. It is an inward inflammation or
apostumation of the upper skin girding the ribs, called Pleura. It is
caused of abundance of hot blood, flowing unnaturally. To the aforesaid upper
skin within there is adjoined difficulty of breathing, the cough, a
continual fever, a vehement pricking pain, and a hard and sharp pulse.

Peripneumonia, is an inflammation of the lungs with a sharp Fever and
difficulty of breathing. It is caused of strong distillations, falling to the
lungs, or else of the Squinancie, or the Asthma, or of the plurisie, or of
other diseases: sometimes a simple inslammation is the cause of this disease.

Sputum sanguinis, spitting of blood. It is caused many times of an outward
cause; as of falling from an high place, or a stroke, or with riding, or
leaping, or of some heavy thing fallen upon the Breast: Sometimes immoderate
cold or heat breaks the veins, as Hippocrates does witness: sometimes
fullness and abundance of naughty blood does gnaw asunder the veins, and
breaks open the heads of them: sometimes also sharp humors falling from the
head to the lungs does gnaw asunder the veins.

Empiema, or suppuratio, it is a spitting of a kind of matters caused when an
apostume or botch, being in the upper skin of those which do girde the
ribs inwardly, or else in some upper skin of the breast; and being broken,
it is shed and powered into the empty place of the breast, which is between
the lungs and the upper skin girding in the ribs. It is sometimes caused
through some eruption of blood; and sometimes through flux of the head and
other parts falling thither, which does sometimes change into the squinancy.

Ptisis, or Tabes, it is an exulceration of the lungs until there follows
spitting of bloody matter. It is caused through a sharp and gnawing humor,
flowing to the lungs from the head. It is caused also through blood and matter
that does remain after the bursting out of it in them that have the Plurisie,
Peripneumonia, or Empiema.

They which have this disease, their flesh does wash away, their eyes are
hollow, they are vexed with a cough, and the fever hectic, they have
difficulty of of breathing, with a pale and swear countenance.

Chap. VIII.
Of the affects of the heart and breasts.

PAlpitatio and tremor cordis is the panting and trembling of the heart: it is
a corrupt motion of the heart, or a stretching out of it against nature: our
modern Physicians do call it Cardiaca. It is caused through some
distemperature or an evil humor which does rest in the celles about the
heart, or else some tumor or swelling against nature: sometimes imbecillitie
and weakness may cause this disease; and sometimes it arises through a
gross melancholicke blood.

Syncope, is a swift failing of the strength, and is caused through much
excretion and avoiding of blood; also throngh infection about the brain and
the heart, causing oppilations; or else through some great sickness: it may
also come through great heat, and sudden cold: it may come through vehement
sweating and other immoderate euacuations: sometimes also fear, dread, and
such like perturbations of the mind may cause swounding.

Chap. IX.
Of the tumor of the Pappes.

THE tumor of the Paps is of manisold causes; for sometimes it proceeds of
cold: sometimes through concretion of milk: sometimes through inflammation:
sometimes through a stroke or blow: sometimes there is an hard tumor which is
cancerus, and does arise of some inward cause, as the stopping of Menstrus,
unnatural melancholy, and such like.

Concretio lactis, curding of milk, is caused through abundance of milk,
which is not drawn forth. It is caused also of some hot distemper, when that
through overmuch heat the thinner part of the milk is digested and
dissolved, and the rest grows together and turns into curds: it may also
be caused of cold which may cause the milk to congeale and turn to curds.

Inflammatio mammarum, the inflammation of the Pappes, is caused of abundance
of hot blood flowing to the Pappes: sometimes through milk curded and turned
to suppuration and matter.

CHAP. X.
Of the affects of the stomach.

DOlor stomachi, pain of the stomach, is caused when naughty, venomous, and
gnawing humors be kept in the stomach, whereby it does chance that through
intolerable gnawing, they cause swounding, which they call stomachica.

Imbecillitas stomachi, weakness of the stomach, is caused through distemper
of the working qualities, without any flowing of humors: sometimes it is
caused of an humor being contained in the bosom and large space of the
stomach, which has power either to heat, or cool, or to moisten, or dry,
or two of these qualities mixed together.

And sometimes also it is caused of an humor stuffed and drowned in the films
and coats of the stomach.

Vomitus and nausea, vomiting and disposition thereunto, proceeds of a
naughty and wicked motion of the expulsive faculty of the stomach. It is
caused of a vicious humor contained in the stomach, being either hot or
cold: which humor either swimmeth in the concauity and hollownes of the
stomach; or it is stuffed in the filmes thereof, cleaving like bird-lime:
sometimes great exercise after meats, sailing on the seas, and ouer-fat meats
may be the occasion of vomit.

Eructatio, belching, is caused either of ventositie, or of some sharp and
four humor: sometimes it proceeds of an hot cause, and that is perceived
when either there is bitterness in the mouth, inflammation, thirst, or that
the patient receives remedy by cold causes, as Gal. affirms, Si a materia
calida sunt cum siti si a frigida cum fame.

Singultus, yelking or hicket, is a motion of the stomach, as it were a crampe
raised of the expulsive faculty, which goes about to expulse evil and
hurtful things. It is caused for the most part either of fullness or
emptiness, as is affirmed by Hippocrates: also sometime it is caused through
the biting and gnawing of sharp humors: also coldness of the mouth of the
stomach, is oftentimes the cause of yelking: sometimes it is engendered in
fevers, when either the stomach or some other bowel is inflamed.

Sitis, thirst, has a two fold cause: the one is through want of moisture, and
partly through abundance of heat; also through much drinking of old strong
wine: sometimes it is caused through salt humors, or eating of very salt
meats: and sometimes the stomach is dried by the consent of the whole body, as
it happens in burning Fevers.

CHAP. XI.
Of the affects of the liver and spleen.

Imbecillitas Iecinoris, weakness of the liver, is caused of distemper, either
hot, cold, moist or dry: a hot distemper does burn up, as well the humors
which were before in the liver, as also those humors which are carried to the
liver, by the veins mesenterij.

But cold distemper does make the phlegmatic and raw humor, which is already
contained in the liver, tough and hard to be moved, and the humors that be
carried to the liver, it does leave them half digested.

A dry distemper does make the humors drier, and thitker.

Moist distemper does make the humors thin, and more watery, therefore those
which have a weak faculty of the liver, are called Hepatici.

Obstructio Iecinoris, obstruction and stopping of the liver, is caused of
vapors and windiness, hard to digest: sometimes it is caused of gross and
viscous humors in the ends of the veins, springing from the flat part of the
liver, by which veins, nourishment is sent from the stomach and bowels to the
liver.

Inflammatio Iecinoris, Inflammation of the liver, is caused as other
inflammations in other members.

Apostema hepatis, the Apostume of the liver, has a twofold cause, as
external, and internal: external, as a fall, bruise, and such like; internal,
as gluttony, indigestion of the stomach, weakness of the virtue digestive of the
liver, humors gathered together in the liver: sometimes it happens through
inperfect clensing of the gall, spleen, raines, and intestines.

Scirrhus lienis, hardness of the spleen, it is caused of a certain humor,
which cleaves stubbornly to the spleen: and sometimes it happens after an
infla^mation of the spleen, if it be not rightly cured.

Obstructio lienis, stoppings of the spleen, is not caused only of the
weakness of the attractiue virtue which is in the spleen, but also through
stopping of the passage, by which the dregs of melancholy are derived from
the liver unto the spleen; by which means, the same vnpure excrements of blood
are dispersed into all the parts of the body, which causes a kind of corrupt
and unnatural color in the whole body, which does incline to blacknes; and
if there be not speedy remedy, there does not only follow the black
Iaundes, but also that same most dangerous disease called Scorbutus, after the
which do follow most dangerous and incurable ulcers.

Scorbutus, the Scuruie, is caused through obstruction of the spleen, whereby
the course and passage of melancholy is hindered, which being mingled with the
rest of the blood, infecteth all the body, with vile wasting corruption; the
gross part whereof falling down, staineth the legs with spots like unto the
color of pomgranets; and the thinner part being carried up, does defile the
gums, with sharp, fretting, and loathsome growing out of the flesh. This very
disease is thought to be that which Pliny makes mention of in lib. 25. of his
natural history, calling it stomacaco, and sceletyrbe.

Icteritia, the Iaundes, which is a sheding of yellow choler, or melancholy all
over the body: sometimes there chances shedding of choler to the skin, the
liver being safe, as in the crisis of diseases: many times the iaundes is
caused, and does chance when the blood is corrupted, without a Fever, of some
external cause, as it falls out by the biting of some venomous beast. Also
it may be caused through inflammation or change of the natural temperament of
the liver. Sometimes it is caused through weakness of the bladder, that receives
the choler, which does not draw it from the liver unto him, and so does leave
the blood vnpure: also sometimes it is caused through obstruction and weakness
of the vessels, whose mouths are derived from the gall to the liver, and for
that cause cannot draw the choleric humor. Sometimes it is caused through
obstruction of the passages that do go to the bowels.

Cacexia, evil state of body, which is a waterish disposition of the whole
body, whereby it waxes loose and soft, it is engendered for the most part, of
some long sickness, after the scirrsosyti and hardness of the liver and spleen.

Hydrops, the dropsy: there are 3. kinds of them, the first is called Ascites,
the second Tympanites, and the third is called Anasarca, yposarca, Sarcites,
and Leucophlegmatia. Ascites is when much watery humor is heaped up between
the skin, or filme called Peritoneum and the bowels. Tympanites is when much
windines and superfluous vapor is gathered in the aforesaid places of the
belly. Anasarca is when the humor is dispersed throughout the whole body, that
all the flesh does appear altogether moist and wet like a sponge. The dropsy
is caused through great coldness of the liver, or through other parts overmuch
cooled, which does bring the liver into the same affect. The liver is affected
through the spleen, being cold, and by the stomach and the bowels; also by the
lungs, the raines, and the midrisse; also it does chance through unmeasurable
avoiding of the haemorrhoas, or through womans flux, or retention of the
menstrus, or through some other great affect of the womb. Some fall into the
dropsy after the gout, and the great pain called Sciatia: and sometimes also
the dropsy does follow the Iaundes; but howsoever, it is the coldness of the
liver, and weakness thereof, that does cause the dropsy.

CHAP. XII.
Of the affects of the belly and intestines.

DIarrhea, is a great flux of the womb, without exulceration, and inflammation.
It is caused through weakness of the instruments that serve to digestion, also
through abundance of nourishment, and meat that is moist and viscous, and
through corrupting of the same meat. Moreover, gnawing and biting of those
things that are contained in the bellic: also flowing of some things from above
to the belly, and also weakness of the retentiue virtue.

Lienteria, is a certain lightness, or smoothnes of the bowels, or a flux of
the belly, in which those things that are eaten and drunk are avoided, even in
the fame order that they were received, that is, before it be changed or
digested: it is caused often times through a grievous flux, Dysenteria
preceding, which causes deep exulceration of the bowels: also sometimes it is
caused through weakness of the virtue retentiue, for being weakened, the meats
be neither digested, nor distributed, but they are cast forth crude, moist,
and nothing changed: also sometimes it does engender after long flux of the
womb: sometimes also when dropsy water is avoided by the belly.

Dysenteria, is an exulceratio^ of the bowels, the Latins call it tormina,
because through it the bowels are tormented and fretted very much with pain:
there is joined with this infla^mation and excretio^ of bloody matter, and
dreggie; the belly and the intestines are vexed with grief. Gordonius says,
that it is a bloody flux, with excoriation, and exulceration of the intestines.
It is caused through exulceration of the bowels, also through drinking of
naughty medicines, as scamonie and such like; also through eating of fruit,
and sower meats, or through sharp and gnawing humors flowing, from the whole
body to the belly, or ingendered in the belly it self.

Tenasmus, is a continual desire to go to the stool or siege, which the
Patient cannot avoid, and yet there is no excrements avoided, except it be a
little blood, or filthy matter, like unto sniuel. It is oftentimes caused
through cold, or sharp and choleric humors, or salt slegme, or impostumation,
or inflammation engendered in the rectum intestinum: sometimes excrements baked
in the blind gutte, do cause Tenasmus.

Colica passio, the cholich or pain which is bred in the gut called colon: it
is caused many ways; for sometimes it is engendered through gross and
slegmatick humors fallen down within the thin skin of the gut colon. Also
sometimes through windines, which may not go out. Sometimes it is engendered
through sharp and gnawing humors, which do afflict the foresaid bowels
vehemently. Sometimes the baking of the excrements in the intestines, is the
cause of that grief.

Iliaca passio, the Iliac passion is a disease, causing most grievous pain in
the small guts: this disease is called of the Latins Voluuius and
Conuoluulus. It is caused through continual corruption and crudity of meats,
but especially of fat meats, which do engender obstructions in the small
guts; also vehement cold, restraining and withholding of the excrements.

In like manner much drinking of cold things; especially if it be taken when
they sweat.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the affects of the reins and bladder.

MIctus sanguinis, pissing of blood, is caused through weakness of the reins
which be not able to divide the urine. Sometimes blood is pissed forth through
breaking of a vein in the reins, as sometimes it does happen to those that
have lifted some great weight, or leapt violently, or fallen from some high
place. Sometimes it does chance through gnawing of the veins of some sharp
humors flowing from above.

Renum inflammatio, inflammation of the reins. It is caused through corrupt
humors and medicines that do engender inflammation of the reins, and
especially continual and vehement ridings.

Calculus renum the stone in the reins, is caused through continual crudity
and rawnes of the stomach, whereby abundance of gross and earthy humors are
heaped together, and burning of fiery heat about the reins parcheth the
humors, and so baketh them together, and hardneth them into a stone.

Diabetes, is a continual disease about the reins, causing much thirst; and
also whatsoever is drunk, even as it is taken, is pissed out again. It is
caused of weakness of the retentiue faculty of the reins; but there is such
strength of the attractiue virtue, that it sucketh from the whole body through
immoderate heat. The patient is troubled with a marucilous thirst, neither is
it avoided by receiving of any kind of liquor.

Ulcers of the reins is caused through rupture and breaking of the veins in
the reins: also it is caused through rotting of inflammations, and through
sharp and gnawing humors carried into the reins.

Inflammation of the bladder is a most grievous and mortal disease: it
proceeds for the most part as other inflammations.

Stillicidium urinae, the strangurie, is a disease when as the urine does
distill down by drops, or by little and little, and causes a continual
provoking and desire to piss. It is caused through the sharpenes of the urine,
or by the exulceration of the bladder, or by an impostume of the iiuer or the
reins, which being broken does send the filth and matter to the bladder,
through the sharpenes whereof it does cause a continual desire to piss.

Dysuria, is a disease wherein the urine is hardly pissed out. It is caused
through weakness of the bladder, and through a cold distemper, which hurts
the actions thereof. Sometimes it is caused of gross and slegmaticke humors,
which do stop the neck of the bladder.

Iscuria suppressio vrinae, it is a disease in the which the urine of the
patient is altogether let and stopped. It is caused sometimes through
weakness of the bladder: sometimes it chances by the stopping of the nether
passages of the bladder, or of gross humors, or of a stone congealed.
Sometimes it is caused through inflammation, or of or hardness of some swelling
against nature, as the caruncle, and such like; which does make the passage
straiter, or stop it altogether. Also matter sent down from the liver and
reins, or some other place causes stopping of the urine. Sometimes gross and
clammy humors fill up and stop the passage, so that the urine is stopped and
hindered.

Priapismus, is a disease wherein the yard is extended in length and bigness,
without any lust or desire to the act of generation at all. It is caused
either through immoderate opening of the mouth of the Arteries, or of some
vaporous spirit, engendered in the hollow and sistulous sinew. Sometimes this
disease chances to them which have abstained long from carnal copulation
contrary to their custom, especially to those in whom blood does predominate,
and using little or no exercise.

Satyriasis, is a continual erection of the yard, with a desire and appetite
to carnal copulation: the causes are as of that of Priapismus.

Gonorrhaea, is a disease in which the seed or sperme is shed against the
patients will. It is caused through imbecillitie and weakness of the retentiue
virtue in the vessels containing the sperme, or through some other disease that
moves the parts of the vessels of sperme: also sometimes it is caused through
flux of the spermaticke vessels: the seed that comes forth is waterish and
thin, without appetite of carnal copulation and for the most part without
feeling of it: but sometimes it does come forth with a certain pleasure.

There is another kind of Gonorrhaea, which those men are subject unto, whose
liver, reins, and seminary vessels abound with heat: full bodies like to
goats, who in their nightly dreams lying upon their backs, shed forth a
spermatick matter, and effusion offeede: of which the Poet Lucretius speaks:

Irritata tument loca semine, fitque voluptas
Eijcere id quo se contendit dira libido.
Incitat, irritans loca turgida semine multo.
Idque petit corpus, me^ unde est sancia amore.
There is yet another kind of Gonorrhaea, and that is virulent, and is a
symptom that does follow lues venerea.

Ischias, called sciatica, is a grievous pain of the huckle-bone, which the
Greeks call Ischion. It is caused through a gross slegmatick humor, which
being congealed abides in the joint of the huckle-bones.

For which cause crudities and rawnes, with unmeasurable using of venereous
acts must be avoided. Also violent exercises and walkings, with stopping of the
haemorrhodes, with other accustomed euacuations, as the purgation of the
menstrues, and other ordinary exercises may be an occasion of this disease.

Arthrites, weakness and pain in the joints, is engendered of continual
crudities and drunkenness, with the immoderate use of lechery: also through
vehement and swift deambulations, and walkings, through long standing and often
riding, also by suppression and stopping of accustomed excretions, and fluxes,
and of letting slip of accustomed exercises; sorrows, cares, watchings, and
other perturbations of the mind, do not only engender this evil, but do also
breed hurtful and corrupt humors. Sometimes also the colicke is turned into
the gout when it is not well cured.

Thus have I breefly touched those chief diseases that are incident to man's
body. I will now proceed to the definition of fevers, and so draw this book to
an end.

Febris, a fever: the original or matter of a fever in general, is from the
abundance of the four humors, for from the redundance of blood is engendered a
continual fever. From the superfluity of choler is engendered the fever tertian.
From the domination of slegm is engendered the fever called Ephemera or
quotidian; and from melancholy putrisied is engendered a continual quartane.
And generally the Physicians do define a fever to be an unnatural heat kindled
in the heart and liver, distempering the whole body and hurting the same.

Some define a fever to be an unnatural heat kindled in the heart and liver,
distempering the whole body, and does proceed from the spirits and blood by
the artiers and veins into the whole body, and so does hurt and let the
operation of it. This we must note, that there be 3. kinds of simple fevers.

The first is called Ephemera, and does continue but one day, for if he
continue any longer, he is changed into some other kind.

The second is called Putrida, and Humuralis, or rotten fever, and is in the
four principal humors, as blood, choler, phlegm, and melancholy.

The third is Febris hectica, and is in the solid and radical members, and of
all others is most dangerous; for it does consume the natural humidity in man:
that is to say, the blood, and so consequently nature. From these three are
derived al other kinds of Fevers.

FINIS.
The Antidotarie. Pills for Alopecia, proceeding of Phlegm.
Rec.
ALoes Hepatici Diagridij an. Scr. ij. Pulpae colocynthidos Scr. j. Mastiches,
bdellij, an.. ss.


With the juice of wormwood make a mass, of which you may give one dragme, or
half a dragme in three pills, according to the strength of the Patient, after
midnight.

Rec.
An vngueut for alopecia. Euphorbij. Seminis Nasturlij an. Scr. ij. Sulphuris
viui. Ellebori Elleborialbi velnigri, an. Scr. j. Cerae Scr. vj.


Olei laurini Q. S. make an unguent, with the which anoint the place.

Pills for Cephallagia, and pain of the head.
Rec.
Pil. aurearum Scr. ij. Pil. de fumo terrae drag. ss.


Mix them with the sirup of violets, and make v. pills.

And if it chance that the pain do proceed from morbus Galicus, you shall
after the takiug of these pills, take this potion following, for the space of
twenty days together, and so sleep upon it.

Rec.
Decocti ligni guiaci Secundum artem facti. lib. vi. Fol. senae alex. an. M.
ss. Betonicae an. M. ss. Staecados Arab. an. M. ss. Polypodij querc. an. M. ss.
Tu^ bith boni an. Drag. Agarici elect. ij. ss


Mix them, and boil them al together, until the third part be consumed,
then let it be strained; and take of the straining. vj.

Oximellis simplicis Drag. ij.

Let them be mixed for one dose. Let him continue this manner, and there is no
doubt but he shall grow well.

Unguents for achor, and Vlcerations of the head.
Rec.
Sulphuris, foliorum Parietariae. an.. ss Saponis Galici. j.


Mix them with the juice of Parietaria, and make an unguent.

An other.
Rec.
Litargirij. ij. Foliorum rutae virid.. j. Staphisagriae. ss Vitrioli Drag. ij.


Mix them together in a mortar, with vinegre and oil of mirtles, until it
come to an unguent, and there with anoint the place.

A water called aqua Booeoartica, or a water against the Pestilence.
Rec.
Cardui benedicti Radicum cnulae an. j. Zedoriae Imperatoriae Carlinae Diptami
albi Angelicae an.. j. ss. Gentianae Pimpinellae Tormentillae Sandalorum omnium
an. drag. vj. Petasite Serpentariae an.. j. Valeriana. ss.


Let all these be bruised very finely, and then add

Musci optimi Ser. j. and gra. v. Camphorae Scr. ij. and ss Theriacae
Mithridati an.. ij. ss.


Let all be infused for two days in vij. pintes of aqua vitae or of wine
twice distilled, and then let it be distilled in a lembeck, with a gentle
fire, and then will it be a most perfect water against the Pestilence, and other
venom, whose dose is Some make an infusion for 3. or 4. days, making
afterward an expression, and it is more delectable.
ij. ounces, or one ounce and a half, with sorrel water and the water of
Cardu: benedictus, and for a presetuatiue, half a spoonful is enough at a
time.

A distilled water against the falling sickness, called aqua Epileptia.
Rec. Florum lilij conuallij. M. vj.

Infuse them in one measure of the best white wine, and so let it stand for
ten days; then let it be distilled at a gentle fire in a lembeck, in balneo
mariae, afterward take

Florum lauendulae M. j. Florum anthos M. ss. Garyophillorum Scr. ij. Macis
drag. ss. Cubebarum Scr. j. Visei quercini Radicis diptami alb. an. drag. ij.
ss


Let these be infused for four days in the aforesaid distillation, then let
all be distilled again by a lembeck. The dose for preservation is one or two
spoonefuls to be taken once or twice in a week, the day before the new moon,
and the full of the moon, and in or after the Paroxysme or fit, so much also.
And with this water and sugar may be made Manus Christi, against the falling
sickness, caros, subeth, and the Apoplexy.

A distilled water againg the Apoplexy and Palsy.
Rec.
Florum primulae veris. an. M. j. Florum rorismarini. an. M. j. Florum
maioranae. an. M. j. Florum iuae artheticae. an. M. j. Speciarum Diamusciamar.
an.. ss. Diapliris. an.. ss. Diambrae. an.. ss. Confectionis anacardinae.. j.
Cubebarum. Ligni alocs. Nucis Muscatae. Gariophillorum. Macropiperis.
Carpobalsami an. Drag. j. Radicum acori Ireos Aristologiae rotund. an.. j. ss.
Seminum sileris montani, Poeoniae Faemiculian. Drag. j. Aquarum herbae
paralyfis Saluiae. Betonicae an. lib. j. Aquae florum tiliae lib. j. ss.
Serapini, opoponacis Myrrhae Gummi Iuniperi. an. Drag. j. ss.


Let al be bruised and mixed together, and let to stand in infusion for eight
days: afterward let there be a threefold extraction in hot ashes, or by
vapor, or Balneo sicco. It is of marvelous virtue, in the preservation from
the Apoplexy, and all other cold sicknesses of the nerves. It cures the
Palsy, tortura oris, spasmus, and does marueilously restore speech.

A water that does strengthen the memory.
Rec.
Aquarum buglossae Betonicae Florum tiliae an. lib. j. Aquae ardentis opt. lib.
ss. Florum anthos Rosarum rubearum Maioranae Buglossae an M. j. Specierum
confectionis Anacardinae. ij.


A Cordial water.
Rec.
Rosarum rubearum M. ij. Florum Borraginis M. ss. Cinamomi drag. ij. ss.
Xyloaloes drag. j. Spicae Indicae Garyophil. an. drag. ss. Radicum ireos. j.
ss. Ben albi and rubei, an. drag. j. Sandalorum rub. and citri. an. drag. ss.
Corallorum rubeorum drag. j. Corticum citri drag. ss. Seminum ocimi Garyophi
lati drag. ss. Galliae muscatae drag. ij. Margaritarum Scr. ij. Zedoriae drag.
j. Zinziberis albi drag. ss. Camphorae gra. vij. Croci orientalis Scr. ij.
Moschi Scr. ss. Aquae rosarum lib. ij. Vini maluatici lib. ss. Aceti ros. lib.
ss.


Let all be finely bruised and mixed for viij. days, and afterward distilled
in Balnea mariae.

A water against the syncope or swounding.
Rec.
Aquae rosat. lib. ij. Acetirosati lib. j. Maluatici lib. ss. Florum
rorismarinae Maioranae an. Dra j. ss. Zedoariae Dra j. Coriandrorum Scr. ij.
Cubebarum Nucis Muscatae Macis Garyophillorum singl. Dra. ss. Cinamonti Scr.
ij. Ligni aloes Dra. ss. Specierum Diamusci Drag. j. Camphorae Scr. ss. Ambrae
Gran. iiij.


Let all be bruised and mixed together with the liquors, and let it infuse
together for four days: then let it be distilled in Balnea Maria. You may
add to these:

Aquarum nympheae Violarum Lauendulae an. ij. Aquae vltae iij.


It is a most effectual remedy astainst swounding in the pestilence.

In like manner three branches of pentiy-royall, infused in two ounces and a
half of vinegar of Roses, and one ounce of Rose water: for only with the
smell of this the spirits are revived.

A restoratiue water.
Take a Capon or Phesant or a Pertridge, the bowels being pulled out, and let
him be cut into small pieces and washed: then with Rose water and vinegar, add
one dragme of Cinnamon.

Of Cloves Ser. ij. Manus Christi Cum perlis. ss. Succiarantiarum ij.
Acetositatis citri iij.


Let all be put into a glass, or into some earthen vessel, and let it be
boiled with a strong fire in Balneamaria, until half beco^sumed; and then
strain it, and preserve it, and drink thereof twice a day.

A Cinnamon water.
We make Cinnamon water either by distillation: the Cinnamon being grossly
bruised, and infused in as much Borrage water, or Rose water as shall suffice,
and so distilled in Bolneamaria.

Or else we take two dragmes of Cinnamon, being finely powdered with sine ounces
of the best sugar, being put into a measure of the water of the decoction of
Barlie, being very hot, and so to remain until it be cold; or else with
three dragmes of Cinnamon, one handful of Barley, Reasons of the sun being
washed, one ounce, Anisseed two drag. of white sugar Candy two ounces and a
half, running water six pints: and so let it be boiled at a gentle fire
until half be consumed, and then strain it.

A water in the opilation of the Liver and Iaundes.
Rec. Caponem Deplumatum.

Et euisceratum being cut into small pieces and boiled, and then bruised with
the flesh and bones in a mortar: then add thereunto

Aquaeviolarum Betonicae Endiuiae Lupulorum Cuscutae Sichorijan.. iij.
Succipomorum Redolentium. iiij. ss. Decoctionis caponis Macri lib. j.
Sandalorum citrimorum Dr. j. Scr. ij. Spodij Drag. j. Cinamomi Dra. ij.
Camphorae Gran. v.


Let all be put into a vessel of tin close stopped, and placed in a vessel of
water, and so boiled for four hours space, then let it be strained, and put
the straining into a Lembecke, and so distilled by Balnea Marinae.

A wine against the oppilation of the liver, spleen, reins, and the evils of
the bladder.
Rec.
Scolopendriae M. vij. Adianti M. iiij. Chamae pyteos M. iij. Roris Marinae M.
ij. ss. Cyperi. ss. Radicis liquiritiaerasae. ij. Rhapontici. j. ss. Passularum
lib. ss. Alkakengi M. iiij. ss.


Let all be put into an earthen vessel well glassed, and being close stopped,
and so let there be put into a piece of fine linen, of

Calamus aromaticus Drag. iij. Gariophillarum Drag. ij.


And so let it hang in the vessel in the midst of the wine for four and
twenty hours: then distill it by filter as we use to distill hipocras, still
letting the Calamus aromaticus, and cloves hang in the vessel.

A wine that is laxatiue.
Rec.
Fumiterrae M. j. Foliorum scolopend. M. ij. Fol. senae alexandr. j. Polypodij
Drag. v. Turbith electi Drag. ij. Cinamomi Drag. j. ss. Garyophillorum Scr.
iiij. Zinziberis Drag. j. Rhabarbari cum scrupulo Vno squinanti in petia.
Ligati Scr. v. Florum violarum Borraginis an. M. ss.


Let all boil in an earthen vessel with three pints of white wine, and so let
it stand for a night; in the morning let it be strained, in which shall be
dissolved four ounces of sine white sugar, one white of an egg, and with ij.
scruples of Cinnamon, and half a dragme of Cloves tied in a piece of fine
linen, in the boiling let it be clarisied. The dose for those that be of ripe
years is iiij. ounces and a half, in which may be dissolved five scruples, or
two dragmes of Diaturbith.

Against the retention of the Menstrus.
Rec.
Baccarum Lauri ss. Roris marini M. ss. Granorum Iuniperi number. xi. Cinamomi
fracti Scr. v. Croci integri in petia ligati Gran. v.


Let all be boiled in one pint and a half of white wine, and let the patient
drink every morning a good draught hot against the time that nature seeks
to expel the matter. In like manner you may take Trochis. de myrrha subt.
pulu. Drag. j. in a cup of white wine being warm, in the morning fasting. Or,

Rec.
Boracis mineralis. Dra. ij. Cassiae ligneae Scr. ij. Croci Graen. iij.


Let al be made into fine powder, and with v. ounces of aqua matricaria. Let it
be given once in a week.

A Diuretic decoction in the stone.
Rec.
Capillorum veneris M. j. ss Crithami marini M. ss. Radicum apij and remorae
an. i. Liquiritiae rasae Drag. ij. Corticum radicis scolymi. j. ss. Seminum
saxifragiae Dra. j. ss. Damasonij Drag. ij. Alcacengi number. xvij. Radicum
graminis Drag. iij.


Let all be cut bruised, and boiled at a gentle fire in three pints and a
half of running water, until the third part be consumed; then make a strong
expression, in which shall be dissolved one ounce and a half of syrup of
Violets, and of fine Rhubarb two ounces: then let it be clarified with the
white of one egg. The dose is iiij. and ss.

A decoction against the strangurie and burning of the Vrin.
Rec.
Flordei integri M. j ss. Liquiritiae Drag. j. Seminum anisi Drag. ij. ss.
Dactilorum incisorum number. v. Sebesten incisorum number. xv.


Let all be boiled in two measures and a half of running water, in an earthen
vessel being glased, until the barley break, then let it be strained, and
take three ounces and a half of this decoction.

Syrupi de papauere. j. Syrupi liquiritiae. ss. Pulueris glandum Drag. j.


Let it be mixed, and given at the entrance into bed.

A Iulep against the Apoplexy and Vertigo.
Rec.
Florum Lauandulae M. j. Violarnm Rosarum Sticados Arabici Origani an. M. ss.
Radicum Poeoniae Acori Pyrethri an.. ss. Squilla Drag. ij. Cubebarum Drag. j.
Cardamomi Cinamoni Gariophillorum an. Scr. j.


Let all be boiled in one pint and a half of Betony water, and one point of
Marioran water, and let it be strained, and with seven ounces of sugar, make a
Iulep according to Art. Or if you will, you may dissolve in your decoction for
your daily use, the syrup of Sticados.

A pectoral Iulep.
Rec.
Cinamomi Scr. iiij. Thymi P. j. Liquiritiae drag. j. ss. Radicumireos drag.
ij. Enulae drag. j. Passularum euucle.. ss.


Let all be boiled in a double vessel, with eight ounces of fennel water,
iij. ounces of hyssop water, half a pint of Scabios water then let it be
strained, and in the straining dissolve 7. ounces of fine sugar.

Cinamomi Scr. ij. Gariophilorum Scr. j. Ireos drag. ss. in


Petia ligati boil the Iulep to a thicknes and with the white of an egg let
it be clarified.

A Cordial Iulep of wine.
Rec.
Vini Rhenensis lib. j. Aquaerosarum. ij. ss. Gariophilorum Contus. Ser. ij.
Cinamomi drag. ss. In petia ligatorum Saccharisim.. iij.


Let it be boiled at a gentle fire, to a thicknes of a clear Iulep, and let
it be given in the morning, and evening, two spoonefuls, against swounding.

A Iulep for the stomach.
Rec.
Foliorum scolopendriae M. iiij. Cuscutae M. ss. Menthae P. j. Galangae
Xyloaloes an. drag. ss. Seminum anisi Scr. ij. Gariophilorum drag. ij. Cinamomi
drag. j. ss. Vini albi lib. j. Aquae absinthij lib. ss. Aquae chamomillae. iij.


Let all be boiled in a double vessel, then let it stand for a night;
afterward make a strong expression, then with v.. of fuger let it be boiled to
the thicknes of a Iulep: it is used in the pain of the stomach, through the
oppilation of the entrals, and from a cold cause.

A Iulep in the intolerable pain of the stomach, and cholick.
Rec.
Conseruae rosarum. j. Opij the baici opij. gr. ij. iusti ponderis Croci
orientalis. gra. iij.


Let it be dissolved in four ounces of chamomel water, and then strained and
drunk three hours before supper. It does extinguish heat and pain of the
stomach and colic without any harm: it does also provoke sleep, especially
if the cause proceeds of heat.

A Iulep for melancholy, a quartan Fever, and the French Pox.
Rec.
Fumiterrae M. j. ss. Scolopendriae Cascutaean. M. ss. Adianti M. j. Foliorum
and folliculor. Senae Drag. vi. Polypody. ss. Corticum myrobalanor. Indorum
Drag. ij. Paffularum enulcat.. j. Florum borraginis Buglossae an. pugil. j.
Epithymi Drag. j. Ellebori nigri Drag. ij. ss. Radicum capparorum Drag. ij.


Let all boil in three pintes of common water, to the consumption of the third
part, then let it stand for two hours, and then make a strong expression,
which shall be afterward twice distilled by filter, then afterward with two
Scr. of cloves, and one dragme, and a half of cinamond tied in a linen cloth,
and with

Sacchari. ij. Syrupi de pomis Velregis sabor.. j. ss.


Let it be boiled to the thicknes of a clear Iulep: the dose is v.. and for
strong bodies there may be in petia ligati

Agarici Drag. j. ss.


Cum duobus scrupulis zinziberis, in the last decoction.

A Iulep for Dysenteria, and the bloody flux.
Rec.
Rosarum rubearum M. ss. Sumach Balaustiarum an. drag. j. ss. Seminum lappatiae
Acutae drag. j. Myrtillorum drag. ij. Antherae drag. ss. Radicum torm^ntillae
drag. ij.


Let it boil for the space of half an hour, in one pint of the water, of the
flowers of the slow tree, and seven ounces of plantane water, then let it stand
eight hours, and make a strong expression, in the which shall be dissolved
one ounce and a half of the juice of plantane being purified, three ounces of
fine white sugar, with two scruples and a half of the powder of nutmegs, and
half a dragme of cloves, tied in a piece of fine linen, and so boiled to the
thicknes of a clear Iulep.

A Iulep for the Sciatica, gout, and pains in the joints.
Rec.
Chamaepyteos M. j. ss. Asari M. j. Betoniae Chamedrios Sticados Arab. an. M.
ss. Capillorum veneris Rutae an. M. j. Turbith alb. gumosi drag. ij. ss.
Polypodij querc.. ss. Foliorum, and folliculorum Senae sine stipitibus drag.
vj. Hermodactilorum drag. iij. Seminum anisi Faniculi an. drag. j. Passularum
enucleat.. j.


Let all boil in three pintes of running water, until the third part be
consumed; then let it stand for an hour, and make a strong expression, which
shall be twice distilled by filter, in which at the last shall be put of

Agarick Scr. iiij. Zinziberis Scr. v. Caryophilorum Scr. ij. ss.


Being bruised and tied in a piece of linen, with three ounces of fine white
sugar, and so again boiled to the thicknes of a clear Iulep: the dose is. v.

A powder against poison, and the Pestilence.
Rec.
Zedoariae Euphorbij Corallinae Tormentillae Gentianae Diptami vulgaris Terrae
sigillatae Boli armeni Corallorum rubeorum and alborum Spicaenardi Masticis
Herbaegaryophillatae Centaurij minoris Sandalorum rubeorum Ossis de cord cerui
Camphorae an. parts equales


Let all be made into fine powder, of which give one dragme with the water of
sorrel, or of wine and sorrel boiled together.

An experimented powder, in the fit of the falling sickness.
Rec.
Seminum nigellae Scr. j. gra. v. Maioranae gra. vj. Nucis muscatae Radicum
poeoniae Mumiae an. Scr. ss


Make all into fine powder, and let it be blown up into his nostrels.

For the Vertigo, Palsy, Apoplexy, Scotoma, and for the memory lost.

Rec.
Radicum acor^ Pyrethri Poeonia an. Drag. j. ss. Galanga Costi an. Drag. ss.
Cileris montani Drag. ij. Roris marini Drag. j. ss. Florum saluiae Lauendulae
Betonicae an. Scr. j. ss. Cubebarum Cardamomi Baccarum lauri an. Scr. ij. Macis
Scr j. Nucis muscatae Ganyrphillorum an. Drag. ss. Cinamomi Drag. j. Sticados
Arab. Foliorum rutae an. P. j. Seminum amisi Sem. faeniculi Ameos Caruian. Scr.
ss. Piperis longi Carpobalzami an. Scr. j.


Let all be mixed and made into a fine powder, and with sugar dissolved in the
waters of maioram and sage, make Lozenges, or with the syrup of sticados, or
honey clarified, you may make an Electurie.

Lozenges for the same.
Rec.
Specierum Diambrae scr. iiij Cinamomi Drag. j. Garyophillorum scr. j. Musci
gra. j. Ambrae gra. ij. Cubebarum scr. ss. Pinearum praeparatarum Drag. iij.
Sacchari. iij. ss.


All being made into fine powder, and with as much of the Epileptick water
before written, and rose water as much as shall suffice, make Lozenges.

Lozenges comforting the brain, and the heart
Rec.
Ambrae griseae. scr. ij. Cinamomi Drag. ij. Sacchari candi. iij. Aquae rosarum
Q. S. make


Lozenges they are of a most pleasant taste.

Lozenges for pain of the head, singing of the ears, and Vertigo.
Rec.
Nucis muscatae nu^. i. Cimini Seminum anisi Faeniculi Carui Cubebarum Piperis
longi Gary^phillorum an. Drag. i. Pulegij sicc^ Foliorum maioranae an. scr. i.
Specierum diacimini. ss.


Mix all together, and make a fine powder, give one dragme with fennel water:
or with five ounces of sugar, and aqua epilleptica, and rose water, Q. S. make
Lozenges.

A Pectorall confection.
Rec.
Cinamomi Drag. i. ss. Liquiritiae Scr. ij. Thymi P. j. Radicum ireos Scr.
iiij.


Let all be bruised, and let it boil

Cum aqua foeniculi. ij. Scabiosae. j. Rosarum. j. ss.


Then let it stand one quarter of an hour, and strain it, and take so much of
the same straining as shall suffice to dissolve ii.. ss. of white sugar candy,
and of Pennidice j.. and so let it boil to a thicknes, and then mix therein,
of cinnamon in sine powder half a scruple.

Radicumireos Scr. j. Dragaganti alb. Scr. ss. Margaritarum Praparat gra. vi.
Seminis bombicis Enucleati Scr. ss. Fol. aurinum. 4.


And therewith make pectorall roles.

Roles for the cough and Asthma.
Rec.
Pinearum praep. Drag. ij. Radicum ireos Liquiritiae rasae au. Scr. ij.
Dragaganti Drag. ss. Seminum anisi Scr. j. Feniculi Vrticae an. Scr. ss. Rad.
angelicae Drag. ss. Cinamomi Scr. iiij. Storacis calamitae Scr. ss. Sacchari
Penidij and candi an. j. ss


And with the water of Scabios, and fenell, as much as shall suffice, make
roles.

Restoratiue Lozenges.
Rec.
Pinearum praepara. Drag. ij. ss. Fisticorum viridium Drag. ij. Specierum
Diambrae Scr. ij. Cinamonu Drag. ss. Galangae Scr. j. Garyophillorum Drag. ss.
Nucis muscatae Scr. ij. Zinziberis albi Drag. ss. Xiloaloes Scr. ss.


With iiij.. and a half of sugar, dissolved in rose water, with the species
and other things, make a confection in Lozenges.

Lozenges for the oppilation of the Liver, evil state of body, and the Dropsy.
Rec.
Specieru^ aromatici rosati. Drag. j. sc. ss. Specterum Dialaccae Drag. ss.
Macis Scr. j. Squinanti Carui Radicum asari an. scr. ss. Cinamomi scr. iiij.
Sandalorum citrin Rubeorum an. Drag. ss. Cyperi scr. j. Limaturae eboris scr.
j. Fisticorum viridium scr. iiij. Seminum melonum Excorticat. scr. ij.


With vj.. of sugar in the water of Agrimony and roses Q. S. dissolved, make a
confection in Lozenges.

A Tragea for Dysenteria, and the blody Flux.
Rec.
Margaritarum scr. ij. Carabe Xyloaloes an. scr. j. Chermes Garyophillorum an.
Dra. ss. Nucis muscatae Corallornm praeparat an. scr. j.


With one ounce and a half of manus Christi sandalini, being finely powdered,
make Tragea: it is also very good against Abortion.

Manus Christi sandalini.

Rec.
Specierum trium sandalorum dr. j. ss. Margaritarum praep. Scr. ij. Corallorum
amborum an. Scr. j. Seminum mclonum Excorticat. Drag. j. Conseruae rosarum j.
Sacchari in aqua Rosarum dissoluti Q S.


Make a confection in roles; it is good against a hot distemper of the liver
and stomach, and other diseases that spring thereof.

Tragea. Against inuoluntarie pissing.
Rec.
Coriandri Drag. j. Carabae Drag. ss Corallorum rub. Xyloaloes an. scr. j.
Glandium quercus Drag. ij. Nucis muscalae Scr. v. Sandalorum rubeor. Scr. ij.
ss.


With v.. and a half of sugar, make Tragea, and let it be given at the
entrance into bed.

Against the superfluous flux of the Menstrus, and of the womb.
Rec.
Granorum chermes Scr. v. Sandalorum rubeorum Drag. ss. Carabe Scr. j. Nucis
muscatae Scr. ij. Fragmentorum sinaragdi. gra. v.


With three ounces of fine white sugar make Tragea.

Against ache and pain of the ioints.
Rec.
Chamedrios Chamepitheos Gentianae an. Drag. iij. Foliorum rutae siccae. iiij.


Make all into fine powder, this must be administered after euacuation, the body
being well purged, and there is used to be given, one spoonefull in the winter
time with white wine, and in the summer with some distilled water.

Her mes composed the like powder ex

Chamedrios. Gentianae an.. iiij. Aristologiae rotund.. j. Seminum rutae siccoe
lib. ss.


The dose is one spoonefull, with Hydromel. Vide Gal. 14. meth. etc.

Tragea de tartaro.
Rec.
Foliorum senae. j. Tartari albi de vino potenti ss Turbit albi and gummosi^m.
ss Cinamomi Zinziberis an. Dra. ss. Gariophillorum Drag. j. Sacchari. j. Fiat
tragea


A laxatiue powder.
Rec.
Polypodij Scr. ij. Zinziberis Scr. j. Agarici trochiscat Drag. ss Rhabarbari
Drag j. Folliculorum senae Scr. j. Garyophiliorum Turbit Cinamomi an. Dra. ss


Make all this into powder for the delicater sort of people.

For those that be stronger there may be added of Diagridium one scruple. The
dose is one Drag. given in four ounces of Claretum laxatinum.

Laxatiue Lozenges.
Rec.
Foliorum senae mund. scr. ij. ss Cinamomi Zinziberis Garyophillorum an. scr.
ij. Hermodactilorum scr. iiij. Rhabarbari Drag. j. Turbit electi Drag. ij. ss
Diagridij Drag. i. scr. ij. ss Squinantij Gran. v. Galangae Nucis muscatae an.
scr. ss


With eight ounces of sugar dissolved in the water of Endive, make a confection
in Lozenges. The dose is from three Drag. unto six Drag.

An Electuarie against the Epilepsie and vertigo.
Rec.
Diacori j. ss Conseruae maioranae Lauendulae Rorismarini an. j. Conseruae
sticados ss Specierum diambrae scr. v. Caryophillorum Cinamomi Cardamomian.
scr. ij. Cubearum Drag. ss Nucis muscatae Golangae an. Drag. ss Visci quercini
scr. ij. Corallorum rubeorum scr. j.


With sugar dissolved in the water of Lauender, make an Electuarie.

An Electuarie for the conservation of the sight.
Rec.
Conseruae Euphragiae j. ss Conseruae rosarum j Galangae Drag. ss Macis ser.
ij. Cubebarum scr. j. Garyophillorum Drag. j. Cinamomi scr. iiij. Seminum rutae
Faniculi an. Drag. ss Nucis muscatae Scr. ij. Pulpae Chebulorum Conditorum Dra.
iij. Nucis muscatae. Conditae ss


Let all be brought into fine powder and cum Brodio emblicorum conditorum, or
of Ginger condite, make an Elexuatie.

An Electuarie for spitting of blood.
Rec.
Conseruae rosarum vet. ij. ss Betonicae ss Electri albi Scr. iiij. Corollorum
praeparat. Drag. j. ss Cornu cerui vsti Drag. j. ss Gummi Arabici Scr. ij. Rob.
deribes Dra. vi.


With the syrup of purslane, as much as is sufficient make an Electuarie.

An Electuarie for trembling of the heart.
Rec.
Conseruae rosarum iij. Conseruae florum Tunicae j. Conserua melissa ss Specier
um margariti Frigidi Scr. iiij. Galangae Scr. j. Cinamomi Scr. iiij.
Garyopbillorum Scr. ij. Doronici Scr. j. Succini alb. Drag. ss. Nucis muscatae
conditae Drag. ij. Zinziberis conditi ss Corticum citri Pinearum praeparat. an.
Drag. ij. Seminum melonum Drag. j. Manus Christi cum Perlis ss Margaritarum
prap. Gran. v. Foliorum aurinum. iiij.


With the syrup of Acetosus cirri make an Electuarie.

A restoratiue Electuarie.
Rec.
Conseruae rosarum ij. ss Conseruae cichorij ss Sandalorum citrinorum
Xyloaloesan. Scr. ss Galangae Scr. j. Cinamomi Scr. ij. ss Calomi aromatici
Conditi Drag. ij. Radicum cichorij conditi Drag. iij. Zinziberis conditi ss
Fisticorum viridium scr. v. Seminum melonum excort. Dra. j.


With the syrup of the roots of Cichorie condit. make an Electuarie.

A restoratiue Electuarie for those that are hectic, and in a consumption.
Rec. Carnis de pectore perdicis optime Decoctae lib. ss

Which being cut into pieces, let it be well beaten in a stone mortar; then let
there be added.

Cinamomi an. Drag.j. Cardamomi an. Drag.j. Garyophillorum an. Drag.j. Folij
an. Drag.j. Cubebarum. an. Drag.j. Zinziberis an. Drag.j. Draganti an. Drag.j.
Gummi Arabici an. Drag.j. Galangae an. Drag.j. Nucis muscatae an. Drag.j. Croci
an. Drag.j. Maci^an. sor. ij.


Let all be beaten together, then add

Amili. Liquiritiae Pinearum mund. Amygdalarum dulc. Passularum Sebesten
Fisticorum viridium an. ss Incisorum grosso modo Seminum cucurbitae Melonum
Cucumeris. Papaueris albi Lactucae Portulacae an. Drag ij. Penidiarum ij. ss


Let all be mixed together with the flesh in a mortar; then afterward take
Sacchari albissimi lib. iij. ss being dissolved in the broth of a Partridge, or
a fat young Cockrill, and being added to the rest, make an Electuarie.

An other, called Eiectuarium regale.
Rec.
Conseruae rosarum j. Conseruae violarum ss Fisticorum viridium Drag. vi.
Pinearum mund. j. Amygdalarum dulc. ss Galangae Scr. ij. ss Cinamomi
Garyophillorum an. Drag. ij. scr. ss Macis Ligni aloes an. Scr. ij.


And with sugar dissolved in Malmsey. the nuts being finely beaten, make an
Electuarie.

A Loch for the Catarrh, proceeding of an hot cause.
Rec.
Conseruae rosanum recentium iij. Conseruae violarum j. Muscillaginis psilly Et
maluae an. ss Seminum maluae j. Pinearum praep. Dra. iij. ss Fisticorum Dra.
ij. Passularum Drag iij. Seminum melonum Succi liquiritiae an. Drag. ij.
Seminum faeniculi Seminum vrticae an. Drag. j. ss Draganti Gummi Arab. an. sor.
v. Carnem vnius dactili Cinamomi Drag. iij. Rad. ireos Drag. ij. ss


Let all be cut and beaten together, and with syrup of Scabios make a loch.

Rec.
Loch ad catarrhum subtilem. Capillorum veneris M. j. Seminum papauer is albi
ss


Let is be macerated for a night in running water, then let it be strained,
and boil the strayning to the one half, cum Aqua de semini bus psisij.

Cidoniorum Portulacae Dragagantian. Drag. ij. Gummi Arab. Scr. v.


Make a Muscilage, in the which dissolve

Anili Drag. vi. Sacchari candi j. ss


And make a Loch.

An Electuarie for pain of the stomach, proceeding of a cold cause and wind.
Rec.
Conseruae rosarum j. ss Specierum Diagalange Drag j. ss Seminum anisi Carui
an. Scr. ss Caryophillorum Scr. j. Xyloaloes Scr. ss Calami aromatici Conditi
Drag ij. Zinziberis condit. Drag. iij. Cinamomi Drag. ss Seminum melonum Scr.
iiij.


Cum Brodio Zinziberis: make an Electuarie.

For pain of the stomach proceeding of wind.
Rec.
Theriacae Drag. iij. Diptami Drag. ss Amcos Daucian. Gran. vi. Galangae
Garyophillorum an. Scr. j. Lignialoes Corallorum an. Scr. ss Conseruae rosarum
j. Conseruae menthae ss


Make a mixture with the syrup of Mints. There may be added, if need require,
two grains of Opium.

For the oppilation and obstruction of the Liver.
Rec.
Mellis passularum ij. Fisticorum viridium Drag. ij. ss Seminum melonum Scr.
iiij. Cinamomi Drag j. ss Garyophillorum Scr. ij. ss Limaturae eboris
Raccepraep. an. Drag. ss Radicum asari Scr. ij. Cyperi Scr. ss Seminum anisi
Macis an. Scr. j. Cardamomi Squinanti an. Scr. ss Calami aromatici Conditi
Drag. iij. Zinziberis conditi ss Diacalamenti in Rotulis fracti j.


With the syrup of Agrimonie and Calament minus amar. make an Electuary
effectual in Cacexia and Hsposarca.

An Electuary for the dropsy and oppilation of the Liner.
Rec.
Rhabarbari electi Drag. j. Laccaepraeparat. Drag. ij. Xyloaloes Cinamomi
Aristologiae longae an. Dra. ss Passularum enucleat. Fisticorum an. j.
Squinanti Asari an. Dra. j. Croci Scr. ss


With the syrup of Cichorie cum Rhabarbaro, make an Electuarie.

For the supersluous flux of the Menstrues.
Rec.
Athanasiae Nicolai Drag. ss Philonij Persici Scr. iiij. Garyophillorum Nucis
muscatae Cinamomi Smaragdi an. Scr. ss Granorum chermes Scr. j. Cum modico
acetositatis


Citri, make an Electuarie. The dose is from one scruple to two, to be taken
at the entrance into bed with wine of the infusion of Chermes and Sanders.

Pills for the plague.
Rec.
Aloes rasatae Drag. iij. Agarici trociscat. Scr. ij. ss Zedoariae Angelicae
an. Scr. j Garyophillorum Dra. ss Radicum eryngij Scr. ss Rhabarbari Scr. ij.
Croci Smaragdi an. Oran. v. Trochiscorum Alhandal Scr. j.


Cum theriaca in aqua vitae aurea dissoluta fiat massa.

Pillulae de tribus.
Rec.
Aloes Rosati Agarici trociscat.


Rhabarbari an. parts aequal.

Cum syrupo de Rhabarbaro nostro fiat massa.

Pills for the dimnesse of sight and weakness of the brain.
Rec.
Calami aromatici Cubebarum Nucis muscatae Spicae Squinanti Carpobalsami
Epithymi. Macis Masticis Asari Garyophillorum Myrobalanorum citrini an. Drae.
j. Euphragiae Dra. ss Rhabarbari Sor. v. Turbit. Colocy^thidis an. Drag. j. ss
Agarici Drag. ss Aloes Drag. iij. ss


Cum succo faeniculifiat mossa. The dose is from one Dragme to sieve scruples.

Pills against melancholy, and the French Pocks.
Rec.
Eleborinigri Drag. iij. Turbit albi and gummosi Drag. ij. Agarici albiss. Sor.
v. ss Polypodij quere. Epithymi cretens. an. Scr. ij. Dtagridij Drag. ij. ss
Trociscorum alhandal. Drag. j. Specierum hierae simpl. Drag. ij. Garyophillorum
Scr. j.


Let al be incorporated with two Dra. ss of old treacle and a little water of
Fumiterra, and make a mass. The dose is from a Drag. unto sour scruples.

Pills to provoke the Menstrues.
Rec.
Corticum cajsia lignae Myrrhae Cinamomi Aristologiae long. an. Drag. j.
Borracis Scr. ij. Croci Scr. j. Nigellae Drag. ss


Let al be incorporated cum succo sabinae, and given in the water of
penny-royall or Camomell; it is an expert medicine.

Pills against the worms.
Rec.
Aloes Scr. ij. Rhabarbari Myrrhae an. Scr. ss Trociscorum alhandal gran. iij.
Pulueris corallinae Drag. ss


With the juice of Wormwood make ix pills; one scruple is sufficient for a
child.

Trocisci sub lingua in Paralysi.
Rec.
Radicum acori very Drag. j. Pyrethri Scr. ij. Zinziberis Garyophillorum Nucis
muscatae an. Drag. ss Cubebarum Scr. ss


With Sage or water of Lauender make Trocisks of the bigness of a Lupin.

To make oil of Hypericon.
Rec.
Florum hypericonis ante. Solis ortum M. iiij.


Let them be bruised, and boiled in three pints of red wine, almost to the
consumption of the wine. Then let the juice be strained out, and put into a
glassen vessel; and let it stand in the sun for eight days space, and then
ad thereunto,

Olei veteris lib. j Terpentinae. iiij. Succi scabiosae Succi millefolij
Centaurij minoris Agrimonie Barbae siluanae an. ij. Sanguinis humani Rec.nt
extracti iiij. Vermium terrestrium lot. Vino number. xv. Myrrhae Masticis
Sarcrcollae Opoponacis an. Drag. ij.


Let all be mixed together, and boiled to the consumption of the juices.

Oleum ranarum.
Rec.
Ranas maiores excoriatas Cum capitibus number vij. Florum Camomillae M. j.


Let it be boiled in one pint of common oil until the flesh be dissolved from
the bones, then let it be beaten, and adding a little more oil, let it be
again boiled. Then make a strong expression, to the which shall be added of
Turpentine washed iiij. Let it be mixed hot in a mortar one ounce and a half
of this oil, with so much of Vnguentum de succo Ebuli, mixed together, is good
against the gout, pains of the joints, and Nerves.

An oil for the Sciatica and pains of the joints.
Rec.
Petrolei Olei philosophorum Succi Ebuli Terebenthinae an. ss Lumbricorum Drag.
vi. Vini matuatici ss


Boil all together at a gentle sire and anoint the place grieved hot.

Vnguentum de succo Ebuli.
Rec.
Succi radicum ebuli Succi rutae an. iij. Lumbricorum lot. lib. j. Olei
Camomislae lib. ss Olei rosati lib. j.


Let the worms be cut and boiled to the consumption of the juices; then let it
be strained, and add unto the straining

Terebinthinae ij. Cerae iij.


Make an unguent for the pain of the back and Nerves, the gout, and sciatica.

An unguent for the French pocks.
Rec.
Auxungiae canis j. Auxungia porc. j ss Theriace veteris ss Mithridati Drag.
iij. Argenti viui cum succo Mercurialis extincti Drag. vij. ss Masticis
Olibanian. Drag. ij. Pimpinellae Drag. j. ss Succi Lap alij acut. De radice
expressi Olei laurinian.. j.


With a little wax make an unguent. Some use to mix with these kinds of
unguents Oleum de euphorbio, because that then there is no euacuation by flux
at the mouth or vomit, but by feege and sweat.

An other unguent for pain of the joints and muskles, proceeping from Lues
venerea.
Rec.
Olei irini De keiri Laurini an.. iij. Auxungiae porc. Mascul. lique fact. and
colatae ix. Succorum Radicis ebuli Absinthij Rutae agrestis an.. iiij. Vini
maluatici aut. Albi odoriseri and opt. lib. j. ss


Let all boil together, to the consumption of the juices and wine at a gentle
fire, then let it be strained, and add to the straining Bdellij dissoluti in

Aceto Drag. ix. Olibani pulis. sub. ij. Drag. ij. Euphorbij Pyrethri subt pull.
an. Drag. vj,


Cerae Q. S. Let all be put together, and placed upon the fire until the wax
be liquified, then remove it from the fire, and still stir it up and down
until it be cold: then add

Mercurij extincti j. ss

And being well mixed together, make and unguent; of which, being hot, anoint
the members grieved, or tumors, in the morning: then let the patient rest in
his bed being well covered, for the space of three or four hours, and let
him sweat thoroughly: then let the sweat be wiped away, and so let him rest for
an hour, until be he somewhat cool. The patient must be of a spare diet
until the cure be ended, which will be in run or twelve days. This unguent
is of such excellency, that it does not procure any pain in the throat or
month; so that the body be well cleansed before by purgation and phlebotimie.

Emplastrum de succo Ebuli.
Rec.
Vnguenti de succo ebuli ij. ss Olei hypericonis Drag. v. Terebenthinae cum
vino Lotae ss


Make an Emplaster: it is good against the pain of the Nerves, conuulsion in
the muscles, arms, and feette.

An other Emplaster for pain of the Nerves.
Rec.
Oleorum Camomillae iij. Hypericonis. j. ss Verbasci j. Benzoi ss Croci Drag.
j. ss Masticis Drag. ij. ss Camomulae Scr. v. Ping^edinis caponis j ss Medullae
vituli Drag. v. Storacis liquidae ss Terpentinae ij. Picis colophoniae j. ss
Cerae albae ss


Make an Emplaster. S. Ae.

An Emplaster for the Squinancie and Apostumes of the throat.
Rec. Lithargirij j.

Upon which pour as much oil of Violets, and Oleum sesaminum as may make it
in the form of an unguent: then take Muscilaginis psyllij

Seminum altheae and Marubij an. ss Gummi amygdalarum In fusi in aqua coriandri
Dic ac nocte, and colati j.


Put thereunto of the flowers of Camomell and Melilot finely powdered, of
either Dragme two: at the last let all be mix^d well together, and adding
thereunto three new laid eggs, being well mixed together, and so apply it.

An Emplaster that does consolidate and mundifie.
Rec.
Tut^^e praeparat. Drag. ij. Cinabaris aut minij ij. ss Lithargirij auri j. ss
Cerusae ij. Sanguinis draconis ss Camphorae Scr. v. ss Olei rosati lib. j.
Cerae albae iiij.


Make an Emplaster, and let it be malaxed with Rose water.

Rec.
Cerotum stomachale. Masticis pull. iij. ss Terbenthinae cum aqua Mentae lotae
j. ss C^rae albae iij.


These being mixed in a hot mortar, let it be spread upon leather; then cast
this following powder thereon.

Rec.
Garyophillorum Scr. v. Xyloalo^s Drag. j. Calami aromatici Nucis muscatae an.
Dra. ss Corallorum rubeorum Scr. ij. Menthae Scr. ss


Make it into powder, and then let it be covered over with read sarsnat, and
inter-bast it* and so apply it. In like manner Mastix being wrought in a hot
mortar with a pestell, may be spread for a Cerot to be applied for the stomach:
but it is best if there be added a quantity of oil of mints, to bring it into
the form of a Cerote.

A Declaration of the quality of certain seeds, herbs, flowers, roots, and
waters.
The four greater hot seeds.
ANisseede. Fenelseed. Cominseed. Caraway seed.


The four lesser hot seeds
Yellow Caret seed. Smallage seed. Ameos and Amonie.


The four greater cold seeds.
The Gourd seed. The Cucumber seed. The Melon seed. And the Citron seed.


The four lesser cold seeds
Endive seed. Cichorie seed. Lettisse seed. And purslan seed.


The four hot ointments.
Vnguentum martiaton. Vnguentum de althea. Vnguentum Aragon. Vnguentum
Agrippae.


The four cold ointments.
Vnguentum album. Vnguentum citrinum. Vnguentum populion. Vnguentum
resumptiuum.


The five opening roots.
The Smallage root. The Fenell root. The Parsley root. The Sperage root. The
Kneeholme root.


The four waters that do comfort the heart.
The water of Endive. The water of Cichorie. The water of Scabios. The water of
Buglosse.


The eight herbs that are laxatiue.
Mallows. Mercury. Holyhock. Parietarie. Violets. The Colewort. Branckursin,
and Beetes.


The three common hot flowers.
Camomell. Melilot. And the Lilly.


The four common cold slowres.
Violets. Red Roses. Borrage. And Buglosse.


A Table of those simples that are appropriat for all the chief parts of the
body.
Comforters of the head and brain are:
CVbebes, Lignum aloes Balm called Melissa, Acorus, nux Mistica, Roses,
Peonia, Spicke, Melilot, Francumcense, Castoreum, Galengall, Maioran, Staphy
sagre, Musk, Rosemarie, Stoechados, Hyssop, Camomel, Rue, Ladanum, Capparis,
and such like.

Things good for the eyes.
Eyebright, Fennel, Cloves, Agrimonie, Celendine.

Things good for the heart.
Chyperus, Safferne, Cloves, Lignum Aloes, Macis, Myrobalans, Nutmegs, the bone
of the Stagges heart, Rosemarie, Spodium, Terra Sigillata, Buglosse, Maioran,
Cinnamon, Coral, Amber, Perels, Balm, Musk, Olibanum, Pistacia, Roses,
Stoechados, Zedoaria, Borage, and such like.

Thing good for the Lungs.
Enula campane, Horehound, Liquirish, Iuiubes, Figs, Penidice, Dates,
Hyssope, Scabios, Reasons of the Sun, Maydenhaire, Sebesten, Tragacantum,
Almonds, Pistacia, and such like.

Things comforting the stomach.
Wormwood, Cassia lignea, Calamus aromaticus, Cyperus, Safferne, Cuscuta,
Fumus terrae, Cloves, Lacca, Lignum aloes, Mints, Nutmegs, Origanum, the inward
skin of the stomach of a Cock, Spodium, Olibanum, Corrall, Agrimonie,
Galengale, Gallia muscata, Leuisticus, Mastech, of Balm, Myrobalans, Pistacia,
Quinces.

Things profitable for the liver.
Wormwood, Safferne, Agrimonie, Cloves, Origanum, Liuerwort, Cichory, the
greater Plantane, both kinds of Dragons, Spicke, Fenell, Cassia lignea,
Cuscuta, Fumus terrae, Gallia muscata, Pistacia, Endive, Schaenanthos, Polium,
Reasons of the Sun, Anisseeds, Sanders.

Things profitable for the spleen.
Walwort, Iuie berries, the Ashe-tree, Hearts tongue, Tamarix, Polytrichon,
Calament, Cyperus, Acorus, the yellow Caret; Madder, Capparis, Asarum, the
Elder tree, Agrimonie.

Things good for the obstruction of the Liver.
Cassia lignea, Maydenhaire, read Phetches, Dodder, Agrimonie, Fumus terrae,
Horehound, Draggons, Asparagus, Stechados, Polium, Rhaponticke, Rhubarbe,
Smallage.

Things good for the obstruction of the Spleen.
Rhapontick, Maydenhaire, Capparis, Dodder, Agrimonie, Fumus terrae, Horehound,
Tamariske.

Things profitable for the Matrix.
Sauin, Sothernwood, Iuniperburies, Maioran, Penniroyall, Staphy sagre,
Hypericon, Acorus, Fenell, Saxifrage.

Things profitable for the reins and bladder.
Asparagus, Saxifrage, Milium solis, Asarum, Acorus, Filipendula, Genista,
Parsley, Polium, Dodder, Fennel.

Things profitable to the joints.
Polium montanum asarum, Acorus, Amonium, Sage, Calament, Pellitorie of Spain,
Stoechados, Cost.

Of syrups concocting Choler in the head.
Syrupus De Nymphaea simplex. De Nymphaea compos. Head. Choler.
Syrupus De Papauere simpl. De Papauere compos.


Of syrups concocting yellow Choler in the breast.
Syrupus Infusionis violarnm. Breast.
De succo violarum. Syrupus violarum. De Imubis. Sir. granatorum Dulc.


In the stomach.
Syrupus acetosus simpl. Stomach.
Granatorum acid. Oxisacchara simpl. Oxisacchara comp. Syrupus De agresta.
Syrupus insusionis rosarum. Syrupus De succo rosarum. Mitta cotoneorum. Syrupus
De succo myrtil. Syrupus myrtinus.


In the heart.
Syrupus De succo acetosae. Acetositatis citri. Heart.
Arantiarnm, and limonum.


These syrups purge choler simply.
Infusion of Roses. Purgers of choler.
Infusion of Violets. Ex Floribus Persicorum. De Cichorio cum Rhabarbaro. De
Rhabarbaro solutiuus. Mel. mercuriale. Syrupus De Bryonia. Purgers of phlegm.
Syrupus De Hermodactylis. Oxymel Iuliani. Oxymel Elleboratum. Syrupus
Diasereos. Syrupus Diacnicu.


In the head. Digesters of phlegm. Head.

Syrupus De Betonica compos. Syrupus De Staechade Mel anacardinum. De Hyssopo.
De prassio. In the breast.
Capillorum veneris. De Betonica. Glycyrhizae. De Calamentho. Syrupus.
Scabiosae, etc.


In the heart.
Syrupus Bisantinus. Heart.



In the stomach. Stomach.

Aqua mulsa. Syrupus De absinthio. Syrupus De mentha. Mel Rosarum colatum.
Oxymel simplex. Oxymel compositum. Oxymel scilliticum.


In the Liver.
Syrupus Acetosus simplex. De Duabus radicibus. Liver.
De quinque radicibus. De eupatorio.


The Matrix.
Syrupus De Artemesia. Matrix.
Syrupus De Calamentho, etc.


Syrups concocting melancholy in the heart: are
Syrupus De pomis. Melancholy.
Syrupus De succo Borraginis. Syrupus De succo Buglossae.


Digesters of melancholy in the Liver and Spleen.
Syrupus De Epithymo. Liver and Spleen.
Syrupus Lupulorum. Syrupus Splenicus. Syrupus De fumo terrae.


Electuaries that doepurge Choler.
Electuarium De succo rosarum. Choler.
Electuarium rosarum mesuae. Electuarium De psislio. Diaprunum solutiuum.


Purgers of phlegm.
Benedicta laxatiua. Phlegm.
Diaphaenicon. Electuarium Indum maius, and minus. Electuarium Elescoph.
Diaturbith maius. Diaturbith minus. Hiera picra. S. Hiera picra Constantini.


With all the other kinds of Hieros.

Purgers of melancholy.
Diasena, confectio hamech. Melancholy.
Diapolypodion magistrale. Hieralogodium.


Purgers of mixed humors.
Catharticum imperiale. Diacarthamum. Diaturbith cum Rhabarbaro. Hiera ruffi.
Hiera abbatis. Electuarium de eupatorio. Vomitorium Andreae. Vomitiuum Nicolai.


Pills purging Choler from the head.
Pilulae aureae. Head Pillus.
Pilulae Arabicae. etc.


From the Liver.
Pilulae ad bilem. Liver.
Pilulae ad febres, Pilulae ex Rhabarbaro. Pilulae sabelliae. Pilulae De
eupatorio.


Pills purging phlegm.
From the head. Pilulae cochiae. Pilulae hiero cum Agarico. Pilulae ex
colocynthide. Pilulae alhandal. Pilulae ex sex rebus. Pilulae ex octo rebus.
From the breast. Pilulae hierae cum Agarico. Pilulae ex Agarico. Pilulae
Bechichae, etc.
From the stomach. Pilulae Alephanginae. Pilulae ante cibum. Pilulae
mastichina. Pilulae stomachicae. Pilulae ex turbith. Pilulae communes. Pilulae
contra pestem, etc.
From the joints. Pilulae De hermodactilis. Pilulae arthreticae. Pilulae
foetidae Pilulae ex sagapeno. Pilulae ex oppanace. Pilulae De sarcocolla.
Pilulae benedictae. Pilulae De nitro, etc.



Pills purging melancholy from the Liver and Spleen.
Pilulae ex Fumaria. Melancholy.
Pilulae Inde. Pilulae De Lapide lazuli. Pilulae De lapide armeno, etc.


Pills purging serous and watrish humors.
Pilulae De mezaereo. Watrish humors.
Pilulae De euphorbio, etc.


Pills purging mixed humors from the head: as
Pilulae sine quibus. Pilulae Lucis maiores. Pilulae Lucis minores. Pilulae
cochiae, etc. Pil. de hiera simplici Gal. From the stomach.
Pil. Assaieret. Pil. Ex turbith. Pil. De aloe and mastice. Pil. imperiales.
Pil. pestilentiales. Pil. Aureae ex turbith, etc. Pil. De tribus. Pil. Ex
halicacabo, etc. Liver.



Pills purging all humors: are
Pilulae aggregatiuae.


FINIS.
A Table expressing the signification of the weights and measures contained in
this Book.
A Barley corn. Gran. A Scruple Scr. A Dragme Drag. An Ounce A Pound Lib. A
Half ss A Handful M Of every one a like ana.



