THE ELEMENTS OF ARITHMETICKE most methodically delivered.

Written in Latin by C. VRSTITIVS professor of the Mathematickes in the
University of Basil.

AND Translated by THOMAS HOOD, Doctor in Physic, and well-willer of them
which delight in the Mathematical sciences.

Obedire nouit, nescit seruire Virtus.

.ANCHORA. SPET.



LONDON Printed by Richard Field. 1596

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL Sr CONIER CLIFFORD KNIGHT. health and felicity.
ULYSSES (Right worshipful) having spent some time in the Court of Aeolus,
where he was friendly entertained, desired at length to be dismissed: his suit
was granted, and he sent away in Princely manner, with all the winds tied up
in a bottle, to be commanded as he thought best. He was not past a days
journey or two from the shore, but he went to wrack thorough the misdealing of
those, to whose safe conduct he had committed himself, and by the winds was
driven back again to the coast of Aeolia. His weather beaten men, and
himself being refreshed as time and place then served, he set forward to
Aeolus his Court, hoping to find such entertainment as he found before. Not
daring suddenly to enter in, he rested himself at the Porter his lodge, where
he heard these words: (...).

It may be they moved his patience a little, because they touched his former
estate, yet having better conceit of others in that place he let them pass,
and preased forward to the presence of the King, sitting not far off with his
Nobility about him, to whom he spoke thus in humble manner:

(...). And that his request might the better prevail, he added his reason,
(For it is not likely though his estate were bad, that he would crave any thing
more then reason.) (...). But he was so far off from finding his expected
relief, that he was commanded to get him thence with these hot words to his
cold comfort:

(...). Such as Ulysses his departure was from the Island Aeolia, such was mine
from London Northward; such as his entertainment was at his return, such was
mine coming thither again. For miscarying in that voyage besides mine
expectation (I would say my desert were it not presumption) I found that of
Horace to be true:

-- Diffugiunt cadis,
Cum faece siccatis amici,
Far iugum pariter dolosi.
Some said they could not, some durst not for fear, and some answered they
would not help to repair that loss, which the unkind Northern blast had
enforced me to. What should I do, or what other thing could I do in this
case, but that which Ulysses had done before? (...). I suffered all, and bare
it out, not lying still as a man careless, but knowing mine head and hands
(under God) to be my best friends, I set them to their old occupation again,
teaching the Mathematical arts, and penning, or translating such books as I
thought most convenient for that purpose, of the which this book is some
little part. And for so much (Right worshipful) as I intended therein not
only your pleasure, but your profit especially among the rest, I am bold to
make that intent known in dedicating it unto your Worship, and craving your
favorable acceptance thereof, which if it please you to afford, you shall inuit
me to a farther work, and bind me not to be unthankful for your friendly
favor.

Your worships to command, THOMAS HOOD.

THE ELEMENTS OF ARITHMETICKE MOST METHODICAL LIE DELIVERED.
CHAP. I. The definition and subject of Arithmeticke.
Arithmetic is the Art of numbering well.

This definition is short and plain, being drawn from the end of Arithmetike,
after which sort other Arts also are defined.

To number well, is to express and practice the whole force, properties, and
use of numbers.

It appears then that the Subject of Arithmetike (that is to say, the thing
whereabout that Art is wholly occupied and whereunto all the rules thereof are
to be referred) is number.

Number is a Multitude consisting of unities.

It is the definition of the seventh book of Euclide. Aristotle in his
Categories seems to define it thus. A number is a discreet quantity not
having position but order. The which definition agrees with that of Euclid,
saving that it distinguishes an unity from a point by a certain contrary
quality which is in them; attributing to a point position or place, to an
unity only order and consequence. Whereby it appears that a number is the
joining together of things following one an other in order not touching one the
other much less cleaving together, and that in such sort that you can not
determine any bond or common knot in them, whereby they should be knit together
and continued.

The beginning of number in an Unity.

An unity is that, whereby every thing that is, is said to be one.

An unity properly is no number, because it is no multitude, for multitudes
only are numbered: neither is it a part of a number because that every part of
a number ought also to be a number. It answeareth in proportion to a moment,
and to a point: whereof the one is the beginning of time, the other of
magnitude, and yet no part of them: as Aristotle proves in the fifth and in
the beginning of the sixth book of Phisicks: yet in Arithmeticall numeration
it is wont to be taken for a number, and that the least that may be.

The division of number shall be drawn out of numeration.

The Scholemen divide numbers into Digites, articles and mixed numbers: to this
end as I think that they might make a distinction in the natural consequence
of numbers: wherein first of all the nine simple figures are to be considered,
the which the number 10. succeeds as it were a knot knitting them to the mixed
numbers following. But for so much as this is no lawful division of numbers,
we will draw an other out of the last part of Numeration, which we call
Division, the use whereof is exceeding great. In the mean time if the former
two numbers metaphorically so termed (which have given occasion to the rest
used of the Latins who say Arithmeticum pauciores habere digitos, plures autem
articulos homine) if that division I say do displease you, you may peradventure
more fitly divide numbers into simple, decades and compounde numbers.

CHAP. II. Of Notation, and of the first part thereof.
Simple, consisting of Notation which has two parts One more general, wherein
the figures are considered, By themseluyes, and so there are Nine signifying
figure. One without any signification.
Or One with another, where there are to be considered, Degrees, which are
Simple, containing single numbers. Multiplied co^taining Tens. hundreds.

and Periods, whereof some are Single Compound both being
perfect or imperfect.



The other more special, wherein the numbers to be considered are either of One
term, as whole numbers More terms, and they be either Of one kind, as parts,
otherwise called fractions. Of diverse kinds, as mixed numbers.


Numerration. A.
Compared. E.
ARithmeticke is double: Simple and compared, Simple is that which teaches
the practice of simple numbers without comparison.

This partition springs of the diversity of the subject. For numbers are
considered either by themselves alone absolutely, or else one with an other in
respect of their proportionalitie, or proportion which they have one to an
other. Hereon comes this foresaid division containing all things belonging to
this Art.

Simple Aruthmeticke consists of two parts, Notation and Numeration.

Notation is the way havv to set down numbers in vvriting, and to express
them being written.

The Greeks called it Semeiosis, and it is more fitly called Notation then
NUmeration, because it teaches us how to note, that is, to write every number,
and to express it when it is written.

There be two parts of it. The first expresses generally the value of the
figures wherewith the numbers are written.

The figures wherewith numbers are written are ten.

As 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 0. Neither the Greeks nor the Latins used these
figures. For the Rom^^nes used only thesE seven letters, M. D. C. L. X. V. I
but the Grecians used all the letters of the Alphabet, being marked with
certain pricks. Many therefore think that these figures were invented by the
Arabians, the which people in old time practiced this Art and the whole science
of the Mathematickes very diligently, where of beside the word Algorithme,
whereby they expressed the Art of numbering, many other words left unto us in
this kind of knowledge may be a sufficient testimony. For the Latins in the
former rude and barbarous age forsaking the wel-springs of the Grecians,
followed after the small rivers of the Arabians. Valla and Cardane think them
to be invented by the Indians. Some there be that attribute the^ to the
Phoenicians. They have bin retained by the common consent almost of all people,
because they be most convenient to number withal, and most fit to receive all
kind of practice used in this Art.

The figures are considered either by themselves alone, or one with another. By
themselves alone, when they are without composition, or as it were without
composition, for then the first nine have a certain value.

The tenth which has the form of a circle signifies nothing standing by it
self alone, but being placed with the rest, it makes to the increase of their
value.

As, 1. is as much as one, 2. two, 3. three, 4. four, 5. five, 6. six, 7. seven,
8. eight, 9. nine, 0. of it own nature is without value, yet having his place
wherein none of the other signifying figures is placed, it increases the value
of the^ which follow: for it is never set in the last place. It is called
commonly a Cyphar.

Figures are considered one with an other being joined together, and then the
process and order of their places increases their value.

For so much as every number may be increased infinitely, therefore by reason
of their diverse increase amou^ting to tens, hundreds, thousands ten thousands,
etc. it is impossible to write every one of the^ with a diverse figure. For then
should the variety of the figures be also infinite. But what is wanting in the
figures, that their places through often repeating of them, makes up. In
continuance of which places the figures take unto them a diverse signification,
and that so much the greater by how much the more in joining the numbers
together they come nearer to the left hand.

The places of numbers are distinguished by degrees and periods. A degree is a
place whereby the value of each number is gathered.

A degree is of two sorts: the first is of simple numbers, the other of
multiplied numbers, to wit, the second degree is of tens, the third of
hundreds, and so forth after the same manner in the rest.

Numbers according to the custom of all people proceed from the left hand
toward the right, so that the least number occupies the last place next to the
right hand. Wherefore the last figure in value is the first, and every figure
in the first place keeps his first and proper signification. In the other
places every one is armed with a double power, to wit, with his own and with
an other borrowed for a time. For this consideration is generally to be
observed in the places: that, that which follows is twice as much as that
which went before.

As for example: the figure 4. by it self alone is four: and so much also it
signifies in the first degree. But being removed into the second, it
signifies forty, as you see here, 40. Again, being set in the third degree
it is ten times so much as it was in the second: that is, four hundred, as
here, 400. And so forth after the same manner both in the other figures and
degrees.

A periode is that which comprehends the degrees, and is either perfect,
consisting of three degrees, or imperfect containing less then three.

To conclude, that Period which consists but of one trinity or ternarie of
degrees is single, but that which consists of more then one, is compound.

As 1 2 3 is a perfect single period: 1 2 3 4 5 6 is a perfect compounde
periode. Also 1 2 is an imperfect single periode: 1 2 3 4, 1 2 3 4 5 is an
imperfect co^pound period. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8. is an imperfect triple periode. In
numbers the degrees are to the periodes, as the commata and cola are the
periodes in an oration.

CHAP. III. Of the other part of Notation.
THus much concerning Notation in general: now follovveth the other part which
expresses the numbers written more particularly.

And here we have to deal with numbers, either of one term, or more. Whole
numbers are written with one term.

As 20, 24, 360, 1234, 1578, they be also called numbers of one band or rank.

How whole numbers of a single periode should be set down, may be gathered
by tha which has been said before. But that the compound numbers may be
expressed, they must with pricks or small lines be divided into single
periods, and be so uttered that at the first prick we name a thousand, at the
second a thousand thousand, at the third a thousand thousand thousand, and so
forth going forward after the same order, till we have numbered the whole.

Numbers be they never so great may easily be expressed, if distinguishing them
with periodes you utter them by parts, in such sort that both the value of the
figures and the power of the degrees, may govern them when they be uttered. So
that at the end of the first periode you shall name a thousand, at the end of
the second a thousand thousand (which some call a million) and to be short, at
the end of the third periode, you shall name a thousand thousand thousand:
observing the same increase in all the periodes following, be they never so
many. Hereupon it comes to pass that the least signifying figure of the
periode following, is greater then any of the periode going before. Moreover
the ready uttering of numbers makes a man to write them speedily, and
contrariwise the speedy writing of them makes a man to utter them readily. For
example, having distinguished this number 34567890 with pricks you shall
express it thus beginning at the left hand. At the first periode you shall say
thirty four thousand thousand or else thirty four millions. At the second,
five hundred sixty seven thousand. At the third eight hundred and nintie.

The number following you shall express thus 2016542009873. Two thousand
thousand thousand thousand: then sixteen thousand thousand thousand, five
hundred forty two thousand thousand, 9. thousand eight hundred seventy three.

The Romans were wont to number by hundred thousands. The which fashion if
you list to follow you shall set down a prick next to the second degree of the
second periode and express the other numbers following, as you did the first.
As in this number 7789320, you shall say thus seventy seven hundred four score
and nine thousand three hundred and twenty. After this manner Pliny in his
second book 108. Chap. affirms according to the saying of Artemidorus that
the longitude of the earth inhabited West ward from the pillars of Hercules in
India, is eighty five hundred seventy and eight thousand miles. The which
number must be set down thus.

8578000.

Thus much for the notation of numbers of one term: now follow the numbers of
many terms. And they be either of one kind as parts (which we commonly call
fractions,) or of diverse kinds as mixed numbers.

Parts are set down with two terms divided one from an other with a line:
whereof the uppermost numbreth the parts, the neathermost names them.

Although an unity by it self of it own nature can not be divided, yet if we
regard the subject thereof, or the magnitude whereto it is applied, it may be
divided. And yet the unities of the number proceeding of this division do not
arise of the very unity it self, but of the dividing of the magnitude, that
is: they come not of the unity as it is by it self alone, but as it is joined
to some other thing. As a shilling can not be divided as it is one, but as it
is a piece of money, which customablie is divided into testons, groates, three
pences, two pences, pence and half pence, etc. Wherefore although parts be
called by the name of numbers, and are written with the figures belonging to
whole numbers: yet in very deed they are no numbers, if Euclides definition of
a number be true. But in the notation of these parts there are two things to
be considered, the quantity of the parts (for a whole number may have many
parts, both great and final) and the number of them. Hereupon it comes that
when they be written they require two terms or numbers: whereof the uppermost
declares the number of the parts the which are to be found out, whereupon it
is called the Number, or Numerator. But the neathermost naming the parts of the
whole, expresses their quantity: wherefore it is called the name, or the
Denominator. As 1/2 signifies one part of the whole divided into two halfes,
that is; one half. 1/3 one third part 3/4 three fourth parts, or three
quarters. 5/6 five sixth parts, that is, five parts of the whole divided into
six parts.

Hereby it appears that the greater the Denominator is, the less is the
quantity of the parts.

Parts are either principal, or of the second sort. The one have their
original of the first division of the whole, the other are parcels of the
principal parts.

They may be called Simple and Deriuatiue parts: whereof the one arises of the
first division of whole numbers, the other of breaking the parts into smaller
parcels. Their notation and value differs much. The principal parts are
written after the manner before named. But the parcels, or the parts of parts
called commonly fractions of fractions, are set down by the first toward the
left hand, without any line between them for difference sake, as 5/12 1/3 five
twelve parts of one third part, 3/4 7/8 three fourth parts, of seven eight
parts: or else otherwise by the preposition 5/6 out of 3/10.

Moreover, parts are either proper or improper. They are less then the
whole: these are either equal unto, or greater then the whole.

True and proper parts in deed are less then the whole, and therefore that
which they signify can not be expressed by an unity, whereupon they have the
numerator always less then the Denominator. But those parts whose Numerator
is equal or bigger then the Denominator, are improper parts, for that they
may be expressed by an whole or mixed number: as 3/3 are as much as one whole:
4/2 are two whole, 6/5 are one whole, and 1/5 more then the whole.

Wherefore although whole numbers be sometime set down as parts, yet when the
Numeration is once finished, they are never written after this manner, but must
be reduced to whole numbers: for you cannot fitly say, 2/2 two halfes, or 4/3
four third parts, or 8/4 eight quarters: but one whole, one whole with a
third part, etc.

There remain as yet mixed numbers, which are whole numbers with parts. But
their notation may be easily gathered out of the former kinds.

In Geometry they are not accounted for numbers: but when the measure of a
thing cannot be expressed but by a mixed number, it is called irrational, as
though it were not indeed to be expressed by a number. Hereupon comes the
name of Surde numbers.

CHAP. IIII. Of Numeration, the other part of simple Arithmeticke, and of the
first kind thereof.
Numeration is double.
Simple, or of numbers of one kind which is either of Whole numbers, and is
either Prime, as Addition. Subductio^.
Second as Multiplication. Division.

Parts.
Mixed, or of numbers of diverse kinds.
HItherto we have entreated of Notation, now follows Numeration: which of
two numbers given finds out the third.

As the framing of an argument is in Logic, even so is numeration in this
art. For as the Logicians in reasoning do infer the conclusion by the
premises, even so the Arithmeticians by numbering do infer a diverse number
from the numbers given.

The numbers given are either of one and the self same kind, as whole numbers,
or parts, or of diverse kinds as mixed numbers.

Numeration of whole numbers is when the numbers given are whole numbers.

And this Numeration is double. Prime: which numbreth one number with an other
only once, and that either by adding or subtracting them: whereupon it is
called Addition or Subtraction.

As if these numbers 360. and 15. were given either to be added or subtracted,
you must either add 360. once to 15. or else subtract them once and not many
times as in the second numeration. Wherefore this may well be called single
numeration, and the other manifold numeration.

Addition is a Prime Numeration, which joining one number to an other, finds
out the total of the numbers given.

Touching Addition of simple figures the rule of reason teaches us how to do
it, but the addition of compound figures may be learned by this rule.

If, proceeding orderly from the first of the numbers given to those which
follow, you set the particular sums (being less then ten) of the figures of
every degree added together alone by themselves, each one under his own
degree, putting the overplus (that is, for every ten, an unity) to the degree
following: you shall find out the total of the numbers given.

Addition of single numbers may be wrought by the direction of nature only,
wherefore it may be practiced in our minds, and brought hither for the speedy
dispatching of our work. As 5 and 6 are 11, 7 and 8 are 15, 9 and 9 are 18.
But the Addition of compound numbers goes on by peecemeale from part to part,
so that it requires the help of art. The first precept to be observed in this
place, is to number all the figures of every place alone by themselves, as
though they were but single figures: and this must be done in all the parts of
Numeration following. The second is to number the figures of one and the same
degree only together, that you confound not the one with the other. Last of
all, you must set down the total made of the parts, in such sort, that if
they increase to ten or more, only the figure next to the right hand must be
written under that degree, the other which remains must be added to the
degree following. As for example, add 983. to 402. First, setting down the
numbers in such sort one under an other, that the figures of every degree may
answer may answer one to an other, I must begin at the first and say, 2 and
3 are 5, the which I set down under that degree: then 0 and 8 are 8, the which
I write under the second place. Then 4 and 9 are 13, which number for that it
is in the last place, I set it down whole. So that the total of the numbers
given is, 1385. The example stands thus.

983 402 1385

Item add 89647 unto 78450. The numbers being duly set down one under an
other, according to the order of their degrees, and a line drawn underneath
them, I begin to number at the right hand saying, 0 and 7 are 7. Then 5 and 4
are 9. Item 4 and 6 are 10. But for so much as the total is written with two
figures, I set down the cipher only under that degree, and keep the unity in
my mind. Then 8 and 9 are 17, and the unity which I kept makes 18, where
again I set down 8 because it is next to the right hand and keep the unity
next to the left hand in my mind. Lastly 7 and 8 are 15, and one which I kept
are 16, the which I set down wholly. So the total of the numbers given is,
168097. The example is to be set down in this order.

89647 78450 168097

In this part of numeration and in the rest, there are said to be but only two
numbers given, although sometime there be more to be added together, for that
the two first numbers only are added together, and then if there be more, the
total is added to that which follows, as in the example following.

90641 4790 2853 98284 678921 54086 560 9522 743089

Here, I say, 2 and 6 are 8, 8 and 1 are 9, taking 8, which is the total made
of 2 and 6, for one simple number, and adding it to 1 standing above it, etc.

Subduction is a prime Numeration, which taking one number from another,
finds out the Remainder of the numbers given.

The use of it is to find out the difference between two numbers: whereupon it
is requisite that the numbers given, should be unequal, and that from which
the subtraction is made, must be the greater.

Subduction of simple numbers may be drawn of the table of our mind. But
co^pound numbers are to be subducted by the the Theoreme following.

If proceeding orderly from the first of the numbers given, you set the
remainder of every figure of one and the same degree, subtracted one from the
other (either by it self alone, or by borrowing ten of the degree following)
severally each one under his own degree: the remainder of the numbers given may
be found.

In every part of numeration there must a certain practice go before it: the
which must not then be to seek when we should work, but it must be drawn out
of the threasure of our minds, and ministered unto us. So that in subductio^
there is required of us a ready foresight, that we may know what number will
remain, when any one of the figures is taken from another by it self alone,
or else added unto ten. As 5 from 8, there remain 3, 4 from 9 there remain 5.
Or by adding ten to the single figure: as 9 from 17, there remain 8, 6 from
15, there remain 9, etc.

In compound and great numbers, it is most convenient to place the greater
uppermost, and the less beneath, and then to number by the parts going on
toward the left hand. For that way is more easy then the other which
proceeds from the left hand to the right, as in the examples following.

857 345 512 58734 9832 48902 300065 1984 298081

In the first example every thing is plain.

In the second I begin to number, 2 from 4 remain 2, 3 from 3 remain 0.
Then for so much as 8 can not be taken from 7, the figure of the same degree, I
borrow an unity of the degree following, and join it to 7 thus 17, and draw
8 out of 17 there remains 9 to be noted under neath. This may be done, if (as
some are wont) I take the distance of the nether number from 10. and add it
to the uppermost number, or set down the uppermost number only, if the
neathermost be 10. As for example, because 8 differs 2 from 10, I take 2 and
add them to 7 which make 9 to be written under the third degree. But for so
much as I borrowed 1 of 8 in the uppermost number following, there remain but
7, I draw therefore 9 from 17 (taking an unity from 5 following) there remain
8. In the last degree, because there is no figure beneath which answers to
that above, I set not down the whole 5 but 4, because I borrowed one of it
before.

In the third example, that the signifying figures may be subducted out of the
ciphers, we must borrow of the numbers following an unity, as we did before.
First take 4 from 5 there remains 1, then because you cannot take 8 from 6,
you must subtract it from 16, there remains 8. For although the figures
following, from whence I borrow the unity, be a cyphar, and therefore without
signification, yet for so much as it has a signifying figure before it, I may
borrow an unity of it. Then I go on and take 9 from 9, there remains
nothing. Moreover I take 1, not from 10, because there was an unity borrowed
of it before, but from 9, there remain 8. And for so much as there is no
figure to be drawn out of that which follows, I set down 9. Likewise I
write down the last figure less by one then it is, because I presuppose that
it wants that unity which I took from the first cyphar.

CHAP. V. Of the second kind of Numeration.
Hitherto of prime Numeration. Now follows second Numeration, which numbreth
one number with an other, so often as one of the two numbers given requires,
and that either by multiplying or dividing: vvhereupon it is called
Multiplication or Division.

Second Numeration is either often Addition, as Multiplication: or often
Subtraction, as Division. For one of the numbers given is so often either
increased or diminished, as the other, either the multiplyer or divisor
requires, according to the number of the unities contained in them.

Multiplication is a second Numeration, which joining together the
multiplicande, so often as there be unities in the Multiplier, brings forth
the facit.

This is the 15. definition of the 7. Book of Euclide. It makes no matter
which number you make the multiplicande, or which number you make the
multiplier, as it appears by the 16. prop. of the seventh Book of Euclide,
which says: If two numbers multiplied together, the one into the other,
produce any numbers, the numbers produced are equal the one to the other: that
is, they make one and the same number. Notwithstanding the Scholemen set the
greatest number uppermost for the multiplicande, and the least neathermost for
the multiplier, for that it seems most convenient for young beginners.

Multiplication of single numbers is to be conceived in our minds by this
Theoreme.

If either of the two numbers given be divided into certain parts, the
product coming of the whole numbers multiplied together, is equal to the
product made by one of the whole numbers and the parts of the other number so
divided. The 1. proposition of the second book, or else, if both the numbers
given be divided into certain parts, that which is made of the whole number,
is equal to the product made of their parts.

That we may multiply easily and readily, we must have in our minds, a table
whereby we may know what the pruduct of every simple figure is, being
multiplied one by an other: the which thing may be easily done by the rule of
whole numbers and their parts. Every child by the direction of nature can tell
how many twice four, or four times five, or thrice six do make. But if you
happen to stick in greater numbers, a little exercise will make this table very
ready. As if you would know how much seven times eight is: divide either of
the two numbers given, into as many parts as you list, as 7. into 2. 3. 2.
Then multiply 8. by every one of these parts, and add the particular productes
together, and you shall have 56. How many are eight times 9. divide 9. into 3.
3. 3. and multiply 8. by those parts, adding the products together, so you
shall make 72. The same may be done if you divide both the numbers. The
examples must be set down thus.

I.
8 2. 3. 2. 7 8 3. 3. 3. 9 16 24 16 56 24 24 24 72 II.
4. 4 8 3. 4 7 5 3 8 5 4 9 16 16 12 12 56 12 20 15 25 72

The Scholemen frame this Table by this Theoreme. Two numbers being given which
jointly together are more then ten, if you multiply the difference of each of
them from ten one by the other, and then subduct crosswayes one of the
differences out of one of the numbers given, the product and the remainder
parted into diverse degrees, shall be the product of the numbers given. As you
see in these examples.

Multiplication of compound figures is drawn out of the Theoreme following.

If proceeding from the first of the numbers given toward the left hand, you
multiply the figures of the multiplier, into every one of the multiplicand, and
join together the particular products being less then ten, setting them
orderly under their multiplier, and put the overplus to the degree following:
the total made of the parts, is the product of the numbers given.

For example sake, multiply, 365 by 3. Here the numeration must proceed from
part to part. Having therefore set down the numbers, as you did in the former
kinds of numeration, multiply the neathermost figure severally into every one
of the uppermost thus: three times 5 are 15, I set down 5, and keep 1: thrice
6 are 18, and one which I kept, are 19, I set down 9 and keep one to be added
to the degree following: thrice 3 are 9, and one are 10, which I set down
wholly. The example stands thus.

365 3 1095

Now take an example of multiplication to be wrought by the parts of both the
numbers given. Multiply 1568 by 54: Item multiply 3508476 by 2509. In both
these numbers you shall have so many rows of numbers, as there be figures in
the multiplier. Wherefore we must take diligent heed, that we confound not the
particular products, and beware that in distinguishing the products, we set the
first figure of every one of them under his particular multiplier, as you see
here. ^

An abridgement of multiplication.

Neither are the shortest ways to be neglected: this therefore is an especial
abridgement of multiplication.

If one, or both the numbers given, have ciphers in the beginning, the^ if
multiplying only the signifying figures together, you put the ciphers to the
total, you shall have the product of the numbers given.

The correllary of this abridgement may be this.

If the last figure of the multiplier be an unity, and the other ciphers, then
setting the ciphers before the multiplicand, you shall have the product of the
numbers given. The exsamples.

Division is a numeration, which drawing one number from another, as often as
may be, finds out the quotient of the greater.

In division there are three numbers to be considered, the Diuidende, the
Divisor, and the Quotient, the which must be so placed, that the Dividend may
stand above, the Divisor beneath, and the Quotient at the side, or between
them both. The use of division is to declare how many times the less is
contained in the greater. The Artisicers term division by a Geometrical
phrase, calling it Comparison, which is the applying of a measure given to any
right line, as here,

A -- -- -- -- -- B

C -- D the line CD, is compared with the line AB to see how many times it may
be contained in it. Or it is the joining of one side to an other side, given to
make a rightangled parallelogram. As therefore in multiplication, the
multiplying of two sides together makes a right angled figure, if the lines
meet perpendicularly, even so in division, the dividing of the area or
platform of the right angled figure given by the length as it were by the
divisor finds out the breadth which is represented by the quotient, as you
see here.



Multiply the side A C, by the side C D, the product will be the area or
platform of the right angled figure A B C D. Likewise divide the platform of
the right angled figure E F G H, by the side G H which is the length, you shall
find out the other side E G which is the breadth which answers to the
quotient in division. Hereupon it is called the breadth of the comparison or of
the compared figure.

A quotient is a part of the diuidende, having the same denomination with the
divisor.

This definition is taken out of the 39 prop. of the seventh book of Euclide
which says: If a number measure any number, the number measured shall have a
part of the same Denomination with the number which measures it. And
contrariwise, as it is in the 40. prop. If it have a part, the number whereof
the part takes his denomination, shall measure it. For Euclide takes
measuring here for dividing: as for example, because 48 may be divided by 6
into 8 the quotient, I say that 8 being the quotient, is the 6 part of 48, and
takes his denomination of the Divisor. And contrariwise, because 8 is the 6
part of 48, therefore 6 divide 48. Likewise if 6 divide 54, the quotient will
be 9, and 9 therefore is the 6 part of 54, and because 9 is the sixth part of
54, therefore 6 divide 54, etc.

A part of a number is a less number in respect of a greater, when the less
measures the greater.

This is the first definition of the 5 and the third def. of the seventh book.
Euclide will not have every number that is less then a greater number, to be a
part of the greater, but only that which being taken oftentimes by it self
alone, measures the greater, that is, either makes it, or takes it clean
away: As two is the third part of 6, five is the half part often. For that 2
being three times taken, either makes or takes away 6, and 5 twice taken make
10 or destroys ten. This kind of part is called commonly, pars metiens, or
mensurans. A measuring part and of the barbarous it is called pars aliquota, an
aliquot part, that is, a quotient: but the number which by it self alone being
oftentimes taken, makes not a number without the help of some other part or
number, is the parts of the whole, using the word parts in the plural number
for distinction sake. As 2 are the parts of five, because two make not five
alone, without the help of three, or some other numbers. This kind of part
they commonly call, pars constituens, or componens: of the barbarous it is
called, pars aliquanta.

Division of a simple quotient may be taken out of the table of Multiplication.
For by the same numbers that a number is made, by the same it may be divided.

The first principle to be observed in division is to consider wittily, and to
know readily by what number, and what number every one of the single figures do
divide another, as six times 7 are 42, therefore 7 divide 42 by 6, and 6
divide it by 7. Item seven times 9 are 63, therefore 9 divide 63, and the
quotient is 7, or 7 divide it, and the quotient is 9.

The division of a number that has many figures, is wrought by the Theoreme
following.

If, beginning at the last figure of the numbers given, you multiply the
particular quotient of the divisor contained in the dividend (setting it down
aside by it self) into the Divisor, and then subtract the product from the
dividend, doing this as often as may be, by setting forward the Divisor
toward the right hand, till you come to the first figure of the dividend, the
quotient of the parts will be the quotient of the numbers given.

Although division commonly be wrought by finding out the quotient by
multiplication and subduction: yet the principal work wherein the whole force
or virtue of division consists, is only the finding out of the quotient,
which being once found, the division in mind is supposed to be done. But when
we have found out the quotient, we are to think and consider with our selves
into how many parts the divisor cutteth the number which is set over it, and
how often it may be drawn out of it. That this therefore may be set before our
eyes, and that in removing forward the Divisor, the remainder (wherein
afterward the quotient must be sought for) may more manifestly appear, the
truth of that which we conceived before, is proved by multiplication and
subtraction.

To express this by examples, divide 4936 by 4, we must seek how often the
Divisor 4 being set under the last figure of the dividend, is contained in the
same. I say then that 4 is contained in 4 once: wherefore I set down 1 in the
quotient, and take 4 out of 4, there remains nothing. Then set I the Divisor
one degree forward toward the right hand, where 4 are contained in 9 twice:
wherefore I note 2 in the quotient, and multiply the Divisor by it, the product
is 8, which being subducted from 9, there remain 1. The figures out of which
the subtraction is made, must straight way be blotted out. Again set forward
the divisor: there 4 may be taken from 13 three times, wherefore I set 3 in the
quotient, and multiply 4 by it, the product is 12, which being drawn out of
13, there remains 1. To conclude, I find 4 in 16 four times, therefore I set
down 4 for the quotient, and multiply 4 by it, which being taken out of 16,
there is nothing left. The example.

Again divide 1008 by 36. In this example there be many things to be taken
heed of. First, because the last figure of the dividend is less then the last
of the Divisor, therefore I set not 2 under 1, but one place farther toward the
right hand under the o. And first I consider with my sefe, how often three may
be had in ten, I find it to be thrice, and there remains one. But for so much
as I cannot subduct the Product made by multiplying the quotient into the whole
divisor, out of the number standing above it, to wit, 108 out of 100, therefore
I take a quotient less then that by one, that is 2, whereby the divisor being
multiplied, there arise 72, which being taken out of 100, there remain 28 to
be written over the head. Then the divisor being set forward, I see three to be
contained in 28 nine times, but because I must have regard also of the figure
following, I set but 8 in the quotient, which being multiplied into the
divisor, make 288 to be drawn out of the number set over it. The example is
thus.

It appears therefore by this, that the question must be made not of the
whole Divisor, unless it be a single number, but only of the last figure of
the Divisor, and every particular must be but a single figure, as if you should
seek how often 2 were in 21, you can not take it ten times, but 9 times, but
9 times at the most. Moreover the nature of the thing requires that we find
out always such a quotient, as being multiplied by the Divisor, makes no
greater a number then the dividend is. See the examples following.

An abridgement of division.

If the Divisor end in ciphers, the work may be wrought by the signifying
figures alone setting the ciphers in the mean time, under the utmost figures
of the dividend, next to the right hand. But if the last figure of the Divisor
be an unity, and the rest ciphers, then setting the Divisor as before, and
taking the figures that have no cyuphers underneath them for the quotient, the
division is dispatched. the figures that remain after the division is done,
must be set down as the parts are with the divisor underneath them for their
denominator.

As for example, divide 165968 by 360. Item 6734 by 100: the example shall
stand thus.

CHAP. VI. Of the double division of numbers.
Numbers by division are distinguished 2. manner of ways,
First they are either Odd. Or Even: which may be divided either, One way
only, and are either, Euenly even. Or Oddely even.
Many ways, and are both euenly, and oddely even.

Secondly, as they be considered, either By themselves alone, and then they are
Prime. or Compound.
One with an other, and then also they are Prime. or Compound.


NVmbers are divided two manner of ways, first into even and odd numbers. An
even number is that which may be divided by 2. An odd number is that which
can not be divided by 2.

This is the 6 and 7 definition of the seventh book of Euclide, whence this
difference of numbers drawn out of their division, is taken, as that also
which follows, whose use in Arithmeticke is very great. Even numbers are as
these following, 2. 4. 6. 8. 10. 12. 14. and so forth after the same order,
always omitting one. Odd numbers are, as 3. 5. 7. 9. 11. 13. 15. etc.

Of even numbers some may be divided but one way only, other some may be
divided many ways. Those which may be divided but one way only, are euenly
even, or oddely even.

A number euenly even, is that which an even number divides by an even number.

This is the eight definition of the seventh, such are 4. 8. 16. 32. 64. etc.
that is to say, all the numbers from 2 upward doubled by 2. As appears by the
32 prop. of the 9 book.

A number odly even, is that which an odd number measures by an even number.

As it is in the 9 definition of the seventh book. Euclide calls it an
euenly odd number, as 6. 10. 14. 18. 22. For 3 an odd number divides 6 by 2
an even number: 5 an odd nu^der divides 10. by 2 an even number. Such are all
the numbers whose moytie or half is an odd number, as appears by the 33
prop. of the seventh book.

The numbers which may be divided many vvayes, are euenly even and odd:
which may be divided both by an even number, and by an odd, into an even
number.

This third kind of numbers, is let pass of Euclide among the definitions of
the seventh book, but yet not neglected in the propositions of the ninth
book. The examples thereof are these, 12. 20. 24. 28. 56. 144. As 2 an even
number divides 12 by 6 an even number, and 3 an odd number divides it by 4
an even number. Item 2 an even number divides 20 into 10 an even number: and 5
an odd number divides it into 4 an eue^ number. Such are all those numbers
which are neither doubled by two from 2 upward, nor have their half an odd
number as it is in the 34. prop. of the 9 book.

Again, numbers be distinguished otherways being considered both by
themselves, and one with another. Being considered by themselves, they are
either prime, which may be divided by an unity only: or compound, which may
be divided by some other number.

This is the 12 and 13 definition of the seventh book, where Euclide divides
numbers into prime and compound numbers. The matter of this division is taken
out of the 34 prop of the seventh book, which says: That every number is
either a prime number, or else divided by a prime number: that is, a compound
number, as appears by the 33 prop. of the same book. A prime number is that
which no other number divides besides an unity, saving that it measures it
self. It may be called an vncompound number for that it is made of no number:
as 2. 3. 5. 7. 11. 13. etc. A compound number is that which some other number
makes, being taken certain times, as 4. 6. 10. 12. Of this sort are first of
all, all even numbers, then all those odd numbers which in the eleventh
definition of the seventh book are called oddely odd: which may be divided by
an odd number into an odd number, as 9. 15. 21. 25. 27. etc.

Numbers compared one with an other, some are Prime in respect one of an other,
which can not commonly be divided by any other number, but by an unity.

Other some are compound in respect one of an other, which may be commonly
divided by one or more numbers.

This difference of numbers compared together, is drawn out of the former,
and is set down in the twelfth and eleventh definition of the seventh book.
Numbers prime in respect one of another, have no common divisor beside an
unity, which measures all numbers: As 3 and 8, 6 and 7, 5 and 12. Therefore
when the numbers given are prime one to an other, there can no less numbers be
given in the same proportions. So that prime numbers are the least, and the
least are prime numbers, as appears in the twenty and twenty four
proposition of the seventh book. And therefore, when the numbers given are
prime, they are also the terms of the proportion given, as we shall see
afterward. Compound numbers in respect one of an other, may commonly be divided
by one, or many numbers, as 3 and 9, 9 and 15: for 3 is the common Divisor of
them both. Item 12, 18, 24, may be commonly divided not only by 6, but also by
3 and 2.

If you would know whether the numbers given, be prime or compounde one to
an other, you may do it by the Theoreme following.

Two unequal numbers being given, if in subducting the less from the greater
as often as may be, the remainder divides not that which went before it,
until it come to an unity, the numbers given are prime one to an other. 1.
prop. 7.

As in 4 and 11, 18 and 7, 35 and 12, in subducting the one from the other
continually, you shall come to an unity: wherefore I say, that they be prime
in respect one of an other.

And hereby we may easily conclude, if after the continual subducting of the
one from the other, we come not down to an unity, but meet with some one
number dividing that which went before: the numbers given are compound in
respect one of an other. As in 14 and 6, 30 and 18, 49 and 14.

An abridgement of the former work.

For so much as division is nothing but an often subduction, if you divide the
greater number given by the less, you may do the former work more readily.
Yet in dividing the numbers after this manner, you must have no regard to the
quotient, but compare the Divisor with the remainder. As I prove that 234 and
17 are prime numbers one to the other, by division thus.

In compound numbers take these for example 144 and 27.

CHAP. VII. Of the greatest common Divisor, and the least common dividend.
NVmbers are divided after the manner before named. Moreover out of the
difference of numbers compared together, there arises a double invention: one
is the finding out of the greatest common divisor, the other of the least
common dividend.

For so much as compound numbers may be divided often times by many diuisors,
the drift of the first invention is out of many to choose the greatest number,
which may be the common divisor, or as Euclide terms it the common measure of
them all. The numbers therefore given

Are either
Two only, and no more, as in the first Rule. I. Three or more, and in them we
meet with the greatest common divisor, either. At the first. II. Or at the
second time. III.

The finding out of the greatest common divisor is to be learned by the
Theoreme following.

I. If after the continual subduction of two numbers given, the one from the
other, as often as may be (which may more briefly be done by division) there
remain some one number which will exactly divide them both: The number
remaining shall be their greatest common divisor.

As in 76 and 20, their greatest common divisor is 4, as appears by this.

Item of these compound numbers 63 and 4, their greatest common divisor is 7.

II. When there are three numbers given, if the greatest common divisor of the
two foremost, being compared with the third, do divide it also, that divisor
shall be the greatest common divisor of them all: and so forth in the rest, be
they never so many. 3 prop. 7.

As 14. 21. 35. 63. Compound numbers. 7 The greatest common divisor. 2. 3. 5.
9. The quotients of the numbers, being prime numbers one to an other.

Here 7 being the greatest common divisor of the two for most 14 and 21,
compared with the third number 35, divides it also and in like manner the
fourth 63: wherefore it is the greatest common divisor of them all.

III. But when the greatest common divisor of the foremost, divides not those
which follow, then comparing the first divisor, found out with the third
number, the greatest common divisor of the numbers compared together shall be
the common divisor of the numbers given: and so forth in the rest be they
never so many 3 prop. 7.

As between 18. 12. 9. The greatest common divisor between 18 and 12, is 6, the
which number for so much as it cannot divide 9, compare 9 and 6 together by
themselves, and then because the greatest common divisor of 6 and 9 is 3, it
shall be also the greatest common Divisor of all the numbers given. The example
is thus set down.

18 12 9 The numbers given. 6 The numbers compared. 3 The greatest Divisor.

See also this example following of four compound numbers in respect one of an
other, wherein there is a double comparison made, and the greatest common
Divisor divides it self also.

8 16 28 26 The numbers given. 8 The comparisons. 4 2 The greatest common
divisor.

The greatest common divisor is found out as is aforesaid. Now follows the
finding out of the least number that may commonly be divided by the numbers
given: that is, such a number, then which there cannot be a less, which two
or more numbers given may exactly divide.

Euclide calls it the least that may be divided by certain numbers. For as
many numbers given may make many compound numbers, even so also they may divide
them, out of which numbers to chose the least that may be divided, is greatly
available to the readiness and easiness of numbering.

The numbers whose least common dividend we seek for, are either
Only two alone, and those Prime one to another. I. or Compound. II.
Many, wherein we find our the least number that may be divided. At the first.
III. Or At the second time. IIII.

The finding out of the least number that may be commonly divided by certain
numbers given, is learned by the Theoremes following.

I. If the two numbers given, be prime one to an other, their product is the
least number that may be commonly divided by them.

As 15 the product of 3 and 5, being prime numbers one to an other, is their
least common dividend. Item 63 is the least number commonly divided by 9 and 7

II. But if the two numbers given, be compound one to an other, if the quotient
of the one, found out by the greatest common divisor, multiply the other, the
product shall be the least number that may be divided by them two. 36 prop. 7.

As for example, I divide 9 and 12, being compound one to another by 3, their
greatest common divisor, the quotient will be 3 and 4. Then if I multiply
either 9 by 4, or 12 by 3 crossewayes, the product 36 shall be the least number
that may be commonly divided by 9 and 12, the numbers given:

9 12 3 3 4 36 15 21 3 5 7 105

III. But when there be more then two numbers given, if the third divides
that which the two former divided, the first numbers found out shall be the
least that may commonly be divided by them all.

As these three numbers 6. 10. 15. compound one to an other being given,
because 30 being the least number to be divided by 6 and 10, may also be
divided by 15, which is the third number, therefore it is the least that may be
divided by them all. Likewise in 4. 7. 28, because 28 being the least number
that may commonly be divided by 4 and 7, it may also be divided by the third
number 28, as by it self, it shall be the least number that may be divided by
the numbers given. As in these examples.

6 10 15 2 3 5 30 30 4 7 28 28 28

IIII. But if the third number does not divide that number which the former
numbers did divide, then compare the least dividend found out, with the third
number: the number which may commonly be divided by the numbers thus compared
together, shall be the least that may be divided by them all: and so forth in
the rest. 38 prop. 7.

As in 4, 8, 12, the least dividend is 24. Item in 6, 16, 28, the least common
dividend is, 336, as you see.

4 8 12 4 1 2 8 4 2 3 24 6 16 28 2 3 8 48 4 12 7 336

So, the least number that may be divided by 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 12, 15, 30,
is 60, whereupon it comes to pass, that this number has so greatly pleased
the Astronomers in numbering their parts.

1 2 3 4 5 6 10 12 15 30 The number given. 2 The numbers compared. 6 2 3 2 12
60 6 10 1 60 10 6 1 60 12 5 1 60 15 4 1 60 30 2 1 60 The least common dividend.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Accidental numeration of parts which commonly they call
Reduction.
The numeration of parts is
Accidental: and is called Reduction, which is of parts unto parts either of
Least terms. One denomination.
Unto whole numbers, which is either of Proper parts. Improper parts.

Or Essential, which is Prime, as Addition. Subduction.
Second, as Multiplicatio^. Division.


HItherto we have spoken of the numeration of whole numbers: now follows the
numeration of parts, wherein the numbers given are only parts. And it is also
double, Accident all and Essential.

Accidental numeration is that which by reduction changes the form and
fashion of the parts, changing their value nothing at all.

This numeration in one word is commonly called reduction, where the parts are
so ordered, that they only take unto the^ another shape, such an one as is
fittest for the work ensuing.

Reduction is double: the one is of parts unto parts, the other of parts unto
whole numbers.

Reduction of parts unto parts, is that which finds out other parts
proportionable to the parts given, by reducing them either to less terms or
to terms of one denomination.

Reduction of parts to less terms, is that which divides the terms of the
parts given (being compound numbers one to another) by their greatest common
divisor: and takes their quotients in stead of their numbers given.

Seeing that parts have their value only of the proportion that is between
the upper number and the neathermost, and every proportion is best known when
it is set down in least terms: therefore in the parts also it shall not be
amiss to reduce them which are written in greater terms (that is, with
numbers compound one to an other) or lesser terms, the which thing is done by
the common divisor. For the quotients have the same proportion that the numbers
divided have, as appears by the 35 prop. 7. So that their value is not
changed.

The proof also of this may be taken out of the 17 prop. 7. which says, If a
number multiply two other numbers, the products shall have the same proportion
that the multipliers have. Contrariwise therefore if a number divide other two
numbers, the quotients and the numbers divided shall have one proportion the
one to the other. As if 4 multiply 6 and 8, their products 24 and 32 shall have
the same proportion which the numbers given have. Again, if you divide these
products 24 and 32 by 4, the same numbers to wit, 6 and 8 will return again
in the quotient. If the parts given therefore be 6/21 they must not be set
down in these terms, but must be reduced straight ways to 2/7. Likewise 4/16
divided by 4, come to 1/4. So 108/252 may be reduced by 36 their greatest
common divisor to 3/7.

By this kind of Reduction not only the terms of the same parts, but also
the terms of diverse parts may be reduced crossewayes one by an other: that
is, the numerator of the one, and the denominator of the other. As 2/3 and 5/8
their terms being reduced crossewayes will be 2/3 5/4.

But this rule concerning the Reduction of diverse parts, is not so general
as the other of one and the same parts. For it is more special and peculiar,
as it were to multiplication, as we shall see hereafter, wherefore we must not
think that all such parts given may be reduced after this manner.

Reduction of parts to one denomination is that, which (when the parts given
are of diverse denomitations) takes first the least number which may be
divided by the denominators, for the common Denominator, and then dividing that
number by the denominators of the parts given, sets down the products made
by the quotients, and by the numerators of the parts given for the numerators
of the partswhich we seek for.

It is a thing of great use to reduce the parts given to one denomination, and
to make them proportionable one to an other in the least terms that may be:
that is; of parts of diverse kinds, to make parts of one and the same kind.
As for example if 3/4 and 5/6 were to be brought to one denomination, I must
first seek out the least number that may be divided by 4 and 6, which is 12,
then I divide 12 by their denominators 4 and 6, and multiply 3 and 5 the
numerators of the parts given by the quotients 3 and 2, the products 9 and 10
shall be the numerators of the parts sought out: and the least number which
might be divided by the denominators: to wit, 12, shall be the common
denominator to them both. As in this example.

See also the examples following.

In the first example therefore, the parts of one denomination are 9/12 10/12,
and they be likewise the least proportionable to the parts given. For as in 3/4
4 is to 12, so is 3 to 9: and in 5/6 as 6 is to 12, so is 5 to 10, and so forth
in the other examples.

By this rule of reduction we may know whether the parts being of diverse
denominations be equal or unequal. For being brought to one denomination, if
they have the same numerators they be equal: if not, they be unequal: they
that have the greatest numerator are the greatest, and they that have the least
numerator are the less. As if it should fall into question what proportion
there were between 5/6 and 10/12. Item between 5/7 and 13/21, whether they be
equal or unequal, this rule will take away the doubt: and will declare that
the former parts are equal, the latter unequal, and 5/7 to be the greater,
13/21 the lesser, as you see here.

To this reduction of parts to parts, succeeds the reduction of parts to
whole numbers, and it is either of proper or improper parts.

The first reduction of proper parts takes the numerators of many parts,
having one denomination for the parts given.

As 3/5 and 4/5 are reduced to whole numbers when the numerators of the parts
given 3 and 4, being as it were proportionable to the parts given, are taken
for the parts themselves: so likewise we reduce these parts 1/9 4/9 7/9 to
whole numbers, when we take 1, 4, 7, the numerators for the parts themselves.

Reduction of improper parts takes the quotient of the numerator divided by
the denominator, for the parts given.

This reduction is used when the parts are but one, and their value either
equal or greater then the whole, as 3/3 10/5 27/9. If you divide the
numerators of every part severally by his denominator, the quotients will be 1,
2, 3.

Hitherto also may those parts be referred whose denominators do not exactly
divide the numerators, as 36/7 are reduced to 5 1/7 and 29/6 to 4 5/6.

CHAP. IX. Of the Essential numeration of parts.
WE have spoken of the Accident all numeration of parts. Now follows the
Essential numeration, which numbreth the parts either by increasing, or
diminishing them.

There be two kinds of Essential numeration. The first gives the same
denominator to the numerator found out, which the parts have that be given:
and it is either Addition or Subduction.

Addition adds together the numerators having one denomination, and sets
the common denominator of the parts given under the total.

Parts of diverse denominations the one being greater or less then the other,
can not be added together without confounding of the denominators, wherefore it
is needful to reduce them to one denomination. As if you add 3/5 to 4/5 the
total will be 7/5, or by reduction 1 2/5. Item add 3/4 to 5/8, here if you
should confound 4 with 8, the total should have his denominator of neither of
them both. Wherefore the parts must first be brought to one denomination, and
then be added together. As in this example.

The Reduction. The Addition. The total.

Likewise in adding 1/2 unto 5/6 and 3/11 there arise 106/66, or by reduction,
1 20/33. The example is thus. Reduction. Addition. The parts found out.

Subduction is a numeration which subducting the numerators of the parts
given, having one denomination, one from the other, takes the common
denominator of the parts given, for the denominator of the remainder.

As in subducting 3/8 from 7/8 there remains 4/8 or 1/2. Item subduct 1/3 from
10/13. Here for so much as the parts be of diverse denominations, you must
reduce them to 13/39 and 30/39, then subducting the numerators one from
another, that is, 13 from 30, there remains 17, under which you must set the
common denominator, so that the parts found out are 17/39. As in this example.

Thus much of the first kind of the Essential numeration of parts: the second
kind gives to the numerator found out an other denominator then the parts
have which are given. And it is either Multiplication or Division.

Multiplication is that which multiplying the terms of one kind together
(that is the numerators by the numerators, and the denominators by the
denominators) takes the products for the terms of the parts found out.

This multiplication is properly the finding out of other parts then are given,
which are to one of the parts given, as the other is to an unity: and it is
wrought by multiplying both the numerators and the denominators of the parts
given one by an other, whereby we may necessarily conclude, that the parts
found out are always less then the parts multiplied. As if there were 1/2 to
be multiplied by 1/3, multiplying the numerators and the denominators one by
the other, the product is 1/6, which is to 1/3, as 1/2 is to 1. For as 1/2 is
the half of one, so 1/6 is the half of 1/3, wherefore 1/6 is less then 1/3
or 1/2. This perhaps may be perceived more easily in the numbering of some
certain thing. As for example, in a degree there be 60 minutes, therefore 1/2
of a degree are 30 minutes, 1/3 20 minutes, 1/6 10 minutes: as therefore 60 are
to 30, so are 20 to 10. Again in a shilling there are twelve pence, therefore
1/2 of a shilling are six pence, 1/3 four pence, 1/6 2 pence: as therefore a
shilling is to six pence, so are four pence to two pence. Item if 5/7 be
multiplied by 3/4 the product will be 15/28.

The abridgement of multiplication.

If the opposite terms of the parts given be numbers compound one to an
other, then in their stead take their quotients found out by their greatest
common divisor: and then work the multiplication as before.

As, multiply 3/4 by 5/18. Here for so much as 3 and 18 being opposite terms,
are compound one to another, you shall set down in their stead their quotients
1 and 6 found out by their common Divisor, so that the parts thus reduced shall
be 1/4 and 5/6. Now multiplying 1 by 5, and 4 by 6, the product will be 5/24.
Likewise if 3/7 should be multiplied by 14/15, first you must reduce them to
1/1 and 2/5, which being multiplied one by the other, make 2/5. As in these
examples.

So if 3/10 5/6 and 1/4 be multiplied together, they give 1/16. For first 3/10
and 5/6 being multiplied together, do make 1/4, which being afterward
multiplied with 1/4 make 1/16. Thus:

Correlarie gathered of the former abridgement.

Of this reduction of numbers this consequence is gathered. If the cross or
opposite terms of many parts be equal one to the other, then neglecting them
which are equal, the numerator remaining set over the denominator remaining,
is the product of the^ all.

As if 4/5 5/6 6/7 7/8, were to be multiplied together, I cast away the middle
numbers which are equal, and see 4 the numerator over 8 the denominator, so
that the product is 4/8 or by reduction 1/2. The reason hereof is this, because
the cross terms being as it were compound one to the other, are by reduction
to one denominator brought to unities thus, 4/1 1/1 1/1 1/8. But for so much as
an unity in multiplication changes not a number, therefore the figure 4
multiplied by the three unities in the same rank, makes but 4, no more does 8.

Moreover it appears by this proportion which is in multiplication, that
second parts may well be reduced to principal parts by this means, as 1/3
out of 3/4 are 3/12 or 1/4 of the whole, which thing may be easily perceived in
the numbering of any thing, as 3/4 of a degree are 45 minutes, whose third part
are 15 minutes, which are equal to 1/4 of a degree. So 2/3 of ^/4 parts of a
crown are half a crown. For 3/4 are three shillings nine pence, whose 2/3
parts are two shillings six pence. So 5/6 1/2 of 3/8 by multiplication are
brought to 15/96 or 5/32. And thus much of multiplication of parts.

Division is that which in stead of the parts given divides whole numbers
proportionable unto them.

The division of parts is properly the finding out of a quotient which is in
proportion to the dividend, as an unity is to the divisor. Whereby it is
manifest, that the quotient must needs be greater then the parts which are
divided, otherwise then it is in division of whole numbers: for there the
quotient is always less then the dividend. This invention comes of the
division of such numbers as are proportionable to the parts given, for so much
as the parts themselves can not be divided.

First therefore divide these parts of one denomination, to wit, 9/10 by 3/10.
Here therefore you shall reduce them (by the former reduction to whole numbers)
unto 9 and 3, then shall you divide 9 by 3, the quotient will be 3, which
declares that 3/10 the divisor is contained in 9/10, the dividend three times,
and as 3/10 are to one, so are 9/10 to three: the which quotient therefore is
bigger then the parts divided.

Divided 5/6 by 3/6, that is, see how many times 3/6 are contained in 5/6.
First you shall reduce the parts given to whole numbers proportionable unto
them, that is, to 5 and 3, then shall you divide 5 by 3, the quotient will be 1
2/3. Contrariwise, 3/6 divided by 5/6 give in the quotient 3/5. For both the
denominators being neglected, I set the one numerator over the other as parts,
because the one cannot be divided by the other.

Furthermore if you divide parts of diverse denominations, as 3/4 by 1/3, you
shall first make the parts of one denomination, reducing them to 9/12 and
4/12: then by the former reduction you shall bring them to whole numbers, and
divide 9 by 4, the quotient will be 2 1/4. Divide 8/9 by 5/6, reduce the parts
to one denomination, that is, to 16/18 and 13/18, then reduce these parts
having one denomination to whole numbers 16 and 15, which being divided one by
another, make in their quotient 1 1/15.

CHAP. X. Of mixed numeration.
Mixed numeration is either
Accidental, and is reduction of Whole numbers, Or Mixed numbers.
Essential, whereof there are two kinds Prime, as Addition. Subduction.
Second, as Multiplicatio^. Division.


Hitherto of simple numeration. It remains now to speak of mixed numeration
wherein the numbers given are whole numbers and parts together. And this
numeration also as that of the parts is double. First Accident all, which
beside the former reduction consists of the reduction both of whole and mixed
numbers unto parts.

Reduction of whole numbers unto parts takes the product made of the whole
numbers given, and the denominator of the parts given, for the numerator of the
parts which we seek for.

This reduction may be drawn out of the ^^^uction of improper parts, as it
were a consequence following it. For as you reduce 4/4 by division unto 1
whole, so contrariwise you shall bring one whole to 4 quarters, if you multiply
one whole by 4 which is the denominator of the parts, for they will return to
4/46

Item, as 30/5 by division are reduced to 6 an whole number: so if you multiply
6 by 5 the denominator of the parts, and take the product 30 for the
numerator, and 5 for the denominator, there will be again 30/5 which are
equal to the whole numbers given. Thus whole numbers as often as the use of
numeration requires, are written as parts, by setting an unity underneath
them. As for example these whole numbers, 2, 5, 9, having an unity set
underneath them for their denominator shall be as it were parts after this
manner, 259/111

Reduction of mixed numbers takes the product made of the whole numbers given,
and the denominator of the parts given being added to the numerator, for the
numerator of the parts found out.

As you may reduce 4 3/7 into parts, if you multiply 4 by 7, the denominator
of the parts given, and add 3 the numerator, to 28 the product, taking the
total 31 for the numerator, and setting the denominator given underneath it,
thus, 31/7. Likewise reducing 6 3/4, there come forth 27/4, and so forth in
the rest.

Thus much concerning the accidental numeration of mixed numbers: now remain
the special kinds of numeration, whereof the first numbreth the terms of
mixed numbers severally by themselves alone: that is, the whole numbers by
themselves, and the parts by themselves, and that by adding or subducting them,
vvhereupon it is called addition and subduction.

These kinds of numeration differ nothing from the former, but are in
proportion all together like unto them.

The examples of Addition.

I. Add 3 and 2 4/5 the total will be 5 4/5.

II. Item add 3/4 to 6 6/7, first the parts added together are 45/28, or by
reduction 1 17/28, the total therefore is 7 17/28.

III. Add 8 7/9 to 4 1/2, first the parts added together are 23/18, or by
reduction 1 5/18, then add, 1 to 4 make 5, which being added to 8, are 13. So
that the total is 13 5/18.

The examples of Subduction.

I. Take from 3 the whole number 5/9, here I reduce an unity of the whole
number to 9/9, and there remains 2. Afterward I subduct 5/9 out of 9/9, there
remain 4/9. The remainder therefore of the numbers given to be numbered is, 2
4/9.

II. Item, take 1/4 from 8 1/5. Here because 1/4 cannot be taken out of 1/5, to
wit, the greater from the less: I take 1 from 8, there remain 7, then I bring
1 and 1/5 by the reduction of mixed numbers unto 6/5, from whence (after I have
brought the parts to one denomination) I take 1/4, there remain 19/10. So that
the remainder of the numbers given is, 7 19/20.

III. Take 4 from 10 1/2, the remainder will be 6 1/2.

IIII. Take 5 7/12 from 7 5/8. Here first you shall make the parts of one
denomination, that is, 15/24 14/24. Then taking 5 from 7 there remain 2, then
also subducting the parts having one denomination one from the other, there
remains 1/24. The remainder therefore of the parts given is, 2 1/24.

The latter kind of mixed numeration numbreth the terms of the mixed numbers
given jointly together: that is, the whole numbers with the parts, and that
by multiplying or dividing them: vvhereupon it is called Multiplication or
Division.

If 3/4 were to be multiplied by 5, setting down the whole numbers after the
manner of parts, I multiply 5/1 by 3/4, the product is 15/4 or by reduction 3
3/4.

The value of the parts is sought out after this manner. As if you would know
what 5/8 of a circle were, I set down the whole parts of a circle were, I set
down the whole parts of a circle, that is, 360 degrees after the common order
of parts, thus, 360/1: then multiplying the numbers given together, the
product is 1800/8, or by reduction unto whole numbers, 225. So many degrees are
5/8 of a circle.

So likewise if you would have 1/7 of 10 ^/8, first you shall reduce the last of
the two numbers given by the reduction of mixed numbers into 83/8, which being
multiplied by 1/7, make 83/56, or by reduction 1 27/56.

Likewise if both the numbers given be mixed, as 4 1/3 and 5 3/11, the product
made by multiplication will be 754/33, or by the reduction of improper parts,
22 28/33.

The examples of Division.

If 4 were to be divided by 7/9, you must find out whole numbers proportionable
to the numbers given: for the whole 4 being reduced into 9, the parts will be
36/9 and 7/9, whereby I see that the whole numbers 36 and 7, are proportionable
unto the numbers given: and they being divided one by the other, make in the
quotient 5 1/7.

Item if 1/2 be divided by the whole number 3, 3 being reduced unto 6/2, I
find the whole numbers 1 and 6 to be proportionable to the numbers given:
which being divided the one by the other, make in the quotient 1/6. Item,
divide 8 2/3 by 4 3/5: here reduce the terms of both numbers by the reduction
of mixed numbers to 26/3 and 23/5, then make them of one denomination thus,
130/15 69/15, afterward reduce them to whole numbers proportionable unto them,
that is, to 130 and 69, which being divided one by the other, the quotient
shall be 1 61/69.

The end of the first part.
THE SECOND PART OF ARITHMETICKE.
CHAP. XI. Of the kinds of proportionalitie or reason.
E. The second part of Arithmeticke consists in the comparison.
Either of the terms, and is called proportionality or reason, whereof The one
is in equal terms: and is called the proportionalitie or reason of equality.
The other is in unequal terms: and is called the proportionalitie or reason
of inequality, and is to be considered Either according to the difference of
the terms. Or according to their quotient: and herein we are to note, The
kinds: for of the proportionalitie of inequality some is, Of the greater
inequality, and that is Either Prime, as Multiplex. or Simple, which is
Muitiplex Superparticular. Or Multiplex Superpartiens.


Of the lesser inequality, which is to be divided into as many kinds as the
former is divided into.
Or The handling of the kinds wherein we are to co^sidertheir Notation.
Numeration, which is, Addition. Or Subduction.




Or of the proportionalities or reasons. F.
HIther to of Simple, now follows Compare Arithmeticke, which consists in
repressing the nature and the quality of terms compared together.

In writing of proportions the numbers whereby they are expressed, are by a
Geometrical phrase called terms: by which word are to be understood such
quantities as are compared together. Hereupo^ generally such things as are
compared together are called Terms.

The co^paring of terms together, is called Proportion, which is a certain
respect which the terms have one to another according to their quantity.

This definition in this place is more general then the 3 def. of the 5 book of
Euclide, which faith, that Proportion is a certain respect of two magnitudes
of one kind only, according to their quantity. For in that place it was
requisite that there should be mention made of magnitudes of one kind only,
because that magnitudes are not al of one kind. But here those words may be
omitted, because al numbers are of one kind, and every one may be compared
together: and moreover the analogy or respect which they have one to another,
may be expressed by an other number, which thing cannot be done in all
magnitudes, though they be all of one kind itrationall, and surde magnitudes
can not be expressed by number.

The comparison of terms, is either equal or unequal, whereupon it is called
Proportion of equality or inequality.

Proportion of equality is one only, and not divided into many kinds.

As the proportion of 5 to 5, of 6 to 6, of 12 to 12. For both in these, and in
all other equal terms, the respect is all one, neither has it any more
kinds, because that one and the same number cannot be either more or less
equal to another.

Proportion of inequality is known either by the difference of the terms, or
by their quotient.

The proportion of difference, is that whereby one term differs from
another.

The proportion of the quotient is when one term contains another.

The proportion of difference is known by subduction, the proportion of the
quotient is known by division.

As in the natural order of the numbers the difference between 1 and 2, 2 and
3, 3 and 4, 4 and 5, 5 and 6, etc. is all one, that is an unity. Again, the
difference between 8 and 5 is 3, between 6 and 4 it is 2. But the proportion
of the quotient is by an especial phrase simply called proportion. As, the
proportion of 2 to 1 is double, of 3 to 2 sesquialter, of 24 to 3 octuple. For
the former terms (which commonly are called the antecedents) being divided by
the terms following (which are called the co^sequents) the quotients are 1, 1
1/2, 8: whereby we may gather that there may be now and then the same
difference between the terms though as touching the quotient their proportion
differ, as in 4 8 and 12, the difference between 4 and 8, and between 8 and 12,
is all one, yet the proportion gathered by their quotients is diverse, for in
the one it is 2, double, in the other it is but sesquialter 1 1/2. Contrariwise
also in terms the proportion of the quotient may be all one, though their
difference be diverse: as in 3 and 9, 4 and 12, the quotient is 3 triple in
them both: yet the difference is not a like, for in the former it is 6, in the
second it is 8.

Pro^portion of inequality is double, for either the greater term is
antecedent to the less, or consequent. Hereupon the one is called the
proportion of the greater inequality, the other the proportion of the lesser
inequality.

When two terms are compared together, the one is called the Antecedent, the
other the consequent. Therefore, as often as the greater term is the
antecedent and goes before, it is called the greater inequality. As when 6 is
compared to 3, and 3 to 2. But if the lesser term be the Antecedent, and we
consider what difference there is between that and the greater, it is called
the lesser inequality.

Both these fornamed proportions are either Prime or Second.

Prime, is a proportion of one kind only, and is either simple or multiplex.

Simple proportion, is when the greater term contains the less once and
somewhat more, as proportion Superparticular and Superpartiens.

Superparticular, is a simple proportion wherein the great^^^ term contains
the less, and one part more of the less.

As when 3 is compared to 2, 6 to 5, 8 to 7. For in these proportions the
antecedent contains the consequent once, and one part beside of the lesser
term. As it may be perceived by their quotients when they be divided thus, 1
1/2, 1 1/5, 1 1/7. This kind contains under it infinite other kinds,
whereof the first is sesquialter, the second sesquitertia, the fourth
sesquiquarta.

Item there is the same proportion between 12 and 8, that is between 15 and 10,
as appears by their terms reduced to the least denomination thus, 1 1/2.

Superpartiens is a simple proportion, wherein the greater term contains the
less, and ^ertaine parts of it.

As 5 to 2, 7 to 4, 13 to 8. For the antecedents being divided by the
consequents, their quotients declare their proportion on this manner, 1 2/3, 1
3/4, 1 5/8. Likewise the proportion between 15 and 9 is superpartiens, as
appears by the quotient and the parts reduced to the least denomination. 1
2/3.

Multiplex is a prime proportion when the greater term contains the less
certain times exactly.

Multiplex is defined after the same manner in the second defin. of the fifth
book of Euclide, which says, that Multiplex is a greater quantity in respect
of a less, when the less measures the greater.

As the proportions of 4 to 2, 9 to 3, 16 to 4 are multiplices, that is to say,
double, triple, quadruple: for their quotients are 2, 3, 4.

Second proportion consists of two kinds of proportion, and is either
multiplex superparticularis, or multiplex superpartiens.

It seems that these kinds of proportions are made of the former, by joining
two of their names together. For the one is the third kind of proportion
joined to the first, and the other is the third joined to the second.

Multiplex superparticular is is a compound proportion, wherein one term
contains another certain times, and one part besides.

As 5 to 2, 10 to 3, 13 to 4. For the quotients declaring their proportions,
are 2 1/29 3 1/3, 3 1/4.

Multiplex superpartiens, is when the one term contains the other, and
besides more parts then one.

Here we are to understand, that they be the true parts which are not equal
to the lesser term, as in 11 to 4, 12 to 5, 22 to 6. For the quotients are 2
3/4, 2 2/3, 3 2/3.

CHAP. XII. Of Notation and Numeration of proportions.
THus much for the kinds of proportion, now followetg the handling and practice
of them: which consists in Numeration and Notation.

Notation is the writing of the antecedents above, and the consequents beneath.

The Antecedents 4 8 6 Or 5 1

The Consequents 3 3 2 Or 6 2

The proportions being written, are expressed by the quotient (the parts if
there be any, being reduced to the least terms) which declares as well their
proportion as their denomination.

In multiplex proportion it is called double, triple, quadruple, octuple
proportion, where the quotients are 2, 3, 4, 8. In proportions of lesser
inequality this preposition Sub is generally added in them all. As for
example, it is called in Submultiplex, Subduple, Subtriple, Subquadruple, etc.
In Superparticular proportion (because the half of the greater number is the
proportion) it is called after the manner of the Latins Sesquialtera,
Sesquitertia, etc. putting the word Sequi in the beginning, and the
denominator of the parts in the ending as when the quotients are 1 1/2, 1 1/3,
1 1/4. In proportions of the lesser inequality we say, Subsesquialtera,
Subsesquitertia, etc.

Likewise Submultiplex, Superparticular, Submultiplex Superpartiens. For in
compound proportions the names are also compound, as in 3 1/1 triple
sesquiquarta, 2 4/4 dupla superquadripartiens, etc.

And thus much for instruction sake. For I know that these words are very
strange to us, and not heard of, nor used among the best writers. For they
when they would speak of the proportions of things, were wont to express them
by two numbers. As Archimedes in expressing the proportion of the circumference
of a circle to the Diameter, said not that it was triple sesquitertia, but as
22 was to 7.

Moreover the quotients teach us the way not only how to express the
proportions given, but also how to set them down in the least terms. For if
you set an unity underneath, or over against the quotients being whole
numbers, you shall find out the least terms of the multiplex which you seek
for. As in the multiplices, if you set an unity right against 3, 4, 5, the
proportion in the least terms will be triple, quadruple, quintuple. Again, if
you reduce the quotients being mixed numbers, by the second reduction of mixed
numbers unto parts, you shall in like manner find out the least terms in the
other kind of proportions: as in Superparticular proportion, if you seek for
the least terms of 1 1/2 sesquialtera, 1 1/3 sesquitertia, 1 1/8 sesquioctaua,
then the quotients reduced after the foresaid manner, the least terms will be
these.

3 4 9 2 3 8

The like is in all the other kinds, as if you would find out the least terms
in duple superpartiens five six parts, then shall you of 2 5/6 make the
antecedent 17, and the consequent 6, and they shall be the least terms in the
proportion assigned, and so forth in the rest.

Thus much for notation. Numeration is the addition or subtraction of
proportions.

Addition, is that which takes the products made by multiplying the like
terms together, (that is, by multiplying the antecedents by the antecedents,
and the consequents by the consequents) for the terms of the compound portion.

The adding of proportions is set down in the fifth def. of the sixth book
thus. A Proportion is said to be made of proportions, when the qua^tities of
the proportions multiplied together produce another proportion. By the
quantities of the proportions he means the quotients whereof the proportions
take their names. As if you add a sesquialtera to an equal proportion, it
makes a sesquialtera. Add a sesquiquarta to a duple superpartiens two third
parts, the product will be a sesquitertia: as you see in these examples.

Simple proper. Co^pound proport. Simple. Co^pound. Anteced. 3 4 12 1 8 40
Conseq. 2 4 8 4 3 12 That is, add 1 1/2 unto 0 1 1/2 1 1/4 unto 2 2/3 3 1/3

That the products made of multiplying the terms together, have a compound
proportion appears by the 5 prop. of the eight book of Euclide, which says,
that Plain or superficial numbers, are in that proportion one to the other
which is composed of their sides. As 3 and 12 being plain numbers, have
proportion one to another, according to their sides, as you see. The sides. The
plain numbers. 3 4 12 1 3 3

If diverse proportions be to be added together, first add two of them, then
add the compound to that which remains. As if the proportions given were, 2
6 10 1 5 4

First two of them added together, make 18/5 to which the third proportion
being added, makes a Sextuple. 120/22: 6.

Thus every proportion may be tripled or quadrupled: if the terms of the
proportion given being set down three or four times be added together after
the foresaid manner. So a double proportion being tripled, makes an octuple.
And a sesquialtera being doubled four times, makes a quintuple sesquidecima,
as you see here.

Subduction of proportions, is that which takes the products made of the
opposite terms of the proportion given, for the terms of the proportion
remaining.

Which proportion is least, and which may be subduced one from the other in
Multiplices may be easily known by the denomination only. But in the other
(the terms being compared together as parts) it may be gathered by that which
has been taught before in the parts. Subduction seems to be the consequence
of that which was set down in the fifth def of the sixth book. For if the
addition of proportions be wrought by multiplycation, it follows then that
subduction must be wrought by division. Therefore whether you divide the
quotients one by the other, or multiply the opposite terms of the parts given
one by the other (for in parts the multiplying of the terms crossewayes is as
much as division) the terms produced will have a proportion left like unto the
former.

As take a sesquialtera from a double proportion, the remainder will be a
sesquitertia. Item, take a sesquiquarta from a double sesquialtera, there
remains a double, as in these examples. The prop. given. The rem. The propor.
given. The remainder. Anteced. 2 3 4 5 5 20 2 or Conseq. 1 2 3 2 4 10 1 2 from
1 1/2 1 1/3 2 1/2 from 1 1/4 2

There is no multiplication in proportions properly as in numbers, unless you
take the continuing of the proportions for their multiplication. Neither is
there any division required in them beside the finding out of one or more
proportionals. Wherefore we will proceed to the rest.

CHAP. XIII. Of proportion and the kinds thereof, but especially of
Arithmeticall proportion.
F. The comparison of reasons, is
Either of unequal reasons, and is called improportion, whereo^ in the 8 d. 5.
with the which Arithmeticke does not meddle. Or of equal reasons, and is
called proportion, consisting Either in the equality of the differences: and
is called Arithmeticall proportion, which is Either disiunct, Or continual,
and this again is, Either simple, Or multiplex, and is called progression:
wherein we are to observe, Either the order of the terms, Continual, as they
follow one another. Or Interrupted, when we seek but for certain terms.
Or the sum of the terms.


Or in the equality of the quotients: and is called Geometrical proportion. G.

NOw that we have spoken of comparing the terms together it remains to
speak of the comparison of reasons, wherein first we have to deal with
proportion.

Proportion is the equality of reasons.

Euclide in the fourth definition of the fifth book, defines proportion to
be a similitude of reasons. Aristotle in the fifth book and 3. Chapter of the
Ethickes, calls it an equality of reasons. If we should define it to be
the Identitie of reasons, we should not vary much from the meaning of Euclide,
who in the sixth definition of the fifth book speaks after the same manner,
calling them proportional quantities which have the same reason one to
another. And albeit that these definitions do properly agree to Geometrical
proportion, yet if you take the word reason in the largest sense, for any kind
of respect it shall be general, so that as reason or proportionalitie is a
mutual respect of two terms one to another, so proportion shall be a respect
of like terms one to another.

Proportion is either Arithmeticall or Geometrical.

Arithmeticall proportion is an equality of differences.

As in 8, 7, 6, and in 12, 9, 6, 3. Here are two proportions, wherein you may
see an equality of differences, or an equal excess of the antecedents. In
the first, the difference is 1, in the latter it is 3. So likewise in 15, 11:
8, 4, as 15 exceed 11 by 4, so 8 exceed 4 by 4.

Arithmeticall proportion is double, for either it is continued in the terms,
or it is severed, vvhereupon it is called continual, or disiunct proportion.

These differences are common both to Arithmeticall, and to Geometrical
proportion. That proportion is continual wherein not only the extremes are
continued together by one mean, but generally every proportion, wherein many
and sundry middle terms have a continual respect one to another, so that any
of them may be either the antecedent or the consequent. In so much, that not
only the proportion between 3, 2, 1 is continual: where 2 is the consequent
of the former, and the antecedent of the latter proportion: but this also 5, 7,
9, 11, where the same difference is continued from the first to the last. And
any of the middle numbers either 7 or 9, have the same nature in respect of
them that go before and follow after, that 2 had in the former example.

Proportion is severed in the terms when the first only has the same respect
to the second, that the third has to the fourth, but the second agrees not
proportionablie with the third: that is, when all the terms in order as they
follow are not of like proportion one to the other. As 10, 8, 4, 2, are
severally proportional because 2 the first difference is not continued between
8 and 4. So that here is a seuering not only of the terms, but also of the
proportions. Leaving therefore in this place to speak of disiunct proportion,
we will handle that which is continual.

Continual proportion is either Simple, where the extremes have but one
middle term: or manifold, wherein many middle terms go on in order
continually: vvhereupon it is called progression.

Progression is a continual enlarging of the terms of the proportion given:
wherein there are two extremes given, and many other numbers in the middle
between them.

In Arithmeticall progression we are to find out two things, either the number
of the terms as they stand in order, or else their sum.

Sometimes the terms be all sought for as they follow in order, and are found
out by the continual adding of the difference to the last term in the
progression.

As if you would know the terms of this progression 1, 5, 9, 13, as they
follow in order, you must add 4, which is the difference unto 13, then the
fifth term will be 17, to which if you add 4 again, it makes 21, which is
the sixth term, and so forth infinitely.

Sometime breaking off their natural order, we seek for some one term in the
progression, which may be found out by the Theoreme following.

The progression increasing, if you take an unity from the name of the term
which you seek for, and add the product made of the remainder, and the common
difference of the terms, unto the first term, the total will be that which
you desire. The progression decreasing, if that product be taken from the first
term the remainder is the term sought for.

As in this progression 4, 7, 10, where the difference is 3, I desire to know
the 12 term beginning at 4. Here 12 is the name of the term which I seek
for, from whence I take 1, and multiply 11 which remain by 3 the difference,
the product is 33, whereto I add 4 the first term. So the total is 37 the
term which I sought for. Likewise the 30 term is 91, and so forth. The
terms 4 7 10 37 91 The names or number of the terms. 1 2 3 12 30

Thus much for the finding out of the terms. The finding out of the sum is
the half of the product made by multiplying the two extremes added together,
and the name of the last term, as it stands in order.

As in this example, 1, 5, 9, 13, 17, 21, both the extremes added together
make 22, the name of the last term is 6, for it is the sixth in order. Whereby
if you multiply 22, the product will be 132, the half whereof (that is) 66, is
the sum sought for.

This rule may be proved by the 41 prop. of the first book of Euclide, which
says, If a parallelogramme and a triangle have one and the self same base,
and be in the same altitude, the parallelogramme shall be double to the
triangle. The numbers then of the progression represent the triangle: whereof
one side is the name of the last term, or (as they commonly term it) the
number of the places: the other is the extremes added together. But for so much
as the product made of these two sides makes not a triangle, but a
parallelogramme, therefore in taking the one half I gather by it how big the
platform of the triangle is, which is the sum of the progression.

The example of this progression 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, is set down here as you see:

5 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 The whole parallelogram is 60, wherefore 30 which is
the half, is the sum of the progression. 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1
0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 12

To set forth the profit and use of this in resolving certain questions, let
this be the first example.

For so much as a natural day has 24 hours, I demand how many strokes the
clock will strike in a day.

In this example we seek for the number of the strokes beginning at one, and
adding one till you come to the 24 term. After this manner the clockes in
Italy and Norinberge are made. Both the extremes added together make 25, which
being multiplied by 24, the name of the last place, make 600, whose half are
300 strokes, which is the sum sought for.

Another.

There be 30 eggs laid in a rank, every one three foot from another. I
must put them in a basket which stands 13 foot from the first egg: yet so
that at every time I go to and fro I must take up but one. The question is,
how far a man may go before I have gathered them all.

This was wont to be a pastime used amongst young men, when one gathered the
eggs and put them in a basket without breaking them, and another went to a
certain place and came again, so he which first had done his task, got the
game. Here the question is about the sum of the Arithmeticall progression. 13
16 19 40 64 100 1 2 3 10 18 30

Both the extremes together are 113, the product made of this sum, and the
name of the last term is 3390, whose half is 1693 feet, which make 339
Geometrical paces. This space he goes and comes, wherefore the double of it
which was first found out, that is 3390 feet, or 678 paces is the sum which we
sought for.

CHAP. XIIII. Of Geometrical proportion, and of the golden rule belonging
thereunto.
G. Geometrical proportion is two fold.
Disiunct: out of whose propriety a rises the golden rule: and that is,
Simple: simple proportions is Direct: before which there goes Either no kind
of Arithmeticall account Chap. 14. Or some Arithmeticall account, and that
Either simple, as the numeration of Whole numers. Chap. 15. Parts or fractions.
Chap. 16. Mixed numbers.
Chap. 17. Or, compared as the proportion Arithmeticall. Geometrical.


Or Reciprocal. Chap. 18.
Or Manifold. H.
Coniunct or Continual. L.
THus much of Arithmeticall proportion, Geometrical follows, which is the
equality of reasons.

Here this word Reason is not taken generally, but specially, for the equality
of the quotients arising of the numbers compared together. As in 2, 6, 4, 12,
what reason or proportionalitie is between 2 and 6, the same is between 4 and
12, that is, subtriple. And if four numbers be directly proportional, they
shall be also proportional backwarde, and crossewayes in this manner.

2 6 4 12 Direct. 6 2 12 4 Backward. 2 4 6 12 Crossewaies.

Geometrical proportion is double: Disiunct, or Continual.

Disiunct is that, that agrees neither in terms nor proportionalitie, or
reason.

As in 6, 3, 16, 8, for here are two double proportions distinquished both in
terms and in reason, because that between 3 and 16 there is not the same
reason observed, that is between 6 and 3 and between 16 and 8.

Disiunct proportion consists of four terms at the least. It has this
property that the product of the extremes, is equal to the product made of
the middle numbers, and contrariwise. 16. p. 6. and 19. p. 7.

Among the properties of Geometrical proportion set forth by Euclide, this is
most excellent and necessary to be known, because the force and fruitfulness
thereof is such, that it may very well be called the head of cyphering, that
is, the foundation and offspring of all rules, as we shall see hereafter. It
has this meaning, that the number made by multiplying of the first into the
fourth, is equal to the number made by multiplying the second into the
third, as in 6, 4, 18, 12, the product made of 6, multiplied by 12 is 72, the
which number arises by multiplying the middle numbers 4 and 18 one by another.
And this thing is proper to continual, and generally to all Geometrical
proportion, as we shall see hereafter.

This property ministers unto us the golden Rule, which three proportional
numbers being given, dividing the product made by multiplying the third into
the second by that which remains, finds out the fourth proportional
number.

Out of the fore named property, as out of a most plentiful spring is drawn
this Rule, wherein consists the chiefest parts of casting accounts. The
which some for the excellency of it do call the Rule, others the rule of
Proportion, other the rule of three, and all men all most in general, for the
excellent use of it, do call it the golden Rule. The drift and end of it, is
the finding out of a fourth term, or number, that shall have the same
proportion with the three numbers given: the which thing it brings to pass
by multiplying two terms of the proportions given one by the other, that is,
the antecedent of the one, and the consequent of the other, and dividing the
product by the other which remains: for the quotient will be the fourth
number of the proportion given.

As in 3, 2, 9, I desire to know the fourth that shall be to 9, as 2 to 3,
multiply therefore 2 by 9, and divide 18 the product by 3 which remains, the
quotient will be 6, the proportional number which was sought for.

The cause of this consequence is manifest, because having the product of the
middle numbers, it is all one as if you should say, that you had the product
made of the first and fourth numbers, and to prove that, or to bring to light
the fourth number lying hid in the product, you must divide the product by
the first number, and say, that the quotient is the other number unknown which
made the dividend: because that every number is divided by those numbers by
which it is made, and every product divided by one of the multiplicators
brings forth the other.

As in 9, 6, 12, I desire to find the fourth, multiply therefore 6 by 12, that
is the middle number, then I say, the product 72 is the product arising of 9,
and the fourth number unknown. The product then being had, and one of the
multipliers known, the other cannot any longer be hid. Wherefore I divide 72
by 9 the quotient will be 8, which is the other multiplier, and also the fourth
number in proportion: thus, 9, 6, 12, 8.

This rule is used in proportion simple or manifold.

Simple proportion is that which consists only of four terms or numbers.

The form whereof is double, for either the proportion proceeds directly
forward, or else backewarde, whereupon it is called Direct, or Reciprocal.

I call that Direct proportion, wherein as the first term is to the second,
so the third is to the fourth, and crossewayes.

Which is Direct proportion, may be easily gathered by this, that by how much
the third number is greater or less, by so much the fourth in order-shall be
greater or less, whether the numbers be given ordinarily, or crossewaies, or
backwards.

And it is handled two manner of ways, for sometimes besides the ordering of
the terms there is nothing else required: sometimes it requires some former
kind of numeration.

The ordering or disposing of the terms to conclude the proportion attributes
to every one that is given his own place: that is, to the thing which is
called into question, it gives the third place: the first place to the thing
of the same kind: the middle place to that which remains.

The lawful order of the terms is that in distinguishing the reasons, we
join the consequent of every reason to his own antecedent of the same kind.
As if I should say, seeing Jupiter in four months moves ten degrees in the
Zodiac: therefore in six months it moves 15 degrees. Here the proportion
ordinarily shall stand thus, 4, 6, 10, 15. For as 4 months is to 6 months,
so is 10 degrees unto 15 degrees. For here also the product made of the
extremes is equal to the product made of the middle numbers.

But the terms in the Rule of proportions is otherwise ordered, because in
things of one kind the question is not so moved, that they should be joined
together, but crossewayes. For we do not move the question customably from the
antecedent of the second reason to his consequent thus, if 4 months are 6
months, what are ten degrees? But the question is moved from the consequent
of the first reason to the consequent of the second crossewayes: if 4 months
give 10 degrees, then 6 months shall give 15 degrees. Therefore seeing the
proportion is moved crossewayes: and thereby may be handled more conveniently,
and may be better conceived by this means of the learner, therefore in the
ordering of the terms, we place them which be of like sort crossewayes in
sundry places, not jointly together.

And hereupon the question being moved somewhat confusedly, we must set that
term that has the question adjoined unto it in the third place, and the term
of the same kind, that is the term which betokens the same thing, and is
called by the same name in the first place: and the other in the midst: then
must we follow the Method and direction of the rule, multiplying the third
by the second, or contrariwise, the second by the third, and dividing the
product by the first.

The examples.

A traveler is to go 180 miles, whereof he goes 9 in two days, the
question is when he shall end his journey.

Here the question being propounded somewhat confusedly, you set in order the
terms. And for so much as the question is moved about the 180 miles, in what
time they may be gone thorough, you shall set that number in the third place,
the 9 miles being a term of the same sort, shall stand in the first place,
the two days in the middle. Then multiply 2 by 180, and divide the product 360
by 9, the quotient will be 40, the fourth number in proportion answering the
question. The example is thus:

If 9 require 2 days, ergo 180, 40 days. If a pole six foot long standing
upright upon the ground casts a shadow ten foot long, I demand how high
that Tower is, which at the same time casts a shadow 125 foot long.

Here I see that the numbers given are proportional. For as the height of the
pole being known is unto the shadow, so is the hight of the tower unknown
unto his shadow. The terms therefore being set duly in order, and handled
according unto the rule, the example shall be thus.

If 10 give 6: ergo 125 shall give 75.

After the same manner in this rule may the parts be ordered and handled, as
may be perceived by the examples following:

If the sixth part of the Moon increases when she is distant from the Sun
the twelfth part of a circle: how big shall she be when she is distant from
him half a circle.

Here the first term shall be 1/12 of a circle, the second 1/6 of the Moon,
which in that distance is lightened with the light of the Sun: the third 1/2,
the work being wrought there arises 1, which signifies that the Moon is at
the full when she is half a circle off from the sun. The terms are thus:

1/12 1/6 ergo 1/2 1.

I spend in the fourth part of a month 5/6 of a crown, what do I spend in
7/10 of a month?

Here the terms are given in order, wherefore I multiply the third by the
second, the facit will be 7/12, which being divided by 1/4 after the manner of
parts or fractions, the quotient will be 2 1/3, so that the example shall be
thus:

1/4 5/6: ergo 7/10 2 1/3.

But here if you desire to know the value of 1/3 of a crown or of any other
fraction what so ever, you shall search it out in like manner by the rule. For
that they teach commonly, that the number made by multiplying of the numerator,
and the parts of the whole being known, must be divided by the denominator,
whereupon proceeds the value of the parts given, it is nothing else but to
practice the rule of proportion. For it is all one, as if you should set the
denominator of the parts in the first place, the numerator in the third, and
the parts of the whole being known in the middlemost place, and so work
accordingly. As, put case three parts of a crown be 45 pence, you shall find
out the value of 1/3 part thus:

If 3 be 45 pence: I shall be 15 pence.

If one or more of the terms be mixed, you must use the same method which
before was used in whole and broken numbers: saving that both the whole and
broken numbers must first be reduced into fractions. As the question being
moved, two yardes and 1/6 of cloth are bought for five crowns, what shall I
pay for 5 3/4 of a yard: you shall reduce therefore the first term unto 13/6,
the second unto 5/13 the third unto 23/4, whereof there amount 13 crowns and
7/26, which is the number required.

Certain abridgements.

In whole numbers it shall not be amiss to have regard unto the abridgement
following. If of the proportional numbers given, the first and second, or the
first and third be compound one to another, then they being divided by the
greatest common divisor: the proportion shall be more briefly concluded by the
prime numbers.

The reason of this abridgement is this, because the terms being changed
after this manner, yet the proportion is not changed by the 15 prop of the
fifth book, where it is said, that Like parts of multiplices, and also their
multiplices compared together have one and the same proportion. As in 12, 32,
15, because 12 and 32 are compound one unto the other, therefore they being
divided by 4, I take their quotients 3 and 8 in stead of the numbers gluen.
Thus, if 3 give 8, therefore 15 shall give 40.

Likewise seeing the first and the third that is to say 12 and 15 are also
compound the on^ unto the other: taking their quotient 4 and 5, being prime
numbers found out by their greatest common Divisor, for the numbers given, the
proportion may be easily concluded in this manner.

If 4 be 32: therefore 5 shall be 40.

In the fractions it seems a brief kind of working to dispatch the matter by
multiplication only: to wit, if you take the number made by multiplying of the
denominator of the first term, by the numerator of the second term, and then
by the numerator of the third term, for the numerator of the fourth: and the
facit of the numerator of the first term, by the denominators of the second,
and third for the denominator of the 4.

The draught of them is thus:

As if 1/4 give 2/3, what shall 5/6 give? Multiply 4 by 2, there arises 8,
then by 5, the product is 40, which is the numerator of the number which we
seek for. Furthermore multiply 1 by 3, and then by 6, the facit will be 18,
the denominator of the fourth term. The example is thus:

1/4 2/3 ergo 5/6 40/18, or 2 2/9.

CHAP. XV. Of examples of the rule of proportion, requiring some kind of
simple numeration before them.
IN the former examples, the rule of proportion was simple.

But oftentimes it requires some certain kind of numeration to go before it:
the which numeration serves to the ordering of the terms of the principal
proportion, according to the nature and laws of the question propounded, that
thereby the proportional number, which we desire to know, might be with more
easily found out.

And this numeration is drawn out of both the parts of Arithmeticke: Sometime
out of absolute or simple Arithmeticke, and is either simple or mixed.

Great is the variety of those questions which may be resolved by Geometrical
proportion. Wherefore here wit is to be required, that by the former conditions
and nature of the question offered, we may be able to perceive what is meet
for the vnknitting and conclusion of the proportion, and how also (as it were
a certain preparatiue to the future demonstration) the terms of the
proportion lying hid, are to be unfolded, orderred, set down, and to be
applied to the rule it self.

First therefore in this example addition of whole numbers is required. A
Vintener buying at Ansa in Italy 120 hogesheads of wine for 2400 ss. laid out
for the carriage of them to Basil 1200 ss. and to the waggeners for lading and
vnlading them 30 ss. for custom in diverse places he paid 50: his expenses in
his journey came to 64. He desires to gain 800. I demand for what he shall
sell an hogshed.

In this example Addition orders one of the proportional terms: for add
the price to his expenses, and to the gain, the total will be 4544. Whereby I
perceive that the number of the hogsheds assigned is unto this total sum as
one hogshed is to the price which we seek for. Wherefore the example shall be
thus.

If 120 Hog. be worth 4544 sss.: ergo 1 Hog. gives 37 1^/1^ sss.

Another.

Two travelers going from Basil unto two contrary places, do travail a
diverse pase one faster then the other: the one goes every day five, the
other but three miles: I demand how many miles they shall be a sunder at nine
days end.

Here also Addition helps to the ordering of one of the terms. For add
their daily iourneyes 5 and 3, the total will be 8, which is the distance for
one day, whereupon the rule concludes,

1 day. gives 8 miles.: therefore 9 days 72. miles.

Examples of subduction going before.

A pipe of water voydeth into a cesterne containing 250 firkins, every hour
24 firkins, now there run out at another pipe every hour 16 firkins, I
demand in what time the Cesterne will be filled.

Here you must find out by subduction, one of the terms of the proportion to
be ordered according unto the rule. For reason tells me that I must seek out
the excess of the filling above the emptying. Subducting therefore 16 firkins
from 24, there remains 8 firkins, for so many every hour are left in the
cesterne. Hereby the proportion may easily be concluded:

8 Remain in 1: ergo 250 31 1/4

A certain man selling an hundred pound of certain kind of merchandise for
15 crowns, found at the length that in an hundred crowns he had lost so much
as he paid for every hundred weight: I demand what he paid for an hundred.

Here you shall subduct the price of an hundred pound, to wit, 15 crowns,
(which number also represents the loss) out of an hundred crowns, the
remainder will be 85, the first term of the proportion. For even as 85 crowns
which is the stock diminished, is unto an 100, which is the whole stock: even
so 15 the price of an hundred weight which was lost, must be unto the stock
whereof it was raised: whereupon the terms shall stand thus: If there remain

85 Crowns. of 100: ergo 15 de 17 11/17.

Examples wherein Multiplication goes before.

A Polonian going unto the University of Basil to study, delivers unto a
Merchant 126 golden Ducats (every one being valued at 28 vrsati, to receive
again of him for them at Basil siluerlings (which commonly are called
Thaleri) being vvorth 18 vrsati. The question is how many siluerlings he shall
receive.

Here you shall reduce by multiplication 126 ducats unto vrsati, accounting to
every ducate 28, whereof the whole sum amounts unto 3528 vrsati. Then
look what proportion there is between 18 vrsati, and one siluerling, the same
there is between the whole number of the vrsati, and between the siluerlings
which we seek for. Wherefore the terms shall be thus:

18 Vrsati are vvorth 1 Thaler.: ergo 3528, 196

This and such like examples may be also resolved by the rule of reciprocal
proportion, as shall appear hereafter.

He that has 34 crowns for his yearly wages, what has he for eight days?

Here I see there is a question of proportion moved, but for so much as the
first and third terms be of a diverse denomination, I reduce them by
multiplication to one kind of denomination. And so generally the terms of
diverse kinds are by a former multiplication to be drawn to the least
denomination. Therefore I take for a year 365 days, and that the account
might be the more exact, I divide the 34 crowns into 510 vrsati (reckoning 15
vrsati to a crown) or if it please you to bring them into a smaller coin, you
may resolve them into pence, and then the example shall be thus:

365 510: ergo 8 11 13/73

Sometimes Multiplication goes before with Addition or Subduction.

The examples of the first.

He that desires in six crowns to gain 10 vrsati, how shall he sell a pound
of that vvare which cost 20 vrsati?

For so much as the money here set down is of a diverse denomination: first of
all I reduce the 6 crowns by multiplication unto vrsati: valuing every crown
at 15 vrsati, the facit is 90. Whereunto if I add the gain, the whole sum
of the vrsati, to wit, 100 shall be the middle term of the proportion after
this manner:

If of 90 there arise 100: then of 20 22 2/9 In the least terms thus: 9 10:
ergo 20 22 2/9

A Butcher delivering unto his servant 216 crowns, sent him to market vvilling
him to buy as many Oxen, Calves, Weathers, and Hogs of every one an even
number, as that money would afford him to buy: I demand how many beasts he
bought.

First let us appoint the prices: an Ox at 11 crowns, a Calfe at two, a
Weather at one crown and 5 vrsati, an Hog at 3 crowns and ten vrsati.
Here then is there a double multiplication with addition required, to the
ordering out of the principal proportion. For here you must resolve the 216
crowns by 15 (for at so many vrsati do Germans commonly value their
crowns) into 3240 vrsari: and likewise reduce the several prices of every
beast unto one denomination: to wit, the prices of the Oxen unto 165, of the
Calves unto 30, of the Weathers unto 20, of the Hogs vuto 55 vrsati, and then
add together the prices of the same denomination, the total 270 shall be the
first term of the proportion. For as this number is to one of each kind of
beasts, so the whole summo of money is unto the number of the beasts unknown.
The example is thus:

270 give 1: ergo 3240, 12

The example of the latter.

A thief having by stealth conuayed away certain silver vessels, in his
flight goes every day 128 furlongs. Four days after the owner following the
thief on horseback, rides every day 174 furlongs. I demand when he shall
overtake him.

For the resolving of this question, two terms of the principal proportion
must be set down, the one by multiplication, the other by subduction. For
first we must see how far the thief was gone before the owner espying the
matter entered his journey. Wherefore I multiply 128 furlongs by 4 days, the
facit is 512 furlongs. Secondly, I consider how much the latter outgoeth the
former every day. Subducting therefore 128 from 174 the remainder is 46. Then
look what proportion the daily excess has unto a day, the same proportion
shall there be between the former flight and all those days wherein the
latter ouertaketh the former. So that the terms of the proportion shall be
thus:

46 give 1: ergo 512 11 4/23.

CHAP. XVI. Of examples of the golden Rule, wherein there is required some
numeration of broken or mixed numbers.
IN the former examples before the proportions could be concluded, there was
required a certain numeration of whole numbers: in those which follow, the
numeration is of broken or mixed numbers.

Example. 1.

A certain man selling his house for 75 crowns, finds he has gotten the
fourth part of the money which he paid for him, I demand what he paid for
him?

Here add unto the money which he gave (which is supposed to be 4/4) the
games, to wit 1/4, the total will be 5/4: for he that of his stock laid out
raises 1/4, he by 4 gains 5. Wherefore the principal proportion shall be
thus: 5 75: ergo 4, 60

A Farmer having gotten by one years harvest certain sackes of corn, pays
to his Landlords for his years rent, to one 2/5, to another 1/4, and has
remaining 35 sackes: I demand how many he had at the first.

In this and such like examples of broken numbers having diverse denominations,
out of the least number which may commonly be divided by the denominators of
the fractions given, must be drawn whole numbers being unto the number divided
as the parts assigned do require. As here the least number which may be divided
by the denominators set down which are 5 and 4, is 20: whereof 2/5 are 8, and
1/4 is 5, which being added together, and the common denominator set underneath
do make 13/20. The farmer then of his whole heap of corn which is supposed to
be 20, paid 13, wherefore 13/20 being subducted out of 20/20, there remain
7/20: whereupon the denominators being omitted, the terms shall thus be set
together:

7 are 35: ergo 13 were 65

A certain man selling his horse lost the sixth part and 2/15 of the money
which he paid for it. and had remaining 243 crowns: the question is what the
house cost him.

This example is like to the former. for you must take the least number which
may commonly be divided by the denominators of the parts given, 6 and 15, to
wit, 30: whose parts being of the same denomination, to wit, 1/6 is 5, and 2/15
are 4. The parts added make 9/30, which being subducted from 20/30 leave 21/30
where upon the proportional numbers according to the rule shall be:

21 are 243: ergo 30 347 1/3

So much was the principal stock wherefore he lost 104 crowns 1/7.

Sometimes not only simple, but also mixed numeration helps oftentimes to the
ordering of proportion.

For example.

Of three silver pots, the first wayeth 12 half ounces and 2/3, the second 16
1/2, the third 23 1/6. The half ounce is worth 11 vrsati 1/2: what then is
the price of the pots?

Here of necessity must addition of mixed numbers go before, although the
principal proportion also consists of mixed numbers. For the weight of all
the pots being added together, you shall have half ounces 52 1/3: whereupon the
proportion shall be thus framed.

If 1 cost 11 1/2, therefore 52 1/3 601 5/6

A Vintener having bought 16 hogsheds of wine for 27 3/4 crowns, the price of
the wine falling, could not sell them but for crowns 19 5/6: I demand what
he should have lost if there had been 84 hogsheds?

Here subduction of mixed numbers must go before. For the price of the thing
sold for less then it cost being subducted out of the price which it was
bought for, will bring out the second term of the proportion, so that you may
easily answer the question. Therefore 19 5/7 being subducted from 27 3/4 there
remains 7 11/12, the loss in 16 hogsheads of wine. Wherefore the terms of
proportion shall thus be set down:

In 16 hogs. there are lost 7 11/12: ergo 84, 41 9/16

Mixed numeration is more common a great deal then any other, because the
measures, prices, etc. of things are seldom contained in whole numbers:
wherefore the studious may here have plentiful matter to exercise him self in.

CHAP. XVII. Of examples of the golden Rule requiring proportion before them.
HItherto numeration used in simple and absoulte Arithmeticke served to the
finding out of the conclusion in Geometrical proportion. Yet oftentimes some
part of compared Arithmetic is required thereunto: as for example, proportion
either Arithmeticall or Geometrical. First then let these be examples wherein
Arithmeticall proportion must go before.

An Epsy enformeth his Captain of the distance of his enemies camp after
this manner. If we take our journey hence, and go the first day 30, the second
28, the third 26 furlongs, diminishing after that order every day two furlongs,
we shall meet with them at fifteen days end. Now the enemy knowing of
their coming, made toward them, so that at nine days end they met together. I
demand how far the Captain went before he met with the enemy.

Here first and foremost we must gather the sum of the proportion Arithmeticall
(which commonly we call progression) whose terms are 15, and the extremes 30,
and 2: the whole sum, then is 240 furlongs, which is the second term serving
to conclude the Geometrical proportion on this manner.

15 240: ergo 9 144

So far therefore they traveled, the rest, to wit, 96 furlongs the enemies
went.

A labourer was hired for this wages, to receive the first day a penny, the
second three, the third five, and after the same order his wages should be
continued for the days following: at length being dismissed, he received 1500
pence, I demand how many days he served?

Here if you gather together all the terms of the Arithmeticall progression
into one sum, you shall make a way to the Geometrical progression. As for
example, if you add together his wages for 30 days, the first term of the
progression being an unity, and the difference 2, the whole sum shall be 900
pence: whereupon I may conclude:

If 900 require 30: ergo 1500, 50.

In the examples following, Geometrical proportion must go before to inform
the principal proportion.

When a web of cloth containing 40 yardes is bought for 50 crowns, for how
much shall he sell the yard, that in an hundred crowns, desires to gain 12?

Before you can conclude the question by Geometrical proportion, being as it
were the decider of the whole controversy, you must seek out the price of one
yard. If 40 yardes are bought for 50 crowns: then one yard does cost 11 1/4
of a crown. This shall be the third term of the principal proportion, in
this manner. If of an

100 crowns there arise 112: then of 1 1/4 there arise 1 2/5

A Merchant buying at Venice an hundred yardes of silk for a crown a yearde,
spent in his journey and for the carriage of them 30 crowns. At Lipsia where
the yard is more by a quarter then the yard of Venice, he sold every yard
for 3 crowns. The question is what he gained?

In this example addition of whole numbers, together with proportion goes
before. For his stock laid out, and his charges being added, the whole is
130. Besides, to know how many yardes of Lipsia answer the Venice measure,
you shall work by proportion on this manner. If 5/4 of Lipsia measure, make a
yard of Venice, then 80 yardes of Lipsia shall make an hundred Venice yardes.
So that you may readily infer the principal proportion thus:

If 1 is sold for 3: ergo 80 240

Whereupon 130 crowns being the stock and charges subducted out of 240, I see
he gained 110.

Another merchant bought three hogsheads of honey. The first vvayed 349 pound,
the second 286 pound, the third 300, out of every hundred are subducted ten
pound because of the vessel, and a pound of honnie is sold for 5 pence: I
demand what he is to pay.

For so much as the price of one pound of honey is set down, therefore by
proportion seek out the price of an hundred, 1 pound is sold for five pence:
ergo 100, for 500 pence, then add the weight of the vessels, the whole is 110,
add also the weight of the three hogsheds, the total is 935: whereupon you
shall conclude:

110 are sold at 500 pence, ergo 935 at 4250, that is, 170 florentines.

Another buying two yardes of cloth at three crowns, sold six yardes
afterward for 11 crowns. Having got by this means 46 crowns, there arises
a question how many yardes he bought, and how many he sold.

Before you can come unto the principal proportion, you must order the terms
thereof by a former proportion, and by subduction. First therefore you must
consider how much the six yardes of cloth which afterward were sold at an
higher price cost at the first, the which may easily be inferred by that which
is presupposed in the question: for if two yardes cost three crowns, then six
yardes cost three crowns, then six yardes were sold at nine crowns. This
price I subduct from 11, and I see that six yardes were sold for two crowns
more then they cost. So that it is easy to resolve the doubt thus:

If 2 come of 6, then 46, 138

A Vintener bought 1. 24 hogsheds of wine on this condition, that subducting
out of every two hogsheds because of the leese five gallons, he should pay for
every hogshed 26 crovvines: Tell me what he is to pay.

Proportion going before with multiplication and subduction, will set in order
the principal proportion. First I seek how much is subducted out of all the
hogsheds because of the dragges. Out of two hogsheds are drawn 5 gallons, ergo
out of 120 hoggesheds are drawn 310. Then I reduce all the foresaid hogsheds
unto gallons, multiplying them by 32, for so many gallons does every hogshed
hold, the facit is 3968. Out of these I subduct according to covenant 310
measures: the remainder is 3658 gallons, whereupon the proportion shall be thus:

32 give 26: ergo 3658 2972 1/8

Of two Carpenters, the one alone would frame an house in 30 days, the other
in 40. Now taking another unto them, they finished the work in 15 days. In
what time then would the third man have made it?

Here must you use proportion with addition, and subduction of fractions. The
first would have done the work in 30 days, ergo in 15 days he finished 15/30
or 1/2 of the work, the second would have wrought it in 40 days ergo in 15
days he wrought 15/40 or 3/8. The parts added together are 7/8 of the work:
which being subducted out of 8/8, that is, out of the whole work, there
remains 1/8, the third man's work. In so much that the proportion may thus be
concluded:

1/8 is framed in 15: ergo 1/1 120

Put case 14 pound of some vvare were bought for 6 crowns, and every hundred
were sold for 47 crowns: subduct so many pound out of the whole as will in
the sale amount to 80 crowns gain. How many pound then were there sold?

To unknit this knot you shall use proportion with subduction of mixed numbers.
First I seek what he paid for an hundred pound. If 14 pound be bought for 6
crowns, then 100 pound give 42 6/7. Moreover for so much as an hundred pound
were sold for 47 crowns, therefore 42 6/7 being subducted out of 47, the
remainder is 4 1/7 the gain of an hundred: whereupon I say, If 4 1/7 come of
100, then 80 of 1931 1/29.

Sometimes many and sundry kinds of numeration, as well out of simple as
compared Arithmeticke, go before the principal proportion, wherein the
diligent young practitioner may exercise himself.

CHAP. XVIII. Of reciprocal proportion.
HItherto of simple direct proportion: now must we come to Reciprocal
proportion. Reciprocal proportion is that wherein the terms being set down
crossewaies, as the third is unto the second, so reciprocally the first is to
the fourth.

A mong the vulgar people we call Reciprocation the going backewarde the same
way we begun: which is evidently seen in reciprocal proportion being
compared with direct proportion.

For that way that direct proportion goes on forward, the same way
reciprocal proportion returns backwarde. For in direct proportion the terms
are proportional, not only as they stand in order, but also crossewayes: that
is to say, as the first is to the second, so the third is to the fourth, and
also as the first is to the third, so the second is to the fourth. But in
reciprocal proportion the terms being taken first orderly, are altogether
without proportion, and crossewayes they differ in all respects in that one is
of greater inequality, the other always of less: yea rather as the third is
to the second, so backwardes, the first is to the fourth, in so much that that
which in direct proportion was the first term, is the third in reciprocal
proportion: and again that which is the third in direct proportion, is the
first in reciprocal proportion.

For example sake, if twelve hired servants do their work in 8 days, then
24 shall do it in four days. Here are set down four terms of reciprocal
proportion, which being placed directly shall stand thus: (...) stion I must
use the rule of reciprocal proportion on this manner:

If 40 require 7: then 70 how many?

Multiply 40 by 7, the facit shall be 280, which being divided by 70, gives 4
or two ounces, which is the weight of the loaf. Three milles in two days
grind 20 bushels of corn, in what time then shall five milles grind so many
bushels?

Here again by how many more milles there be, in so much less time they shall
grind the corn. Wherefore the proportion shall be concluded reciprocally in
this manner.

3 grind 2: ergo 5 1 1/5.

A certain man borrowing 66 crowns of his friend, and repaying them at seven
months end, promises to pleasure his credit or in as great a matter.
Whereupon the creditor afterward desired to borrow of him 112 crowns, but they
doubt how long time he should keep the money, that the lending of his money
might be correspondent.

For so much as the latter man desired to borrow the greater sum, therefore
he is bound to restore it sooner then the first should, whose sum was less:
whereupon the reciprocation shall be concluded thus:

66 give 7: ergo 112 4 1/8.

So likewise the former example of reducing 126 Hungary ducats (each of them
being valued at 28 vrsati) unto Thaleri being worth 18 vrsati, may be handled
and resolved after this fashion.

28 126: 18 196.

CHAP. XIX. Of manifold proportion, and first of that which is compound by
Addition commonly called the rule of Fellowshippe.
Manifold proportion is
Either co^pounded, and is two fold, Prime, wherein there is required Either
one kind of numeration only, as Addition. Chap. 19. Multiplication. Chap. 20.
Or many kinds of numeration: as that which is compounded by multiplication,
and addition together. Chap. 21.
Or Second, and is called Alligation.
Or continued. Chap. 27.
HItherto has been handled simple proportion, as well direct as reciprocal,
being set forth by diverse examples: now follows manifold proportion.

Manifold proportion is that which consists of more thenfoure terms.

Simple proportion disiunct, consists of four terms, but manifold
proportion consists of more, as when in one and the same proportion there be
many consequents to one antecedent, or contrariwise, or else when there be two
rows of numbers proportional in two numbers, or some such like manner.

Manifold proportion is double: for either it is compounded in the terms, or
else continued.

The first joins together the terms given, either by one only kind of
numeration, to wit, either by addition or multiplication, or else by more, as
by addition and multiplication together.

Compound proportionalitie or proportion is said to be that wherein the terms
are united together. But the things so united and joined together, are of many
brought into one, and heaped together two manner of ways, either by addition or
multiplication alone, or else both ways together.

By Addition, as when many as well antecedents as consequents are taken and
compared, as one antecedent to one consequent.

Although proportions may be compounded many ways by Addition, yet of them all
this is the most usual: wherefore this special definition serving most for
this purpose is taken in stead of that which is more general. For example
sake, if 3 unto 2, be as 9 unto 6, then by addition 3 and 9 that is 12, shall
be in like manner unto 2 and 6, that is 8, so that the terms of the proportion
may stand as you see,

12 unto 8: are as 3 to 2 and 9 to 6

In this kind of manifold proportion, the rule following is to be used,

If in the terms of manifold proportion the consequent of the one
proportionality be given added together, and the antecedents severally by
themselves, then as the antecedents knit together by addition, are unto the
consequents added, so shall the several antecedents be unto their several
consequents, and so contrariwise.

This is the 12 p. 7, saving that it is reuersed and applied some what more
fitly to this purpose. For the words of the proposition be these: If there be a
multitude of numbers, how many so ever proportional, as one of the antecedents
is to one of the consequents, so are all the antecedents unto all the
consequents. And the same backward is true also. By which conversion it
appears how the examples which commonly are referred unto the rule of
fellowshippe, having many proportions coupled by addition, are to be handled
and to be resolved by the rule of proportion, in which examples the antecedents
of the one proportion are set down severally, to wit, the contributions of the
partners, and the consequents are added together, to wit, the common gain or
loss. So that the contributions and common stock of the partners, or else
generally all those numbers into which the other is to be distributed
proportionally must be added together, and the total must be set in the first
place in stead of the antecedent of the first proportion, whose consequent must
be the foresaid number which is taken to be distributed proportionally. In the
third place the terms compounded by addition must be placed severally, and the
rule must be repeated as often as there be several numbers, whereupon I may
conclude the proportion. As in the examples following.

Three men being partners laid their money together, the first 60, the second
100, the third 135 crowns. Now they gained after a while 45 crowns. The
question is how much of the gains each of them by duty ought to have.

In this and such like examples equity and reason requires, that that which
is gotten by the common stock should also be common, and should be so
distributed, that every man's portion should have the same proportion to the
whole gain, that the money which he laid down had unto the whole stock: and
crossewayes as the whole stock is unto the whole gain, so then every man's
portion laid together, should be unto his part of the gains. Wherefore here
this question of manifold proportion is manifest. Now the terms given are
these:

The first propor. The second propor. I II III IIII 60 45 100 135

The consequents of the second proportion are set down but jointly together, to
wit, 45, the antecedents are several. Wherefore to conclude the several
consequents, I set the whole stock gathered by adding of 60, 100, 135, to wit,
295 in the first place, which is unto the whole gain, as the severally terms
in the third place are unto the several terms in the fourth place, which we
desire to know. The example is thus:

Three partners in a common stock of 500 crowns, lost 124, to the repayring
whereof the first was bound to be contributarie 20 crowns, the second 43: I
demand how much every one put into the common purse.

Here we have of the latter proportion three antecedents, two are assigned in
express words, but the third is set down somewhat obscurely. But for so much
as the total of the three added together is set down, to wit, 124, the third
may easily be known by subduction. Add therefore 20 and 43, the total is 63,
which being subducted out of 124 there remains 61, which is the third man's
portion in the loss. Wherefore as in the former example we gathered every man's
gain by every ones contribution, so likewise in this place by the parts of
the loss we may gather each man's stock. The example is thus:

Cicero in his Oration for Cecinna says: A woman making her will departed
this life, she made Cecinna heir of eleven ounces and an half of her goods,
and Marcus Fulcinus the free man of her former husband heir of two fixed parts
of an ounce. Unto Eutius she gave one sixth part. How much then had every one
for his portion.

In this example the whole patrimony is divided into eleven ounces, half an
ounce, and three sixth parts of an ounce: the which parts are the antecedents
of the late proportion. But in that they be of diverse denominations, I resolve
them all into the least denomination, to wit, into sixts. If then you allow to
an ounce six sixths, and to the pound twelve ounces, there shall be in a pound
72 sixths. Whereof 11 ounces and an: half are worth 69, and two sixths 2, one
1. Whereupon supposing the whole patrimony to be 2500 crowns, the terms
shall be thus:

Three couenanted between themselves, that of their gains the first should
have twice as much as the second. Now they had laid down 24 crowns, and the
third 36. But when they had gotten 12 crowns they cannot tell how to divide
them lawfully according to their covenant.

Here that which the first man laid down being covertly expressed, must be
gathered out of the covenant. For in that he was to receive twice so much as
the second, it is manifest that that which he laid out was twice as much as
that whereof the second was contributary, whether it were money, or whether it
were his labor, or whether it were valued in both. Wherefore if for the first
you take 48 crowns the double of 24, then they being added together, the whole
doubt shall be removed by the rule on this manner.

The good man of an house bequeatheth unto four men 584 crowns, to be divided
after this rate, that A should receive 1/2, B 2/3, C 3/4, D 5/6, what was
every ones portion?

Here the proportion of the parts unto the goods which were left is expressed:
yet the parts themselves in the goods do not yet appear manifest. The least
number therefore that may be divided by the denominators of the fractions,
which is 12, will declare the proportion. For 1/2 of 12, are 6, 2/3 are 8, 3/4
are 9, 5/6 are 10. These being added, the example shall be thus:

But if he willed to make such a division among them that were to receive the
legacy that the first should have 1/2 and 1/5 wanting 20 crowns, the second
1/3 and 30 crowns, the third 3/4 and 10 crowns, the fourth 1/6 wanting 12
crowns: then what should their portions be?

In this case that which is more then their portions I take it from the whole
substance, that which wants I add unto it: as 30 and 50 are 80, which being
taken from 584, there remains 504. Hereunto add 20 and 12, or 32, the total
is 536. Then I seek out the least number that may be commonly divided by the
denominators, to wit, 60, the parts of the same denomination are for the first
30 and 12, for the second 20, for the third 45, for the fourth 10: and then the
portion of the first being first added together, and afterward all the rest,
the example will be thus:

Then that the testator may be satisfied, from the first man's portion I take 20
crowns there remains 172 48/117, unto the second add 30, they make 121
73/117, unto the third add 50, his whole portion will be 256 18/117, lastly
from the fourth take 12, there remain unto him 33 95/117, all which parts are
answerable unto the 584 crowns, which were to be divided.

Three partners laid together three equal portions, but they left them there,
some for longer time and some for shorter: the first left his money in the
stock two months and an half, the second three months and 2/5, the third
four months and 2/3. Put case they gained 12 crowns, I demand what was
every man's portion.

This example being of mixed numeration, requires no other work then the
former. For the several times being added together, wherein they left their
stock for the common traffic, the total will be 317/30: So that the example
will be.

CHAP. XX. Of multiplied proportion compound by multiplication, which commonly
is called the double Rule.
THe former examples appertained unto proportion compound by addition: now
follows that which is compound by multiplicacion, which in stead of two
terms of the proportion, uses the facit made of them.

This is the right compounding of proportion, which gathers them together by
multiplication as was said before, and appears by the fifth definition of the
sixth book of Euclide, because it does not only join together the terms
themselves, but also makes the proportion of the compound terms to comprehend
the proportion of the simple. Wherefore hitherto are to be referred, and by
this rule of proportion are to be handled these examples, wherein two terms by
multiplication must be reduced unto one: for there proportion as appears by
the fifth prop. of the eighth book of Euclide, is gathered of the proportion
of the terms multiplied one by the other. Of this sort are all those examples
which commonly are referred to the double rule, wherein two terms are set in
the same places, that is, the principal proportion has a certain
circumstance adjoined unto it, in so much that here the proportion should be
twice concluded, were it not that for those two terms the products made of
them are taken as one.

The terms propounded by multiplication, are either of the same place, as in
direct proportion, or of diverse places, as in reciprocal proportion.

The examples of the first are these.

Four Students spend in 3 months 19 crowns: how much therefore shall eight
Students spend in 9 months.

You see here the principal terms have annexed unto them a circumstance of
time, and therefore (the manner of ordering the terms in the golden rule being
observed) the first and the third are double, on this fashion: 4 19 8 3 9

Wherefore for those two I take the compounds by multiplication. As for 4 and 3
I take 12, for 8 and 9, 72, to wit their products: So that the compound
multiplication shall be concluded thus: 12 19 72 114 Or 1 9

Here between the expenses of four students in three months, there is
observed the same proportion which is between the expenses of 8 students in 9
months, to wit, the proportion compound of the two, to wit, of 4 unto 8, and 3
unto 9, or to speak more plainly, the expenses are one to another, as thrice
four unto nine times eight. The which may easily be proved, if you put in the
mean proportional number to whom the terms of the antecedents and
consequents may belong. So that if you should set it down that four student
in 9 months should make their expense, the example will be thus:

Here then if four students in three months dispende every one but one, then
so many students in nine months shall spend thrice as much. Wherefore the
proportion of the expenses of A unto B, shall be the same that is between three
and nine. Likewise if four students in nine months spend every one but one,
then 8 students in as many months will spend twice as much. Whereupon there
will be the same reason between B and C, as is between 4 and 8.

Furthermore if you multiply 3 and 9, the terms of the first reason by one and
the same number, namely by 4, the productes, namely 12 and 36, shall keep the
same reason by the 17 proposition of the 7 of Euclide: so shall 36 and 72 being
made of 4 and 8 multiplied by 9. Whereby it is gathered that as the charges of
A is unto B, so is 12 unto 36. And in like manner as B is unto C, so is 36 unto
72. To conclude, seeing there are here three proportional numbers, A, B, C,
and as many more in number answerable unto them 12, 36, 72, therefore by the 14
of the 7 (taking the extremes the mean proportionals being withdrawn) the
charges of A shall be all one to the charges of C, as 12 is unto 72, whereby
the goodness of the working does appear.

An other example.

Two Printers in four days print 16 forms, ho^e many shall seven Printers
print in 14 days?

Here the placing of the terms prescribed in the rule of proportion being
observed, they shall be set in this manner:

Printers. 2 16 7 Days. 4 14

Then, the first terms and the last being multiplied one by another, the
proportion is concluded thus:

8 16: therefore 98 196

Eight yardes of cloth, 4 yardes and 1/4 broad are bought for 11 crowns:
therefore how shall 15 yardes of cloth be bought 1 yard 3/4 broad?

This example of mixed numeration varieth nothing from the former, therefore it
is thus dispatched:

Three men trading together by ill luck lost 52 crowns. The first put in 110
crowns for 5 months, the second put in 84 crowns, the third 65, I know not
for what time. Their traficke being ended, the first found that he had lost 22
crowns, the second found he had lost 18, the third 12. How long therefore was
the money of the last two in the common stock?

I think that this example (though it seem to belong to the Rule of
Fellowship) may well be referred to the rule of proportion compounded by
multiplication, yet it is unlike to the other, because of the numbers given,
the middlemost only is compounded by multiplication, the other are sought out
by the rule of three, proceeding from a term known to those which are
unknown. Therefore the first man's 22 crowns being multiplied by his 5
months, the facit is 550. Whereupon I conclude, if his money, that lost 22
crowns, multiplied by the time does make 550, what shall the loss of 18
crowns? and what shall the loss of 12 crowns make? The terms shall stand
thus:

22 550: therefore 18 450 22 550: therefore 12 300
The fourth numbers inferred by the rule of three are compounded of each man's
stock multiplied by the time for which it was laid out. Therefore each of them
severally divided by his own stock, the time is severally inferred, so that
the second man's money was out of his hands five months and 5/14, the third
man's money was out four and 8/13 of a month.

An abridgement of the former work.

If the terms in the first and third place fall out to be equal, then they
being taken away, the rest of the terms shall infer the proportion.

The reason of this abridgement arises out of the 17 proposition of the 7, for
the numbers given keep the same proportionalitie which they would have being
multiplied by one and the same number. As: If the gain of 25 crowns in four
year be eight crowns, what shall 100 crowns yield in four year?

Here the terms are given as you see.

Stock 25 8 100 Years 4 4

For So Much therefore as 25 has the same reason to 100 which they would have
being multiplied by 4, as it appears by the 17 prop. 7, therefore the equal
numbers which are in the first and third place, being cast away, I conclude
the proportion in simple terms thus:

25 8 therefore 100 32

Likewise the question being thus propounded, the gain of 25 crowns in 4
year, is 8 crowns, therefore what shall 100 yield in 25 years? The terms
shall stand thus:

25 8 100 4 25

Here again the alternate terms of the first and third place being omitted,
the rest shall conclude the proportion thus:

4 8: therefore 100 200

If the proportion chance to be reciprocal, then are the terms of the first
and third place compounded by alternate or cross multiplication, and the
question afterward is concluded directly.

Some transpose the principal terms setting the first in the third and
contrariwise the third in the first place, and then bring the twofold terms
into one by multiplication. The example:

Eight horses in 12 days eat 9 bushels of oats, in how many days shall 18
horse eat 24 bushes?

I easily perceive that there is here a reciprocation, for 18 horses will spend
in a great deal lesser time that heap of oats, which 8 horse will consume in
12 days. Therefore by how much the third term is the greater, by so much the
fourth term is the lesser. Therefore I must take heed that disposing the
terms as I did before, I conclude not directly the reciprocal proportion by
multiplying of the first and last terms one by another. The terms in the
example are thus:

Here therefore I multiply 9 by 18 and make 162 the first term, likewise I
multiply 8 by 24 and make 192 the third term, whereby the lawful induction of
the proportion is thus dispatched:

162 12: therefore 192 14 2/9

If 100 crowns do give 5 crowns interest every year, in what time will
56 crowns give. 12? In this question for so much as a greater interest is
sought for by a lesser stock of money, the reciprocation is manifest, the
which interest craves so much the more time by how much the more the stock is
lesser. Therefore the terms being set down as it is convenient, and
multiplied crossewayes, the doubt is answered by the rule of three.

CHAP. XXI. Of manifold proportion compounded by multiplication and addition.
THus much concerning the examples of proportion compounded by addition or
multiplication only: now must we proceed to that proportion which joins
both kinds of numeration together.

Therefore proportion compounded by multiplication and addition, is that which
first of all multiplieth the manifold terms given one with another, and then
adds their productes together.

This kind of proportion by a two fold, yea sometimes by a fourefolde
composition, brings many terms into one. Unto this appertain the examples
of the Rule of second fellowship, as they commonly call them, wherein the time
is annexed to the stock, or some other circumstance to the principal term.
The Theoreme following serves for the working of those examples.

If among the terms of the manifold proportion, the consequents of one reason
be given added together, but some antecedents be given severally and double:
then as the antecedents compounded by multiplication and addition are unto the
consequents added together, so shall the several antecedents compounded by
multiplication be unto the several consequents.

As thus for example.

Two men in common traffic got 60 crowns, the first brought 50 crowns for
two year, the second 15 for five year: what shall be each man his share.

In this question containing a partnership of equal contributions in regard of
the diverse times, I see the division of the gain must be made according to
the proportion of the time. That this division may be made the consequents of
the latter reason are given added together, namely 60, but the antecedents are
given not only severally, but also double, as you see here.

The first reason. The second reason. I II III IIII 50 2 60 15 5

Therefore first of all I compound the double terms by multiplication, so that
after a sort I reduce the unequal times to an equality, the products are 100
and 75, which are all one as if you should say, that the first man should have
as much gain by 100 crowns in one year, as he should have for 50 crowns in
2 year. In like manner the second man should get by 75 crowns in one year,
as much as he should get by 15 crowns in five year. Moreover these two
products 100 and 75 set down severally, shall possess the third place of the
proportion: but added together they shall stand in the first place: now the
rule of three twice repeated, shall deliver the numbers sought for in this
manner:

175 60: therefore 100 34 2/7 175 60: therefore 75 25 5/7
I do of set purpose omit the demonstration of this composition of the terms,
because it is not much unlike the former.

A hundred and sixty footmen and forty horsemen got a booty of 138 crowns
to be divided between them so, that as often as the footmen received one, the
horsemen should receive three. How much were the footmen, how much were the
horsemen to have?

Here likewise I place the consequents of the second reason added together in
the second place, namely, 138: in the third place I set the products made by
multiplying the numbers signifying how often each one should take his share by
the number of the soldiers: namely, 160 and 120, these added together and
making 280, shall have the first place. The example is thus:

280 138: therefore 160 78 6/7 280 138: therefore 120 59 1/7
Three Butchers hired a meddow together, promising to pay yearly rent for it
30 crowns, the first fed in it 20 Oxen 70 days, the second fed 46 Oxen 56
days, the third fed 32 Oxen 60 days: How much of the rent shall each
partner pay?

Again therefore I multiply each man's heard by the several times, the products
1400, 2576, 1920, shall possess the third place: and being added together,
they shall have the first place, the yearly rent shall be in the midst thus:

5896 30: therefore 1400 7 91/737 5896 30: therefore 2576 13 79/737 5896 30:
therefore 1920 9 567/737
Three merchants were partners for a year. The first in the beginning brought
250 crowns, but after 3 months he withdrew 100. The second after 2 months
brought 180 crowns, but after 6 months of their partnership were expired, he
took away 50. The third after three months brought in 235 crowns, and after
five months added 45 crowns. Now having gotten 68 crowns, what is each man's
share?

These kind of examples being in outward show most intricate, require a little
more labor, otherwise they are to be handled by the same art. They will soon be
dispatched, if you endeavor but to sever every man's time accordingly as he
changed his stock, and make as many multiplications as there were changes. As
in this present example: Because the first man left in the partnership 250
crowns for three months, let them be multiplied together, the product will be
750. Then withdrawing 100 crowns, he left but 150 for the nine months
remaining. Wherefore these being again multiplied by their time, make 1350.
Which numbers being added, the total sum for the first partner is 2100.

Likewise the second man his 180 crowns being multiplied by the 4 months
wherein he left them in the common traffic, do make 720. Moreover 50 crowns
being subducted from 180 (for so many he fetched away from the principal after
the sixth month of their partner ship) there remain 130 crowns, which if you
multiply by the six months remaining, the product will be 780, which added to
the former, makes 1500.

So also multiply the third man his 235 crowns by 9, they make 2115. Item 45
by 7, they make 315, which added to the former, make 2430. These terms being
thus compounded, if you proceed as you did before, the proportion will be
inferred, which here you see set down, with ordering of the whole example.

The stock. Month. Numbers co^pou^ded first by multiplicatio^. Numbers
co^pounded by addition. I. 250. 3. 750. 2100. 150. 9. 1350. II. 180. 4. 720.
1500. 130. 6. 780. III. 235. 9. 2115. 2430. 45. 7. 315. 6030. 68. 2100. 23
137/201 1500. 16 184/201 2430. 27 81/201

CHAP. XXII. A treatise of Alligation, whereof B. SALIGNACVS was the Author.
l. In Aligation we are to consider,
The propriety which is this: that in alligation, The measures should be like.
The price of the mixed measure should be mean in quantity between the prices
of the simple measures.
The kinds which are two Prime: which cou^terchaungeth the differences between
the extremes and the mean: and herein we are to consider the Chap. 23.
Propriety, which is this, that if the extremes are in number Even: each of them
severally must be compared once only with the mean. Odd: then Every extreme
of the greatest number must be compared with the mean once only. Every
extreme of the least number must be compared diverse times with the mean.

Kinds. which are two, The first kind, some part of the numbers sought for
being given, infers the rest by simple proportion. Chap. 24. The second
kind, the total sum made of the numbers sought for being given, infers
all the particulars by proportion compou^ded by addition. Chap. 25.

Second: which infers the mean by proportion compounded by multiplication
and addition. Chap. 26.

Of the Definition and proprieties of Alligation. Chap. 1.

HItherto we have spoken of the first kind of compound proportion: the second
follows, and is called Alligation.

Alligation is an art, which (by the means of certain things given) makes
equal the total made of the prices of the measures mingled together, unto the
total made of prices of the measures taken severally.

There is 100 pound weight of silver worth 17 pound to be mingled with other
silver worth 24 pound, so that the total made of the prices of the waightes
mingled together may be equal to the total made of the prices of the waights
taken severally. Here all the prices are given, the art therefore which by the
means of these prices given makes equal the total numbers is Alligation.

Item, Of two kinds of corn mingled together suppose there were 10 bushels
worth 16 shillings, and 18 bushels worth 12 shillings: four bushels of this
mingled corn are to be sold, so that the total sum made of the prices of
the 28 bushels mingled together be equal to the total made of the prices of
the 10 and 18 bushels severally taken. Here both the number and the price of
the simple measures are given, but there is but only a certain part given of
the number of the measures mingled together. The art therefore which by the
means of the things given makes equal the totals propounded in the
question, is called Alligation.

The property of Alligation is this, that the measures in it be alike: but the
price of the mingled measure must be in quantity mean between the prices of
the measures severally given.

A bushel of corn worth 16 shillings is supposed to be mingled with a
bushel of corn worth 18 shillings. Here by this property first of all the
bushels are like measures. Then the price of a mingled bushel must be in a
quantity mean between 16 and 18. that is to say, it must be greater then 16,
and less then 18. So that the price of a simple measure is called the Extreme,
but the price of a mingled measure is the Mean.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Prime Alligation, and the property thereof.
ALLigation is two fold. Prime, which does counterchange the differences of
the terms from the mean.

By the definition of Alligation generally taken it appears, that in all
alligation there are certain things given. Therefore in Prime alligation
generally let all prices be understood to be given. Moreover to cou^terchange
the differences of the extremes, is nothing else but to attribute the
difference of the lesser extreme to the greater extreme, and contrariwise to
attribute the difference of the greater extreme to the lesser extreme. Now
this counterchaunge is therefore used, that we may thereby make equal the
total made of the prices of the measures severally taken unto the total of
the prices of the measures mingled together. That this may be the better
demonstrated, we must first of all set down two premises. The first is this:

If one and the same number do multiply certain numbers severally, and the
total made of them being added together, the product made of the total shall
be equal to the total made of the products of the parts.

As here: let 10 be the total number made of 4 and 6, let the number
multiplying them all, be 2, the products made of 4 and 6, are 8 and 12, and the
total made of them is 20. Therefore the product made of 10 by 2 shall be 20.

The second premisse is this:

If three unequal numbers being given, you multiply any one of them by the
other two remaining, and augment the self same number by one of them which
remain, and diminish it by the other: and then multiply the number augmented
by that which was taken away, and the number diminished by that which was added
to: the total number made of the latter products shall be equal to the total
made of the former products.

As here: Let there be three unequal numbers 4, 7, 9, multiply 9 by 4 and 7,
and let the products be 36 and 63, then augment and diminish the self same
number 9 as is aforesaid, add therefore 7 unto it, and let the total be 16,
also from 9 take 4, and let the remainder be 5, then multiply 16 by 4, and 5 by
7, and let the products be 64 and 35: here the total made of 64 and 35, shall
be equal to the total made of 36 and 63.

These things being thus set down: now of two kinds of wine, let one be
worth 14 pence, another worth 11 pence, let the difference be 2 and 1 from the
mean, which is 12 pence. The total made of the differences is 3. The mean
price is 12, the extremes are 14 and 11. Therefore multiply the mean which is
12, by the total made of the differences, namely by 3, the product is 36, that
is to say, three pottles worth 12 pence a piece shall be worth 36 pence, I say
therefore that one pottle worth 14 pence, and two pottles worth 11 pence a
piece shall be worth 36 pence. That is: I say that the total made of 1 and 2,
by 14 and 11, is 36. For here 3 is the total made of 1 and 2 as was aforesaid.
Therefore by the first premisse if you multiply 12 by 2 and 1, the total made
of the productes 24 and 12 shall be equal to the product made of 12 and 3. But
12 multiplied by 3 makes 36, therefore the total of the products made of 12
multiplied by 2 and 1 shall be 36.

Again these three numbers 11, 12, and 14 are unequal, the differences of the
extremes 14 and 11 from 12, which is the mean, are 2 and 1. The greater
extreme 14 is 12 more by 2, the lesser extreme 11 is 12 less by 1. Therefore
by the second premisse if you multiply 12, augmented by 1, which was taken from
it, and 12 diminished by 2, which was added to it: that is to say, if you
multiply 14 by 1, and 11 by 2, the total made of their products shall be
equal to the total made of the products of 12 multiplied by 1 and 2. But the
total of the products made of 12 by 1 and 2 is 36, as it appeared before:
therefore the total of the products made of 1 and 2 by 14 and 11, shall be
also 36, which was the thing to be demonstrated. Therefore the reason why with
use this counterchaunging is as you see.

Here this also is to be noted:

If each number of the extremes be a number of multitude, the differences may
be counterchaunged diuersely: and therefore then in one and the same example a
diverse alligation may be made.

But all Alligation makes equal the total made of the prices of the mixed
measures to the total made of the measures severally taken, as appears by
the definition of general alligation: wherefore in the alligation intended
when each number of the extremes is a number of multitude, the counterchanging
of the differences is at our own choice.

Hereafter follow two proprieties, and as many kinds of prime alligation. The
first propriety is thus:

If the extremes be equal in number, each of them is compared with the mean
but once only.

As here:
14 18 2 24 4

15 20 3 16 1 14 1 12 5

The second propriety is thus:

If the extremes be unequal in number, then each of the extremes whose number
is the greater, are compared with the mean once only: but touching the
lesser number of extremes, if the extreme be but one only, then is that one
extreme to be cempared with the mean so often as there is unities in the
greater number of the extremes.

As here:
11 18 3 14 3 8 7, 3 10

In this example the greater number of the extremes is 2, and therefore the
extreme of the lesser number is twice compared with the mean. Where also you
shall note that the total made of the manifold differences attributed to one
and the same extreme, is taken for one difference: for, for 7 and 3 we take 10.

But if the extremes of the lesser number be many, if you compare more then one
of them oftentimes with the mean, the number arising of the comparison is
without art: but if you compare but one only with the mean, that shall be
compared with it so often as the difference of the unequal numbers is being
added to an unity, but the rest shall be compared with the mean but once
only.

As here:
15 4 17 5 17 6 17 7 13 28 8 32 11, 10, 9 30

In this example the greater number of the extremes is 4, the lesser is 2, the
difference of these unequal numbers is 2, unto which if you add 1, the total
will be 3. Now I compare only one extreme of the lesser number, namely 32,
oftentimes with the mean 15, and I compare it three times, but I compare the
extreme which remains but once only with the mean. And then last of all. I
take the total made of the manifold differences attributed to one extreme, for
one difference as I did before.

Thus much concerning the two proprieties of prime alligation: now follow the
two kinds for the understanding whereof we are to note that the numbers sought
for are the numbers of the simple measures.

CHAP. XXIIII. Concerning the first kind of prime Alligation.
PRime alligation of the first kind, is when some part of the numbers sought
for being given, we infer the rest by simple proportion.

Here we take the difference attributed to that extreme, whose measures are by
number given, for the first term of proportion, and for the third we take the
number of the measures given. The which kind of working shall be evidently
seen in the examples following.

My neighbor mingled 12 bushels of fine wheat worth 14 pence, with other
corn, namely, wheat, barlie, and oats: the bushel of wheat was worth 18
pence, the barlie 11 pence, the oats 9 pence, the bushel of corn mingled
together was worth 10 pence. The question is, how much wheat? how much barlie?
how much oats was mingled together?

Here a part of the numbers sought for is given namely 12 bushels, therefore
first of all I counterchaunge the differences of the extremes as you see:

10 18 Wheat 1 14 Fine wheat 1 11 Barley 1 9 Oats 8, 4, 1 13

Then for the first term of the proportion I take the difference attributed to
that extreme whose measures are by number given, namely one bushel worth 14
pence, but for the third term I take the number of the measures given, namely
12 bushels worth 14 pence a bushel. And so conclude the question propounded by
two simple proportions. The first proportion is thus:

1 Bushel worth 14 pence requires 13 bushels worth 9 pence the bushel:
therefore 12 bushels at 14 pence the bushel require 156 bushels at nine pence
the bushel.

The second is thus:

1 bushel worth 14 pence requires 1 bushel of each other kind: therefore 12
bushels at 14 pence the bushel require 12 bushels of each other kind.

Wherefore with 12 bushels at 14 pence the bushel were mingled 156 bushels at
9 pence the bushel, and 12 bushel of each of the other kinds.

Suppose there were four kinds of silver: let a pound of the one be worth 20
pound, of the other 16 pound, of the third 14 pound, of the fourth 12 pound.
These four kinds of silver are to be mingled together, so that a pound of the
mingled silver be worth 15 pound. Now there were taken 33 pound of the silver
worth 16 pound, the question is how many pound of each other kind is to be
taken?

Here a part of the numbers sought for is given, namely 33, therefore the
differences being counterchaunged as you see:

15 20 3 16 1 14 1 12 5

For the first term of the proportion, I take the difference added to the
extreme whose measures are by number given, namely one pound worth 16 pound,
but for the third I take the number of the measures given, namely 33 pound at
16 pound the pound. Then I conclude the question propounded by three simple
proportions, the first proportion is thus:

1 pound worth 16 pound, requires one pound worth 14 pound: therefore 33 pound
worth 16 pound the pound, require 33 pound worth 14 pound the pound.

The second is thus:

1 pound worth 16 pound, requires three pound worth 20 pound the pound:
therefore 33 pound worth 16 pound the pound require 99 pound worth 20 pound the
pound.

The third is thus:

1 pound worth 16 pound, requires five pound worth 12 pound the pound:
therefore 33 pound worth 16 pound the pound require 165 pound worth 12 pound the
pound.

Therefore if there were 33 pound taken of the silver worth 16 pound the pound,
there might be taken 33 pound of the silver worth 14 pound the pound, and 99
pound of the silver worth 20 pound the pound, and 165 pound worth 12 pound the
pound, I say they may be taken, but it is not needful they should be taken.
For seeing that here each number of the extremes is a number of multitude,
therefore the alligation may be manifold, according as I noted it before in
the definition of prime alligation.

The prices of the same kinds of silver being kept, if there had been 6 pound
taken of the silver worth 16 pound the pound, and 8 pound of the silver worth
12 pound the pound, that a pound of the mingled silver might be worth 15 pound,
you shall say thus:

1 pound worth 16 pound requires 5 pound worth 12 pound: therefore 6 pound
worth 16 pound the pound requires 30 worth 12 pound the pound.

And therefore unto those 8 pound worth 12 pound the pound, there are to be
added 22 pound of the same price. The rest is easy by that which has been
said before.

CHAP. XXV. Of the second kind of prime Alligation.
WE have spoken of the first kind of prime alligation. Prime alligation of the
second kind is that, which by the means of the total made of the numbers
sought for infers all the particulars by the help of proportion compounded
by addition.

This compound proportion is commonly called the rule of Fellowship. In it for
the first term of proportion we take the total made of the differences added
together: for the second, we take the total made of the number of the
measures, and for the antecedents of the reasons remaining, the counterchannged
differences of the extremes from the mean.

Mine host has two sorts of wine, one worth six pence a quart, another
vvorth 12 pence a quart. Of these two he purposes to draw six quarts at 10
pence: how many quartes therefore shall he draw of each several kind.

Here the whole number given made of the numbers of the simple measures is
six. Therefore counterchaunging the differences as you see:

10 6 2 12 4

For the first term I take the total made of the differences which is 6. For
the second term I take 6, and for the antecedents of the reasons remaining I
take 2 and 4, and then I make a compounded proportion in this manner:

6 6 therefore 2 2 6 6 therefore 4 4
Here therefore there must be drawn two quarts at 6 pence the quart, and 4 at
12 pence the quart. Hereby it appears that if the total made of the numbers
of the simple measures be equal to the total made of the numbers of the
differences, the numbers of the differences are the numbers of the simple
measures.

Hiero King of Syracusa voweth to the gods for the prosperous success of his
affairs a crown of gold. Let us suppose that Hiero for the making of this
crown gave unto a vvorkeman 500 pound of gold: and that the workman made in
deed a crown of just weight, but mingled some silver in the crown. The king
demands of Archimedes how much gold, how much silver was in the mingled
crown.

For the resolving of this question Archimedes took two lumpes of metal of
the same weight with the crown, but of the same kind with the gold and silver
which was in the crown. I say they must be of the same kind. For let there be
two lumps of silver of equal weight one to an other, but of vneqall finenesse,
the finer lump shall fill a lesser place then the other which is not so fine.
The same is to be said of the lump of gold. So that here will be a most
manifest error, if the metals be they either gold or silver, be not both of
one kind. I say therefore that the lump both of gold and silver was of the
same kind with the gold and silver in the crown.

Now let there be 3 such bodies chosen: let the one be a lump of gold, the
other a lump of silver, the third the crown mingled of gold and silver. And
let them be hanged one after another severally in a vessel full of water, and
let the weight of the first be 968, of the second 952, of the third 964. Then
let the waights be taken for the value of the bodies themselves: the value
therefore of the lump of gold shall be 968, of the silver 952, of the crown
964. Now in the mingled crown by supposition there are 500 pound weight:
therefore here the total example made of the numbers of the measures shall be
500, so that the differences being counterchaunged as you see:

964 968 12 952 4

For the first term I take the total made of the differences, namely 16, for
the second I take the total made of the numbers of the measures sought for,
namely 500, for the antecedents of the reasons remaining. I take 12 and 4, and
thereof frame a compound proportion in this manner:

16 500: therefore 4 125 16 500: therefore 12 375
Whereby it is inferred that there was in the mingled crown 125 pound of
silver, and 375 of gold.

Archimedes in Vitruuius is said to have found out the mixture of the gold,
grounding his reason on the differences of the water running out of the
vessel. But that the art may stand sure, I construe his manner of reason thus:
that is to say, that by the known differences of the water running out of the
vessel Archimedes attained unto the other differences of the water unknown,
and then at length answered the question by prime alligation of the second
kind. Otherwise suppose an unequal running out of the water, that is to say,
when the gold was put in, say that there ran out 20, when the silver was put
in 36, and when the crown was put in 24. These several quantities of water
running out are to be taken for the values of the bodies as they were put in,
according to the intent of him which gainesayeth mine assertion. Therefore the
value of a lump of gold of 500 pound, shall be lesser then the value of a
mass of silver of the same weight, which is against reason. Therefore
Archimedes by the known differences of the water running out, attained to the
differences of the water remaining in this manner. Suppose that the vessel
into the which the crowns were put were 488 pintes. If therefore the water
which ran out when the lump of gold was put in were 20 pintes, the rest was
468, the like we may judge of the rest.

My host mingled four sorts of wine to the quantity of 300 quartes: A
quart of the one wine was vvorth 12 pence, of another 10 pence, of the third
9 pence, of the fourth 7 pence: He sold a quart of the mingled wine for 11
pence, how many quartes of the first? how many of the second? how many of the
third? and how many of the fourth kind did he mingle together?

Here the total number given made of the number of the simple measures is 300.
Therefore counterchaunging the differences as you see:

11 7 1 9 1 10 1 12 4, 2, 1 7

For the first term I take the total made of the differences, namely 10, for
the second I take 300, for the antecedents of the reasons remaining I take 1,
1, 1 and 7, and then I frame a compounded proportion thus:

10 300 therefore 7 210 10 300 therefore 1 30 10 300 therefore 1 30 10 300
therefore 1 30
Whereupon I conclude that the quartes herein mingled, were first 210 at 12
pence a quart, then of each of the rest there were 30 quartes.

An Apothecary was to mingle pepper, sugar, cinnamon and ginger to the
quantity of fifty ounces. An ounce of pepper was vvorth 25, sugar 24,
cinnamon 22, ginger 18. An ounce of the spice mingled together was worth 23:
How many ounces of pepper, how many of sugar, how many of each other kind are
to be mingled together?

Here first of all the total given being made of the numbers of the simple
measures is 500. Therefore the differences being counterchaunged as you see:

23 25 5 24 1 22 1 18 2

For the first term of the proportion I take the total made of the
differences, namely 9, for the second I take 500, for the antecedents of the
reasons remaining I take 5, 1, 1, and 2, and thereof I frame a compounded
proportion in this manner:

9 500 therefore 5 277 7/9 9 500 therefore 1 55 5/9 9 500 therefore 1 55 5/9 9
500 therefore 2 111 1/9
Here therefore may be mingled of pepper 277 ounces and 7/9, of sugar 55 5/9,
and so much cinnamon, of ginger 111 and 1/9. I say they may be mingled, but
they shall not be mingled. For in this question each number of the extremes is
a number of multitude, and therefore a manifold alligatio^ may be made therein,
of which manifold alligation I gave a note before in the first kind of prime
alligation.

CHAP. XXVI. Of second Alligation.
HItherto of prime alligation: Second alligation follows which by proportion
co^pounded by multiplication and addition infers the mean.

Here both the numbers and prices are given of each several measure, but there
is but some part only of the mingled measures given. Therefore here for the
first term I take the total made of the numbers of the simple measures, and
for the second term, I take the total of the products made by multiplying
those numbers by their extremes, and last of all for the third term of the
proportion, I take the part given of the number of the mixed measures.

Of two kinds of corn there were mingled 10 bushels at 16 pence a bushel,
with 18 bushels at 12 pence a bushel: what is the bushel of mingled corn
worth?

Here first of all I add together the numbers of the simple measures 10 and
18, the total is 28. Then I multiply 10 by 16, and 18 by 12, and make 160 and
216, the total of them is 376. The total therefore of the prices of the
simple measures is 376 pence. But alligation makes the total of the prices of
the mixed measures equal to the total of the simple measures as appears by
the definition thereof. Therefore these 28 mingled bushels shall be worth 376.
Therefore I conclude the question thus:

28 mingled bushels are worth 376. therefore one bushel of mingled corn is
worth 13 3/7.

P. Ramus the most famous Philosopher of our time, calls this alligation,
alligation of the mean sought for: and defines it to be that, which (two
extremes being given) seeks out the mean by dividing the extrems added
together by their number. He adds these words as if there be two extremes
the divisor must be 2, if there be three extremes the divisor must be 3, and
so forth. Therefore by this definition if corn at 16 pence and 12 pence a
bushel be mingled together to the quantity of 28 bushels as is aforesaid,
the price of a bushel of mingled corn shall be 14 pence, for here the number
of the extremes is 2, and the extremes 16 and 12 being added make 28, so that
if thou divide 28 by 2, the quotient is 14.

But let us see how true this is: Here by the rule of prime alligation the
counterchaunging of the differences is in this manner:

14 16 2 12 2

By the which counterchange it is insinuated, that when there are taken two
bushels of corn at 16 pence, then must there be two also taken of 12 pence the
bushel. Therefore when there shall be 10 taken at 16 pence the bushel, then
shall there also be 10 taken at 12 pence the bushel. The numbers of the simple
measures 10 and 18 being added together make 28. Therefore I reason thus: If
when 10 bushels at 16 pence the bushel are mingled with 18 bushels at 12 pence
the bushel, the mean is then 14: therefore when 28 bushels of these simple
several corns are so mingled, that the price of a mingled bushel is 14 pence,
then shall 10 bushels at 16 pence the bushel, be mingled with 18 bushels at 12
pence the bushel. (For it is all one way from Newhause to Heidelberge, and
from Heidelberge to Newhause.) But this second assertion is false (for here
when 10 bushels at 16 pence the bushel are taken, then also there are taken 10
bushels at 12 pence the bushel as appeared before) therefore the first
assertion is also false. Whether with 18, or with 10 bushels at 12 pence a
bushel, you mingle 10 bushels at 16 pence a bushel, the extremes added
together in both are 28, and their number is 2. Therefore whether you mingle 10
bushels at 16 pence the bushel, with 18, or 10 bushels at 12 pence a bushel,
the price of a bushel of mingled corn shall be all one, and so the price of
the cheaper wheat shall be the price of the dearer wheat, which is absurd.

I always reverenced my master while he was a live as my duty required, and
much more do I now embrace the writings of that most holy Martyr being dead.
But it is incident to a man to err: and therefore he being a Philosopher of
most holy memory, esteemed those men to be mad that thought it an hurtful
thing for a common wealth to have their faults amended: therefore following his
own decree by my definition, I correct his in this place. For he himself
either did correct it before his death, or if he had lived any longer, I doubt
not but he would willingly have amended it: if he did correct it, truly it was
never my chance as yet to see his correction.

Let 6 ounces of cloves at 36, and 8 ounces of cinnamon at 16, be mingled with
4 ounces of pepper at 15: how shall 4 ounces of the mingled spice be sold?

Here the numbers of the simple measures are 6, 8, and 4, whereof the total is
18. The products of 36, 16, and 15, made by multiplying them by 6, 8, and 4 are
216, 128, and 60. The total of them is 404. Therefore I will say thus:

18 ounces of mingled spice are worth 404 therefore 4 ounces are worth 89 7/9.

Let the prices of the simple spices be as they were before: and let 1/2 of an
ounce of cloves, and 1/8 of an ounce of cinnamon be mingled with 1/4 of an
ounce of pepper: what shall an ounce of the mingled spice be worth?

Here first of all the unlike measures which are given 1/2, 1/3, 1/4 must be
made like. For the property of general alligation requires that the measures
should be like. Therefore by reduction of fractions to one denomination, for
1/2, 1/3 and 1/4, I find out 6/12, 4/12, and 3/12. Then that the work may be
more easy for the parts found out, by reduction of fractions to whole numbers,
I take 6, 4, and 3. The total therefore of the numbers of the measures shall
be 13. Then multiply 36, 16, and 15, by the numbers of their measures 6, 4, and
3, you shall produce 216, 64, and 45: whereof the total is 325. Then shall you
conclude the question thus:

13 ounces of mingled spice are worth 325, therefore one ounce is worth 25 3/13.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Manifold proportion continued in the terms.
Manifold proportion compounded in the terms has been handled hitherto:
that remains which is continued in the terms.

Manifold proportion continued in the terms is, when unto the disiunct terms
of the reasons given, other proportional terms do answer, whereof each
middlemost term joins the antecedent reason with the consequent.

As in the examples following 2 3 4 5 8 12 15

For the reasons given in the uppermost row of numbers (namely a
subsesquialtera, and a subsesquiquarta) are in the nethermost row of numbers so
continued and knit one to an other, that of the two middlemost terms there is
made one, which according to the reasons given in the first rank of numbers is
both the consequent of the former, and the antecedent of the latter. For as 2
is unto 3, so is 8 unto 12: and as 4 is unto 5, so is 12 unto 15.

In this kind of proportion therefore there is intended an invention or finding
out of the least terms continually proportional with the reasons given how
many so ever.

This invention is set forth in the 4 prop. 8, where it is demonstrated by
what means, how many reasons so ever being given in the least terms, you may
find out other least terms continually proportional, keeping the reasons
given. Let that problem therefore be turned into two theoremes: whereof let
the one concern two reasons given, and let the other concern many reasons
given in this manner:

I
If the middlemost terms being prime one to another of the two reasons given,
be set crossewayes, and then the former of the two multiply the terms of the
first reason, and the latter the terms of the consequent: the three products
shall be the least terms continually proportional as the reasons given are.

Therefore we are to note, that in the reasons given the middlemost terms are
either prime numbers or compound, if they be co^pound, they must be reduced to
prime numbers. As in 3, 2, 7, 4, the middlemost numbers are prime numbers in
respect one of an other. Wherefore being set crossewise one under another, if
you multiply 7 by 2 and 3, which are the terms of the former reason: and then
multiply 2 by 7 and 4, which are the terms of the reason following, the
products 21, 14, 8, shall be the least numbers continually proportional, as
the numbers given are, as you see here:

For as 3 is unto 2, so is 21 to 14: and as 7 is to 4, so is 14 to 8.

Let these two reasons or proportions be given like one to an other 3, 2, 6, 4.
Here 2 and 6 are compound numbers in respect one of another, wherefore I reduce
them to prime or the least numbers, namely to 1 and 3, and place them
crossewise, and multiply 3 into 3 and 2 the antecedents, and likewise 1 into 6
and 4 the consequents, the products are 9, 6, 4, which are the least terms
continually proportional, as the reasons given, according as you see them here
written.

II.
Any three reasons being given, if two terms prime in respect one of another,
(whereof the one is the last of the least continual proportional terms of the
former reasons found out, the other is the antecedent of the third reason) be
set crossewise, and then all the numbers found out be multiplied by the first,
and the numbers following by the last: the products shall be the least numbers
continually proportional as the reasons given are: and so forth if there be
more given.

For example sake, let there be three reasons given 4 unto 3, 2 unto 1, 5 unto
6, to be continued in the least or prime proportional terms. First therefore
I dispatch the former two reasons, and find 8, 6, 3. And because 3 (the last of
them that are found out) is a prime number to 5 the antecedent of the reason
remaining: therefore they being set crossewise, let 5 multiply 8 and 6, the
products are 40 and 30: but let 3 multiply the numbers following 5 and 6, the
products are 15, 30, so that we have now four terms in the least numbers
continually proportional as the three reasons given were. The example is in
this manner:

Let these three be given to be continued after the manner aforesaid, 3 2, -- 5
4, -- 4 3. The same kind of working must be followed, saving that after that 2
reasons are dispatched, in steed of 8 and 4 which are compound numbers in
respect one of another, I take 2 and 1, which are prime numbers as you see in
this example:

In the example following there are four reasons continued together, and after
the same manner there may be as many as you please continued together in the
least terms.

Therefore the questions of proportion wherein any number offers it self to
be parted according unto many reasons in diverse terms so linked together,
that the former term has respect unto that which follows, are to be
answered by the rule of proportion compounded by addition, the least terms
being first found out continually proportional as the reasons given are.

The example.
Two hundred crowns are to be divided on that condition that the first man
shall have three times so much as the second: the second shall have four times
as much as the third. How much shall every man have*

Here there are two reasons propounded, the one is triple, the other is
quadruple, which are knit together in this manner:

3 1 a c c e 4 1

That is to say, let a be triple to c, but let c be quadruple unto e. These are
knit together by two middle terms 1 and 4, which being so lincked together,
that one and the same term according to the reasons given, may be both
consequent to a, and antecedent unto e, I shall easily resolve the doubt. Now
this will be done, if I find out the least terms continually proportional as
the terms are which are given, namely 3, 1, 4, 1, the which terms found out
will be these, 12, 4, 1. For then they being added together, the proportion
will be inferred thus:

17 200 therefore 12 141 3/17 17 200 therefore 4 47 1/17 17 200 therefore 1 11
11/17
Let there be 24 crowns so to be parted, that as often as the first has 3, so
often the second has 4, and as often as he has two, so often the third has
3, and as often as the third has 6, so often the fourth has 1. What shall
each man's portion be?

Here the terms of the three reasons 3, 4: 2, 3, 6, 1: are to be reduced (by
the last theoreme) into four terms continually proportional as the reasons
given are, the which four terms are these, 3, 4, 6, 1. The total made of
these terms added together, shall be the first term of the proportion, and
being severally set down, they shall be the third term. The number which is
to be divided shall be the middlemost, and then the proportion shall be
concluded thus:

14 24: therefore 3 5 1/7 14 24: therefore 4 6 6/7 14 24: therefore 6 10 2/7 14
24: therefore 1 1 5/7
Four other men were to divide 120 crowns gotten in partnershippe, so that
as often as the second had 5, so often the third had 9, and as often as the
third had 7, so often the fourth had 11, and as often as the fourth had 9, so
often the first had 13, what was each man his portion.

This question is somewhat differing in show, but the working is all one. For
the matter is dispatched by proportion of addition, the least numbers being
found out continually proportional as the reasons given are. As you see here:

340 120 therefore 35 12 6/17 340 120 therefore 63 22 4/17 340 120 therefore 99
34 16/17 340 120 therefore 143 50 8/17
CHAP. XXVIII. Of continual proportion.
L Coniunct or continual proportion, is either
Simple. Or Manifold: and is called progression, wherein we are to consider The
order of the terms, Entering into the progression. Or Making a new progression.
Or The sum of the terms.

HItherto of disiunct proportion: now follows continual.

Continual proportion is that whose middle terms do all supply the place of
an antecedent, and a consequent.

In continual proportion the first extreme is only an antecedent, and the
last is only a consequent: of the other terms, which are in the midst
between the extremes any of them in respect of that which went before it is a
consequent, in respect of that which follows it is an antecedent, as this is
in three terms 9, 6, 4, in four terms, 8, 12, 18, 27, in five terms 32, 16,
8, 4, 2 etc.

Continual proportion is either simple, or manifold, simple continual
proportion, is that wherein there is but one only mean between the extrems.

This is the 9 d. 5. which affirms that proportion consists in three terms
at the least, as in 9, 6, 4, where the extremes 9 and 4 are lincked together by
one only term. This is framed in the least terms, if you multiply the terms
of the reason given being prime in respect one of another, both by themselves,
and one by another, for the products are the terms of the continual
proportion, according to the reason given. As for example, of 2, 1, which are
the terms of a double reason, you shall make a simple continual proportion if
you multiply 2 by it self, and then by 1, and last of all 1 by it self, for
the products will be 4, 2, 1. Likewise of 3, 2, the terms of a sesquialter
reason, you shall by the same means make 9, 6, 4.

The property of it is this: The product made of the extremes, is equal to
the product made of the mean, and contrariwise.

This is the 17 p. 6. concerning magnitudes, and also the 20 p. 7. where this
property is also attributed unto numbers, because in three proportional
numbers, the product made of the extremes, is equal unto the square made of
the mean. As in 9, 6, 4, the product made of 9 and 4, is 36, which is equal
to the square of the mean, namely unto six times six, or which is all one to
the product made of the mean multiplied by it self. For it is, as if you
should infer the proportion disiunctiuely in four terms after this manner:

9 give 6: therefore 6 give 4.

Wherefore it is to be gathered, that this property is general to all simple
proportion whether it consist of three or four terms.

Manifold continual proportion, is that wherein many mean terms proceed
continually after one and the same reason. Hereupon it is called progression.

As 1, 2, 4, 8. Item 16, 24, 36, 54, 81.

In progression we have aneye to the finding out of the order of the terms
making the progression, or else to the sum of them.

The finding out of the terms is two fold: for either the terms given enter
into the progression, or else new terms are made by their means.

All the terms of a proportion given, can not be extended and continued. In
manifold proportion it may be, but in other reasons it can not so well be done.
It shall appear therefore by the theoreme following, what terms given will
admit a progression.

If the last term saving one does divide the product made of the last term,
the quotient shall be the proportional term following, Or, If the last term
does divide the product made of the last saving one, the quotient shall be the
antecedent proportional.

This Theoreme is gathered out of the 18 p. 9. It is also deduced as it were a
consequence out of the propriety of continual proportion, whereby not only
proportion, but any reason given may be continued. As in 3, 9, 27, wherein 9
divides 729, the product made of the last number 27, the quotient is 81, which
is the fourth proportional number. Likewise let 9 which is the second number
divide 9 which is the product made of the first number 3, the quotient 1, is
the first proportional number. So that the progression shall be in this
manner, 1, 3, 9, 27, 81. This continuation of the terms in manifold proportion
may be infinitely inferred only by the multiplication of the last term by the
denominator of the reason or proportion:

Yet in those whose reason is manifold, any term sought for may be found our
readily in this manner:

If you divide the product made of the last number multiplied in it self, by
any of the numbers which went before it: by how many degrees the divisor went
before the number multiplied, by so many degrees shall the quotient follow the
same number multiplied.

For example sake, let this double proportion be given.

2 4 8 16 32 64 128 4 3 2 1 2 3 4 Antecedents Consequents.

And let 16 be the number to be multiplied by it self, th product is 256,
divide that by 8 which is the number next before it, the quotient 32 is the
number which must follow next after 16. But if you divide the product 256 by 4
which went before 16 in the third place, the quotient will be 64, which must
follow in the third place after 16. If you make the division by 2, which went
before 16 in the fourth place, the quotient 128 must follow in the fourth place
after 16, and so forth in the rest. For it is as if you should set the rule of
proportion thus: If 2 give 16: then 16 shall give 128.

Out of the foresaid abridgement, another arises, whereby we may find out any
term of manifold progression, in this manner:

If some certain terms of continual progression be given, and the numbers
following one another from an unity according to their natural order, do
answer the said terms from the second forward, the quotient of the product
made by any of the terms whatsoever divided by the first term, shall be the
term of the progression more by one, then both the numbers answering to the
numbers multiplied, do amount unto being added together.

As in this triple proportion, let there be given some terms, and let the
numbers be written underneath them in order as you see:

3 9 27 81 243 0 1 2 3 4

Then if you multiply 27 by 81, and divide the product 2187 by 3, which is the
first number in the progression, the quotient 729 shall be the sixth term of
the progrestion which is more by one, then 2 and 3 (that is to say 5) are.
Likewise if you multiply 243 by it self, and divide the product by the first,
the quotient shall be 19683, to be placed in the ninth place, and so forth of
the rest.

The terms as well of manifold reason as of proportion and progression, may in
this manner be continued infinitely. But the nature of numbers does not bear
it so well in the other kinds of reason or proportion. For first of all, if of
the reason given the terms be prime numbers one to another, then can not a
third, much less a fourth or fifth in whole numbers be adjoined to them in
continual proportion: as it appears by the 16 p. of the 9. As in the reason
of 3 to 5, which is superpartient two fifts, you shall never bring forth a
continual proportion, unless you join to it this mixed or surde number 8 1/3,
which cannot be expressed by an whole number. Likewise how many proportional
numbers soever being given, if the extremes be prime one to another, no such
number can be given at the last, as the second is unto the first, by the 17 p.
of the 9. As in this subsesquialter 4, 6, 9, because 4 and 9 are prime one to
another, therefore there can be no whole number in such proportionalitie unto
9, as 4 is unto 6. Therefore in such kind of proportions this Theoreme
following takes place.

If the terms of continual simple proportion, not admitting an usual
progression be multiplied by the antecedent of the reason whereof they consist,
and the last be multiplied by his consequent: there shall be produced four
least terms continually proportional according to the numbers given: and so
forth continually by multiplying the products by the antecedent given, and the
last by the consequent given, you shall find the least terms how many so ever
continually proportional according to the reasons given:

As for example, seeing that this sesquitertia 16, 12, 9, has not a fourth
number in progression. Therefore first of all, I multiply all the numbers given
by 4, the antecedent of the reason given between 4 and 3, whereof they were
made: the products shall be 64, 48, 36. Likewise I multiply the last number 9
by 3 the consequent given, the product is 27, the which numbers are all
continually proportional next unto the numbers given. After this manner many
others may be found out.

4 3 The terms of the reason given. 16 12 9 The simple prop. 64 48 36 27 The
first progression. 256 192 144 108 81

Behold also this example following of a manifold superparticular reason.

5 2 25 10 4 125 50 20 8 625 250 100 40 16

Thus much concerning the ranging of the terms: now follows the sum of the
progression.

The finding out of the sum, is that which (the first term of the
progression increasing being subducted from the sec^ond and the last) adds
unto the last term given a number, to the which the remainder of the last
term has such proportion as the remainder of the second term has unto the
first.

I said (the progression increasing) that ye may understand that the first
term is here taken for the least, and the last for the greatest. Now the
masterie of this invention is general, being not only of force in manifold
proportion, as that rule is which the common sort of Arithmeticians do
prescribe, but all progression of what proportionalitie so ever given: It is
taken out of the 33 prop. 9. which affirms this, of how many proportional
numbers soever following one another. If from the second and the last term
there be taken away numbers equal to the first, the remainder of the last
term shall be unto all the antecedents going before it, as the remainder of
the second term is unto the first term. Therefore these three proportional
terms being found out, you shall set the excess or the remainder of the last
term in the third place, and the remainder of the second in the first place,
and the first or least term of the progression in the middlemost place, and
then work by the rule of three, whereby you shall infer a number containing
all them which were antecedents to the last, which being therefore added to the
last shall contain the sum of them all.

As in this manifold progression, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, if 2 be taken from 4, and
32, there remain 2 and 30. Now as 2 the remainder of the second term is unto
the first term 2, so is 30 unto all the antecedents. Therefore for the working
of the rule, the terms shall stand thus:

2 give 2: therefore 30 give 30.

The reason is in each place alike and equal. Therefore seeing that the total
made of the numbers going before the last is 30, it being added to the last,
namely unto 32, declares the sum of the progression to be 62.

Likewise in this subtriple progression, 2, 6, 18, 54, let 2 be taken from 6
and 54, the remainders shall be 4 and 52. Now as 4 the remainder of the second
term is unto the first term 2, so is 52 the remainder of the last term unto
all the antecedents. Wherefore the three terms known shall be thus ordered of
the finding out of the fourth term.

4 2: therefore 52 26

And for so much as this fourth number, is equal unto all the antecedents, it
being added to the last term 54, the total 80 shall be the sum of the
progression.

Likewise let there be this subsesquialter progression, 16, 24, 36, 54, 81. The
remainders of the second, and last term are 8, and 65, whereupon by these
three proportional numbers 8, 16, 65, the fourth number 130 is inferred, which
is the total made of all the antecedents except the last, it being therefore
added unto the last term 81, declares the sum of the progression to be 211.
Whereby it appears that the first, second, and last term of the progression
being known the sum cannot lie hid.

An Example.

A certain man sold his house to be paid for it in wheat after such a
manner, that when he that bought it came in at the first door he should give
him one grain, at the second two, at the third 4, and so forth proceeding
continually by double proportion according to the number of the doors. He that
shrunk from his bargain should pay to the other 12 crowns for a penalty. Now
being 60 doors, the question is how much wheat he was to pay.

A rich man of Basil not ignorant of the huge increase of Geometrical
progression, sold his house sometimes upon this condition being among his
cups. But the condition of his bargain being brought unto an account, the
number of the wheat was found to be unmeasurable, so that all the houses of
Basil being turned in garners, were not sufficient to receive it. I thought
good to set down the example. Let the 60 term of the progression be
compendiously found out.

1 2 4 8 16 32 512 1024 0 1 2 3 4 5 9 10 524288 19 536870912 29
288230376151711744 58 576460752303423488 59

Wherefore the sum of all the grains shall be,

1152921504606846975

The which number is so great, that it soemeth sufficient to match the sand of
the Adriatique sea.

FINIS.
A BRIEF TREATISE ADDED CONCERNING THE RESOlution of the Square and Cube in
numbers, whereby the side of them may be found.
AFigured number, is a number made by the multiplying of one number by another.

The sides of the figured number, are the numbers by whose multiplication it
was made.

Albeit a number be not a magnitude admitting figure and angles, yet seeing
that the multiplying of numbers is like unto the making of right lined plane
figures, therefore for that resemblance of a Geometrical thing, the names of
figures are attributed unto numbers produced by multiplication. For even as a
right line drawn first a long one right line comprehends a plane figure, and
then a long another, which is the depth, comprehends a body: even so the
multiplying of one number by another, makes a plane number (so called because
the unities whereof i^ consists, may be contrived into a plane figure) and
that being multiplied by a third number makes a solid number, receiving that
title because it may be fashioned like a solid figure. The numbers multiplied
one by another represent their sides.

A figured number is twofold, a plane and a solid number.

A plane number is that, which is made by multiplying two numbers one by
another.

16 d. 7. Multiplication (as is aforesaid) makes a certain thing like to a
right angled parallelogramme. Wherefore here are excluded all other numbers,
which others call trigonals, pentagonals, etc. made by addition, whereof
Euclids Arithmeticke makes no mention.

A plane number is either made of two equal numbers as a Square: or of two
unequal numbers, as an Oblong.

18 d. 7. A square number is made by a number multiplied by it self, as four
times 4 are 16, fiuetimes 5 are 25, ten times 10 are 100: for these products
may by their several unities be so displayed in a plane surface, that they may
represent plane squares, as here you see in the number 16: 1 1 1 1 16 is the
platform, 4 is the side. 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 wherefore by the making of
this Square, it is evident that a square may be made of any number given, and
that any number may be the side of a square. But as it is requisite that the
sides (being lesser then 10) of the squares under an hundred should be gathered
by the Table of multiplication: so the sides of greater Squares are to be
sought out by art. The squares whose sides are simple numbers, are here set
down as you see:

The sides 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 The squares 1 4 9 16 25 36 49 64 81

The Square is known by finding out his side expressed by a whole number.

Albeit the finding out of the side of a square, be applied to each number
given as to a square, yet the square numbers only have a side to be expressed
by a certain number of unities or by rational numbers, the other are to be
expressed but in power only. The sides are commonly called roots by a
metaphorical phrase.

The side of a square is to be found by the Theoreme following.

If the odd degrees of a square number being marked from the right toward the
left hand with points, you subduct from the number given, the particular
square of the last period, setting the side thereof alon^e by it self, 2 then
going on if you divide the remainder (if there be any) with the figure going
before it, by the double of the side set alone by it self, 3 and multiply the
quotient found out (being placed by the side which was first set alone by it
self, and also before the doubled number on the right hand) by both the
numbers (namely by the doubled number, and the figure set by it) being counted
as one divisor, subducting the products from the number given, and then renew
this last work of division so many times as there are pricks remaining, the
side of the square shall be found out.



This artificall devise is borrowed out of the 4 p. 2. Where by demonstration it
is proved, that if a right line be cut into two segments, how soever, the
square of the whole line is equal to the squares of the segments, and to the
two right angled figures made of the segments: as in the figure here annexed,
the two Diagonals k g, and b f, are the squares of the segments a b, and a c.
Also the complements b k and f g, are the right-angled figures made by
multiplying the line a b by b c.

The self same parts are to be found in any square number. As for example in
the number 169, whose side is 13. This side being divided into two pieces 10
and 3, multiply each piece by it self once, namely 10 by 10, and 3 by 3, the^
multiply one by another, as 10 by 3, and 3 by 10, so shall you have 4 plane
numbers, whereof two are Squares as here you see.

10 3 10 3 100 30 30 9 169

Therefore as the Square 169 is made by the adding together of these four
plane numbes, so by subducting them severally it is resolved. First therefore I
mark each odd place with points because the particular squares are to be
found in the odd places. Then for so much as the unity standing under the
first point next unto the left hand, and representing the last period, is both
a square and the side of a square: that figure therefore being set alone by it
self in the quotient, and being subducted from the unity standing over the
point, there remains nothing. This unity set alone by it self in the
quotient shall signify 10, when another figure is set by it representing the
side of some other particular square. Whereupon I say, that the greater
Diagonall kg, is now subducted from the whole square, and the side of it k i
or a b (for they are equal one to another) and also the side of one of the
complements is found out. This is the first step to this resolution.

Moreover I double the figure found out, because being doubled, it is the side
of both the complements taken jointly together, namely k i and g i. Then
setting 2 the doubled number under 6, I divide 6, (which in this place is as
much as 60, and represents both the complements) by 2, the quotient 10 3,
representing the other side remaining of the compleme^t, namely, i f, or b c,
the which number I set in the quotient, and count it for the segment remaining
of the right line given. Wherefore because this number 3 is the side of the
Diagonall remaining, that is to say, of the lesser square b f: therefore being
set by the divisor on the right hand, and multiplied both by it self, and by
the divisor, it brings forth three plane numbers, namely, the square b f, and
the two complements a i and i l, which being subducted from the numbers
standing over them, there remains nothing. The example is thus:

169 (13 123 3 69 which is all one as if you had set down the numbers found out
thus: 169 100 The greater Diagonall. 60 The two Co^plements. 9 The lesser
Diagonall. 169

Take this for an other example to make this devise more plain. Let the Square
given be 1764. This number being marked with two points tells us that the
side thereof is to be written with two figures. First therefore beginning at the
point on the left hand, I seek the side of the last periode, namely of 17.
But for so much as it is no square number, I take 4 the side of the next lesser
square, which I set alone by it self in the quotient, and then multiply it by
it self, the product is 16, which being subducted from 17 there remains 1.
Moreover, I double the side found out, the product is 8, I place this doubled
number under 6, and by it I divide 16 standing above it, the quotient is 2,
which must be set by 4. This quotient 2 must be set before the divisor 8 on the
right hand under the point, and then must it be multiplied both into it self
and into 8, the product is 164, which being subducted from the figures standing
over them, there remains nothing, whereby I gather that the number given is a
just Square. The example stands thus:

^ The same manner of working is to be followed in greater square number given,
saving that the former part of the work is to be used but once, but the latter
part is to be followed so many times as there are points remaining, excepting
the last. As in 54756, I say, that the side of the square next unto 5 is 2,
therefore 2 being set in the quotient, and multiplied by it self make 4, and
taken from 5, the remainder is one. Moreover I double the quotient, the product
is 4, which I set under the next figure toward the right hand, and thereby
divide 14, the quotient is 3, the which 3 being set both in the quotient, and
also before the divisor toward the right hand, I multiply both the numbers by
it, the product is 129, this being subducted from 147 standing above it, the
remainder is 18. But because there is yet one point remaining with the which I
have not meddled, therefore again I double all the whole quotient. For in this
case I must take 23 for the one side of one former square, and generally in
great numbers when I light upon more particular squares then two, I must
esteem them but as two, and take the sides which are first found out but as
the sides of one only square. Therefore twice 23 are 46, by this I divide 185,
the number to be set in the quotient is 4, the which number also must be set
before the divisor on the right hand, then must 464 be multiplied by 4, the
product is 1856, this product being subducted from the numbers standing over
it, there remains nothing. The example stands thus:

^ See also the example following:

10942864 (3308

Out of this invention this conclusion follows:

The number whose side cannot be expressed by whole numbers, is no square
number.

Such are all prime numbers, and (the squares themselves excepted) all other
compound numbers. For if in them you desire to find out the square side, you
shall labor in vain, because they are not squares for to the whole numbers
arising in the quotient, there will be some fraction adjoined, whereby it
comes to pass, that the number of the side is not to be expressed by a true
number, and commonly it is called a surde number.

Yet if you adioyne to the side found out the number remaining, taking his
denomination from the double of the side augmented by an unity, you shall
find the next side that may be like to the side of a square.

As if from 40 you take the nearest square, namely 36, the remainder is 4. Here
therefore the side sought for of the square, exceeds not the side found out
by an unity, but either by one, or more parts of some whole number: wherefore
I double 6 the side found out, and add an unity to it being doubled, the
total is 13, this number I set under 4 the remainder, and say that the side of
40 sought as near as may be, is 6 4/13, the denominator of the fraction being
added to the greatest square in the number given, namely unto 36, makes the
next greatest square above it, namely 49, whose side is 7. But this surde side
namely 6 4/13, multiplied by it self makes 39 133/169, which are not just
equal unto 40 the number given. The like judgment may be used in the rest
which are not squares.

Thus much concerning plane numbers, but especially such as are square numbers.
The solid number follows, which is a number made of three numbers.

17 d. 7. A solid number is made by a twofold multiplication, even as a solid
body among magnitudes is made by a twofold co^prehension: the first is like
that which makes a plane figure, the second is like that which makes a body.
As three times 4 taken five times: for three times 4 are 12, this is a plane
number, five times 12 are 60, this is a solid number.

A solid number is made either of 3 equal numbers as a Cube: or of 3 unequal
numbers as an Oblong.

19 d. 7. A cube in numbers is made by multiplying the side thereof by the
square of the side: whereby we may gather, that to multiply a number cubically,
is to multiply the number made of it self, by himself again as four times 4
four times are 64, which is a cube having relation to a Geometrical thing,
partly because their making is like, partly also because the unities of the
number set in a certain distance one from another resemble a cube.

The cube is known by finding out the side expressed by a whole number.

For every Cube in numbers has such a side as may be expressed by whole
numbers, but in magnitudes it is not always so, as in deed in magnitudes
there are many things not to be expressed by whole numbers. Now for so much as
the side of any Cube under 1000 is a simple figure, it is meet before we
undertake to find out the side of any greater number, that we should know what
Cube is made of each simple figure, and what is the side of any Cube lesser
then 1000, as I have here set them down.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 4 9 16 25 36 49 64 81 1 8 27 64 125 216 343 512 729

But in searching out of greater Cubes, we must proceed as the Theoreme
following teaches us.

If you distinguish with points as it were into periods, the Cube given
beginning at the first figure on the right hand, and omitting each two figures
continually, and first of all subduct the particular Cube of the last period
from the number given, setting the side thereof in the quotient: and then set
the triple of the quotient under the figure next following the former point on
the right hand, and the square of the quotient being tripled beneath it one
degree more toward the left hand: and afterward divide the number above
written by the triple of the square, setting the quotient by it self, and then
multiply the divisor by the quotient found out, and the tripled square by the
square of the quotient, and the quotient cubically, subducting the products (so
orderly added together, that each figure may answer the numbers whereof it was
multiplied) from the number given: and renew this last manner of division so
many times as there are points remaining, the side of the Cube shall be found out.

This artificial devise is drawn out of that Theoreme which Ramus made,
imitating that of Euclide concerning square numbers in this manner. If a right
line be cut into two segments, the Cube of the whole line shall be equal to the
Cubes of the segments, and to the two solid figures comprehended three times
under the square of his segment, and the segment remaining. As the line c i
which is 13, is cut into two segments 10 and 3: the cube therefore of the whole
line, namely 2197, is equal unto the Cubes of the Segments, namely unto 1000
and 27, and also to the two solides or parallelipipedons thrice taken, whereof
three have a like soliditie, the Soliditie of each of the three lesser is 90,
being made of the square of the Segment 3, that is to say of 9 multiplied by
the other Segment 10. These three parallelipipedons jointly taken together make
270. But of the three greater parallelipipedons each contains 300, being made
of 100, the square of the greater segment 10 multiplied by the lesser segment
3, and they being taken jointly together make 900.

The cube of the greater segment 10.
The cube of the lesser segment 3,
The greater Parallelipipedons.
The lesser parallelipipedons.


The cube therefore has eight particular solides in numbers which are made of
the parts of the number given, namely of 10 and 3 in this manner. First let
there be four plane numbers made, each part being multiplied by it self, and
one by another:

10 3 10 3 100 30 30 9 169

If again you multiply these planes by the same parts, there will arise 8
solides, as you see here:

9 9 30 30 30 30 100 100 3 10 27 90 All these being added together are equal
unto 2197, the cube of the whole line. 90 300 90 300 300 1000

The same way therefore that is kept in making the Cube, is also to be followed
in resolving the Cube. As for example, I mark the cube given with points in
this manner, 2197. Then I subduct the particular cube of the number set under
neath the last point: but for so much as that number is no Cube, I take the
nearest to it, namely an unity, which also I set in the quotient. This unity
in the number given is 1000, but in the quotient it is but 10. The unity
subducted from 2, the remainder is 1, which must be written over the number
given. So that the greater cube A is to be supposed to be subducted from the
number given. This is the first step of this work:

^ I triple the quotient found out (that is to say, I multiply it by 3) this
triple represents the three sides taken jointly together of the three lesser
solides marked with C, I place the tripled number under 9. Again I multiply
the quotient squarewise, and triple the product which makes likewise 3. This
product resembles the three squared sides taken jointly together of the three
greater solides, marked with D, I place the product one degree lower toward the
left hand underneath 1. With it I divide 11, which is written above it, the
quotient is 3. This segment or quotient 3, being multiplied by 3 the divisor,
makes 9, which in respect of the place wherein it stands is 900, and
represents the three greater solides marked with D taken jointly together.
Furthermore the same quotient being multiplied squarewise makes 9, and
multiplied afterward by the tripled number standing under 9, it makes 27,
which in respect of the place wherein it stands is 270, and represents the
three lesser solides marked with C. Last of all, the same quotient multiplied
cubically, breeds the lesser Cube B. These three products therefore being
added together, and the total subducted from the numbers standing over it,
there remains nothing, which imports that the number given is a Cube. The
example is as you see:

^ Take these examples following to make the matter more plane. Let the side be
sought out of this Cube, 16387064: contriue it therefore (as it were) into
certain periods with points. Then first of all, seek out the side of the
cube, which you find in the last number over the point next to the left hand.
But for so much as 16 is no cube, take 2 the side of the next cube under it
that is to say, of 8, and set it in the quotient, and subduct 8 the cube from
16, there remain 8. This first work is not to be renewed throughout the whole
number, but the rules following must be repeated as often as there are points
remaining. The first step to find out the side is in this manner.

^ Moreover triple the quotient found out, the product is 6, which are to be
placed under 8, namely under the figure following the next prick toward the
right hand. Then multiply the quotient by this tripled number (or which is
all to one purpose, square the quotient, and then triple the products) it
makes 12, set that number in a lower place one degree nearer to the left hand:
and make it the divisor. Divide 83 by 12, observing this rule in chosing your
quotient, that it be no greater, then that the numbers afterward produced by
multiplication may not exceed the numbers standing over it. So that here you
shall take 1 in 8, but five times. Afterward by this number 5, multiply the
divisor 12, and by the square of 5 multiply the trebled number 6, and last of
all, multiply 5 cubically, so shall you produce three numbers, namely 60, 150,
125, to be described as you see: These numbers added together, and subducted
from 8387, the remainder is 762. The second step to find out the side is in
this manner:

^ And because there is yet one point remaining, this last manner of division
must be wrought again. First therefore I triple the quotient, the product is
75, which must be so placed, that the first figure thereof, namely 5, may stand
under 6, the second under the 0. Again multiply the quotient by this tripled
number (or which is all one, square the quotient, and triple the product) it
makes 1875, which shall be the divisor, whose first figure namely 5, must be
placed under 7, the last figure of the tripled number. Then you see that I may
be contained in 7 many times, but I can take it but four times, I set 4 in the
quotient, and multiply the divisor by 4, the product is 7500, afterward I
square 4, it makes 16, which I multiply by the tripled number 75, the product
is 1200. Last of all, I multiply 4 cubically it makes 64: these products added
all together make 762064, this number being subducted from the Cube, there
remains nothing, whereby I gather that the number given is a just Cube. The
third step to find out the side is in this manner:

^ Behold also the example following: 614125000 (850

Another manner of working:

Hitherto the princely high way to find out the side of the Cube has been
declared.

But there are other ways also bending thereto, and leaning to the same
principles: whereof this is one.

Having found out in the Table of the simple cubes, the figure representing the
side of the cube contained in the number standing under the first point on the
left hand, set it in the quotient, and subduct the particular cube of that
figure as you did before: then square, that figure, and triple the square, the
product shall be the divisor, whose first figure shall be set under that figure
which is on the right hand next of all to the first point aforesaid.

2 See how many times the divisor is contained in the number written over it,
multiply the divisor by the quotient, and subduct the product from the
dividend. Yet here you must take heed, that you choose not a greater quotient,
then that the products made afterward thereby may be subducted from the numbers
given.

3 When the subduction is done, triple the first figure which was set in the
quotient, and place the last number which was set in the quotient on the right
hand of the product.

4 Multiply this whole number by the square of the quotient last found out, and
set down the product so, that the first figure thereof toward the right hand
may stand under the point next going before on the same hand, and then subduct
it from the number given.

As in 804357 the particular Cube, namely, 729, being taken from the number
standing under the last period upon the left hand there remain 75357, the side
of that particular cube is 9, which I set in the quotient. I square that side,
it makes 81, and triple the square, the product 243 is my divisor, which I set
under the number given, so that 3 may stand under 3. With this divisor divide
the number standing over it, you shall find 2 to be contained in 7 three
times. I set therefore 3 in the quotient, and multiply the divisor by it, the
product is 729, which being subducted from 753, the remainder is 24. As you see
in this induction.

^ Moreover I I triple 9, the product is 27, by the which on the right hand I
set 3 the quotient last found out, the total is 273. This number I multiply by
9 the square of 3 the quotient last found out, the product is 2457, which being
subducted from the number standing over it, there remains nothing. The
induction is on this manner:

^ The self same work may be dispatched another way somewhat differing from
the former in this manner. The figure in the quotient being found out by
subducting the particular cube, and also the second figure in the quotient
being found by division, let the whole quotient be tripled, and let the tripled
number be multiplied by the former figure in the quotient. Then let the product
be multiplied again by the latter figure found out, and let a cipher be set on
the right hand of that product. Last of all, let the cube of the latter figure
found out be added to this product, and let the total sum be subducted from
the number given. As in 373248. The first induction is in this manner:

^ Moreover I square the side found out, it makes 49 and triple the square,
the product is 147, which shall be the divisor, by this I divide 302, the
number written over it, the quotient is 2. Now I triple the whole quotient 72,
it makes 216, and multiply this triple by 7, the former figure in the
quotient, the product is 1512. I multiply also this product by 2 the latter
figure of the quotient, and set a cipher on the right hand of it, so that it
makes 30240, unto this number I add 8 the cube of the latter figure found
out, the total is 30248, which being subducted from the figures above it,
there remains nothing. The induction is thus:

^ All the points of the number given being examined, if any thing remain, it
signifies that the number given is no Cube: wherefore the true side of it
cannot be given exactly in numbers. Yet if it please you to sift out the
nearest side that may be, by the first kind of reduction of mixed numbers, you
must reduce the number given into a cubicall fraction of a great denomination,
and afterward seek out the cubicall side of that fraction.

For example sake, because 120 is no Cube, therefore let it be reduced into
sixty cubicall parts, after this manner. Multiply 60 cubically in it self, it
makes 216000, by this being taken for the denominator of the fraction,
multiply 120 the number given, the product is 25920000, whose cubicall side is
295/60 that is, 4 11/12 the nearest to the true side that may be.

FINIS.

