A DISCOURSE OF THE RELIGION Anciently professed by the IRISH and BRITISH.

By JAMES VSSHER Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of IRELAND.

LONDON, Printed by R. Y. for the Partners of the Irish Stock. 1631.

TO MY VERY MVCH HONORED Friend, Sir Christopher Sibthorp, Knight, one of his
Majesty's Justices of his Court of chief place in IRELAND.
WORTHY SIR:
I Confess, I somewhat incline to be of your mind, that if unto the
authorities drawn out of Scriptures and Fathers (which are common to us with
others) a true discovery were added of that Religion which anciently was
professed in this Kingdom; it might prove a special motive to induce my poor
countrymen to consider a little better of the old and true way from whence
they have hitherto been mis-ledd. Yet on the one side, that saying in the
Gospel runs much in my mind; Luke 16. 31.
If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded,
though one rose from the dead: and on the other, that heavy judgment
mentioned by the Apostle; 2 These. 2. 10, 11.
because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved,
God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe lies. The woeful
experience whereof, we may see daily before our eyes in this poor nation:
where, such as are slow of heart to believe the saving truth of God delivered
by the Prophets and Apostles, do with all greediness embrace, and with a most
strange kind of credulity entertain those lying Legends, wherewith their
Monks and Friars in these latter days have polluted the religion and lives of
our ancient Saints.

I do not deny but that in this Country, as well as in others, corruptions
did creep in by little and little, before the Devil was let loose to procure
that seduction which prevailed so generally in these last times: but as far
as I can collect by such records of the former ages as have come unto my hands
either manuscript or printed) the religion professed by the ancient Bishops,
Priests, Monks, and other Christians in this land, was for substance the very
same with that which now by public authority is maintained therein, against
the foreign doctrine brought in thither in later times by the Bishop of Romes
followers. I speak of the more substantial points of doctrine, that are in
controversy betwixt the Church of Rome and us at this day; by which only we
must judge, whether of both sides has departed from the religion of our
Ancestors: not of matters of inferior note, much less of ceremonies and such
other things as appertain to the discipline rather than to the doctrine of the
Church.

And whereas it is known unto the learned, that the name of Scoti in those
elder times (whereof we treat) was common to the inhabitants of the greater
and the lesser Scotland (for so heretofore they have been distinguished) that
is to say, of Ireland, and the famous colonie deduced from thence into Albania:
I will not follow the example of those that have of late labored to make
dissension betwixt the daughter and the mother, but account of them both, as of
the same people.

Tros Rutulusve fuat, nullo discrimine habebo. The religion doubtless received
by both, was the self same; and differed little or nothing from that which was
maintained by their neighbors the Britons: as by comparing the evidences that
remain, both of the one nation and of the other, in the ensuing discourse more
fully shall appear.

The chief Heads treated of in this discourse, are these:
I. OF the holy Scriptures. page 1. II. Of Predestination, Grace, Free Will,
Works, Justification and Sanctification. page 11. III. Of Purgatory, and
Prayer for the dead. page 21. IIII. Of the Worship of God, the public form of
Liturgy, the Sacrifice, and Sacrament of the Lords Supper. page 30. V. Of
Chrisme, Sacramental Confession, Penance, Absolution, Marriage, Divorces, and
single life in the Clergy. page 45. VI. Of the discipline of our ancient
Monks; and abstinence from meats. page 54. VII. Of the Church and various
state thereof, especially in the days of Antichrist: of Miracles also, and of
the Head of the Church. page 66. VIII. Of the Popes spiritual Jurisdiction,
and how little footing it had gotten at first within these parts. page 75. IX.
Of the Controversy which the Britons, Picts, and Irish maintained against the
Church of Rome, touching the celebration of Easter. page 92. X. Of the height
that the opposition betwixt the Roman party, and that of the British and the
Scottish grew unto; and the abatement thereof in time: and how the Doctors of
the Scottish and Irish side have been ever accounted most eminent men in the
Catholic Church, notwithstanding their disunion from the Bishop of Rome. page
105. XI. Of the temporal power, which the Popes followers would directly
entitle him unto over the Kingdom of Ireland: together with the indirect power
which he challenges in absolving subjects from the obedience, which they owe
to their temporal Governors. page 117.
OF THE RELIGION PROFESSED BY THE ANCIENT IRISH.
CHAP. I.
Of the holy Scriptures.

TWo excellent rules does St. Paul prescribe unto Christians for their
direction in the ways of God: the one, that they Ephesians. 5. 17.
be not unwise, but understanding what the will of God is; the other, that they
Romans 12. 3. (...).
be not more wise than behooves to be wise, but be wise unto sobriety. and
that we might know the limits, within which this wisdom and sobriety should
be bounded; he elsewhere declares, that not to be more wise than is
fitting, is 1 Cor. 4. 6. (...).
not to be wise above that which is written. Hereupon Sedulius (one of the most
ancient Writers that remains of this Country birth) delivers this for the
meaning of the former rule; Scrutamini legem, in qua voluntas ejus continetur.
Sedul. in Ephesians. 5.
Search the Law, in which the will of God is contained: and this for the later;
Plus vult sapere, qui illa scrutatur quae Lex non dicit. Id. in Romans 12.
He would be more wise than is meet, who searches those things that the Law
does not speak of. Unto whom we will adjoyne Claudius another famous Divine,
(counted one of the founders of the University of Paris) who for the
illustration of the former, affirms that men Propterea errant, quia
Scripturas nesciunt: and quia Scripturas ignorant, consequenter nesciunt
virtutem Dei, hoc est, Christum, qui est Dei virtus and Dei sapientia. Claud.
in Matthew. lib. 3. Habetur MS. Romae in Bibliotheca Vallicellana; and
Cantabrigiae, in Bibliothce. Colleg. Benedict. and Aulae Pembrochianae.
therefore err, because they know not the Scriptures; and because they are
ignorant of the Scriptures, they consequently know not Christ, who is the power
of God and the wisdom of God: and for the clearing of the latter, brings in
that known Canon of Saint Hierome; Hoc, quia de Scripturis non habet
authoritatem, eadem facilitate contemnitur qua probatur. Id. ib.
This, because it has not authority from the Scriptures, is with the same
facility contemned, wherewith it is avowed.

Neither was the practice of our Ancestors herein different from their
judgment. For as Bede touching the latter, records of the successors of
Colum-kille the great Saint of our Country; that they Tantum ea quae in
Propheticis, Evangelicis and Apostolicis literis discere poterant, pietatis and
castitatis opera diligenter observantes. Bed. lib. 3. histor. Ecclesiast. cap.
4.
observed only those works of piety and chastity, which they could learn in
the Prophetical, Evangelicall, and Apostolical writings: so for the former,
he specially notes of one of the principal of them, to wit, Bishop Aidan;
that In tantum autem vita illius a nostri temporis segnicia distabat; ut omnes
qui cum eo incedebant, sive adtonsi, sive laici, meditari deberent, id est, aut
legendis Scripturis, aut Psalmis discendis operam dare. Id. ibid. cap. 5.
all such as went in his company, whether they were of the Clergy, or of the
Laity, were tied to exercise themselves, either in the reading of Scriptures,
or in the learning of Psalms. And long before their time, it was the
observation which Saint Chrysostom made of both these Islands: that (...)
Chrysostom. in sermon. de utilitate lectionis Scripturae, tom. 8 edit. Savil. page
111.
although thou did go unto the Ocean, and those British Isles, although
thou did sail to the Euxine Sea, although thou did go unto the Southern
quarters; thou should hear ALL men every where discoursing matters out of
the SCRIPTVRE, with another voice indeed, but not with another faith, and with
a different tongue, but with an according judgment. Which is in effect the
same with that which venerable Bede pronounces of the Island of Britain in
his own days, that Quinque gentium linguis unam eandemque summae veritatis
and verae sublimitatis scien^^a^ scrutatur and confitetur; Angl^rum videlicet,
B^itonum, Scotorum, Pictorum, and Latinorum, quae meditatione Scripturarum
caeteris omnibus est facta communis. Bed. lib. 1. Histor. Ecclesiast. cap. 1.
in the language of five Nations it did search and confess one and the same
knowledge of the highest truth, and of the true sublimity; to wit, of the
English, the Britons, the Scots, the Picts, and the Latins. which last although
he affirms by the meditation of the Scriptures to have become common to all
the rest: yet the community of that one among the learned, did not take away
the property of the other four among the vulgar, but that such as understood
not the Latin, might yet in their own mother tongue have those Scriptures,
wherein they might search the knowledge of the highest truth, and of the true
sublimity. even as at this day in the reformed Churches, the same Latin tongue
is common to all the learned in the meditation and exposition of the
Scriptures; and yet the common people for all that, do in their own vulgar
tongues John 5. 39.
search the Scriptures, because in them they think to have eternal life. For
as by us now, so by our forefathers then, the Bonis semper moribus delectatur
and consentit; and assiduis Scripturarum meditationibus and eloquiis animam
vegetar. Patric. de abuseonibus saeculi, cap. 5. de Pudicitia.
continual meditation of the Scriptures was held to give special vigor and
vegetation to the soul (as we read in the book attributed unto St. Patrick,
of the abuses of the world:) and the holy documents delivered therein, were
esteemed by Christians as their chief riches; according to that of Columbanus,
Columban. in Monastichis, and in epistola ad Hunaldum.
Sint tibi divitiae, divinae dogmata legis. In which heavenly riches our
ancient Scottish and Irish did thrive so well, that many worthy personages in
foreign parts were content to undergo a voluntary exile from their own
Country; that they might more freely traffic here for so excellent a
commodity. And by this means Altfrid King of Northumberland, purchased the
reputation of Successit E^gfrido in regnum Altfrit, vir in Scripturis
doctissimus. Bed. lib. 4. hist. ca. 26.
a man most learned in the Scriptures. Scottorum qui tum versatus incola terris,
Coelestem intento spirabat cord sophiam.
Nam patriae fines and dulcia liquerat arva,
Sedulus ut Domini mysteria disceret exul.
as Bede writes of him, in his Poem of the life of our Countryman St.
Cuthbert.

So when we read in the same Bid of Ab ipso tempore pueritiae suae curam non
modicam lectionibus saeris, simul and monasticis exhibebat disciplinis. Bed.
lib. 3 hist. cap. 19. Ab infantia sacris literis and monasticis disciplinis
eruditus. Johannes de Tinmouth ( and ex eo Io. Capgrar.) in vita Fursei.
Furseus, and in another ancient Author of A puerili aetate magnum habet
studium sacras discere literas. Tom. 4. Antiqu. lect. Heur. Canis. page 642.
Kilianus, that from the time of their very childhood, they had a care to
learn the holy Scriptures: it may easily be collected, that in those days it
was not thought a thing unfit, that even children should give themselves unto
the study of the Bible. Wherein how greatly some of them did profit in those
tender years, may appear by that which Boniface the first Archbishop of
Mentz, relates of Livinus (who was trained up in his youth by Benignus in
Davidic^^ Psalmo^um melodiis, and sanctorum Evangeliorum mell. fluis
lectionibus atque caeteris divitiis exercitationibus E^u fac. in vita Livini.
the singing of David's Psalms, and the reading of the holy Gospels, and other
divine exercises) and Jonas of Columbanus; in whose Tantum i^^ejus pectore
divinatum thesauri Scripturarum conditi tenebantur; ut intra adolescentiae
aetatem detentus, Psalmorum librum elimato sermon exponeret. Ion^^ in vita
Columba i, cap. 2.
breast the treasures of the holy Scriptures were so laid up, that within the
compass of his youthful years he set forth an elegant exposition of the
book of the Psalms, by whose industry likewise afterward, the study of Gods
Word was so propagated; that in the Monasteries which were founded B.
Burgundofora monasterium quod Euoriacas appellatur, etc. secundum regulam S.
Columbani instituit. Id. in vita Burgundos.
according to his rule beyond the Seas, not the men only, but the religious
women also did carefully attend the same, that through patience and comfort of
the Scriptures they might have hope. See for this, the practice of the Virgin
Cum jam in extremis posita posceret per successiones noctium lumen coram se
accendi, and sacrae lectionis praeconia ante se legi, etc. Id ibid.
Bitihildis lying upon her death bed; reported by the same Jonas, or whosoever
else was the Author of the life of Burgundofora.

As for the edition of the Scriptures used in these parts at those times: the
Latin translation was so received into common use among the learned, that the
principal authority was still reserved to the original fountains. Therefore
does Sedulius in the Old Testament commend unto us Hebraicam veritatem Sedul.
in Galat. 3. and Hebr. 7.
the Hebrew verity (for so with S. Hierome does he style it:) and in the New
correct oftentimes the vulgar Latin according to the truth of the Greek copies.
For example: in 1 Cor. 7 34. he reads as we do, There is difference
between a wife and a virgin; and not as the Rhemists have translated it out of
the Latin. Romans 12. 19. he reads, Non vosmetipsos vindicantes, not avenging
your selves: where the vulgar Latin has corruptly, Non vosmetipsos
defendentes, not defending your selves. Romans 3. 4. where the Rhemists translate
according to the Latin, God is true: he shows that in the Greek copies it
is found, Let God be true, or, let God be made true. Romans 15. 17. he notes
that the Latin books have put glory for gloriation. Galat. 1. 16. where the
Rhemists have according to the Latin, I condescended not to flesh and blood: he
says, that in Graeco melius habet (for so must his words be here corrected
out of St. Hierome, whom he follows) the Greek has it better, I conferred
not. Romans 8. 3. where the Rhemists say of God, according to the Latin
translation, that of sin he damned sin in the flesh: Sedulius affirms,
that verius habetur apud Graecos, it is more truly expressed in the Greek
books; that for sin he damned sin in the flesh. Lastly, where the Rhemists
translate after their Latin copy, Gal. 5. 9. A little leaven corrupts the
whole paste: he says it should be, leaveneth, (as we have it) and Non, ut
male in Latinis codicious, corrumpit. Sedul. in Gal. 5.
not corrupts, as it is ill read in the Latin books. So where they translate
by the same authority, Galat. 6. 1. Instruct such an one in the spirit of
lenity: Instruat; sive, ut melius habetur in Graeco, perficiat in spiritu
lenitatis. Claud. in Gal. 6.
Claudius, following St. Hierome, affirms that it is better in the Greek,
Restore or Perfect him. and where they make St. Peter say, Mat. 16. 22. Lord,
be it far from thee: Absit a te Domine: vel ut melius habetur in Graeco;
Propitius esto tibi, Domine. Id. lib. 2. comment. in Matthew.
he notes, that it is better in the Greek, Lord, favor thy self.

In the old Testament I observe that our Writers do more usually follow the
translation taken out of the Septuagint, than the Vulgar Latin, which is now
received in the Church of Rome. So, for example, where the Vulgar Latin has
Esaias 32. 4. Lingua balbo^um velociter loquetur and plane.
The tongue of the stammerers (or mafflers, as the Doway Translation would have
it englished) shall speak readily and plainly: in the Confession of St.
Patricke Linguae balbutientes velociter descent loqui pacem.
we find it laid down more agreeably to the (...),
Greek lection: The stammering tongues shall swiftly learn to speak peace.
and in his Epistle to Coroticus or Cereticus; Exultabitis sicut vituli ex
vinculis resoluti. Graec. (...).
Malach. 4. 2. You shall dance as calves loosed out of bands: where our common
Latin has; Salietis sicut vituli de armento.
You shall leap as calves of the heard. And Job 20. 15, 16. Divitiae quas
congregabit injuste, evomentur de ventre ejus, trahit illum angelus mortis. Ita
draconum mulctabi^ur: interficiet illum lingua colubri. Graec. (...).
The riches which he shall gather unjustly, shall be vomited out of his belly,
the Angel of death draws him. He shall be mulcted with the wrath of Dragons:
the tongue of the Serpent shall kill him. where the Vulgar Latin reads:
Divitias quas devoravit ^vomet, and de ventie illius extrah^t ^as Deus. Caput
aspidum suget, and occidet cum lingua viperae.
The riches, which he has devoured, he shall vomit out, and God shall draw
them forth out of his belly. He shall suck the head of Aspes, and the Vipers
tongue shall kill him. The same course is likewise observed by Sedulius in his
citations. But Gildas the Briton in some Books, (as Deuteronomy, Esaias and
Jeremy, for example) uses to follow the Vulgar Latin translated out of the
Hebrew; in others (as the books of Chronicles, Job, Proverbs, Ezekiel, and the
small Prophets) the elder Latin translated out of the Greek, as also long
after him his country man ^^nn. Hisior. Briton. cap. 1.
Nennius, in reckoning the years of the age of the world, follows the LXX.
and Asser alleges the text, Genes. 4. 7. Si recte offeras, recte autem non
dividas, peccas. Asser Menervens. de gestis Alfreat R.
If thou offer aright, and do not divide aright, thou sinnest; according to
the (...).
Greek reading: whereas the Vulgar Latin has it; Nonne si been egeris,
recipies? fin autem male, statim in foribus peccatum ^derit?
If thou do well, shall thou not receive again? but if thou do ill, shall
not thy sin forthwith be present at the door?

Of the Psalter there are extant four Latin translations out of the Greek,
(namely the old Italian, the Roman, the Gallican, and that of Millayne:) and
one out of the Hebrew, composed by St. Hierome: which though it be now
excluded out of the body of the Bible, and the Gallican admitted in the room
thereof; yet in some Manuscript Copies, it still retains his ancient place.
three whereof I have seen my self in Cambridge, the one in Trinity, the
other in Benet, and the third in Jesus College Library: where this
translation out of the Hebrew, and not the Vulgar out of the Greek, is inserted
into the context of the Bible. In the citations of Gildas, and the Confession
of Saint Patrick, I observe that the Roman Psalter is followed, rather than the
Gallican: in the quotations of Sedulius, on the other side, the Gallican rather
than the Roman. Claudius speaking of a text in the 118th. (or as he accounts
it, the 117th.) In Psalmo 117. ubi LXX. interpretes transtulerunt, O Domine
salvu^ me fac; in Hebraeo scriptum est, Anna Adonai Osanna: quod interpres
noster Hieronymus diligentius elucidans ita transtulit; Obsecro Domine, salva
obsecro. Claud. Scot. in Matthew. lib. 3.
Psalm, says, that where the LXX. Interpreters did translate it, O Lord save
me, it was written in the Hebrew, Anna Adonai Osanna: which our Interpreter
Hierom (says he) more diligently explaining, translated thus; I beseech thee,
O Lord, save I beseech thee. Before this translation of S. Hierome, MS. in
Bibliothec^ eruditissi^i antistiatis D. Guilielmi Bedelli, Kilmorersis and
Ardachadensis apud nos Episcopi.
I have seen an Epigram prefixed by Ricemarch the Briton; who by Caradoc of
Lhancarpan Caradoc. in Chronico Cambriae, circa annum 1099. ad quem in aliis
etiam Annalibus Britannicis MSS. annotatum repperi. Sub hujus anni ambitum
morti succumbit Richmarch cogno. mine Sapiens, filius Sulgeni Episcopi, cum jam
annum XLIII. aetatis ageret.
is commended for the godliest, wisest, and greatest Clerk that had been in
Wales many years before his time, his father Sulgen Bishop of S. David's only
excepted, who had brought him up, and a great number of learned disciples. He
having in this Epigramme said of those who translated the Psalter out of
Greek, that they did darken the Hebrew rays with their Latin cloud: adds of
S. Hierome, that being replenished with the Hebrew fountain, he did more
clearly and briefly discover the truth; as drawing it out of the first vessel
immediately, and not taking it at the second hand. To this purpose thus
expresses he himself; Ebraeis nablam custodit littera signis:
Pro captu quam quisque suo sermon Latino
Edidit, innumeros Lingua variante libellos;
Ebraeumque jubar suffuscat nube Latina.
Nam tepefacta ferum dant tertia labrasaporem.
Sed sacer Hieronymus, Ebraeo font repletus,
Lucidius nudat verum, breviusque ministrat.
Namque secunda creat, nam tertia vascula vitat.


Now for those books annexed to the Old Testament, which S. Hierom calls
Apocryphal, others Ecclesiastical; true it is that in our Irish and British
writers some of them are alleged as parcels of Scripture, and prophetical
writings; those especially that commonly bare the name of Solomon. But so also
is the fourth book of Esdras cited by Gildas, in the name of Quid praeterea
beatus Esdras Propheta ille, Bibliotheca legis, minatus sit attendite. Gild.
Epist.
blessed Esdras the Prophet; which yet our Romanists will not admit to be
Canonical: neither do our writers mention any of the rest with more titles of
respect than we find given unto them by others of the ancient Fathers, who
yet in express terms do exclude them out of the number of those books which
properly are to be esteemed Canonical. So that from hence no sufficient proof
can be taken, that our ancestors did herein depart from the tradition of the
Elder Church, Vid. Richard. Armachanum, de questionib. Armeniorum, (...) 18.
cap. 1.
delivered by S. Hierome in his Prologues, and explained by Brito (a Briton, it
seems, by nation, as well as by appellation) in his commentaries upon the
same; which being heretofore joined with the Ordinary Gloss upon the Bible,
have of late proved so distastefull unto our Popish Divines, that in their new
editions (printed at Lions anno 1590. and at Venice afterward) they have quite
crossed them out of their books.

Yet Marianus Scotus (who was borne in Ireland in the MXXVIII. year of our
Lord) was somewhat more careful to maintain the ancient bounds of the Canon
set by his forefathers. For he in his Chronicle, following Eusebius and S.
Hierom, at the reign of Artaxerxes Longimanus writes thus: Hucusque
Hebraeorum divina Scriptura tempurum seriem continet. Quae vero post haec apud
Iudaeos sunt gesta, de libro Maccabaeorum, and Iosephi atque Aphricani scriptis
exhibentur. Marian. Chron. MS.
Hitherto the divine Scripture of the Hebrews contains the order of Times.
But those things that after this were done among the Jews, are represented out
of the book of the Maccabees, and the writings of Josephus and Aphricanus. But
before him, more plainly, the author of the book de mirabilibus Scripturae (
who is accounted to have lived here, about the year DCLVII.) In Maccabaeorum
libris etsi aliquid mirabilium numero inserendum conveniens fuisse huic ordini
inveniatur; de hoc tamen nulla cura satigabimur: quia tantum agere proposuimus,
unde divini canonis mirabilibus exiguam (quamvis ingenioli nostri modulum
excedentem) historicam expositionem ex part aliqua tangeremus. Lib. 2. de
mirabilib. Script. cap. 34. ( inter opera B. Augustini, tom. 3.)
In the books of the Maccabees, howsoever some wonderful things be found,
which might conveniently be inserted into this rank; yet w^ll we not weary
our selves with any care thereof* because we only purposed to touch in some
measure a short historical exposition of the wonderful things contained in
the divine canon. as also in the apocryphal additions of Daniel, he tells
us, that what is reported De ^acu vero iterum and Abacuk translato in Belis and
Draconis fabula, idcirco in hoc ordine non ponitur; quod in authoritate divinae
Scripturae non habentur. ibid. cap. 32.
touching the lake (or den) and the carrying of Abackuk, in the fable of Bell
and the Dragon, is not therefore placed in this rank, because these things
have not the authority of divine Scripture.

And so much concerning the holy Scriptures.

CHAP. II.
Of Predestination, Grace, Free Will, Faith, Works, Justification and
Sanctification.

THe Doctrine which our learned men observed out of the Scriptures and the
writings of the most approved Fathers, was this* that God Praescitam and
praedestinatam immobili consilio creaturam, ad se laudandum, and ex se and in
se and per se beat vivendum. S. Gallus in sermon. habit. Constant.
by his immovable counsel ( as Gallus speaks in his Sermon preached at
Constance) ordained some of his creatures to praise him, and to live blessedly
from him and in him, and by him: namely, Praedestinatione scilicet aeterna, non
creatione temporaria, sed vocatione gratuita, vel ^ndebita, gratia. Id. ib.
by his eternal predestination, his free calling, and his grace which was due
to none. that Miseretur magna bonitate, ^obdurat nulla iniquita^^: ut neque
libera^^s de luis meritis glorietur, neq damnatus nisi de suis meritis
conquetatur Sola enim (...) ^edemptos discernit a perditis, quos in unam
perdi^^^^ concreavcrat massam, ab ori^^ne ducta caussa communi. Sedul. in Romans
9.
he has mercy with great goodness, and hardneth without any iniquity: so
as neither he that is delivered can glory of his own merits, nor he that is
condemned complain but of his own merits. for as much as grace only makes the
distinction betwixt the redeemed and the lost; who by a cause drawn from their
common original, were framed together into one mass of perdition. For Videt
universum genus humanum tam justo judicio divinoque in apostatica radice
damnatum; ut etiamsi nullus inde liberatur, nemo recte posset Dei vituperare
justitiam: and qui liberantur, sic oportuisse liberari, ut ex pluribus non
liberatis, atque damnatione justissima derelictis, ostenderetur quid meruisset
universa conspersio, quod etiam justos debitum judicium Dei damnaret, nisi in
ejus debitum misericordia subveniret: ut volentium de suis meritis gloriari,
omne os obstruatur; and qui gloriatur, in Domino glorietur. Id ibid.
all mankind stood condemned in the apostaticall root ( of Adam) with so just
and divine a judgment; that although none should be freed from thence, no man
could rightly blame the justice of God: and such as were freed, must so have
been freed, that by those many which were not freed, but left in their most
just condemnation, it might be showed what the whole lump had deserved, that
the due judgment of God should have condemned even those that are justified,
unless mercy had relieved them from that which was due: that so all the
mouths of them, which would glory of their merits, might be stopped; and he
that glories, might glory in the Lord.

They further taught (as Saint Augustine did) that Libero arbitrio male utens
homo, and se perdidit, and ipsum. Sicut enim qui se occidit, utique vivendo se
occidit, sed se occidendo non vivit, neque seipsum poterit refuscitare cum
occiderit: ita cum libero arbitrio peccaretur, victore peccato amissum est and
liberum arbitrium. a quo enim quis devictus est, huic and servus addictus est.
sed ad been faciendum ista libertas unde erit homini addicto and vendito, nisi
redimat, cujus illa vox est; Si vos Filius liberaverit, vere liberi eritis? Id.
ibid.
Man using ill his Free will, lost both himself and it. that, as one by living
is able to kill himself, but by killing himself is not able to live, nor has
power to raise up himself when he has killed himself so when sin had
been committed by free will, sin being the conqueror, free will also was
lost; for as much as of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he also brought
in bondage (2 Pet. 2. 19.) that unto a man thus brought in bondage and sold,
there is no liberty left to do well, unless he redeem him, whose saying is
this; If the Son make you free, ye shall be free indeed. ( John 8. 36.)
that Quod ab adolescentia men's hominum apposita sit ad malitiam: non est enim
homo qui non peccet. Id. in Ephesians. 2.
the mind of men from their very youth is set upon evil: there being not a
man which sins not. that a man Quid habes ex teipso nisi peccatum? Id. in 1
Cor. 4.
has nothing from himself, but sin. that Deus author est omnium bonorum,
hoc est, and naturae bonae, and voluntatis bonae; quam nisi Deus in illo
operetur, non facit homo. quia praeparatur voluntas a Domino in homine bona; ut
faciat Deo donante, quod a seipso facere non poterat per liberi arbitrii
voluntatem. Claud. li. 1. in Matthew.
God is the author of all good things, that is to say, both of good nature, and
of good will; which unless God do work in him, man cannot do. because this
good will is prepared by the Lord in man; that by the gift of God he may do
that, which of himself he could not do by his own free will. that Praecedit
bona voluntas hominis multa Dei dona, sed non omnia: quae autem non praecedit
ipsa, in eis est and ipsa. Nam utrumque legitur in sanctis eloquiis; and
misericordia ejus praeveniet me, and misericordia ejus subsequetur me: nolentem
praevenit ut velit, volentem subsequitur, ne frustra velit. Cur enim admonemur
petere ut accipiamus; nisi ut ab illo fiat quod volumus, a quo factum est ut
velimus? Sedul. in Romans 9.
the good will of man goes before many gifts of God, but not all: and of those
which it does not go before, it self is one. For both of these is read in the
holy Scriptures; His mercy shall go before me, and, His mercy shall follow
me: it preventeth him that is unwilling that he may will, and it follows
him that is willing, that he will not in vain. and that therefore we are
admonished to ask that we may receive, to the end, that what we do will may
be effected by him, by whom it was effected that we did so will.

They taught also, that Non ergo lex data est, ut peccatum auferret, sed ut sub
peccato omnia concluderet. Lex enim oflendebat esse peccatum, quod illi per
consuetudinem caecati possent putare iustitiam: ut hoc modo humiliati
cognoscerent non in sua manu esse salutem suam, sed in manu mediatoris. Id. in
Gal. 3.
the Law was not given, that it might take away sin, but that it might shut
up all under sin: to the end that men, being by this means humbled, might
understand that their salvation was not in their own hand, but in the hand of
a Mediator. that by the Law comes, Non remissio, nec ablatio peccatorum, sed
cognitio. Id. in Romans 3.
neither the remission nor the removal, but the knowledge of sins: that it
Lex, quae per Moysen data est, tantum peccata ostendit, non abstulit. Claud. in
Gal. 2. Perque illam legem morbos ostendentem non auferentem, etiam
praevaricationis crimine contrita superbia est. Id. in Gal. 3.
takes not away diseases, but discovers them; Lex non do^at peccata, sed
damnat. Sedul. in Romans 4.
forgiveth not sins, but condemns them. that Dominus Deus imposuerat non
justitiae servientibus sed peccato: justam scilicet legem injustis hominibus
dando, ad demonstranda peccata eorum, non auferenda. Non enim aufert peccata
nisi gratia fidei quae per dilectionem operatur. Claud. in argument. epist. ad
Gal.
the Lord God did impose it, not upon those that served righteousness, but
sin; namely, by giving a just law to unjust men, to manifest their sins, and
not to take them away: forasmuch as nothing takes away sins but the grace of
faith which works by love. That our Gratis nobis donantur peccata. Sedul. in
Gal. 1. A morte redemptis gratis peccata dimittuntur. Id. in Ephesians. 1.
sins are freely forgiven us; Absque operum merito, and peccata nobis
concessa sunt pristina, and p^x indulta post veniam. Claud. in Gal. 1.
without the merit of our works: that Gratia estis salvati per fidem, id est,
non per opera. Sedul. in Ephesians. 2.
through grace we are saved, by faith, and not by works; and that therefore we
are to rejoice, Non in propria justitia, vel doctrina, sed in fide crucis, per
quam mihi omnia peccata dimissa sunt. Sedul and Claud. in Gal. 6.
not in our own righteousness, or learning, but in the faith of the Cross,
by which all our sins are forgiven us. That Abjecta and irrita gratia est, si
^^bi sola non sufficit. Sedul. in Gal. 2.
grace is abject and vain, if it alone do not suffice us: and that we
Christum vilem habetis, dum putatis eum vobis non sufficere ad salutem. Id. in
Galat. 3.
esteem basely of Christ, when we think that he is not sufficient for us to
salvation.

That Disposuit Deus propitium sefuturum esse humano generi, si credant in
sanguine ejus se esse liberandos. Id. in Romans 3.
God has so ordered it, that he will be gracious to mankind, if they do
believe that they shall be freed by the blood of Christ. that, as Vita corporis
amma, vi a animae fides est. Id. in Hebr. 10.
the soul is the life of the body, so faith is the life of the soul: and that
we live In fide vivo filii Dei, id est, in sola fide, qui ni^^ld^b olegi. Id.
in. Gal. 2.
by faith only, as owing nothing to the Law. that Perfectionem legi habet, qui
credit in Christo. Cum enim nullus iustifica^^tui ex lege, quia nemo implebat
legem, nisi qui sp^raret in promissionem Ch^^^^: fides posita est, quae cederet
pro perfectione legi; ut in omnibus praetermissis fides satissaceret pro tota
lege. Id. in Romans 10.
he who believes in Christ, has the perfection of the Law. For whereas none
might be justified by the Law, because none did fulfill the Law, but only he
which did trust in the promise of Christ: faith was appointed, which should be
accepted for the perfection of the Law, that in all things which were omitted
faith might satisfy for the whole Law. That this righteousness therefore is
Non nostra, non in nobis, sed in Christo, quasi membra in capite. Id. in 2 Cor.
5.
not ours, nor in us, but in Christ; in whom were are considered as members in
the head. That Fides, dimissis per gratiam peccatis, omnes credentes filios
efficit Abrahae. Id. in Romans 4.
faith, procuring the remission of sins by grace, makes all believers the
children of Abraham: and that Iustum fuerat, ut quo modo Abraham credens ex
gentibus per solam fidem iustificatus est; ita caeteri fide^ eius imitantes
salvarentur. Id. in Romans 1.
it was just, that as Abraham was justified by faith only, so also the rest
that followed his faith should be saved after the same manner. That Per
adoptionem efficimur filii Dei, credendo in Filium Dei. Claud. l^b. 1. in Mat.
through adoption we are made the sons of God, by believing in the Son of
God: and that this is Testimonium adoptionis, quod habemus spiritum, per quem
ita oramus: ^ intam enim arrham non poterant, nisi filii accipere. Sed. in Romans
8.
a testimony of our adoption, that we have the spirit; by which we pray, and
cry Abba Father; forasmuch as none can receive so great a pledge as this, but
such as be sons only. That Ipse Moses distinxit inter utramque iustitiam,
fidei scilicet atque factorum: quia altera operibus, altera sola credulitate
iustificet accedentem. Id. in Romans 10.
Moses himself made a distinction betwixt both the justices, to wit of faith
and of deeds: that the one did by works justify him that came, the other by
believing only. that Patriarchae and Prophetae non ex operibus legis, sed ex
fide iustificati sunt. Id. in Gal. 2.
the Patriarchs and the Prophets were not justified by the works of the Law,
but by faith. that Ita praevaluit consuetudo peccandi, ut nemo iam perficiat
legem: sicut Petrus Apostolus ait; Quod neque nos neque patres nostri portare
potuimus. Si qui vero iusti non erant maledicti; non ex operibus legis, sed
fidei gratia salvati sunt. Id. in Gal. 3.
the custom of sin has so prevailed, that none now can fulfill the Law: as
the Apostle Peter says, Acts 15. 10. Which neither our fathers nor we have
been able to bear. But if there were any righteous men which did escape the
curse: it was not by the works of the Law, but for their faiths sake that they
were saved.

Thus did Sedulius and Claudius, two of our most famous Divines deliver the
doctrine of free will and grace, faith and works, the Law and the Gospel,
Justification and Adoption; no less agreeably to the faith which is at this
day professed in the reformed Churches, that to that which they themselves
received from the more ancient Doctors, whom they did follow therein. Neither
do we in our judgment one whit differ from them, when they teach that Hoc
contra illos agit, qui solam fidem posse sufficere dicunt. Sedul. in Ephesians. 5.
Non ergo sola ad vitam sufficit fides. Claud in Gal. 5. bis. Haec sententia
illos revincit, qui solam fidem ad salutem animarum suarum sufficere
arbitrantur. Id. ibid. in fine.
faith alone is not sufficient to life. For when it is said, that Faith alone
justifies: this word alone may be conceived to have relation either to the
former part of the sentence, which in the Schools they term the Subject; or
to the latter, which they call the Predicate. Being referred to the former, the
meaning will be; that such a faith as is alone (that is to say, not accompanied
with other virtues) does justify: and in this sense we utterly disclaim the
assertion. But being referred to the latter, it makes this sense; that faith
is it which alone or only justifies: and in this meaning only do we defend
that proposition; understanding still by faith, not a dead carkase thereof (for
how should the just be able to live by a dead faith?) but a true and lively
faith, Gal. 5. 6.
which works by love. For as it is a certain truth, that among all the
members of the body, the eye is the only instrument whereby we see; and yet it
is as true also, that the eye being alone, and separated from the rest of the
members, is dead, and for that cause does neither see only, not see at all: so
these two sayings likewise may stand well enough together, that among all the
virtues in the foul, faith is the only instrument whereby we lay hold upon
Christ for our justification; and yet, that faith being alone, and disjoined
from the society of other graces, is dead in it self, (as St. Iam. 2. 17.
James speaks) and in that respect can neither only justify, nor justify at
all.

So though Claudius do teach as we do, that Si gentes fides sola non salvat,
nec nos: quia ex operibus legis nemo iustificabitur. Claud. in Galat. 2.
faith alone saves us; because by the works of the law no man shall be
justified: yet he adds withal this caution. Non quo legis opera contemnenda
sint, and absque eis simplex fides adpetenda; sed ipsa opera fide Christi
adornentur. Sc^^ est enim sapientis viri ^sla sententia; non fidelem v^v^^e ex
iustitia, sed iustum ex fide. Id. in Galat. 3.
Not as if the works of the law should be contemned, and without them a simple
faith ( so he calls that solitary faith whereof we spoke, which is a simple
faith indeed) should be desired; but that the works themselves should be
adorned with the faith of Christ. For that sentence of the wise man is
excellent, that the faithful man does not live by righteousness, but the
righteous man by faith. In like manner Sedulius, acknowledges with us, that
God Gratis proposuit per solam fidem dimittere peccata. Sedul. in Romans 4.
has purposed by faith only to forgive our sins freely, and Vt sola fide
salvatentur credentes. Idem. in Galat. 3.
by faith only to save the believers; and that, when men have fallen, they are
to be renewed Per solam fidem Christi, quae per dilectionem operatur, Id. in
Hebr. 6.
only by the faith of Christ, which works by love. intimating by this last
clause, that howsoever faith only be it which justifies the man, yet the
work of love is necessarily required (for all that) to justify the faith. And
this faith ( says Haee fides cum justificata fuerit, ^anquam radix imbre suse
pro, haeret in animae solo; ut cum per legem Dei excoli ^aeperit, rurtum in eam
surgant rami, qui fructus operum ferant. Non ergo ex operibus radix justitiae,
sed ex radice justitiae fructus operum crescit^ illa scilicet radice justitiae,
cu^ Deus accep^^in fert justitiam sine operibus. Id. in Romans 4.
he) when it has been justified, sticks in the soil of the soul, like a
root which has received a shower: that when it has begun to be manured by
the law of God, it may rise up again into bows, which may bear the fruit of
works. Therefore the root of righteousness does not grow out of works, but
the fruit of works out of the root of righteousness; namely out of that root
of righteousness, which God does accept for righteousness without works. The
conclusion is: that saving faith is always a fruitful faith; and though it
never go alone, yet may there be some gift of God, which it alone is able to
reach unto. as Columban. in (...).
Columbanus also implies in that verse: Sola fides fidei dono ditabitur almo.

The greatest depressers of Gods grace, and the advancers of man's abilities,
were Pelagius and Celestius^ the one borne in Britain ( as appears by
Prosper Aquitanus) the other in Scotland or Ireland; as Pe^s^three Convers.
part. 1. chap. 3. sect. 10.
Mr. Persons does gather out of those words of S. Hierom in one of the Prefaces
of his commentaries (not upon Ezechiel, as he quoteth it, but) upon Jeremy.
Habet enim progeniem Seoticae gentis, de Britannorum vicinia. Hieron. prooem.
lib. 3. commentar. in Ierem.
He has his offspring from the Scottish nation, near to the Britans. These
heretics (as our Marianus notes out of Prosper. in his Chronicle) preached,
among other of their impieties, Vnumquem jue adiustitiam voluntate propria
regi; tantumque accipere gratiae, quantum meruerit. Morian, Scot. Chron. ad an.
Dom 413. vel 414. Whereof see more particularly, the Answer to the Jesuit, in
the question of Free Will.
that for attaining of righteousness every one was governed by his own will,
and received so much grace as he did merit. Whole venomous doctrine was in
Britain repressed, first by Palladius, Lupus, Germanus and Severus from
abroad; afterward, by David Menevensis, and his successors at home agreeably to
whose institution, Asser. Men^vensis does profess, that God is always to be
esteemed both the mover of the will, and the bestower of the good that is
willed for he is (says he) Omnium bonarum voluntatum inssigator; necnon
etiam, ut habeantur bona desiderata, largissimus administrator. neque enim
unquam aliquem been velle insligaret, nisi and hoc, quod been and iusto quisque
habere desiderat, largiter administraret. Asser. d^ rebus gestic Aelfredi. R.
the instigatour of all good wills, and withal the most bountiful provider
that the good things desired may be had: forasmuch as he would never stir
up any to will well, unless he did also liberally supply that which every one
does well and justly desire to obtain.

Among our Irish, the grounds of sound doctrine in these points were at the
beginning well settled by Palladius and Patricius, Prosp. Aquitan. advers.
Coelater. (...).
sent hither by Celestinus Bishop of Rome. And when the poison of the Pelagian
heresy, about two hundred years after that, began to break out among them:
the Clergy of Rome in the year of our Lord DCXXXIX. (during the vacancie of
the Sea, upon the death of Severinus) directed their letters unto them, for the
preventing of this growing mischief. Wherein among other things they put them
in mind, that Blasphemia and stultiloquium est dicere, esse hominem sine
peccato quod omnino non potest, nisa unus mediater Dei and hominum (...)
Christus Jesus, qui sine peccato est conceptus and partus. Epist. Cler. Roman.
apud. ^^dam, lib. 2. hist. cap. 13.
it is both blasphemy and folly to say, that a man is without sin: which none
at all can say, but that one mediator betwixt God and man, the man Christ
Jesus, who was conceived and borne without sin. Which is agreeable, partly to
that of Claudius; that Quia, (quod omnibus sapientibus patet, licet haeretici
contradicant) nemo est, qui sine adtactu alicuius peccati vivere possit super
terram. Claud. lib. 2. in. Matthew.
it is manifest unto all wise men, although it be contradicted by heretics,
that there is none who can live upon earth without the touch of some sin:
partly to that of Sedulius, that Nullus electus and ita magnus, quem Diabolus
non audeat accusare: nisi illum solum, qui peccatum non fecit, qui and dicebat;
Nunc venit princeps huius mundi, and in me nihil. invenit. Sedul. in Romans 8.
there is none of the elect so great, whom the Devil does not dare to accuse,
but him alone who did no sin, and who said; The Prince of this world comes
now, and in me be finds nothing.

For touching the imperfection of our sanctification in this life, these men
held the same that we do: to wit, that the Law Non potest impleri. Id. in
Romans 7.
cannot be fulfilled; that Non est qui faciat bonum, hoc est, perfectum and
integrum bonum Id. in Romans 3.
there is none that does good, that is to say, perfect and entire good. that Ad
hoc nos elegit, ut essemus sancti and immaculati, in futura vita; quoniam
Ecclesia Christi non habebit maculam neque rugam. Licet etiam in praesenti vita
justi, and sancti, and immaculati, quamvis non ex toto, tamen ex part, non
inconuenienter dici possunt. Id. in Ephesians. 1.
Gods elect shall be perfectly holy and immaculate in the life to come, where
the Church of Christ shall have no spot nor wrinkle: whereas in this present
life they are righteous, holy, and immaculate, not wholly, but in part only
that Tunc erit iustus fine ullo omnino peccato, quando nulla lex erit in
memberis eius, repugnans legi mentis eius. Claud. in Gal. 5.
the righteous shall then be without all kind of sin, when there shall be no
law in their members, that shall resist the law of their mind. that although
Non enim iam regnat peccatum in eorum mortali corpore ad obediendum desideriis
eius: quamvis habitet in eodem mortali corpore peccatum, nondum extincto impetu
consuetudinis naturalis, qua mortaliter nati sumus, and ex proptlis vitae
nostrae, cum and nos ipsi peccando auximus quod ab origin peccati humani
damnationis trahebamus. Id ibid.
sin do not now reign in their mortal body to obey the desires thereof:
yet sin dwells in that mortal body, the force of that natural custom being
not yet extinguished, which we have gotten by our original, and increased by
our actual transgressions. And as for the matter of merit: Sedulius does
resolve us out of S. Paul, that we are Saints Vocatione Dei, non merito facti.
Sedul. in. Ro^. 1.
by the calling of God, not by the merit of our deed; that God is able to
exceeding abundantly above that we ask or think, Se^^nd^m virtutem quae
operatur in nobis; non secundum merita nostra. Id. in Ephesians. 3.
according to the power that works in us, not according to our merits; that
Sciendum est, quin omne quod habent homines a Deo, gratia est: nihil enim ex
^ebito habent. Id. in Romans 16.
whatsoever men have from God; is grace, because they have nothing of due; and
that Nihil dignum inveniri vel comparati ad futuram glori^m potest. Id. in Romans
8.
nothing can be found worthy or to be compared with the glory to come.

CHAP. III.
Of Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead.

THe next Point that offers it self unto our consideration, is that of
Purgatory. Whereof if any man do doubt; Qui de Purgatorio dubitat, Scotiam
pergat, Purgatorium sancti Patricii intret, and de Purgatorii poenis amplius
non dubitabit. Caesar. Heisterbach. Dialog. lib. 12. cap. 38.
Caesarius (a Germane Monk of the Cistercian order) advises him for his
resolution to make a journey into Scotland (the greater Scotland he means)
and there to enter into S. Patricks Purgatory: and then he gives him his word,
that he shall no more doubt of the pains of Purgatory. If Doctor Terry (who
commends this unto us as the testimony of Cujus loci fama, ita sparsim per
omnes Europae parts velare visa est; ut Caesarius celeberrimus auctor, de eo
nihil dubitans sic scribat. Guil. Thyraeus, in Discurs Panegyrit. de S. Patric.
page 151.
a most famous Author) should chance to have a doubtful thought hereafter of
the pains of Purgatory; I would wish his ghostly Father to injoyne him no other
penance, but the undertaking of a pilgrimage unto S. Patricks purgatory; to
see whether he would prove any wiser when he came from thence, than when he
went thither. In the mean time, until he has made some further experiment of
the matter, he shall give me leave to believe him that has been there, and
has cause to know the place as well as any (the Island wherein it is seated,
being held by him as a part of the inheritance descended unto him from his
ancestors) and yet professes, that he found nothing therein, which might
afford him any argument to think there was a Purgatory. I pass by, that
Nennius, and Probus, and all the elder writers of the life of S. Patrick that I
have met withal, speak not one word of any such place; and that Henr.
Saltereyens. in lib. de Visione Oeni mil it is MS. in publica Cantabrigiensis
academiae Bibliotheca; and privata viri doctiss. M. Tho^ae Alani Oxomensis; and
in Nigro libro Ecclesiae S. Trinitat. Dublin.
Henry the monk of Saltrey, in the days of King Stephen, is the first in
whom I could ever find any mention thereof. this only would I know of the
Doctor, what the reason might be, that where he brings in the words of
Giraldus Cambrensis touching this place, as De posteriori non minus authentica
videtur auctoritas Giraldi Cambrensis, rerum lbernicarum diligentissimi
investigatoris, qui taliter loquitur. Thyr, Discurs. Panegyric. page 153.
an authentical authority; he passes over that part of his relation, wherein
he affirms, that S. Patrick intended by this means to bring the rude people
to a persuasion of the certainty De infernalibus namque reproborum poenis, and
de vera post mortem perpetuaque electorum vita vir sanctus cum gente incredula
dum disputasset: ut tanta, tam inusitata, tam inopinabilis rerum novitas
rudibus infidelium animis oculata fide certi^s imprimeretur: efficaciorationum
instantia magnam and admirabilem utriusque rei notitiam, dutaeque cervicis
populo perutilem, meruit in terris obtinere. Giral. Cambrens. Topograph.
Hibern. distinct. 2. cap. 5.
of the infernal pains of the reprobate, and of the true and everlasting life
of the elect after death.

The Grecians allege this for one of their arguments against Purgatory: that
whereas (...). Marcus Ephesius, in Graecorum Apolog. de igne Purgatorio ad
Council. Basileens.
their Fathers had delivered unto them many visions and dreams and other
wonders concerning the everlasting punishment, wherewith the wicked should be
tormented in Hell; yet none of them had declared any thing concerning a
purgatory temporary fire. Belike the Doctor was afraid, that we would
conclude upon the same ground; that S. Patrick was careful to plant in men's
minds the belief of Heaven and Hell, but of Purgatory taught them never a
word. And sure I am, that in the book ascribed unto him, De tribus
habitaculis, (which is to be seen in his Majesty's Library) there is no
mention of any other place after this life, but of these two only. I will lay
down here the beginning of that treatise; and leave it to the judgment of any
indifferent man, whether it can well stand with that which the Romanists teach
concerning Purgatory at this day. Tria sunt sub omnipotentis Dei nutu
habitacula: primum, mum, medium* Quorum sumimum, regnum Dei vel reg^u^ Coelorum
di^itur, imum vocatur inferous, medium Mundu^ praesens vel Orbis tertarum
appellatur. Quo^um extrema omnino sibi invieem sunt contraria, and nulla sibi
societate conju^cta: (quae enim societas potest esse luci ad tenebras, and
Christo ad Belial?) medium veo nonnullam habet similitudinem ad extrema, etc
Commixio namque malorum simul and honorum in h^c mundo est. In regno autem Dei
nulli mali sunt, sed omnes boni: at in Inferno nulli boni sunt, sed omnes mali.
Et uterque locus ex medio suppietur. H^minum enim huius mundi ali^ elevantur ad
Coelum, ali^ trahuntur ad Infernum. Similes quippe similibus i^^gu (...), id
est, boni bonis, and mali malis; iusti homines justice angelis, transg essores
homine transgressoribus angelis; servidei Deo, servi diaboli Diabolo. Benedicti
vocantur ad (...) paratum ab origin mundi: maledicti expelluntur in ignem
aeternum, qui prae para^^ (...) Diabolo and angelis eius. Patric. de trib,
babitac. MS. in Bibliotheca Regid Iacobae^.
There be three habitations under the power of Almighty God: the first, the
lowermost, and the middle. The highest whereof is called the Kingdom of God,
or the Kingdom of Heaven, the lowermost is termed Hell, the middle is named
the present World, or the circuit of the earth. The extremes whereof are
altogether contrary one to another: (for what fellowship can there be betwixt
light and darkness, betwixt Christ and Belial?) but the middle has some
similitude with the extremes. For in this world there is a mixture of the bad
and of the good together. whereas in the Kingdom of God there are none bad,
but all good: but in Hell there are none good, but all bad. And both those
places are supplied out of the middle. For of the men of this world, some are
lifted up to Heaven, others are drawn down to Hell* namely, like are joined
unto like, that is to say, good to good, and bad to bad: just men to just
Angels, wicked men to wicked Angels; the servants of God to God, the servants
of the Devil to the Devil. The blessed are called to the Kingdom prepared
for them from the beginning of the world: the cursed are driven into the
everlasting fire that is prepared for the Devil and his angels, Thus far
there.

Hitherto also may be referred that ancient Canon of one of our Irish Synods,
wherein it is affirmed, that the soul being separated from the body is
Custodita^imam usque dum steterit ante tribunal Christi; cui refert sua prout
gesserit propria. Nec archangelus potest ducere ad vitam, usque dum indicaverit
eam Dominus; nec Zabulus ad poenam traducere, nisi Dominus damnaverit came.
Synod. Hibern. in vet. cod. Canonum, titulorum 66. MS. in Bibliotheca D.
Roberti Cot^oni. Cuius initium: inter vetera Concilia, quatuor esse venerabiles
Synodos, etc.
presented before the judgment seat of Christ, who renders it own unto it,
according as it has done: and that neither the Archangel can lead it unto
life, until the Lord has judged it; nor the Devil transport it unto pain,
unless the Lord do damn it. as the sayings of Sedulius likewise; that after
the end of this life, Finem dixit exitum vitae and actuum; cui aut mors, aut
vita succedit. Sedul. in Romans 7.
either death or life succeeds, and that Mors po^ta est, per quam itur ad
regnum Id. in. 1. Cor. 3.
death is the gate by which we enter into our kingdom: together with that of
Claudius; that Suscepit Christus sine reatu supplicium nostrum; ut inde
solreret reatum uostrum, and finiret etiam supplicium nostrum. Claud. in Galat.
3.
Christ did take upon him our punishment without the guilt, that thereby he
might loose our guilt, and finish also our punishment. Cardinal Bellarmine
indeed alleges here against us the vision of Furseus: who Beda lib. 3. hist.
Anglor. cap. 19. scribit, B. Furseum a mortuis resurgentem narrasse multa, quae
vidit de purgatoriis poenis. Bellarm. de Purgator. lib. 1. cap. 11.
rising from the dead, told many things, which he saw concerning the pains of
purgatory; as Bede, he says, does write. But, by his good leave, we will be
better advised, before we build articles of faith upon such visions and
dreams as these: many whereof deserve to have a place among (...). Phot.
Bibliothec. number. ^30.
the strange narrations of souls appearing after death, collected by Damascius
the heathen Idolater; rather than among the histories and discourses of sober
Christians.

As for this vision of Furscus: all that Bid relates of it to this purpose,
is concerning certain great fires above the air, appointed to Etsi terribilis
iste and grandis rogus videtur, tamen iuxta merita operum singulos examina^:
quia uniuscuiusque cupiditas in hoc igne ardebit. Bid lib. 3. cap. 19.
examine every one according to the merits of his works. which peradventure
may make something for Damascius his Purgatory in Circulo lacteo (for in that
circle made he (...). Damasc.. apud ^o. Philoponum (...) 1. Meteor. fol. 104.
b.
away for the souls that went to the Hades in Heaven; and (...). Id. ibid.
would not have us wonder, that there they should be purged by the way:) but
nothing for the Papists Purgatory, which Bellarmine by the common consent of
the Schoolmen determines to be within the bowels of the earth. Neither is
there any thing else in the whole book of the life of Furseus (whence Bid
borrowed these things) that looks toward Purgatory: unless peradventure
that speech of the Devil may be thought to give some advantage unto it. Hic
homo non purgavit delicta sua in terra, (...) vindictam hic recipit. Vbi ^st
ergo iusticia Dei? ab. v^ae Furse^.
This man has not purged his sins upon earth; neither does he receive
punishment for them here. Where is therefore the justice of God? as if Gods
justice were not sufficiently satisfied by the sufferings of Christ; but man
also must needs give further satisfaction thereunto by penal works of
sufferings, either here, or in the other world. which is the ground, upon which
our Romanists do lay the rotten frame of their devised Purgatory.

The later visions of Malachias, Tundal, Owen, and others that lived within
these last five hundred years; come not within the compass of our present
inquiry: nor yet the fables that have been framed in those times, touching
the lives and actions of elder Saints; whereof no wise man will make any
reckoning. Such (for example) is that which we read in the life of St. Brendan:
that the question being moved in his hearing, Si peccata mortuorum redimi
possunt ab amicis suis remanentibus in hac vita; orando, vel eleemosynas
faciendo. Vit. Brendani, in Legenda. Io. Cap. gravii.
Whether the sins of the dead could be redeemed by the prayers or almsdeeds
of their friends remaining in this life (for that was still a question in the
Church:) he is said to have told them, that on a certain night, as he sailed
in the great Ocean, the soul of one Colman Colmannus, inquit, vocor: qui sui
Monachus iracundus, discordiaeque seminator inter fratres. Ibid.
(who had been an angry Monk, and a sower of discord betwixt brethren)
appeared unto him; who complaining of his grievous torments, entreated that
prayers might be made to God for him, and after six days thankefully
acknowledged that by means thereof he had gotten into heaven. Whereupon it is
concluded, In hoc ergo, dilectissimi, apparet: quod oration vivorum multum
mortuis prodest. (...).
that the prayer of the living does profit much the dead. But of S. Brendans
sea-pilgrimage, we have the censure of Molanus a learned Romanist; that there
be Multa apocrypha deliramenta. Molan. in Vsuard. martyolog. May. 26.
many apocryhall fooleries in it: and whosoever reads the same with any
judgment, cannot choose but pronounce of it, as Photius does of the strange
narrations of Damascius, formerly mentioned; that it contains not only
apocryphal, but also (...). Phof. Bibliothec. number. 130.
impossible, incredible, ill-composed, and monstrous fooleries. Whereof though
the old Legend it self were not free (as by the heads thereof, touched by
Glaber Rodulphus and Giraldus Cambrensis, may appear) yet for the tale that I
recited out of the Nova Legenda Angliae. impress. Londin. an. 1516.
New Legend of England, I can say, that in the manuscript books which I have
met withal here, in St. Brendans own country, (one whereof was transcribed
for the use of the Friars minors of Kilkenny, about the year of our Lord
1350.) there is not the least footstep thereof to be seen.

And this is a thing very observable in the ancienter lives of our Saints (such
I mean, as have been written before the time of Satan's loosing; beyond which
we do not now look:) that the prayers and oblations for the dead mentioned
therein, are expressly noted to have been made for them, whose souls were
supposed at the same instant to have rested in bliss. So Adamnanus reports,
that Saint Colme (called by the Irish, both in Qui videlicet Columba nunc a
nonnullis, composito a cella and Columba nomine, Colum-celli vocatur. Bed. lib.
5. hist. ca. 10.
Bedes and our days, Colum-kille) Adaman. Vit. Columb. lib. 3. cap. 15.
caused all things to be prepared, for the sacred ministry of the Eucharist;
when he had seen the soul of St. Brendan received by the holy Angels: and
that he did the like, when Columbanus Bishop of Leinster departed this life.
for I must to day (says St. Colme Meque (ait) hodie, quamlibet indignus sim,
ob venerationem illius animae, quae hac in nocte inter sanctos Angelorum choros
vecta ultra siderea coelorum spatia ad Paradisum ascendit, sacra oportet
Eucharistiae celebrare mysteria. Ib. cap. 16.
there) although I be unworthy, celebrate the holy mysteries of the Eucharist,
for the reverence of that soul which this night, carried beyond the starry
firmament betwixt the holy Quires of Angels, ascended into Paradise. Whereby it
appears, that an honorable commemoration of the dead was herein intended,
and a sacrifice of thanksgiving for their salvation rather than of propitiation
for their sins. In Bid also we find mention of the like obsequies
celebrated by St. Cuthbert for one Hadwaldus; after Vidi, inquit, animam
cujusdam sancti manibus Angelicis ad gaudia regni coelestis ferri. Bed. in vit.
Cuthbert. cap. 34.
he had seen his soul carried by the hands of Angels unto the joys of the
kingdom of heaven. So Gallus and Magnus (as Walafridus Strabus relates in the
life of the one, and Theodorus Campidonensis, or whosoever else was author of
the life of the other) Coeperunt missas agere, and precibus insistere pro
commemoratione B. Columbani. Walafrid. Vit. Gall. lib. 1. cap. 26. Theodor.
vit. Magni, li. 1. cap. ult. edit. Goldasti, c. 12. Canissi.
said Mass (which what it was in those days we shall afterward hear) and
were instant in prayers for the commemoration of Abbat Columbanus their
countryman; Deinde tanti patris memoriam precibus sacris and sacrificiis
salutaribus frequentaverunt. Ibid.
frequenting the memory of that great Father, with holy prayers, and healthful
sacrifices. Where that speech of Gallus unto his Deacon Magnus or Magnoaldus,
is worthy of special consideration: Post hujus vigilias noctis, cognovi per
visionem, Dominum and patrem meum Colum. banum de hujus vitae angustiis hodie
ad Paradisi gaudia commigrasse. Pro ejus itaque requie sacrificium salutis
debeo immolare. Ibid.
After this nights watch, I understood by a vision, that my master and father
Columbanus is to day departed out of the miseries of this life unto the joys
of Paradise. For his rest therefore I ought to offer the sacrifice of
salvation. In like manner also, when Gallus himself dyed; Presbytez eum ut
surgeret monuit, and pro requie defuncti ambitiosius Dominum precaretur.
Intraverunt itaque Ecclesias, and ^piscopus pro ^^a^ssimo salutares hostias
immolavit amico. Finito autem fraternae commemorationis obsequio, etc.
Walafrid. Strab. vit. Gall. lib. 1. cap. 30. qui etiam addit postea, Discipulos
ejus, pariter cum Episcopo orationem pro illo fecisse. cap. 33.
John Bishop of Constance prayed to the Lord for his rest, and offered
healthful sacrifices for him: although he were certainly persuaded that he had
attained the blessing of everlasting life; as may be seen in Walafridus. And
when Magnus afterward was in his death bed, he is said to have used these
words unto Tozzo Bishop of Ausborough, that came to visit him. Noli flere,
venerabilis P^aesul, quia me in tot mundialium perturbationum procellis
laborantem conspicis: quoniam credo in misericordia Dei, quod anima mea in
immortalitatis liberate fit gavisura. tamen deprecor, ut orationibus tuis
sanctis me peccatorem and animam meam non desinas adjuvare. Theodor, Campiden.
vel quicunque author fuit vitae Magni, lib. 2. cap. 13. edit. Goldasti, cap.
28. Canissi.
Do not weep, reverend Prelate, because thou beholdest me laboring in so
many storms of worldly troubles: because I believe in the mercy of God, that
my soul shall rejoice in the freedom of immortality. yet I beseech thee,
that thou will not cease to help me a sinner and my soul with thy holy
prayers. Then follows: that at the time of his departure, this voice was
heard; Veni, Magne, veni; accipe cotonam quam tibi Dominus praeparatam habet.
Ibid.
Come, Magnus, come, receive the crown which the Lord has prepared for thee.
and that thereupon Tozzo said unto Theodorus (the supposed writer of this
history) Cessen^^^ flere, frater; quia potius nos oportet gaudere de animae
ejus in immortalitate sumprae hoc signo audito, quam luctum facere: sed eamus
ad Ecclesiam, and pro tam charissimo amico salutares hostias Domino immolare
studeamus. Finito itaque fraternae commemorationis obsequio, etc. Ibid.
Let us cease weeping, brother; because we ought rather to rejoice, having
heard this sign of the receiving of his soul unto immortality, than to make
lamentation. but let us go to the Church, and be careful to offer healthful
sacrifices to the Lord for so dear a friend.

I dispute not of the credit of these particular passages: it is sufficient,
that the authors from whom we have received them, lived within the compass of
those times, whereof we now do treat. For thereby it is plain enough (and
if it be not, it shall elsewhere be made yet more plain) that in those elder
days it was an usual thing, to make prayers and oblations for the rest of
those souls, which were not doubted to have been in glory: and consequently,
that neither the Commemoration nor the Praying for the dead, nor the Requiem
Masses of that age, have any necessary relation to the belief of Purgatory.
The lesson therefore which Claudius teaches us here out of Saint Hierome, is
very good: that Dum in praesenti seculo sumus, sive orationibus, sive consiliis
invicem posse nos adjuvari: cum autem ante tribunal Christi venerimus, nec Job,
nec Daniel, nec Noe, rogare posse pro quoquam; sed unumquemque portare onus
suum. Claud. in Gal. 6.
while we are in this present world, we may be able to help one another,
either by our prayers or^ by our counsels, but when we shall come before the
Judgment seat of Christ, neither Job, nor Daniel, nor Noah can entreat for
any one, but every one must bear his own burden. and the advice which the no
less learned than godly Abbat Columbanus gives us, is very safe: not to
pitch upon uncertainties hereafter, but now to trust in God, and follow the
precepts of Christ; while our life does yet remain, and while the times,
wherein we may obtain salvation, are certain. Vive Deo fidens ( says
Columban. in epist. ad Hunaldum.
he) Christi praecepta seque^do;
Dum modo vita manet, dum tempora certa salutis.


Whereunto John the Briton (another son of Sulgen Bishop of St. David's) seems
also to have had an eye, when (at the end of the Poem which he wrote of his
own and his fathers life) he prays for himself in the same manner: Vt
genitor clemens solita pietate remittat
Factis aut dictis quae gessi cord nefando;
Dum mihi vita manet, dum flendi flumina possunt.
Nam cum tartareis nullius cura subintrat.


CHAP. IV.
Of the Worship of God, the public form of Liturgy, the Sacrifice and
Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

TOuching the worship of God, Sedulius delivers this general rule: that
Adorare alium praeter Patrem and Filium, and Spiritum sanctum, impietatis
crimen est. Sedul. in Romans 1.
to adore any other beside the Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost, is
the crime of impiety; and that Totum quod debet Deo anima, si alicui praeter
Deum reddiderit, moechatur. Id. in Romans 2.
all that the soul owes unto God, if it bestow it upon any beside God, it
commits adultery. More particularly, in the matter of Images, Recedentes a
lumine veritatis sapientes; quasi qui invenissent, quo modo invisibilis Deus
per simulacrum visibile coleretur. Id. in. Romans 1.
he reproves the wise men of the heathen, for thinking that they had found
out a way, how the invisible God might be worshipped by a visible image: with
whom also accords Claudius; that Deus non in manufactis habitat, nec in
metallo aut saxo cognoscitur. Claud. lib. 2. in Matthew.
God is to be known, neither in metal nor in stone. and for Oaths, there
is a Canon ascribed to Saint Patricke; wherein it is determined, that Non
adjurandam esse crea^uram aliam, nisi creatorem. yaod. Patricij. can. 23. MS.
no creature is to be sworn by, but only the Creator. As for the form of
the Litugrie or public service of God, which the same St. Patrick brought
into this country: it is said, that he received it from Germanus and Lupus;
and that it originally descended from S. Mark the Evangelist. for so have I
seen it set down in an ancient fragment, written wellnigh 900. years since:
remaining now in the Library of Sir Robert Cotton, my worthy friend; who can
never sufficiently be commended, for his extraordinary care, in preserving all
rare monuments of this kind. Yea St. Hieromes authority is there vouched for
proof hereof. Beatus Hieronymus adfirmat, quod ipsum cursum, qui dicitur
praesente tempore Scottorum, beatus Marcus decanta^it. which being not now to
be found in any of Saint Hieroms works, the truth thereof I leave unto the
credit of the reporter.

But whatsoever Liturgy was used here at first: this is sure, that in the
succeeding ages no one general form of divine service was retained, but
diverse rites and manners of celebrations were observed in diverse parts of
this Kingdom; until the Roman use was brought in at last by Gillebertus, and
Malachias, and Christianus, who were the Popes Legates here about 500. years
ago. This Gillebertus ( an old acquaintance of Auselm. lib. 3. epist. 143.
Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury) in the Prologue of his book De usu
Ecclesiastico, directed to the whole Clergy of Ireland, writes in this
manner. Episcopis, presbyteris totius Hiberniae, infimus praesulum Gille
Lunicensis in Christo salute^. Roga^^, nec non and praecepto multorum ex vobis
(Charissimi) canonicalem consuetudinem in dicencis Horis, and peragendo totius
Ecclesiastici ordinis officio, scribere conatus sum; non praesumptivo, sed
vestrae cupiens piissimae servire jusstoni^ ut diversi and schismatici illi
Ordines, quibus Hibernia pene tota delusa est, uni Catholico and Roma^o ced^nt
officio. Quid enim magis indecens aut schismaticum dici poterit; quam
doctiss^mum unius ordinis in alterius Ecclesia idiotam and laicum fieri? etc.
Prolog Gille five Gilleberti Lummicensis epise. De usu Ecclesiastic. MS. in
Colleg. S. Benedict. and public^ academiae Cantabrigiensis Bibliotheca.
At the request, yea and at the command of many of you (dearly beloved) I
endeavored to set down in writing the Canonical custom in saying of Hours,
and performing the Office of the whole Ecclesiastical Order; not
presumptuously, but in desire to serve your most godly command: to the end that
those diverse and schismatic Orders, wherewith in a manner all Ireland is
deluded, may give place to one Catholic and Roman Office. For what may be
said to be more undecent or schismatic; than that the most learned in one
order, should be made as a private and lay man in another man's Church?

These beginnings were presently seconded by Malachias: in whose life, written
by Bernard, we read as follows. Apostolicas sanctiones as decreta sanctorum
patrum, praecipueque consuetudines sanctae Romanae ecclesiae in cunctis
eccle^iis statuebat. Hinc est quod hodieque in illis ad horas canonicas
cantatur and psallitur juxta motem universae terrae: nam minime id ante f^^bat,
ne in civitate quidem. Ipse vero in adolescentia cantum didicerat, and in suo
coenobio mox cantati fecit; cum necdum in civitate seu in episcopatu universo
cantare scirent, vel vellent, Bernard. in vita Mal^thia.
The Apostolical constitutions, and the decrees of the holy Fathers, but
especially the customs of the holy Church of Rome, did he establish in all
Churches. And hence it is, that at this day the Canonical Hours are chanted
and sung therein, according to the manner of the whole earth: whereas before
that, this was not done, no not in the City it self. ( the poor city of
Ardmagh he means.) But Malachias had learned song in his youth, and shortly
after caused singing to be used in his own Monastery; when as yet, as well in
the city as in the whole Bishopric, they either knew not, or would not sing.
Lastly, the work was brought to perfection, when Christianus Bishop of
Lismore, as Legate to the Pope, was President in the Council of Casshell:
wherein a special order was taken for Officium etiam Ecclesiasticum rite
modulandum statuerunt. Johan. Brampto^, in Ioralanensi historia. MS.
the right singing of the Ecclesiastical Office; and a general act
established, that Omnia divina ad instar sa ^osanctae Ecclesiae, iuxta quod
Anglicana observat Ecclesia, in om^ibus pa^tibus Hiberniae amodo tractentur.
Girald. Cambr. Hibern. exp^gnat. lib. 1. cap. 34.
all divine offices of holy Church should from thenceforth be handled in all
parts of Ireland, according as the Church of England d^d observe them. The
statutes of which Council were Conci^^ statuta sub^cripta sunt, and Regiae
sublimitatis authoritate firmata Id. ibid.
confirmed by the Regal authority of King Henry the second; Ex ipsius
triumphatoris mandato, in civitate Cassiliensi convenerunt. Id. ibid.
by whose mandate, the Bishops that met therein were assembled, in the year of
our Lord 1171. as Giraldus Cambrensis* witnesses, in his history of the
Conquest of Ireland. And thus late was it, before the Roman use was fully
settled in this Kingdom.

That the Britons used another manner in the administration of the Sacrament of
Baptism than the Romans did: appears by the proposition made unto them by
Austin the Monk; Vt ministerium baptizandi, quo Deo renascimur, iuxta morem
Sanctae Romanae and Apostolicae Ecclesiae compleatis, Bed. lib. 2. Histor cap.
2.
that they should perform the ministry of baptism, according to the custom
of the Church of Rome. That their form of Liturgy was the same with that
which was received by their neighbors the Galls, is intimated by the Author of
that ancient fragment before alleged: who also adds, that the Per universum
orb terra^um, in Ecclesia ordo cursus Gallorum diffusus est. Fragment. de
Ecclesiasticorum officiorum origin. MS. Bibliotheca C^ttoniana.
Gallican Order was received in the Church throughout the whole world. Yet
elsewhere do I meet with a sentence alleged out of Gildas; that Gildas ait.
Britones toti mundo contrarii, moribus Romany inimici non solum in Missa, sed
etiam in tonsura. Cod. Ca^^^^ titulorum 66. MS. in eadem Bibliotheca.
the Britons were contrary to the whole world, and enemies to the Roman
customs, as well in their Mass, as in their Tonsure.

Where to let pass what I have collected touching the difference of these
tonsures (as a matter of very small moment either way) and to speak somewhat
of the Mass (for which so great ado is now adays made by our Romanists) we
may observe in the first place, that the public Liturgy or service of the
Church, was of old named the Mass: even then also, when prayers only were
said, without the celebration of the holy Communion. So the last Mass that S.
Colme was ever present at, is noted by Adamnan. Vit. columb. lib. 3. cap. 31.
Adamnanus to have been vespertinalis Dominica noctis Missa. He dyed the
midnight following; whence the Lords day took his beginning (9^ viz. Iunii,
Anno Dom. 597.) according to the account of the Romans: which the Scottish and
Irish seem to have begun from the evening going before. and then was that
evening-Masse said: which in all likelihood, differed not from those (...)
mentioned by (...) Tactic. cap. 11. sect. 18.
Leo the Emperor in his Tacticks, that is to say, from that which we call
Even-song, or Evening prayer. But the name of the Mass was in those days more
specially applied to the administration fo the Lords Supper: and therefore in
the same Adamnan. Vit. Columb. lib. (...). 15.
Adamnanus we see that Sacra Eucharistiae ministeria and Missarum solemnia, the
sacred ministry of the Eucharist and the solemnities of the Mass, are taken
for the same thing. So likewise in the Walafrid. Strab. Vit. Gall. lib. 1. cap.
26. Theodor. Campidonens. vel quicunque author. fuit Vit. Magni, lib. 1. cap.
9. edit. Goldast. cap. 12. Conis^i.
relation of the passages that concern the obsequies of Columbanus, performed
by Gallus and Magnoaldus; we find that Missam celebrare and Missas agere, is
made to be the same with Divina celebrare mysteria and Salutis hostiam (or
salutare sacrificium) immolare: the saying of Mass, the same with the
celebration of the divine mysteries and the oblation of the healthful
sacrifice. for by that term was the administration of the sacrament of the
Lords Supper at that time usually designed.

For as in our Heb. 13. 16.
beneficence, and communicating unto the necessities of the poor (which are
sacrifices wherewith God is well pleased) we are taught to 2 Cor. ^5.
give both our selves and our alms, first unto the Lord, and after unto our
brethren by the will of God: so is it in this ministry of the blessed
Sacrament. the service is first presented unto God, (from which, as from a most
principal part of the duty, the sacrament it self is called the Eucharist;
because therein we Heb. 13. 15.
offer a special sacrifice of praise and thankesgiving always unto God) and
then communicated unto the use of Gods people. in the performance of which part
of the service, both the minister was said to give, and the communicant to
receive the sacrifice: as well as in respect of the former part, they were said
to offer the same unto the Lord. For they did not distinguish the Sacrifice
from the Sacrament, as the Romanists do now adays: but used the name of
Sacrifice indifferently, both of that which was offered unto God, and of that
which was given to and received by the communicant. Therefore we read of
offering the sacrifice to God: as in that speech of Gallus to his scholar
Magnoaldus; Praeceptor men's B. Columbanus in vasis aeneis Domino solet
sacrificium offerre salutis. walafrid. Strab. Vit. Gall. lib. 1. cap. 19.
My master Columbanus is accustomed to offer unto the Lord the sacrifice of
salvation in brazen vessels. Of giving the sacrifice to man: as when it is said
in one of the ancient Synods of Ireland, that Testamentu^ Episcopi sive
principis est; 10. scripuli Sacerdoti danti sibi sacrificium. Synod. Hibern. in
vet. lib. Can^num Cotte^^nious, titulorum 66.
a Bishop by his Testament may bequeath a certain proportion of his goods for
a legacy to the Priest that gives him the sacrifice. and of receiving the
sacrifice from the hands of the minister: as in that sentence of the Synod
attributed unto S. Patrick; Qui in vita sua non merebi^^ sacrificu^ accipere:
quomodo post mortem illi potest adjuvare? Synod Patric. cap. 12. MS.
He who deserves not to receive the sacrifice in his life, how can it help
him after his death? and in that gloss of Sedulius upon 1. Cor. 11. 33.
Invicem expectate, id est, usque quo sacrificium accipiatis. Sedul. in 1 Cor.
11.
Tarry one for another, that is, (says he) until you do receive the
sacrifice. and in the British antiquities: where we read of Amon a noble man
in Wales (father to Samson the Saint of Dole in little Britain) that Gravi
infirmitate depressus, a suis commonitus est vicinis, ut iuxta morem susciperet
sacrificium communienis. Ex vita S. Samsonis MS. in libro (...) Eccles^^ (...)
Tilo.
being taken with a grievous sickness, he was admonished by his neighbors,
that according to the usual manner he should receive the sacrifice of the
communion. Whereby it does appear, that the sacrifice of the elder times was
not like unto the new Mass of the Romanists, wherein the Priest alone does
all; but unto our Communion, where others also have free liberty given unto
them to Hebr. 13. 10.
eat of the Altar, as well as they that serve that Altar.

Again, they that are communicants in the Romish sacrament, receive the
Eucharist in one kind only: the Priest in offering of the sacrifice receives
the same distinctly, both by way of meat and by way of drink; which they tell
us Id fit potissimum ob^^acrificii, non ob Sacramenti integtitatem. Bellarmin.
de sacrament. Eucharist. lib. 4. cap. 22. in fine.
is chiefly done, for the integrity of the Sacrifice and not of the Sacrament.
For in the Sacrifice, they say, Rhem. annotat. in Matthew. 26. 26.
the several elements be consecrated, not into Christ's whole person as it was
borne of the Virgin or now is in heaven: but the bread into his body apart, as
betrayed, broken, and given for us; the wine into his blood apart, as shed out
of his body for remission of sins and dedication fo the new Testament, which
be conditions of his person as he was in sacrifice and oblation. But our
ancestors, in the use of their Sacrament, received the Eucharist in both
kinds: not being so acute as to discern betwixt the things that belonged unto
the integrity of the sacrifice and of the sacrament, because in very truth,
they took the one to be the other.

Thus Bid relates, that one Hildmer, an officer of Egfrid King of
Northumberland, entreated our Cuthbert Mittas presbyterum qui illam, priusquam
moriatur, visitet; eique Dominici corporis and sanguinis sacramenta ministret
Bed. de Vit. Cuthbert. pros. cap. 15.
to send a Priest that might minister the sacraments of the Lords body and
blood unto his wife that then lay a dying: and Cuthbert himself, immediately
before his own departure out of this life, received the communion of the Lords
body and blood; as Acceptis e me sacramentis salutaribus exin^^ suum, quem iam
venisse cognovit, Dominici corporis and sanguinis com^un^^^^ munivit. Ibid.
cap. 39.
Herefride Abbat of the monsterie of Lindisfarne (who was the man that at that
time ministered the sacrament unto him) made report unto the same Bid. who
elsewhere also particularly notes, that he then tasted of the cup. Bed. de
Vit. Cuthbert. corm. cap. 36.
Pocula degustat vitae, Christique supinum Sanguine munit iter. lest any man
should think, that under the forms of bread alone he might be said to have
been partaker of the body and blood of the Lord, by way of Concomitance: which
is a toy, that was not once dreamed of in those days. So that we need not to
doubt, what is meant by that which we read in the book of the life of
Furseus (which was written before the time of Bid) that Petivitque and accepit
sacri corporis and sanguinis communionem. Author antiqu. Vitae Fursaei.
he received the communion of the holy body and blood; and that he was wished
to admonish Principes and doctores Ecclesiae Christi, animas fidelium ad
poenitentiae lamentum post culpas pro^ocent; and eas spiritual pastis
doctrinae, ac sacri corporis and sanguinis participatione solidis reddant. Ibid.
the Pastors of the Church, that they should strengthen the souls of the
faithful with the spiritual food of doctrine, and the participation of the
holy body and blood, or of that which Cogitosus writes in the life of Saint
Brigid, touching the place in the Church of Kildare; Pe^ alterum ^stium
Abbati^^ cu^suis puellis and vid^is fidelibus (...) convivio corporis and
sanguinis fruantur Jesus Christi. Cogitos. vit. Brigid.
whereunto the Abbatesse with her maidens and widows used to resort, that they
might enjoy the banquet of the body and blood of Jesus Christ. which was
agreeable to the practice, not only of the Nunneries founded beyond the seas
according to the rule of Columbanus; where the Virgins Quadam ex his nomine
Domna, cum jam corpus Domini accepisset, ac sanguinem libaffet. I^n. Vit.
Burgundofor.
received the body of the Lord, and sipped his blood (as appears by that
which Jonas relates of Domnae, in the life of Burgundofora:) but also of S.
Brigid her self, who was the foundresse of the monastery of Kildare; one of
whose miracles is reported, even in the later Legends, to have happened when
she was about to drink out of the Chalice, at the time of her receiving of
the Eucharist. which they that list to look after, may find in the
collections of Capgrave, Surius, and such like.

But, you will say; these testimonies that have been alleged, make not so
much for us, in proving the use of the communion under both kinds, as they
make against us, in confirming the opinion of Transubstantiation: seeing they
all specify the receiving, not of bread and wine, but of the body and blood of
Christ. I answer, that forasmuch as Christ himself at the first institution of
his holy Supper did say expressly; This is my body, and, This is my blood: he
deserves not the name of a Christian, that will question the truth of that
saying, or refuse to speak in that language, which he has heard his Lord and
Master use before him. The question only is, in what sense, and after what
manner, these things must be conceived to be his body and blood. Of which
there needed to be little question: if men would be pleased to take into their
consideration these two things; which were never doubted of by the ancient, and
have most evident ground in the context of the Gospel. First, that the subject
of those sacramental propositions delivered by our Savior (that is to say,
the demonstrative particle THIS) can have reference to no other substance, but
that which he then held in his sacred hands, namely, bread and wines which are
of so different a nature from the body and blood of Christ, that the one cannot
possibly in proper sense be said to be the other; as the light of common reason
does force the Romanists themselves to confess. Secondly, that in the
Predicate, or latter part of the same propositions, there is not mention made
only of Christ's body and blood; but of his body broken, and his blood shed: to
show, that his body is to be considered here apart, not as it was borne of the
Virgin, or now is in heaven, but as it was broken and crucified for us; and his
blood likewise apart, not as running in his veins, but as shed out of his
body; which the Rhemists have told us to be conditions of his person, as he
was in sacrifice and oblation.

And lest we should imagine, that his body were otherwise to be considered in
the sacrament than in the sacrifice; in the one alive, as it is now in heaven,
in the other dead, as it was offered upon the Cross: the Apostle puts the
matter out of doubt, that not only the minister in offering, but also the
people in receiving, even 1 Cor. 11. 26.
as often as they eat this bread, and drink this cup, do show the Lords
death until he come. Our elders surely, that held the sacrifice to be given
and received (for so we have heard themselves speak) as well as offered; did
not consider otherwise of Christ in the sacrament, than as he was in sacrifice
and oblation. If here therefore, Christ's body be presented as broken and
livelesse, and his blood as shed forth and severed from his body; and it be
most certain, that there are no such things now really existent any where (as
is confessed on all hands:) then must it follow necessarily, that the bread and
wine are not converted into these things really. The Rhem. in Mat. 26. 26.
Rhemists indeed tell us, that when the Church does offer and sacrifice Christ
daily; he in mystery and sacrament dies. Further than this they durst not
go: for if they had said, he dyed really; they should thereby not only make
themselves daily killers of Christ, but also directly cross that principle of
the Apostle, Romans 6. 9. Christ being raised from the dead dies no more. If
then the body of Christ in the administration of the Eucharist be propounded as
dead (as has been showed) and dye it cannot really, but only in mystery and
sacrament: how can it be thought to be contained under the outward elements,
otherwise than in sacrament and mystery? and such as in times past were said
to have received the sacrifice from the hand of the Priest; what other body and
blood could they expect to receive therein, but such as was suitable to the
nature of that sacrifice, to wit, mystical and sacramental?

Coelius Sedulius (to whom Gelasius Bishop of Rome, with his Synod of LXX.
Bishops, gives the title of Venerabilis viri Sedulii Paschale opus, quod
heroicis descripsit versibus, insigni laud praeferimus. Synod. Roman. sub
Gelasi^.
venerable Sedulius; as Venantius Fortunatus of Hinc quoque conspicui radiavit
lingua Seduli. Venant. Fortunat. de vita S. Martini, lib. 1.
conspicuous Sedulius; and Hildephonsus Toletanus of the Bonus Sedulius, poeta
Evangelicus, Orator facundus, scriptor catholicus. Hildephons. Toletan. sermon.
5. de assumpt. Maria.
good Sedulius, the Evangelicall Poet, the eloquent Orator, and the Catholic
Writer) is by Trithemius and others supposed to be the same with our Sedulii
Scoti Hiberniensis, in omnes epistolas Pauli Collectan: excus. Basil. an. 1528.
Sedulius of Scotland (or Ireland) whose Collections are extant upon St. Paul's
Epistles: although I have forborne hitherto to use any of his testimonies,
because I have some reason to doubt, whether he were the same with our
Sedulius or no. But Coelius Sedulius (whatsoever countryman he was) intimates
plainly, that the things offered in the Christian sacrifice, are the fruit of
the corn and of the vine: ( Sedul. Carm. Paschal. lib. 4.
Denique Pontificum princeps summusque Sacerdos
Quis nisi Christus adest? gemini libaminis author,
Ordine Melchisedech, cui dantur munera semper
Quae sua sunt, segetis fructus, and gaudia vitis.
or, as he expresses it in his prose; Triticeae sementis cibus suavis, and
amoenae vitis potus amabilis. Id. pros. lib. 4. ca. 14.
the sweet meat of the seed of wheat, and the lovely drink of the pleasant
vine. Of Melch^sedek (according to whose order Christ, and he only, was
Priest) our own Sedulius writes thus: Melchisedech vinum and panem obtulit
Abraham, in figuram Christi, corpus and sanguinem suum Deo patri in cruce
offerentis. Secul^n Heb. 5.
Melchisedek offered wine and bread to Abraham for a figure of Christ, offering
his body and blood unto God his Father upon the Cross. Where note, that first
he says, Melch sedek offered bread and wine to Abraham, not to God: and
secondly, that he was a figure of Christ offering his body and blood upon the
cross, not in the Eucharist. But we (says Nos vero in commemorationem
Dominicae semel passionis quotidie nostraeque salutis offerimus. Id^^ Heb. 10.
he) do offer daily, for a commemoration of the Lords passion (once performed)
and our own salvation. and elsewhere, expounding those words of our Savior,
Do this in remembrance of me; he brings in this similitude, used before and
after him by others. Suam memoriam nobis reliquit: quemadmodum si quis peregre
proficiscens aliquod pignus ei quem diligit derelinquat; ut quotiescunque illud
viderit, possit ejus beneficia and amicitias recordari. Id. in 1 Cor. 11.
He left a memory of himself unto us: even as if one that were going a far
journey, should leave some token with him whom he loved; that as often as he
beheld it, he might call to remembrance his benefits and friendship.

Claudius notes, that our Saviors Voluit ante discipulis suis tradere
sacramentum corporis and sanguinis sui, quod significavit in fractione corporis
and effusione calicis, and postea ipsum corpus immolari in ara Crucis. Claud.
lib. 3. in Matthew.
pleasure was, first to deliver unto his Disciples the sacrament of his body
and blood; and afterward to offer up the body it self upon the altar of the
cross. Where at the first sight I did verily think, that in the words
fractione corporis an error had been committed in my transcript ( corporis
being miswritten for panis) but afterward comparing it with the original,
whence I took my copy, I found that the author retained the manner of
speaking used both See Chrysostom, Theodoret, and Ephraemius Antiochenus, in
the Answer to the Jesuit, page 66, 67. of the last edition.
before and Apud Rathrannum (sive Bertramum) and Aelfricum, passim.
after his time; in giving the name of the thing signified unto the sign, even
there where the direct intention of the speech was to distinguish the one from
the other. For he does expressly here distinguish the sacrament of the body,
which was delivered unto the Disciples, from the body it self, which was
afterward offered upon the Cross: and for the sacramental relation betwixt
them both, he renders this reason. Quia panis corpus confirmat, vinum vero
sanguinem operatur in carne: hic ad corpus Christi mystice, illud refertur ad
sanguinem. Id. ibid.
Because bread does confirm the body, and wine does work blood in the flesh:
therefore the one is mystically referred to the body of Christ, the other to
his blood. Which doctrine of his (that the sacrament is in it own nature bread
and wine, but the body and blood of Christ by mystical relation) was in effect
the same with that which long afterward was here in Ireland delivered by Henry
Crumpe the Monk of Baltinglas, Quod corpus Christi in altaris sacramento est
solum speculum ad corpus Christi in coelo. Ex actis ^ illelmi Andreae Midensis
episcopi contra Henr. Crumpe, anno 1384. que MS a. hab^o.
that the body of Christ in the sacrament of the altar was only a looking
glass to the body of Christ in heaven: yea and within fifty or threescore
years of the time of Claudius Scotus himself, was so fully maintained by
Johannes Scotus in a book that he purposely wrote of that argument; that when
it was alleged and extolled by Berengarius, Pope Leo (the ninth) with his
Bishops assembled in Synodo Vercellensi, an^. Domini, 1050 (which was 235.
years after the time that Claudius wrote his commentaries upon St. Matthew)
had no other means to avoid it, but by flat Iohannis Scoti liber de
Eucharistia lectus est, ac damnatus. Lanfranc. de Eucharist. contr. Berengar.
condemning of it. Of what great esteem this John was with king Alfred, may be
seen in William of Malmesbury, Roger Hoveden, Matthew of Westminster, and
other writers of the English history. The king himself, in the Preface before
his Saxon translation of St. Gregory's Pastoral, professes that he was helped
in that work by Iohanne mjnu^ (...) Alfred. praefat. in Gregor. Pastoral.
Saxonic.
John his Mass Priest. By whom if he did mean this John of ours: you may see,
how in those days a man might be held a Mass Priest, who was far enough from
thinking that he offered up the very body and blood of Christ really present
under the forms of bread and wine; which is the only Mass that our Romanists
take knowledge of.

Of which wonderful point how ignorant our elders were, even this also may be
one argument: that the author of the book of the wonderful things of the holy
Scripture (before alleged) passes this quite over, which is now esteemed to
be the wonder of all wonders. And yet does he profess, that he Praefertim cum
ex mirabilibus Scripturae Dominicae nil praeterire disposui, in quibus a
ministerio quotidian^ excellere in aliis videntur. Lib. 2. de mirabilib.
Scriptur. cap. 21.
purposed to pass over nothing of the wonders of the Scripture, wherein they
might seem notably to swerve from the ordinary administration in other things.

CHAP. V.
Of Chrisme, Sacramental Confession, Penance, Absolution, Marriage, Divorces,
and single life in the Clergy.

THat the Irish Quod infantes baptismo sine Chrismate consecrato baptizantur.
Lanfranc. epist. MS. in Bibliotheca Cottonian^: and apud Baron. an. 1089. number.
16. ubi tamen sive male habetur prosine.
did baptize their infants without any consecrated Chrisme, Lanfranc makes
complaint in his letters to Terdeluacus (or Tirlagh) the chief King of that
country. And Bernard reports, that Malachias in his time (which was after the
days of Lanfranc and Pope Hildebrand) did Vsum saluberrimum Confessionis,
sacramentum Confirmationis, contractum conjugiorum (quae omnia aut ignorabant
aut negligebant) Malachias de novo instituit. Bernard. in vita Malachiae.
of the new institute the most wholesome use of Confession, the sacrament of
Confirmation, and the contract of marriages: all which he says the Irish
before were either ignorant of, or did neglect. Which, for the matter of
Confession, may receive some further confirmation from the testimony of
Alcuinus: who writing unto the Scottish (or, as other copies read, the Gothish)
and commending the religious conversation of their laity, who Inter mundanas
occupationes castissimam vitam rationabili consideratione degere dicuntur.
Alcuin. epist. 26. edit. H. Canisti, 71. Andreae Quercetan^.
in the midst of their worldly employments were said to lead a most chaste
life; condemns notwithstanding another custom, which was said to have
continued in that country. For Dicitur vero neminem ex Laicis suam velle
Confessionem sacerdotibus dare: quos a Deo Christo cum sanctis Apostolis
ligandi solvendique potestatem accepisse credimus, Ibid.
it is said (quot he) that no man of the laity will make his confession to the
Priests; whom we believe to have received from the Lord Christ, the power of
binding and loosing, together with the holy Apostles.

They had no reason indeed to hold (as Alcuinus did) that they ought to
confess unto a Priest all the sins they could remember: but upon special
occasions, they did (no doubt) both publicly and privately make confession of
their faults, as well that they might receive counsel and direction for their
recovery, as that they might be made partakers of the benefit of the keys,
for the quieting of their troubled consciences. Whatsoever the Gothish did
herein (by whom we are to understand the inhabitants of Languedok in France,
where Alcuinus lived) sure we are, that this was the practice of the ancient
Scottish and Irish. So we read of one Fiachna or Fechnaus, that being touched
with remorse for some offense committed by him, he fell at St. Colmes feet,
lamented bitterly, and Coram omnibus qui ibidem erant peccata sua confessus
est. Adamnan. vit. Columb. lib. 1. cap. 16. ( vel 20. in MS.)
confessed his sins before all that were there present. Whereupon the holy
man, weeping together with him, is said to have returned this answer: Surge
fili, and consolare: dimi^^a sunt tua, quae commi^isti, peccamina. quia sicut
scriptum est; Cor contritum and humiliatum Deus non spernit. Ibid.
Rise up, Son, and be comforted, thy sins which thou have committed are
forgiven; because (as it is written) a contrite and an humbled heart God does
not despise. We read also of Adamanus, that being very much terrified with the
remembrance of a grievous sin committed by him in his youth; he Accedens ad
sacerdotem, a quo sibi spera^at iter salutis posse demonstrari; confessus est
reatum suum, petiique (...) consilium sibi daret, quo posset fugere a ventura
Dei ira. Bed. lib. 4. histor. cap. 25.
resorted unto a Priest, by whom he hoped the way of salvation might be
showed unto him, he confessed his guilt, and entreated that he would give him
counsel, whereby he might flee from the wrath of God that was to come.

Now the counsel commonly given unto the Penitent after Confession, was; that
he should Confessa dignis (ut imperabat) poenitentiae fructibus abstergerent.
Id. ibid. cap. 27.
wipe away his sins by meet fruits of repentance: which course Bid observes
to have been usually prescribed by our Cuthbert. For penances were then
exacted, as testimonies of the sincerity of that inward repentance which was
necessarily required for obtaining remission of the sin: and so had reference
to the taking away of the guilt, and not of the temporal punishment remaining
after the forgiveness of the guilt; which is the new found use of penances,
invented by our later Romanists. One old Penitential Canon we find laid
down in a Synod held in this country about the year our Lord CCCCL. by S.
Patrick, Auxilius, and Isserninus: which is as follows. Christianu^ qui
occiderit, aut fornicationem fecerit, aut more Gentilium ad aruspicem meaverit;
per singula crimina annum poenitentiae agar, impleto cum testibus veniat anno
Poenitentiae, and postea resolvetur a sacerdote. Synod. Patricij, Auxilij and
Issernini MS. in Bibliotheca Collegii Benedict. Cantabrig.
A Christian who has killed a man, or committed fornication, or gone unto a
Southsayer after the manner of the Gentiles, for every of those crimes shall
do a year of Penance: when his year of penance is accomplished, he shall
come with witnesses, and afterward he shall be absolved by the Priest. These
Bishops did take order (we see) according to the discipline generally used in
those times, that the penance should first be performed; and when long and good
proof had bin given by that means of the truth of the parties repentance, they
wished the Priest to impart unto him the benefit of Absolution. whereas by the
new device of sacramental penance the matter is now far more easily
transacted: by virtue of the keys the sinner is instantly of attrite made
contrite, and thereupon as soon as he has made his Confession he presently
receives his Absolution: after this, some sorry penance is imposed, which upon
better consideration may be converted into pence; and so a quick end is made
of many a foul business.

But for the right use of the keys, we fully accord with Claudius: that Necnon
etiam nunc in Episcopis ac Presbyteris omni Ecclesiae officium idem
committitur: Ut videlicet agnitis peccantium caussis, quoscunq, humiles ac vere
poe^^^entes aspexerint, hos iam a timore perpetuae mortis miserantes absolvant,
quos ver in peccatis quae egerint persistere cognove^int illos perennibus
suppliciis obli gandos ^^^sinuent. Claud in Matthew. lib. 2.
the office of remitting and retaining sins which was given unto the
Apostles, is now in the Bishops and Priests committed unto every Church.
namely, that having taken knowledge of the causes of such as have sinned, as
many as they shall behold humble and truly penitent, those they may now with
compassion absolve from the fear of everlasting death; but such as they shall
discern to persist in the sins which they have committed, those they may
declare to be bound over unto never ending punishments. And in thus absolving
such as be truly penitent, we willingly yield, that the Pastors of Gods Church
do remit sins after their manner, that is to say, ministerially and
improperly: so that the privilege of forgiving sins properly and absolutely,
be still reserved unto God alone. Which is at large set out by the same
Claudius; where he expounds the history of the man sick of the palsy,
that was cured by our Savior in the ninth of S. Matthew. For, following Bid
upon that place, he writes thus. Verum dicunt Scribae, quia nemo dim^^tere
peccata nisi sulus Deus potest; qui per eos quoque dimi^ ut, quibus dimitiendi
tribuit p^testatem. Et ideo Christus vere Deus esse probatur; quia dimittere
peccata quasi Deus potest. Verum Deo testimonium reddunt; sed personam Christi
negando falluntur. Id. in Matthew. lib. 1.
The Scribes say true, that none can forgive sins but God alone; also
forgiveth by them, to whom he has given the power of forgiving. And therefore
is Christ proved to be truly God because he forgiveth sins as God. They
render a true testimony unto God: but in denying the person of Christ, they are
deceived. and again: Si and Deus est, iuxta Psalmistam, qui quantum distat
Oriens ab occasu clongavit a nobis iniquitates nostras; and filius hominis
potestatem habet in terra dimittendi peccata: ergo idem ipse and Deus and
filius hominis est. ut and homo Christus per divinitatis suae potentiam peccata
dimittere possit; and idem Deus Christus per humanitatis suae fragilitatem pro
peccatoribus mori. Ibid.
If it be God that, according to the Psalmist, removes our sins as far from
us, as the East is distant from the West; and the Son of man has power upon
earth to forgive sins: therefore he himself is both God and the Son of
man. that both the man Christ might by the power of his divinity forgive
sins; and the same Christ being God, might by the frailty of his humanity
dye for sinners. and out of S. Hierome: Ostendit se Deum, qui potest cordis
occulta cognoscere; and quodam modo tacens loquitur. Eadem maiestate and
potentia qua cogitationes vestras intueor, possum and hominibus delicta
dimittere. Ibid.
Christ shows himself to be God, who can know the hidden things of the
heart; and after a sort holding his peace he speaks. By the same majesty and
power, whereby I behold your thoughts, I can also forgive sins unto men. In
like manner does the author of the book of the wonderful things of the
Scripture observe these In paralytico a quatuor viris portato, quatuor divina
opera cernuntur. Dum dimittuntur ei peccata, and praesentis aegritudinis plaga
verbo tunc solvitur, and cogitationibus in ore Dei omnia scrutantis
respondetur. Auth. lib. de Mirabilib. S. Scriptur. lib. 3. cap. 7.
divine works in the same history: the forgiving of sins, the present cure
of the disease, and the answering of the thoughts by the mouth of God who
searches all things. With whom, for the property of beholding the secret
thoughts, Sedulius also does concur, in those sentences. Deus solus potest
occulta hominum scire, Sedul. in Romans 2.
God alone can know the hidden things of men. Corda hominum noffe solius Dei
est, and mentis secreta agnoscere. Id. ibid.
To know the hearts of men, and to discern the secrets of their mind, is the
privilege of God alone.

That the contract of Marriages, was either unknown or neglected by the Irish,
before Malachias did institute the same anew among them (as Bernard does seem
to intimate) is a thing almost incredible. although Nondum deeimas vel
primitias solvunt: nondum matri^^nia contrahunt; non incestus vitant. Girald.
Cambr. Topograph. Hibera. distinct. 3. cap. 19. Vide etiam Lanfranci epist. ad
Gothricum and Terdeluacum reges Hibern. apud Baronium, an. 1089. number. 13. and
16.
Giraldus Cambrensis does complain, that the case was little better with them
after the time of Malachias also. The licentiousness of those ruder times, I
know, was such, as may easily induce us to believe, that a great both neglect
and abuse of Gods ordinance did get footing among this people. Which enormities
Malachias, no doubt, did labor to reform: and withal peradventure brought in
some new matters, not known here before; as he was very desirous his country
men should generally conform themselves unto the traditions and customs of
the Church of Rome. But our purpose is here only to deal with the doctrine and
practice of the elder times: in which, first, that Marriage was not held to be
a sacrament, may be collected from Videtur indicare, esse aliquid quod donum
quidem fit, non tamen spirituale: ut Nuptiae. Sedul. in Romans 1.
Sedulius, who reckons it among those things, which are gifts indeed, but not
spiritual.

Secondly, for the degrees of Consanguinitie hindering marriage, the Synod
attributed unto St. Patricke seems to refer us wholly unto the Levitical
law; prescribing therein De consanguinitate in conjugio. Intelligite quid Lex
loquitur, non minus nec plus. Quod autem observatur apud nos, ut quatuor genera
dividantur; nec vidisse di^unt nec legisse. Synod. Patric. cap. 19. MS.
neither less nor more than the Law speaks: and particularly, against
matching with the wife of the deceased brother (which was the point so much
questioned in the case of King Henry the eighth) this Audi decreta Synodi
super istis. Frater thorum defuncti fratris non ascandat: Domino dicente, Erunt
duo in carne una. Ergo uxor fratris tui soror tua est, Ibid. cap. 25. and in
Excerptis e Inre Sacerdota^i Egborti archiepisc. per Hucarium Levitam. MS.
Synodicall decree is there urged. The brother may not ascend into the bed of
his deceased brother: the Lord having said, They two shall be one flesh.
Therefore the wife of thy brother, is thy sister. Whereupon we find also, that
our Kilianus did suffer martyrdom for Vit ^ilia^^, tom. 4. antiqu. lect. Henr.
Ca^^sti, page 633. and 644.
dissolving such an incestuous marriage in Gozbertus Duke of Franconia: and
that Clemens Scotus for maintaining the contrary was both by Iudaismum
inducens, judicat justum esse Christiano, ut si voluerit, viduam fratris
defuncti accipiat uxorem. Bonifac. epist. ad Zachar. tomo 3. Council. part. 1.
page 382. edit. Colon. An. 1618.
Boniface Archbishop of Mentz, and the Inferens Christianis Iudaismum, dum
praedicat fratris defuncti accipere uxorem. Council. Roman. II. sub. Zachar.
ibid. page 383. e.
Council held at Rome by Pope Zachary in the year DCCXLV. condemned as a
bringer in of Iudaisme amongst Christians. Yet how far this condemned opinion
of his prevailed afterward in this country, and how foul a crime it was
esteemed to be by others abroad (notwithstanding the Pope does now by his Bulls
of dispensation take upon him to make a fair matter of it) may easily be
perceived by this censure of Giraldus: Quinimo (quod valde detestabile est, and
non tantum fidei, sed and cuilibet honestati valde contrarium) fratres pluribus
per Hiberniam locis fratrum defunctorum uxores, non dico ducunt, sed traducunt,
imo verius seducunt; dum trupiter eas, and tam incestuose cognoscunt: veteris
in hoc testamenti non medullae sed cortici adhaerentes, veteresque libentius in
vitiis quam virtutibus imitari volentes. Girald. Cambr. Topograph. Hibern.
distinct. 3. cap. 19.
Moreover, says he, which is very detestable, and most contrary not only to
the faith, but also unto common honesty; brethren in many places throughout
Ireland do, I say not marry, but mar rather and seduce the wives of their
deceased brothers, while in this sort they filthily and incestuously have
knowledge of them: cleaving herein not to the marrow but to the bark of the
Old Testament, and desiring to imitate the ancient in vices more willingly than
in virtues.

Thirdly, touching divorces, we read in Sedulius; that Non licet secundum
praeceptum Domini ut dimittatur conjunx, nisi caussa fornicationis. Sedul. in 1
Cor. 7.
it is not lawful, according to the precept of our Lord, that the wife should
be put away, but for the cause of fornication, and in the Synod ascribed to St.
Patrick. Non licet viro dimittere uxorem nisi ob caussam fornicationis. ac fi
dicat, ob hanc caussam. Vnde si ducat alterum, velut post mortem prioris, non
ve^ant. Synod. Patrie. cap. 36 MS.
It is not lawful for a man to put away his wife, but for the cause of
fornication. as if he should say; for this cause, he may. Whence if he marry
another, as it were after the death of the former, they forbid it not. Who they
were, that did not forbid this second marriage, is not there expressed: that
Saint Patrick himself was of another mind, would appear by this constitution
following; which in another ancient Canon-booke I found cited under his name.
Si alicujus uxor fornicata fuerit cum alio viro: non adducet aliam uxorem,
quandiu viva fuerit uxor prima. Si forte conversa fuerit, and agat
poenitentiam, suscipiet eam; and serviet ei in vicem ancillae: and anuum
integrum in pan^ and aqua per mensuram poeniteat; nec in uno lecto permaneant.
Ex libro (...) Cott^^an^, titul^^m 66.
If any man's wife have committed adultery with another man: he shall not marry
another wife, as long as the first wife shall be alive. If per adventure she be
converted, and do penance: he shall receive her; and she shall serve him in
the place of a maidservant. Let her for a whole year do penance in bread and
water, and that by measure: neither let them remain in the same bed together.
Fourthly, concerning single life, I do not find in any of our records, that
it was generally imposed upon the Clergy; but the contrary rather. For in the
Synod held by St. Patrick, Auxilius, and Isserninus; there is a special order
taken, Quicunque Clericis, ab Ostiario usque ad Sacerdotem, fine (...) visus
fuerit, etc. and uxor ejus si non velato capite ambulaverit: pariter a laicis
contemnenurtur, and ab Ecclesia separentur. Synod. Patric. Auxil Issernin.
that their wives shall not walk abroad, with their heads uncovered. And St.
Patrick himself confesses (at leastwise the Confession which goes under his
name says so; and Probus, Iocelinus, and others that write his life, agree
therewith) that he Patrem habui Calporn^^^^ Diaconum, filium quondam Potiti
presbyteri. S. Patricii Confessio. MS.
had to his father Calphurnius a Deacon, and to his grandfather Potitus a
Priest. For that was no new thing then among the Britons: whose Bishops
therefore Gildas does reprehend (as for the same cause he did the chief of the
Laity) that they were not content to be the husbands of one, but of many wives,
and that they corrupted their children by their evil example: whereas
Imperfecta est patrum castitas, si eidem non and (...) accumul^^^. Sed quid
crir, ubi nec pater, nec filius mali genitoris exemplo pravatus, conspicitu^
castus? Gildas.
the chastity of the fathers was to be esteemed imperfect, if the chastity of
their sons were not added thereunto.

Nennius, the eldest Historiographer of the Britons which we have after him
(who in many copies also bears his own name) wrote that book which we have
extant of his, to Sic inveni, ut tibi Samuel (infans magistri mei Benlani
presbyteri) in ista pagina scripsi. Nennius in MSo. Dunelmensi.
Samuel the child of Benlanus the Priest, his master: counting it a grace,
rather than any kind of disparagement unto him, to be esteemed the son of a
learned Priest. Which makes him in the Versus Nennii ad Samuelem filium
magistri sui Benlani, viri religiosi, ad quem historiam istam scripserat. Nenn.
MS. in publica Cantaebrigiensis academiae Bibliotheca
verses prefixed before the work to say: Christ, tribuisti patri Samuelem,
Hinc apud Balaeum, Centur. 1 cap. 77. Benlani presbyteri (...) Laeta est
nominata.


But about 60. or 70. years after, I find some partial eclipse here (and the
first, I think, of this kind, that can be showed among the Britons) in the
laws of Howel Dha: where it is ordered, that Si clericus haberet foeminam
datam a suo genere, and sic habee filium ex ea; and postea ille cleritus
presbyteratus ordinem accipiens, si post votum consecrationis filium haberet de
eadem foemina; prior filius non debet partiri cum filio post nato. Ex legib.
Howel Dha, MS. in (...) Cottonia^a.
if a Clerk of a lower degree should match with a woman, and have a son by
her, and that Clerk afterward having received the order of Priesthood, should
have another son by the same woman; the former son should enjoy his fathers
whole estate, without being bound to divide the same with his other brother.
Yet these marriages for all that were so held out, that the fathers not content
their sons should succeed them in their temporal estate alone, prevailed so
far that they continued them in the succession of their spiritual promotions
also. Which abuse Giraldus Cambrensis Successive and post patres filii
ecclesias obtinent, non elective sed haereditate possidentes and polluentes
Sanctuarium Dei. quia si praelatus alium eligere and instituere forte
praesumpserit; in instituentem procul dubio, vel institutum, genus injuriam
vindicabit. Girald, Cambrensis Descript. Cambri^, libro 2^. MS. Successio^is
quippe vitium non solum in sedibus cathedralibus, verum etiam adeo per totam in
clero sicut and in populo Walliam per^inaciter inyaiuit; quod and post patres
filii passim ecclesias and consequenter obtineant, tanquam haereditate
possidentes and polluentes Sanctuarium Dei, etc. Id. in Dialogo de Ecclesia
Menevensi, distinct. 1. MS.
complains to have been continuedin Wales unto his time; and out of
Hildebert. epist. 65. ad Honorium II. (tomo 12. Bibloth. Patr. part. 1. page
338. 339. edit. Colon.)
Hil^ebertus Cenomanensis shows to have prevailed in little Britain also:
whence he infers, Ex quibus constare potest, utrumque vitium toti huic genti
Britanniae tam cismarinae quam transmarinae ab antiquo commune fuisse. Girald.
Cambr. in utroque.
that this vice was of old common to the whole British nation as well on this
side as on the other side of the sea. Whereunto for Ireland also we may add
the letters written by Pope Innocent the third unto Johannes Salernitanus the
Cardinal, his legate, Alphons. Ciacon. in Vitis Pontificum and Cardinalium,
page 515.
for abolishing the custom there, whereby sons and grandchildren did use to
succeed their fathers and grandfathers in their Ecclesiastical benefices.

CHAP. VI.
Of the discipline of our ancient Monks; and abstinence from meats.

WHat has been said of the married Clergy, concerns the Seculars, and not
the Regulars, whereof there was a very great number in Ireland; because here
(...) in clerum electi (...) distinct 3. cap. 29.
almost all the Prelates were wont to be chosen into the Clergy out of
monasteries. For our monasteries in ancient time were the seminaries of the
ministry: being as it were so many Colleges of learned divines, whereunto
the people did usually resort for instruction, and from whence the Church was
wont continually to be supplied with able ministers. The benefit whereof was
not only contained within the limits of this Island, but did extend it self to
foreign countries likewise. For this was it that drew Ecgbenu^ cum C^adda
adolescente and ipse adolescens in Hibernia monasticam in orationibus and
continentia and meditatione divinaru^ scriptura^um vitam sedulus agebat. Bed.
lib. 4. hist. cap. 3.
Egbert and Ceaddae (for example) into Ireland; that they might there lead a
monastical life in prayers and continency and meditation of the holy
Scriptures: and hence were those famous monasteries planted in England by
Aidan, Finan, Colman, and others; unto which Sed and diebus Dominicis ad
ecclesiam sive ad monasteria certatim, non reficiendi eorp^ris, sed erudiendi
sermonis Dei gratia confluebant Id. lib. 3. cap. 26.
the people flockt apace on the Lords day, not for the feeding of their body,
but for the learning of the word of God, as Beda witnesses. Yea this was the
principal means, whereby the knowledge both of the Scriptures and of all
other good learning was preserved in that inundation of barbarism, wherewith
the whole West was in a manner overwhelmed. Hitherto (says Hactenus videri
poterat actum esse cum sapientiae studiis; nisi semen Deus servasset in aliquo
mundi angulo. In Scotis and Hibernis haeserat aliquid adhuc de doctrina
cognitionis Dei and honestatis civilis; quod nullus fuerit in ultimis illis
mundi finibus armorum terror, etc. Et summam possumus ibi conspicere and
adorare Dei bonitatem; quod in Scotis, and locis, ubi nemo putasset, tam
numerosi coaluerint sub strictissima disciplina coetus. Jacob. Curi^, lib. ^
rerum Chronology.
Curio) it might seem that the studies of wisdom should quite have perished;
unless God had reserved a seed in some corner of the world. Among the Scottish
and the Irish something as yet remained of the doctrine of the knowledge of God
and of civil honesty; because there was no terror of arms in those utmost
ends of the world. And we may there behold and adore the great goodness of
God; that among the Scots, and in those places where no man would have thought
it, so many great companies should be gathered together under a most strict
discipline.

How strict their discipline was, may appear partly by the Rule, and partly by
the Daily penances of Monks; which are yet extant of Columbanus his writing.
In the later of these, for the disobedience of Monks these penances are
prescribed. Si quis frater inobediens fuerit; duos dies uno paxmate and aqua.
Si quis dicit, Non faci^m; tres dies uno paxmatio and aqua. Si quis ^^murat;
duos dies uno paxmatio and aqua. Si quis veniam non petit, aut dicit
excu^^tionem; (...) dies uno paxmatio and aqua. Col^^ lib. de quatidi^^us
P^^itentus (...) ca 10. MS. in ^^asteris S. Galli.
If any brother be disobedient; he shall fast two days, with one biscuit and
water. If any say, I will not do it; three days, with one biscuit and water. If
any murmr; two days, with one biscuit and water. If any do not ask leave,
or tell an excuse; two days, with one biscuit and water* and so in other
particulars. In his Rule, these good lessons does he give unto his Monks,
among many others. That Quid prodest, si virgo corpore sit, and non sit virgo
^ente? Id. in Regula (...). cap. 8.
it profited them little, if they were virgins in body, and were not virgins in
mind. that they Quotidie proficiendum est: sicut quotidie orandum, quotidicque
est legendum. Ibid. cap. 5.
should daily profit, as they did daily pray, and daily read. that Bona vane
laudat^ Pharis^i perierunt: and peccata Publicani accusata evanuerunt. Non
exeat igitur verbum grande de ore Monachi: ne suus grandis pereat labor. Ibid.
cap. 7.
the good things of the Pharisee being vainly praised were lost, and the sins
of the Publican being accused vanished away: and therefore that a great word
should not come out of the mouth of a Monk, lest his great labor should
perish. They were not taught to vaunt of their state of perfection, and works
of supererogation: or to argue from thence (as Celestius the Pelagian Monk
sometime did) that Tantam nos habere per natural liberi arbitrii non peccandi
possibilitatem: ut plus etiam quam praeceptum est, faciamus: quoniam perpe^a
servatur a plerisque virginitas, quae praecepta non est; cum ad (...) peccandum
praecepta impl^re sufficiat. Aug. de gesti^ Synod. Palestin. contra Pelag. cap.
13.
by the nature of their free will they had such a possibility of not sinning,
that they were able also to do more than was commanded; because they did
observe perpetual virginity which is not commanded, whereas for not sinning it
is sufficient to fulfill the precepts. It was one of the points which Gallus
(the scholar of Columbanus) delivered in his sermon preached at Constance;
that our Savior Ipsis Apostolis and eorum sequacibus ita bonum virginitatis
arripiendum persuasit: ut hoc scirent non humanae industriae, sed muneris esse
divini. S. Gallus, in sermon. ^abit. Constant.
did so persuade the Apostles and their followers to lay hold upon the good of
virginity; that yet they should know, it was not of humane industry, but of
divine gift. and it is a good observation which we read in Claudius: that Non
in solo rerum corporearum nitore, sed etiam in ipsis sordibus luctuosis esse
posse jactantiam: and eo periculosiorem, quo sub nomine servitutis Dei decipit.
Claud. lib. 1. in Matthew.
not only in the splendor of bodily things, but also in mournful abasing of
ones self, there may be boasting; and that so much the more dangerous, as it
deceives under the name of the service of God.

Our Monks were religious in deed, and not in name only; far from the
hypocrisy, pride, idleness and uncleanness of those evil beasts and
slothful bellies that afterward succeeded in their room. Under color of
forsaking all, they did not hook all unto themselves; nor under semblance of
devotion did they devour widows houses: they held begging to be no point of
perfection; but Act. 20. 35.
remembered the words of our Lord Jesus, how he said, It is a more blessed thing
to give rather than to take. When king Sigebert made large offers unto
Columbanus and his companions, to keep them within his dominions in France: he
received such another answer from them, as (...); Eusebius. lib. 1. hist. cap. ult.
Thaddaeus in the Ecclesiastical history is said to have given unto Abgarus
the governor of Edessa: Qui nostra reliquimus, ut secundum Evangelicam
jussionem Dominum sequeremur, non debemus alienas amplecti divitias; ne forte
praevagicatores simus divini mandati. Walafrid. Strab. vit. Galli, lib. 1. cap.
2.
We who have forsaken our own, that according to the commandment of the
Gospel we might follow the Lord, ought not to embrace other men's riches; lest
peradventure we should prove transgressors of the divine commandment. How then
did these men live, will you say? Walafridus Strabus tells us, that Alii
hortum labor averunt, alii arbores pomiferas excoluerunt. B. vero Gallus
texebat retia, etc. and de ^odem labor afliduas populo benedictiones exhibuit.
Ibid. cap. 6.
some of them wrought in the garden, others dressed the orchard; Gallus made
nets and took fish, wherewith he not only relieved his own company, but was
helpful also unto strangers. So Bid reports of Cuthbert, that when he
retired himself unto an anchoreticall life, he Et primum quidem permodicum ab
eis panem, quo vesceretur accipi^hat, ac suo bibebat e font: postmodum vero
proprio mantum labor juxta exempla patrum vivere magis aptum ducebat. Rogavit
ergo afferri sibi instrumenta quibus terram exerceret, and triticum quod
fereret. Bed. vit. Cuthbert. pros. cap. 19. Vid. li. 4. hist, eccles. cap. 28.
first indeed received a little bread from his brethren to feed upon, and
drank out of his own well; but afterward he thought it more fit to live by
the work of his own hands, after the example of the Fathers: and therefore
entreated, that instruments might be brought him wherewith he might till the
earth, and corn that he might sow. Id. in Carm. de vit. Cuthbert. cap. 17.
Quique suis cupiens victum conquirere palmis;
Incultam pertentat humum proscindere ferro,
Et sator edomitis anni spem credere glebis.
The like does he relate of Id. lib. 3. hist. eccles. cap. 19.
Furseus; and Bonifacius of Bonifac. in vita Livini, page 240.
Livinus; and Theodorus Campidonensis (or whosoever else wrote that book) of
Theod. Ca^did. vit. Magni, lib. 1. cap. 5. edit. Goldasti, 6. Ca^issi.
Gallus, Magnoaldus, and the rest of the followers of Columbanus; that they got
their living by the labor of their own hands. And the 2 These. 3. 12.
Apostles rule is generally laid down for all Monks, in the life of Furseus:
Qui in monasteriis degun^, cum silentio operante^, suum panem manducent. Vit.
Fursei.
They which live in Monasteries should work with silence, and eat their own
bread.

But now there is start up a new generation of men, that refuse to eat their
own bread, and count it a high point of sanctity to live by begging of other
men's bread; if yet the course they take may rightly be termed begging. For as
Richard Fitz-Ralphe, that famous Archbishop of Armagh, objected to their faces,
before the Pope himself and his Cardinals in ^am enim istis in temporibus non
poterit magnus aut mediocris in clero and populo aut vix cibum sumere, ubi
tales non affuerint mendicantes: non more pauperum petentes ad portas vel ostia
humiliter eleemosynam (ut Franciscus in Testamento praecepit and docuit)
mendicando; sed curias, sive domos, sine verecundia penetrantes, and inibi
hospitantes, nullatenus invitati, edunt and bibunt quae apud eos reperiunt.
secum nihilominus aut grana, aut similam, aut panes, aut carnes, seu caseos
(et^amsi in domo non fuerint nisiduo) secum extorquendo reportant: nec eis
quisquam poterit denegare, nisi verecundiam naturalem abjiciat. Rich.
Armachanus, in Defensorio Curaterum, page 56. 57. edit. Paris. an. 1625. (
collat. cum vetere editione Ascensiana.)
his time (and the matter is little amended, I wisse, in ours) scarce could any
great or mean man of the Clergy or the Laity eat his meat, but such kind
of beggars would be at his elbowe: not like other poor folks humbly craving
alms at the gate or the door (as Francis did cammand and teach them in his
Testament) by begging; but without shame intruding themselves into courts or
houses, and lodging there. where, without any inviting at all, they eat and
drink what they do find among them: and not with that content, carry away
with them either wheat, or meal, or bread, or flesh, or cheeses (although
there were but two in an house) in a kind of an extorting manner; there being
none that can deny them, unless he would cast away natural shame.

This did that renowned Primate (whose anniversary memory is still celebrated
in Dundalke, where he was borne and buried, by the name of Saint Richard)
publicly deliver in the year 1357. at the Consistory of Avinion: where he
stoutly maintained against the whole rabble of the Friars, what he had
preached the year before at Paul's Cross unto the people. namely, Prima
conclusio erat, quod Dominus Jesus Christus in conversatione sua humana semper
pauper erat, non quia propter se paupertatem dilexit aut voluit. Ibid. page
104, 105.
that our Lord Jesus Christ, although in his humane conversation he was
always poor, Secunda conclusio erat, quod Dominus noster Jesus Christus
nunquam spontanee mendicavit. Ib. page 107.
yet did he never voluntarily beg himself, Tertia conclusio fuit; quod
Christus nunquam docuit spontanee mendicare. Ib. page 121.
nor taught others so to do, Quarta conclusio fuit; quod Dominus noster Jesus
Christus docuit non debere homines spontanee mendicare. Ibid. page 123.
but taught the plain contrary: and Quinta conclusio erat; quod nullis potest
prudenter and sancte spontaneam mendicitatem super se assumere perpetuo
asservandam. quoniam ex quo talis mendicitas vel mendicatio est dissuasa a
Christo, a suis Ap^sto^^ and Discipulis, and ab Ecclesia ac sacris Scripturis,
ac etiam reprobata: consequitur quod non potest prudenter and sancte assumi hoc
modo. Ibid. page 131. Vid. ejusd. Richardi sermonem 3 apud Crucem Londi^. edit.
Paris an. 1512.
that no man could prudently and holily take upon himself the perpetual
observation of voluntary beggary; forasmuch as such kind of begging, as well
by Christ, as by his Apostles and Disciples, by the Church and by the holy
Scriptures, was both dissuaded and also reproved.

His Countryman Henry Crumpe (a Monk of the Cistercian order in Baltinglas)
not long after, treading in his steps, was accused for delivering in his
Determinations at Oxford: that Quod fratres de quatuor ordinibus Mendican^^^
non sunt nec fuer^at Domino inspirante instituti; sed contra Concilium generale
(...) sub Innocentio tertio celebratum, ac per ficta and falsa and falsa
somnia, Papa Honorius suasus a fratr^^bus eos confirmavit. Act. contra Henr.
Crumpe, in Thomae Waldensis Fasciculo (...), quem MSum ^abeo.
the Friars of the four Mendicant orders are not, nor ever were instituted by
Gods inspiration, but that contrary to the general Council of Lateran, held
under Innocent the third (which prohibited the bringing in of any more new
religious orders into the Church) and by feigned and false dreams, Pope
Honorius being persuaded by the Friars, did confirm them. and Quod omnes
Doctores determinantes pro part fratrum (...) Dudum, vel timuerunt veritatem
dicere, ne eorum libri per fratres Inquisitores haer^^^ pravitatis damnarentur;
vel dixerunt, ut videtur, vel solum disputative and non deter^^tive
processerunt: quia si plane veritatem pro Ecclesia dixissent, persecuti eos
fuisse^^ Fratres, sicut persequebantur sanctum Doctorem Armachanum. Ibid.
that all the Doctors which did determine for the Friars side, were either
afraid to speak the truth, lest their books should be condemned by the Friars
that had gotten to be Inquisitors; or said, As it seems, or proceeded only
by way of d^sputation and not of determination: because if they had spoken the
truth plainly in the behalf of the Church, the Friars would have persecuted
them, as they d^d persecute the holy Doctor Armachanus. Which Crumpe himself
found afterward to be too true by his own experience. for he was forced to
deny and abjure these assertions in the house of the Carmelite Friars at
Stanford, before William Courtney Archbishop of Canterbury: and then silenced,
that he should not exercise publicly any act in the Schools, either by
reading, preaching, disputing, or determining; until he should have a
special license from the said Archbishop so to do.

But to leave the begging Friars (being a kind of creatures unknown to the
Church for twelve hundred years after Christ) and to return to the laboring
Monks: we find it related of our Brendan: that he Tribus monachorum (qui
suis, sibi ipsi laboribus victum, manibus operando suppeditabant) millibus
praefuisse creditur. Nicol. Horpsfield. hist. Eccles. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 25.
governed three thousand such Monks, who by their own labors and handy-worke
did earne their living. which agrees well with that saying ascribed to him by
the writer of his life: Monachum oportet labor manuum suarum vesci and
vestiri. Vit. S. Brendani.
A Monk ought to be fed and clothed by the labor of his own hands. Neither
was there any other order observed in that famous Monastery of Bangor among
the Britons, In quo tantus fertur fuisse numerus monachorum; ut cum in septem
portiones esset cum praepositis sibi rectoribus monasterium divisum, nulla
harum portio minus quam trecentos homines haberet: qui omnes de labor manuum
suarum vivere solebant. Bed. lib. 2. histor. Ecclesiast. cap. 2.
wherein there is said to have been so great a number of Monks, that the
Monastery being divided into seven portions (together with the Rectors
appointed over them) none of all those portions had less than three hundred
persons in them: all which (says Bid) were w^nt to live by the labor of
their own hands. From the destruction of which Monastery, unto the erection of
Tuy Gwyn, or White-house (which is said to have been about the year 1146.)
the setter forth of the Chronicle of Wales, page 253, 254.
Welsh Chronicle observes, that there were no Abbeyes among the Britons.

Here in Ireland Bishop Colman founded the Monastery of Magio (in the Vid.
Arnal. Hibern. a Camdeno edit. ad an. 1370.
county of Limrick) for the entertainment of the English: where they Ad
exemplum venerabilium patrum, sub regula and Abbate canonico, in magna
continentia and finceritate proprio labor manuum vivunt. Bed. lib. 4. bist.
eccles. cap. 4.
did live according to the example of the reverend Fathers (as Bede writes)
under a rule and a canonical Abbot, in great continency and sincerity, with
the labor of their own hands. Like whereunto was the monastery of Mailros
also, planted by Bishop Aidan and his followers in Northumberland; where St.
Cuthbert had his education: who affirmed, that Iure, inquit, est coenobitaru^
vita miranda, qui Abbatis per emnia subjiciuntur imperiis; ad ejus arbitrium
cuncta vigilandi, orandi, jejunandi, atque operandi tempora moderantur. Bed.
vit. Cuthbert. pros. cap. 22.
the life of such Monks was justly to be admired, which were in all things
subject to the commands of their Abbot; and ordered all the times of their
watching, praying, fasting, and working, according to his direction. id. Carm.
cap. 20.
Excubiasque, famemque, preces, manuumque laborem
Ad votum gaudent proni fraenare regentis.


As for their fasting (for of their watching and praying there is no question
made; and of their working we have already spoken sufficiently) by the rule of
Columbanus, they were Quotidie jejunandum est, sicut quotidie reficiendum est.
Columb. Regul. c. 5.
every day to fast, and every day to eat: that by this means, Quia haec est
vera discretio, ut possibilitas spiritalis profectus cum abstinentia carnem
macetante retentetur. Ibid.
the enabling of them for their spiritual proficiency might be retained,
together with the abstinence that did macerate the flesh. He would therefore
have them Ideo quotidie edendum est, quia quotidie proficiendum est. Ibid.
every day to eat, because they were every day to profit; and because Si enim
modum abstinentia excesserit, vitium non virtus erit. Ibid.
abstinence, if it did exceed measure, would prove a vice and not a virtue. and
he would have them to fast every day too, that is, not to eat any meat at
all (for other fasts were not known in those days) until evening. Cibus sit
vilis and vespertinus Monachorum, satietatem fugiens and potus ebrietatem; ut
and sustineat, and non noccat. Ibid.
Let the food of Monks (says he) be mean, and taken at evening; flying
satiety and excess of drink: that it may both sustain them and not hurt them.
This was the daily fasting and feeding of them that lived according to
Columbanus his rule. although the strictness of the fast seems to have been
kept on Wednesdayes and Fridayes only: which were the days of the week,
wherein the ancient Irish (agreeable to the custom of the Grecian rather than
the Roman Church) were wont to observe abstinence both from meat and from the
Synodus Hiberniensium dicit. In tribus quadragesimis anni, in die Dominico and
in quarta feria and sexta, conjugaies continere se debent. Canonum Collectio,
cujus initium; Sancta Synodus bis in anno decrevit habere Concilia. MS. in
Bibliotheca Cotton.
marriage bed. Whence in the book before alleged, of the Daily Penances of
Monks, we find this order set down by the same Columbanus: that Si quis ante
horam nonam quarta sextaque feria manducat, nisi infirmus; duos dies in pane
and aqua. Columban. lib. de quotidianis Poenitent. monachor. cap. 13.
if any one, unless he were weak, did upon the Wednesday or Friday eat
before the ninth hour (that is to say, before three of the clock in the
afternoon, according unto our account) he should be punished with fasting two
days in bread and water* and in Bedes Ecclesiastical History; that Cujus
exemplis informati, tempore illo, religiosi quique viri ac foeminae,
consuetudinem fecerunt per totum annum, (excepta remissione quinquagesimae
Paschalis) quarta and sexta sabbati ieiunium ad nonam usque horam protelare.
Bed. lib. 3. hist. eccles. cap. 5.
such as followed the information of Aidan, did upon the same days observe
their fast, until the same hour. in which history we also read of Bishop
Cedd (who was brought up at Lindisfarne with our Aidan and Finan) that keeping
a strict fast, upon a special occasion, in the time of Lent, he did Quibus
diebus cunctis, excepta Dominica, iciunium ad vesperam iuxta morem protelans;
nec tunc nisi panis permodicum, and unum ovum gallinaceum, cum parvo lacte aqua
mixto percipiebat. Ibid. cap. 23.
every day, except the Lords day, continue his fast, (as the manner was) until
the evening; and then also did eat nothing but a small pittance of bread, and
one egg, with a little milk mingled with water. Where by the way you may
note, that in those days eggs were eaten in Lent, and the Sundays excepted
from fasting, even then when the abstinence was precisely and in more than an
ordinary manner observed.

But generally for this point of the difference of meats, it is well noted by
Claudius out of S. Augustine, that Ostendens evidenter, filios sapientiae
intelligere, nec in abstinendo nec in manducando esse iustitiam; sed in
aequanimitate tolerandi inopiam, and temperanti^ per abundantiam non se
co^rumpendi, atque opportune sumendi vel non sumendi ea, quorum non usus sed
concupiscentia reprehendenda est. Claud. lib. 2. in Matthew.
the children of wisdom do understand, that neither in abstaining nor in
eating is there any virtue; but in contentedness of bearing the want, and
temperance of not corrupting a man's self by abundance, and of opportunely
taking or not taking those things, of which not the use but the concupiscence
is to be blamed. and in the life of Furseus, the hypocrisy of them is justly
taxed, that being Sunt nonnulli, qui spiritualibus vitiis impugnantur; sed his
omissis, corpus in abstinentia affigunt. Vit. S. Fursei.
assaulted with spiritual vices, do yet omit the care of them, and afflict
their body with abstinence: who Multi enim cibis, quos Deus ad percipiendum cum
gratiarum action creavit, abstinentes, haec nefanda quasi licita sumunt; hoc
est, superbiam, avaritiam, invidiam, falsum testimonium, blasphemiam. Ibid.
abstaining from meats, which God has created to be received with
thankesgiving, fall to wicked things, as if they were lawful; namely to pride,
covetousness, envy, false witnessing, backbiting. Of whom Gildas gives this
good censure, in one of his Epistles which now are lost. Gildas in epistolis
su^^. Hi dum pane ad mensuram vescuntur, pro hoc ipso fine mensura gloriantur,
dum aqua utuntur, simul odii poculo potantur; dum siccis ferculis vescuntur,
detractionibus utuutur; dum vigiliis expendunt, alios somno pressos vituperant:
ieiunium caritati, vigilias iustitiae, propriam adinventionem concordiae,
clausulam Ecclesiae (al. Cellae,) severitatem humilitati, postremo hominem Deo
anteponunt. Horum ieiunium, nisi per aliquas virtutes adfectatur, nihil
prodest. qui vero caritatem perficiunt, cum cithara Spiritus sancti dicunt:
Quasi pannus menstruatae, omnes iustitiae nostrae sunt. Ex libro Canonum
Cottoniano, titulorum 66.
These men, while they do feed on bread by measure, for this same very thing
do glory without measure; while they use water, they are withal drenched with
the cup of hatred; while they feed on dry meats, they use detractions; while
they spend themselves in watchings, they disprayse others that are oppressed
with sleep; preferring fasting before charity, watching before justice, their
own invention before concord, severitie before humility, and lastly, man
before God. Such men's fasting, unless it be proceeded unto by some virtues,
profits nothing at all: but such as accomplish charity, do say with the
harp of the holy Ghost; All our righteousnesses are as the cloth of a
menstruous woman. Thus Gildas: who upon this ground lays down this sound
conclusion; wherewith we will shut up this whole matter. Abstinentia
corporalium ciborum sine charitate inutilis est. Meliores ergo sunt, qui non
magnopere ieiunant, nec supra modum a creatura Dei abstinent, cor intrinsccus
nitidum coram Domino solicit servantes, a quo sciunt exitum vitae: quam illi
qui carnem non edunt, nec prandiis secularibus delectantur, neque vehiculis and
equis vehuntur, pro his quasi superiores caeteris se putantes; quibus mors
intravit per fenestras clationis. Gildas, ibid.
Abstinence from corporal meats is unprofitable without charity. They are
therefore the better men, who do not fast much, nor abstain from the creature
of God beyond measure, but carefully keep their heart within pure before God,
from whence they know comes the issue of life: than they who eat no flesh,
nor take delight in secular dinners, nor ride with coaches or horses, thinking
themselves hereby to be as it were superior to others* upon whom death has
entered through the windows of haughtiness.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Church, and various state thereof, especially in the days of
Antichrist: of Miracles also, and of the Head of the Church.

COncerning the Catholic Church, our Doctors taught with S. Gregory; that God
Haber vineam, universam scilicet Eccl^siam; quae ab Abel iusto usque adul^mum
e^ectum qui in ^^ne mundi na^^riturus est, quot sanctos prouilit, quasi tot
palmites mis^t. Claud. lib. ^ in Matthew.
has a vineyard, to wit, the universal Church, which from just Abel until
the last of the elect that shall be borne in the end of the world, as many
Saints as it has brought forth, so many branches (as it were) has it budded.
that Congregatio quippe iustorum, regum ^^lorum dicitur; quod est Ecclesia
in^^^rum Id. lib. 3. in Matthew.
the congregation of the just is called the kingdom of heaven; which is the
Church of the just. that Ecclesiae filii sunt omnes ab institutione generis
humani usque nu^c, quotquet iusti and sancti esse pomerunt. Id. lib. 2. in
Matthew.
the sons of the Church be all such as from the beginning of mankind until
now, have attained to be just and holy. that His and caeteris instruimur, tam
Apostol^s omnesque credentes, quam ipsam quoque Ecclesiam, coluamnam in
Scripturis appellari; and nihil interesse de corpore quid dicatur in membris,
cum and corpu^ dividatur in membra, and membra fint corpori^. Id. in Gal. 2. ^^
Hitro^ymo.
what is said of the body, may be said also of the members; and that in this
respect, as well the Apostles and all believers, as the Church it self, have
the title of a pillar given them in the Scriptures. that Ecclesias vocat, quas
post^a errore arguit depravatas. Ex quo noscendum, dupliciter Ecclesiam posse
dici: and came, quae non habeat maculam aut rugam, and vere corpus Christi sit;
and eam quae in Christi nomine absque plenis perfectisque virtutibus
congregetur. Id. in Galat. 1. ex eodem.
the Church may be considered two manner of ways: both that which neither has
spot nor wrinkle and is truly the body of Christ, and that which is gathered
in the name of Christ without full and perfect virtues; which notwithstanding
by the warrant of the Apostle, may have the name of the Church given unto it,
although it be depraved with error. that Ecclesiam non habituram maculam neque
rugam dicitur, respectu futurae vitae. Sc^ul in Ephesians. 1.
the Church is said not to have spot or wrinkle, in respect of the life to
come. that when the Apostle says; In a great house there are not only vessels
of gold, etc. but some to honor and some to dishonor: (2 Timothy 2. 20.) by this
Magnam domum non Ecclesiam dicit (ut quidam putant) quae non habet maculam
neque rugam: sed mundum, in quo z^zauia sunt mixta tritico. Id. in. 2. Tim. 2.
great house he does not understand the Church (as some have thought) which
has not spot nor wrinkle: but the world, in which the tares are mingled with
the wheat. that yet in Sancta Ecclesia december Virginibus similis denuntiatur:
in qua quia mali cum bonis and reprobi cum electis admixtisunt, recte similis
virginibus prudentibus and fatuis esse perhibetur. Claud. lib. 3* in Matthew.
the holy Church also, the evil are mingled with the good, and the reprobate
with the elect: and that in this respect it is resembled unto the wise and
foolish virgins; as also to Perhas regis nuptias praesens Ecclesia designatur;
in qua cum bonis and mali convenient. Id. lib. eod.
the Kings marriage, by which this present Church is designed, wherein the good
and the bad do meet together. So that In h^c ergo Ecclesia, nec mali esse sine
bo^is, nec boni esse sine malis possunt: quos tamen sancta Ecclesia and nunc
indiscrete suscipit, and postmodum in egressione discernit. Id. ibid.
in this Church, neither the bad can be without the good, nor the good without
the bad: whom the holy Church notwithstanding does both now receive
indifferently, and separate afterward at their going from hence.

The number of the good, Gildas complains to have been Exceptis paucia, and
valde, paucis, qui (ob amissione. tan^ae multitudinis, quae quotidie p^ona ruit
ad tartara) tam brevis numeri habentur; ut ^os quodammodo venerabilis matter
Ecclesia in suo sinu recumber^es non videat, quos solos veros filios habet.
Gild. epist.
so exceeding short in his time among the Britons, in comparison of the other;
that their mother the Church in a manner did not see them lying in her own lap,
albeit they were the only true sons which she had. And for external
pressures, our Doctors have delivered, that Nonnunquam Ecclesia ^ntis gentilium
pressuris, non solum aftlicta, sed and faedata est; ut, si fieri possit,
redemptor ipsius came prorsus de^eruisse ad tempus videretur. Claud. lib. 2. in
Matthew.
the Church sometimes is not only afflicted, but also defiled with such
oppressions of the Gentiles; that if it were possible, her redeemer might seem
for a time utterly to have forsaken her: and that, in the raging times of
Antichrist, Ecclesia non apparebit, impiis tunc persecutoribus ultra modum
saevientibus. Id. lib. 3. in Matthew.
the Church shall not appear; by reason that the wicked persecutors shall then
exercise their cruelty beyond all measure. that in those Temporibus Antichristi
non solum tormenta crebtiora and acerbiora, quam prius consueverant, ingerenda
sunt fidelibus; sed (quod gravius est) signorum quoque operatio eos qui
tormenta ingerunt, comitabitur: tests Apostolo, qui ait; Cujus est adventus
secundum operationem Satanae, in omni seductiorie, signis, and prodiglis
mendacii. Id. lib. c^d.
times of Antichrist, not only more often and more bitter torments shall be
put upon the faithful, than before were wont to be; but (which is more
grievous) the working of miracles also shall accompany those that inflict the
torments: as the Apostle witnesses, saying; Whose coming is after the working
of Satan, with all seduction, signs, and lying wonders. namely, Praestiglosis:
sicut ante praedictum est; Dabunt signa, ita ut seducantur, si fieri potest,
etiam electi. per phantasticam virtutem: ficut Iamnes and Mambres coram
Pharaone ^ecerunt. Sedul. in ^ These. 2.
juggling ones: as it was foretold before; They shall show such signs that, if
it were possible, the very elect should be deceived, by such a fantastical
power, as Iamnes and Mambres wrought withal before Pharao. Quis ergo ad fidem
convertitur incredulus? cujus jam credentis non pavet and concutitur fides?
quando persecut^r pietatis fit etiam operator virtutis: idemque ipse qui
tormentis (...) ut Christus negetur, provocat miraculis ut Antichristo (...).
Claud. lib. 3. in Matthew.
What unbeleever therefore ( say they) will then be converted unto the faith?
and who is he that already believes, whose faith trembles not and is not
shaken? when the persecuter of piety is the worker of wonders: and the same man
that exercises cruelty with torments, that Christ may be denied; provokes by
miracles, that Antichrist may be believed? And Quam ergo mundo and simplici
oculo opus est, ut inveniatur via sapientiae, cui tantae malorum and
perversorum hominum deceptiones erroresque obstrepunt? quas omnes necesse est
evadere, hoc est, venire ad certissimam pacem, and immobilem stabilitatem
sapientiae. Id. lib. 1. in Matthew.
what a pure and a single eye is there need of, that the way of wisdom may be
found; against which so great deceivings and errors of evil and perverse men,
do make such a noise? all which notwithstanding men must pass through; and so
come to most certain peace, and the unmovable stabilitie of wisdom.

Hence concerning Miracles, they give us these instructions. First, that Nec si
se Angelus nobis ostendat, ad seducendos nos subornatus fallaciis patris sui
Diaboli, praevalere debebit adversum nos: neque si virtus ab aliquo facta siet,
sicut dicitur a Simone Mago in aare volasse. Sedul. in Romans 8.
neither if an Angel should show himself unto us to seduce us, being suborned
with the deceits of his father the devil, ought he to prevail against us;
neither if a miracle should be done by any one, as it is said of Simon Magus
that he did fly in the air: Neque signa vos terreant, tanquam per Spiritum
facta: quia hoc and Salvator praemonuit. Id. in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
neither that signs should terrify us, as done by the Spirit; because that
our Savior also has given us warning of this beforehand. ( Matthew. 24. 24,
25.) Secondly, that Hic ostenditur, crescente fide signa cessare: quando
fidelium causa danda esse praedicantur. Id. in 1 Corinthians. 14.
the faith having increased, miracles were to cease; forasmuch as they are
declared to have been given for their sakes that believe not. and therefore
that Vnde nunc cum fidelium numerositas excrevit, intra sanctam Ecclesiam multi
sunt qui vitam virtutum tenent, and signa virtutum non habent: quia frustra
miraculum foris ostenditur, si deest quod intus operetur. Nam iuxta Magistri
Gentium vocem: Linguae in signum sunt, non fidelibus sed in fidelibus. Claud.
lib. 1 in Matthew.
now when the number of the faithful is grown, there be many within the holy
Church that retain the life of virtues, and yet have not those signs of
virtues: because a miracle is to no purpose showed outwardly, if that be
wanting which it should work inwardly. For according to the saying of the
Master of the Gentiles; Languages are for a sign, not to the faithful but to
infidels. (1 Cor. 14. 22.) Thirdly, that the working of miracles is no good
argument to prove the holiness of them that be the instruments thereof: and
therefore Qualia propter infideles cum fecerit Dominus, monuit tamen ne talibus
decipiamur, arbitran^es ibi esse invisibilem sapientiam, ubi miraculum visibile
viderimus. Adiungit ergo and dicit, Multi dicent mihi in illa die, Domine,
Domine: (...) in nomine tuo prophetavimus, and in tuo nomine daemonia eiecimus,
and in tuo nomine virtutes multas fecimus? Id. lib. eod.
when the Lord does such things for the convincing of infidels, he yet gives
us warning that we should not be deceived thereby, supposing invisible
wisdom to be there, where we shall behold a visible miracle. For he says:
Many shall say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord; have we not prophesied in thy
name, and in thy name cast out Devils, and in thy name done many miracles? (
Matthew. 7. 22) Fourthly, that Ille Deum tentat, qui iactantiae suae vitio,
superfluam and inutilem vult ostentare virtutem. Quid e^im utilitatis habet,
quid commodi confert, si praeceps hin^ in plana descendero? etc. Id. lib. eod.
he tempts God, who for his own vain glory will make show of a superfluous
and unprofitable miracle. such as that (for example) was, whereunto the Devil
tempted our Savior, Matthew. 4. 6. to come down headlong from the pinnacle of
the Temple unto the plain, Inane est enim omne miraculum, quod utilitatem
saluti non operatur humanae. Ibid.
every miracle being vain, which works not some profit unto man's salvation.
Whereby we may easily discern, what to judge of that infinite number of idle
miracles, wherewith the lives of our Saints are every where stuffed: many
whereof we may justly censure (as Amphiloch* in l ^ ambis ad Sel^^^^um.
Amphilochius does the tales that the Poets tell of their Gods) for (...),
Fables, of laughter worthy, and of tears;
Yea some of them also we may rightly brand, as (...)
Unseemly fables, and Devils documents.
For what (for example) can be more unseemely, and tend further to the
advancement of the doctrine of devils, than that which Cogitosus relates in
the life of S. Brigid? that she, for saving the credit of a Nun that had
been gotten with child, Cogitos. Vit. Brigid. in exemplaribus MSo. antiquiss.
Bibliothec Cottonianae, and Ecclesiae Sarisburiensis.
blessed her faithfully forsooth (for so the author speaks) and so caused her
conception to vanish away, without any delivery and without any pain. which
for the saving of St. Brigids own credit, either Tom. 5. Antiqu. lection. in
lacuna, sub ^^nem, page 629.
Hen. Canisius or the friars of Aichstad ( from whom he had his copy of
Cogitosus) thought fit to scrape out, and rather to leave a blanke in the
book, than to suffer so lewd a tale to stand in it. But I will not stir this
puddle any further: but proceed on, unto some better matter.

And now are we come at last to the great Point, that touches the Head and
the foundation of the Church. Concerning which Sedulius observes, that the
title of Fundamenta.] Christum, and Apostolos, and Prophetas. Sedul. in Hebr.
11.
foundation is attributed both to Christ, and to the Apostles and Prophets.
that where it is said, Esaias 28. 16. Behold, I lay in Sion a stone, etc.
Compertum est in petra vel lapide Christum esse significatum. Id. in Romans 9.
it is certain, that by the rock or stone Christ is signified. that, in
Ephesians. 2. 20. Apostoli fundamentum sunt, vel Christus fundamentum est
Apostolorum. Christus est fundamentum, qui etiam lapis dicitur angularis, duos
conjungens and continens parietes. Ideo hic fundamentum and summus est lapis;
quia in ipso and fundatur, and consummatur Ecclesia. Id. in Ephesians. 2.
the Apostles are the foundation, or Christ rather the foundation of the
Apostles. For Christ ( says he) is the foundation, who is also called the
corner stone, joining and holding together the two walls. Therefore is he the
foundation and chief stone; because in him the Church is both founded and
finished. and we are to account the Apostles Vt ministros Christi: non ut
fundamentum. Id. in 1 Cor. 4.
as Ministers of Christ, and not as the foundation. The famous place, Matthew
16. 18. ( whereupon our Romanists lay the maine foundation of the Papacy)
Claudius expounds in this sort. Super hanc petram aedificabo ecclesiam meam,
id est, super Dominu^ salvatorem, qui fideli suo cognitori, amatori,
confessori, participium sui nominis donavit, ut scilicet a petra Petrus
vocaretur. Aedificatur Ecclesia: quia non nisi per fidem and dilectionem
Christi, per susceptionem sacramentorum Christi, per observantiam mandatorum
Christi, ad sortem. electorum and aeternam pertingitur vitam, Apostolo
attestante qui ai^; Fundamentum enim aliud nemo potest ponere praeter id quod
positum est, qui est Christus Jesus. Claud. lib. 2. in Matthew.
Upon this rock will I build my Church, that is to say, upon the Lord and
Savior, who granted unto his faithful knower, lover, and confessor the
participation of his own name; that from petra (the rock) he should be
called Peter. The Church is builded upon him: because only by the faith and
love of Christ, by the receiving of the Sacraments of Christ, by the
observation of the commandments of Christ, we come to the inheritance of the
elect and eternal life, as witnesses the Apostle, who says, Other foundation
can no man lay beside that which is laid, which is Christ Jesus.

Yet does the same Claudius acknowledge, that Pettum solum nominat, and sibi
comparat: quia primatum ipse accepit ad fundandam Ecclesiam: se quoque pari
modo electum, ut primatum habeat in fundandis Gentium Ecclesiis. Id. in Galat.
2.
St. Peter received a kind of primacy for the founding of the Church ( in
respect whereof he terms him Id. in Galat. 5.
Ecclesiae principem, and Id. in Galat. 2.
Apostolorum principem, the prince of the Church, and the prince or chief of
the Apostles) but he adds with all, that Saint Paul also was chosen in the
same manner, to have the primacy in founding the Churches of the Gentiles. and
that he Ab his itaque probatum dicit donum quod accepit a Deo, ut dignus
essect habere primatum in praedicatione Gentium, sicut and habebat Petrus in
praedicatione Circumcisionis. Id. in Gal. 2.
received this gift from God, that he should be worthy to have the primacie
in preaching to the Gentiles, as Peter had it in the preaching of the
Circumcision. and therefore that Gratiam sibi soli primus vendicat concessam a
Deo, sicut and soli Petro concessa est inter Apostolos. Id. ibid.
St. Paul challenges this grace as granted by God to him alone, as it was
granted to Peter alone among the Apostles. and that he esteemed himself Non
illi sum inferior; quia ab uno sumus ambo in unum ministerium ordinati. Id.
ibid.
not to be inferior unto St. Peter, because both of them were by one ordained
unto one and the same ministry. and that writing to the Galatians, Apostolum
se Christi titulo praenotavit, ut ex ipsa lecturos nominis auctoritate
terreret; judicans omnes, qui in Christo crederent, debere sibi esse subjectos.
Id. in Gal. 1.
he did in the title name himself an Apostle of Christ, to the end that by the
very authority of that name he might terrify his readers; judging, that all
such as did believe in Christ, ought to be subject unto him.

It is furthermore also observed by Claudius, that Nam sicut interrogatis
generaliter omnibus, Petrus respondit unus pro omnibus: ita quod Petro Dominus
respondit, in Petro omnibus respondit. Id. lib. 2. in Matthew.
as when our Savior propounded the question generally unto all the Apostles,
Peter did answer as one for all; so what our Lord answered unto Peter, in Peter
he did answer unto all. and therefore Quae solvendi ac ligandi potestas,
quamvis soli Petro data videatur a Domino; absque ulla tamen dubietate
noscendum est, quia and caeteris Apostolis datur: ipso test, qui post
passionis resurrectionisque suae triumphum apparens eis insufflavit, and dixit
omnibus: Accipite Spiritum sanctum, quorum remiscritis peccata, remittuntur
eis, and quorum retinueritis, rerenta sunt. Id. lib. eod.
howsoever the power of loosing and binding might seem to be given by the Lord
unto Peter alone, yet without all manner of doubt it is to be known, that it
was given unto the rest of the Apostles also: as himself does witness, who
appearing unto them after the triumph of his passion and resurrection, breathed
on them, and said unto them all; Receive the holy Ghost, whose sins ye remit,
they are remitted unto them, and whose sins ye retain they are retained.
Gildas the Briton goes further, affirming that Vero sacerdoti dicitur: Tu es
Petrus, and super hanc petram aedificabo ecclesiam meam. Gild. epist.
to the true Priest it is said; Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will
build my Church. that Petro ejusque successoribus dicit Dominus: Et tibi dabo
claves regni coelorum. Ibid.
to Peter and his successors our Lord says; And unto thee will I give the
Keys of the Kingdom of heaven. and consequently, that Itemque omni sancto
sacerdoti promittitur: Et quaecunque solveris super terram, erunt soluta and in
coelo; and quaecunque ligaveris super terram, erunt ligata and in coelo. Ibid.
unto every holy Priest it is promised: Whatsoever thou shall bind on earth,
shall be bound likewise in heaven; and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth,
shall be loosed likewise in heaven. Whereupon he pronounces of the good Priests
of Britain; that they Apostolicam sedem legitime obtinent. Ibid.
do lawfully obtain the Apostolical state, and Si hunc vos Apostoli
retinetis in omnibus affectum; ejus quoque cathedrae legitime insidere
noscatis. Ibid.
lawfully sit in the chair of St. Paul: and on the other side of the bad, that
Sedem Petri Apostoli immundis pedibus usurpantes; sed merito cupiditatis in
Iudae traditoris pestilentem cathedram decidentes. Ibid.
with unclean feet they usurp the seat of the Apostle Peter, but by the
demerit of their covetousness fall into the pestilent chair of the traitor
Judas; and so the ordainers of such, place Iudam quedam modo in Petri cathedra
Domini traditorem statuunt. Ibid.
after a sort Judas the betrayer of our Lord, in the seat of Peter.

Lastly, as Claudius notes, that Super ipsos Ecclesiae fit positum
fundamentum. Claud. in Gal. 2.
the foundation of the Church was laid not only upon St. Peter, but also upon
St. John: so in a certain Hymn supposed to be written by Secundinus (known
in this country commonly by the name of St. Scachlin) in the year of our Lord
CCCCXLVIII. St Patrick also is thus commended. Constans in Dei timore, and fide
immobilis, super quem aedificatur ut Petrum Ecclesia: cujusque Apostolatum a
Deo sortitus est, and inferni porta adversus eum non praevalebunt. Hymn in
laud. S. Patricij.
He is constant in the fear of God, and unmovable in the faith, upon whom the
Church is builded as upon Peter; whose Apostleship also he has obtained from
God, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against him. yea Christus illum
sibi elegit in terris Vicarium. Ibid.
Christ is there said to have chosen him for his Vicar upon earth. His See
likewise of Armagh, is by one Calvus Perennis in the days of Brian king of
Ireland (who was slain, as appears by Brianus rex Hiberniae, Parasceve
Paschae, sexta feria, IX. Calend. Maii, manibus and mente ad Deum intentus
necatur. Marian. Scot. See Caradoc of Lhancarran, in the Chronicle of Wales,
page 80.
Marianus in the year 1014.) termed Sanctus Patricius iens ad coelum, mandavit
totum fructum laboris sui (tam baptismi, tam causarum quam eleemosynarum)
deserendum esse Apostolicae Vrbi, quae Scotice nominatur Arddmacha. Sic repperi
in Bibliothecis Scotorum. Ego scripsi, id est, Calvus Perennis, in conspectu
Briani Imperatoris Scotorum. Ex. Vet. Cod. Ecclesiae Armachanae.
the City Apostolic. So Desiderius Bishop of Cahors in France, is by our
countryman Gaellus saluted both Domino semper suo, and Apostolico Patri,
Desiderio Papae, Gallus peccator.
Papa and Apostolicus: and the Bishop of Kildare in Ireland, honored by
Cogitosus, with the style of Cogitos. in vit. Brigid. tom. 5. antiqu. lect.
Henr. Canisii, page 625. lin ult.
Summus Sacerdos, and Ibid. page 640. lin. 2.
Summus Pontifex, the highest Priest and the highest Bishop. those titles and
prerogatives, which the Pope now peculiarly challenges unto himself, as
ensigns of his Monarchy, being heretofore usually communicated unto other
Bishops, when the universal Church was governed by way of Aristocratie.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Popes spiritual Jurisdiction; and how little footing it had gotten at
first within these parts.

MAster Campion tells us; that Edm. Camp. History of Ireland. lib. 2. ca. 2.
when Ireland first received Christendom, they gave themselves into the
Jurisdiction both spiritual and temporal of the Sea of Rome. But herein he
speaks without book; of the spiritual jurisdiction untruly, of the
temporal absurdly. For from the first legation of Palladius and Patricius, who
were sent to plant the faith in this country, it cannot be showed out of any
monument of antiquity, that the Bishop of Rome did ever send any of his Legates
to exercise spiritual jurisdiction here (much less any of his Deputies to
exercise jurisdiction temporal) before Gillebertus, quem aiunt prima functum
legatione Apostolicae sedis per universam Hiberniam; says one that lived in
his own time, even Bernard himself in the life of Malachias. One or two
instances peradventure may be alleged out of some obscure authors, whose
names, and times, and authority no man can tell us news of: but unless that
which is delivered by Bernard, as the tradition that was current in his time,
can be controlled by some record that may appear to have been written before
his days; we have small reason to detract any thing from the credit of so
clear a testimony.

This country was heretofore, for the number of holy men that lived in it,
termed the Island of Saints: of that innumerable company of Saints, whose memory
was reverenced here; what one received any solemn canonization from the Pope,
before Malachias Archbishop of Armagh, and Laurence of Dublin? who lived, as it
were, but the other day. We read of sundry Archbishops that have been in this
land: betwixt the days of Saint Patrick and of Malachias, what one of them can
be named, that ever sought for a Pall from Rome? Ioceline indeed a late Monk
of the Abbey of Furnesse, writes of St. Patrick; that the Bishop of Rome
Pallio decoravit, illique vices suas committens atque legatum suum constituens,
quaecunque in Hibernia gesserat, constituerat, disposuerat, auctoritatis suae
munimine confirmavit. Iocelin. vit. Patric. cap. 166.
conferred the Pall upon him, together with the execution of legatine power in
his room. But he is well known to be a most fabulous author: and for this
particular, Bernard (who was his ancient) informs us far otherwise; that
Metropoliticae sedi deerat adhuc, and defuerat ab initio pallii usus. Bernard.
vit. Malach.
from the very beginning until his time, the metropoliticall See of Armagh
wanted the use of the Pall. with whom the author of the Annals of Mailros does
fully accord; noting that Anno 1151. Papa Eugenius quatuor pallia per legatum
suum Iohannem Papirum transmisit in Hiberniam, quo nunquam antea pallium
delatum fuerat. Annal. Coenobij Melros. MS. in Bibliotheca Cottoniana.
in the year 1151. Pope Eugenius (the same to whom Bernard did write his
books de Consideratione) did by his Legate John Papiron transmit four Pals
into Ireland; whither a Pall before had never been brought. And therefore
Giraldus Cambrensis, howsoever he acknowledges that Saint Patrick did Apud
Ardmacham sibi sedem elegit; quam etiam quasi metropolim constituit and
proprium totius Hiberniae primatiae locum. Girald. Cambr. Topograph. Hibern.
distinct. 3. cap. 16.
choose Armagh for his seat, and did appoint it to be as it were a
metropoliticall See, and the proper place of the primacie of all Ireland; yet
does he affirm withal, that in very deed Archiepiscopi vero in Hibernia
nulli fuerant; sed tantum se Episcopi invicem consecrabant: donec Johannes
Papyrio Romanae sedis legatus, non multis retro annis advenit. Hic quatuor
pallia in Hiberniam portavit, etc. Ibid. cap. 17.
there were no Archbishops in Ireland, but that Bishops only did consecrate one
another, until Johannes Papirio (or Paparo) the Popes Legate brought four
Pals thither. whereupon some of our Chroniclers after him, give this note
concerning Gelasius, who was at that time Archbishop of Armagh; that Hic primus
Archiepiscopus dicitur, quia primo pallio usus est. Alii vero ante ipsum solo
nomine Archiepiscopi and Primates vocabantur; ob reverentiam and honorem Sancti
Patricii, tanquam Apostoli illius gentis. Pembrigius, author. Annal. Hibern. a
Guil. Camden^ edit. Thomas Casaeus in Chronic. Hi^ern. MS. ad ann. 1174.
he is said to have been the first Archbishop, because he used the first
Pall: and that others before him were called Archbishops and Primates in name
only; for the reverence of Saint Patrick, as the Apostle of that Nation.

And indeed it might seem, that the complaint made by Anselme in his letters
to Muriar dach King of Ireland, that Episcopi quoque (qui debent esse forma and
exemplum aliis Canonicae religionis) inordinate, sicut audivimus, aut a solis
Episcopis, aut in locis ubi ordinari non debent, consecrantur. Anselm. lib. 3.
epist. 142.
Bishops here were consecrated by Bishops alone, might somewhat justify the
truth of Giraldus his relation; if we did not find a further complaint there
also, that they were often Dicitur, ab uno Episcopo Episcopum, sicut quemlibet
presbyterum, ordinari. Id. ibid. epist. 147.
ordained by one Bishop only. But as this latter argues, not the want of a
competent number of Bishops in the land (for, as we shall hear presently, they
had more than a sufficient number of such) but a neglect of the observance of
the Canon provided by the Nicence Fathers in that behalf: so can it not
rightly be inferred out of the former, that we had no Archbishops here at
that time, but that the Bishops rather did fail much in the Canonical respect
which they ought to show unto their Metropolitan. For that the Irish had their
Archbishops (beside many other pregnant testimonies that might be produced)
Pope Hildebrands own Brief does sufficiently manifest; which is directed
Terdeluacho inelyto Regi Hiberniae, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus,
Proceribus, omnibusque Christianis Hiberniam inhabitantibus. Gregor. VII.
epist. ad Hibern. MS. in Bibitotheca Cotton.
to Terdeluachus (or Tirlagh) the illustrious King of Ireland, the ARCHBISHOPS,
Bishops, Abbots, Nobles, and all Christians inhabiting Ireland. And for the
Archbishops of Armagh in particular; it appears most evidently by Bernard in
the life of Malachias, that they were so far from being Metropolitans and
Primates in name only; that they exercised much greater authority before they
were put to the charges of fetching Pals from Rome, then ever they did
afterward: and that they did not only consecrate Bishops, but erected also new
Bishoprics, and Archbishopricks too sometimes, according as they thought
fitting.

We read in Nennius, that at the beginning St. Patrick Ecclesias sundauit
CCCLXV. Ordinavit Episcopos eodem numero CCCLXV. Presbyteros autem usque ad
tria millia ordinavit. Nenn. histor. Brit. MS.
founded here 365. Churches, and ordained 365. Bishops, beside 3000.
Presbyters. In process of time the number of Bishops was daily Mutabantur and
multiplicabantur Episcopi pro libitu metropolitani; ita ut unus Episcopatus uno
non esset contentus, sed singulae pene Ecclesiae singulos haberent Episcopos.
Bernard. vit. Malach.
multiplied according to the pleasure of the Metropolitan, (whereof Bernard
does much complain) and that, not only so far, that every Church almost had
a several Bishop: but also that in some Quod in villis, vel civitatibus plures
ordinantur. Lanfranc. epist. ad Terdeluachum regem Hibern. apud Baron. ann.
1089. number. 16.
Towns or Cities there were ordained more than one; yea and oftentimes
Dicitur, Episcopos in terra vestra passim eligi, and sine certo Episcopatus
loco constitui. Anselm. lib. 3. epist. 147. ad Muriardachum regem Hibern.
Bishops were made without any certain place at all assigned unto them. And as
for the erecting of new Archbishoprickes: if we believe our Legends, Rex Engus
and S. Patricius, cum omni populo, ordinaverunt Archiepiscopassm Mumeniae in
civitare and in sede sancti Albei, qui tunc ab eisdem Archiepiscopus ordinatus
est, per seculum. Ex vita S. Declani. Rex Engus and Patricius ordinaverunt; ut
in civitate and cathedra sancti Albei e^^et Archiepiscopatus omnium Memonensium
semper, Ex vita S. Albei.
King Engus and S. Patrick, with all the people, did ordain, that in the City
and See of Albeus (which is Emelye, now annexed to Cashell) should be the
Archbishopric of the whole Province of Mounster. in like manner also, Facta
Synodo magna in terra Laginensium, decrevit rex Brandubh, and tam laici quam
clerici, ut Archiepiscopatus omnium Laginensium semper esset in sede and
cathedra sancti Moedog. Et tunc sanctus Moedog a multis catholicis consecratus
est Archiepiscopus. Ex vit. S. Edani. A rege jam Laginensium Brandubh filio
Eathach constitutum est, ut Archiepiscopatus Laginensium in civitate sancti
Moedog esset. Ipsa civitas vocatur Ferna, quae est in terra gentis Kenselach.
Ex vit. S. Molyng.
Brandubh King of the Lagenians, with the consent as well of the Laity as of
the Clergy, did appoint that in the City of Fernes (which was the Sea of
Moedog, otherwise called Edanus) should be the Archbishopricke of all the
Province of Leinster. But Bernards testimony, we have no reason not to
believe, relating what was known to be done in his own very time: that Erat
and altera Metropolitica seeds, quem de novo constituerat Celsus, primae tamen
sedi and illius Archiepiscopo subdita tanquam primati. Bernard. in vita
Malachiae.
Celsus the Archbishop of Armagh, had of the new constituted another
Metropoliticall See, but subject to the first See, and to the Archbishop
thereof. By which we may see that in the erection of new Archbishopricks and
Bishoprics, all things were here done at home, without consulting with the Sea
of Rome for the matter.

As for the nomination and confirmation of the Archbishops and Bishops
themselves: we find the manner of advancing Saint Livinus to his
Archbishopric thus laid down by Boniface in the description of his life. Illo
defuncto, Rex Calomagnus, and eius Palatinorum chorus cum suis subaulicis,
totiusque regionis illius confluentia, pari cordis affectu conclamaverunt,
sanctum Sacerdotem Livinum in honorem huius ordinis dignissime sublimandum
fore. His Rex omnibus devotior consentiens, ter quaterque bearum virum in
cathedra Archiepiscopatus debito honor, Domino jubente, collocavit. Bonifat.
Vit. Livin.
When Menalchus the Archbishop was dead, Calomagnus the King of Scots, and the
troop of his Officers with the under-courtiers, and the concourse of all that
country, with the same affection of heart cried out, that the holy Priest
Livinus was most worthily to be advanced unto the honor of this order. The
King (more devout than all of them) consenting thereunto, three or four times
placed the blessed man in the chair of the Archbishopric with due honor,
according to the will of the Lord. In like manner also did Rex Ecgfridus
Episcopum fecit ordinari Lindisfarnensium ecclesiae virum sanctum and
venerabilem Cudbertum. Bed. lib. 4. hist. cap. 27. and Vit. Cuthbert. cap. 24.
King Ecgfrid cause our Cuthbert to be ordained Bishop of the Church of
Landisfarne; and King Pipin Episcopatum Salzburgensem, pro debito regiae
magnificentiae, sancto concessit Virgilio. Vit. Episc. Saluburgensaom. 2.
Antiqu. lect. Henr. Canis. page 259. and tom. 6. page 1174.
granted the Bishopric of Salzburg to our Virgilius: and Duke Gunzo would have
Walafrid. Strab. Vit. Gall. lib. 1. cap. 16, 17, 19, 20.
conferred the Bishopric of Constance upon our Gallus; but that he refused it,
and Theodor. Compidonens. v^lquicunque author fuit vitae Magni. lib. 1. cap. 8.
edit. Goldesti, 10. Canisii.
caused another upon his recommendation to be preferred thereunto.

In the book of Landaffe, which is called Tilo (either from Teliau the second
Bishop of that place, whose life is largely there described; or rather from the
place it self, which of old was called In the Laws of Howel Dhae it is named
Ecclesia Teilau: and so in Caradot of Lhancarvans Chronicle of Wales, page 94.
Joseph is called Bishop of Teilo, or Landaff.
Telio) we read that Germanus and Lupus Super omnes Britannos dextralis partis
Britanniae B. Dubticium summum Doctorem, a Rege and ab omni parochia electum
Archiepiscopum, consecraverunt. Hac dignitate ei a Germano and Lupo data;
constituerunt ei Episcopalem sedem concessu Mourici Regis, Principum, Cleri and
populi, apud Podium Lantavi. Lib. Ecclesiae Landavensis, MS.
did consecrate chief Doctor over all the Britons inhabiting the right side of
Britanie, S. Dubricius, being chosen Archbishop by the King and all the
Diocese: and that by the grant of Mouric the King, the Nobility, Clergy,
and people, they appointed his Episcopal See to be at Landaff. that Electione
Cleri and populi succedit in episcopatu Landavensis Ecclesiae. electione cleri
Mercguini and Elgoreti and Gunnuini magistri; and trium Abbatum, Catgen abbatis
^^duti, Concenn abbatis Catmaili, Cetnig abbatis Docguinni; laicorum, Regis
Mourici, and filiorum Athruis and Idnerth, Guidgen and Cetiau, Brogmail,
Gendoc, Louhonerd, Catgualatyr, and omnium principum totius parochiae. Missus
est S. Oudoceus cum clericis suis praedictis (Merchui and Elguoret and Gunubui)
cum legatis trium Abbatum and Regis and Principum, ad Dorobornensem civitatem
ad beatum Archiepiscopum; ubi sacratus est ecclesiae Landaviae in honor S.
Petri fundatae. Ibid.
Oudoceus, the third Bishop after him, being elected by King Mouric, and the
chief of the Clergy and Laity of the whole Diocese, was by them sent to the
Archibishop of Canterbury for his consecration. that DCCCCLXXXII. (vel
DCCCLXXII. potius) lucarnationis Domini anno, Gucaunus episcopus Landaviae
confecratus a metropolitano Du^stano Dorobornensis ecclesiae archiepiscopo,
data sibi virga pastorali in regali curia a summo Rege Anglorum AE^garo. Ibid.
Gucaunus (the 26th. Bishop of that Church) was consecrated by Dunstan
Archbishop of Canterbury; the pastoral staff being given him in the Court by
Edgar chief King of the English. that next after him, DCCCCLXXXIII. anno,
electione facta regum Morcannuc, Ouein videlicet and Idguallaun, Catell and
Cinuin filiorum Morcantheu, Rotri and Crifud filiorum Elired, and totius Cleri
and populi Morcannuc infra hortum Taratir in Gui and hortum Tivi positi: and
dato sibi baculo in regali curia a summo Rege Anglorum Adelredo, and a
metropolitano Dorobornensis Ecclesiae Albrico archiepiscopo, Bledri episcopus
Landaviae consecratus est; and 1022. o^. anno Incarnationis Domini,
ordinationis suae autem 39o. anno, migravit ad Dominum. Ibid.
in the year. 983. election being made by the Kings and the whole Clergy and
people of Glamorgan, and the pastoral staff given in the Court by Ethelred
chief King of the English; Bledri was consecrated by the Archbishop of
Canterbury, who is there named Albricus. (though in truth, at the year here
assigned, Dunstan did still hold the place.) and that after his decease in the
year 1022. MXXII. anno Incarnationis Domini, consecratus est Joseph episcopus
Landaviae, Cantuariae a metropolitano Dorobornensis ecclesiae Aelnod
archiepiscopo, in Kalendis Ostobris, and in primo (vel XVI^. potius) anno Cycli
decennovennalis, verbo Regis Anglorum Cout, and dato sibi baculo in Curia
illius: electione populi and cleri Landaviae, and Regum Britanniae, regis
videlicet Riderch regnantis per totam Gualiam tune tempore, and Hivel subreguli
regis Moreannuc infra hortum Taratir in Gui and hortum Tivi regnantis. Ibid.
by the election of the people and Clergy of Landaff and the Kings of the
Britons (namely King Riderch that reigned at that time through all Wales, and
Hivel the substitute of the King of Glamorgan) Joseph was consecrated Bishop by
Aelnod Archbishop of Canterbury, at the word of Cnut King of England, in whose
Court the Pastoral staff was given unto him.

Here in Ireland much after the same manner, Mr. Campion himself sets down,
that Edm. Campion. Histor. Hibern. lib. 1. cap. ult^ ad annum 948.
to the Monarch was granted a negative in the nomination of Bishops at every
vocation: the Clergy and Laity of the Diocese recommending him to their King,
the King to the Monarch, the Monarch to the Archbishop of Canterbury. although
this last clause be wrongly extended by him to the Bishops of the whole land,
which properly belonged to the Ostmann strangers, that possessed the Girald.
Cambrens. Topograph. Hiber^. distinct. 3. cap. 43.
three cities of Dublin, Waterford, and Limrick. For these being a Colonie of
the Norwegians and Livonians, and so countrymen to the Normans, when they had
seen England subdued by the Conqueror, and Normans advanced to the chief
archbishopric there; would needs now assume to themselves the name of Eodem
tempore Norwagenses sive Ostmanni, qui civitates Hiberniae and maritima
occupaverunt, Normanni vocati sunt. Annal. Dublin. ad ann. 1095.
Normans also, and cause their Bishops to receive their consecration from no
other metropolitan but the Archbishop of Canterbury. And forasmuch as they were
confined within the walls of their own cities: the Bishops which they made had
no other diocese to exercise their jurisdiction in, but only the bare circuit
of those cities. Whereupon we find a Certificate made unto Pope Innocent the
third in the year 1216. by the Archbishop of Tuam and his suffraganes; that
Dominus Johannes Papiron legatus Romanae Ecclesiae veniens in Hiberniam,
invenit Dublin Episcopum habentem, qui tantum intra muros Episcoplae officium
exercebat. Testimon. Tuamens. archiepisc. in Registro Dublin. archiepisc. and
nigro libro Ecclesia S. Trinitatis.
John Papiron the Legate of the Church of Rome coming into Ireland, found that
Dublin indeed had a Bishop, but such a one as did exercise his Episcopal
office within the walls only.

The first Bishop which they had in Dublin (as it appears by the Records of
that Church) was one Donatus, or Dunanus, as others call him: upon whose death,
in the year 1074. Ad regimen Dublinensis Ecclesiae Lanfrancus archiepiscopus
Cantuariae, petente Goderico rege, Dubliniensis Ecclesiae populo and clero
consentientibus and eligentibus, in Ecclesia sancti Pauli Londin. Patricium
sacravit Antistitem. Annul. Dublin. ad annum 1074.
Gothric their King, with the consent of the Clergy and people of Dublin,
chose one Patrick for their Bishop, and directed him into England to be
consecrated by Lanfranc Archbishop of Canterbury: who sent him back with
commendatory Habentur apud Baron. ann. 1089. number. 12. and 15.
letters as well to the said Gothric King of the Ostmans, as to Terdeluacus the
chief King or Monarch of the Irish. Hereupon, after the decease of this
Patrick, Anno Dom. 1085. Laufrancus Archiepiscopus Cantuar. ad regimen
Dublinensis Ecclesiae sacravit Donatum monasterii sui monachum in sede
metropoli Cantuar. petentibus atque eligentibus eum Terdeluaco Hiberniae rege,
and episcopis Hiberniae regionis, atque clero and populo praefarae civitatis.
Annal. Dublin.
in the year 1085. the same Terdeluacus and the Bishops of Ireland joined with
the Clergy and people of Dublin, in the election of Donatus, one of Lanfrancs
own Monks in Canterbury: who was by him there also consecrated. Then when he
dyed, in the year 1095. his nephew Samuel, a monk of St. Albans but borne in
Ireland, was A Rege Hiberniae, Murierdach nomine, ^ecnon a clero and populo in
Episcopatum psius civitatis electus est; atque ad Anselmum, iuxta morem
antiquum, sacrandus cum communi decreto directus. Fadmer. Histor. Nevor. lib.
2. page 34.
chosen Bishop in his place by Murierdach King of Ireland, and the Clergy and
people of the City: by whose common decree he was also sent unto Anselme
Archbishop of Canterbury for his consecration. Not long after, the
Waterfordians, following the example of the Dublinians, erected a Bishopric
among themselves; Ibid. page 36.
and sent their new Bishop to Canterbury for his consecration. the manner of
whose election the Clergy and people of Waterford in the letters which they
wrote at that time unto Anselme, do thus intimate. Nos and Rex noster
Murcherta^bus, and Episcopus Dofnaldus, and Dermeth Dux noster frater Regi^,
elegimus hunc Presbyterum Malchum, Walkelini Wintoniensis Episcopi monachum,
nobis sufficientissime cognitum, etc.
We and our King Murchertach, and Dofnald the Bishop, and Dermeth our Captain
the Kings brother, have made choice of this Priest Malchus, a monk of
Walkeline Bishop of Winchester, the same man, without doubt, who was afterward
promoted to the Bishopric of Lismore; so much commended by Bernard in the
life of Malachias.

The last Bishop of Dublin in the year 1122. was sent unto Anselmes next
successor for his consecration: touching which I have seen this writ of King
Henry the first, directed unto him: Henricus Rex Anglia, Radulpho Cantuariensi
Archiepiscopo, salutem. Vt apud Graecos (...), non est semper (...),
qu^madmodum ad Iliad. (...). notatum est ab Eustathi^ (page 884 and 831. edit.
Roman.) sed aliquando respondet (...). ita and vox Mando, apud Latinos mediae
aetatis scriptores. ut apud Vincentium, verbi gratia, lib. 30. Specul.
Historical. cap. 130 ( humiliter ei mandaverunt.) and hoc in loco.
Mandavit mihi Rex Hiberniae per Breve suum, and Burgenses Dublinae, quod
elegerunt hunc Gregorium in Episcopum, and eum tibi mittunt consecrandum. Vnde
tibi mando, ut petitioni eorum satisfaciens, ejus consecrationem sine dilatione
expleas. Test Ranulpho Cancellario apud Windelsor.

Henry King of England, to Ralphe Archbishop of Canterbury, greeting. The King
of Ireland has intimated unto me by his writ, and the Burgesses of Dublin,
that they have chosen this Gregory for their Bishop, and send him unto you to
be consecrated. Wherefore I wish you, that satisfying their request, you
perform his consecration without delay. Witness Ranuph our Chancellor at
Windsor.

All the Burgesses of Dublin likewise, and the whole assembly of the Clergy,
directed their joint letters to the Archbishop of Canterbury the same time:
where in among other things they write thus. Sciatls vos revera, quod Episcopi
Hiberniae maximum zelum erga nos habent, and maxim ille Episcopus qui habitat
Ardimachae: quia nos nolumus obedire eorum ordinationi, sed semper sub vestro
dominio esse volumus. MS. ad calcem collectionis Is^dori Mercatoris, in
Bibliotheca Cottoniana.
Know you for verity, that the Bishops of Ireland have great indignation toward
us, and that Bishop most of all that dwells at Armagh: because we will not
obey their ordination, but will always be under your government. Whereby we
may see, that as the Ostmans were desirous to sever themselves from the Irish,
and to be esteemed Normans rather: so the Irish Bishops on the other side,
howsoever they digested in some sort the recourse which they had to Lanfranc
and Anselme (who were two of the most famous men in their times, and with whom
they themselves were desirous to hold all good correspondence) yet could they
not well brook this continuation of their dependence upon a Metropolitan of
another kingdom; which they conceived to be somewhat derogatorie to the
dignity of their own Primate. But this jealousy continued not long. for this
same Gregory being afterward made Archbishop of Dublin, and the Bishoprics
here settled by Johannes Paparo: as well they of Dublin, as the others of
Waterford and Limrick (for they also had one Patricke consecrated Bishop unto
them by Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury) did ever after that time cease to
have any relation unto the Sea of Canterbury.

And now to go forward: as the Kings and people of this land in those elder
times kept the nomination of their Archbishops and Bishops in their own hands,
and depended not upon the Popes provisions that way: so do we not find by
any approved record of antiquity, that any Visitations of the clergy were
held here in the Popes name; much less that any Indulgences were sought for by
our people at his hands. For, as for the Charta S. Patricii, in Gulielmi
Mal^esburiensis libello, de Antiquitate Glastoniensis Ecclesiae. MS.
Charter of S. Patrick, (by some entitled, De antiquitate Avalonica) wherein
In scriptis recentioribus inveni, quod sancti Phaganus and Deruvianus
perquifierant ab Eleutherio Papa, qui eos miserat, X. ( al. XXX.) annos
indulgentiae. Et ego frater Patricius a piae memoriae Celestino Papa XII. annos
tempore meo acquisivi. Ibid.
Phaganus and Deruvianus are said to have purchased ten or thirty years of
Indulgences from Pope Eleutherius; and St. Patrick himself to have procured
twelve years in his time from Pope Celestinus: it might easily be
demonstrated (if this were a place for it) that it is a mere figment, devised
by the Monks of Glastenbury. Neither do I well know, what credit is to be
given unto that straggling sentence, which I find ascribed unto the same
author. Patricius ai^ Siquae quest^ones in h^c insula oriantur, ad sedem
Apostolicam referantur. Vet. Collect. Canonum, Bibliothecae Cottoniane. cujus
initium: Synodicorum exemplariorum innumerositate^ conspiciens.
If any questions do arise in this Island, let them be referred to the Sea
Apostolic. or that other decree, attributed to Auxilius, Patricius, Secundinus
and Benignus. Quaecunque causa valde difficilis exorta suerit, atque ignota
cunctis Scotorum gentium judiciis; ad Cathedram Archiepiscopi Hibernensium (id
est, Patricii) atque huius antistitis examinationem recte referenda. Si vero in
illa, cum suis sapientibus, facile sana^i non poterit tali. causa (...)
negotiationis: ad se^^m Apostolicam decrevimus esse mittendam; id est, ad petri
Apostoli Cathedram, auctoritatem Romae Vrbis habentem. Hi sunt qui de hoc
decreverunt: id est, Auxilius, Patricius, Secundinus, Benignus, Vet. Codex
Ecclesiae Armacha^e.
Whenever any cause that is very difficult, and unknown unto all the Judges
of the Scottish nations, shall arise; it is rightly to be referred to the Sea
of the Archbishop of the Irish (to wit, Patrick) and to the examination of the
Prelate thereof. But if there, by him and his wisemen, a cause of this nature
cannot easily be made up: we have decreed, it shall be sent to the Sea
Apostolic; that is to say, to the chair of the Apostle Peter, which has the
authority of the City of Rome. Only this I will say, that as it is most
likely, that St. Patrick had a special regard unto the Church of Rome, from
whence he was sent for the conversion of this Island: so if I my self had lived
in his days, for the resolution of a doubtful question I should as willingly
have listened to the judgment of the Church of Rome, as to the determination
of any Church in the whole world; so reverend an estimation have I of the
integrity of that Church, as it stood in those good days. But that St.
Patrick was of opinion, that the Church of Rome was sure ever afterward to
continue in that good estate, and that there was a perpetual privilege
annexed unto that See, that it should never err in judgment, or that the Popes
sentences were always to be held as infallible Oracles; that will I never
believe: sure I am, that my contrymen after him were of a far other
belief; who were so far from submitting themselves in this sort to
whatsoever should proceed from the Sea of Rome, that they oftentimes stood out
against it, when they had little cause so to do. For proof whereof I need to
seek no further, than to those very allegations which have been lately urged
for maintenance of the supremacy of the Pope and Church of Rome in this
Country.

First, Mr. Coppinger comes upon us, with this wise question. Copping. (...)
to the Catholics of Ireland, lib. 2. cap. 3.
Was not Ireland among other Countries absolved from the Pelagian heresy by
the Church of Rome, as Caesar Baronius writes? then he sets down the copy
of S. Gregory's Gregor. lib. 2. epist. 36. Indict. 30.
epistle, in answer unto the Irish Bishops that submitted themselves unto him.
and concludes in the end, that the Bishops of Ireland being infected with the
Pelagian error, sought absolution first of Pelagius the Pope: but the same was
not effectually done, until S. Gregory did it. But in all this, he does
nothing else but bewray his own ignorance. For neither can he show it in
Caesar Baronius or in any other author whatsoever, that the Irish Bishops did
ever seek absolution from Pope Pelagius; or that the one had to deal in any
business at all with the other. Neither yet can he show that ever they had to
do with Saint Gregory in any matter that did concern the Pelagian heresy.
for these be dreams of Coppingers own idle head. The epistle of S. Gregory
deals only with the controversy of the three chapters, which were condemned
by the fifth general Council; whereof Baronius writes thus. Ardentissimo
studio protrium capi ulorum defensione, junctis animis omnes qui in Hibernia
erant Episcopi, insurrexere. Addiderunt and illud nefas, ut cum percepissent
Romanam Ecclesiam aeque suscepisse Trium damnationum capitulorum, atque suo
consensu Quintam Synodum roborasse: ab eadem pariter resilierint, atque
reliquis qui vel in Italia, vel in Africa, aliisve regionibus erant
schismaticis inhaeserint; fiducia illa vana erecti, quod pro fide Catholica
starent, cum quae essent in Concilio Chalcedonensi statuta defenderent. Baron.
Annal. tom. 7. an. 566. number. 21.
All the Bishops that were in Ireland, with most earnest study, rose up jointly
for the defense of the Three Chapters. And when they perceived that the Church
of Rome did both receive the condemnation of the Three Chapters, and strengthen
the fifth Synod with her consent: they departed from her, and clave to the rest
of the schismatickes, that were either in Italy, or in Afric, or in other
countries, animated with that vain confidence, that they did stand for the
Catholic faith, while they defended those things that were concluded in the
Council of Chalcedon. Sed eo fixius inhaerent errori, cum quaecunque Italia
passa sit bellorum motibus, fame, vel pestilentia, ea ex caussa illi cuncta
infausta accidisse putarent, quod pro Quinta Synodo adversus Chalcedonense
Concilium praelium suscepisset. Ibid.
And so much the more fixedly (says he) did they cleave to their error,
because whatsoever Italy did suffer by commotions of war, by famine or
pestilence, all these unhappy things they thought did therefore befall unto it,
because it had undertaken to fight for the fifth Synod against the Council of
Chalcedon.

Thus far Baronius: out of whose narration this may be collected, that the
Bishops of Ireland did not take all the resolutions of the Church of Rome for
undoubted oracles; but when they thought that they had better reason on their
sides, they preferred the judgment of other Churches before it. Wherein how
peremptory they were, when they wrote unto St. Gregory of the matter; may
easily be perceived by these parcels of the answer, which he returned unto
their letters. Prima itaque epistolae vestrae frons, gravem vos pati
persecutionem innotuit. Quae quidem persecutio dum non rationabiliter
sustinetur, nequaquam proficit ad salutem. Gregor. Regest. lib. 2. epist. 36.
The first entry of your epistle has notified, that you suffer a grievous
perfecution^ which persecution indeed, when it is not sustained for a
reasonable cause, does profit nothing unto salvation. and Dum igit^^ ita sit,
incongruum nimis est de ea vos, quam dicitis, persecutione gloriari, per quam
vos constat ad aeterna praemia minime provehi. Ibid.
therefore it is very unfit, that you should glory of that persecution, as you
call it, by which it is certain you cannot be promoted to everlasting rewards.
Quod autem scribitis, quia ex illo tempore inter alias provincias maxim
flagelletur Italia; non hoc ad ejus debetis intorquere opprobrium: quoniam
scriptum est; Quem diligit Dominus, castigat, flagellat autem omnem filium quem
recipit. Ibid.
And whereas you write, that since that time among other provinces Italy has
been most afflicted; you ought not to object that unto it as a reproach:
because it is written: Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every
son that he receives. Then having spoken of the book that Pope Pelagius did
write of this controversy (which indeed was penned by Gregory himself) he
adds. Porro autem si post hujus libri lectionem in ea, qua estis, volueritis
deliberatione persistere; sine dubio non rationi operam, sed obstinationi vos
dare monstratis. Ibid.
If after the reading of this book, you will persist in that deliberation,
wherein now you are; without doubt you show, that you give your selves to be
ruled not by reason, but by obstinacy. By all which you may see, what credit
is to be given unto the man, who would bear us in hand, that this epistle of
St. Gregory was sent as an answer unto the Bishops of Ireland, that did submit
themselves unto him: whereas (to say nothing of the Vid. Roman Correct. in
Gratian. De comsecrat. distinct. 4. cap. 144. Ab antiqua.
copies, wherein this epistle is noted to have been written to the Bishops of
Iberia, and not, in Hibernia) the least argument of any submission does not
appear in any part of that epistle; but the whole course of it does clearly
manifest the flat contrary.

In the next place steppeth forth Osullevan Bear; who in his Catholic history
of Ireland, would have us take knowledge of this, that Quando vero Doctores
Ibernici de gravibus fidei quaestionibus minime consentiebant, vel aliquid novi
dogmatis peregre allati audiebant; soliti erant Romanum Pontificem veritatis
Oraculum consulere. Philip Osullevan. Bearr. hist. Catholic. Ibern. tom. 1.
lib. 4. cap. 6.
when the Irish Doctors did not agree together upon great questions of Faith,
or did hear of any new doctrine brought from abroad, they were wont to consult
with the Bishop of Rome the Oracle of truth. That they consulted with the
Bishop of Rome, when difficult questions did arise, we easily grant: but that
they thought they were bound in conscience to stand to his judgment,
whatsoever it should be, and to entertain all his resolutions as certain
Oracles of truth; is the point that we would feign see proved. For this he
tells us, that Namque de tempore agendi Paschatis solennia (de que aliae
queque Catholicae gentes saepe ambegerunt) and de Pelagiana haeresi ubi fuit in
quaestionem disputationemque deducta; Doctores Iberni ad Sedem Apostolicam
retulerunt. Ac ita miseri Pelagli error nullum in Ibernia patronum vel
assertorem invenisse fertur; vel insulae aditu interclusus, vel ab ea protinus
explosus, ubi contagiosam faciem aperuit, seseque cognoscendum praebuit: and
ratio communis and ab Ecclesia usitata celebrandi redivivi Domini festum ab
Australibus Ibernis fuit semper observata; and a Septentrionalibus quoque and
Pictis and Britonibus, qui Doctoribus Ibernis fidem acceperunt, amplexa, ubi
Ecclesiae Romanae ritum cognoverunt. Quod ex Apostolicarum literarum duplici
capite a Beda relato non obscure constat. Ibid.
when questions and disputations did arise here concerning the time of Easter
and the Pelagian heresy; the Doctors of Ireland referred the matter unto the Sea Apostolic. Whereupon, the error of Pelagius is reported to have found no
patron or maintainer in Ireland: and the common course of celebrating Easter
was embraced both by the Northren Irish, and by the Picts and Britons, as soon
as they understood the rite of the Roman Church. Which ( says he) does not
obscurely appear by the two heads of the Apostolic letters, related by Bid,
lib. 2. cap. 19.

But that those Apostolic letters (as he calls them) had that success which
he talks of, appears neither plainly nor obscurely by Bid, or any other
authority whatsoever. The error of Pelagius, says he, is reported to have
found no patron or maintainer in Ireland. But who is he that reports so,
beside Philip Osullevan? a worthy author to ground a report of antiquity upon:
who in relating the matters that fell out in his own time, discovers
himself to be as egregious a liar, as any (I verily think) that this day
breaths in Christendom. The Apostolic letters he speaks of, were written
(as before has bin touched) in the year of our Lord DCXXXIX. during the
vacancie of the Roman See, upon the death of Severinus. Our Countryman
Kilianus repaired to Rome 47. years after that, and was ordained Bishop there
by Pope Conon in the year DCLXXXVI. The reason of his coming thither, is thus
laid down by Egilwardus or who ever else was the author of his life. Hibernia
siquidem olim Pelagiana foedata fuerat haeresi, Apostolicaque censura damnata,
quae nisi Romano judicio solvi non poterat. Author antiqu. Vit. Kilian.
For Ireland had been of old defiled with the Pelagian heresy, and condemned
by the Apostolical censure, which could not be loosed but by the Roman
judgment. If this be true: then that is false which Osullevan reports of the
effect of his Apostolical Epistle, that it did so presently quash the Pelagian
heresy, as it durst not once peep up within this Island.

CHAP. IX.
Of the controversy which the Britons, Picts, and Irish maintained against the
Church of Rome, touching the celebration of Easter.

THe difference betwixt the Romans and the Irish in the celebration of Easter,
consisted in this. The Romans kept the memorial of our Lords resurrection
upon that Sunday, which fell betwixt the XV. and the XXI. day of the Moon
(both terms included) next after the XXI. day of March; which they accounted
to be the seat of the Vernall aequinoctium, that is to say, that time of the
Spring wherein the day and the night were of equal length. and in reckoning
the age of the Moon they followed the Alexandrian cycle of XIX. years (whence
our golden number had his original) as it was explained unto them by Dionysius
Exiguus: which is the account that is still observed, not only in the Church
of England, but also among all the Christians of Greece, Russia, Asia, Egypt,
and Aethiopia; and was (since the time that I my self was borne) generally
received in all Christendom, until the late change of the Calendar was made
by Pope Gregory the XIIIth. The Northren Irish and Scottish, together with the
Picts, observed the custom of the Britons: Non enim Paschae diem Dominicum suo
tempore, sed a decimaquarta usque ad vicesimam Lunam observabant. Quae
computatio 84* annorum circulo continetur. Bid lib. 2. hist. cap. 2.
keeping their Easter upon the Sunday that fell betwixt the XIIII. and the XX.
day of the Moon; and following in their account thereof, not the XIX. years
computation of Anatolius, Porro isti secundum decennem novemque Anatolii
computatum, aut potius juxta Sulpicii Severini regulam, qui LXXXIV. annorum
cursum descripsit, XIV. Luna cum Iudaeis Paschale sacramentum celebrant: cum
neutrum Ecclesiae Romanae Pontifices ad perfectam calculi rationem sequantur.
Aldelm. epist ad Geruntium regem and Domnonios: inter epistolas Bonifacij, number.
44.
but Sulpicius Severus his circle of LXXXIIII. years. for howsoever they
extolled Anatolius Bed. lib. 3. hist. cap. 3. and 25. Vid. Dionysii Petavii
notas in Epiphan. page 194. 195.
for appointing (as they supposed) the bounds of Easter betwixt the XIIII. and
the XX. day of the Moon, yet Wilfride in the Synod of Strenshal charge them
utterly to have rejected his cycle of XIX. years: from which therefore
Cummianus draws an argument against them; that Ad veram Paschae rationem
nunquam pervenire eos, qui cycium LXXXIIII. annorum observant. Cumm^an. epist.
ad Seg^enum abbat. de Disputatione Lunae. MS. in Bibli^thec. Cottonian.
they can never come to the true account of Easter, who observe the cycle of
LXXXIIII. years.

To reduce the Irish unto conformity with the Church of Rome in this point,
Pope Honorius (the first of that name) directed his letters unto them:
Exhortans, ne paucitatem suam in extremis terrae finibus constituta^,
sapientiorem antiquis sive modernis, quae per Orbem terrae erant, Christi
Ecclesiis aestimarent: neve contra Paschales computos, and decreta synodalium
totius Orbis Pontificum aliud Pascha celebrarent. Bed. lib. 2. hist. cap. 19.
Exhortintg them, that they would not esteem their own paucity, seated in the
utmost borders of the earth, more wise than the ancient or modern Churches of
Christ through the whole world; and that they would not celebrate another
Easter contrary to the Paschall computations, and the Synodall decrees of the
Bishops of the whole world. and shortly after, the Clergy of Rome (as we have
said) upon the death of Severinus, wrote other letters unto them to the same
effect. Now where Osullevan avoucheth, that the common custom used by the
Church in celebrating the feast of the Lords resurrection was always observed
by the Southern Irish; and now embraced also by the Northren, together with
the Picts and Britons (who received the faith from Irish Doctors) when they had
knowledge given them of the rite of the Church of Rome: in all this (according
to his common wont) he speaks never a true word. For neither did the
Southern Irish always observe the celebration of Easter commonly received
abroad: neither did the Northren Irish, nor the Picts, nor the Britons, many
years after this admonition given by the Church of Rome, admit that
observation among them. to speak nothing of his folly in saying, that the
Britons received the faith from the Irish: when the contrary is so well known,
that the Irish rather received the same from the S. Patrick, and his followers.
Britons.

That the common custom of celebrating the time of Easter was not always
observed by the Southern Irish, may appear by those words of Bid, in the
third book of his history and the third chapter. Porro gentes Scottorum, quae
in australibus Hiberniae insulae partibus morabantur, jamdudum ad admonitionem
Apostolicae sedis antistitis Paschacanonico ritu observare didicerunt. For if
(as this place clearly proves) the nations of the Scots, that dwelt in the
Southern parts of Ireland, did learn to observe Easter after the canonical
manner, upon the admonition of the Bishop of Rome: it is evident, that before
that admonition they did observe it after another manner. The word jamdudum,
which Bid here uses, is taken among authors oftentimes in contrary senses:
either to signify a great while since, or else, but lately, or erewhile, In
the former sense it must be here taken, if it have relation to the time
wherein Bid did write his book: and in the latter also it may be taken, if it
be referred to the time whereof he treats, (which is the more likely opinion)
namely to the coming of Bishop Aidan into England; which fell out about half
a year, after that Honorius had sent his admonitorie letters to the Irish.
who, as he was the first Bishop of Rome we can read of, that admonished them
to reform their rite of keeping the time of Easter: so that the Irish also
much about the same time conformed themselves herein to the Roman usage, may
thus be manifested.

When Bishop Aidan came into England from the Island Hy, now called
Y-Columkille; Bed. lib. 3. hist. cap. 5.
the College of Monks there was governed by Segenius, who in the Id. lib. 2.
cap. 19.
inscription of the epistle of the clergy of Rome sent unto the Irish, is
called Segianus. Now there is yet extant in Sir Robert Cottons worthy Library,
an epistle of Cummianus directed to this Segienus (for so is his name there
written) Abbot of Y-Columkille* wherein he plainly declares, that the great
cycle of DXXXII. years, and the Roman use of celebrating the time of Easter
according to the same, was then newly brought in into this country. Ego enim
primo anno quo cyclus DXXXII. annorum a nostris celebrari ors^s est; non
suscepi, sed silui, nec laudare nec vituperare ausus. Cummian. epist. ad
Segienum.
For the first year (says he) wherein the cycle of DXXXII. years began to
be observed by our men; I received it not, but held my peace, daring neither
to commend it nor to dispraise it. That year being past, he says he consulted
with his ancients; who were the successors of Bishop Ailbeus, Queranus
Coloniensis, Brendinus, Nessanus and Lugidus. who being gathered together in
Campo-lene, concluded to celebrate Easter the year following together with the
universal Church. Sed non post multum surrexit quidam paries dealbatus,
traditionem seniorem serva^e se simulans; qui utraque non fecit unum sed
divisit, and irritum ex part fecit quod promissum est: quem Dominus ut spero,
percutiet quoquo modo veluerit. Ibid.
But not long after (says he) there arose up a certain whited wall,
pretending to keep the tradition of the Elders; which did not make both one,
but divided them, and made void in part that which was promised: whom the Lord
(as I hope) will smite, in whatsoever manner he pleases.

To this argument drawn from the tradition of the elders, he makes answer:
that Seniores vero, quos in velamine repulsionis habetis, quod optimum in
diebus suis esse noverunt ^impliciter and fideliter sine culpa contradictionis
ullius and animositatis observaverunt, and suis posteris sic mandaverunt. Ibid.
they did simply and faithfully observe that which they knew to be best in
their days, without the fault of any contradiction or animosity, and did so
recommend it to their posterity. and opposes thereunto Vniversalia Ecclesiae
Catholicae unanimem regulam. Ibid.
the unanimous rule of the Universal Catholic Church: deeming this to be a
very harsh conclusion. Roma errat, Hierosolyma errat, Alexandria errat,
Antiochia errat, totus mundus errat: soli tantum Scoti and Britones rectum
sapiunt* Ibid.
Rome erreth, Jerusalem erreth, Alexandria erreth, Antioch erreth, the whole
world erreth: the Scottish only and the Britons do alone hold the right. but
especially he urges the authority of the first of these Patriarchicall Sees,
which now (since the advancement thereof by the Emperor Phocas) began to be
admired by the inhabitants of the earth, as the place which God had chosen;
whereunto, if greater causes did arise, recourse was to be had, according to
the Synodicall decree, as unto the head of cities. and therefore he says, that
they sent some unto Rome: who returning back in the third year, informed
them, that they met there with a Grecian, and an Hebrew, and a Scythian, and an
Egyptian in one lodging; and that they all, and the whole world too, did keep
their Easter at the same time, when the Irish were dis-joyned from them by the
space of a whole This seems to have fallen out, eith r^i^ the year 634. or
645. wherein Easter was solemnized at Rome the 24. day of April. and it
appears by ou^ Annals, that Segenius was abbot of Y^Columkille from the year
624. until 652.
month. Vidimus oculis nostris puellam coecam omnine ad has reliqulas oculos
aperientem, and paralyticum ambulantem, and multa daemonia ejecta. Cummian.
And we have proved (says Cummianus) that the virtue of God was in the
relics of the holy Martyrs, and the Scriptures which they brought with them.
For we saw with our eyes, a maid altogether blind opening her eyes at these
relickes, and a man sick of the palsy walking, and many devils cast out. Thus
far he.

The Northren Irish and Albanian Scottish on the other side, made little
reckoning of the authority, either of the Bishop or of the Church of Rome. And
therefore Bid, speaking of Oswy king of Northumberland, says that
Intellex^rat enim veraciter Oswi, quamvis educatus a Scotis, quia Romana esset
Catholica and Apostolica Ecclesia. Bed. lib. 3. hist. cap. 29.
notwithstanding he was brought up by the Scottish, yet he understood that the
Roman was the Catholic and Apostolic Church (or, that the Roman Church was
Catholic and Apostolic) intimating thereby, that the Scottish, among whom he
received his education, were of another mind. And long before that,
Laurentius, Mellitus and Iustus (who were sent into England by Pope Gregory to
assist Austin) in a letter which they sent unto the Scots that did inhabit
Ireland (so Bid writes) complained of the distaste given unto them by their
countrymen, in this manner. Sed cognoscentes Britones, Sc^ttos meliores
putavimus. Scottos vero per Daganum Episcopum in hanc insulam, and Columbanum
Abbatem in Galliis venientem, nihil discrepare (...) Britonibus in eorum
conversatione didici^^m. Nam Daganus episcopus ad nos veniens, non solum cibum
nobiscum, sed nec in eodem hospitio quo vescebamur, sumere voluit, Laurent.
epist. apud Bed. lib. 2. cap. 4.
We knew the Britons, we thought that the Scots were better than they. But
we learned by Bishop Daganus coming into this Island, and Abbot Columbanus
coming into France; that the Scots did differ nothing from the Britons in
their conversation. For Daganus the Bishop coming unto us, would not take
meat with us, no not so much as in the same lodging wherein we did eat.

And as for miracles, we find them as rife among them that were opposite to
the Roman tradition, as upon the other side. If you doubt it, read what Bid
has written of Bishop Aidan ( Qui cuius meriti fuerit, etiam miraculorm signis
internus arbiter edocuit. ^ed. lib. 3. hist. cap. 15. item. 16* and 17.
who of what merit he was, the inward Judge has taught, even by the tokens of
miracles; says he) and Adamnanus of the life of S. Colme or Columkille.
Whereupon Bishop Colman in the Synod at Strenshal frames this conclusion.
Nunquid reverendissimum patrem nostrum Columbam, and successores ejus, viros
Deo dilectos, qui eodem modo Pascha fecerunt, divinis paginis contraria
sapuisse vel egisse credendum est? cum plurimi fuerint in eis, quorum
sanctitati coelesti signa and virtutem quae fecerunt miracula, testimonium
praebuerunt: quos ut ipse sanctos esse non dubitans semper eorum vitam, mores
and disciplinam sequi non desisto Colman. apud. Bed. lib. 3. hist. cap. 29.
Is it to be believed, that Colme our most reverend father, and his successors,
men beloved of God, which observed Easter in the same manner that we do, did
hold or do that which was contrary to the holy Scriptures? seeing there were
very many among them, to whose heavenly holiness the signs and miracles which
they did, bare testimony: whom nothing doubting to be Saints, I desist not to
follow evermore their life, manners, and discipline. What Wilfride replied to
this, may be seen in Bid: that which I much wonder at, among the many
wonderful things related of St. Colme by Adamnanus, is this* that where he
says, that this Saint, during the time of his abode in the abbay of Clone (now
called Clonmacnosh) did Revelante Spiritu Sanct^ prophetavit de illa quae post
dies mult^s ob^diversitatem Paschalis^ festi ona est inter Sco^iae Ecclesias
discordia. Adam^nan. Vit. Columb. lib. 1. cap. 3.
by the revelation of the holy Ghost prophecy of that discord, which after
many days arose among the Churches of Scotland (or Ireland) for the diversity
of the feast of Easter: yet he tells us not, that the holy Ghost revealed
unto him, that he himself (whose example animated his followers to stand more
stiffely herein against the Roman rite) was in the wrong, and ought to
conform his judgment to the tradition of the Churches abroad. as if the holy
Ghost did not much care, whether of both sides should carry the matter away in
this controversy: for which (if you please) you shall hear a very pretty tale
out of an old Legend, concerning this same discord whereof S. Colme is said to
have prophesied.

Quodam tempore erat magnum Concilium populorum Hiberniae in Campo albo: inter
quos erat contentio circa ordine^ Paschae. Lasre^nus enim abbas monasterii
Leighlinne, cui suberant mill quingenti monachi, no^um ordinem defend ^^at qui
nuper de Roma venit: alii vero veterem defendebant. Vit. S. Munna abbatit MS.
Upon a certain time (says my Author) there was a great Council of the
people of Ireland in the white field: among whom there was contention about the
order of Easter. For Lasreanus, the abbot of the monastery of Leighlin, unto
whom there were subject a thousand and five hundred monks, defended the new
order that lately came from Rome: but others defended the old. This Lasreanus
or Lazerianus is the man, who in other Legends (of no other credit than this we
now have in hand) is reported to have been the Bishop of Romes Legate in
Ireland; and is commonly accounted to have been the first Bishop of the Church
of Leighlin. His principal antagonist at this meeting was one Munna, founder
of the monastery which from his was called Teach-munna, that is, the house of
Munna (in the Bishopric of Mead:) who would needs bring this question to the
same kind of trial here, that Austin the monk is said to have done in
England. In defense of the Roman order, Bid tells us that Austin made this
motion to the British Bishops, for a final conclusion of the business.
Obsecremus Deum, qui habi^ate fecit unanimes in do^o patris sui, ^t ipse nobis
in^^^^^re coelestib^s signis dignetur, quae sequenda traditio, quibus sit vi^^
ad ingressum regni illius properandum. Adducatur aliquis aeger; and per cujus
preces fuerit curatus, hujus fides and operatio Deo devota atque omnibus
sequenda ^redatur. (...) ^ lib. 2. hist. cap. 2.
Let us beseech God, which makes men to dwell of one mind together in their
fathers house; that he will vouchsafe by some heavenly signs to make known
unto us, what tradition is to be followed, and by what way we may hasten to
the entry of his kingdom. Let some sick man be brought hither; and by whose
prayers he shall be cured, let his faith and working be believed to be
acceptable unto God, and to be followed by all men.

Now Munna, who stood in defense of the order formerly used by the British and
Irish, makes a more liberal proffer in this kind, and leaves Lasreanus to
his choice. Breviter disputemus: sed in nomine Domini agamus judicium. Tres
optiones dantur tibi, Lasreane. Duo libri in ignem mittentur, liber veteris
ordinis and novi; ut videamus, quis eorum de igne liberabitur. Vel duo monachi,
unus meus alter tuus, in unam domum recludantur, and domus comburatur: and
videbimus, quis ex eis evadat intactus igne. Aut eamus ad sepulchrum mortui
iusti monachi, and resuscitemus eum; and indicet nobis, quo ordine debemus hoc
anno Pascha celebrare. Vit. S. Munn^.
Let us dispute briefly ( says he) but in the name of God let us give
judgment. Three things are given to thy choice, Lasreanus. Two books shall be
cast into the fire, a book of the old order and of the new; that we may see
whether of them both shall be freed from the fire. Or let two Monks, one of
mine and another of thine, be shut up into one house: and let the house be
burnt, and we shall see which of them will escape untouched of the fire. Or
let us go unto the grave of a just Monk that is dead, and raise him up
again: and let him tell us, after what order we ought to celebrate Easter
this year. But Lasreanus being wiser than so, refused to put so great a matter
to that hazard: and therefore returned this grave answer unto Munna; if all be
true that is in the Legend. Non ibimus ad iudicium tuum, quoniam scimus quod,
pro magnitudine laboris tui and sanctitatis, si diceres ut mons Marge
commutaretur in locum Campi albi and Campus albus in locum montis Marge; hoc
propter te Deu. statim faceret. Ibid.
We will not go unto thy judgment: because we know that, for the greatness
of thy labor and holiness, if thou should bid that mount Marge should be
changed into the place of the White field, and the White field into the place
of mount Marge; God would presently do this for thy sake. So prodigal do
some make God to be of miracles, and in a manner careless how they should
fall; as if in the dispensing of them, he did respect the gracing of persons
rather than of causes.

In what year this Council of the White field was held, is not certainly
known: nor yet whether S. Munna be that whited wall, of whom we heard
Cummianus complain. The Synod of Strenshal (before mentioned) was assembled
long after, at Whitby (called by the Saxons Streanesheale) in Yorkshire, the
Bed. lib. 3. hist. cap. 26.
year of our Lord DCLXIIII. for the decision of the same question. Concerning
which, in the life of Wilfrid ( written by one Aeddi an acquaintance of his,
surnamed Stephen; at the commandment of Acca, who in the time of Bid was
Bishop of Hangustald or Hexham, in Northumberland) we read thus. Quodam
tempore in diebus Colmanni Eboracae civitatis episcopi metropolitani,
regantibus Oswi and Alhfrido filio eius, Abbates and Presbyteri omnesque
Ecclesiasticae disciplinae gradus simul in unum convenientes, in coenobio quae
Streaneshel dicitur; praesente sanctimoniale matre piissima Hilde, praesentibus
quoque Regibus and duobus Colmanno and Aegilberhto Episcopis, de Paschali
ratione conquirebant, quid esset rectissimum. utrum more Brittonum and
Scottorum omnisque Aquilonalis partis a XIIII. Luna Dominica die veniente usque
ad XXII. ( leg XX.) Pascha agendum; an melius sit ratione Sedis Apostolicae, a
XV. Luna usque XXI. Paschalem Dominicam celebrandam. Tempus datum est Colman^o
episcopo primum, ut dignum erat, audientibus cunctis reddere rationem. Ille
autem intrepida mente responden^, dixit. Patres nostri and antecessores eorum
manifest Spiritu sancto inspirati, ut erat Columcille, XIIII. Luna die
Dominica Pascha celebrandum sanxerunt: exemplum tenentes Iohannis Apostoli and
Evangelistae, qui supra pectus Domini in Coena recubuit, and amator Domini
dicebatur. Ille XIIII. Luna Pascha celebravit; and nos, sicut discipuli eius
Polycarpus and alii, celebramus: nec hoc audemus pro patribus ( ^ort. partibus)
nostris, nec volumus mutare. Stephanus presbyter (qui and Ae^di, apud B^dam,
lib. 4. hist. cap. 2.) in Vita wilfrid. cap. 10. MS. in Bibliotheca
Sarisburiensis Ecclesiae, and D. Roberti Cottoni.
Upon a certain time in the days of Colman metropolitan Bishop of the city
of York, Oswi and Alhfrid his son being Kings; the Abbots and Priests and
all the degrees of Ecclesiastical orders meeting together at the monastery
which is called Streaneshel, in the presence of Hilde the most godly mother of
that abbey, in presence also of the Kings and the two Bishops Colman and
Aegelberht, inquiry was made touching the observation of Easter, what was most
right to be held: whether Easter should be kept according to the custom of
the Brittous and the Scots and all the Northren part, upon the Lords day that
came from the XIIII. day of the Moon until the XX. or whether it were better,
that Easter Sunday should be celebrated from the XV. day of the Moon until
the XXI. after the manner of the Sea Apostolic. Time was given unto Bishop
Colman in the first place, as it was fit, to deliver his reason in the audience
of all. Who with an undaunted mind made his answer, and said. Our fathers and
their predecessors, who were manifestly inspired by the holy Ghost, as
Columkille was, did ordain that Easter should be celebrated upon the Lords day
that fell upon the XIIII. Moon; following the example of John the Apostle and
Evangelist, who leaned upon the breast of our Lord at his last Supper, and was
called the lover of the Lord. He celebrated Easter upon the XIIII. day of the
Moon: and we with the same confidence celebrate the same, as his Disciples
Polycarpus and others did; neither dare we for our parts, neither will we
change this.

Bid relates his speech thus. Pascha hoc quod agere soleo, a maioribus meis
accepi, qui me huc Episcopum miserunt: quod omnes patres nostri viri Deo
dilecti eodem modo celebrasse noscuntur. Quod ne cui contemnendum and
reprobandum esse videatur: ipsum est quod beatus Johannes Evangelista,
discipulus specialiter Domino dilectus, cum omnibus quibus prae erat Ecclesiis,
celebrasse legitur. Colman. apud Bedam, lib. 3. hist. cap. 23.
This Easter which I use to observe, I received from my elders, who did send me
Bishop hither: which all our fathers, men beloved of God, are known to have
celebrated after the same manner. Which that it may not seem unto any to be
contemned and rejected: it is the same which the blessed Evangelist John, the
disciple specially beloved by our Lord, with all the Churches whech he did
oversee, is read to have celebrated. Fridegodus a who wrote the life of Wilfrid
at the command of Odo Archbishop of Canterbury) expresses the same Verse,
after this manner. F^idegod. Vit. Wilfrid. MS in Bibliothec. Cottonian.
Nos seriem patriam, non frivola scripta tenemus,
Discipulo i. Sancti vel Beati.
eusebit Polycarpo dante Iohannis.
Ille etenim bis septenae sub tempore Phoebae
Sanctum praefixit nobis fore Pascha colendum,
Atque nefas dixit, si quis contraria sentit.


On the contrary side Wilfrid objected unto Colman and his Clerks of Ireland;
that they with their accomplices, the Pictes and the Brittons, Cum quibus de
duabus ultimi^ Oceani insulis, his non totis, contra totum Orbem stulto labor
pugnant. Wilfrid. apud Bed. lib. 3. cap. 25.
out of the two utmost Isles, and those not whole neither, did with a foolish
labor fight against the whole world. Et si sanctus erat aut potens virtutibus
^lle Columba vester, imo and noster si Christi erat: number praeferri potuit
beatissimo Apostolorum principi? cui Dominus ^it: Tu es Petrus, and super hanc
petram aedificabo Ecclesiam mea^, and portae inferi non praevalebunt adversus
eam; Et tibi dabo claves ^egni coelorum. Ibid.
And if that Columb of yours ( says he) yea and ours also if he were Christ's,
was holy and powerful in virtues: could he be preferred before the most
blessed Prince of the Apostles? unto whom the Lord said: Thou art Peter, and
upon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it; and I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of
heaven. Which last words wrought much upon the simplicity of King Oswy; who
feared, that Neforte me adveni^nte ad fores regni coelorum, non sit qui
reseret, averso illo qui claves tenere probatur. Ibid.
when he should come to the doors of the kingdom of heaven, there would be
none to open, if he were displeased who was proved to keep the keys: but
prevailed nothing with Bishop Colman; who Tonsuram and Paschae rationem propter
timorem patriae suae contempsit. Steph. presbyter, in Vit. Wilfrid. cap. 10.
for the fear of his country ( as Stephen in the life of Wilfrid writes)
contemned the tonsure and the observation of Easter used by the Romans; and
Colman videns spretam suam doctrinam, sectamque esse despectam; assumptis his
qui se sequi voluerunt, id est, qui Pascha catholicum and tonsuram coronae (nam
and de hoc quaestio non minima erat) recipere nolebant, in Scotiam regressus
est. Bed. lib. 3. hist. cap. 26. Vide etiam lib. 4. cap. 4.
taking with him such as would follow him, that is to say, such as would not
receive the Catholic Easter and the tonsure of the crown (for of that also
there was then no small question) returned back again into Scotland.

CHAP. X.
Of the height that the opposition betwixt the Roman party and that of the
British and Scottish grew unto; and the abatement thereof in time: and how the
Doctors of the Scottish and Irish side have been ever accounted most eminent
men in the Catholic Church, notwithstanding their disunion from the Bishop of
Rome.

IN Colmans room Wilfrid was chosen Archbishop of York: who had learned at
Rome from Archdeacon Boniface, Paschalem rationem, quam schismatici Britanniae
and Hiberniae non^cognoverunt; and alias multas Ecclesiasticae disciplinae
regulas Bonifacius archidiaconus quasi proprio filio suo diligenter dictavit.
Step* Presb. vit. Wilfrid. cap. 5. See also Bid, lib. 5. cap. 20.
the course of Easter, which the schismatics of Britain and Ireland did not
know ( so go the words of Stephen, the ancient writer of his life:) and
afterward did brag, Se primum fuisse, qui verum Pascha in Northanimbria Scotis
eiectis docuerit, qui cantus Ecclesiasticos antiphonatim instituerit, qui
sanctissimi Bendicti regulam a monachis observari jusserit. Gulielm. Malmesbur.
lib. 3. de gest. Pontific. Angl.
that he was the first which did teach the true Easter in Northumberland
(having cast out the Scots) which did ordain the Ecclesiastical songs to be
parted on sides, and which did command S. Benets rule to be observed by Monks.
But when he was named to the Archbishopricke, Sed perstitit ille negare; ne ab
Episcopis Scottis, vel ab iis quos Scotti ordinaverant, consecrationem
susciperet, quorum communionem seeds aspernaretur Apostolica. Id. ibid.
he refused it at the first (as William of Malmesbury relates) lest he should
receive his consecration from the Scottish Bishops, or from such as the Scots
had ordained, whose communion the Apostolic See had rejected. The speech which
he used to this purpose, unto the Kings that had chosen him, is thus laid down
by Stephen the writer of his life. O Domini venerabiles Reges; omnibus modis
nobis necessarium est provide considerare, quomodo cum electione vestra, sine
accusatione catholicorum vitorum, ad granum Episcopalem cum Dei adiutorio
venire valeam. Sunt enim hic in Brytannia multi episcopi, quoru^ nullum meum
est accusare, quamvis veraciter sciam, quod aut quatuordecim anni sunt, ut
Brytones and Scotti ab illis sunt ordinati, quos nec Apostolica seeds in
communionem recepit, neque eos qui schismaticis consentiunt, Et ideo in mea
humilitate a vobis posco, ut me mittatis cum vestro praefidio trans mare ad
Galliarum regionem, ubi catholici episcopi multi habentur: ut sine controversia
Apostolicae sedis, licet indignus, gradum Episcopalem merear accipere. Steph.
Presb. Vit. Wilfrid. cap. 12.
O my honorable Lords the Kings; it is necessary for us by all means
providently to consider, how with your election I may (by the help of God)
come to the degree of a Bishop, without the accusation of catholic men. For
there be many Bishops here in Britain, none of whom it is my part to accuse,
ordained within these fourteen years by the Brittons and Scots, whom neither
the Sea Apostolic has received into her communion, nor yet such as consent
with the sch^smaticks. And therefore in my humility I request of you, that you
would send me with your warrant beyond the Sea, into the country of France,
where many Catholic Bishops are to be had; that without any controversy of
the Apostolic See I may be counted meet, though unworthy, to receive the
degree of a Bishop.

While Quo ultra mare moras nectente, Oswius Rex, praeventus consiliis
Quartadecimanorum (qui vocabantur ita, quia Pascha in quartadecima Luna cum
Iudaeis celebrabant) Ceddam virum sanctissimum, tamen contra regulas, intrusit
tribunali Eborac^nsi. Gulielm. Malmesb. lib. 3. de gest. Pontif. Angl.
Wilfrid protracted time beyond the Seas, King Oswy led by the advice of the
Quartadecimans (so they injuriously nicknamed the British and Irish, that did
celebrate Easter from the fourteenth to the twentieth day of the moon)
appointed Ordinantes servum Dei religiosissimum and admirabilem Doctorem, de
Hibernia insula venientem nomine Coeodda, adhuc eo ignorante, in sedem
Episcopalem Euroicae civitatis indocte contra canones constituerunt. Steph.
presb. Vit. Wilfrid* cap. 14.
a most religious servant of God and an admirable Doctor that came from
Ireland, named Ceadda, to be ordained Bishop of York in his room. Constituunt
etenim perverso canone Coeddam,
Moribus acclinem, doctrinae robore fortem,
Praesulis eximij servare cubilia: sicque
Audacter vivo sponsam rapuere marito,
says Fridegodus. This Ceadda, being the scholar of Bishop Aidan, was far
otherwise affected to the British and Irish than Wilfrid was: and therefore
was content to receive his ordination from Ab illo est consecratus antistes,
assumptis in societatem ordinationis duobus de Britonum gente Episcopis, qui
Dominicum Paschae diem secus morem canonicum a XIIII. usque ad XXI. Lunam
celebrant. Non enim erat tunc ullus, excepto illo Wini, in tota Brittannia
canonice ordinatus episcopus. Bed. lib. 3. hist. ca. 28.
Wini Bishop of the West Saxons, and tow other British Bishops that were of
the Quartadeciman party. For at that time (as Bede notes) there was not in
all Britain any Bishop canonically ordained (that is to say, by such as were
of the communion of the Church of Rome) except that Wini only.

But shortly after, the opposition betwixt these two sides grew to be so great,
that our Cuthbert ( Bishop of Lindisfarne) upon his deathbed required his
followers; that they should Cum illis autem qui ab unitate catholicae pacis,
vel Pascha non suo tempore celebrando, vel perverse vivendo aberrant, vobis sit
nulla communio, etc. Id. in Vit. Cuthbert. cap. 39.
hold no communion with them which did swerve from the unity of the Catholic
peace, either by not celebrating Easter in his due time, or by living
perversely: and that they should rather take up his bones and remove their place
of habitation, than any way condescend to submit their necks unto the yoke of
schismatickes. For the further maintaining of which breach also, there were
certain decrees made both by the Romans, and by the Saxons that were guided
by their institution. One of the instructions that the Romans gave them, was
this: J^stitutio dicit Romans Cavendum est ne ad alias provincias aut ecclesias
referantur causae, quae alio more and alia religione utantur: sive ad Iudaeos,
qui umbrae legis magis quam veritati deserviunt; aut Britones, qui omnibus
contratii sunt, and a Romano more and ab unitate Ecclesiae se absciderunt; aut
Haereticos, quamvis sint in Ecclesiasticis causis docti, and studiosi fuerint,
Ex Codice Canonum Cottoniano, titulorum 66.
You must beware, that causes be not referred to other Provinces or Churches,
which use another manner and another religion: whether to the Jews, which do
serve the shadow of the Law rather than the truth* or to the Britons, who are
contrary unto all men, and have cut themselves off from the Roman manner, and
the unity of the Church; or to Heretics, although they should be learned in
Ecclesiastical causes, and well studied. And among the decrees made by some of
the Saxon Bishops (which were to be seen in the Library of Sir Thomas Knevet
in Northfolke, and are still, I suppose, preserved there by his heir) this is
laid down for one. Qui ordinati sunt a Scottorum vel Brittannorum Episcopis,
qui in Pascha vel Tonsura Catholicae non sunt adunati Ecclesiae; iterum a
Catholico Episcopo manus impositione confirmentur Similiter and Ecclesiae quae
ab illis Episcopis ordinantur, aqua exorcizata aspergantur, and aliqua
collectione confirmentur. Licentiam quoque non habemus eis poscentibus Chrismam
vel Eucharistiam dare, ni ante confessi fuerint velle se nobiscum esse in
unitate Ecclesiae. Et qui ex horum similiter gente, vel quacunque, de baptismo
suo dubitaverint, baptizentur. Decret Pontific. MS. cap. 9. De communicatione
Scottorum and Brittonum, qui in Pascha and Tonsura catholici non sunt.
Such as have received ordination from the Bishops of the Scots or Britains,
who in the matter of Easter and Tonsure are not united unto the Catholic
Church, let them be again by imposition of hands confirmed by a Catholic
Bishop. In like manner also let the Churches that have been ordered by those
Bishops, be sprinkled with exorcized water, and confirmed with some service.
We have no license also to give unto them Chrisme or the Eucharist, when they
require it; unless they do first profess, that they will remain with us in
the unity of the Church. And such likewise as either of their nation, or of any
other, shall doubt of their baptism, let them be baptized. Thus did they.

On the other side, how averse the British and the Irish were from having any
communion with those of the Roman party; the Bed. lib. 2. hist. cap. 4.
complaint of Laurentius, Mellitus, and Iustus before specified, does
sufficiently manifest. And the answer is well known, which Septem Britonum
Episcopi, and plures viri doctissimi, maxim de nobilissimo eorum monasterio,
quod vocatur lingua Anglorum Bancornaburg, cui Dinoot abbas praefuisse
narratur. Bed. lib. 2. hist. cap. 2.
the seven British Bishops, and many other most learned men of the same
nation, did return unto the propositions made unto them by Austin the Monk (who
was sent unto their parts with authority from Rome:) that Illi nihil horum se
facturos, neque illum pro Archiepiscopo habituros e^se respondebant. Id ^bid.
Tam ipsum quam ejus statuta, statim reversi spreverunt: nec ipsum pro
Archiepiscopo se habituros public proclamabant. Girald. Cambrens. ^tinerar.
Cambriae, lib. 2. cap. 1.
they would perform none of them, nor at all adneit him for their Archbishop.
The Welsh Chroniclers do further relate, that Dinot the Abbot of Bangor
produced diverse arguments at that time, to show that they did owe him no
subjection: and this among others. In a Welsh Manuscript, sometime belonging
unto P. Mostein Gentleman.
We are under the government of the Bishop of Kaer-leon upon Vske, who under
God is to oversee us, and cause us to keep the way spiritual. and Gotcelinus
Bertinianus in the life of Austin: A^ctorizabant suas ceremonias non solum a
sancto Eleutherio Papa primo institutore suo ab ipsa pene infantia Ecclesiae
dicatas, ve^um a sanctis patribus suis Dei amicis and Apostolorum sequacibus
hactenus observatas; quas non deberent mutare propter novos dogmatistas.
Gotcel^. monachus, in vita Augustini, cap. 32. MS. in Bibliotheca Cottoniana.
that for the authority of their ceremonies they did allege, that they were
not only delivered unto them by Saint Eleutherius the Pope their first
instructor at the first infancy almost of the Church, but also hitherto
observed by their holy fathers who were the friends of God and followers of the
Apostles: and therefore they ought not to change them for any new dogmatists.
But above all others, the British Priests that dwelt in West-wales abhorred
the communion of these new dogmatists above all measure: as Aldhelme Abbot of
Malmesbury declares at large in his Epistle sent to Geruntius King of
Cornwall. where among many other particulars he shows, that Si quilibet de
nostris, id est, Catholicis ad eos habi^andi gratia perrexerint; non prius ad
consortium sodalitatis suae adsciscere dignantur, quam quadraginta dierum
spatia in poenitendo peragere compellantur. Aldhelm. epist. ad Domnonios.
if any of the Catholics (for so he calls those of his own side) did go
to dwell among them; they would not vouchsafe to admit them unto their company
and society, before they first put them to forty days penance. Yea, Quippe cum
usque hodie moris sit Britonum, fide^ religionemque Anglorum pro nihilo habere,
neque in aliquo eis magis communicare quam paganis. Bed. lib. 2. hist. cap. 20.
even to this day ( says Bid, who wrote his history in the year DCCXXXI.) it
is the manner of the Brittons, to hold the faith and the religion of the
English in no account at all, nor to communicate with them in any thing more
than with Pagans.

Whereunto those Verses of Taliessyn (honored by the Britons with the title of
Ben Beirdh, that is, the chief of the Bardes or Wisemen) may be added: (which
show, that he wrote after the coming of Austin into England, and not 50. or
60. years before, as others have imagined.) Chronicle of Wales, page 254.
Gwae'r offeiriad bid
Nys engreifftia gwyd
Ac ny phregetha:
Gwae ny cheidw ey gail
Ac of in vigail,
Ac nys areilia:
Gwae ny cheidw ey dheuaid
Rhac bleidhie, Rhufeniaid
A'iffon gnwppa.
Woe be to that Priest yborne,
That will not cleanly weed his corn
And preach his charge among:
Woe be to that shepherd (I say)
That will not watch his fold always,
As to his office does belong:
Woe be to him that does not keep
From Romish wolves his sheep
With staff and weapon strong.


As also those others of Mantuan; which show that some took the boldness to
tax the Romans of folly, impudency, and stolidity, for standing so much upon
matters of humane institution, that for the not admitting of them they would
break peace there, where the Law of God and the Doctrine first delivered by
Christ and his Apostles was safely kept and maintained. Baptist. Mantuan.
Fastor. lib. 1.
Add quod and patres ausi taxare Latinos;
Causabantur eos stulte, imprudenter, and aequo
Durius, ad ritum Romae voluisse Britannos
Cogere, and antiquum tam praecipitanter amorem
Tam stolido temerasse ausu. Concedere Roma
Debuit, aiebant, potius quam rumpere pacem
Humani quae juris erant; modo salva maneret
Lex divina, fides, Christi doctrina, Senatus
Quam primus tulit ore suo; quia tradita ab ipso
Christo erat, humanae doctore and lumine vitae.


By all that has been said, the vanity of Osullevan may be seen, who feigneth
the Northren Irish, together with the Picts and the Britons, to have been so
obsequious unto the Bishop of Rome; that they reformed the celebration of
Easter by them formerly used, as soon as they understood what the rite of the
Roman Church was. Whereas it is known, that after the declaration thereof
made by Pope Honorius and the Clergy of Rome; the Northren Irish were nothing
moved therewith, but continued still their own tradition. And therefore Bid
finds no other excuse for Bishop Aidan herein; but that Quod autem Pascha non
suo tempore observabat, vel canonicum ejus tempus ignorans, vel suae gentis
auctoritate, ne agnitum sequeretur, devictus; non approbo nec laudo. Bed. lib.
3. hist. cap. 17.
either he was ignorant of the canonical time, or if he knew it, that he was
so overcome with the authority of his own nation, that he did not follow it:
that he did it, More suae gentis. Ibid. cap. 3.
after the manner of his own nation; and that Pascha contra morem eorum qui
ipsum miserant, facere non potuit. Ibid. cap. 25.
he could not keep Easter contrary to the custom of them which had sent him.
His successor Finan Id. ibid.
contended more fiercely in the business with Ronan his countryman; and
declared himself an open adversary to the Roman rite. Colman that succeeded
him, did tread just in his steps: so far, that being put down in the Synod
of Streanshal, yet for fear of his country (as before we have heard out of
Stephen, the writer of the life of Wilfrid) he refused to conform himself;
and chose rather to forgo his Bishopric, than to submit himself unto the
Roman laws, Colmanusque suas inglorius abjicit arces,
Malens Ausonias victus dissolvere leges:
says Fridegodus. Neither did he go away alone: but Colmanus qui de Scotia
erat Episcopus, relinquens Britanniam, tulit secum omnes quos in Lindisfarorum
insula congregaverat Scotos. Bid lib. 4. cap. 4.
took with him all his countrymen that he had gathered together in Lindisfarne
or Holy Island: the Scottish monks also that were at Rippon (in Yorkshire)
Optione data, maluerunt loco cedere, quam Pascha catholicum, caeterosque ritus
canonicos juxta Romanae and Apostolicae Ecclesiae consuetudinem recipere. Id.
lib. 5. cap. 20. See also lib. 3. cap. 25. where Humpum is ^^sprinted for
Hripum.
making choice rather to quit their place, than to admit the observation of
Easter and the rest of the rites according to the custom of the Church of
Rome. And so did the matter rest among the Irish about forty years after that:
until their own countryman Ibid cap. 16. and 22.
Adamnanus persuaded most of them to yield to the custom received herein by
all the Churches abroad.

The Picts did the like not long after, under King Naitan: who Nec mora, quae
dixerat, regia autoritate perfecit. Statim namque jussu publico mittebantur ad
transcribendum, discendum, observandum per universus Pictorum provincias
circuli Paschae decennovennales; obliteratis per omnia erroneis octoginta and
quatuor annorum circulis. Attondehantur omnes in coronam ministri altaris ac
monachi. etc. Ibid. ca. 22.
by his regal authority commanded Easter to be observed throughout all his
provinces according to the cycle of XIX. years (abolishing the erroneous
period of LXXXIIII. years which before they used) and caused all Priests and
Monks to be shorn croune-wise, after the Roman manner. The monks also of
the Island of Hy or Y-Columkille, Id. lib. 3. ca. 4. and lib. 5. cap. 23.
by the persuasion of Ecgbert (an English Priest, that had been bred in
Ireland) in the year of our Lord DCCXVI. forsook the observation of Easter
and the Tonsure which they had received from Columkille a hundred and fifty
years before, and followed the Roman rite; about LXXX. years after the time
of Pope Honorius, and the sending of Bishop Aidan from thence into England. The
Britons in the time of Id. lib. 5. cap. 23. and 24.
Bid retained still their old usage: until See the Chronicle of Wales, page
17. 18. and Humfr. I. buyd. fragment. Britan. Descript. fol. 55. b.
Elbodus (who was the chief Bishop of Northwales, and dyed in the year of our
Lord DCCCIX. as Caradoc of Lhancarvan records) brought in the Roman
observation of Easter. which is the cause, why Ego Nennius sancti Elbodi
discipulus, aliqua excerpta scribere curavi. Nem. MS. in publica Cantabrig.
academ. Bibliotheca, ubi alia exemplaria habent: Ego Nennius ( vel Ninnius)
Elvodugi discipulus.
his disciple Nennius, designeth the time wherein he wrote his history, by the
character of the Ab adventu Patricii in jam dictam insulam ( Hiberniam sc.)
usque ad cyclum decennovennalem in quo sumu^, 22. sunt cycli, id est, 421. and
sunt duo anni in Ogdoade usque in hunc annum. Id.
XIX. years cycle, and not of the other of LXXXIV. But howsoever North Wales
did; it is very probable that West-wales (which of all other parts was most
eagerly bent against the traditions of the Roman Church) stood out yet longer.
For we find in the Greek writers of the life of Chrysostom, that certain
Clergy men which dwelt in the Isles of the Ocean, repaired from the utmost
borders of the habitable world unto Constantinople, in the days of Methodius
(who was Patriarch there, from the year DCCCXLII. to the year DCCCXLVII.) to
enquire of (...) Tom. 8. Chrysostom. edit. Henr. Savil. page 321. 60 and in
Noels. col. ^66. 5.
certain Ecclesiastical traditions, and the perfect and exact computation of
Easter. Whereby it appears, that these questions were kept still a foot in
these Islands; and that the resolution of the Bishop of Constantinople was
sought for from hence, as well as the determination of the Bishop of Rome, who
is now made the only Oracle of the world.

Neither is it here to be omitted, that whatsoever broils did pass betwixt
our Irish that were not subject to the Sea of Rome, and those others that were
of the Roman communion: in the succeeding ages, they of the one side were
esteemed to be Saints, as well as they of the other; Aidan for example and
Finan, who were counted ringleaders of the Quartadeeiman party, as well as
Wilfrid and Cuthbert, who were so violent against it. Yet now adays men are
made to believe, that out of the communion of the Church of Rome nothing but
Hell can be looked for; and that subjection to the Bishop of Rome, as to the
visible Head of the Universal Church, is required as a matter necessary to
salvation. Which if it may go current for good Divinity: the case is like to
go hard, not only, with the (...) lib. 2. hist. cap. ^.
twelve hundred British Monks of Bangor, who were martyred in one day by
Edelfride king of Northumberland (whom our Annals style by the name of Ann.
Dom. 612. ( vel 613.) Bellum Cairelegion, ubi Sancti occisi sunt. Amlt. Vlton.
MS.
the Saints;) but also with St. Aidan and St. Finan, who deserve to be
honored by the English nation with as venerable a remembrance, as (I do not
say, Wilfrid and Cuthbert; but) Austin the Monk and his followers. For by the
ministry of Bed. lib. 3. hist. cap. 3. and 6.
Aidan was the kingdom of Northumberland recovered from paganism: (whereunto
belonged then, beside the shire of Northumberland and the lands beyond it unto
Edenborrow, Frith, Cumberland also and Westmorland, Lancashire, Yorkshire, and
the Bishopric of Durham:) and by the means of Ibid. cap. 21. 22. 24.
Finan, not only the Kingdom of the East Saxons (which contained Essex,
Middlesex, and half of Hertfordshire) regained, but also the large Kingdom of
Mercia converted first unto Christianity; which comprehended underit,
Glocestershire, Herefordshire, Worcestershire, Warwickshire, Leicestershire,
Rutlandshire, Northamptonshire, Lincolneshire, Huntingtonshire, Bedfordshire,
Buckinghamshire, Oxfordshire, Staffordshire, Darbyshire, Shropshire,
Nottinghamshire, Chesshire, and the other half of Hertfordshire.

The Scottish that professed no subjection to the Church of Rome, were they,
that sent preachers for the conversion of these countries; and ordained Bishops
to govern them: namely, Ibid. cap. 3. 5. 17. 25. 26.
Aidan, Finan and Colman successively for the kingdom of Northumberland; Ibid.
cap. 22. 25.
for the East Saxons, Cedd brother to Ceadda the Bishop of York before
mentioned, Ibid cap. 21. 24.
for the Middle-Angles (which inhabited Leicestershire) and the Mercians, Diuma
(for Paucitas enim Sacerdotum cogebat unum antistitem duobus populis praefici.
Ibid. cap. 21.
the paucity of Priests, says Bid, constrained one Bishop to be appointed
over two people) and after him Cellach and Trumhere. And these with their
followers, notwithstanding their division from the Sea of Rome, were for Ibid.
cap. 3. 4. 5. 17. 26.
their extraordinary sanctity of life and painfulnesse in preaching the Gospel
(wherein they went far beyond those of the other side, that afterward thrust
them out and entered in upon their labors) exceedingly reverenced by all that
knew them: Aidan especially, who Etsi Pascha contra morem eorum qui ipsum
miserant, facere non potuit; opera tamen fidei, pietatis and dilectionis, juxta
morem omnibus sanctis consuetum diligenter exequi curavit. Vnde ab omnibus
etiam his qui de Pascha aliter sentiebant, merito diligebatur: nec solum a
mediocribus, verum, ab ipsis quoque episcopis, Honorio Cantua^^orum and Felice
Orientalium Anglorum, venerationi habitus est. Ibid. cap. 25.
although he could not keep Easter (says Bid) contrary to the manner of
them which had sent him; yet he was careful diligently to perform the works
of faith and godliness, and love, according to the manner used by all holy
men. Whereupon he was worthily beloved of all, even of them also who thought
otherwise of Easter than he did: and was had in reverence not only by them that
were of meaner rank, but also by the Bishops themselves, Honorius of
Canterbury, and Felix of the East Angles. Neither did Honorius and Felix any
other way carry themselves herein, than their predecessors Laurentius, Mellitus
and Iustus had done before them: who writing unto the Bishops of Ireland, that
dissented from the Church of Rome in the celebration of Easter and many other
things; made no scruple to prefixe this loving and respectfull superscription
to their letters. Dominis charissimis fratribus, Episcopis vel Abbatious per
universam Scotiam; Laurentius, Mellitus, and Iustus Episcopi, servi servorum
Dei Id lib. 2 cap. 4.
To our Lords and most dear brethren, the Bishops or Abbots throughout all
Scotland; Laurentius, Mellitus and Iustus Bishops, the servants of the servants
of God. For howsoever Ireland at that time Gens quanquam absque reliquatum
gentium legibus; tamen in Christiani vigoris dogmate florens, omnium vicinarum
gentium fidem praepollet. Ion. Vit. Columban. cap. 1.
received not the same laws wherewith other nations were governed: yet it so
flourished in the vigor of Christian doctrine, (as Abbot Jonas testifies)
that it exceeded the faith of all the neighbor nations; and in that respect
was generally had in honor by them.

CHAP. XI
Of the temporal power, which the Popes followers would directly entitle him
unto over the Kingdom of Ireland: together with the indirect power which he
challenges in absolving subjects from the obedience which they owe to their
temporal Governors.

IT now remains that in the last place we should consider the Popes power in
disposing the temporal state of this Kingdom: which either directly or
indirectly, by hook or by crook, this grand Usurper would draw unto himself.
First therefore Cardinal Allen would have us to know, that Allen. Answer to
the Execution of Justice in England. page 140.
the Sea Apostolic has an old claim unto the soveraigntie of the country of
Ireland; and that before the Covenants passed between King John and the same
Sea. Which challenges (says he) Princes commonly yield not up, by what ground
soever they come. What Princes use to yield or not yield, I leave to the
scanning of those, unto whom Princes matters do belong: for the Cardinals
Prince I dare be bold to say, that if it be not his use to play fast and loose
with other Princes, the matter is not now to do; whatsoever right he could
pretend to the temporal state of Ireland, he has transferred it (more than
once) unto the Kings of England. and when the ground of his claim shall be
looked into; it will be found so frivolous and so ridiculous, that we need not
care three chippes, whether he yield it up or keep it to himself. For
whatsoever become of his idle challenges: the Crown of England has otherwise
obtained an undoubted right unto the soveraigntie of this country; partly by
Conquest, prosecuted at first upon occasion of a Sociall war, partly by the
several submissions of the chiefetaines of the land made afterward. For Cum
juri suo renuntiare liberum fit cuilibet (quanquam subjectionis cujuslibet
hactenus immunes) his tamen hodie nostris diebus, Anglorum Regi Henrico secundo
omnes Hiberniae principes firmis fidei sacramentique vinculis se sponte
submiserunt. Girald. Cambrens. Hibern expug^at. lib. 3. cap. 7.
whereas it is it free for all men, although they have been formerly quitt from
all subjection, to renounce their own right: yet now in these our days (says
Giraldus Cambrensis, in his history of the Conquest of Ireland) all the
Princes of Ireland did voluntarily submitt, and bind themselves with firm
bonds of faith and oath, unto Henry the second King of England. The like might
be said of the general submissions made in the days of King Richard the
second and King Henry the eighth: to speak nothing of the prescription of
diverse hundreds of years possession; which was the plea that Judge. 11. 26.
Iephte used to the Ammonites, and is indeed the best evidence that the Bishop
of Romes own Genebrard. Chr^^graph. lib. 3. in Sylvest. 1. Bellarmin. de Roman.
Pontif. lib. 5. cap. 9. in fine.
Proctors do produce for their Masters right to Rome it self.

For the Popes direct dominion over Ireland, two titles are brought forth;
beside those covenants of King John (mentioned by Allen) which he that has
any understanding in our state, knows to be clearly void and worth nothing.
The one is taken from a special grant supposed to be made by the inhabitants
of the country, at the time of their first conversion unto Christianity: the
other from a right which Insulas omnes sibi special quodam iure vendicat.
Girald. Cambr. Hibern. expugnat. lib. ^. cap. 3.
the Pope challenges unto himself over all Islands in general. The former of
these was devised of late by an Italian, in the reign of King Henry the
eighth; the later was found out in the days of King Henry the second: before
whose time not one footestep does appear in all antiquity of any claim that
the Bishop of Rome should make to the dominion of Ireland; no not in the Popes
own records, which have been curiously searched by Nicolaus Arragonius, and
other ministers of his, who have purposely written of the particulars of his
temporal estate. The Italian of whom I spoke, is Polydore Vergil; he that
composed the book De inventoribus rerum, of the first Inventers of things:
among whom he himself may challenge a place for this invention; if the
Inventers of lies be admitted to have any room in that company. This man
being sent over by the Pope into England Nos hanc alim quaesturam aliquot per
a^not gessimus; eiusque muneris obeundi caussa, primum in Angliam venitnus.
Poly (...) Vergil. Anglic. bis^^. lib. 4.
for the collecting of his Peterpence, undertook the writing of the history
of that nation, wherein he forgot not by the way to do the best service he
could to his Lord that had employed him thither. There he tells an idle
tale; how the Irish being moved to accept Henry the second for their King, Id
Hiberni posse fieri, nisi autoritate Romani Pontificis negabant; quod iam inde
ab initio, post Christianam religionem acceptam, sese ac omnia sua in eius
ditionem dedidissent: atque constanter affirmabant, non alium habere se
Dominum, praeter ipsum Pontificem: id quod etiam nunc iactitant, Id. lib. 13.
eiusa. histor.
did deny that this could be done otherwise than by the Bishop of Romes
anthoritie: because (forsooth) that from the very beginning, after they had
accepted Christian Religion, they had yielded themselves and all that they had
into his power. and they did constantly affirm (says this fabler) that they
had no other Lord, beside the Pope: of which also they yet do brag.

The Italian is followed herein by two Englishmen, that wished the Popes
advancement as much as he; Edmund Campian and Nicholas Sanders. the one
whereof writes, that Camp. History of Ireland. lib. 2. cap. 1.
immediately after Christianity planted here, the whole Island with one consent
gave themselves not only into the spiritual, but also into the temporal
Jurisdiction of the Sea of Rome. the other in Polydores own words (though he
name him not) that Hiberni initio statim post Christianam religionem acceptam,
sesuaque omni^ in Pontificis Romani ditionem dederant; nec quenquam alium
supremum Hiberniae Principem ad illud usque tempus praeter unum Romanum
pontificem agnoverunt, Sander de schism. Anglican. lib. 1. ad ann. 1542.
the Irish from the beginning, presently after they had received Christian
Religion, gave up themselves and all that they had into the power of the Bishop
of Rome; and that until the time of King Henry the second, they did
acknowledge no other supreme Prince of Ireland, beside of the Bishop of Rome
alone. For confutation of which dream, we need not have recourse to our own
Chronicles: the Bull of Adrian the fourth, wherein he gives liberty of King
Henry the second to enter upon Ireland, sufficiently discovers the vanity
thereof. For, he there showing what right the Church of Rome pretended unto
Ireland, makes no mention at all of this (which had been the fairest and
clearest title that could be alleged, if any such had been then existent in
rerum natura) but is feign to fly unto a farre-fetcht interest which he says
the Church of Rome has unto all Christian Islands. Sane omnes Insulas, quibus
Sol iustitiae Christus illuxit, and quae documenta fidei Christianae
susceperunt, ad ius S. Petri and sacrosanctae Romanae Ecclesiae (quod tua etiam
Nobilitas recognoscit) non est dubium pertinete. Bull-Adrian. IV. ad Henr. II.
Angl. reg.
Truly (says he to the King) there is no doubt, but that all Islands unto which
Christ the Sun of Righteousness has shined, and which have received the
instructions of the Christian faith, do pertain to the right of Saint Peter
and the holy Church of Rome: which your Nobleness also does acknowledge.

If you would further understand the ground of this strange claim, whereby all
Christian Islands at a clap are challenged to be parcel of St. Peter's
patrimony: you shall have it from Johannes Sarisburiensis, who was most inward
with Pope Adrian, and obtained from him this very grant whereof now we are
speaking. Ad preces meas illustri Regi Anglorum Henrico secundo concessit and
dedit Hiberniam iure haereditario possidendam: sicut literae ipsius testantur
in hodiernum diem. Nam omnes insulae, de iure antiquo, ex donatione
Constantini, qui eam fundavit and dotavit, dicuntur ad Romanam Ecclesiam
pertinere. Johan. Sarisburiens. Metalogie. lib. 4. cap. 42.
At my request (says he) he granted Ireland to the illustrious King of England
Henry the second, and gave it to be possessed by right of inheritance: as his
own letters do testify unto this day. For all Islands, of ancient right, are
said to belong to the Church of Rome, by the donation of Constantine, who
founded and endowed the same. But will you see, what a goodly title here is, in
the mean time? First, the Donation of Constantine has been long since
discovered to be a notorious forgerie, and is rejected by all men of judgment
as a senseless fiction. Secondly, in the whole context of this forged Donation
I find mention made of Islands in one place only: Per nostram Imperialem
iussionem sacram, tam in Orient quam in Occidente, vel etiam septentrionali
and meridiana plaga, videlicet in Iudaea, Graecia, Asia, Thracia, Aphrica and
Italia, vel diversis Insulis nostra largitate eis libertatem concessimus: ea
prorsus ratione, ut per manus beatissimi patris nostri Sylvestri Pontificis
successorumque eius omnia disponantur. Edict. Constantin.
where no more power is given to the Church of Rome over them, than in general
over the whole Continent (by East and by West, by North and by South) and in
particular over Iudaea, Graecia, Asia, Thracia, and Aphrica; which use not to
pass in the account of St. Peter's temporal patrimony. Thirdly, it does not
appear, that Constantine himself had any interest in the Kingdom of Ireland:
how then could he confer it upon another? Some words there be in an oration
of Vltra Occanum vero quid erat praeter Britanniam? Quae a vobis ita recuperata
est; ut illae quoque nationes terminis eiusdem insulae cohaerentes vestris
nutibus obsequantur. Eumen. Panegyric. ad Constant.
Eumenius the Rhetorician, by which peradventure it may be collected, that his
father Constantius bare some stroke here: but that the Island was ever possessed
by the Romans, or accounted a parcel of the Empire, cannot be proved by any
sufficient testimony of antiquity. Fourthly, the late writers that are of
another mind, as Pomponius Laetus, Cuspinian, and others, do yet affirm
withal, Pomp. Laet. in Roman. histor. Compend. Io. Cuspian. in Caesarib. Seb.
Mu^ster. in lib. 2. Cosmograph.
that in the division of the Empire after Constantines death, Ireland was
assigned unto Constantinus the eldest son: which will hardly stand with this
donation of the Islands supposed to be formerly made unto the Bishop of Rome
and his successors. Pope Adrian therefore, and John of Salisbury his
solicitor, had need seek some better warrant for the title of Ireland, than
the Donation of Constantine.

John Harding in his Chronicle says, that the Kings of England have right
Harding. Clhronic. cap. 241.
To Ireland also, by King Henry (le fitz
Of Maude, daughter of first King Henry)
That conquered it, for their great heresy.
which in another place he expresses more at large, in this manner: Ibid. cap.
132*
The King Henry then, conquered all Ireland
By Papal dome, there of his royaltee
The profits and revenues of the land
The domination, and the soveraigntee
For error which again the spiritualtee
They held full long, and would not been correct
Of heresies, with which they were infect.
Philip Osullevan on the other side, does not only deny Osullevan. Histor.
Catholic. Iberniae, tom. 2. lib. 1. cap. 7.
that Ireland was infected with any heresy: but would also have us believe,
Ibid. cap. 4. 5. 9. and lib. 2. cap. 3.
that the Pope never intended to confer the Lordship of Ireland upon the
Kings of England. For where it is said in Pope Adrians Bull; Illius terrae
populus te recipiat, and sicut Dominum veneretur. Bull. Adrian. IV.
Let the people of that land receive thee, and reverence thee as a Lord: the
meaning thereof is, says this Glozer, Sicut Dominum veneretur, id est, ut
Principem dignum magno honor; non Dominum Iberniae, sed praefectum caussa
colligendi tributi Ecclesiastici. Osullevan. Hist. Ibern. fol. 59. b. in
margin.
Let them reverence thee, as a Prince worthy of great honor; not as Lord of
Ireland, but as a Deputy appointed for the collecting of the Ecclesiastical
tribute. It is true indeed that King Henry the second, to the end he might the
more easily obtain the Popes good will for his entering upon Ireland, did
voluntarily offer unto him the payment of a yearly pension of one penny out of
every house in the country: which (for ought that I can learn) was the first
Ecclesiastical tribute that ever came unto the Popes coffers out of Ireland.
But that King Henry got nothing else by the bargain but the bare office of
collecting the Popes Smoke-silver (for so we called it here, when we paid
it) is so dull a conceit; that I do somewhat wonder how Osullevan himself
could be such a blocke-head, as not to discern the senselessness of it.

What the King sought for and obtained, is sufficiently declared by them that
writ the history of his reign. Robert. de Monte. Roger. de Wendover. Matthew.
Paris. and Nicol. Trivett in Chronic. an. 1155.
In the year of our Lord MCLV. the first Bull was sent unto him by Pope
Adrian: the sum whereof is thus laid down in a second Bull, directed unto him
by Alexander the third, the immediate successor of the other. Venerabilis
Adriani Papae vestigiis inhaerentes, vestrique desiderii fructum attendentes;
concessionem eiusdem super Hibernici regni dominio vobis indulto (salva Beato
Petro and sacrosanctae Ecclesiae Romanae, sicut in Anglia Sic in Hibernia de
singulis domibus annua unius denarii pensione) ratam habemus and confirmamus.
Bull. Alexandri III. apud Grialdum Cambrens. lib. 2. Histor. Hibern. expugnat.
cap. 6. in codicibus MS. (in edito enim caput hoc mancum est) and Io. Rossum
Warvicensem, in tract. De terris Coronae Angliae annexis.
Following the stepps of reverend Pope Adrian, and attending the fruit of your
desire; we ratify and confirm his grant concerning the dominion of the
KINGDOM of Ireland conferred upon you: reserving unto St. Peter and the holy
Church of Rome, as in England so in Ireland, the yearly pension of one penny
out of every house. In this sort did Pope Adrian, as much as lay in him, give
Ireland unto King Henry, haereditario jure possidendam, to be possessed by
right of inheritance; and withal Annulum quoque per me transmisit aureum,
smaragdo optimo decoratum, quo fieret investitura iuris in gerenda Hibernia:
idemque adhuc annulus in curiali archio publico custodiri jussus est. Io.
Sarisbur. Metalogic. lib. 4. cap. 42. de quo consulendus etiam est Giraldus
Cambrens. lib. 2. Hibern. expugnat. cap. 6.
sent unto him a ring of gold, set with a fair Emerauld, for his investiture
in the right thereof: as Johannes Sarisburiensis, who was the principal agent
betwixt them both in this business, does expressly testify. After this, in the
year MCLXXI. the King himself came hither in person: where the Archbishops and
Bishops of Ireland In Regem and Dominum receperunt. Roger. Wendover, and Matthew.
Paris. in Historia maiori, an. 1171. Roger. Hoveden, in posteriore part
Annalium. Johan. Brampton in Historia Ioralanensi, and Bartholomaeus de Cotton,
in Histor. Anglor. MS.
received him for their KING and Lord. The King (says John Brampton) Recepit
ab unoquoque Archiepiscopo and Episcopo literas, cum sigillis suis in modum
Char^ae pendentibus; regnum Hiberniae sibi and haeredibus suis confirmantes,
and testimonium perhibentes ipsos in Hibernia cum and haeredes suos sibi in
Reges and Dominos in perpetuum constituisse. Io. Brampton. ibid.
received letters from every Archbishop and Bishop, with their seals hanging
upon them in the manner of an Indenture; confirming the KINGDOM of Ireland
unto him and his heirs, and bearing witness that they in Ireland had ordained
him and his heirs to be their KINGS and Lords for ever. At Waterford ( says
Roger Hoveden) Venerunt ibidem ad regem Angliae omnes Archiepiscopi, Episcopi,
Abbates totius Hiberniae, and receperunt cum in Regem and Dominum Hiberniae;
jurantes ei and haeredibus suis fidelitatem, and regnandi super ^os potestate^
in perpetuum: and inde dederunt ei chartas suas. Exemplo autem clericorum,
praedicti Reges and Principes Hiberniae, receperunt simili modo Henricum regem
Angliae in Dominum and Regem Hiberniae; and homines sui devenerunt, and ei and
haeredibus suis fidelitatem juraverunt contra omnes homines. Rog. Hoveden. ad
ann. 1171.
all the Archbishops, Bishops, and Abbots of Ireland came unto the King of
England, and received him for KING and Lord of Ireland; swearing fealty to him
and to his heirs, and power to reign over them for ever: and hereof they gave
him their Instruments. The Kings also and Princes of Ireland, by the example of
the Clergy, did in like manner receive Henry King of England for Lord and KING
of Ireland; and became his men ( or, did him homage) and swore fealty to him
and his heirs against all men.

These things were presently after confirmed in the National Synod held at
Casshell: the Acts whereof in Giraldus Cambrensis are thus concluded. Dignum
etenim and justissimum est, ut sicut Dominum and Regem ex Anglia sortita est
divinitus Hibernia; sic etiam exinde vivendi formam accipiant meliorem. Girald.
Cambrens. Hibern. Expugnat. lib. 1. cap. 34.
For it is fit and most meet, that as Ireland by Gods appointment has gotten a
Lord and a KING from England; so also they should from thence receive a better
form of living. King Henry also at the same time Rex Angliae misst
transcriptum Chartarum universorum Archiepiscoporum and Episcoporum Hiberniae,
ad Alexandrum Papam: and ipse authoritate Apostolica confirmavit illi and
haeredibus suis regnum Hiberniae, secundum formam Chartarum Archiepiscoporum
and Episcoporum Hiberniae. Rog. Hoveden.
sent a transcript of the Instruments of all the Archbishops and Bishops of
Ireland, unto Pope Alexander: who by his Apostolical authority ( for so was it
in those days of darkness esteemed to be) did confirm the KINGDOM of
Ireland unto him and his heirs, (according to the form of the Instruments of
the Archbishops and Bishops of Ireland) Nam summus Pontifex regnum illud sibi
and haeredibus suis auctoritate Apostolica confirmavit; and in perpetuum eos
constituit inde Reges. Io. Brampton.
and made them KINGS thereof for ever. The King also Perquisierat ab Alexandro
summo Pontifice, quod liceret ei filium suum quem vellet Regem Hiberniae
facere, and fimiliter coronare; ac Reges and potentes ejusdem terrae, qui
subjectionem ei facere ^ollent, debellare. Id. ad. (...). 1177.
obtained further from Pope Alexander, that it might be lawful for him to
make which of his sons he pleased, KING of Ireland, and to crown him
accordingly; and to subdue the Kings and great ones of that land, which would
not subject themselves unto him. Whereupon, in a grand Council held at Oxford
in the year of our Lord MCLXXVII. Iohannem filium suum coram Episcopis and
regni sui principibus Regem Hiberniae constituit. Id. ibid. and Gualterus
Coventrensis, inejusdem anni historia.
before the Bishops and Peers of the Kingdom he constituted his son John
KING of Ireland; Constituit Iohannem filium suum Regem in Hibernia, concessione
and confirmatione Alexandri summ^ Pontificis. Rog. Hoveden. Annal. part. 2. ad
an. 1177.
according to that grant and confirmation of Pope Alexander. And to make the
matter yet more sure, in the year MCLXXXVI. he obtained a new license from
Pope Urban the third; Ab eo impetravit; quod unus quem vellet de filiis suis
coronaretur de regne Hiberniae. and hoc confirmavit ei Dominus Papa Bulla sua:
and in argumentum voluntatis and confirmationis suae, misit ei coronam de penna
pavonis auro contextam. Id. ad an. 1185.
that one of his sons, whom he himself would, should be crowned for the
KINGDOM of Ireland. And this the Pope did not only confirm by his Bull: but
also the year following purposely sent over Cardinal Octavian and Hugo de
Nunant ( or Novant) Quibus ipse commisit legatiam in Hiberniam, ad ceronandum
ibi Iohannem filium Regis. Sed Dominus Rex coronationem illam distulit. Jd. ad
an. 1187.
his Legates into Ireland, to crown John the Kings son there.

By all this we may see, how far King Henry the second proceeded in this
business: which I do not so much note, to convince the stolidity of
Osullevan, who would feign persuade fools, that he was preferred only to be
collector of the Popes Peterpence: as to show, that Ireland at that time was
esteemed a Kingdom, and the Kings of England accounted no less than Kings
thereof. And therefore Paulus IIII nostris temporibus Hiberniam insulam in
regni titulum ac dignitatem erexit. Gabutius in vita^ PijV.
Paul the fourth needed not make all that noise, and trouble Ad omnipotentis
Dei laudem and gloriam, ac gloriosissimae ejus genitricis Virginis Mariae,
totiusque Curiae coelestis honorem, and fidei Catholicae exaltationem, Philippo
Rege and Maria Regina nobis super hoc humiliter supplicantibus, de fratrum
nostrorum consilio and Apostolicae potestatis plenitudine, Apostolica
authoritate Insulam Hiberniae in Regnum perpetuo erigimus; ac titulo,
dignitate, honor, facultatibus, juribus, insigniis, praerogativis,
antelationibus, praeeminentiis regiis, ac quibus alia Christi fidelium Regna
utuntur, potiuntur, and gaudent, ac uti, potiri, and gaudere poterunt quomodo
libet, in futurum insignimus and decoramus. Bulla Pauli IV. in Rotulo
Patentium, ann. 2. and 3. Philippi and Mariae, in Cancellaria Hiberniae.
the whole Court of heaven with the matter: when in the year MDLV. he took
upon him by his Apostolical authority (such I am sure, as none of the Apostles
of Christ did ever assume unto themselves) to erect Ireland unto the title and
dignity of a Kingdom. Whereas he might have found, even in his own
Provinciale ex archivis Cancellariae Apostolicae. edit. tomo 2. Tractat.
Doctor. fol. 344. (impres. Venet. an. 1548.)
Roman Provincial, that Ireland was reckoned among the Kingdoms of
Christendom, before he was borne. Insomuch, that in the year MCCCCXVII. when
the Legates of the King of England and the French Kings Ambassadors fell at
variance in the Council of Constance for precedencie; the English Orators,
among other arguments, alleged this also for themselves. Satis constat,
secundum Albertum Magnum and Bartholomaeum de proprietatibus rerum, quod toto
Mundo in tres parts diviso (videlicet Asiam, Africam, and Europam) Europa in
quatuor dividitur regna: primum videlicet Romanum, secundum
Constantinopolitanum, tertium regnum Hiberniae quod jam translatum est in
Anglicos, and quartum regnum Hispaniae. Ex quo patet, quod rex Angliae and
regnum suum sunt de eminentioribus antiquioribus Regibus and Regnis totius
Europae: quam praerogativam regnum Franciae non fertur obtinere. Act. Council.
Constant. Sess. 28. MS. in Bibliotheca Regia.
It is well known, that according to Albertus Magnus and Bartholomaeus in his
book De proprietatibus rerum, the whole world being divided into three parts
(to wit, Asia, Africa and Europe) Europe is divided into four Kingdoms:
namely, the Roman for the first, the Constantinopolitane for the second, the
third the Kingdom of Ireland which is now translated unto the English, and the
fourth the Kingdom of Spain. Whereby it appears, that the King of England
and his Kingdom are of the more eminent ancient Kings and Kingdoms of all
Europe: which prerogative the Kingdom of France is not said to obtain. And
this have I here inserted the more willingly, because it makes something for
the honor of my Country (to which, I confess, I am very much devoted) and in
the printed Acts of the Council it is not commonly to be had.

But now comes forth Osullevan again, and like a little fury flies upon
Cujus mali maxima culpa in aliquot Angloibernos Sacerdotes jure transferenda
est; qui tartareum dogma ab Orco in Catholicorum perniciem emissum non
negabant, licere Catholicis contra Catholicos and suam patriam pro Haereticis
getere arma and dimicare. Philip. Osullevan. Hist. Cathosic. Iberniae, tous. 4.
lib. 3. cap. 5. fol. 263. edit. Vlissipon. an. 1621.
the English-Irish Priests of his own religion, which in the late rebellion of
the Earl of Tirone did not deny that Hellish doctrine, fetched out of Hell for
the destruction of Catholics, that it is lawful for Catholics to bear
arms and fight for Heretics against Catholics and their country. or rather
(if you will have it in plainer terms) that it is lawful for them of the
Romish Religion, to bear arms and fight for their Sovereign and
fellow subjects that are of another profession, against those of their own
religion that traitorously rebel against their Prince and Country. and to
show, Haec est Academiarum censura; qua liquido constat, quanta ignoratione and
caligine erraverint illi Iberni, qui in hoc bello Protestantibus opem tulerunt,
and Catholicos oppugnarunt: quamque insanam and venenosam doctrinam attulerint
nonnulli doctiores vulgo habiti, qui saeculares homines ad Reginae parts
sequendas exhortati, a fide tuenda averterunt. Id. tom. 3. lib. 8. cap. 7. fol.
204.
how mad and how venomous a doctrine they did bring (these be the caitiffes
own terms) that exhorted the laity to follow the Queens side: he sets
down the censure of the Doctors of the University of Salamanca and Vallodilid,
published in the year MDCIII. for the justification of that Rebellion, and the
declaration of Pope Clement the eights letters touching the same; wherein he
signifies that Cum enim Pontifex dica^ Anglos adversus Catholicam Religionem
pugnare, eosque non minut ac Turcas oppugnari debere; eisdemque gratiis eos
oppugnantes prosequatur, quibus contra Turcas pugnantes prosequitur: quis
dubitet, bellum ab Anglis adversus exercitum Catholicum omnino iniquum geri?
Censur. Doct. Salmanti^. and Vallisolet. de Hibermiae bello.
the English ought to be set upon no less than the Turks, and imparteth the
same favors unto such as set upon them, that he does unto such as fight
against the Turks. Such wholesome directions does the Bishop of Rome give unto
those that will be ruled by him: far different (I wisse) from that holy
doctrine, wherewith the Church of Rome was at first seasoned by the Apostles.
Romans 13. 1.
Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers; for there is no power but
of God: was the lesson that S. Paul taught to the ancient Romans. Where if it
be demanded; Quid, and illa potesta^, quae servos Dei persequitur, fidem
impugnat, religionem subvertit, a Deo est? Ad quod respondendum, quod etiam
talis potestas a Deo data est, ad vindictam quidem malorum, laudem vero
bonorum. Sedul in Romans 13.
whether that power also, which persecuteth the servants of God, impugneth the
faith, and subverteth religion, be of God? our countryman Sedulius will teach
us to answer with Origin; that even such a power as that, is given of God, for
the revenge of the evil, and the praise of the good. although he were as
wicked, as either Nero among the Romans, or Herod among the Jews: the one
whereof most cruelly persecuted the Christians, the other Christ himself.

And yet when the one of them swayed the scepter, Saint Paul told the Christian
Romans; that they Romans 13. 5.
must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake: and
of the causeless fear of the other, these Verses of Sedulius are solemnly
sung in the Church of Rome, even unto this day. Sedul. in Hymno acrostich. de
Vit^ Christi.
Herodes hostis impie,
Christum venire quid times?
Non eripit mortalia,
Qui regna dat coelestia.
Why, wicked Herod, do thou fear
And at Christ's coming frown?
The mortal he takes not away,
That gives the heavenly crown.
a better paraphrase whereof you cannot have, than this which Claudius has
inserted into his Collections upon St. Matthew. Rex iste qui natus est, non
venit Reges pugnando superare, sed moriendo mirabiliter subjugare: neque ideo
natus est ut tibi succedat, sed ut in eum mundus fideliter credat. Venit enim,
non ut regnet vivu^, sed ut triumphet occisus: nec sibi de aliis gentibus auro
exercitum quaerat; sed ut pro salvandis gentibus pretiosum sanguinem fundat.
Inaniter invidendo timuisti successorem, quem credendo debuisti quaerere
salvatorem; quia si in eum crederes, cum eo regnares; and sicut ab illo
accepisti teraporale regnum, accipe^es etiam sempiternum. Hujus enim pueri
regnum non est de hoc mundo; sed per ipsum regnatur in hoc mundo. Ipse est
etiam Sapientia Dei, quae dicit in Proverbiis: Per me Reges regnant. Puer iste
Verbum Dei est, Puer iste Virtus and Sapientia Dei est. Si potes, contra Dei
sapientiam cogita: in tuam perniciem versaris, and nescia. Tu enim regnum
nullatenus habuisses, nisi ab isto Puero qui nunc natus est accepisses. Claud.
lib. I. in Matthew.
That King which is borne, does not come to overcome Kings by fighting, but to
subdue them after a wonderful manner by dying: neither is he borne to the end
that he may succeed thee, but that the world may faithfully believe in him.
For he is come, not that he may fight being alive, but that he may triumph
being slain: nor that he may with gold get an army unto himself out of other
nations, but that he may shed his precious blood for the saving of the
nations. Vainly did thou by envying fear him to be^ thy successor, whom by
believing thou ought to seek as thy Savior: because if thou did
believe in him, thou should reign with him; and as thou have received a
temporal kingdom from him, thou should also receive from him an
everlasting. For the kingdom of this Child is not of this world; but by him
it is that men do reign in this world. He is the Wisdom of God, which says
in the Proverbs: By me Kings reign. This Child is the Word of God: this
Child is the Power and Wisdom of God: If thou can, think against the
Wisdom of God: thou workest thine own destruction, and do not know it. For
thou by no means should have had thy kingdom, unless thou had received
it from that Child which now is borne.

As for the Censure of the Doctors of Salamanca and Vallodilid: our Nobility
and Gentry, by the faithful service which at that time they performed unto the
Crown of England, did make a real confutation of it. Of whose fidelity in
this kind I am so well persuaded, that I do assure my self, that neither the
names of Franciscus Zumel and Alphonsus Curiel (how great Schoolmen soever
they were) nor of the Fathers of the Society (Johannes de Ziguenza, Emanuel de
Roias, and Gaspar de Mena) nor of the Pope himself, upon whose sentence they
wholly ground their Resolution; either then was or hereafter will be of any
force, to remove them one whit from the allegiance and duty which they do owe
unto their King and Country. Nay I am in good hope, that their loyal minds
will so far distaste that evil lesson, which those great Rabbis of theirs
would have them learn; that it will teach them to unlearne another bad lesson,
wherewith they have been most miserably deluded. For whereas heretofore
Veritas sapienti nitet, cujuscunque ore prolata fuerit. Gildas, in Codice
Ca^num Cottoniano tit. De veritate credenda, quocunque ore prolata fuerit.
Similiter Nennius, praefat. in in Historiam Brittonum (Ms. in publica
Cantabrigiensis academiae Bibliotheca:) Non quis dicat, aut qualiter dicatur,
sed quid dictum sit, veritatis testimonio magis attendendum esse probanae.
wise men did learn to give credence to the truth, by whosoevers mouth it
should be delivered: now men are made such fools, that they are taught In
doctrina religionis non quid dicatur, sed quis loquatur attendendum esse. Thom.
Stapleton. Defens. Ecclesiastic. authoritat. lib. 3. cap. 57. and Demonstrat.
Principior. Doctrinal. lib. 10. cap. 5.
to attend in the doctrine of Religion, not what the thing is that is said, but
what the person is that speaks it.

But how dangerous a thing it is, to have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ in
respect of persons; and to give entertainment to the truth, not so much for it
self as for the regard that is had to the deliverer of it: I wish men would
learn otherwise, than by woeful experience in themselves. Veritas propter
seipsam diligenda est, non propter Hominem, aut propter Angelum, per quem
adnunciatur. Qui enim propter adnunciatores eam diligit, potest and mandacia
diligere, siqua forte ipsi sus protulerint. Claud. in Galat. 1.
The truth (says Claudius) is to be loved for it self, not for the Man, or
for the Angel, by whom it is preached. For he that does love it in respect of
the preachers of it, may love lies also, if they peradventure shall deliver
any. as here without all peradventure, the Pope and his Doctors have done:
unless the teaching of flat Rebellion and high Treason may pass in the
account of Catholic verities. The Lord of his mercy open their eyes, that
they may see the light; and give them grace to receive the love of the truth,
that they may be saved. The Lord likewise grant (if it be his blessed will)
that Truth and Peace may meet together in our days, that we may be all
gathered into John 10. 16.
one fold under one shepherd, and that Psalm. 72. 19.
the whole earth may be filled with his glory. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.
Faults in some Copies.
IN the Jesuits Challenge, page 3. lin. 2. read, contrary. page 4. lin. 9. for
should, read shall.

In the Answer, page 4. l. 26. likewise. p. 5. l. 21. satisfy. p. 12. l. 7.
continued. p. 16. l. 22. Penitential. p. 26. l. 6. knew. p. 27. l. 26.
Augustine. p. 50. l. 23. ( says n Fulgentius) p. 51. l. 6. when he ^s found to
be that. p. 62. l. 3. Antoninus. p. 64. l. 12. after Christ. p. 72. l. 4. for
(...) put (...). p. 75. l. 6. cresse out, of Mets first and afterward. p. 76.
l. 3. Carisiacum or Cressy. p. 96. l. 9. secretly. p. 123. l. 26. commanded. p.
124. l. 5. sins. p. 126. l. 17. intercession. ibid. l. 19. for the comma put
a full point; and in the next line for the full po^nt put a comma. p. 136. l.
1. Anastasius. p. 139. l. 4. Scriptures. ibid. l. 7. Levite. 146. l. 31.
instrumentally. p. 147. l. 22. death. page 154. l. 25. Augustine. p. 156. l. 2.
and p. 162. l. 19. medicine. p. 171. l. 16. the p. 172. l. 14. for these, read
their. p. 285. l. 2. Clympiodorus. p. 188. l. 10. (about 243. p. 190. l. 4. who
very. p. 194 l. 16. (with. ibid. l. 18. for pid read paid. p. 195. l. 6.
intended. p. 205. l. 15. Halleluia. p. 206. l. 8. for drive, read not drive. p.
221. l. 1. write, p. 226. l. 19. in the Roman Pontifical. p. 228. l. 17.
apocryphal. p. 234. l. 7. entering again into. p. 253. l. 8. form. p. 264. l.
5. kinds. p. 270. l. 18. for ceasing, read casing. p. 277. l. 26. ascension.
p. 281. l. 23. (...) p. 284 l. 5. expounding that place in. p. 291. l. 1.
entering again into. p. 307. l. 14. apocryphal; p. 310 l. 1. cross out, Us. p.
323. l. 17. Steuchus. p. 328. l. 20, 21. with that which Olympiodorus writes
upon the same chapt er. p. 330. l. 3. divisiun. p. 343. l. 5. cross out the
last comma. l. 22. palace. p. 359. l. 28. of it. p. 361. l.. 27. judgment. p.
368. l. 6. for gives, read goes. p. 376. l. 25. sister. p. 379. l. 12.
coming. p. 391. l. 26. (...) p. 395. l. 26. for depravation, r. deprivation.
p. 398. l. 2. (...). l. 18. (...) p. 427. l. 9. for excepting r. accepting. l.
15. invocation. l. 16. salvation. l. 18. noted. l. 20. call. p. 428. l. 19. in
stead of for, r. of. p. 437. l. 6. Anastasius. p. 439. l. 6. were in. p. 441.
l. 16. lliads. p. 443. l. 4. tried. p. 449. l. 11. congruitie. p. 453. l. 14.
here a. p. 454. l. 25. there of. p. 461. l. 26. descend. p. 469. l. 17. of Ang.
p. 471. l. 30. Collections. p. 472. l. 5. Colossians. l. 22. Phrygia. p. 473.
l. 6. for mad, r. made. l. 18. the word. p. 476. l. 17. (says. l. 28. speak.)
p. 491. l. 4. m Blessed. p. 492. l. 10. despise. p. 497, 500, 501. and 504. in
the title, r. Of Images. p. 497 l. 21. for confirm, rs. conform. p. 503. l.
12. Origin. p. 505. l. 8. deaes and diverse. p. 506 l. 13. prevail. p. 508. l.
9. a whoring. p. 516. l. 15. destitute. p. 518. l. 3. pu^e. page 521. l. 19. to
bew, p. 525. l. 15. observes. p. 535. l. 12. pray. p. 538. l. 6. iuvet. p.
539. l. 30. hortatuque p. 540. l. 2. ex fracto. p. 541. l. 17. inspiration. p.
547. l. 27. hereby. p. 548. l. 10. therefore. p. 556. l. 7. in the. p. 557. l.
6. freely. p. 561. l. 10. receiving. p. 569. l. 24. substantial.

In the Margent. Page 17. after the letter i, lin. 3. read Monasterii. p. 29.
g. l. 10. praescientiam. p. 31. n. l. 1. in 2. 2. p. 42. k. l. 8. (...). l.
lin. 5. (...). p. 43. 0. l. 8. presbyter. p. 45. b. l. 2. videtis. l. 8. apud
Fulgentium in fine libelli de Baptismo AEthiopis; Bedam, etc. p. 46. l. ult.
Psalmum. p. 49. l. 14. (...). p. 50. n. l. 6. invenitur. Fulgentius (in fine
libelli de Baptismo AEthiopis) Augustini nomine citatus apud Bed. etc. p. 54.
a. l. 1^. (...). p. 66. r. l. 5. divina autem illum. p. 72. p. l. 1.
Removeantur. p. 73. t. l. 4. (...). p. 74. c. l. 7. (...) p. 76. i. l. 2.
effieitur. ibid. k. Supra. p. 77. r. l. 1. mysterium. p. 82. h. l. 8. Colleg.
p. 87. l. lin. 16 for 162. read 262. p. 88. o. l. 2. (...). ibid. q. l. 4.
(...). p. 94. l. l. 25. (...) ibid. l. 30 (...). p. 104. l. lin. ult. inter. p.
111. o. l. 10. quod. p. 116. g. l. 3 non p. 119 s. l. 2. (...) p. 121. g. l. 3.
(...). p. 123 a l. 3. Sacerdotio. p. 124. g. l. 6. Theophyl act in Ioh. 8. p.
126. u. l. 11. Vossio. p. 128. f. l. 14. inedit. ibid. k. l. 3. misericordiam.
p. 129. * l. 1. for (...), r. (...). p. 143. i. l. 4. (...). p. 152. t. l. 2.
ignoret. p. 156. l. lin. ult. Aquisgran. sub Ludovico Pio, cap. 37. p. 157. m.
l. 1. illum. ibid. l. 27. Iidem. p. 167. c. l. 13 quaest. p. 171. o. l. 33.
ostendendi. p. 177. x. l. 4. (...). ibid. y. l. 2. (...). p. 180. h. l. 18. for
(...). p. 182. s. l. 10. (...). p. 187. m. l. 17. (...) p. 188. o. l. 27.
corripimur. p. 189. p. l. 23. after conversat. insert this parenthesis (cuius
author Eligius Noviomensis) p. 192. d. l. 2. (...). p. 196. d. l. 4. offerimus.
ibid. l. 13. cross out, and 178. ibid. g. l. 8. (...). p. 197. i. l. 15. blot
out the point after (...). ibid. k. l. 2. Apostolis. p. 198. n. l. 5. (...)p.
199. s. l. 3; fruntur. ibid. l. 5. contextione. p. 202. h. l. 25. refern. p.
205. o. l. 2. (...) p. 206. u. l. 2. (...). p. 208. c. l. 6. quos. p. 209. g.
l. 4. Gra. ca. p. 210. n. l. 4. Beneventani) p. 211. r. l. 10. for in r. ex. p.
213. y. l. 6. Menesi^. p. 214. l. 1. (...). p. 215. * l. 19. pareret. p. 218.
i. l. 9. (...)l. 13. (...) p. 222. l. 6. consequuntur. ibid. y. l. ult. col.
228. e. p. 228. q. l. 2. Apocrypha. p. 231. a. l. 14. invenire. p. 232. c. l.
10. (...). p. 235. q. l. 10. praecesserunt videantur usque ad iudiciidiem, per
plurimum scilicet temporis, debita sibi remuneratione, etc. p. 236. x. l. 29.
for 206. r. 220. p. 237. a. l. 3. (...). ibid. c. l. 22. Ephesius. p. 238. * l.
3. (...) l. 8. (...). ibid. ^. l. 14. (...). and l. 17. (...). p. 241. k. l. 6.
(...). p. 245. a. l. 2. (...). p. 246. f. l. 6. Euchologio, p. 247. m. l. 1.
(...). p. 248. n. l. 6. (...). p. 253. h. l. 1. Volaterran. ibid. l. 6. Rupe.
p. 254. o. l. 1. (...). p. 255. r. l. 12. (...) p. 260. e. l. 10. (...). p.
262. d. l. 29. (...). p. 263. el. 16. (...). p. 264. h. l. 3, 4. (...). p. 265.
l. lin 8. (...). ibid. l 9. (...). ibid. l. 13. (...). ibid. l. ult 138. p.
269. l. 3, 4. (...). p. 272. s. l. 22. (...). ibid. l. 37. (...) p. 273. t. l.
5. (...). ibid. l. 9. (...). p. 275. h. l. 6. for aufe^e, r. offerre. p. 278.
m. l. 2. for (...), r. (...). p. 282. g. l. 24. donec. p. 284. p. l. 2. (...).
p. 286. al. 10. (...). p. 287. h. l. 9. (...). ibid. l. 11. Asterius. p. 290.
s. l. 4. (...). p. 291. z, l. 11. cross out in. ibid. l. 14. Lugd. p. 292. l.
lin. 3. (...). p. 293. n. l. 9. (...). ibid. r. l. ult. intravit. p. 294. u. l.
6. cross out, in fine. p. 295. z. l. 6. paupertatis. p. 297. h. l. 10.
infernum. p. 299. q. l. 3. infernum ibid. s. l. 1. (...). ibid. u. l. 1. (...).
l. 2. (...). p. 300. x. l. 3. (...); Ira. ibid. z. l. 11. (...). l. 18. (...).
p. 301. g. l. 3. (...). ibid. m. l. 3. (...). ibid. n. l. 4. laudantes. p. 303.
z. l. 1. 2. (...). p. 308. y. l. 4. (...). p. 313. y. l. 1. for mortuorum, r.
mortuum. p. 318. l. (...). ibid. *. l. 3. (...). ibid. m. l. 1. (...). p. 319.
p. l. 12. uruntur. ibid. l. 14. m. Annaeus Seneca, lib. 8. ibid. r. l. 10.
(...). p. 323. o. l. 19. falso. p. 325. c. l. 1. Ibidem in. p. 327. s. l. 9.
(...). p. 328. u. l. 8. recidant. ibid. x. l. 4, 5. (...). ibid. z. in stead of
the Latin, put the Greek. (...); Olympiod. Caten. Graec. in Job 17. p. 333. h.
l. 1. (...). p. 342. * l. 13, 14. phasada for corruption. p. 343. s. l. 1.
(...). p. 346. u. l. 4. (...). ibid. v. l. 2. (...). p. 347. b. l. 2, 3. (...).
p. 348. d. s. 9. (...). p. 349. h. l. 3. (...). p. 350. m. l. 10. cr^sse out
the comma. p. 351. s. (...). p. 352. a. l. 3. (...). ibid. (...). ibid. l. 4.
(...). p. 353. b. l. 2. (...). ibl. 6. (...). p. 357. n. l. 25. Number. 16. 30,
33. ib. o. l. 10. (...). p. 361. dil. 10. (...). ib. l. 18, (...). ib. l. 24.
(...). p. 362. h. l. 2. (...). ib. l. 3. (...). p. 363. s. l. ult. for 238. put
237. p. 364. t. l. 6. (...). ib. x. l. i. (...). p. 366. l. 1. c. Autholog. ib.
e. l. 8, 9. (...). p. 367. a. apud. p. 3^9. r. put the comma before, not after
(...). p. 370. b. l. 2. (...). p. 371. k. l. 1. (...). ib. l. lin. 1. (...).
ib. o. l. 1. (...). p. 376. k. l. 4. positam p. 377. l. lin. 18. (...). ibm.
(...). ib. l. 18. (...). ib. n. l. ult. (...); p. 378. o. l. 12. (...). p. 379.
u. l. 31. Numer. p. 383. k. l. 2. cresse out, 294. and. p. 384. r. l. 2. (...).
p. 386. * l. 16. for 349. r. 939. ibid. l. 13. Ad. p. 387. a. l. 17 (...). ib.
l. 19. (...). p. 391. a. l. 2. (...). p. 394. c. l. 10. Spoletinus. p. 401. z.
l. 6. (...). ib. l. 9. (...). p. 401. l. lin. 1. (...). p. 404. r. l. 18. for
308. put 309. p. 407. i. l. 3. (...). ib. l. 4. (...). ib. k. l. 4. (...). p.
422. 0. l. 4. (...). ib. l. 19.(...), ib. l. 20. (...). p. 423. r. l. 2. (...).
ib. s. l. (...). p. 425, x. l. (...). p. 428. b. l. 11, 12. (...). p. 43. n. l.
ult. for 142. put 241. p. 432. o. for contr. put conc. p. 436. ^. l. 9,
supplicia. ib. g. l. 5. for (...), put (...), p. 4. ^7. h. l. 25. (...), p. 43.
8. l. 1. k. Sic, p. 440. q. l. 8. (...). ib. l. 29 (...). p. 44. u. l. 4.
(...). ib. z. l. 2. (...). ib. l. 7. (...). p. 44, 2. a. l. 15. (...). ib. 22.
(...), p. 444. d. l. 3. (...). p. 446. l. lin. 4, 5. for initio page 392. put
page 435. ad. y. literam. p. 452. * l. 16. quaestiones, ib. l. 18. for,
auctorum, r. sanctorum. p. 453. m. l. 16. Vi, p. 457. u. l. 6. for, audiens, r.
audens, p. 458. g. l. ult. (...). p. 60. k. l. 44. (...). ib. l. 14. (...). ib.
l. 16. (...). ib. l. 27. (...), ib. l. 29. (...). ib. l. 12. in. Matthew. and, in
Eclogis. ib. l. lin. 5. (...). p. 461. m. l. 7. (...). ib. n. l. 2, ^.(...),
ib. o. l. 4. (...). p. 462. q. l. 20. (...). ib. r. l. ult. (...). p. 463. l.
5, 6. (...). ib. l. 26. (...), p. 46^. y. l. 7. (...), p. 46. *. l. 2. Feirand,
p. 469. t. l. 1. (...). ib. u. l. 9. (...). ib. l. ^0. (...), p. 473. 1. l. 4.
Origin ib. l. l. 2. (...). p. 474. o. l. 5. quirogae. ib. p. l. 4. (...). p.
475. (...). p. 476. u. l. 8. honorari, p. 477. a. l. 7. (...), ib. d. l. 1.
(...), lin. 3. (...), ib. e. l. ult. (...), p. 485. h. l. 18. AEneid, p. 490.
d. l. 2. tribulationis ^p. 491. q. l. 1. Miserere, p. 502. x. l. 5. (...), ib.
z. l. 3. (...). p. 506. u. l. 1. (...), l. 6. (...). p. 507. z. l. 3. (...), p.
508. b. l. 2. (...), p. 509. l. 17. for, (...), r. (...). p. 514. l. 1. a.
(...). p. ^16. l. 1. f. Quis. a nostrum p. 518. x. l. 3. istis, r. estis, p.
519. v. l. 5. ut sit. p. 523. l. in. 22. aliqua, l. 27. aequitatem, inesse, p.
526. a. appetere, p. 537. i. Prosper, p. 538. k. l. 11. cum, p. 540. * l. 25.
Baron, p. 542. x. l. 2. viribus, p. 543. a. l. ult. Augustini, p. 548. c. l. 2.
quam, p. 553. *. l. 5. merue. p. 554. * l. 7. (...), p. 555. g. l. 10. (...).
(...). ib. l, 17. (...). ib. l, 21. (...). p. 556. m. lin. 5. Proaemium. ib. n.
l. 4, 5. (...), ib. p. l. 2. (...). p 557. q. l. (...). ib. s. l. 5. (...). ib.
t. l. 1. (...), ib. u. l. 2. (...), p. 5^8. x. l. 10. (...). ib. a. l. (...).
l. 2. (...). l. (...). l. 4. (...). l. 6. (...), 18. after (...). put a full
point; and after (...), in lin 9. (...). l. 11. (...). p. 562. k. l. 2. (...),
p. 563. n. l. 18. resecat, ib. p. 3. comparari, p. 564. q. l. 6. blot out. the
point. after (...). ibid. r. l. 4, 5. read the place thus; quippiam iustum, non
respondebo, sed meum iudicem deprecabor. Veiut si apertius fa^catur, dicens:
Etsi ad opus virtutis excrevero, etc. p. 565. t. l 2. Beda, p. 573. a. l. 3.
bona, p. 576. q. Enchirid, p. 580. p. 1. 10. condignae, p. 58. 1. q. l. 8.
quidam, p. 582. v. l. 4. Origin, ib. z. l. 15. Ca^sidor, ib. a. l. 2. (...)

In the Catalogue of the Authors at the end; refer Tatianus to they year
170. at the year 290. put Pamphilus, for Pamphylus. at the year 475. Faustus
Regensis, for Repensis. refer Concilium Aquisg^anense sub Pipino, to the
year 836. at the year ^^3. (...) Asser Menevensis be placed.


