NATVRALL AND ARTIFICIAL DIRECtions for health, derived from the best
Philosophers, as well modern, as ancient.

By William Vaughan, Master of Arts, and student in the Civil law.

LONDON Printed by Richard Bradocke. 1600.

To the Right worshipful, his loving sister, the Lady Marga ret Vaughan;
health, happiness, and tranquillity both of body and mind.
MAdame, when I had ferreted through every nooke of my Muses poor treasury,
to find some present worthy your acceptaunce, J could find none so fit, as
this little Treatise of health, whose happy continuance, with fair increase
of years, and plenteous fruitfulness, I have ever wished you; that as the
dew of heaven has sent forth the bud of your tender age sweet, virtuous, and
right worthy of the noble root, from whence it sprang: so the sun shine of
grace will ripen those excellent blossoms to perfection. The first occasion,
which made me fall into this kind of study, was the necessary regard of mine
own health; necessary I call it in diverse respects: for when sorrow and
coffeehouse had almost dried and stifled up my vital spirits (the reasons
whereof are not altogether to you unknown) and driven me to this doleful
exigent, that I doubted, which were better either to be, as then I was, or not
to be at all: at the last, Reason and Religion forced me to take this course,
least despair should ouerwhelme the natural and purer faculties of my soul.
Now, since the length and process of time by favor of the great Prince of
Hierarchies, has somewhat enlarged and fortified my spirits, I have sent you
no other Physic, then what I my self applied, wishing, that it may lie by
you without occasion of use, even so long, that the leaves may lack renewing,
before you lack health.

Whereto although it may be, that some close and subtell-headed petifogger may
except, yea, and sue my conceit in the Exchequer of his own opinion, in that
I protesting says to Justinian, do enter league with Galen,, and studying the
Civil law, do undertake to meddle with Natural and Artificial experiments:
yet my plea shall be drawn from a principal Maxim in Nature, namely, that
my health is of more consequence with me, then my Clientes case, and my
friends being well more rejoices me, then the worlds being rich. But how can
you do amiss (dear sister) for whom such careful parents, and such a
circumspect husband, have so carefully and circumspectly provided? How can you
(for whom Nature, Fortune, and worship, have, like unto the Poets three
Goddesses, reserved the golden ball) how can you, I say, want all health, and
happiness, which this earth affoordes? Nay, more, how is it possible, that you
having made your self hitherto dear to God (as appears by his wonderful
benefits on you bestowed) by your virtuous conversation in the very April of
your years, be without the saving health of joy and glory from above? What
Direction need you to respect, that are entered the right path? Truly, my
prayers are, that you may proceed forward still in that way, but yet that you
may be lang in going; both that I may long enjoy part of your felicity, and
also that other Ladies of the like sympathy of natural inclination may take
president from your example.

It greatly befitteth your virtuous and ingenuous nature to rejoice in the
blessings of the Lord so inestimable; as first, in your noble minded father,
that famous Knight, sir Gelly Meiricke, (who for integrity of life, prudence,
magnanimity, and liberal behavior, is inferior to no man of what quality
soever): and no less in the joining with such an Husband, whom brotherly
regard of modesty forbids me to extol with praises according to deserts.
And when the third blessing by the favorable permission of one and the same
God shall betide you, even the propagation of children, as blooming vines round
about your table, with both your powers equally endued to your earthly
comfort: J know not to whom J may say, that the type and title of equal
happiness has been granted more then unto you. But leaving these, and
whatsoever other blessings it has pleased the supreme Giver of all goodness,
to rain down upon you, as upon a grateful and fertile soil: my only
purpose and intent is to request you (Madame) to patronize, and receive with
good liking, this pamphlet of mine, fraught with Natural and Artificial
Directions, as undertaken for the health of all: so especially consecrated
unto your suitable tuition and service in particular, not so much (I protest) in
regard of any your urgent need, through any distemperature, which I know;
as to prescribe unto you a dietarie plat-forme, whereby you may keep back all
such griefs, as might percase steal upon you here after, before you be aware:
withal assuring my self, that in the often reading thereof, you shall get a
treasury stored with precious Margarites, Rubies, and Diamonds; and in the
using of it, you shall find comfortable medicines, to prolong your life. Which
the first and eternal Breather of life confirm and furnish with religious
ornaments, and necessary complements thereto belonging, while it remains in
this earthly mould; and after death make you partaker of those triumphant and
euer-during joys, which before the foundation of the world his Divine
Majesty has prepared for his Godly and adopted children.

From Jesus College in Oxford, the first day of April, Anno Domini, 1600, Your
loving Brother, William Vaughan.

The Author to his Book.
Sail, Book, the legate of a zealous mind,
(Composed by Nature, and Art Natures ape)
While at thy beck thou have both tide and wind,
That will transport thee to my Countries cape.
Sail, little Book, embarkt with furniture,
And to my sister be as Palinure.
O be a sure and true Sollicitour,
For her to plead at Aesculapius chair:
Fetch thousands of subpoenaes every hour
Against such griefs, as might her strength empaire
Arrest all such, as might her unaware
Assail; and cure her of health-wasting care.
Out of Philosophy thy rivers spring,
By Physic thy Directions are refined.
Both which who so by virtues lore do bring
Into the square of Diets rule assigned:
They doubtless shall by Gods permission live
Old Nestors years, and Aeson -like revive.
Fear not the taunts of railing Satyrists,
Whose critic vein in poison all ydrench'd,
Makes them to rave, and bend their ugly fists,
Until their wrath be altogether quenched.
Fear not, I say: of proof thou have strong arms,
Which feel no bru^ts of Momists great alarms.
Well may they bark, but never dare they bite,
Unless as savage bears do martyrize
Such, as have yealded to their r au'ning might:
So these remorselesse curres do tyrannize,
And cruelly inflict a mortal wound
On them, that prostrate lie upon the ground.
Like as the snakie fiend temptes cu'rie one,
Beginning first at our first simple sire,
And us inuironeth, that scotfree none
Escape; so they inuelloped with ire
Will not permit one silly book to pass
Without some frump, and token of disgrace.
But thou, my book, have such a Patroness,
That will defend thee from their furious rents.
To favor thee her mind she will address,
If she find true thine Arts experiments.
Adieu: until, as pledge of Brothers love,
I shortly send three books of Golden-groue.
Momi obiectio in Authorem.
F^rtiuis olim varijsque superbijt Oscen
Plumis; ex multis fit liber iste libris.
Read c^iquesuum: vilescit protinus Oscen;
Hic sin^ Natura foetet and Art liber.
Authoris Responsio ad Momum.
EX herbis fit mel: hominis ceu simia, (...)
Aemula Naturae est; Moeonidisque Mar^.
Sit licet ex multis opus hoc: tamen vtile quonis
Test; voluminibus candidiissque tuis.
NATVRALL and artificial directi ons for health.
The first Section.
Chap. 1.
What be the causes of the preservation of man's health?
THe causes of the preservation of man's health be six. The first, Air, fire,
and water. The second, meat and drink, and such as we use for nourishment.
The third, exercise and tranquillity of the body. The fourth, moderate sleep
and early rising. The fifth, auoydaunce of excrements, under which Phlebotomie,
purgations, vomits, urine, sweat, bathes, carnal copulation, and such like are
contained. The sixth cause of health is mirth temperatly used.

What is Air?
Air by it self is an element hot and moist, whereupon the whole constitution
of our lives depends. The attractio^ of this natural body is so necessary
unto us, that if any one of the instruments of our bodies be stopped, we cannot
choose but forthwith be strangled. In respect whereof, the choosing of a good
air must (for the preservation of health) obtain the chief place.

Which is the best Air?
That, which is a man's native and countries air, is best. This by the
Philosophers is approved in this principle: Every man's natural place
preserves him, which is placed in it. And by the Poet confirmed:

Sweet is the smell of countries soil.
Also, a good Air may be known both by his substance (as, when it is open,
pure, and clean, free from all filthy dunghilles, noisome chanelles, nut
trees, fig trees, coleworts, hemlockes, mines, and forges; for these have a
contrary quality unto the animal spirit, and make men to fall into
consumptions) and by his qualities: as, extremity of cold, heat, and moisture.

What shall a man do, if the Air be either too hot, or too cold?
He must use cold things to keep away the heat, and hot things to expel the
cold. He must add dry things to moist, and moist to dry. To depart thence into
another place were not amiss. For oftentimes it is seen, that sick folks do
recover their former health only by change of air. But if the air be
corrupt, and that a man cannot remove thence very quickly, he must artificially
rectify it, by perfuming his chamber with Juniper, Rosemarie, Bay tree, or
with wood of Aloes: and then by sprinkling vinegar here and there in his
chamber. In brief, a man in such cases must get him a nosegay composed of
Roses, Violets, Maioram, Marigold, and such like. And when he goes abroad, he
must hold in his mouth either the pill of an Orange, or a piece of the root of
Angelica. Likewise, he must have an especial regard, that his chamber be at
least once a day neatly swept

Advise me, how I should build me an house for pleasure, health, and profit?
First, you must choose out a fine soil, which has water and wood annexed unto
it, and forecast in your mind whether the prospect too and fro be decent and
pleasant to the eye. For I am of this opinion, that if the eye be not
satissied, the mind cannot be pleased: if the mind be not pleased, nature
does abhor: and if nature does abhor, death at last must consequently
follow. Next, you must mark, whether the air, which compasses the situation
of your house, be of a pure substance, and that, shortly after the sun is up,
grows warm; and contrarily grows cold, after the sun is set. Thirdly,
you must make your foundation upon a gravel ground mixed with clay, upon a
hill, or a hills side. Fourthly, look that your windows be Northward or
Eastward. Lastly, when your house is finished, you must prepare a garden
replenished with sundry kinds of hearb^s and flowers, wherein you may recreate
and solace your self at times convenient.

Chap. 2. Of water.
What is water?
Water is an element cold and moist, and does not nourish, but help digestion.

How shall I know good water?
By the clearenesse of it. That water is best, which runs from an higher to
a lower ground, and that water, which runs upon clay, is better clarified
then that, which goes upon the stone.

When is water wholesomest?
In summer time it is most wholesome; yet notwithstanding, seldom to be
drunk. But if at any time you be compelled to drink it, see first that you
sees your water gently; for by seething, the gross substance of it is taken
away.

How shall I revive waters, that begin to putrify?
This is performed by the addition of some small proportion of the ovle of
sulphur, or else of Aqua vitae well rectified, incorporating them both together.

Cap. 3. Of fire.
What is fire?
Fire is an element hot and dry, which dissolueth the malicious vapors of the
air, stirs up natural heat in man's body, and expels cold.

What kind of fire is best?
That fire is best, which is made of dry and sweet wood. For wet and green
wood is discommodious; and so are coals, because they make the head heavy,
and dry up natural moisture.

Are not sweatings and hot houses wholesome?
No, because they exhaust the good humors together with the bad.

The second Section, concerning food.
Chap. 1. Of bread and drink.
What is the use of bread?
BRead made of pure wheat flower, well boulted from all bran, sufficiently
leauened, and finely molded and baked, comfort and strengthens the heart,
makes a man fat, and preserves health. It must not be above two or three
days old, at most, for then it waxes hard to be co^cocted. Howbeit
nevertheless, the pith of new hot bread infused into wine, and smelt unto,
does much good to the spirits, and greatly exhilarateth the heart.

What is the use of beer?
Beer which is made of good malt, well brewed, not too new, nor too stale,
nourishes the body, causes a good color, and quickly passes out of the
body. In summer it avails a man much, and is no less wholesome to our
constitutions then wine. Besides the nutritive faculty, which it has by the
malt, it receives likewise a certain property of medicine by the hop.

What is the use of Ale?
Ale made of barley malt and good water does make a man strong: but now a days
few brewers do brew it as they ought, for they add slimie and heavy baggage
unto it, thinking thereby to please tossepots, and to increase the vigor of it.

How shall I discern good ale from bad?
Good ale ought to be fresh and clear of color. It must not be tilted, for
then the best quality is spent: It must neither look muddie, nor yet carry a
tail with it.

Which is the best drink?
The most precious and wholesome ordinary drink as well for them that be in
health, as for sick and impotent persons is made after this manner:

Take half a pound of barley, four measures of water, half an ounce of
Licoras, and two drachmes of the seed of Violets, two drachmes of parsley
seed, three ounces of red Roses, an ounce and a half of Hysop and Sage, three
ounces of figs and raisins well picked: Sees them all together in an earthen
vessel, so long till they decrease two fingers breadth by seething: then put
the pot in cold water, and strain the ingredients through a cloth.

Show me a speedy drink for travelers, when they want beer or ale at their
Inn?
Let them take a quart of fair water, and put thereto five or six
spoonefulles of good Aqua composita, a small quantity of sugar, and a branch
of Rosemarie: Let them be brued well out of one pot into another, and then
their drink is ready.

What shall poor men drink, when malt is extreme dear?
They must gather the tops of heath, whereof the usual brushes are made, and
dry them, and keep them from moulding. Then they may at all times brue a cheap
drink for themselves therewith. Which kind of drink is very wholesome as well
for the liver, as the spleen; but much the more pleasant, if they put a
little licoras unto it. There is another sort of drink, of water and vinegar
proportionably mingled together, which in summer they may use.

How shall I help beer or ale, which begin to be sour or dead?
Put a handful or two of oatemeale, or else of ground malt, into the barrel
of beer or ale, stir the same well together, and so make it revive a-fresh.
Or else, if you please, bury your drink under ground, in the earth, for the
space of four and twenty hours.

Teach me a way to make beer or ale to become stale, within two or three
days?
This is performed, if you bury your beer or ale being filled into pots, in a
shadie place somewhat deep in the ground.

What is mead?
Mead is made of honey and water boiled both together. This kind of drink is
good for them, which enjoy their health; but very hurtful for them, who are
afflicted with the strangurie or colic. Braggot does far surpass it in
wholesomenesse.

What is Meatheglin?
Meatheglin is made of honey, water, and herbs. If it be stale, it is passing
good.

Chap. 2. Of Wine.
What is the property of wine?
Wine moderatly drunk refreshes the heart and the spirits, tempereth the
humors, ingendreth good blood, breaks fleagme, conserueth nature, and makes
it merry.

What is the use of white wine?
White wine, drunk in the morning fasting, cleanses the lunges. Being taken
with red Onions bruised, it pearceth quickly into the blad der, and breaks the
stone. But if this kind of wine be drunk with a full stomach it does more hurt
then good, and causes the meat to descend, before it be fully concocted.

What is the use of Rhenish wine?
Rhenish wine of all other is the most excellent, for it scoureth the reins of
the back, clarifieth the spirits, provoke urine, and drives away the
headache, specially if it does proceed from the heat of the stomach.

What is the use of Muscadell, Malmesie, and brown Bastard?
These kinds of wines are only for married folks, because they strengthen the
back.

What is the use of Sack?
Sack does make men fat and foggie, and therefore not to be taken of young men.
Being drunk before meals it provoke appetite, and comfort the spirits
maruellously.

How shall I know whether honey or water be mingled with wine?
Vintners, I confess, in these days are wont to iuggle and sophistically to
abuse wines, namely, Alligant, Muscadell, and brown Bastard, but you shall
perceive their deceit by this means; take a few drops of the wine, and power
them upon a hot plate of iron, and the wine being resolved, the honey will
remain and thicken. If you suspect your wine to be mingled with water, you
shall discern the same by putting a pear into it: for if the pear swim
upon the face of the wine, and sink not to the bottom, then it is perfect and
unmingled, but if it sink to the bottom, water without doubt is added unto it.

Show me a way to keep Claret wine, or any other wine good, nine or ten
years.
At every vintage, draw almost the fourth part, out of the hogshead, and then
roll it upon his lee, and after fill it up with the best new wine of the same
kind, that you can get. Your caske ought to be bound with iron hoopes, and
kept always full.

How might I help wine, that reboyleth?
Put a piece of cheese into the vessel, and presently a wonderful effect will
follow.

Chap. 3. Of Milk.
What is the use of milk?
Milk purges superfluous humors in the belly, and nourishes the body: but
sour things must not in any case be presently taken after it. Also, for fear
it should co^geale in the stomach, put a little sugar, salt, or honey into it,
and so stir them together. It agrees well with choleric persons, but not
with the phlegmatic.

What is the discommoditie of milk.?
Milk often used, of them that are not wont to labor, causes headache, and
dimnesse of sight: it annoyeth the teeth. Which discommodities may be corrected
by adding rice and sugar unto it.

Which kind of milk is best?
Woman's milk is wholesomest and purest, because it is a restoratiue medicine
for the brain and the consumption. Next unto it, goats milk is best.

What is the use of Cream?
Cream with strawberies and sugar taken of hot choleric persons will not much
hurt.

What is the use of sower Whay?
Sower whay is a temperate drink, which mundifieth the lunges, purges blood,
and alayeth the heat of the liver.

Chap. 4. Of Flesh.
What kind of meat is best.
That kind of meat is best, which ingendreth good blood, and is easy to be
digested, as mutton, beef, lamb, pigges, capons, chickens, partridges,
woodcockes, young pigeons, thrushes, and such like.

What meat is of an hard digestion?
Venison, duckes, geese, together with the kidneyes, livers, and entrails of
birds do breed cruditie in the stomach, and fluxes.

Show me a way to preserve flesh and foul, sound and sweet, for one month,
notwithstanding the contagiousnesse of the weather?
Master Plat, whose authority not only in this, but in all other matters I
greatly allow of, counsels huswiues to make a strong brine, so as the water
be ouerglutted with salt; and being scalding hot, to perboyle their mutton,
veale, venison, foul, or such like, and then to hang them up in a convenient
place. With this usage they will last a sufficient space, without any bad or
ouersaltish taste. Some have helped tainted venison, by lapping the same in a
course thin cloth, covering it first with salt, and then burying it a yard
deep in the ground, twelve or twenty hours space. Others do cover their
foul in wheat.

What is the use of mutton?
Young mutton boiled and eaten with opening and cordial herbs is the most
nourishing meat of all, and hurts none, but only phlegmatic persons, and
those which are troubled with the dropsy.

What is the use of beef?
Young beef bredde up in fruitful pasture, and otherwhiles wrought at plow,
being powdered with salt four and twenty hours, and exquisitely sodden is
natural meat for men of strong constitutions; it nourishes exceedingly, and
stops the flux of yellow choler. Howbeit Martlemas beef (so commonly
called) is not laudable, for it ingendreth melancholic diseases, and the stone.

What is the use of veale?
Veale young and tender sodden with young pullets, or capons, and smallage, is
very nutritive and wholesome for all seasons, ages, and constitutions.

What is the use of swines fiesh?
The lean of a young fat hog, eaten moderately with spices and hot things,
does surpass all manner of meat, except veale, for nourishment: it keeps
the paunch slipperie, and provoke urine: but it hurts them that be subject
to the gout and Sciatica, and annoyeth old men and idle persons. A young Pig is
restoratiue, if it be flayed and made in a ielly. To be short, bacon may be
eaten with other flesh to provoke appetite, and to break phlegm coagulated and
thickened in the stomach.

What is the use of Kid?
The hinder part of a young Kid roasted is a meat soon digested, and
therefore very wholesome for sick and weak folks. It is more fit for young
and hot constitutions, the^ for old men or phlegmatic persons.

What is the use of Venison?
Young fallow dear, very well chafed, hanged up until it be tender, and in
rosting being thoroughly basted with oil, or well larded, is very good for
them, that be troubled with the rheum or palsy. Yet notwithstanding it
hurts lean folks and old men, it disposes the body to agues, and causes
fearful dreams.

Some say that venison being eaten in the morning prolongeth life; but eaten at
night it brings sudden death. The horns of dear being long and slender are
remedies against poisoned potions: and so are the bones, that grow in their
hearts.

What think you of Hare and Conies flesh?
Hare and Conies flesh perboyled, and then roasted with sweet herbs, cloves,
and other spices, consumes all corrupt humors and fleagme in the stomach, and
makes a man to look amiably, according to the proverb: He has devoured a
Hare. But it is unwholesome for lazy and melancholic men.

What is your opinion of Capons, Hens, and Chickens?
A fat Capon is more nutritive then any other kind of foul. It increases
venerie, and healpeth the weakness of the brain. But unless a man after the
eating of it, use extraordinary exercise, it will do him more hurt the^ good.
As for chickens they are fitter to be eaten of sick men, then of them that be
in health.

Show me a way to fallen capons in most short time?
You must follow Master Plats advise, namely, to take the blond of beasts,
whereof the butchers make no great reconing, and boil it, with some store of
branne amongst it (perhaps grains will suffice, but branne is best) until it
come to the shape of a blood pudding, and therewith feed your foul so fat as
you please. You may feed turkies with bruised acornes, and they will prosper
exceedingly.

What is the use of Pigeons?
Pigeons plump and fat boiled in sweet flesh broth with coriander and vinegar,
or with sower cheries and plummes, do purge the reins, heal the palsy
proceeding of a cold cause, and are very good in cold weather for old persons,
and stomachs full of fleagme.

What is the use of goese?
A young fat goose farsed with sweet herbs and spices does competently
nourish. Notwithstanding, tender folks must not eat thereof: for it fills
the body with superfluous humors, and causes the fever to follow.

What is the use of Duckes?
Young duckes stifled with borage smoke, and being eaten in cold weather,
strengthen the voice, and increase natural seed.

What is the use of Partridges?
Young hen Partridges eaten with vinegar do heal all manner of fluxes, and
dry up bad humors in the belly.

What is the use of quails?
Quails eaten with coriander seed and vinegar do help melancholic men.

What is the use of woodcockes and snites?
Woodcockes and Snites are somewhat lightly digested. Yet hurtful for
choleric and melancholic men.

What is the use of swannes, turkies, perockes, hernes, and cra^es?
These birds if they be hanged by the necks five days with waightes at their
feet, and afterward eaten with good sauce, do greatly nourish and profit
them, which have hot bellies.

What think you of larkes and sparrowes?
Larkes and sparrowes are marvelous good for them, that be diseased of the
colic.

What is the use of eggs?
New hen eggs poched do engender good blood, extend the wind pipes, and
stop blood spitting. If the white of them being roasted be strayned, there
will proceed a kind of oil, which being applied to the eyes will heal their
griefs.

Chap. 5. Of Fish.
What is the use of Carpe?
A fresh Carpe salted for the space of six hours, and then fried in oil and
besprinkled with vinegar in which spices have boiled, in all men's censure is
thought to be the wholesomest kind of fish. It may not be kept long, except it
be well covered with bay, myrtle, or cedar leaves.

What are salmon and trouts?
Salmon and trouts well sodden in water and vinegar, and eaten with sour sauce
do help hot livers and burning agues.

What is the use of Barbles?
Barbles roasted upon a gridiron or boiled in vinegar are very wholesome. If any
man drink the wine, wherein one of them has been strangled to death, he
shall ever after despise all manner of wines. Which conclu sion were fit to be
put in trial by some of our notorious swil-bowles.

What is the use of sturgeons?
River sturgeons sodden in water and vinegar and eaten with fennel, do cool
the blood, and provoke lechery.

What is the use of Cuttles?
Cuttles seasoned with oil and pepper do provoke appetite, and nourish much.

What is the use of Lampreyes?
River Lampreyes choked with nutmegs and cloves, and fried with bread, oil,
and spices, is a princely dish and does very, much good.

What is the use of tenches?
Femall tenches baked with garlic, or boiled with onions, oil, and raisins
may be eaten of youth, and choleric men.

What is the use of Pikes?
Pikes boiled with water, oil, and sweet herbs will firmly nourish.

What is the use of Eeles?
Eeles taken in spring time, and roasted in a leaf of paper with oil,
coriander seed, and parsley, do break fleagme in the stomach.

What is the use of Perches?
River Perches will provoke appetite to them, that be sick of the hot ague.

What is the use of Oisters?
Oisters roasted on the imbers, and then taken with oil, pepper, and the juice
of Orenges, provoke appetite and lechery. They must not be eaten in those
months, which in pronouncing want the letter R.

What is the use of Cra-fishes?
Cra-fish roasted in the imbers, and eaten with vinegar and pepper purge the
reins, and help them, that be sick of the consumption or Ptisick.

Show me a way to keep Oisters, lobsters, and such like, sweet and good for
some few days?
Oisters, as Master Plat says, may be preserved good a long time, if they be
barrelled up, and some of the brackish water, where they are taken, powered
amongst them. Or else you may pile them up in final roundelets with the hollow
parts of the shelles upward, casting salt amongst them at every lay which they
make. You may keep lobsters, shrimpes, and such like fish, if you wrappe them
souerally in sweet and course rags first moystened in strong brine, and then
you must bury these clothes, and cover them in some cool and moist place with
sand.

Chap. 6. Of sauce.
What is the use of our common salt?
Salt consumes all putrified humors, and causes meat to keep sweet and
sound the longer.

How many kinds of salts are there?
The number of saltes are infinite, as, niter is a salt, allome is a salt, sugar
is a salt, salicor is a salt, copperas is a salt, vitriol is a salt, tartar is
a salt, and diverse other, which to rehearse were bootlesse at this time.

What is that salt herb which kills worms in childrens bodies?
That salt herb is named Salic^re, whereof the fairest glasses be made. If it
be boiled, and with a little meal made into paste, and the^ fried in butter,
it will (being eaten) expel out of the body all kind of worms.

What is the use of sugar?
Sugar mitigareth and opens obstructions. It purges fleagme, helps the
reins, and comfort the belly.

What is the use of vinegar?
Vinegar made of the best wine, a year old, with Roses steeped in it,
represseth choler, and closes weak gummes.

What is the use of mustard?
Mustard is very good to purge the brain. It must be taken only in cold
weather.

What is the property of oils?
All oils, except the oils of nuttes and olives, do loose the belly.

What is the use of oil of Olives?
Oil olive fatneth the liver, and augmenteth the substance thereof.

Chap. 7. Of grains, spices, and pulse.
What is the use of rice?
Rice sodden with milk and sugar qualifieth wonderfully the heat of the
stomach, increases genitall seed, and stops the flux of the belly.

What is the use of pease?
Pease being well dressed with butter and salt are very wholesome. For they
provoke appetite, they take away the cough, and mundifie the lunges.

What is the use of beans?
Beans well sodden, and eaten with annise seed or commine seed do fatten
the body, and cleanse the reins of the back.

What is the use of Cinnamon?
Cinnamon corroborateth all the powers of the body, restores them that be
decayed, purges the head, and succoureth the cough.

What is the use of Cloves?
Cloves taken moderatly, when the stomach abounds with fleagme in cold
weather, and with moist meats, do strengthen the body, stay vomits and
fluxes, and correct a stinking breath.

What is the use of pepper?
Pepper not full of wrinckles, used in cold weather and with moist meats,
breaks wind, heateth the sinews, and strengthens the stomach.

What is the use of ginger?
Ginger sharpneth the sight, and provoke slothful husbands.

What is the use of saffron?
New saffron well colored used in cold seasons comfort the heart, and
drives away drunkenness.

What is the use of parsneeps, and carrets?
Parsneeps and carrets, if they be spiced with annise seed, or Cinnamon, and
eaten with peniroyall, do increase seed, and break the stone in the reins.

Chap. 8. Of herbs.
What is the use of Tobacco?
Cane Tobacco well dried, and taken in a silver pipe, fasting in the morning,
cures the megrim, the tooth ache, obstructions proceeding of cold, and helps
the fits of the mother. After meals it does much hurt, for it infecteth the
brain and the liver.

What is the use of borage?
Borage is a cordial herb. It purges blood, makes the heart merry, and
strengthens the bowelles.

What is the use of Cabbages?
Cabbages moderatly eaten do mollify the belly, and are very nutritive. Some
say that they have a special virtue against drunkenness.

What is the use of radish?
Radish roots do clear the voice, provoke, urine, and comfort the liver.

What is the use of cucumbers?
Cucumbers are of a cold temperature, and fit to be eaten only of choleric
persons.

What is the use of onions, leekes, and garlic?
They are only fit to be eaten of fleagmatick folks. They clarify the voice,
extend the wind pipes, and provoke urine and menstruall issue.

Show me the best sallet?
The best sallet is made of peniroyall, parsley, lettice, and endive. For it
opens the obstruction of the liver, and keeps the head in good plight.

Cap. 9. Of Fruit.
What is the use of figs?
White figs pared, and then eaten with oreges, pomegranats, or seasoned in
vinegar, in spring time do nourish more then any fruit, break the stone in
the reins, and quench thirst.

What is the use of raisins and curraines?
They are very nutritive, yet notwithstanding they putrify the reins and the
bladder.

What is the use of prunes?
Sebastian prunes do loose the belly, and quench choler.

What is the use of straweberries?
Red garden straweberries purified in wine, and then eaten with good store of
sugar do assuage choler, cool the liver, and provoke appetite.

What is the use of Almonds and nuttes?
Almonds and nuttes are very nutritive, and do increase grossness* they
multiply sperme, and provoke sleep. But I would not wish any to eat them,
that are short winded, or troubled with headaches.

What is the use of Apples?
Old and ripe Apples roasted, baked, stewed, or powdered with sugar and annise
seed, do recreate the heart, open the wind pipes, and appease the cough.

What is the use of pears?
Ripe pears eaten after meat, and powdered with sugar, cause appetite and
fatten the body. And if you drink a cup of old wine after them, they will do
you much good.

What is the use of Orenges?
Weighty Orenges are very good for them that be melancholic, and keep back
the rheum.

What is the use of plummes and damsons?
Plummes and damsons do qualify blood, and repress choleric humors.

The third Section. Of sleep, early rising, mirth, and exercise.
Chap. 1. Of sleep, and early rising.
What be the commodities of sleep?
MOderate sleep strengthens all the spirits, comfort the body, quyeteth
the humors and pulses, qualifieth the heat of the liver, takes away sorrow,
and asswageth the fury of the mind.

What be the discommodities of sleep?
Immoderate sleep makes the brame giddie, ingendreth rheum and impostumes,
causes the palsy, brings oblivion, and troubles the spirits.

How many hours may a man sleep?
Seven hours sleep is sufficient for sanguine and choleric men; and nine
hours for fleagmaticke, and melancholic men.

Upon which side must a man sleep first?
Upon his right side, until the meat, which he has eaten, be descended from
the mouth of the stomach (which is on the left side:) the^ let him sleep upon
his left side, and upon his belly, that the meat may be the more easily sodden
and digested in a more hot and fleshy place.

May a man conveniently ly upright on his back?
No, for it heateth the reins, hurts the brain and memory, and oftentimes
breeds the disease, which is called the Riding mare.

Show me some remedies to procure sleep?
Take a little camphire, and mingle it with some woman's milk, and anoyne your
temples therewith, or else, take an ounce of oil of Roses, and three drachmes
of vinegar, stir them both together, and use them.

What think you of noone sleep?
Sleeping at noone is very dangerous. But if you judge it good by reason of
custom, the^ do off your shoes, while you sleep: for when the body and the
members be heavy with deep sleep, the thickness of the leather at the soles
does return the hurtful vapoures of the feet (that else should vanish away)
into the head and eyes. Also, you must (if you can possibly) sleep in your
chair, and let your head be meanly covered according to the time. For as too
much cold, so too much heat does astonish the mind and spirits.

What are the commodities of early rising?
Early rising is healthful for the blood and humors of the body, and a thing
good for them, that be studious of weighty affairs; for the animal spirit is
then more ready to conceive. Yet notwithstanding it is not amiss to consider,
and serve the time and place: because if the air be corrupt, as in plague
time, or inclined to moistness, as in raynie and mistie wether, or thundering,
it is better to abide either in bed with some light, or to sit in the chamber
by some sweet fire.

What are dreams?
Dreams are either tokens of things past, or significants of things to come.
And surely if a man's mind be free from cares, and he dream in the morning,
there is no doubt, but affairs then dreamed of will truly come to pass.

Chap. 2. Of mirth.
What is mirth?
Mirth is a motion of the mind, whereby it takes delight and stays it self
in that good which is offered unto it.

What are the effects of mirth?
Mirth enlarges the heart, and disperseth much natural heat with the blood,
of which it sends a good portion to the face; especially, if the mirth be so
great, that it stirs a man to laughter Mirth, I say, makes the forehead
smooth and clear, causes the eyes to glister, and the cheeks to become
ruddie.

Wherefore did God give affections unto men?
God afforded mirth and such like unto men, that thereby they might be induced
to seek after his divine Majesty, in whom alone they should find all mirth,
and comfort.

What mirth do the common people love best?
Ignorant men do delight in corporal and outward things, which move their
bodily senses. As in beholding of fair women, pleasant gardens, rich attires,
or else in eating and drinking.

What mirth do wise men like?
Wise men receive pleasure by contemplation: which is proper to the mind and
spirit. This Aristotle approved, when as he placed the end and sovereign Good
in co^templation.

Show me a way to make the heart merry?
You must use to carry about you a sweet Pomander, and to have always in your
chamber some good perfumes; Or you may wash your face and hand with sweet
waters; for nothing in the world can so exhilarate and purify the spirits, as
good odoures.

Chap. 3. Of exercise.
What be the commodities of exercise?
Exercise is that, which makes the body light, increases natural heat, and
consumes superfluous humors, which otherwise would clotter and congeale
within the body. For in every concoction some excrements are engendered, which
being left alone may be the roots of diverse sicknesses. Now the thicker sort
of excrements are avoided by sensible euacuations. But the thinner may be
wasted and purged by exercise.

At what time is it best to exercise?
It is best to exercise, when the body is fasting and empty, least after
meats by violent and vehement motions digestion be hindered, and putrefaction
follow. In summer, exercise is to be used an hour after sun rising, for
fear of a double heat. In spring and harvest time it is to be used about an
hour and a half after sun rising, that the morning cold may be avoided. For
as the heat at midday is hurtful: so the morning cold, especially in Autumn
is to be eschewed.

What kind of exercise is good?
Walking, if it be not too slow, is a commendable exercise, and may be used in
hot months, specially of choleric persons. To hang by the hands on any
thing above your reach, so that your feet touch not the ground, is good. To
climb up against a steep hill, till you pant and fetch your breath often with
great difficulty, is a fit exercise to be frequented in cold seasons. Old men
must content themselves with softer exercises, least that the small heat, which
they have, should be spent. They must only every morning have their members
gently rubd with a linen cloth.

To be brief, they must be combd, and cherished up with fine delights.

Unto which coplexio^ does exercise most appertain?
Unto the phlegmatic, rather the^ the choleric.

What exercise should short winded men use?
They must use loud reading, and disputations, that thereby their wind pipes
may be extended, and their pores enlarged.

The fourth Section. Of Euacuations.
Chap. 1. Of Bathes.
What is the use of Bathes?
COld and natural bathes are greatly expedient for men subject to rheumes,
dropsies, and goutes. Neither can I easily express in words, how much good
cold bathes do bring unto them, that use them. Howbeit, with this caveat I
commend baths, to wit, that no man diste^pered through venery, gluttony,
watching, fasting, or through violent exercise, presume to enter into them.

Is bathing of the head wholesome?
You shall find it wonderful expedient, if you bathe your head four times in
the year, and that with hot lie made of ashes. After which you must cause one
presently to power two or three gallons of cold fountain water upon your head.
Then let your head be dried with cold towelles. Which sudden pouring down of
cold water, although it does mightily terrify you, yet nevertheless it is very
good, for thereby the natural heat is stirred within the body, baldness is
kept back, and the memory is quickened. In like manner, washing of hands often
does much avail the eyesight.

How shall a man bathe himself in winter time, when waters be frozen?
In winter time this kind of artificial bathing is very expedient and
wholesome: Take two pound of turpentine, four ounces of the juice of wormwood
and wild mallowcs, one ounce of fresh butter, one drachme of saffron: mingle
them, and sees them a pretty while, and being hot, wet four linen clothes
in it, and therewith bathe your self.

Chap. 2. Of bloodletting.
Blood is the very essence of life: which, diminished, the spirits must
consequently be dissolved. In consideration whereof, I counsel them, that use
any moderat exercise, not in any case to be let blood; least that corrupt water
succeed in the place of the pure blood. But if they abound with blood, or
their blood be putrified and burnt (if other medicines avail not) this law of
mine must needs be infringed.

Show me a way to discern the effects of bloodletting?
If the blood, which is let out, appear red of color, and white water flow
with it, then the body is sound: if bubbling blood issue, the stomach is
diseased: if green, the heart is grieved.

Chap. 3.
What is the use of purgations?
Purgations, as sometime they be very necessary, so often taking of them is
most dangerous. He that uses exquisite purgations, and especially
electuaries soluble, shall quickly wax old and gray headed. All purgations (a
few simples only excepted) have poisoned effects.

Besides, nature above measure is compelled by purgations, and the vital
powers are diminished. In respect of which reasons, let every man take he de
of those butchering surgeons, and bloud-sucking Empirickes, who roguing up and
down countries, do murder many innocents under pretext of Physic. He that
observes a good diet, and moderatly exercises his body, needs no Physic.
Moist and delicate viandes eaten in the beginning of meals do sufficiently
loose the belly. Sweet wines perform the very same. Also the leaves of Seen
sodde^ in water with sebastian prunes will make the belly soluble. Why then
will men be so headie, as to take their own destruction, seeing that they may
live in health without Physick-help?

Who are apt to take purgations, and who not?
They are apt to take purgations, who are strong of constitutions, and who are
willing. And again, they are unapt for purgations, which are either too fat or
too lean. Likewise children, old persons, women with child, and healthful
folks are not to be purged.

What humors are fittest to be purged?
Those humors, which molest the body, and offend either in quality or
quantity. If choler happen to offend you, it is convenient that you purge the
same: if fleagme trouble you, then by medicine it must be undermined: if
melancholy does abound, it is expedient, that you fetch it out.

What must I do before purging?
Before you purge, you must attenuate the slimie humors, open the pores,
through which the purgation is carried, and extract the whayish humors by some
mild sirupe. Moreover, you must diligently mark the place, where you are
agrieued, namely, whether of the headache, or else sick in the stomach, liver,
kidneyes, or the belly: and then whether by reason of fleagme, choler, or
melancholic. Which being known; according to the humor and place, you must
mingle sirups fit for the part affected, with waters of the same nature, that
the humor may be aforeha^d concocted; but in such wise, that the measure of
the water may double the measure of the sirupe, and that the measures of both
exceed not four ounces.

How many things are to be considered in purgations?
Eight things. First the quality of the purgation. Secondly, the time of the
year. Thirdly, the climate of the country. Fourthly, the age of the Patient.
Fifthly, his custom. Sixthly, the disease. Seauenthly, the strength of the sick.
Eighthly, the place of the Moon.

Show me the best and safest purgation for sleagme?
Take one drachme of turbith, four drachmes of vinegar and sugar; make them
into powder, and use it in the morning with hot water. But care not till three
hours be expired.

For choler?
Take two drachmes of good Rheubarbe beaten into powder, and incorporate the
same with five ounces of hot water, wherein Damask prunes have been sodden;
and use it hot in the morning.

For melancholy?
Take three drachmes of the leaves of Seen, two drachmes of Cinnamon and
Ginger, one drachme of sugar; and sees them in Goats milk, woman's milk,
whay, or in some other like thing.

Show me how I may mundifie blood?
Take two drachmes of Time and Seen, one drachme of Myrobolane, one drachme of
Rheubarbe, white Turbith, and ginger, two drachmes of sugar; let them be done
all into powder, and given in water where in sennell or annise seed have been
boiled.

What shall I do, if the purgation will not work?
If after the taking of a purgation, the belly be not loosed, that
inconvenience happens chiefly for these causes; either through the nature of
the sick, or for the slenderness of the purgation, or because nature
connerteth her endeavor into urine, or else by reason that the belly was
before hand too hard bound, which by a glister might be helped. When therefore
the belly after the purgation is not soluble, it procures grievous maladies in
the body. But if a man take a small quantity of mastick lightly pounded and
ministered in warm water, he shall be cured of that infirmity. Likewise, it
much avails presently to eat an apple.

Seeing that glisters be very commodious, show me a way to make some?
Take honey sodden till it be thick, and mingle the same with wheaten meal;
then add a little fresh butter, and make your glister into a long form. Which
done, dippe it in oil, and use it. Or else take half an ounce of the roots
of succorie and licoras, two drachmes of Endive, one handful of mallows, one
drachme of the seed of succory and fennel, two drachmes of fennigreeke, half
a handful of the flowers of cammomel; sees them, and then a most wholesome
glister is made.

What if the purgation does euacuate too much?
You must infuse three drachmes of the powder of mastick in the juice of
Quinces, and drink it: or else eat a Quince alone.

Chap. 4. Of vomits.
What is a vomit?
A vomit is the expulsion of bad humors (contained in the stomach) upwards.
It is accounted the wholsommest kind of Physic: for that, which a purgation
leaves behind it, a vomit does root out.

Which are the best vomites?
Take of the seeds of Dill, Attriplex, and radish, three drachmes, of
fountain water one pound and a half; sees them all together, til there
remain one pound: then strain it, and use it hot. Or else make you a vomit
after this manner: take three drachmes of the rind of a walnut, slice them,
and steep them one whole night in a draught of white wine, and drink the wine
in the morning a little before dinner.

What if the vomits work not.
If they work not within an hour after you have taken any of them, suppe a
little of the syrup of oximell, and put your left middle finger in your mouth,
and you shall be helped.

What shall I do, if I vomit too much?
If you vomit too much, rub and wash your feet with hot and sweet water:
and if it cease not for all this, apply a gourd to the mouth of the stomach.

Chap. 5. Of vrines.
What is urine?
Urine is the clearer and lighter part of blood proceeding from the reins;
which if a man forces to suppress, he is in danger of the cholick or stone.

What color of urine is most commendable?
That urine is most laudable, which is of color somewhat red and yealow like
gold, answering in proportion to the liquor, which you drink.

Teach me to prognosticate by vrines?
White urine signifies rawnesse and indigestion in the stomach. Red urine
betokens heat. Thick urine and like to puddle shows sickness, or excessive
labor. If white or red gravel appear in the bottom of your vrinal, it
threatens the stone in the reins. In brief, black or green colored urine
declares death most commonly to ensue.

Chap. 6. Of fasting.
Is moderate fasting good?
Moderate fasting, as, to omit a dinner or a supper once a week, is wonderful
commodious for them, that are not choleric or melancholic, but full of raw
humors. This Antonie the Emperor knew very well, when he accustomed to drink
naught save one cup full of wine with a little pepper, after he had surfeted.

Of the commodities of fasting, I have written more largely, in my second book
of the Golden Grove.

Show me a way to preserve my life, if perhaps I be constrained to straggle in
deserts?
Take licoras or Tobacco now and then, chew it, and you shall satisfy both
thirst and hunger. Or else, mix some suet with one pound of violets, and you
shall preserve your life thereby, ten days. Or to conclude, take a piece of
allome, and roll it in your mouth, when you wax hungry: By this means vou
may live (as some write) a whole fortnight without sustenaunce.

Chap. 7. Of venerie.
What is the use of venerie?
Moderate venerie is very expedient for preservation of health. It opens the
pores, makes the body light, exhilarateth the heart and wit, and mitigateth
anger and fury.

When is it best to use carnal copulation?
It is best to use carnal copulation in winter and in spring time, when nature
is desirous, and at night when the stomach is full, and the body somewhat
warm, that sleep immediately after it may lenifie the lassitude caused through
the action thereof.

What be the inco^ueniences of immoder at venerie?
Immoderat venerie weakneth strength, hurts the brain, extinguisheth
radical moisture, and hasteneth on old age and death. Sperme or seed of
generation is the one y comforter of nature: which wilfully shed or lost,
harmeth a man more, then if he should bleed forty times so much.

Teach me, how wiuelesse batchelers and husbandlesse maidens should drive away
their unclean dre tming of venerie, at nights?
First, they must refrain from wine, and venereous imaginations, and not use
to lie in soft down beds. Secondly, they must addict themselves to read the
Bible and moral Philosophy. Thirdly, they must exercise often their bodies.
Lastly, if none of these prevail, let them use the seed of Agnus castus, in
English Park seed, and they shall feel a strange effect to follow.

The fifth Section. Of infirmities and death.
Chap. 1.
What be the causes of infirmities?
THe causes of hot infirmities be six; The first are the motions of the mind:
as love, anger, fear, and such like. The second, the motions of the body: as,
immoderate carnal copulation, vehement labors, strayning, hard riding. The
third, long standing, or sitting in the sun, or by the fire. The fourth cause
of infirmities is the use of hot things, as, meats, drinks, and medicines
untimely used. The fifth, closing or stopping of the pores: which happens by
immoderat anointing, bathing, or otherwise thickning the skin; so that the
holes, whereby the sweat and fumes do pass out, be stopped. The sixth,
putrefaction of humors by distemperature of meats, and long watchings.

What be the causes of cold infirmities?
The causes of cold infirmities be eight. The first is the cold air. The
second is too much repletion. The third is want of good meat. The fourth is
the use of cold things. The fifth is too much quietness. The sixth is opening of
the pores. The seventh is oppilation in the veins or arteries. The eight is
unseasonable exercise.

What is the chiefest cause of death?
The chiefest and unavoidable cause of our deaths is the contrariety of the
elements, where of our bodies be compounded. For the quality, which is
predominant over the temperature (or mediocritie) begins to impugn and
fight with his contrary, which is more weak, until it see the utter
dissolution of the same.

Chap. 2. Of the wicked motions of the mind.
What is love?
Love is an affection, whereby the mind lusts after that, which is either
good indeed, or else that, which seems unto it, to be so.

What is the cause of love?
The cause of love among fools is beauty; but among good men the virtues of
the mind are the principles of love, for they are everlasting; and when all
other things, as beauty and riches do decay, yet they become more fresh, more
sweet, and inestimable then before. Hence is it that we are counseled to
choose wives, not by our eyes, but by our ears; that is, not by prying into
their fairness of bodies, but by inward contemplating of their honest deeds,
and good huswiueries. Ordinarily the most beautiful and goodly sort of men,
and such as are decked with bodily gifts, are most deformed and vicious in
their souls. There is always a great combat betwixt chastity and beauty, so
that we seldom see fair women to be honest matrons: the reason is, because
they prefer the fantastical pleasures of their bodily senses before the
true and right noble virtues of the mind.

What is anger?
Anger is a vehement affection, because it sees things fall out contrary and
crosse-like to reason.

Why do some look red, when they be angry?
Some, when they are angry, become red, because their blood ascends up into
the head: and these are not so much to be doubted.

Why do some look pale?
Men wax pale, when they are angry, because the blood is retired unto the
heart: whereby they become full of heart, and very dangerous.

What is sorrow?
Sorrow is an affection of the mind, whereby it is oppressed with some present
evil, and languisheth by little and little, except it find some hope, or
other, to remedy the grief thereof.

What is the effect of sorrow?
Sorrow stifleth up the purer faculties of the soul, causes a man to fall
into a consumption, and to be weary of the world, yea and of himself.

What is fear?
Fear is a grief, which the mind coceiueth of some evil, that may chance
unto it.

Why do fearful men look pale?
The reason, why fearful men look pale and wanne is, because nature draws
away that heat, which is in the face and outward parts, to relieve and
comfort the heart, which is welnigh stifled and stopped up.

What is envy?
Envy is a grief arising of other men's felicity. It makes a man to look
lean, swart, hollow eyed, and sickly.

Do these affections hurt the soul, as well as the body?
Yea doubtless. For if the body be replenished with these diseases, the soul
can not be whole, nor sound. And even as vices cause disorders and diseases
both in the body and souls so likewise they cause the one to destroy the
other; whereas there should be an unity and harmony not only of the
corporal qualities among themselves, and so of the spiritual among
themselves, but also of their joint qualities one with another, And no marvel;
seeing that God has sowed and planted the seeds and sparks of affections (to
move us) not only into our souls, but also into our bodies.

How do the temperature of the bodily affections, and the souls affections
agree together?
There is great concord betwixt the bodies qualities, and the souls
affections: insomuch that as our bodies are compacted of the elementall
qualities, namely, of moisture and dryness, heat and cold: so among the
souls affections some are moist, some dry, some hot and some are cold. This
we might see by instance made. The affection of mirth is hot and moist, whereas
sorrow is cold and dry. The one is proper to young men, and the other to old
men, who are cold and dry.

Chap. 3. Of the age of man.
Into how many ages is man's life divided?
Man's life by the computation of Astrologers is dinided into seven ages: over
every one of which, one of the seven planets is predominant. The first age is
called infancy, which continues the space of seven years. And then the
Moon reigns, as appears by the moist co^stitutio^s of children, agreeing
well with the influence of that planet.

The second age, named childhood, lasts seven years more, and ends in the
fourteenth of our life. Over this age, Mercury (which is the second sphere)
rules; for then children are unconstant, tractable, and soon inclined to
learn.

The third age endures eight years, and is termed the strippling age: It
begins at the fourteenth year, and continues until the end of the two
and twentieth. During which time, governs the planet Venus: For then we are
prone to prodigality, gluttony, drunkenness, lechery, and sundry kinds of
vices. The fourth age contains twelve years, till a man be four and
thirty, and then is he named a young man. Of this age, the sun is chief
Lord. Now a man is witty, well adiused, magnanimous, and come to know himself.

The fist age is called man's age; and has sixteen years for the continuance
thereof subject to Mars; for now a man is choleric and covetous.

The sixth age has twelve years, that is, from fifty till threescore and two.
This age is termed (although improperly) old age of which Jupiter is master, a
planet significant of equity, temperance, and religion.

The seventh and last (by order) of these ages continues full eighteen
years, ending at fourscore: to which few attain. This age, by the means of
the planet Saturn, which is melancholic and most slow of al other, causes
man to be drooping, decrepite, froward, cold, and melancholic.

Why did men live longer before the stoud, then they do now.
The principal reason, why men in those days lived longer, then we do, is,
because they had not then any of the causes, which inge^der in us so many
maladies, whence consequently ensues death. Their lives were vpholden by the
course of the heavens with the qualities of the planets andistarres, being at
that time far more glorious and gracious then now, There were not so many
meteors, comets, and eclipses past, from whence now diverse and innumerable
circumuolutions proceed.

We must also understand, that our first parents were created of God himself
without any other isntrumental means. And again the earth in those days was
of greater efficacy to bring forth necessaries for man's use, then it is in
this crooked and outworne age. The soil was then gay, trim, and fresh:
whereas now by reason of the inundation (which took away the fatness thereof)
it is barren, saltish, and unsavory.

To conclude, they knew the hidden virtues of herbs and stones, using great
continence in their dyets and behauiours. They were ignorant of our delicate
inventions and multiplied compounds. They knew not our damtie cates, our
marchpanes, nor our superfluous slibber sauces. They were no quaffers, nor were
they troubled with so many cares, and vaineglorious pompes.

Tell me the certain time, wherein man must of necessity die?
To die once, is a common thing to all men. For that was ordained as a
punishment of God for our foreparents, when they transgressed his
commandment, touching the fruit in paradise: but to tell how, and at what
time, that is a secrecy never disclosed to any creature. Such as the man's life
is, such is his death. A righteous man dies righteouslie. But a wicked man
has a wicked end. Death is a suddeine and a sullen guest, never thought on,
before he apprehends us as his slaves. When we think our selves safely
mounted on the pinnacle of worldly felicity, he unawares (hidden in the
darkesome corners of our houses) suppresseth us rudely, and smites us deadly.

For which consideration, O mortal men, lead your lives vprightlie, hearken
not unto the counsels of the ungodly, nor like greedy Cormoraunts snatch up
other men's tightes. Rather know your selves: which done, be vigilant, well
armed in Christ Jesus, and alvvaies meditating on your deaths.

Which be the most dangerous years in man's life?
The ancient Sages by curious notes have found out, that certain years in
man's life he very perilous. These they name climactericall or stayrie years,
for then they saw great alterations. Now a climactericall year is every
seventh year. The reason is, because then the course of the planets return
to Saturn, who most commonly is cruel and noisome unto us. And even as the
Moon, which is the next planet unto us, and swiftest of course, passes almost
every seventh day into the contrary sign of the same quality, from whence
she came forth, and therehence brings the critical days: so Saturn, which
is the planet furthest from us and slowest of course (for he rests in one
sign so many years, as the Moon does days) brings these climactericall
years, and causes sundry mutations to follow. Hence is it, that in the
seventh year children do cast and renew their teeth. In the fourteenth year
proceeds the strippling age. In the one and twentieth, youth. And when a man
has past seven times seven years, to weet, nine and forty years, he is a
ripe and perfect man. Also, when he attaineth to ten times seven years, that
is to the age of threescore and ten, his strength and chiefest virtue begins
to fall away. And again every seventh year was by Gods own institution
pronounced hallowed. And in it the Israelites were prohibited to manure their
grounds, or to plant vineyardes.

Aulus Gellius mentions, that the Emperor Octanian sent a Letter unto his
stepsonne to this effect: Rejoice with me, my son, for I have past over that
deadly year, and enemy to old age, threescore and three. In which number the
seauenthes and ninthes do concur.

The six and fiftieth year is very dangerous to men borne in the night
season, by reason of the doubled coldness of Saturn. And the threescore and
third year is very perilous to them, that be borne in the day time, by reason
of the dryness of Mercury and Venus.

Finally, whenever any man enters into these climactericall years (if
certain tokens of imminent sickness do appear, as wearisomenesse of the
members, grief of the knees, dimnesse of sight, buzzing of the ears,
loathsomeness of meat, sweating in sleep, yawning, or such like) then let him
incessantly pray, and beseeth God to protect and guide his heart; let him be
circumspect and curious to preserve his health, and life, by art, nature,
policy, and experiments.

Which be the Critical days?
The Critical days are the first and seventh of January. The third and
fourth of February. The first and fourth of March. The eighth and tenth of
April. The third and seventh of May. The tenth and fifteenth of June. The
tenth and thirteenth of July. The first and second of August. The third and
tenth of September. The third and tenth of October. The third and fifth of
November. The seventh and tenth of December.

Which humors are predominant in the night season, and which in the day time?
Every one humor reigns six hours. Blood is predominant from nine a clock
in the night, until three a clock in the morning. Choler from three a clock in
the morning, till nine. Melancholye rules from nine a clock in the morning,
till three in the evening. Likewise fleagme governs, from three in the
evening, until nine a clock at night. So that fleagme and melancholy do
reign at night: and blood and choler in the day time. Also blood has his
dominion in the spring time; choler in the summer; melancholy in Autumn; and
fleagme in winter. For which respects, I advise you (if perchance you fall
into a disease) to mark well, in the beginning of your sickness, the hour and
humor then reigning that thereby you may the sooner find out remedy. In
conclusion, you must consider of the critical days: in which, great
alteratio^s either toward your recovery, or toward your further sickness,
will ensue. Most commonly the critical day happneth the seventh the
fourteenth, the one and twentieth, or the eight and twentieth day from the
beginnnig of your sickness. Notwithstanding according to the course of the
Moon, the fourth day, the eleauenth, the seventeenth, and the four and
twentieth day from the beginning of your sickness will foretell you, whether
you shall amend or wax worse.

The sixth Section. Of the restoration of health.
Chap. 1. Of the four parts of the year.
What is the nature of the spring time?
THe Spring time begins, when the sun enters into the sign of Aries,
which is the tenth day of March. At this time the days and nights are of
equal length, the cold weather is diminished, the pores of the earth (being
closed and congealed with cold) are opened, the fields wax green, herbs and
flowers do bud, beasts rut, the birds chirp, and to be brief, all living
creatures do recover their former vigor in the beginning of the spring. Now a
man must eat less, and drink somewhat the more. The best meats to be eaten
are veale, kid, young mutton, chickens, dry foul, potched eggs, figs,
raisins, and other sweet meats: and because the spring is a temperate season,
it requires temperature in all things. Use competent phlebotomie, purgation, or
such like. Venerie will do no great harm.

What is the nature of summer?
Summer begins, when the sun enters the sign of Cancer, which is the twelfth
day of June. In this time choler is predommant, heat increases, the winds are
silent, the sea calm, fruits do ripen, and Bees do make honey. Now a man
must drink largely, eat little; and that sodden: for roast meat is dry. It is
dangerous taking of Physic, and specially in the dog days. To heal wounds
is very difficult and perilous.

What is the nature of Autumn?
Autumn begins, when the sun enters the first degree of Libra, which is
the thirteenth day of September. Then it is Aequinoctiall, meteors are seen,
the times do alter, the air waxes cold, the leaves do fall, come is reaped,
the earth loses her beauty, and melancholy is engendered. For which cause,
such things as breed melancholy are to be avoided, as fear, care, beans,
old cheese, salt beef, broth of colewoorts, and such like. You may safely
eat mutton, lamb, pigges, and young pullets. Take heed of the morning and
evening cold.

What is the nature of Winter?
Winter begins when the funne enters the sign of Capricorn: which is
commonly the twelfth day of December. Now the days are shortened, and the
nights prolonged, winds are sharp, snow and sudden inundations of waters
arise, the earth is congealed with frost and ice, and all living creatures do
quiver with cold. Therefore a man must use warm and dry meats: for the
cheerful virtues of the body are now weakened by the cold air, and the
natural heat is driven into the inward parts of the body, to comfort and
maintain the vital spirits. All roast, baked, or fried meats be good; and so
are boiled beef and porke. Veale agrees not, except it be well roasted. Also
wardens, apples, and pears may be used with wine or with salt for swelling, or
with comfits for windiness. Beware least the cold annoy your body. And above
all things have a regard to keep your head, neck, and feet warm. To use
carnal copulation is expedient.

Chap. 2. Of the four humors.
What is an humor?
An humor is a moist and running body, into which the meat in the liver is
converted; to the end, that our bodies might be nourished by them.

What is the nature of the sanguine humor?
The sanguine humor is hot, moist, fattie, sweet, and seated in the liver,
because it waters all the body, and gives nourishment unto it: out of which
likewise issue the vital spirits, like unto small and gentle winds, that
arise out of rivers and wells.

What is the sleagmatick humor?
The fleagmatick humor is of color white, brackish like unto sweat, and
properly placed in the kidneyes, which draw to themselves the water from the
blood, thereby filling the veins in stead of good and pure blood.

What is the choleric?
The choleric humor is hot and fiery, bitter, and like unto the flower of
wine. It serves not only to cleanse the guts of filth, but also to make the
liver hot, and to hinder the blood from putrefaction.

What is the melancholicke humor.
The melancholicke humor is black, earthly, resembling the lees of blood, and
has the spleen for a seat assigned unto it. Howbeit Physicians say, that
there be three kinds of melancholy. The first proceeds from the annoyed
brain: the second comes, when as the whole constitution of the body is
melancholicke. The third springs from the bowelles, but chiefly from the
spleen and liver.

Show me a diet, for melancholic men?
First, they must have lightsome chambers, and them often perfumed. Secondly,
they must eat young and good meat, and beware of beef, porke, hare, and wild
beasts. Thirdly, let them use Borage, and Buglosse in their drink. Fourthly,
music is meet for the^. Fifthly, they must always keep their bellies loose
and soluble.

Chap. 3. Of medicines, to-prolong life.
Show me certain remedies to preserve health, and to prolong life.
To live for ever, and to become immortal here in earth, is a thing
impossible: but to prolong a man's life void and free from all sickness, to
cause the humors in the body by no means to predominate one over an other,
and to preserve a man in a temperate state, I verily believe it may be done;
first by Gods permission, and then by using weekly either the weight of one
scruple of the spirit of the herb called Rosa solis, or the essence of
Celandine, or the quintessence of potable gold, wherein pearls are dissolved.
Also, who someuer has any of these well prepared may help all the diseases of
man's body, whether they be curable or incurable. Reasons I need not allege,
for that which is openly seen with eyes, need no proofs. It is an absurd
thing, to be ignorant in that which every man knows. Is not the falling
sickness only cured by the spirit of vitrioll? does not mercury heal the
French pox and the filthy scabbe? does not oil of antimonie pluck up at
once the impurities of the fever? They do, none can deny the same. Mineralls
are of most efficacy, if they be rightly prepared and purged from their poison
and superfluities. Truly, it is a wonderful thing in this life, that man's
understanding can bring these inferior works to so great perfection: without
doubt it is the providence of god, that learning in this latter and rotten age
should wax lightsom: thereby to defend life (which otherwise through the
co^tagion of the world would soon decay) from these new and strange maladies,
which are in all places very rife and common: so that the saying of that great
prophet is now verified and come to pass; my age shall renew it self like an
Eagle. O rare gift of the mighty God! who made Moses live 120. years without
dimnesse of sight, without griefs and not loosing any of his teeth, who
prolonged Hezechias life by 15. years, and has inspired into men's hearts such
excellent knowledge.

These quintessences which you speak of, may not be gotten without great
difficulty: wherefore reveal those preservatives, which I may easily get.
Doctor Steuens water is an excellent preservative to prolong life, and is made
after this manner: take a gallo^ of gascoigne wine: the^ take gin ger,
gallingal, ca^momill, cinnamon, nutmegs, grains, cloves, mace, aniseed,
carrawayseed, of each of the^ a drachme; the^ take sage, mints, red roses,
time, pellitorie of the wall, wild mariora^, pennymountayne, otherwise wild
time, cammomille, lauender, of every of them one handful, then bruise the
spices small, bruise the herbs, and put all into the wine, and let it stand
twelve hours, stirring it diverse times, then distill it in a limbeck, and
keep the first pint of the water, for that is the best: and then will come a
second water, which is not so good as the first. The virtues of this water are
these; it comfort the spirits, it preserves the youth of man, it helps
old goutes, the toothache, the palfie, and all diseases proceeding of cold: it
causes barren women to conceive, it cures the cold dropsy, the stone in the
bladder and in the reins of the back, it heals the canker, comfort the
stomach, and prolongeth a man's life. Take but a spoonefull of it once in
seven days; for it is very hot in operation. Doctor Steuens, that used this
water, lived one hundred years wanting two.

The sublimated wine of M. Gallus physician to the Emperor Charles the fifth of
that name, is most admirable. For the use thereof caused him to live sixescore
and nine years without any disease: which I think to be better then Doctor
Steuens water: it is made in this sort: take of Cubebs, cinnamon, cloves, mace,
ginger, nutmegges, and galingall three ounces, of rheubarbe, half anounce, of
Angelica two drachmes, of masticke four drachmes, and of Sage one pound and
two ounces: steep these in two pounds and six ounces of Aqua vitae, which
was six times distilled: then distill them altogether. This wine comfort
the brain and memory, expels melancholy, breaks the stone, provoke
appetite, reuiueth weak spirits; and causes a man to wax young and lusty.
It may be taken twice every week, and not above one spoonefull at each time.
To conclude, there is a iuleppe made only of white wine and sugar, which
comfort and refreshes the body much, causing the spirits to wax lively:
it is made thus; put two pound of sugar in three pound of wine, and one pound
of rosewater; sees it till it come almost to a syrup. This iuleppe is so
acceptable to nature that it supplies the use of meat and drink.

Declare unto me a daily diet, whereby I may live in health and not trouble my
self in Physic.
I will: first of all in the morning when you are about to rise up, stretch
your self strongly: for thereby the animal heat is somewhat forced into the
outward parts, the memory is quickened, and the body strengthened. 2.
Secondarily, rub and chafe your body with the palms of your hands, or with a
course linen clothe: the breast, back, and belly, gently: but the arms,
thighs, and legs roughly, till they seem ruddy and warm. 3. Euacuate your
self. 4. Put on your apparel, which in the summer time must be for the most
part silk, or buffe, made of buckes skin, for it resists venime and
contagions airs: in winter your upper garment must be of cotto^ or friezeadow.
5. When you have apparelled your self handsomely, comb your head softly and
easily with an Iuorie comb: for nothing recreateth the memory more. 6. Pick
and rub your teeth; and because I would not have you to bestow much cost in
making dentifrices for the^: I will advertise you by four rules of importance
how to keep your teeth white and vncorrupt, and also to have a sweet breath.
First wash well your mouth when you have eaten your meat: secondly, sleep
with your mouth somewhat open. Thirdly, spit out in the morning tha^ which is
gathered together that night in the throat: then take a linen cloth and rub
your teeth well within and without, to take away the fumositie of the meat and
the yellowness of the teeth. For it is that which putrifieth them and
infecteth the breath. But least peradventure your teeth become loose and
filthy, I will show you a water far better then pouders, which shall fasten
them, scour the mouth, make sound the gums, and cause the flesh to grow
again, if it were fallen away. Take half a glassefull of vinegar, and as much
of the water of the masticke tree (if it may easily be gotten) of rosemarie,
mirrhe, masticke, bole Armoniake, Dragons herb, roche allome, of each of them
an ounce: of fine cinnamon half an ounce, and of fountain water three
glassefulles; mingle all well together, and let it boil with a small fire,
adding to it half a pound of honey, and taking away the scum of it, then put
in a little bengwine, and when it it has sodden a quarter of an hour, take it
from the fire, and keep it in a clean bottle and wash your teeth therewithal
as well before meat as after; if you hold some of it in your mouth a little
while, it does much good to the head, and sweeteneth the breath. I take this
water to be better worth then a thousand of their dentifrices. 7. Wash your
face, eyes, ears and hands, with fountain water. I have known diverse
students which used to bathe their eyes only in well water twice a day, whereby
they preserved their eyesight free from al passions and bloudsheds, and
sharpened their memories maruaylously. You may sometimes bathe your eyes in
rosewater, fennel water or eyebright water, if you please: but I know for
certainty, that you need them not as long as you use good fountain water.
Moreover, least you by old age or some other means do wax dim of sight, I
will declare unto you, the best and safest remedy which I know, and this it
is: take of the distilled waters of verueine, bettonie, and fennel one ounce
and a half, then take one ounce of white wine, one drachme of Tutia (if you
may easily come by it) two drachmes of sugarcandy, one drachme of Aloes
Epatick, two drachmes of woman's milk, and one scruple of Camphire; beat those
into powder, which are to be beaten, and infuse them together for four and
twenty hours space, and the^ strain them, and so use it when you list.

8 When you have finished these, say your morning prayers, and desire God to
bless you, to preserve you from all dangers, and to direct you in all your
actions. For the fear of God (as it is written) is the beginning of wisdom:
and without his protection whatsoever you take in hand, shall fall to ruin.
Therefore see, that you be mindful of him, and remember that to that intent
you were borne, to weet, to set forth his glory and most holy name.

9 Go about your business circumspectly, and endeavor to bannish all cares
and cogitations, which are the only baits of wickedness. Defraud no man of
his right: for what measure you give unto your neighbor, that measure shall
you receive. And finally, imprint this saying deeply in your mind: A man is
but a steward of his own goods; whereof God one day will demand an account.

10 Eat three meals a day until you come to the age of forty years: as,
your breakefast, dinner, and supper; yet, that between breakefast and dinner
there be the space of four hours, and betwixt dinner and supper seaue^ hours:
the breakfast must be less the^ the dinner, and the dinner somwhatlesse the^
supper. In the beginning of meals, eat such meats as will make the belly
soluble, and let gross meats be the last. Content your self with one kind of
meat, for diversities hurt the body, by reason that meats are not al of one
quality: some are easily digested, others again are heavy, and will lie a
long time upon the stomach: also, the eating of sundry sorts of meat require
often pottes of drink, which hinder concoction; like as we see often putting
of water into the meat-potte to hinder it from seething. Our stomach is our
bodies kitchen, which being distepered, how ca^ we live in te^perat order?
drink not above four times, and that moderatly, at each meal: least the
belly-God hale you at length captive into his prison house of gurma^dise, where
you shall be afflicted with as many diseases as you have devoured dishes of
sundry sorts. The cups, whereof you drink, should be of silver, or silver and
gilt. 11. Labor not either your mind or body presently after meals: rather
sit a while and discourse of some pleasant matters: when you have ended your
co^fabulations, wash your face and mouth with cold waters, then go to your
chamber, and make clea^e your teeth with your toothpicker, which should be
either of iuorie, silver, or gold. Watch not too long after supper, but depart
within two hours to bed. But if necessity compel you to watch longer the^
ordinary, the^ be sure to augme^t your sleep the next morning; that you may
reco^pe^ce nature, which otherwise through your watching would not a little be
empaired. 12. Put of your clothes in winter by the fire side: and cause your
bed to be heated with a warming pan: unless your pretense be to harde^ your
members, and to apply your self unto military discipline. This outward heating
does wonderfully comfort the inward heat, it helps co^coctio^, and co^sumeth
moisture.

13. Remember before you rest, to chew down two or three drachmes of mastick,
for it will preserve your body from bad humors.

14. Pray fervently to God, before you sleep, to inspire you with his grace, to
defend you from al perilles and subtelties of wicked fiends, and to prosper you
in all your affairs: and then lay aside your cares and business as well public
as private, for that nightin so doing you shall sleep more quietly. Make water
at least once, and cast it, out: but in the morning, make water in an vrinall,
that by looking on it, you may guess somewhat of the state of your body; sleep
first on your right side with your mouth open, and let your nightcappe have a
hole in the top, through which the vapor may go out.

15 In the morning remember your affairs; and if you be troubled with rheumes
as soon as you have risen, use diatrio^ piperion, or eat white pepper now and
then, and you shall be helped.

FINIS.
The contents of the sections, and Chapters of this book.
The first section, of the causes of the preservation of health. Of Air. Chap.
1. Of water. Chap. 2. Of fire. Chap. 3.
The second section, of food. Of bread and drink. Chap. 1. Of wine. Chap. 2.
Of milk. Chap. 3. Of flesh. Chap. 4. Of fish. Chap. 5. Of sauce. Chap. 6. Of
grains, spices, and pulse. Chap. 7. Of herbs. Chap. 8. Of fruit. Chap. 9.
The third section, of sleep, early rising, mirth, and exercise. Of sleep and
early rising. Chap. 1. Of mirth. Chap. 2. Of exercise. Chap. 3.
The fourth section, of euacuations: Of Bathes. Chap. 1. Of bloodletting.
Chap. 2. Of Purgations. Chap. 3. Of Vomites. Chap. 4. Of Vrines. Chap. 5. Of
Fasting. Chap. 6. Of Venerie. Chap. 7.
Of the causes of infirmities. Chap. 1. Of the wicked motions of the mind.
Chap. 2. Of the age of man. Chap. 3.
The fifth section, of infirmities and death. The sixth section, of the
restoration of health. Of the four parts of the year. Chap. 1. Of the four
humors. Chap. 2. Of medicines to prolong life. Chap. 3. Of a general diet.
Chap. 4.

FINIS.

