THE SACK of Room, Exsequuted by the Emperor Charles army even at the
Nativity of this Spanish King Philip.

NOTABLY DESCRIBED IN A Spanish Dialogue, with all the Horrible accidents of
this Sack, and abominable sins, superstitions and diseases of that City,
which provoked these just judgments of God.

Translated lately into the English tongue, never fitter to be read nor
deeplier considered, then even now at this present time.

LONDON Printed by Abell Ieffes for Roger Ward 1590.

The Translator of this Spanish Dialogue to his Honest loving learned Friend A.
V.
Having in some public imploime^ts not long since so ouertoyled my self, as
I found my liberty of return to my former delectable studies and recreations,
a very Paradize in respect of the Hell of Envy and Malice wherein I had been
long injuriously with many storms turmoiled: among other histories and
pleasant discourses that at idlest times I read for recreation, this Spanish
Dialogue received from you, so pleased me, as partly for exercise of that
tongue, but chiefly for the singular good liking I had of the matter, and to
pass over some melancolye conceits (wherinto the ingratitude of some persons,
at whose hands I had but to well deserved, had thrown me) I began to
translate the same into English, following as nigh as I could the very Spanish
letter, saving in such phrases as in our tongue have neither grace nor sense.

The Treatise surely is such, as being read of our nation, could not but work
singular good effects, even in our most obstinate modern perverse Papists,
seeing it so palpablie reuealeth the horrible errors and abuses of that their
corrupted Roman religion, or rather putrified superstition (most unjustly by
them misnamed Catholic or Apostolical) and that by a couple of their own
Spanish party: notsomuch by scriptures sacred, where unto they generally bear
so small reverence, as by evident demonstrations and such invincible reasons as
were able to reduce very Heathens and Paynims to a better sense: and the Method
and style such, as if I could deliver it in English with that grace it has in
the Spanish, were no less delectable then profitable and not unfit for other
due respects to be printed and published even in this our time: that as even at
the nativity of this aspiring Philip King of Spain, their chief Champian,
Almighty God miraculouslie stirred up a little army of their own religion,
justly to chastise the hateful pride of that Babilonicall Sea, when her
treachery was not grown to that height of hellish wickedness, it has since
aspired: So the memory thereof revived by the due consideration of every
particular accident, cause, and circumstance, so wittily discussed and lively
represented in this discourse, (conferred with the horrible treasons and
villainies in this age, before our eyes committed by that Sea, ever sithence
hatching continually new rebellions of subjects, murders of anointed Kings
and Princes, Massacres of Christian people, destruction and subversion of
kingdoms, and commonweales, tending finally to the utter dispeopling and
desolation of all Christendom, being mounted even to the height of her
impiety, and ripe for ruin) may now likewise animate and stir up again some
noble spirits of our time before or at the death of the same Phillip their
chief Abbettour, Instat Climactericus eius and babilonica Clades.
and mainteiner, to attempt and atchieue the like, or a more glorious godly
honorable enterprise, causing all men of right sense, no less to abhor
these devilish practices and practisers, then their damnable wickedness indeed
deserves: the which my traduction now finished, I recommend to your correction
and disposition: and so leave you to your Theological or Metaphysicall muses,
and merciful protection of the Almighty.

The Authors preface to the Reader.
SO great is the blindness wherein for the most part the world is now drowned,
that I marvel not at the false judgments by the common people conceived of
this late accident of Rome: for as they suppose Religion to consist only in
these external things: so seeing them so badlie handled, they think the faith
to be utterly overthrown, and in truth as I cannot but commend, the holy
zeal wherewith the common sort are thereto moved, so can I not allow of
their silence, whose duty were to reduce them from that error. Seeing then on
the one part, how prejudicial it should be, first to the glory of God, then to
the salvation of his people: and also to the honor of this most Christian king
and Emperor whom God has given unto us, if these matters should remain thus
cloaked, I have attempted (rather led thereunto by simplicity and hearty love,
then by foolish arrogancy to accomplish with this small service, these three
principal things whereunto men are bound. I was not ignorant that the matter
was much more high and difficile then the measure of my forces, and yet I know
as well that where there is a good intention, Jesus Christ does lighten the
understanding, and supply with his grace the defect of our forces and
knowledge attained by human wit, My thought also, I did see represented
before me the false judgments that superstitious Pharizes are like to
conceive of this matter, wherefore let them know, that I write not for them
nor to them, but to the true Christians and faithful lovers of Christ Jesus.
As Well did I also see, the perverse contrarieties of the common sort, the
which are so settled on things visible, as they do almost make a jest of the
things invisible. Remembering therefore that I wrote not to Gentiles but unto
Christians, whose perfection is to withdraw it self from things visible, and
to love the invisible: I remembered also that I wrote not unto brute people, but
unto Spaniards, whose wits, there is nothing so difficult but they are able to
attain: and seeing my desires are no others then my words express, I easily
persuade my self that I shall attain of all that are discreet, and not
counterfeit Christians, if any default be found in this dialogue, to
interpreat the same in the best sense: and impute the blame to my ignorance,
and not presume to believe that malice has any part therein, since in all I
submit my self to the correction and judgment of the holy Church, the which
I acknowledge for the mother of the Disciples of the truth.

The first part of the Sack of Rome.
The Argument.
A young knight of the Emperors Court named Lattantio, met in the market place
of Valedolid with an Archdeacon that came from Rome in a Soldiers habit, and
entering into S. Frauncis Church had communication concerning matters chanced
at Rome. In the first part Lattantio showed the Archdeacon how the Emperor was
in no fault for that matter. And in the second, how God permitted all that was
done for the good of Christendom.

Lattantio. GOod Lord is not this the Archdeacon of Viso, the greatest friend I
had in Rome, a strange matter, it seems to be he, though not by his apparel,
it may be some brother of his: I will not pass by without speaking whosoever
he be. Tell me Gentleman, are you a brother to the Archdeacon of Viso?


Arch. What Segnior Lattantio have you so soon forgotten me? it appears
Fortune quickly changes men's knowledge.


Latt. What say you? now I see you are the Archdeacon himself indeed.


Arch. Yea sir to do you service.


Latt. Who could know you coming as now you do? you were wont to wear your
garments one longer then another, trailing on the ground, your cappe after the
Ecclesiastical manner, your servants, and reverend Mule, but now I see you on
foot alone, a short cote, with a thread bare Frisado cape, a great sword, and a
Soldiers hat: besides all this a long beard, and your hair and head without
any sign of Crown, who could have known you?


Arch. Who sir? Even he that knows the habit by the man, and not the man by
the habit.


Latt. Well, if the memory have erred, it is no reason goodwill should pay
for that fault which in me has very seldom diminished: But tell me as God
help you sir, how comes this change?


Arch. What, have you not heard what has happened at Rome lately?


Latt. Yes, I have heard some thing, but what concerns the business of Rome,
the change of your garments


Arch. Seeing you ask that question it appears you know not al, for then you
should have known that there is not in Rome a man that dare pass the streets
in habit of an Ecclesiastical person.


Latt. What tell you me?


Arch. I tell you that when I came from Rome, the persequution against the
Clergy was so great, that there was not a man that durst walk the streets in
habit of a Clarke or a Friar.


Latt. O merueilous God how incomprehensible are thy Judgments? But sir I pray
you were you within Rome at that time, when the Emperors army entered?


Arch. Yea for my sins I was found or rather lost there, for of all that ever
I had I have nothing left but that you see.


Latt. Wherefore did you not commit your self to the Spanish soldiers, and
thereby have saved your goods.


Arch. My sins daunted my wits, and my unhappy lot was to fall among the
Almans, where I thought it no little gain to escape with life out of their
hands.


Latt. Is all true we hear from thence, and that men report here?


Arch. I know not what you hear, nor what you say of it, but I can assure you
it was the most terrible thing that ever man saw, I know not how you take it
here, it seems to me you make no great account of it. But on my soul I know
not whether God will so dissemble it: and if we were in some other place where
it were lawful for me to speak I would utter foul and terrible matters with
this mouth.


Latt. Against whom?


Arch. Against him that has done more mischief against the Church of God then
ever Turk or Pagan durst have done.


Latt. But soft sir Archdeacon, it may be yt you are deceived and lay the fault
where it is not, between us any thing may pass, tell me therefore franckly your
mind, and I will so endeavor to open unto you your error, that you shall not
blame him that is not blame worthy.


Arch. I am content to open plainly unto you my mind in this matter, but not
here in the Market place, let us go into this Church of S. Frauncis, and there
we will discourse at our leisure.


Latt. Agreed, let it be so.


Arch. Now that we are where we may talk, and none hear us, I pray you sir
whatsoever passes between us, let no other man be privy of it, for Princes
are Princes, and no wisdom for men to put themselves in peril where they
need not.


Latt. Hereof you may be well assured.


Arch. Let us then see Signior Lattantio, does it seem unto you a matter
tolerable that ye Emperor has done in Rome that which never Infidels had
done, and that for his particular passion, and to revenge himself of I wat not
what, has in such sort sought to distroy the Sea Apostolic, with the
greatest Ignominy, and with greater Contempt, and greater cruelty than ever
was heard or seen. I know that the Goths took Rome, but yet they meddled not
with the Church of S. Peeter, they meddled not with the Relics of the
Saints, they meddled not with the sacred and holy things. But whereas those
half Christians had this respect, now our Christians (albeit I know not
whether they be worthy of that name) they have not forborne Churches, they
have not forborne Monasteries, they have not forborne the sacred things, they
have violated all, they have robbed all, they have profaned all, that I wonder
the earth has not opened and swallowed them up, and those also that sent them,
or consented unto it. What think ye now will the Turks, the Moors, the
Jews, and the Lutherans say, seeing the head of ye Church thus handled. O God,
that suffrest such a thing. Oh God that consentest to so great a wickedness: Was
this the defense that ye Apostolic Sea hoped from her defendor? was this the
honor that Spain hoped for of her so mighty king? was this the glory? was
this the good? was this the Amplification and enlargement that all Christendom
hoped? was it for this that his great Graundfathers got the title of
Catholic? For this cause did they join so many Kingdoms and Seignories unto
the rule of one Lord? for this was he elected Emperor? for this did the
Bishop of Rome help him to thrust out the French out of Italy? To the end
that in one day he should destroy all that their predecessors with so great
travels, and in such a multitude of years had founded? So many and such goodly
churches, such Monasteries, such Hospitals, and Chapels, where God was wont
to be served and honored, to be now defaced and profaned. So many Altars,
yea even in the Church of the Prince of the Apostles embrued with blood, so
many Relics robbed and with sacrilegious hands profaned? For this cause did
their predecessors adioine so great holiness to this city? For this did they
honor the Church with such and so many relics? For this did they bestow on
them so many rich ornaments of Gold and Silver? that in the end he should
come without remorse to rob, deface and destroy al? Oh Sovereign God, is it
possible that so great a cruelty, so great an outrage, so abominable boldness,
so horrible an accident, and so execrable a wickedness can pass without some
most rigorous, most grievous, and most notorious punishment: I know not what
feeling you have here of it, or if you have any I merueile how ye can let it
pass or dissemble it.


Latt. I hear attentively all that you have said, and in truth albeit I hear
the like uttered of that matter by many, yet me thinks you make it more
foul, and blame it more then any other, and in all that you have spoken it
seems to me you are very ill informed, and in my judgment it is not reason,
but passion, for that you have lost, that causes you to utter the same which
you have spoken, I will not speak passionately as you have done, for so should
we spend speech without any Fruit. But without affectionate speeches, I hope
trusting in your discretion and good judgment, that before you part from me
you shall plainly understand how much you have bin deceived in all that you
have yet said, only I request you to be attentive, and not to forbear to
reply when you see cause, to the end you may not rest in any doubt.


Arch. Say what you will, but I will hold you for a greater Orator then Tullius
if you be able to defend this cause.


Latt. Nay I am content you shall account me the veriest idiot that is in the
whole world if I defend it not and prove my opinion to you with most clear
and evident reasons. And the first thing I will prove shall be how the
Emperor was in no fauit for that which happened at Rome. And secondly how all
that happened there came to pass by the manifest and just judgment of God, to
correct and chastise that City, wherein (to the great slander of Christian
Religion) reigned al those vices that the wickedness of man could invent, and
with that correction to awake the christian people, to the end that those evils
being remedied we might open our eyes and live like Christians, seeing we
glory so much in that name.


Arch. A great enterprise you have taken in hand, but how you will go through
with it I see not.


Latt. Concerning the first I must protest unto you, that no one thing of that
which hereafter shall be said is by me spoken in prejudice of the dignity or
person of the Pope: For it is great reason that his dignity be reverenced of
all men, and touching his own person, surely I can speak no ill if I would.
Besides that, it is well known that all which he has done has not passed by
his own means, but by means of the lewdness of some persons yt he keeps
about him. And to the end that we the better understand one another, seeing
this difference is between the Pope and the Emperor, I pray you first declare
unto me, what office that of the Popes is, and likewise what is the office of
the Emperor, and to what end or purpose these Dignities were first
established.


Arch. It seems unto me that the office or duty of the Emperor is to
defend his Subjects and to maintain them in great Peace and Justice
favoring the good, and chastising the ill.


Latt. You say well, but what is then that of the Pope.


Arch. That is more hard to declare, for if we behold the time of S. Peter, it
is one, and in these days another.


Latt. But when I demand of you to what end these dignities were ordained,
it is meant that you should declare unto me, their intention that did ordain
them.


Arch. Surely it seems unto me it was ordained to the end this high Bishop
should take on him the Authority to expound the holy scriptures, and to the
end he should enstruct the people in Christian doctrine, not only with words
but also with example of life, and to the end he should with tears and
prayers make supplication continually unto God, for his Christian people, and
to take on him the supreme charge and power to absolve such as had sinned and
were desirous to convert themselves, and to pronounce damnation against such as
in their wicked lives remain obstinate. And to the end that with continual
careful endeavor he should procure the maintenance of the Christian people in
great peace and concord: and to the end we should have here on earth such a
one as should truly and lively represent unto us the life and holy custom
of Jesus Christ our Redemer, because the hearts of men are much more allured
with works then with words. This is as much as I can gather out of the holy
Scriptures, if you have any thing else, say it.


Latt. This shall suffice at this present, and see that you forget it not, for
we shall have need thereof hereafter in his due time.


Arch. No, I will not.


Latt. Then if I show you plainly, that because the Emperor has done that,
which your self have auerred to be his duty: And because the Pope has
refused to do that which on his part ought to have bin done. This destruction
of Rome has followed: In whom will you then lay the fault?


Arch. If you could do this which I cannot believe, then is it plain to be the
Popes fault.


Latt. Then I pray you tell me your self, seeing you say that the Pope was
instituted to the end he should imitate Jesus Christ, what do you think that
Jesus Christ would rather maintain his people in peace or to stir them up and
tormoile them in wars?


Arch. This is clear, that the Aucthor of Peace does not detest any thing more
then war.


Latt. Then let us see how shall he be the Imitator of Christ Jesus, that
stirred up wars and dissolved peace.


Arch. Such an one should be far off from Imitation of Christ, but to what
end ask you me this?


Latt. I demand it for this purpose, that seeing the Emperor defending his
Subjects, as he is bound: the Pope took arms against him, and dissolved the
peace, and raised a new war in Christendom, neither the Emperor was in
fault for the evils that succeeded, seeing he did that which was his office and
duty: Neither can the Pope be excused of the fault, seeing he did that he
ought not have done, in breaking the peace and raising a new war in
Christendom.


Arch. What peace did the Pope dissolve, or what war did he raise up in
Christendom.


Latt. He dissolved the peace that the Emperor had made with the French king,
and has stirred up the war which we still have, whereby through the just
judgment of God the mischief came upon him, which he has received.


Arch. Oh Sir, you make your account well, but where have you learned that the
pope stirred up the war with the Emperor, and that he dissolved the peace
made with the French King.


Latt. Because immediately so soon as the French King was delivered out of
Prison, he sent him a writ, wherein he did absolve him of the oath which he
had made unto the Emperor, to the end he should not be bound to accomplish
that which he had promised, whereby more freelye he might make war upon him.


Arch. But how know you this? you speak as though you had bin of the Popes
secret Council.


Latt. It is known by many means, but not to loose time look upon the
beginning of the league that the Pope made with the French king, and you shall
plainly see, that the Pope was the aduancer of it, and seeing that this is so
certain a truth, that even the Pope himself confesses it: does it seem
unto you now that this was a deed fit for the Vicar of Jesus Christ. You say
that his office and duty is to make peace among such as are at difference, and
he has sown wars between those that were in concord: you say his office
was to teach the people both with words and works, the doctrine of Christ
Jesus, and he has taught all things clean contrary thereunto: you say his
duty was to pray unto God for his people, and he has gone about to work
their destruction: you say that his office was to imitate Jesus Christ, and he
in all things has labored to be contrary unto him: Jesus Christ was poor and
humble, but he to increase I wot not what Segnorie, has put all Christendom
in arms. Jesus Christ did good against ill, but he ill for good, in making a
league against the Emperor, at whose hands he had received so much good. I
say not this to reprothe the Pope, it is well known it proceeded not of
himself, and that he was irritated thereunto by some bad council.


Arch. By this means should he be wholly in the fault.


Latt. Both they that gave him so bad council, and himself also that kept
about him such mischievous people, for do you think that before God, a Prince
shall be excused, by laying the fault in his Council: No, no: for seeing God
has given him Judgment to make choice of good men to be of his council, and
to advise him to the best, if he choose ill men or retain them about him, the
fault is his, and if he have no judgment to choose such persons let him leave
his Segnorie.


Arch. You require things that are very hard and difficult.


Latt. And why hard and difficult, does there need so great a judgment for
this matter. Tell me I pray you, what war is there so just, that a Vickar of
Jesus Christ should take in hand against Christians, the members of one body,
whose head is Christ and his Vickar.


Arch. The Pope had great reasons to take in hand this war against the
Emperor, one for that he would not first seek his freendship, and an other for
that he held by usurpation the state of Millan, having despoiled the Duke
Frauncis Sforza thereof, and the Pope seeing this feared another day he would
do as much against him, taking from him also his territories of the Church: And
therefore with great Justice and reason did the Pope take Arms against the
Emperor, as well to make him restore the Duchy of Millane to the Duke, as
also to assure the state and territories of the Church.


Latt. I wonder that a man of so good judgment as you are, should speak a
thing so far from reason as this, let us see whether the Pope did this as the
Vickar of Christ, or as Iulio de medicis.


Arch. It is clear that he did it as Vickar to Christ.


Latt. Then I say if the Emperor would against all right and reason, despoile
the Dukes of Millan of all his state, what had the Pope to do therewith, why
would he intermeddle in matters where he was not desired, and in such matters
as apperteined no ways to his office: why did he not rather take example by
Jesus Christ to have done the contrary? who being desired, that in friendly
sort he would make Partition of an inheritance between two kinsemen, he would
not go, leaving an example to his followers not to entermedle in so base
matters, And would you now have his Vickar to intrude himself with an armed
hand being not requested of them? where learn you that Jesus Christ appointed
his Vickar a Judge between seculer Princes, how much less an Executioner or
brewer of war among Christians? will you see how unlike he is to be the Vicar
of Christ that is a stirrer of wars, behold the fruits that proceed thereof,
and see how contrary they are, not only to Christian doctrine, but even to
humane nature? to all other creatures God has given weapons wherewith they
might both defend themselves and offend others: but man alone as a creature
descended from heaven, among whom there should be all concord, as a thing that
should here represent the image of God, he left him unarmed, he meant not he
should make wars, he meant there should be among men as great love and concord,
as there is among the Angels of heaven: and yet notwithstanding we are grown
to so great blindness, that more brute then the brute creatures, more beasts
then the beasts themselves, we do murder one another: the beasts do live in
peace, but we much worse then beasts do live in wars, if we will make search in
all countries how men live, in Christendom only which is but a corner of the
world, you shall find more wars then in all the world besides. And yet are we
not ashamed to call our selves Christians, and for the most part ye shall find
them the most inflamers of wars, that ought most to appease them: the Bishop of
Rome was bound seeing he would be the vicar of Christ Jesus, The Cardinals were
bound seeing they would be the pillars of the church: the bishops were bound
being pastors, to give their lives for their sheep, even as Christ himself
taught when he said Bonus pastor ponit Animam suam pro ouibus suis, but much
more the Pope and Cardinals, seeing their revenues were given to these Prelates
to that end, that using their pastoral office they might the better protect
and preserve their people: but they for fear least they should loose some
little mite of their reputation put all Christendom. O gentill Charity, do I
give thee money to defend me, and do thou therewith gather Soldiers
together to murder me, to rob me, and to destroy me? where learn you that
Jesus Christ commanded his followers to make wars, Read all the Evangelical
doctrine. Read all the Apostolic Epistles, you shall find nothing but peace,
concord, unity, love and charity, when Jesus Christ was borne, they intended
no wars, but the very Angels soong Gloria in excelsis deo, in terra pax,
hominibus bona voluntas, He gave us peace when he was borne, and peace when he
was crucified, how oftentimes did he admonish and exhort his followers to this
peace and charity, and yet not contented with this, he desired of his father,
that his should be one among themselves, even as he and his Father were one,
could he require a greater conformity or unity? And yet furthermore, he
required that those which followed his doctrine, should not make themselves
different from others in garments, neither yet in their manner of behavior,
neither yet in fasting nor in any other external matters, but only in works
of charity, this being the principal figure and means to know our faith,
would you then have the head thereof to walk so far astraie? if seculer
princes then make wars it is no marvel, seeing the Sheep do but follow the
Shepherd, if the head make wars the other members are forced to war also.
Of the Pope I cannot but marvel, that should be a mirror of al Christian
virtues, and a pattern whereupon we should all cast our eyes, being bound to
maintain all in peace and concord (yea though it were with the perrill of his
own life) will notwithstanding make war to gain and maintain things which
Jesus Christ commanded to be contemned, and that there should be found among
Christians any that would give him aid in an action so wicked, so execrable,
and prejudicial to the honor of Christ, what blindness is this? we call our
selves Christians, and yet live worse then Turks, yea worse then brute beasts:
if we think that this doctrine of Christ be but a mockery, why do we not
forsake it all together, for so at least should we not do so great wrongs,
where we have received so great good. But seeing we do know it to be most
true, and that we do so much glory in the name of Christians, and disdain
those that be not: why do we not endeavor to be Christians indeed; why do
we live in sort as if there were neither Faith nor Love amongst us?

The Philosophers and ancient Sages being gentiles despised and contemned
riches, and would you have the Vickar of Christ Jesus make wars for that
which those blind Pagans esteemed not. What shall those Nations say yt do know
no more of Christ Jesus then that which they behold in his Vickar, but that
those Philosophers, who to attain their true good which they had placed in
virtue did despice these worldly things, were much better then Jesus Christ,
when they see his Vickar bruing and stirring up wars for these things which
they contemned. Behold here the honor done unto him by them that maintain
themselves upon his blood. Oh blood of Jesus Christ so evil be thy Vickars
employed, which by thee gather these masses of money to murder men, to murder
Christians, to distroy Cities, to ransack villages, to dishonor Virgins, to
make such numbers of Widows and Orphans, and to cause such a multitude of
mischiefs, as wars drue with it: A man might see in Lumbardie, yea in all
Christendom, so great Prosperity, so many and so goodly cities, such
stately buildinges in the Suburbs and Country, such Gardens, such pleasures,
and so great pastimes: The Laborers gathered their grains for their Flocks,
and manured their lands. The Citizens, Gentlemen, and Nobility, every man in
his degree employed freely their goods, they employed quietly their
inheritances, increased their rents and many of them distributed largely
among the poor: But after this accursed wars began, how many cities have we
seen destroyed, how many houses and places of pleasure dispeopled and razed,
how many vineyards and Orchards spoiled and defaced, how many of the
Nobility, Citizens, and Laborers fallen into extreme poverty, how many
married women have lost their husbands, how many Fathers and Mothers their
dear children, how many Virgins their virginity, how many wives forced in
presence of their Husbands, how many Husbands murdered in presence of their
Wives, how many Nunns dishonored, and what a slaughter and decay of men in
Christendom? and that worse is, what a number of Souls sent to Hell? And do
we wink at it as a matter of jest? And yet this Vicker of Christ not
contented with all this, even at this time when we were in peace comes to
stir us up a new war, even at this time I say when we have the enemies of our
Faith at our door, to the end we may loose the rest as we lost the kingdom
of Hungary, and to the end he might fully accomplish the loss of all the
residue that yet remained, Yea and yet further, his Soldiers not contenting
themselves to make wars like others seek out new kinds of cruelty. For
neither the Emperor Nero nor the Syracusan Dyonisius, nor all the cruel
tirants that have hitherto reigned in the world could invent such cruelties as
this army of the Popes after it brake the truce made with Don Hugo de Moncada
has put in execution in the territory of the Collones where two of these
Christians have taken a Virgin of the Nobility by the legs, and holding her
naked, her head downwards, an other comes with an balberd, all alive as she
was cleeues her into two pieces: Oh cruelty, oh impiety, oh most execrable
wickedness, what could that poor wench have committed, or what had those
wives great with child offended, that in presence of their husbands had their
bellies ripped open with their cruel swords, and the infantes yet warm roasted
on spits before the eyes of the unhappy mother. Oh wonderful God that
consentest to these things. Oh ears of Men that can endure to hear such a
thing, oh supreme Bishop that suffrest these things to be done in thy name.
What had those innocent creatures merited? we speak ill of Herod that caused
the children lately borne to be murdered, and thou consentest to have them
murdered before they were borne: thou might have suffered them at least to
have received Baptism, thou should not have endeavored to have destroyed
both soul and body. How had those poor women merited to die with such
torment, to have their bowels ripped open living, and to see their children
groaning upon spits rosting, or those sorrowful fathers that died with very
grief of their unfortunate Children and unhappy Mothers? What Jew, Turk,
More, or Infidil will now come to the Faith of Jesus Christ, seeing we receive
such works from his Vickars: which of them will ever serve or honor him? And
those Christians which understand not the christian doctrine, what have they to
do but to follow their Pastor. And if every one will seek to follow him, who
will desire to live among Christians? shall we think sir that this is to imitate
Jesus Christ? shall we think that this is to teach the Christian people? shall
we think that this is to interpret the sacred Scriptures? shall we think
that these be the works of Jesus Christ? shall we think that to this end
this dignity was appointed, that by the same he should destroy the Christian
people.


Arch. I cannot deny it to be an horrible thing, but this is a matter so
accustomed in Italy to make no account of a Pope that makes not war, as they
hold it for a very great dishonor for any Pope in his time to lose any little
percel of the lands of the Church.


Latt. Not to be tedious I will omit a number of reasons that I were able to
allege to confute this, but let us come to the extremity: I say, that if the
Emperor would go about to take away the Church lands, what do you think?
were it not better that the Pope had lost all his temporal dignities, then
that Christendom and the honor of Jesus Christ should suffer that it has done?


Arch. No surely, for thus would you go about to spoil the Church.


Latt. And why spoil the Church, what call you the Church?


Arch. The Pope and Cardinals.


Latt. And all the rest of the Christians shall they not as well be the Church
as they?


Arch. They say yes.


Latt. Then the Seignorie and authority of the Church consists rather in men
then in government of Towns, and therefore shall the Church be well established
when it shall have many Christians, and then dispoiled when it shall have few.


Arch. That seems to me to be true.


Latt. Now then he that is the cause of the destruction of any one Christian
man, dispoileth more the Church of Jesus Christ then he that takes from the
Pope his temporal dignities.


Arch. Let it be so.


Latt. Then tell me now you, what number of Christians have perished since the
Pope began this war, to assure as you say his estate? I omit the other
mischiefs which wars draws on with it.


Arch. Infinite.


Lat. Now you see that he that has bin the cause of this destruction has
more despoiled the church then he that should have bereaved the Pope of his
temporal dignity: But let us see if any man should have caught from Jesus
Christ his Cloak, do you believe that he would have taken Arms to have
defended it?


Arch. No surely.


Latt. Why then would you have the Pope to do it, seeing you say he was
appointed to that end that he should imitate Jesus Christ?


Arch. In this manner the Church should never keep any Signorie, every one
would pull a piece from it, if they thought the Pope might not defend it.


Latt. Whether it be necessary or profitable to the Church, for the Popes to
have temporal seignories or not, let them look to that, but surely me thinks,
they might much better intend matters spiritual, if they did not so much
entangle themselves with temporal, and even in that which you have said, you
are much deceived. For if the Pope would be content to imitate Jesus Christ,
and live indeed as his Vickar, he should not only not lose any part of his
lands, but rather much more should be given unto him, and let us see how he
holds any thing of that he has but by that means.


Arch. You say the truth, but now there is scarsely any charity in the world.


Latt. It is your selves with your evil lives that quench the fire of
Charity, and in your selves it lies to kindle and inflame it, If you would.


Arch. You would have us inflame charity by loosing all we have.


Latt. And why not? if it have been given you for Gods sake, why should you not
be content for Gods sake to forgo it. It is most certain that all true
Christians should so do, we hold and possess our goods temporal with this
condition, that we should be always ready to leave them whenever we shall
see it conuentent for the honor and glory of Christ Jesus, and for the common
good of Christendom: how much more then ought you of the Clergy to do the
same, yea, and how much more in duty then ought the Vickar of Jesus Christ to
do it?


Arch. You are so holy as I need not meddle with you, suerly we have no need
of such at Rome.


Latt. Nether would I desire to live among such wicked people?


Arch. You mean as there are now there:


Latt. Neither yet as these that were there, for in an infected flock there is
bad choice to be made.


Arch. What? do you then account us as bad as those Roysters.


Latt. As bad? Ney I would you were not much worse.


Arch. Wherefore.


Latt. Because you are much more pernicious unto the whole commonweal by your
bad example.


Arch. And I pray you what be they?


Latt. They make not profession to be the ministers of God as you do, neither
have they living for such as they have, neither is there any that will seek or
ought to seek to immitate them, as they should you. But stay a while, I have
not yet done, for hitherto have I handled this matter, calling the Pope
Christ's vicar: now will I handle it, making accoumpt or supposing the Pope is
also a secular Prince as the Emperor, to the end you may the more clearly see
the Error you were in. And as concerning the first, it is most certain that
the Pope received this dignity by the favor of the Emperor, and having so
gotten it, behold what gratitude, immediately he comforts himself with the
King of France at his entrance into Italy, and left the freendship of the
Emperor. Yea and some auerre that the Pope himself was the solisitor and
causer of his entrance into Italy, and notwithstanding all this, the Emperor
having the victory against the French King, was not only content not to take
from the Pope his territories of Parma and Placentia, as both in Justice and
Reason he might then have done, but ratified the league that his Ambassador
made with him, yet the Pope notwithstanding not contented with this, began to
frame a new league in Italy against the Emperor after the French King was
Prisoner. But that secret practice was discovered, and so took no effect. And
yet could not all this so alienate the Emperors mind, but that he sought by
all honest and reasonable means to content the Pope, and to procure him to be
a mean in that peace, which was entreaty between him and the King of
France, and that he should not hinder it, but he was never able to attain it.
Yet in the mean time was this peace concluded with France, but so soon as
the King was set at liberty, the Pope began to procure a new league with him
against the Emperor, having received no occasion in the world at his hands so
to do, and all this even at that time, when the Turks with a puisant Army
began to enter by the kingdom of Hungary, do you think that this was a good
part? The enemies were come to our gates, and we brew wars within the house.
He requires the Emperor that he should not prepare any forces to resist the
Turk, and yet himself secretly prepares to make war upon the Emperor. Do
you think that these were works of a Christian Prince?


Arch. But let us see on the other side why the Emperor did not justice to the
Duke of Millan, for if he had committed no fault, was it not good reason he
should restore his state to him again.


Latt. Yes surely, and therefore sir, behold the Emperor placed Frauncis Sforsa
in the state of Millan, whereas he might have taken it to himself, seeing he
has much more right thereunto then that Duke, and that only for the peace and
ease of Italy and all Christendom, he was content to bestow it on such a man,
at whose hands he never had received any service. And afterward the Emperor
understood by his Captains that the same Duke had conference, and had taken
part in that league which the Potentates of Italy had made against him. And
seeing therein he had committed treason, it was good reason, that as a rebel
disgraded, he should be deprived of his state.


Arch. And how will you deprive a man unheard?


Latt. And why not? when the fault is evident and manifest, or by delay might
ensue inconvenience, as at that time when the army of the Emperor was in
extreme danger, if it had not possessed it self of the Cities and Villages
in the state of Millane.


Arch. But why did not the Emperor afterward cause inquiry to be duly
made, to have understood the truth, and then to have restored the state unto
him, if he had been found faultlesse.


Latt. And where have you seen a man accused in causes criminal to answer by
a Procter, especially in matter of treason: he might have presented himself
and so have been tried by order of Justice. But that absenting of himself did
sufficiently prove he was culpable.


Arch. He feared the Captains of the Emperor, whom he knew to bear him
small good will.


Latt. In good faith he feared his own injustice, for behold so soon as he
was escaped out of the Castle of Millaine, he joined himself with the enemies
of the Emperor. But what had the Pope to do in that matter, if a Prince will
punish his Vassal, has he to intermeddle therein? Or if he had to do
therewithal, and that it did appertain unto his office, was it not sufficient
that the Emperor had referred all to Don Hugo di Moncada, offering him all
that he could demand. What man is there in the world that would not rather
enjoy one with peace, then two with wars? if the Pope so much desired that
the Duke Francis Sforsa should be restored to his estate, only, because
neither the Emperor should enjoy it himself, nor should give it to the
infant Don Hernando his kinsman, why did he not accept that which Don Hugo di
Moncada did offer on the part of the Emperor, who was content that the said
state should rest in the power of the Treceros, till such time as the right of
the Duke might be seen, and that if he were not in fault in those matters he
was charged, that then he should be immediately restored, and if he were found
in fault, and that he ought to be deprived, yet the Emperor promised, that
neither he would take it to himself, nor bestow it on the Infant Don
Hernando, but on the Duke of Burboune, who was one of those that by the Pope
himself was first set down for it. But will you that I tell you? the Pope
meant to hold it himself, and thought that the Army of the Emperor being
defeated, they should be able not only to turn him out of Lumbardie, but also
out of Italy, and to take from him his kingdom of Naples, as they had agreed
and made partition among themselves. And upon this hope the Pope would not
accept of that which by Don Hugo the Emperor had offered him.


Arch. It was not for any such matter, but only because he was in league with
others, he would not break his faith with them.


Latt. This is a gentle excuse, but I pray you why should he rather observe his
faith given to the French King, for the destruction of Christendom, then his
former oath given to the Emperor for remedy of the same, he should much
rather have broken the latter given to the French King, then the first given to
the Emperor. Do you not know, that a vow made to the hurt or prejudice of
your neighbor, ought not to be observed, how much more then such an oath as
tends to the hurt of all Christendom, the dishonor of GOD, and destruction
of such a multitude of people as have suffered by means thereof.


Arch. Surely in this I must confess you have very great reason, but you
consider not how the Emperors army menaced to invade the Territories of the
Pope, and that the Pope as a good Prince seeing you will so call him, is bound
to defend the^, and you know well even the law of nature permits every
man to defend his own.


Latt. If the Pope would have kept the league which he had made with the
Emperor, or would have accepted that which was newly offered unto him, his
army would never have threatened to have entered on the Popes territory. And
yet if all were as your self say, and that the law of Nature permits
every man to defend his own: yet tell me, do you Judge that Princes have the
same Authority over their people, that you have over your Mule.


Arch. Wherefore not?


Latt. Because Beasts are made for the service of Man, but Man only for the
service of God, let us see, were Princes made for the people, or people for the
Princes sake?


Arch. Surely I believe Princes were ordained for the peoples sake.


Latt. Then a good Prince without respect of his particular interest, is bound
to procure the good of his people only, seeing for their sake he was ordained.


Arch. Indeed in reason it ought so to be.


Latt. Well then let us put the case, that the Emperors Army would have
invaded and possessed the Territories of the Church, and let us consider
whether were better for the inhabitants, that the Pope should freely have
surrendered to the Emperor, or in defense of them to do as he has done.


Arch. Surely if we shall have regard only to the profit of the people, there
is no doubt if the Pope had freely given all those territories to the Emperor,
they should not have suffered so great damage as they have done, but show me
a Prince that will do this.


Latt. I will show you even the Emperor himself, do you not know that he
might with very great reason and justice have taken to himself both the
Dukedom of Millane and the Seignorie of Genua, seeing there is not any that
have so good right to them as himself. But because he saw it was better for
the good of the people that he should bestow the one on Frauncis Sforza, and
in the other to establish the Adorni, he did it franckly and liberally, less
regarding his own benefit then the public weal, as every good Prince ought.


Arch. If al men should do that they ought to do, then both spiritual and
temporal, all should be the Popes.


Latt. The Popes, and why?


Arch. Because he would govern them better and more holily then any other.


Latt. And are you not ashamed to say so? do you not know, that there are not
any territories worse governed then those of the Church?


Arch. Yes I know it well, but I thought you had not known it.


Arch. But let us consider also if the Pope played the part of a good Prince in
taking Arms against the Emperor, at whose hands he had received so many
benefits, breaking the peace and friendship he held with him.


Arch. The Pope did not take Arms against the Emperor, but against that
unbridled army that committed horrible extortions and other abominable
things in the state of Millane, and right and reason would, those poor people
should be delivered from that Tirannie.


Latt. I marvel that you should say such a thing, for let us see if the Pope
would have maintained friendship with the Emperor, what should his Majesty
have needed to have kept an army in Italy seeing he had so lately given
commandment to discharge it, but when he understood of the league made
against him, he was then constrained to continue it, if the Pope pretended
nothing but the liberty and restitution of the Duke of Millane and to free
that state of the vexations of the Emperors Army, and to assure the Church
lands. Why did he not embrace the Emperors friendship, by the which all
might have bin remedied, seeing the same was also desired at his hands: if the
Pope had desired no more then you speak of, what fault had the kingdom of
Naples committed that they should divide, it among them? what had the cities of
Genua and Sena committed, that the one by sea and the other by land should be
besieged? he would pretend to remedy the extorsions and spoils of the army in
Lumbardie, and yet indeed not only increased them there, but gave occasion to
make them far greatter through all Italy: yea even throughout all
Christendom. Read the league made between the Pope, the K. of France, the
Venetians and the Florentines, and there shall you see even that which the Pope
sought, what had the Emperor done unto him, why he should take Arms against
him?


Arch. Did I not tell you that the Pope did not take Arms against the Emperor,
but only against his unbridled Army?


Latt. So that this war then was only against the Army.


Arch. No otherwise.


Lat. Why then if the war were upon the Army, and the Army have revenged it
self, wherefore lay you the fault in the Emperor.


Arch. Because the Emperor did sustein them, and sent them new supply,
wherewith they might be able to do that they have done.


Latt. Did not your self say that the Emperors office and duty was to defend
his Subjects and to do justice: If the Pope then would misuse them, and seek
to possess his kingdoms and seignories, and to hinder him from doing Justice
upon the Duke of Millan, as he was bound, of force he was constrained to
maintein and increase his army to be able to defend and relieve them, or else in
leaving to do so, he should have left to be a good Emperor.


Arch. In this you have reason, but I pray you tell me, do you think it was
well done of the Emperor to send Don Hugo, and the Colloneses to make that
attempt on Rome?


Latt. The Emperor never did it.


Arch. What? did not the Emperor give commandment that Don Hugo and the
Collonesi together should jointly enter Rome, and apprehend the Pope?


Latt. No, he did it not, but if he had done it, do you think it had bin ill
done?


Arch. Oh my God, And would you take upon you to defend that too?


Latt. Yea surely, and tell me I pray you if your self had a Father, that had
so far lost his wits and senses, that with his own hands would go about to
kill and tear his own children, what would you do?


Arch. Having no other remedy I would either shut him up, or bind his hands
till he returned to his wits again.


Latt. And should you not think that for your brothers sake also it were your
duty and charge so to do.


Arch. Yes surely it is plain I ought to take care and charge also of them.


Latt. Then tell me, the Pope is he not a spiritual Father of all Christians?


Arch. Yea.


La. Then if he with wars go about to destroy his own Children do you not
think it shall be a good and merciful deed as well toward him, as also toward
his Children to endeavor to take away from him the power to do this harm, you
cannot deny me this.


Arc. Well, but all this while see you not how great damage and dishonor done to
Jesus Christ to handle in this manner his Vickar?


Latt. Nay, rather there is done unto him great service, by avoiding this ill
that his Vickar through the bad council that he kepes about him, should not be
the cause of the destruction of such a multitude of people, for whom Jesus
Christ died as well as for him, and believe me even the Pope himself, when
laying aside his passions he shall com to a right knowledge of ye truth, will be
excedingly well pleased with it, that has taken away from him yt means whereby
he might otherwise have done so great an harm: if not I pray you tell me, if
your self (which God forbid) should be so far out of your wits, as that with
your own teeth you should bite and tear your own flesh, and members of your
own body, would you not be singular well pleased with him, and hold your self
much bound unto him that should hold and stay you till you came to your wits
again?


Arch. This is clear.


Lat. Then behold how all we Christians are members of Jesus Christ, and have
for our head the same Jesus Christ.


Arch. You say truth.


Latt. Then if this his Vickar by the bad council he has about him be the
occasion of the perdition and murder of his own proper members which are the
Christians, shall he not be singularly well pleased with him, that shall
hinder and let him from doing so great an evil?


Arch. Without doubt you say the truth, but every man cannot attain this
understanding nor can judge a right farther then they can see, and therefore
Princes should be very wary what they do.


Latt. Much more are the Princes bound unto God then unto men, and more regard
should they have of the judgment of wise men then of fools. It were a goodly
matter that a Prince should leave to do the duty which he owes for the
service of God, and welfare of his country, for fear of that which the blind
multitude should judge or speak. Let a Prince do that he ought, and let the
multitude prate what they list: for so they judged of David because he daunced
before the Arc of the Testament. So they judged of Jesus Christ, because he
died upon the Cross, when they said he saved others, but could not save
himself, even so they judged of the Apostles, because they preached Christ
Jesus: even so they judge in these days of those which endeavor to become true
Christians indeed, dispising the vanity of this world, and follow the right
path of the truth. And who is there that can escape the false judgments of the
common people? Rather we should think that very good which of the multitude
is condemned for bad, and contrariwise. But will you know the truth? Malice and
craft they call industry, Avarice and Ambicion they call Magnanimity, the
slanderous Backbiter a good Companion: a vain dissembling Liar they term a
gallant Courtier: the subtle deceauer they call a wise man: and contrariwise a
good and virtuous man is called simple. If any man in christian humility make
small account of this Worlds vanity, they say he is become a fool. Such a one
as for Gods sake distributes his goods to the poor, they say is prodigal. And
such a one as by practices and deceipts will not seek for honor and wealth they
say he is a man of no valor. and such a one as for the love of Christ
forgeueth injuries, they call a coward and a man of small courage. Finally
converting virtues into vices, and vices into virtues, the lewd and wicked they
term happy and fortunate, and the good and virtuous poor and unhappy. And
notwithstanding all this they are not ashamed to usurp the names of christians
having no sign or mark thereof.


Arch. Surely I am of this mind, that although you say the truth, yet your
self being young, a seculer person, and a Courtier, you should do better to
leave these matters to deuines: but this I say, let all be as you have
declared, yet let us see at least whether it had not bin reason whosoever began
this trouble, that the Emperor should have chastised those which sacked the
holy Palace and the church of S. Peeter.


Latt. Sir it had bin much better that the Pope should not have broken the
league nor his faith that he gave to Don Hugo.


Arch. It was not he that broke it.


Latt. Who then made wars upon the Collonesi.


Arch. He made those wars not in the name of the Pope, but in the name of the
College.


Latt. Never tell me these childish fables, whose were the Captains? whose
were the Soldiers? who paid them? whose were the Ensigns? to whom ought they
obedience? These are toys to mock Children. But I wonder who they were that
invented such a vanity, and also of the Cardinals that gave their consent to
have it done in their name. But it is very well, seeing God has well
chastized them for it.


Arch. Would you not have the Pope chastize the Collonesi being his own
subjects.


Latt. Noe, seeing he had given his faith not to do it, and brake his league
so often as he took arms against them, and he knew the Emperor ought not to
give his consent, seeing the Collonesi were as well his subjects as the Popes,
and he bound as a good Prince to defend his subjects.


Arch. But let us then see forasmuch as after this league was broken, there was
on the one side and the other so much hurt done, wherefore did not the
Emperor observe the other league which the Viceroy of Naples made with the
Pope, at that time when a great part of that kingdom was lost, and all the
rest in manifest perrill to be gone?


Latt. What would not the Emperor observe it? Nay I tell you truly, that when
the Capitulations of that truce came to his hands, albeit the conditions thereof
were unjust, and against the honor and reputation of the Emperor, yet did his
Majesty presently without regard of that which the Pope had so dishonestlie
done) in giving the Inuestidure of his kingdoms unto such as had no manner
right unto them (a matter for the very Children to laugh at) he did ratify
and approve the league showing how much he desired the friendship of the Pope,
and to stand in good terms with him, seeing he chose rather to accept such
unjust conditions, then to prosequute the just revenge which he had in his
hands. But by the permission of God, who had determined to chastise these
injuries, the capitulations staid so long in sending hither, and the
ratification in going thither, that before all was finished, that was done
which we hereof passed in Rome, and surely if you will judge rightly, there
was none in fault but the very Pope himself, who when he might have lived in
peace, sought for war, and that truce he rather made for necessity then
moved by virtue, when he saw with what determination the Emperors Army went
to Rome. But was it not more reason that you should have observed the league
ye made with Don Hugo, for having so broken the former, what could there
behoped but that ye would do the like now, if the Army should have returned.
But seeing the army would not return, why did you not moderate those
conditions that ye had put into that truce, and so both the Army had
returned, and Rome remained free.


Arch. Would you that the Pope should have given the^ money.


Latt. And why not? if he had it to give.


Arch. What if he had to give being no way bound to do it.


Latt. How was he not bound? wherefore then do Christians give unto him the
rents and revenues he has.


Arch. Because he should bestow and spend them in those things that should be
most profitable for the Christian commonweal.


Latt. And what could have bin more profitable then to have caused that army
to have turned back again? This is clear that although matters in the end
should have fallen out even as the Pope desired, yet that Army going forward
there could not have been escaped many murders besides such other mischiefs
as wars draws on with it.


Arch. You say the truth, but why did not the Emperor pay his Army, that it
might have bin obedient to his Captains, for it is well known, it was not the
fault of the Duke of Burbone, that the truce was not observed, but the Army
would not obey him, because it was not paid, and this was the Emperors fault.


Latt. The Emperor paid not his Soldiers that he had there, because he had
not wherewithal.


Arch. Then seeing he had not wherewithal to pay his Soldiers, why would he
make war?


Latt. But why do you the same your selves, and thereby enforce him to keep an
army to defend himself, for the emperor full gladly would have lived in peace,
if your selves had not made the war.


Arch. Nay somewhat more I can tell you, that if his army had not made such
extreme diligence, it should have had enough to do to have defended him, for
I do verily believe before this day he should not have had left him a foot
of ground in Italy.


Latt. How so?


Arch. The Pope was then in making another league, much more terrible then the
first, whereunto the King of England also should have entered, and the Pope
promised to excommunicate the Emperor, and all those on his part, and to
deprive him of his kingdoms of Naples and Scicilia, and to continue a new
war upon him till such time as they had enforced him to restore unto the
French king his Sons.


Latt. A gentle piece of work I promise you, but had it not been better to
have brought to pass that the army might have returned then to kindle a new
fire.


Arch. Better no doubt: but to conclude, men are men, and cannot at all times
command themselves according to the rule of reason. But I pray you come
nearer, albeit in all that you have said, you have the greatest reason in the
world, yet in good faith do you think it well done, that with those Almans
worse then heretics, and that with that scomme of Spaniards and Italians that
have neither faith nor law. The Emperor should suffer that sacred City of
Rome to be destroyed, the which (be it good or be it bad) in conclusion it is
the head of Christendom, he ought to have had an other manner of regard
thereunto.


Latt. I have already plainly showed you, that this was not done neither by
the commandment nor by the will of the Emperor, and further that your selves
began to make the war, when there was a truce, and notwithstanding the
Emperor ratified the peace so soon as it was presented.


Arch. But why should he keep in Italy such wicked people as like ravenous
Woolues should come to destroy that holy City.


Latt. If you your selves would have bin contented to have lived in peace, and
not have made war upon the Emperor when he did nothing against you, there had
been indeed no cause why he should have maintained or sent any such people
into Italy would you have it lawful for your selves to make wars upon us,
and not lawful for us to defend our selves. This were in deed a gentle manner
of living.


Arch. Well let it be lawful for you in Gods name, but yet not with Infidels
and Heretics.


Latt. Surely you speak very badlie herein, for as concerning the Almanes,
you cannot be certain that they are Lutherans, neither is it likely or
credible considering they were sent by King Ferdinando his brother, that does
persequute the Lutherans. But you your self have received into your Army
Lutherans that were fled out of Almany, and with them have you made wars upon
the Emperor. And as concerning the Spaniards and Italians, which you call
Infidels, if your meaning be to call wicked living Infidilitie. Who are then
more Infidels then your selves, for where may a man find more vices, yea or so
many or so public, or so free of punishment as in your court of Rome? or who
ever committed so great and abominable cruelties as that Army of the Pope in
the territories of the Colonesi? if those of the Emperors be Infidels for
living so ill, why are not those of yours Infidels that are much worse? If it
be lawful for you to make wars with people that you your selves repute
Infidels, why shall it not be lawful for us to defend our selves with a people
that we take not to be Infidels? what a mockery is this. That which you do
against the Emperor, you do it not against him but against his Army, but that
the Army does against you, is not done by the Army but by the Emperor.


Arch. Well let us say the Army did it without commandment, without consent,
and against the will of the Emperor, And that his Majesty was in no fault,
let us then see when it was done, why has he not punished the offenders
and ill dooers.


Latt. Because he knows it to be a thing rather divine then humane. And
because he is accustomed rather to do good for ill, then ill for good. And a
gentill toye it were for him to chastise and punish those that venture their
lives for him, and in his service.


Arch. Well then seeing ye will not chastise and punish them, yet why would ye
be any longer served with such a people as had committed so horrible and
abominable outrage,


Latt. For two respects, first to avoid the mischief they would have done
being disbanded or cashed, and also to resist the flames that your selves had
kindled: For a mockery had it been at that time when the French were marching
into Italy for the Emperor to cash or dissolve his Army.


Arch. I cannot well tell what to reply, and surely in this you have very
fully performed your promise, and in this I must confess I was much abused.
But now I would desire you to open unto me the causes why God has permitted
the euilles which have bin done in Rome, seeing you say it has been for the
great good of Christendom.


Latt. Seeing in the first you rest satisfied I doubt not by Gods help but to
leave you much better contented in the second, but seeing it now late, we will
leave that part for after dinner because I mean now to deteine you for my
guest.


Arch. It shall be sir as you command, for hither we may afterward return
again.


The second part.
Lattantio. TO accomplish now that, which I have promised you, having already
half done in performing the first part, ye will not deny me that all the vices
and all the deceipts that the malice of Man was able to invent, was not
conioined together in that City, which with great reason ye name the holy
City, because it ought so to be.


Arch. Surely therein you have great reason, and God knows what I always
thought of that matter, and what I felt at heart to see that City which in
reason ought to be even the pattern of virtues to all the world, to be so full
of vices, chafferie, deceit, and manifest villeinies: Such sale made of
Offices, Benefices, Bulls, Indulgences, and Dispensations, so shamelessly, that
in very truth it seemed a very mockery of the Christian Faith, and that the
Ministers of the Church took no other care but only to invent means to scrape
money. The Pope pawned certain Apostles, that he had of Gold, and afterward
made an imposition to be levied by Bulls, pro redemptione Apostolorum. It is
strange they were not ashamed to commit things so foul and prejudicial to
their own dignity.


Latt. The very same say all they that come thence, and the same did I my self
know when I was there: But come you hither: If your Sons?


Arch. Ah sir speak courteously.


Latt. Pardon me, I remembered not you were a Clarke, albeit ye have many
Clerks that take no shame to have Children, but this speech I only use for an
example.


Arch. Well then, speak on.


Latt. If your Sons should happen to have a very vicious and bad
Scholemaister, and that you did perceive that by his vicious and bad manners
he did infect them, what would you do?


Arch. I would many times admonish him that he should amend, but if he would
not do it, I would use my authority over him, and chastise him gently, that
for fear of ill he should amend, if he would not for the love of good.


Latt. Then behold here God is Father to us all, and has delivered us unto
the Pope as unto our Scholemaister, to the end we should learn of him, and of
those that are about him to live like Christians. But seeing the vices of that
court of Rome, were such and so great, that they infected these Children of
God, and that we did not only not learn of them the doctrine of Christ, but
rather a manner of life most contrary, God seeing that neither the Prophets,
the Evangelists, nor such a number of learned Doctors as have written in times
past, reproving vices, and praising virtues, could move them that lived
wickedly to amend and live like Christians, he sought out new means to draw
them to do their duties. And besides many other very good Masters and
Preachers sent us in times past, he has sent even in these our days that
excellent Man Erasmus Roterodamus, who with much eloquence, prudence, and
modesty, in many of his works, discovering the vices and deceipts of the
Romans Court, and in general of all the Persons Ecclesiastical, a man would
have thought it had bin enough to have moved all such as in that calling lived
so wickedly to have amended for very shame of those things were spoken of
them. But when this would nothing profit them, but that their wickedness
rather daily more and more increased, God sought a new mean to convert them,
and therefore permitted that Friar Martin Luther to rise up, who should not
only utterly shame them, declaring without any respect all their vices, but
should also draw a number of people from the obedience of these prelates, to the
end yt such as would not be moved with shame might at least for coueteousnes
of their worldly wealth be reformed, seeing how much ye should loose by the
revolt of Almanie, or for ambition, seeing how great a Seignorie ye should
part withal if Almanie should fall from your obedience in sort as presently it
does.


Arch. But that Friar has not only spoken evil of us but also of God in a
thousand heresies that he has written.


Latt. You say the truth, but if your selves had not first amended that which
with great reason he reproved and not irritated him farther with your
excommunications, perhaps he never would have broken out into those heresies,
which afterward he wrote, nether should ye have had in Germany so great a
destruction of souls and bodies, as since by means thereof has happened.


Arch. But stay sir, this could not be remedied without a counsel general, and
they say it was not fit at that time to call a council, for that it had bin a
manifest betraying of all ye ecclesiastical persons, so as if at yt time we
should have called a general counsel, we might have gone al to ye Hospital, and
the Pope too with us for company.


Latt. How so?


Arch. The whole states of the Empire presented certain wrongs, which they
said they received of the apostolik Sea and of many persons ecclesiastical, and
in every point they required redres,


Latt. And why then did you not redress them?


Arch. Therabout we went, but they alleged that seeing the rents of the church
were given and appointed for relief and succor of the poor that they should
be spent that way, and not in wars, nor in vices, nor in pride as at this
day for the most part they are. And then they farther desired that the people
and not the clergy should have the administration of them. And then they
desired that no dispensation should be given for money, alleging that as well
the poor were the Children of God as the rich, and that giving dispensations
for money, the Poor who in reason should be most priueledged were most
oppressed, and the Rich contrariwise most priueledged.


Latt. And were not you in that as I have often been and still am astonished in
such sort as I know not what to say, I see on the one side that Christ praises
poverty and inuiteth us with his most perfect example thereunto, but on the
other side, I see we can scarsly get any thing of his Ministers but for money,
at Baptism money, at Bishoping money, at Marriage money, at Holy Orders money,
for Confession money, for discharge of Excommunications money, no not Extreme
Unction without money, they will ring no Bells without money, no Burial in the
Church without money, no hearing of Mass in times of Interdiction without
money: So that it seems by them, that Paradize is shut up from them that have
no money. Then what means this that the Ritche is buried in the Church and
the poor in the Church yard. If Christ had meant that his Church should have
bin more partial to the Rich, then to the Poor, why does he council us to
poverty? The Rich man may marry with his nearest kin, but the poor not so,
albeit he be ready to die for love of her. The Rich may eat flesh in Lent,
but the poor may not, albeit Fish perhaps be much dearer. The rich man
readily gets large indulgences, but the poor none, because he wants
money to pay for them. And of this manner ye shall find an infinite number of
other things: and you shall not want of them, that will allege many things
to be done for the service of God as to found Churches and Monasteries, to say
many Masses, and many Trentals, and to buy many Tapers to burn upon your
Sepulture. Jesus Christ does council me to despise and leave all these
worldly things to follow him, and thou do council me to seek them. You
should do me a very great pleasure to show me the reason they can allege for
it, for as God shall save me, I neither know, nor can conceive any.


Arch. In good faith ye are now climing a good Tree, but hear you? I never
brake my Brain about these matters that could yield me no profit.


Latt. Now well might you thee I pray God.


Arch. Besides all this they said, that when unto the Clergy these liberties
and Immunities were first given, which yet they hold, they were then poor and
imparted that they had with others that were in want more then themselves, but
now they are much more rich then their founders, and that it seemed neither
honest nor reasonable, that the poorer sort of the people should be burdened
with impositions, when the Clergy upon whom they spent all should be
exempted. They said also that they had so many feasts days to observe, that
workmen and laborers received great prejudice thereby, and that by proof it
was seen, that men upon those days did not exercise themselves in such
matters as they ought, but in other matters much worse, then upon other days,
so that it were convenient also to have some moderation of these holy days.


Latt. And what do you think that they spoke amiss therein.


Arch. And will you defend them to? Do you not see that those Saints whose
feasts you would abolish would be offended, and thereby some great ill might
happen unto us.


Latt. Yea but do not you see that those Saints have much more cause to be
offended with the vices and villainies committed upon those festival days,
then if men did only work for their living. Surely if men did truly serve
God upon these festival days, I would wish every day festival, but seeing
this is not done, I cannot hold it ill, that they were moderated, if a man
play the drunkard, or play all day at Boules or at Dice, or wander about women
or other like villainies, we think we have not broken the feast. But if another
forced by extreme necessity work to get his meat, presently they say this
is an heretic. I cannot skill of these services, it greeueth men to see rich
men upon these days to take all their pleasures, and to lay the whole burden
on the unhappy Artificers, laborers, and poor men.


Arch. For all this that you have said we make no great reckoning, we rather
look to that we should lose in acquitting any of our feast days.


Latt. Why what should you lose.


Arch. Our offerings, which are made much more abundantly on festival days
then upon other. They said also that there was of the Clergy many that lived
very badlie, and marryeng not, yet kept they both women and children, even
as well and as openly as if they had wives, whereupon ensued much offense and
slander among the people, wherefore they say it were better for them to marry.


Latt. Why what should you lose.


Arch. Our offerings which are made much more abundantly on festival days
then upon other. They said also that there was of the Clergy many that lived
very badly and marryeng not, yet kept they both women and children even as well
and as openly as if they had wives, whereupon ensued much offense and slander
among the people, wherefore they say it were better for them to marry.


Latt. And what cause have you to dislike of that.


Arch. And have we not cause of dislike from freemen to be made bondmen.


Latt. I rather think of slaves they would make you freemen, for tell me is
there in the world any greater bondage or slavery then unto sin.


Arch. I think not.


Latt. Why then your selves resting in sin with these your Queanes, do you
not see that you are most shamefully the slaves of sin. And they discharge
you of that slavery, that seek to have you married, whereby you may live
honestlye with your lawful wives.


Arch. But do not you see that if Clerks should marry, it would go ill with
them, and that they should lose much of their authority.


Latt. And do not you think it much worse, they should be whoremongers, and
thereby lose more of their authority, if I might see Clerks live chastely, and
that they would admit none to that dignity, but such as were at least 50.
years of age, as God save me I would think it better, they should not marry.
But among such a number of young priests that take orders rather for
covetousness then for the love of God, in whom you see no sign of Christian
modesty, were it not much better for them to marry.


Arch. But do you not see, that if Clerks should marry their children being
not capable of inheritance, they should either dye for want, or must be forced
to become thieves, or their Fathers should be compelled to rob the Church of
her living, to bestow it on their Sons, whereby should grow two great
inconveniences, the one that we should increase a number more of thieves and
secondly that our Churches should be dispoiled.


Latt. Both these inconveniences may easily be remedied, if that you of the
Clergy would labor to imitate the poverty of them, whose successors you
pretend your selves to be, and that you would not be ashamed to bring up your
children in some honest occupations, whereby they might get their living, and
so should they be also much better brought up and instructed in matters of
faith, whereby should ensue much good to the public weal, and so God help
me it is a thing me thinks your selves should desire.


Arch. Desire quod you. God forbid that ever that should come to pass, for
mark sir, whereto we should then come, if I marry I must then of necessity
live with my wife, be she good or bad, foul or fair, all days of my life or
her life: whereas now if she that I keep content me not to night, I can leave
her to morrow and take an other. And besides all this, if I list not to keep a
wench of mine own, all the prittie wenches in the world are ours or to speak
more frankely and plainly, you keep and maintain them, and we enjoy them.


Latt. But what becomes then of your Souls.


Arch. O let that alone, for God is merciful, I make my prayers and confess
me to God when I lie down, and when I rise again. I take no man's goods, I owe
no man any money, I rob not by the high ways, I murder no man, I fast all
those days that the Church commands, there passes not a day that I here
not mass, and do you not think that all this is enough to make a man a
Christian, as for that other matter of women, to conclude we are men, and God
is merciful.


Latt. You say truth, but surely heerin you are much less then men, and I
stand in great doubt, whether God will be so merciful as to pardon so many
knaueries, if you persevere still in them.


Arch. Well we will leave those matters when we are older.


Latt. You do well to jest with God, but how are you assured to live till the
morrow.


Arch. Be you not so superstitious, God has pardon enough in store, and see
what you do, would you have the constitutions of the Church broken, that has
continued so many years?


Latt. And why not? if so it be convenient for the public weal of
Christendom.


Arch. And shall the Church then seem to have erred so many years together?


Latt. You are much awrie in your accoumpt, for you shall see the church
according to some one time does order things that in an other time again it
does annihilate. Do you not read in the Acts of the Apostles, that in the
Council of Jerusalem it was ordered, that they should eat no blood nor
strangled beast.


Arch. Yea I have read it.


Latt. Why therefore do you not yet observe it?


Arch. I never set my wit on that place.


Latt. Then will I tell you, it was done to satisfy the superstition of the
Jews, albeit the Apostels knew it was not necessary, and therefore afterward
they derogated this constitution, as a thing superstitious: and yet it is not
to be thought for this, that the Council did err. Then after the same manner,
what inconveniences should it be, if that which the Church in one time for
urgent respects had ordered, in an other should be for respects more urgent
abrogated. And therefore me thinks the same constitution should now also be
abrogated, and for truth I know no reason to the contrary, but only that your
self alleges, it should not be for your own benefit.


Arch. Well let us leave this now.


Latt. Now therefore do you not think that it should be much better to
redress those things which you say the Almanes did require, and to amend
your lives, and seeing we do honor you so much as the Ministers of God, to be
so indeed, and not to continue in your hardness, and so not to be the occasion
of great mischiefs as has thereby happened.


Arch. If the Almans desire redress in those matters, the Church may provide
remedy when they see good.


Latt. Well you see, that for as much as you would not give ear to the honest
reprehensions of Erasmus, neither yet to the dishonest rebukes of Luther, God
sought out an other kind of means to convert you, and therefore permitted
those Soldiers that sacked Rome with Don Hugo, and also that the Collonesi
should make that assault, whereof your self now complain: for seeing that all
were now become shameless, and the behavior and course of life they all held,
he sought to make them do that for fear of loosing their lives, which for
fear of destroying their souls, they would not do. And God, seeing that there
was no other way left to deliver his Children from perdition, he has done with
you even as your self said you would have done with the Scholemaister of the
Children which should infect them with his vices, and would not amend.


Arch. It may be as you say, but what had the image committed? what offenses
had ye Relics done? or the dignities, or ye honest and good people which were
also robbed and ill entreated.


Latt. I pray you report me the matter even as it passed, seeing you were there
present and I will tell you the cause as I think why God permitted every of
those things that ye shall truly recompt unto me.


Arch. Great reason ye have surely in all this that you have said, I shall with
a very good will do that you have required: and hear whatsoever you will say
with a much better. You are therefore to know that the Emperors Army having
left their Artillery at Sena, which was but a small quantity, with the
greatest speed that ever was heard of marched even to Rome, and arrived there
the fifth of May.


Latt. But what was the reason the Pope sent not to require some communication.


Arch. Nay the good Duke of Burbone sent to desire of the Pope that he would
send some person with whom he might treat upon his entrance into Rome: But the
Pope relying upon his new league that he had made, and the Army of the
leaguers having promised to come to his succors he would not enter into any
manner of communication: And when the Army knew this, the very next day in the
morning they resolved to assault the City: And such was our ill fortune, that
even at the beginning and within the Town one with an Harquebuze happened to
kill the good Duke of Burbone, whose death was the cause of much ill.


Latt. Surely it even breaks my heart to hear of so unhappy a death.


Arch. Our sins was the cause, for if he had lived there had not bin so much
mischief done.


Latt. Now would to God you had not had those faults, but who ever heard that
the sins of a City should cause their destruction that came to assail them?


Arch. In this matter it may be well said, for the Duke of Burbone came not to
conquer us, but to defend us from his own army, he came not to sack us,
but to keep us that we should not be sacked. It is we that had most cause to
lament his death* for himself there is no man but rather does envy him then
pity him, for he lost his life with the greatest honor that ever did man, and
by his death atteined that, which a number of great Captains were never able to
atteine, so that the very memory of him will be always most honorable: only
one thing greeueth me, that is, the peril of his soul dying excommunicate.


Latt. And why excommunicate?


Arch. Because he entered with an armed hand into the territories of the
Church, and sought to assail the holy city of Rome.


Latt. Do you know what one decree says, to wit, that many are excommunicate
by the Pope, that are not excommunicate by God, neither does the Pope entend,
that he should be excommunicat that remains within the terrritories of the
Church with intention to defend them, and in all that he can to provide that
they should not receive any damage as this Prince did.


Arch. Ye say truth, nevertheless his first motion was voluntary.


Latt. Of this your self before very well declared the cause, for he was
bound to defend the kingdom of Naples, being by the Emperor made his
lieftenant general for all Italy neither went he to possess the lands of
the Church, but to prohibit the Pope that he should not possess the lands
and territories of the Emperor and to bring him to some unity and concord
with his Majesty.


Arch. Well let that be so, but to return to our purpose. The Emperors army
was so desirous to enter Rome, some to rob and spoil, others for the
extreme hatred they bare to that court of Rome, and some both for the one and
the other cause, that the Spaniards and Italians on the one side by scale. And
the Almanes on the other side by Pickaxes breaking down the wall, entered by
the Burge, on which side stands (as you know) the Church of Saint Peeter and
the holy Palace.


Latt. Yea and a great many of very good houses of Cardinals. Of one thing I
very much marvel, that they within having Artillery, and those without
having none, how it was possible for them so easily to enter without the
slaughter of an hundred only of themselves. But of you how many were slain?


Arch. Sir you know how uncertain reports are always in such like matters.
Some say Six thousand men, but in truth there died not upon the entry above
four thousand, for imediatly they retired themselves into the City, and I
tell you truth I should have deemed this a very great miracle, if afterward I
had not seen the same soldiers have done that they did, whereby I cannot
believe that God would do so great a miracle for them.


Latt. You are much deceived, for God did not this miracle for them, but to
punish and correct you.


Arch. Therein I believe you say the very truth.


Latt. I wonder after their General was slain, that they were not dismayed
(as commonly men are) and so did not leave the fight.


Arch. So was it surely but the death of this General inflamed them more and
increased their desire to enter the city with greater fury then before.


Latt. Ye tell me woonders.


Arch. Surely so it was, and this good duke of Burbone was so believed of all,
that every man desired himself to die or to revenge the death of him.


Latt. And therefore it was he me thinks that was cause of all that cruelty.


Arch. It is most likely to be so.


Lat. Oh mighty God how marvelous art thou in all thy works, and in each
particular how wonderfully discouerest thou thy power, thou determinest that
this good Duke should be killed, to the end that with the more rigor thy
justice should be executed: but let us see where was the Pope all this while?


Arch. Even in his own Palace, and so carlesse, that it was a wonder he was
not taken, but seeing in how bad terms matters stood, he retired himself to
the Castle of Saint Angelo with 13. Cardinals and other Bishops and principal
persons which stayed with him. And presently the Ennemies entered and spoiled,
and sacked all that was in the Palace, and the like did they in all the
Cardinals houses, and all other howses, that were within the Burge, not sparing
any, no not the Church of the Prince of the Apostles. This day they had there
enough to do without entering into Rome, whither our people, hoising up the
draw Bridge, had retired and fortified themselves.


Latt. But the people of Rome, and the rest of you that were escaped when you
saw this present danger why did you not accord with the Emperor? what had you
to do with the Popes war.


Arch. Surely very little, but what would you have us to do? have ye not
heard the old prouer be that the laws are as please the Prince. The Poor
Roman people seeing their manifest destruction, would have sent Ambassadors to
the army of the Emperor to have agreed with him, and to have avoided the
sack, but the Pope by no means would consent unto it.


Latt. But herein tell the truth, for this was a strange inhumanitie, had it
not bin better for the poor people to have taken any accord for their safety,
then to have suffered that they have done.


Arch. You say truth, but who would have thought that matters should have fallen
out as they did. The Captains of the Emperor presently determined to assault
the City, and the very same night fighting with their enemies they entered,
and the sack continued more then eight days, in which time they had no regard
of nation, quality, or kind of men.


Lat. O my God, and were not the Captains able to remedy so great an evil?


Arch. Surely the Captains did what they could, but all was in vain, the
Soldiers being so flesht in these robberies as they were: you should behold
troops of Soldiers passing the streets with cries, one carried prisoners, an
other plate, an other howshold stuff. But the sighs, groans, and outcries of
Women, and Children in all places were so pitteous, that my Bones yet shake to
make report of them.


Latt. Yea and mine also to hear you tell of it: but they carried some respect
to Bishops and Cardinals?


Arch. In truth no more then if they had bin soldiers as themselves, and the
like to the Churches and Monasteries, all was fish that came to their net,
there was never seen more cruelty, less humanity nor fear of God.


Latt. This outrage me thinks should be done by the Almanes.


Arch. In good faith our Spaniards were not idle, but plaide their part as well
as any, and then the Italian pages for they were the first that set to their
hand.


Latt. But you your selves what did you all that while.


Arch. We had good leisure to pare our Nails.


Latt. But in good south.


Arch. What would you we should have done, some fled, some were taken and
raunsomed, and all of us sped vnluckely.


Latt. But you that were ransomed, did they then suffer you to live in peace.


Arch. No as God save me, we were even in as great perrill as before, till such
time as we had nothing lest that they could spoil us of.


Latt. But whereof then did you eat.


Arch. The mercy of God never failed, when we had no partridges we eat Hens.


Latt. And upon fasting days.


Arch. What talk ye of fasting days, think you Soldiers make any difference
between fasting days and Soundaies. O cursed generation, for to tell you the
truth me thought it was a most wicked thing that they should have so small
regard of the commandments of the Church.


Latt. Do not you your selves contemn the Commandments of God, and do you
marvel that the Soldiers regard not the precepts of the Church. But which
think you to be the greater fault, simple fornication, or to eat flesh in the
holy time of Lent.


Arch. This is a gentle question, the one is a natural and humane matter, and
the other a great abomination, to eat flesh in the holy Lent, O Jesus speak
not of such a thing.


Latt. Now as God help me, you have a gallant judgment, and do you not know
that a man may better eat flesh in Lent or on any other fasting day, then
commit a single fornication.


Arch. And why so?


Latt. Because it should be more wholesome for the body, and less hurtful for
the soul.


Arch. And how so?


Latt. Is it not clear that flesh is more wholesome then fish.


Arch. Yes.


Latt. Then is it not more wholesome for the body to eat flesh then fish? and
concernng the soul, is it not a greater offense to break the commandments
that God himself has given then these of the Church?


Arch. Yes that is true.


Latt. Then is the sin greater to commit fornication, which is prohibited
Iure Diuino, then to eat flesh in Lent, which was only a constitution humane.


Arch. I am content to confess that you have reason in this also, so as you
would show me the reason why we think it commonly a greater offense to sin
against constitutions humane, then against the divine.


Latt. We will enter no further into this, least we want time for the rest, but
let us prosequute our purpose,


Arch. Let it be so, let us leave this for some other time, and tell me now
what was the reason that the just should suffer for sinners. It is likely that
in Rome there was many good men, that neither were partakers of the vices, nor
in fault for the wars and yet suffered jointly with the bad.


Latt. The bad received punishment for their wickedness, and the good vexations
in this world to attain the greater glory in the next.


Arch. At least they should have had some respect unto the Spaniards and
Almains, and other nations that were Vassals and servants to the Emperor, but
they sacking the Spanish Church of S. James, and the house of Don Pedro de
salmanca Ambassador of Don Ferdinando king of Hungary, and the house of Don
Antonio de salmanca that now is Bishop of Gurcense. They left neither house,
Church, nor man, that was in Rome vnsackt or ransomed, even the Secretary Perez
himself, who was resident at Rome in the behalf of the Emperor.


Latt. Even in this alone ye might know it was a manifest judgment of God,
and no human action, neither executed by the will or commandment of the
Emperor, seeing they took no regard, no not of his own Subjects and servants.


Arch. You say truth, but is it not a horrible thing, that Christians should
sell and ransom Christians as those soldiers did?


Latt. Yes surely, it is a horrible thing indeed, but it is so common a matter
among men of war, as we have no cause to marvel at any thing they did there,
where they were wont not only to sell and ransom men, but even their souls
also.


Arch. What their souls, and how so?


Latt. That will I tell you, but in your ear.


Arch. Why, there is no body here.


Latt. I care not for that, come hither.


Arch. Even so? now I understand you.


Latt. And do you not think I have reason.


Arch. Yes surely and that very great, and now do I know that God has
suffered this even to the end that we should have knowledge of our error. But
now to tell you of the other Cardinals that were in Rome, and could not
together with the Pope escape into the Castle of S. Angelo: how they were
taken, and ransomed, and their persons full ill fauouredly handled, being drawn
by the streets of Rome bare legged, among those Almanes, that it was the
greatest misery in the world to see them, especially when men remembered the
Pomp wherein they were wont to go to the Palace, and of the multitude of
servants that attended them when they passed by the Castle.


Latt. Surely this was indeed a horrible thing, but yet you are to consider
that this was their own seeking, seeing they consented the Pope should make
wars upon the Emperor, and then breaking the truce made with Don Hugo,
suffered the same in the name of the College to be violated, and the most
horrible abominations to be committed that ever were heard of. And how could
you think but God would chastise you for it.


Ar. But alas what could they do, if the Pope would have it so?


Latt. After they had done all their diligence to persuade him, if they could
not prevail, or have done him any good, they might have gotten them out of
Rome, and not have been partakers of so great wickedness, seeing the gates
stood open, know ye not, that Agentes, and Consentientes pari pena puniuntur?
and as well perhaps their own sins on the other side deserved it, if not ask
M. Pasquine.


Arch. No no, I need not ask him, I know that as well as Master Pasquine.


Latt. If you know that, ye need not marvel at that you saw, but only that
God of his infinite bounty should so long dissemble and bear with them.


Arch. But what say you of the mockery they made of them? An Almaine clothing
himself like a Cardinal went riding about Rome in his pontificalibus and a
bottle of Wine on the pumell of his Saddle. And then a Spaniard in the same
manner with a Curtezan behind him, was it possible in the world to make a
greater mockery.


Latt. But let us consider whether it were not a greater shame and mockery of
the dignity of a Cardinal, having taken his hat, to do the works of a
Soulder or worse: or for a Soldier to take a Cardinals hat to counterfeit the
Cardinal, though the one and the other be naught, yet can ye not deny me, but
that the first is the worst, yea and more prejudicial to the sea Apostolic.


Arch. It is true, but for conclusion, the Cardinals are men, and cannot leave
to do like men, but this other is to abandon all reverence and obedience to
such as it is due, without which no commonweal can stand.


Latt. And with that would we be well contented, that the Cardinals were men,
and did not many times show themselves worse then men. But tell me I pray you
the Apostles were they not men too?


Arch. Yes, but they were vpholden by the holy Ghost.


Latt. And let us see the holy Ghost that is now, is it not the very same that
was then.


Arch. Yes.


Latt. And if they would desire it should it be denied them.


Arch. Noe.


Latt. Why do they not then request it?


Arch. Because they have not done it.


Latt. Theirs then is the fault, as you may see, and from hensforth they may
know how great an abomination it is, that they being the pillars of the
Church, have done works much worse then Soldiers, and yet you think it a
more abominable matter for Soldiers to wear their habits. But why do you
tell me nothing of the Bishops.


Arch. Why would you have me tell you of them, they were handled even as
others, I will tell you that I saw among many honorable persons that they had
taken and carried to the market place to be sold, the Almaines led a Bishop of
their own nations which stood upon election to have been Cardinal.


Latt. What, to be sold?


Arch. And what marvel, yea even with a bough in his Forhead, as they do when
they sell beasts, and when they could find none to buy them, they played for
them at dice, what think you of this geere?


Latt. Very ill: and yet I tell you this is not without a misterye. Tell me
which esteem you more a Soul, or a body?


Arch. A Soul without comparison.


Latt. But how many Souls then have you sold in this world.


Arch. Why how is it possible to sell Souls?


Latt. Have you not read in the Apocalips that they counted the Souls among
their other Marchaundise. He that sells a-Bishoprick, he that sells a
Benefice with cure of Souls, does not he sell the Souls of his Subjects?


Arch. Surely you say most true, these things I never liked of, neither of
giving benefices to pencion with condition of Redemption at so much in the
hundred, which is nothing else but to go about to deceive God Almighty.


Latt. In good faith was this their trick to deceive, and in this manner? how
many souls have you seen played at dice?


Arch. Infinite.


Latt. Now do you see, or hereby you may see and know your error, and need not
meruell that those soldiers that have accustomed to live by robbery should
sell Priests, seeing your selves sold benefices, neither yet if they sold
Bishops seeing your selves sold Bishoprics, and the one is so much more
grievous then the other as the Soul is more precious then the Body: but
rather you should allow well of the^ seeing they sold never a Cardinal.


Arch. Was it not enough that they did ransom them, and made composition for
their houses and all they had in Rome, that nothing remained free.


Latt. Your selves will not remember those purses of ours that you have emptied
with your compositions, and therefore merueile you not if they also forget
yours. Have ye not read in the Apocalips. Restore unto her even as she has
rendered unto you, duble their dublinges according to their works, even in the
pot they have mingled for you mix them duble, even so much as they have
glorified and delighted themselves, so much give them in torments and sorrow,
because God is strong that has judged her. What think you, are not these the
very judgments of God?


Arch. My very flesh does tremble in hearing of it: But I pray you tell me,
wherefore or to what purpose serves the loss and spoil of so much money, as
it is said the sack of Rome amounted unto by ransomes and compositions above
15. millions of Ducades.


Latt. What call you this spoil and loss? in good faith I count it rather
gain.


Arch. And why gain?


Latt. Because for these many years all the money of Christendom went to
Rome, where it was consumed and lost, but now it is diuerted and found
elsewhere.


Arch. And which way?


Latt. The money it gat by pleas, by garboiles, by brables, by benefices, by
pensions, by spoils, by first fruits, by Bulls, by indulgences, by
confessionaries, by compositions, by dispensations, by excommunications, by
curses, by fulminations, by agrauations and redagrauations, by connonizations,
and such like exactions, the Soldiers have taken as husbandmen and laborers to
sow round about the world.


Arch. Oh black laborrers that served to destroy Rome in such sort, as it will
not turn to be Rome again these 500. years.


Latt. O would to God that were so.


Arch. What?


Latt. That Rome would not turn again to those vices it had, nor that therein
should rain no more so small charity, and love and fear of God.


Arch. But what had the sacred palace merited, and those Chambers and painted
haules, that was the most lamentable sight in the World to see them made
stables for horses and all things in them utterly defaced.


Latt. In deed sir you say well, and great reason it were that the whole City
suffering sack and spoil, that place should be preserved, from whence all the
ill council proceeded.


Arch. But then the Prince of the Apostles Church, and all the other Temples,
Churches and Monasteries of Rome, who is able to recount how they were handled
and raunsacked, so as there remained in them neither Gold nor silver, nor other
thing of valiew, but all was by those Soldiers robbed and spoiled, and is it
possible that God can like that his own Churches should be so handled and
ransacked, and things to his honor dedicated, so robbed?


Latt. Surely sir this is a thing indeed so soul and wicked, as it cannot be
but condemned of any. Nevertheless if ye look well into it, ye shall find
even in these things that have bin dedicated to the service of God so much
superstition, and the people therein so much abused, that I meruell not if God
have permitted this and much more to the end there may be in those matters some
moderation. The Merchant thinks after he has gotten together an infinite
quantity of money, that all the ill he has done or shall do shall be
forgiven him. If he build a church or a Monastery, or give a Lamp or a
Challice to a Church: and in this also do they deceive, that they seem to give
that for Gods sake, which is rather for the most part given for a certain
pride, or for a certain worldly vain glory, as is manifest by the arms that
commonly every one puts on the things they give, and putting their trust in
these things they think that now they need no longer live like Christians,
and albeit this be an extreme error, yet are they not ashamed to admit it,
so as thereby they make there profit by it, not considering in the mean time
the injury they do to Christian Religion.


Arch. And why an injury?


Lattan. Do you not think it an injury, yea and a very great injury, that
we being Christians and instructed from God himself should be ignorant of that
knowledge, which many Heathens only by the light of natural reason had
attained of God. For they had atteined to this knowledge, that it was no true
service of God to offer him any corruptible thing. They had atteined, that unto
a bodilesse substance such as God is, we ought not to offer any bodily thing
for a principal offer, nor as a thing that should be very grateful unto
him. They said that such knew not what thing God was, that supposed he took
pleasure in the possession of such things which many wise and good men thought
a commendation in themselves to esteem little as Jewels and Riches: And yet
we Christians are so blind as we think our God is greatly served with these
corrupt and corporal matters.


Arch. By this means you would have men do no service to God, neither in
building of Churches nor in offering Challeces, and such other ornaments.


Latt. I say he does better and more true service to God which fitteth his
soul with such virtues as God commands to the end he may come and dwell in
him, then he that builds a church, yea though it were made of gold, and as
great as that of Toledo for God to dwell in, when in the mean time by vices
he makes God a stranger to his own soul, albeit his intention therein were
the best even in the world: and I say that it is a very great error to think
that we please God by offering Gold or Silver when it is done with an intention
to be praised for it, or for any other vain respect. And I say that God is
better served if in steed of that we give unto Churches which are but dead
Temples, we did bestow the same on the poor to relieve their necessities,
seeing we know they are the living Temples of God.


Arch. By this reason we should have neither Churches nor any other ornaments
to serve God.


Latt. What should we have no Churches? Yes surely I think we should have
many more Churches, for having many good Christians more: of these any two or
three being joined together in his name should be a Church, yea and besides
that, although the lewd would not build Churches or Monasteries, think you
that there would want good Men to do it? But let us behold this universal
World, is it any thing else then a beautiful Church, wherein God dwells?
What is the Sun but a Lamp lighted to shine unto the Ministers of the
Church? What is the Moon? What be the Stars, but Candles which burn in
this Church of God. Would you your self desire another Church? Does not the
Apostle say, the Temple of God is holy, which you your selves are, would you
have other Candles to lighten this church, you have the spirit, you have
understanding, you have reason, and do you not think that these be good
Candels?


Arch. Yes but yet no man sees them.


Latt. And you, have you seen God? Behold brother seeing God is indeed
invisible he will be principally honored with things invisible, God will not be
paid or contented with gold nor with silver, neither stands in any need of
these like things, seeing he is Lord of all, he seeks nothing but hearts.
Will you see this, Seeing God is omnipotent, If he would, could he not in a
moment make an hundred thousand temples more sumptuous and more ritche then the
temple of Solomon?


Arch. Yes that is clear.


Latt. I pray you what service should you do him then, in giving that he has
already, and not yielding that unto him which he requires. Let us see if God
delight in Temples, if God delight in gold, if God delight in silver, why does
he not take all, since all is his.


Arch. Marry sir, because he would have us of our own good wills, to offer it,
to the end we might that way have mean to merit?


Latt. What merit is it to give unto God that he least esteems, when ye will
not render that he requires.


Arch. Now I perceive you would not have us retain the Churches we have, nor
that they should take ornaments.


Latt. I say I would not have these things done for vain glory, neither
would I that to honor a Church of stones, we should leave to honor the Church
of God which is our soul, I would not, that to build an altar, we should
forbear to succor a poor body, or to repair tables or dead images, we
should leave the poor naked, which be the lively images of Jesus Christ,
neither would I that we should lay so great a foundation on those things which
we are not in any duty bound to do, neither yet that we should give men to
understand, that the Lord is served and pleased with the possession of these
things, that every wiseman contemns and holds a praise in himself, not to
esteem. Tell me, why did Jesus Christ contemn all the riches and wealth of
this world?


Arch. Because we should likewise by his example value it as nothing.


Latt. Why then do we seek to present unto him these things, as matters very
precious and grateful, seeing himself we know contemned them, and would also
that we should contemn them, and not rather take care to present our minds
and souls pure and clear from all vices and sins, this being the most
precious and acceptable offering that we can present.


Arch. I muse who should teach you so many arguments being yet so young.


Latt. Then behold sir it has pleased God therefore to suffer these churches
to be thus robbed, that we might evidently know that he esteems as nothing
all such things as may be robbed, neither yet does he esteem any thing
corruptible, to the end that hereafter we may rather present unto him living
then dead temples, And that we should offer up unto him hearts and wills before
gold and silver, and that we serve him with such things as he commands,
rather then with such vanity.


Arch. Yea tell me a thing that I never heard of, but seeing it is so, tell
me how and wherewith we ought to serve him.


Latt. This is an other matter a part, whereof we may confer an other tune
more at our good leisure, but now I pray you proceed on.


Arch. Even as you will, but what will you say, that the very temples where
God was wont to be served and honored, were become stables for Horses, what
a thing was it to see the very Church of Saint Peter, both on the one side and
the other, all full of Horses, even to think of it, it breaks my heart.


Latt. Certainelye, it was a thing that no good man could like of, and yet many
times we see, that necessity causes things that by the law is prohibited,
and in time of war these and far worse matters are commonly done, whereof
they are in fault that are the cause of the war.


Arch. This is a gentle excuse.


Latt. And why not, and do you not also think that he that draws a greater
and worse filthiness then that, into a place more holy then that, does he
not commit a greater abomination.


Arch. This is clear.


Latt. Then tell me if you have read the holy Scripture, have ye not found
in it, that God dwells not in Temples builded with the hands of men, and
that every man is that temple wherein God dwells.


Arch. Yes sometimes.


Latt. Then tell me which should be the greater ill and abomination to make a
stable of those Temples of stone, where the Apostle says God dwells not, or
to make it of our souls, which are the true temples of God?


Arch. This is clear, that of our souls were the worse, but how can that be.


Latt. Demand you how, why what call you a Stable?


Arch. A place where Beasts rest.


Latt. But what call you Beasts?


Arch. Brute Beasts without reason.


Latt. And are not vices brute and void of reason.


Arch. Yes without doubt, and much worse then brute beasts.


Latt. Thus is it manifest, that it is far greater abomination to bring
vices that are much worse then brute Beasts, into the Soul which is the true
Temple where God dwells, then to bring horses into a Church of stone.


Arch. Surely I think that true.


Latt. Hereby may you now know, how blind your understanding was in Rome,
that meeting daily by the streets, men that manifestly had their souls the
stables of vices, of that you made no accoumpt, and because you saw in case of
necessity, horses in the Church of Saint Peter, you thought it an horrible
abomination, and broke your heart to think on it, And yet your heart was never
broken, to see such multitude of Souls full of such filthy and abominable
sins, and God by whom they were made and redeemed, banished out of them,
surely your religion is a gentle religion.


Arch. You have great reason, but yet consider I pray you, that which Saint
Paul spoke, that God dwells not in Temples made with hands of men, was to
be understood of that time, wherein he spoke it, for since and now in our
Temples the Sacrament abides.


Latt. You say truth, but have not you confessed unto me that vices are worse
then beasts.


Arch. Yea and so I say still.


Latt. Why then, he that brings into the Church a heard of vices that are
worse then Beasts, is he not worse then he that brings into the church a
troop of Horses.


Arch. It seems so to me, but these beasts are invisible.


Latt. What? will you say that God cannot see men's vices.


Arch. Yes God can see them, but men cannot, but these horses we may all see.


Latt. By this reason ye would make it a less abomination to offend God then
men, and then ye would excuse the offense committed in appearing before God,
so burdened with wickedness, because men see it not, you aggrauate greatly the
putting of Horses into the Church, in that time of necessity, because they are
visible unto men. But mark sir I pray you, God is not offended with the bad
sauors wherewith men are offended, The Soul wherein vices are rooted, that is
it wherewith God is offended, and therefore he requires that this soul be
most clear of vices and sins, and many times he has so commanded us. And
therefore ye take all things the wrong way: ye take great care to keep neat
and clean the material Temples, and the true Temple of God which is your
souls, you keep it so full of vices and abominable sins, that they neither
see God, nor know what thing he is.


Arch. Now as God save me you have the greatest reason in the world, but if you
had seen the Soldiers how they carried along the streets, the poor Nuns
taken out of their monasteries, and other Virgins taken out of their Fathers
houses you would have had the greatest compassion in the world.


Latt. This is a matter so common among Soldiers and men of war, that albeit
in mine opinion, it be indeed much more grievous then all the rest joined
together, we make scarslie any accoumpt of it, as if it were not worse to
defile a Virgin, which is the living temple, where Jesus Christ dwells, then
a church of stone or wood, wherefore the fault hereof must not only be laid
to the charge of those Soldiers, but much more unto you, who began and raised
this war, and were the cause that they have done that they did: verelye if
the war were cause of no other ill then this, even for this alone you ought
to leave it.


Arch. The Registers and Records of the Apostolic Chamber, of the Bulls and
supplications, and those of the Notaries and process are all destroyed and
defaced.


Lattan. Those I think surely God did permit, that together with vice we
should give over all suits and pleas for matters Ecclesiastical. For seeing
these benefices are exequuted by Clarks, and the first and chief charter of a
Clarke should be charity, how does he hold charity that goes to suit with his
neighbor?


Arch. And why not?


Latt. Because that charity is of that nature, that if it met with any of
these suites, it would rather loose the benefice then stand in controversy
with his neighbor.


Arch. This were very perfection.


Lattan. And so should all the Clergy be men of such perfection.


Arch. All men cannot attain to this perfection, but I pray you whereupon
should so many Auditors, Proctors, Aduocats, registers, and other officers
feed, if there were no suits and pleas?


Lat. Let them be Tailors, Waterbearers and Cowkeepers, and not defrawd us
utterly of all Christian charity.


Arch. And this is a gentle charity of yours that so honorable persons should
take so base occupations, but I pray you what should we do with the suits
already commenced?


Latt. Let the benefice be bestowed on the most worthy of them that are in suit
for it, or taken from them both, and given to a more worthy, and that could
deserve it better.


Arch. By this means we should have no Justice.


Latt. Yes much more Justice, for benefices should be bestowed on such persons,
as should do that they were ordained for.


Arch. And now do they not their duties?


Latt. No surely, for these benefices are the goods of the poor, and while you
wast them in brables among Proctors and Doctors, the poor die for want.


Arch. Ye have many indeed that spend their livings that way and some much
worse, as your self I know can be a good witness. But whom would you have to
be the Judge of the sufficiency or insufficiency of Clerks to give or take
from them their benefices.


Latt. Every Bishop in his own Dioces, so as they would better examine and
know the persons.


Arch. Well, but ye have many Bishops that have not learning enough, nor
knowledge to do this.


Latt. And therein is there another sin committed, for such should not be
admitted to be Bishops, but other persons thereto deputed that were able.


Arch. Will ye have me tell you the truth, even that way too all would go by
favor.


Latt. Think not so there are a number of wise Bishops and men of good
conscience, and others would follow their example. And in truth I think this
would be the best remedy till there be some other more perfect reformation in
the Church.


Arch. And for pleas that are upon seculer matters, what would you have done?


Latt. If I were a Prince I would either divide it between them, or give it
all to the woorthiest and honestest.


Arch. Do you not see that hereby you would pervert and overthrow all Justice?


Lattan. Will you have me tell you my mind plainly, God created all things
for the use and service of man, but the administration thereof rather to one
man then an other, because they should bestow them where most need was, and it
is good reason that such as have impart with such as want. And it is good
Justice, that he have the administration of most, that best knows how to use
them, and contrary manifest injustice.


Arch. By this means you would go about to make a new world.


Latt. No, but I would establish the good, and remove the quite out of it.


Arch. So long might I live till you had gone through with such an enterprise.


Latt. God send the Emperor Charles life, and then shall you see whether he
will go through withal.


Arch. But tarry, for yet have ye not heard all. Never since the Emperors
Army entered Rome, till the time that I departed, which was the twelfth of
June, there was not a Mass said in Rome, nor all that time heard we a bell
Ring, nor a Clock.


Latt. The bad became little better by hearing of Mass when they did it
without devotion or reverence, and the good would do that in Spirit, which
they could not do with their Body, but how chances the Priests and Friars
would say no Mass?


Arch. By God, and that is a gentle question. Did not I tell you at the
beginning there was not a Priest or Friar in Rome that durst show himself in
other garments then such of a Soldiers as I were?


Latt. And why so?


Arch. Because the Almanes so soon as they saw a Friar, or a Priest in the
steetes they would give the word and cry out, a Pope, a Pope, kill, kill.


Latt. As God shall help me I do now remember, that when I was in Rome, there
were many Prophesies that foretold of this persequution of the Clergy, and
that it should be even in this Emperors time.


Arch. That is indeed most true?


Latt. And why then would you not amend?


Arch. Why? who would then have believed that it should have proved true?


Latt. That would any man that had well considered the state of all things at
Rome.


Archd. But besides all this, there was such an extreme stink in all the
Churches, that no man could endure to tarry in them.


Latt. A stink and whereof?


Arch. The Soldiers had opened many Sepultures hoping to have found treasure
in them, but after they were opened they found nothing but the dead Carcasses.


Latt. Was it not much that you suffered of that perfume in telling of the
money that ye exacted for burying of the dead.


Arch. Now you are disposed to jest.


Latt. No in good faith but I tell you truth, that seeing you of the Clergy
were not ashamed to take tribute of the dead, a thing that even among the
Gentiles was held most foul, as little should you have lothed to have entered to
have prayed to God for them.


Arch. Well you thought ye had done, but there remains yet worse matter for
you to resolve, for I have kept the woorst, and most grievous for the last.


Latt. Well tell it me.


Arch. They left no Relics vnsackt, and spared not to take the Gold and
Silver with their sacrilegious hands, wherewith those Relics were covered,
that it was the most horrible abomination in the world to see these Raskals to
enter those places, whereunto Bishops, yea Cardinals, yea the Popes themselves
scarsly durst enter: And to take those heads and arms of the Apostles and of
the happy saints, I cannot imagine what good could grow unto Christendom by
such an abominable boldness and contempt.


Latt. Surely it was in deed a foul action, but I pray you tell me after they
had taken the Gold and Silver, what did they with the bones?


Arch. The Almanes threw them down, some in the Church yard, some in the holy
Field, others drew them to the howses of the Prince of Orange and other
Captains, and the Spaniards as the people most religious drew them all to the
house of John de Vrbina.


Latt. What, so dispoiled?


Arch. See what you doubt, I my self saw one basketfull in the house of the
same John de Vrbina.


Latt. And do you take this for the most heinous?


Arch. This is clear.


Latt. But come hither, is not one body living worth an hundred dead?


Arch. Yes.


Latt. Then much more grievous was the death of those 4. thousand men which you
speak of, then ye sack of these Relics.


Arch. And why so?


Latt. Because the Relics are dead bodies, and the men were living, and your
self have already acknowledged, that one such is worth an hundred of the
other.


Arch. You say true, but these were the bodies of holy men, and so were not
the other.


Latt. So much the worse, for the souls of these saints feel not the bad
handling of their bodies, they being now in bliss: but these wicked ones dying
in sin go to hell, and so perish both Soul and body.


Archb. It is as you say, but nevertheless it is an horrible thing that in our
days we should see such a bold and outrageous action.


Latt. Surely so it is, and yet is it not without cause, that God has suffered
it, for the deceipts were great that they used with these Relics to beguile
the simple people, and to get their money from them, for ye have many Relics
that they will show you in two or three several places, as if you go to Dura
in Almanie, they will there show you the head of Saint Anne, the mother of our
Lady, and the very same they will show you also at Lions in France, So that
manifest it is that one or both are false, unless they would have us believe
also that our Lady had two mothers, or Saint Anne two heads. And one or both
these being counterfeit, is it not a great wickedness thus to deceive the
people, and to worship a dead carcass that perhaps was of some thief hanged.
But tell me which think you to be the greatest inconvenience, either that we
should want the body of Saint Anne, or that under pretense of that relic,
they should make you worship the carcass of some common woman.


Arch. Surely I had rather there should neither be that relic nor any other,
then that they should make me worship a Sinner instead of a Saint.


Latt. Nay would you not rather that these bodies of Saint Anne, at Dura and
Lions, were put in a Sepulture and never showed, then that so many people
should be abused by them?


Arch. Yes surely.


Latt. And of this sort, ye had an infinite number of Relics in the world,
and little should be our loss, if we had none of them at all, and would to God
the inconveniences were so remedied. The foreskin of our Savior cut off in
circumcision, I have seen in Rome and in Burgos, and the very same they will
show you also at our Ladies Church in Antwerpe. Likewise the head of Saint John
Baptist, ye may see both in Rome and at Amians in France. But the Apostles if
we will count them, albeit there were indeed but twelve, and one of them not to
be found, and an other in the Indians, yet shall we find above 24. of them in
our part of the world. The Nails of the cross Eusebius writes were three, and
one of them Saint Hellen the mother of the Emperor Constantine threw into the
Adriatike sea to assuage a tempest, an other she caused to be cast into an
helmet for her Son, and of the third she caused a bridle to be made for her
horse, and yet have you in Rome one, and an other in Millaine, and an other in
Coloine, and an other in Paris, and an other in Lions, and I wot not how many
elsewhere, Then for the cross, if all the pieces which they show thereof
through Christendom, were gathered together, ye should have wood enough to
lade a Charects. And of the teeth that Christ changed when he was a Child, even
in France alone ye have at least five hundred. Then of the milk of our Lady,
of the heir of Marie Magdelen, and the teeth of Saint Christopher, there are
relics innumerable. And then even of the uncertainty of these things, it is a
great shame to see and hear what themselves give out to the people. My self
last day in a very ancient Abbey was showed a table of their Relics, and
there amongst other things it named a piece of the River of Cedron. I demanded
whether it were of the water or of the Stones of the River, they told me I
must not jest at their Relics, an other was of the earth, whereupon the Angel
did appear to the Shepherds, but I durst not ask them what they meant
thereby. If I should tell you of a number of their rediculous and impious
things which they will tell they have. As of the wing of Saint Gabriell, of the
penitence of Mary Magdalen, the breath of the Mule and Ox, of the shadow of
the staff of Saint James, of the doublet of the Trinity: a number of other
things like to these. It were enough to make us burst with laughing. Only I
will tell you, how within these few days in a collegiall Church they showed
me a ribbe of the holy Savior, whether they have any other savior then
Jesus Christ, or whether he left any ribbe here behind them, let them look.


Arch. These things indeed, as you say, are rather to be laughed at then
lamented.


Latt. You have reason, and therefore I come to the other things which be
uncertain, yea and if they were certain, yet are they stumbling blocks, to
make a man commit Idolatry, for they cause us to hold them in so great
reverence, as even in Aquisgrane, albeit they have no other relic but a pair
of old breeches, which they say were S. Joseph's, which they show not but every
five years once, there goes thither an infinite number of people to behold
them, as a thing divine, and of these matters we make so great accoumpt, as if
in one Church on the one side there stand in a shrine of Gold the slippers of
saint Christopher, and on the other side the holy Sacrament, the people will
rather choose to go say their prayers before ye slippers of S. Christopher then
before the sacrament, and this being so great a wickedness, they do not
only, not reprove it, but most willingly admit and allow it, in respect of
the great profit they gather by it, and the fine devises they have invented for
it. Let us see then which were the greater inconvenience, either to have no
relics at all in the world, or to have men thus abused by them?


Arch. I cannot tell, neither would I trouble my head with these profound
matters.


Latt. And how profound, which think you of greatest value, either the soul
of some simple body, or the body of a Saint.


Arch. This is out of question, that a soul is much better then a body.


Latt. Why then what reason have you (in seeking to honor the body of some
saints, as they say, which perhaps notwithstanding is the boddy of some thief)
to put in perrill so many souls?


Arch. You say the truth, and therefore may they very well thereof admonish
the ignorant and simple sort.


Latt. Very well, and yet even these that should admonish are many times
themselves ignorant, And yet besides all this, why should you put any one soul
in danger without necessity. Let us see if you would in this Town go to our
Ladies church of Prado, and knew not the way, would you not think it a very
great inhumanity, if any man would direct you through the River with great
danger to drown you therein, when you might more safelye and more quickelye
have gone over by the Bridge.


Arch. Yes surely.


Latt. And wherefore then do you seek after Relics?


Arch. Because many times they stir me to devotion.


Latt. And devotion to what end desire you?


Arch. To salve my soul.


Latt. Seeing then you may save your Soul without peril of damning it, would
you not rather choose the more safe way.


Arch. Yes, and our confessors also say it is a sin for us wittingly to put
our selves in danger to sin.


Latt. They say therein the very truth.


Arch. But yet what way have you of greater safety?


Latt. The same which Christ himself taught, to love God above all things, and
to put in him our whole trust.


Arch. You say the truth. But because I cannot do that, I go about to do this
other.


Latt. This is a great heresy to say you cannot do it, desire at least of God
grace to do it. But if you will say you do request it, and that God will not
do it, you make God a liar, who says, Ask and you shall have, And farther
what a blindness is this, do you think to go to heaven without fulfilling
of the commandments of God? albeit you have an Arm of a Saint, or the piece
of the Cross, or the whole Cross in your house, you may be an enemy to the
cross, and do you think to save your self by the Cross?


Arch. Surely I was deceived.


Latt. Then behold the common sort have so much more just cause to complain on
them that lead them into these and such other like superstitions, to put them
in danger of their souls, then you of him that should guide you through the
river with danger to drown you, as the soul is more worthy then the body.


Arch. Well but yet the common sort are more easilye by things visible induced
and directed to the invisible.


Latt. You say truly, and therefore has Jesus Christ left us his holy
sacrament of the Altar, and having this, I know not wherefore we have need of
any other.


Arch. And the true relics indeed, would you not have them kept and garnished
with Gold and Silver.


Latt. No surely.


Arch. Wherefore.


Latt. Not to give occasion of such another spoil, as this of Rome, nor yet to
make men think, that the Saints are pleased to possess these things, that
those which are good men do glory to contemn.


Arch. You say well, but do you not see yet that the Saints may be offended
with us for taking away the Gold and silver, wherein their bones be enclosed,
and being so offended, may do us some hurt?


Latt. No, rather I think they would be very well pleased to see those
things taken and employed on the poor, who many times perish for famine not
having what to eat.


Arch. That understand not I unless you explain your meaning better.


Latt. I will show you plainly, that Saint which whilst he lived in this
world, and had need of these goods, did nevertheless leave them and empart
them to the poor for the love of Christ Jesus, do you not believe that much
more he would be pleased, to have the same done now after his death when he
has no cause at all to use them?


Arch. Yes surely I think so, for we that be no Saints, yet when we die, and
cannot carry our goods with us, we are well pleased to give them to the
poor, and to divide them among Churches and Monasteries.


Lattan. Why then tell me wherefore should you think a Saint should be
grieved to have that done with his goods now he is dead, which himself would
have done if he were alive.


Arch. No surely I think a Saint would be very well pleased to see that done
with his goods now he is dead, which himself would have done if he were alive.


Latt. Then you see plainly, that the Saints who while they lived were so well
pleased to distribute their own goods among the poor would now much more be
pleased to help the poor with that silver and gold which good people have
presented unto them after they were dead.


Arch. So God save me this reason is very good, and I believe you say herein
also the very truth, and yet surely the common sort would be offended.


Lattan. No on my faith I dare assure you there would be no offense taken, if
it were provided that such superstitious people as regarded more their Bellye,
then the Glory of Christ Jesus should not go about to provoke them to
offense.


Arch. Surely for this matter I hold my self fully satisfied.


Lattan. Thus you see how Jesus Christ has suffered that in Rome so great a
Sack and spoil should be committed on Relics, to remedy the dec^iptes
that were committed by them.


Archde. Well, this I confess, so as you will also declare unto me touching
the small reverence used toward the Images, what the reason should be that
God would suffer that.


Latt. That I will tell you, neither will I deny that it was very ill done,
but God has permitted it not without very great cause, For you may see among
the common people, yea, and even among many of the principal persons also,
that they did so much repose themselves upon Images, and things visible,
that they had no care at all of the invisible. In my Country a very good Man,
a Divine, going a visitation of a Bishopric in the behalf of the Bishop,
found in one Church an Image of our Lady, which they said did many
Miracles, and was set over against an Altar of the Sacrament (in comparison
whereof all Images in the World are less then nothing) And yet thereunto
might you see them kneeling and knocking of their breasts before that Image of
our Lady. The good man when he saw so great an Ignominy, as was thereby done
to our Savior Jesus Christ, conceived so great a grief as he took away that
Image and brake it into pieces. The people so much were moved with this act,
that they would have killed him, but GOD delivered him out of their hands.
The Clergy of that Church being offended for their rentes, that thereby
they had lost, traveled with the people to complain to the Bishop, thinking
he would presently send to burn the poor visitator. The Bishop (like a wise
Man) understanding the matter how it passed, reproved the Visitor of the
contempt he had committed in breaking the Image into pieces, but commended
much his act in remoouing it from that place, so that seeing there was so few
such good Visitors in Christendom, that would be agreeued with the dishonor
done to GOD, and to take away such superstitious, God permitted these Soldiers
to commit that spoil you speak of, to the end that leaving all superstition
we should in such sort honor Images, as we do not dishonor Jesus Christ.


Archd. Surely this is a most Godly consideration and farther I promise you,
there is great need of remedy in this matter especially in Italy.


Latt. Nay, even here also as well as there: And if you will look well into
this matter, you shall see the very same deceipts in Images that were in
Relics.


Archde. I know you say truly, but I could tell you of another matter, that
even in thinking of it my flesh trembles.


Latt. Tell it me, and be not afraid.


Arch. Can you imagine a greater wickedness, then to break open the Pixe of
the Altar, and to let faule on the ground the holy Sacrament? Is it possible
any good can come of this? Oh Christian ears that can endure to hear it.


Latt. Good God and have you seen this too?


Arch. No, but surely all men say it was so.


Latt. That which I have heard was that a Soldier took the Pixe of Gold and
left the sacrament upon the Altar, and did not throw it down on the ground as
you say, but howsoever, it was a meruellous boldness, and worthy of great
correction: but in truth it is no new matter, but a thing that happens many
times among Soldiers, and the fault is theirs which choose rather to live in
war then in peace. But if it had never bin heard of before do you think this
to be the greatest abhomition that could be done? think you that it were not
much worse to throw it into a dunghill?


Arch. How? into a dunghill.


Lattan. I will tell you, but first tell me which stinketh woorst before GOD,
a dead Dog that lies upon a Doung hill, or a Soul that obstinatelye
continues in his sins.


Arch. A Soul, for Saint Augustine says, Quod tollerabilius fetet, Canis
putridus hominibus, quam anima peccatrix Deo.


Latt. Then you will not deuie me that a sinful soul is a foul filthy
dunghill.


Arch. No surely.


Lattan. Seeing then a Priest that rising in the Morning from his Queen (that
I say no worse) of course goes to say Mass. A Priest, I say, that holds
his Benefice by Symmonye, and carries in his heart mortal rancor against his
neighbor, that by right or wrong will heap up riches, becoming obstinate in
these and other vices, yea in much more worse then these go every day to
receive the Sacrament, do you not think that to let it fall in such an one, is
much worse then to let it fall into a stinkinge Dounghill?


Arch. You talk to me in a new language, I know not what to answer you.


Lattan. I meruell not though truth seem to you a new language: But behold now
how this is the cause that God has suffered these things to be done, that
Clerks seeing how great abomination it is to handle in this sort the Body of
Christ might thereby know and remember that themselves have handled it much
worse, that departing from their wicked manner of living, they might cleanse
their Souls from vices, and beautifye it with Virtues, that Christ might come
to dwell in them, and not to keep him as they do, bannished from them:


Arch. Now as God save me you have very well satisfied me in all my doubts,
and I was even now meruelling to see how blinded all men were in these
external things without having regard to the internal.


Lattan. You have very great reason to meruell, for in very truth it is a
great pity to see the false opinions wherein the common sort are drowned,
and how backwarde we are to become Christians, and how contrary our works
are to the Doctrine of Christ Jesus, and how we are burdened with
Superstitions, and in mine opinion all proceed from a pestiferous Avarice and
pestilent Ambition which at this time reigns much more among Christians, then
in any other time: to what purpose do you think, do they persuade the people
that an Image of Wood goes to recover Prisoners, and returns all sweating,
but only to allure the simple sort to make offeringes to that Image, to make
thereof their own profit, neither have they any fear of GOD in this sort to
abuse and deceive the people, as though our Lady had no other mean to
redeem Prisoners, but to take with her a wooden Image. And albe it, this be
a most ridiculous thing, yet do the common people by reason of their
authoritte believe it, and in this manner they make men also believe, that if
they cause so many masses to be said, with so many candles, at the second
sorrow that you shall recover that you have lost, O wretched sinner, know
thou not that in this superstition this cannot but be a work of the devil,
And were it not better thou should loose all that thou have in the world,
then that thou should introduce into a thing so holy, a thing so wicked.
Even of like accoumpt are these names, which you carry about your necks to
escape death by fire, by water, and the hands of enemies, enchantments and
charms made as the common people call them for men and beasts, I cannot
imagine how we came into so great a blindness, that we are fallen into a
manner of Gentillitie. He that will seek to honor a Saint, should travail to
follow his holy virtue, but now in liewe thereof, we chase Bulls upon his day,
besides many other abuses which are committed, we say and hold it a great
devotion, to kill four Bulls upon S. Bartholmewes day, and if we kill them not,
we are afraid that he will spoil our Vines, what greater gentilitye can you
wish then this? what is it less to hold devotion in killing four Bulls on his
day, then to sacrifice four Bulls unto S. Bartholmew? I do not think it ill,
that the people for recreation should assemble, chase, and kill Bulls on that
day, but I think surely that it is a wicked thing, to think that by such
acts we please God or his Saints: for in truth between killing of Bulls with
such intent, and sacrificing of Bulls, I know no difference. Will you see
another Heathenish custom, as plain as this, Behold how we have divided among
our Saints even the very same offices that the gods of Paynims had, instead of
Mars we have S. James and S. George. In liew of Neptune, S. Elmas. In liew of
Bacchus, S. Martine. Instead of Aeolus, S. Barbola. in liew of Venus,
Magedelena. The charge of Esculapius we have parted among many, S. Cosme, and
S. Daman have charge of common disceases, S. Roque and S. Sebastian of the
pestilence, S. Lucie of the eyes, S. Polonya of the teeth, S. Aquida the
Dugges, and of the other side S. Antony and S. Aloy of Beasts, S. Simon and
Judas of false witnesses, and S. Blas of those that neese, I know not to what
end these inventions serve, and this distribution of offices, but to make us
appear altogether Paynims, and to abandon the love and trust which in Christ
alone we ought to repose, tormoiling our selves in seeking such help of
others, as he alone is able to give us, and thereof it also comes, that some
think because they recite a heap of Psalms, or a flock of Rosarys: others
because they wear the habit of a Merced. Others because they eat no flesh on
wensdaies: others because they are clothed in Blew or yellow, that thereby
they want nothing of perfect Christians, reteining nevertheless their envy
still, their ranckor, their avarice, and their ambition, and other vices, as
entirely as if they had never heard what it is to a Christian.


Arch. And whence proceeds this as you think.


Latt. Nay enter me not into this Laborinth, more perrilous I think then that
of Creta, let that alone for an other day, and tell me if in your opinion I
have accomplished as much as at the beginning I promised.


Arch. I say you have performed it so fully, that I hold all well employed
that I have lost in Rome, and all the troubles and travails I have sustained
in this journey, seeing I have thereby gained such a day as this, wherein me
thinks I have shaken off from my self a pestiferous cloud of abominable
blindness and recovered the sight of the eyes of my understanding, which I had
lost ever since I was borne.


Latt. Seeing then you know this, give thanks unto God, and endeavor your
self not to be ungrateful for the same, and considering you remain
satisfied of all done there, it were reason you did also recount unto me that
which passed at Rome until your departure.


Arch. That shall I do with a very good will: you are to understand, that
after the Army entered into Rome, they placed a Guarde on the Castle, that
none should pass out nor in, and the Pope knowing the evident perrill he stood
in, and the small regard those Soldiers had of him he determined to take some
composition with the Emperors Captains, and therefore sent to parle with John
Bartlemew de Gateuera, Regent of Naples, and gave him certain conditions,
whereupon he was contented to render himself, to the end that on his part he
might offer them to the Captains of the army: and although that in going too
and to procure this agreement, he were shot throuh the Arm out of the Castle
with an Harquebuze, yet before the end of five days after, the army entered
Rome, the capitulation was concluded and signed on either part. Nevertheless
in this mean time the Pope receiving news how ye army of the legars came to
aid him he would not have that agreement executed.


Latt. Now surely, this me thinks was one of the most wicked things of all, ye
have yet told me, had not poor Rome already suffered enough for his sake, but
that he must endeavor utterly to destroy it. If the Army of the Legars
should come, it was to succor him, it was clear, they must fight with our
Army, and thereby great slaughter must ensue on either side, if then ours did
vanquish, the Pope and his party should fall into greater peril, but if these
did conquer them, must Rome be new sacked, why then had it not been better to
have taken any accord, rather then having before seen so great mischief, to
be yet the cause of many more murders of people, and of a new destruction.


Arch. Surely you have great reason, and much less inconveniences had it been
to have accepted any conclution, then the damage that must have ensued by he
succor of the Leagers. But so soon as the Emperors Army knew of this, they
presentlye marched out of the Town into the field, with resolution to fight,
But the Legars durst not come of the Island, where they had remained certain
days, and the Castle still held out, hoping on that succor, or at least
that some discord might fall out in the Emperors Army the General being
dead. But they ceased not all this while to make their Mines and trenches to
win the Castle, yea albeit the Prince of Orange that then remained the
chief commander, were also hurt with a shot. Then came Cardinal Collona,
with the Lords Vespasian and Ascaino Collonna, and they did remedy some part
of the evils that were committed. There came also the Viceroy of Naples, and
Don Hugo di Moncada, and the Marquess of Guasto, and the Lord of Alorcan, and
many other commanders and Knights, with the Soldiers of the kingdom of
Naples. And although in the mean time there ceased not shooting from the
Castle, yet in the end the Pope understanding that the Legars army returned,
and that there was no hope to be succored from them, he accorded for to
render up the Castle into the Emperor his hands, with these conditions, that
all the people within the Castle should go freelye whether they would, not
taking any thing that was within the Castle, And for ransom of their persons
and goods, the Pope promised to give 14. hundred thousand Duccats to pay the
Soldiers.


Latt. And how so, was it not inoughe that they had robbed before?


Arch. Yes sure it was enough, but that might not be reckoned any part of
their pay. And for security hereof, the Pope gave them in pledge that good
Creature John Mart Gibberto, Bishop of Verona, with three other Bishops, and
Jacob Salimato, with other two Merchants of Florence. And besides all this,
consented to leave in the Emperors power, till such time as they might know
what his Majesty would command) the Castle Angelo and Ostia, and Ciuita
Vechia, with the haven: and promised also to deliver the Cities of Parma and
Placentia and Modena, And his Holiness with the 13. Cardinals that were in the
Castle, went to the kingdom of Naples, even from thence to go see the Emperor.


Latt. Surely this was a good mean to do some good in Christendom.


Arch. So was it, but to tell you the truth, albeit they desired it should be
so reported (because they thought it ill to hold the Pope and College of
Cardinals against their will) they said it was their desire, but in Conclusion
they were gentill Prisoners.


Latt. What say you then, that himself desired not to go to Naples?


Arch. Yes but all this was but to make a virtue of necessity, for seeing he
sought to stay so many days in hope of succor from the Legars, do you not
think, that if he might have been at his own choice, he would not have been
rather in the Army of the Legars, then where he now is.


Latt. I cannot deny unto you, but it is very likely, but what can you tell if
afterward he changed his mind.


Arch. Now certainly I cannot tell, but I believe it not, neither do I think
it well, that the head of the Church should be handled in this manner.


Latt. Let us see then, is not a man that may avoid mischief bound to do it.


Arch. Who doubts that?


Latt. Should not he be blame worthy, that should give another cause to do
ill.


Arch. He should be in the same fault, for Qui causam damni dat, damnum dedisse
videtur:


Latt. You say very well, then behold, the Pope either is there with his will,
or against his will: if with his will, then is all well that you complain of,
but if against his will, then tell me wherefore would he be with the Army of
the Leagers.


Arch. Why that's plain to revenge himself of the insolency and hurtes he had
received.


Latt. Let us then see what would have fallen out.


Arch. What could have ensued but much discord, wars, murders, and damage
through Christendom.


Latt. Then to avoid these so apparent mischiefs, do you not think it better
that he should be in the power of the Emperor then elsewhere, albeit he
should be there against his will, according to that we talked of before
touching the Sun that kept his Father tied: and if the Emperor would have
let him go where himself list, should not the euilles have been iustlye
imputed to the Emperor that would have ensued, seeing he gave the cause
thereof.


Arch. I confess this too, but what will all both great and small say, but
that the Emperor holds the Pope and Cardinals prisoners.


Latt. This will ignorant persons say, whose judgment it is impossible to
satisfy, whereas the wise and prudent knowing it to be for the good of
Christendom, that the Pope should remain in the power of the Emperor, will
hold it, and account it very well done, and will highly praise, the virtue and
wisdom of his Majesty, yea even all Christendom may think themselves
perpetually bounden for it.


Arch. As for me I could be well content that he should be wheresoever ye
would have him, so as they would give me the possession of my benefices, but I
cannot tell whether you consider how they stand excommunicate.


Latt. And why so?


Arch. Because they have apprehended and hold against his will the chief
Pastor of the Church.


Latt. Behold sir he stands excommunicate that with a wicked meaning will not
obey the Church. But he that for the common weal of all Christendom
deteineth the people, and will not let him lose, only to avoid the evils which
would follow upon his delivery. Believe me he does not only stand not
excommunicate, but also meriteth much at Gods hands for it.


Archd. Surely this is a thing very likely and reasonable, but I know not
whether our Cannonists would grant you this.


Latt. That Cannonist that will not grant this, shall show himself void of
judgment.


Arch. I believe so too, but at one thing I was very greatly displeased, that
the Pope should presently give pardon to all the Soldiers of all whatsoever
they had done.


Latt. And why are you agreeued at that?


Arch. Because they remain all rich and pardoned, and we bewailing our
losses and sorrows.


Latt. Do you think that pardon of valiew? as much did he to the Collonesi,
he pardoned them first but after destroyed them. A gentle kind of pardon.


Archd. I cannot tell what I may believe, but that their souls were absolved,
and their purses damned.


Latt. Why then did you not stand against it?


Arch. Yes, even there about we went to leave our Skin with our goods,
things stood then in these terms, that you would pardon all past for that
that was to come, if you had seen the Pope as I saw him.


Latt. Where?


Arch. In the Castle.


Latt. And why went you thither?


Arch. There were certain benefices fallen in my Country by the death of an
neighbor of mine, and I went to demand them.


Latt. An extraordinary boldness was this surely: Were you not ashamed in
such a time to importune him with suits?


Arch. No surely, for a shamefast man the Devil will soon chase out of the
Palace, and many more were there to beg them as well as I, and sure I had as
leeue prevent as be prevented.


Latt. Well, I tell you again, that most terrible is the Avarice of the
Clergy.


Arch. A wondrous matter I promise you: and wherefore do you suppose, do we
of the Clergy come to Rome?


Latt. I thought it had been for devotion.


Arch. Yes iwis, now surely I was never in my life less devout.


Latt. Nor yet less a Christian.


Arch. Well Sir, even as it please you so let it be.


Latt. On my word, if I had been Pope you should not have benefices only for
early rising, seeing that after so notable a persequution, you had not left
your covetousness.


Arch. Yea even for this is God very good, that he would not give us you, but
Clement the 7. who gave it me presently with a very good will, although I went
in the habit of a Soldier as you see me.


Latt. Now I promise you this was even an immesurable clemency, but tell me
how found you him.


Arch. I found both him and all the rest of the Cardinals and others about him,
so sad and sorrowful, that even in beholding of them, the tears burst out of
mine eyes, He that had seen him go in his triumph with so many Cardinals,
Bishops, protonotaries a foot, and himself carried in a seat borne by men,
bestowing upon us all his holy blessings, that he seemed even a thing divine:
and now to see him solitarye, sad, afflicted, comfortless, committed to a
Castle, and that above all, is in the power and hands of his ennemies, and
besides all this, to see the Bishops and other persons Ecclesiastical that
came to visit him to be all in Soldiers apparel, and that even in Rome the
head of the Church should not have a man that durst go in the habit of an
ecclesiastical person: I know not what heart can be so indurate, that hearing
these things, should not be persed with compassion.


Latt. Immeasurable God how profound are thy judgments? with how great
clemencye do thou suffer us? with how great goodness do thou call us? with
how great patience do thou tarry us? whilst that we with the continuation of
our sins do provoke against our selves even the rigor of thy Justice, and
consequently both in the one and in the other do show us thy mercy and
infinite goodness, for all o Lord we yield thee infinite thanks knowing that thou
do it not, but for our great good: for he that had seen ye majesty of that
Roman court, such and so great Cardinals and Bishops, such and so many Cannons,
Protonotaries, Abbets, Deacons, and Archdeacons, so many Chamberleins, some
ordinary, some extraordidary, so many Auditors, some of ye chamber, and others of
the Chauncerie, so many Secretaries, so many Scribes, some of Bulls, some of
Writtes, so many Abreuiators, so many Aduotates, Doctors, and Proctors, and a
thousand other kind of officers as were in that Court, and to have seen them
all come with that triumph and pomp to that Palace, who would have said we
should have had such and so sudden a change as this I have now heard off. Now
do I know that with the rigor of pain he does recompense the delay of
punishment.


Arch. Seeing also that in truth the Cardinals were feign to dismiss their
families because they had nothing left to buy bread for them to feed upon.


Latt. Yet one thing does comfort me that at least so long as they continue in
this estate they shall the more liuelye represent those they should.


Arch. Who is that?


Latt. Jesus Christ and his Apostles.


Arch. You say truth, but in this case I had rather represent Pope Iulio with
his triumphs, but tell me I pray you how did the Emperor take these injuries
that in Rome his Army had committed against the Church?


Latt. I will tell you: immediately after the certain news came of the evils
that happened at Rome, the Emperor showing his compassion, caused the feasts
that were made for the birth of his Son Don Philip to cease.


Arch. And do you think that it grieved him.


Latt. And what do you think?


Arch. Now surely I cannot tell, for on the one side I see things that should
displease him, and on the other things that should content him, and therefore
do I demand that question of you.


Latt. And I will tell you, The Emperor is surely even indeed a very good
Christian, and does so hold all his actions and accidents recommended and
committed to the hands of God, as he takes all chances in the best part, and
therefore it comes, that we never see him either in prosperity overmuch to
rejoice, or in adversity to be agreeued, So that by his utter appearance, it
is not possible for any man to Judge, but surely I think, that in this, as
in all other things he will not leave for to conform himself to that which
shall please almighty GOD.


Arch. But in good faith sir, what think you now, his Majesty will do in a
matter of so great importance as this, now in truth he had need of very good
council, for if at this time he do reform the Church (seeing now all men
know what need there is besides the service which he should do unto God, he
shall attain even in the world the greatest fame and glory that ever Prince
attained. And men will say even to the end of the world, that Jesus Christ
framed the Church, and the Emperor Charles which restored it, and if he do not
this, albeit all fell out against his will, and that he had or have the best
meaning in the world, it will not be possible to excuse him, but that there
will fall into men's minds a very hard conceit of him, neither do I know
what will be said of him after he is dead, nor what accoumpt he can give unto
God, for having omitted and not known how to have used so notable and great an
opportunity as now he has to do unto God, so notable a service, and so
incomparable a good unto the Universal commonweal of Christendom.


Latt. The Emperor as I told and tell you, is indeed a very true Christian,
and very prudent, and has about him persons very wise in his Council, I hope
he will provide for all to the glory of God, and good of Christendom. But
seeing you ask me this question, I will not forbear to tell you my opinion,
and that is as touching the first. The Emperor should.


Porter. What now my masters, the Church was made to pray in, and not to
prate in. Ye may go forth and please you for I will shut the door.


Latt. Well Father we will away by and by.


Porter. And you will not out I will lock you in.


Arch. That were a gentill piece of courtesy, but I think that Saint Frauncis
has given you noe such commandment.


Porter. What care I for Saint Frauncis commanndements.


Latt. I believe you well Father, let us go we shall have some other time to
finish that is left.


Arch. I would be wounderfull glad to hear out that you began, but seeing it
is thus, let us go a Gods name, upon condition that we return hither again
to morrow morning.


Latt. Nay let us rather meet at Saint Bennits, least this Friar turn us out
again.


Arch. You say well Sir, let it be even so, but in the mean time, Read I pray
you this Prayer in manner of a new Pater noster, made by our Spaniards in
couples that they soung even under the window of our high Bishop.

Padre nuestro in quanto Papa,
Soys Clemeynte sin que os quadre
Mas Rennego yo deel padre,
Que al bijo quita la Capa, etc

FINIS.

