THE SVPPRESSING OF THE ASSEMBLY OF THE PRETENDED Shee-Iesuites.

By the Edict of our most holy Father and Lord, VRBANVS, Dei Gratia.

The eight (of that name) now Pope of Rome.

Translated out of the Low Dutch Coppie, Printed at Bruxells.

LONDON Printed for Nathaniell Butter, and Nicholas Bourne. 1631.

Vrbanus, Bishop, Servant of the servants of God, to everlasting Memory.
THe Pastoral care and vigilance of the Romish Pope (unto whom the Vineyard of
the Lord of Sabbath, through the unspeakable providence of the chiefest and
supreamest Father of the Family, is committed) does chiefly aim at this
scope, that no Laborers shall presumptuously intrude themselves into this
Vineyard without being lawfully called and elected, who may destroy the good
seed, root out the well-growing, make weeds to spring up, and mix evil
bastard branches among the good plants.

Notwithstanding that there has been made a very sharp and strong
prohibition, by the Christian Ordinances of the General Lateran Council, and
the Council of Lions, that no person should dare to ascribe so much power to
himself, or take upon him to bring in innovations in Religion, and that
likewise by the godly Institutions of our predecessors of blessed Memory, John
the 22. and Clemens the fifth, Popes of Rome, all assemblies of Women,
instituted by their own power and authority, was clean cut off, and rooted
out, and condemned as most dangerous and pernicious. Nevertheless, (as we
have understood not without great grief and sorrow of heart) there are in
diverse parts of Italy, and of the Netherlands, certain Women and Maidens,
which have boldly and presumptuously taken upon them the name of Shee-Iesuites,
without the consent and approbation of the Holy Apostolical Chair. These have
of late years made Convents and Assemblies, under pretense, and show, of
leading a devout and religious life. They have used a singular kind of habit,
differing from all other, built Edifices and Houses in manner of Colleges,
erected places named by the name of Novitiate, or trial and probation. In
these builded Colleges they have established one to be General, and governo
over the whole Assembly, giving them Styles of Shee-Provosts; Ascribing and
taking upon them such power and authority, as seemed good unto themselves.
Making Vows and Protestations of Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience, and these
to stand for sound and solemn Vows, having no ground nor warrant for this
their Obedience, but only their own pleasure and well seeming, (all under
this Cloak and pretense of promoting Souls salvation) taking upon them (not
withstanding their Vow) to walk freely about the Streets, and to perform such
works and businesses, which go beyond the weakness, and capacity, and
brain of that sex. And which do in no wise beseem and befit the modesty
and civilitie of Women, and especially the Virgin Chastity. Yea, such things,
which godly and learned men, well experienced in the holy Scriptures, being of
great knowledge and honest life, are wont to exercise and practice, not without
a great deal of trouble, and much difficulty.

We therefore desiring and laboring by all means, in time to extirpate and
root out, all weeds and briars out of the field of the holy Militant Church,
have Commanded and Charged our Reverend Brother Aloysius, Bishop of Tricariken,
Ours and the Holy Apostolical Chaires Nuntius in the Countries of
Lower-Germany, as also diverse other Ordinaries, that they finding and
perceiving the great dangers and scandalls which do thence arise, should (in
the name of our Apostolical Authority,) earnestly admonish, and forewarne,
and exhort the aforesaid Women and Maidens, to withdraw themselves from such
intended courses and practices, and to betake themselves to better and wiser
ways and devises.

But whereas these presumptuous Women, contemning and despising the fear of
God, and Us, and abusing the great respect due unto the Apostolical Sea, to
the great prejudice of their own souls, and offending of many good religious
people, have not only not obeyed our Fatherly and Godly admonitions, but have
not been ashamed to continue and go on in these their idle practices, and to
broach and produce many things contrary to the Godly Truth and Doctrine of the
Church. We have now earnestly resolved to prevent such a farther contempt and
presumption, with a sharp and bitter sentence and penalty. And to root out
and extirpate all such plants and sprouts utterly, being so infectious,
pernicious, and hurtful to the Holy Church, for fear least they spread
themselves farther, if they be not suppressed.

Therefore having held wise and provident Counsel with our Honorable
Brothers, the Cardinals of Rome, and the General Inquisitors, specially
deputed against all evil Heresies of the said Sea, with unanimous Counsel and
Consent, according to the Decrees of the foresaid Counsels, adhering to the
Institutions of our Predecessors, We have tituled the said Convents and
Congregations of the said Women or Maidens, Shee-Iesuites. And doomed their
sect and State, from the first beginning of their Institution, by our
Apostolical Authority. And do by the tenor of this present Edict of Ours,
declare the same to be void and of none effect or power, and that the same is
of no worth, neither ever was.

And because they have proceeded with the very action and execution of this
their profession, We do by our Apostolical Authority, utterly suppress and
annihilate the same, and make them subject to eternal abolition, and take
away, and cut off the same from the most holy Church of God. Willing and
ordaining, that the same Order of Women and Maidens, shall of all Christian
believing people, be held for suppressed and abolished, extinguished, utterly
taken away, and extirpated. Neither will We that the same Women or Maidens
shall any ways be tied, or obliged to perform the solemn Vow which they so
strongly have made to this purpose.

Furthermore, We will, ordain, and declare, that all Shee-Visiters,
shee-registrices, and shee-Provosts, as all other Shee-Governants and
Officialls of the said Congregation and sect, by what name or title they may be
named or called, shall by power of this our Edict be deprived of the Office,
service, or place which they have taken upon them to perform or execute.

We do likewise absolve all and every Woman or Maiden, which under pretense
of a solemn Vow, has (upon whatsoever occasion in this kind) bound or
obliged her self to any obedience tending to this Order, and utterly free them
from such Vow and Obligation. Yea even those that have in this nature tied
themselves by approbation of an Oath.

Furthermore, We do ordain, and command all Women or Maidens, and their
aforementioned Governors, named or dignified with the foresaid or other
manner of titles, (by virtue of the holy obedience due unto Us, and upon
penalty of our Bull, and farther Excommunication, which they will presently
incur, and from the which they cannot be absolved by any but our self, and
whosoever shall be Pope of this holy City of Rome) to depart, and separate
themselves from all those Colleges, or Houses where they are assembled,
prohibiting them to have any more meetings or assemblies together, to consult,
confer, or treat together, or perform either spiritual or temporal
exercises. Willing and charging them presently and speedily to abandon and
dismiss the manner of habit supposedly and fally taken upon them, and never to
put on the same any more, neither to admit any other Women or Maidens to
receive and put on the same. As also that they with their consent shall not
suffer, nor counsel, help, or favor others to do it directly or indirectly,
or in any manner whatsoever, neither shall they profess themselves, or make
known themselves to be religious persons, followers of that pretended sect and
Congregation.

For the better suppressing of which Assembly, We do freely and willingly
absolve all those Women and Maidens, who have really and punctually made their
Vows (as We said before) with that intention, being in such an estate,
condemned and reprobated by the Apostolical Chair, although they have not
performed the promised conditions of their secret Vows, nor could not perform
the Obligation of their Vows fully.

But all those who in any case have made Vows, (being they are simple Vows to
live honestly and religiously, being separated from the other, and this
reprobate State, and the pretended sect and Assembly, shunning and avoiding
whatsoever has by this Edict been prohibited, these We permit to submit
themselves to the obedience of the Ordinary, with the use, but nor the full
command of their Goods, but with such power which We mercifully grant them,
both in their lives, and before their decease to dispose of them to holy and
pious uses. Nevertheless this provided, that the same Goods shall, without any
will or Testament befall, and be derived unto those, which by right and equity
were to succeed in them, and to inherit the same, if so be that these women
or maidens had not made such a vow of voluntary poverty.

And in case any of these afore-sayd women or maidens would betake themselves
to the estate of Matrimony we grant them free permission to marry: but with
this proviso, that they shall keep that which therein is to be observed, and
we do afford them our Apostollicall Benediction, and as far as necessity
requires, the relaxation and quittance of all their vows (as aforesaid) made
by them.

But because the Apostle teaches, that he that marries does well, but he
that remains unmarried does better, we do therefore, as earnestly, and with
as much power as we can, admonish and exhort those afore-sayd women and
maidens, by the mercies of God, in our fatherly love and care, that they would
but recall and truly consider, the zeal and affection which they have had to
embrace a holy, Religious, and Spiritual life, and to take upon them the Lords
yoke, and that they renounding themselves, and all worldly luses, cares, and
concupiscences, would betake themselves into some holy and religious order
instituted and approved of by this Holy Apostollicall Chair. And there with a
faithful, holy and godly desire, and intentions, make their vows unto the God
of Jacob: and with innocence of hands, and purity and sincerity of heart,
practizing and performing holy spiritual exercises of Religious works, would
manifest themselves to be the purest and pretioust part of Christ's Sheep and
Flock. And there kindle their lamps with the flames of Love, and so prepare
themselves to mere the sweet heavenly Bridegroom of their souls.

Thus then we do ordain, that these present Letters, and all the Contents of
the same, yea notwithstanding, that the women or maidens of such a Sect and
Assembly, or any other, having some suspicion or seruple of the Premises, or
pretending to have, should not have consented unto the same, or have not been
summoned and heard in the matter. And that the reasons of this same Edict,
alleged, verified, and otherwise sufficiently justified, shall at no time
whatsoever hereafter be subject to subreption, or obreption, nullitie, or
invaliditie, or accounted wanting in our intentions. Or be accused of any
fault or defect, how great, unthought of, or substantial the same might be;
neither be lessened or dimished. No not although that in the afore-sayd
business, the Solemnities, and all other things before said, which ought to
have been kept and observed, were not prosecuted, observed, and performed, Nor
by reason of some Capital point or Clause in Law, Ordinance, or Use, nor by
reason of any total breach or prejudice, nor under pretense or any other
excuse or cloak whatsoever: nor conclution of Law, nor any just reasonable and
and privileged reason, which for the strength and validity of the Premises,
ought to have been produced or performed. Yea although that of our aforesaid
will and pleasure, could no ways nor no where appear, nor be made good or
manifested otherwife, yet the same shall not be impugned, opposed, made
invalidable, be brought into Law, be controverted, nor be brought upon
terms of Law. Neither shall any easement, making of way, terms and times
granted by Law, or any other Judicial acts and remedies of favor, grace, or
Justice be obtained, or any way granted in this behalf. Neither shall it be
lawful for any one who has obtained such easements, to use or employ them, or
benefit and help himself with such means in or without the Law. Neither
shall these letters of ours be comprehended under any other equal or unequal
favors, which in time to come shall be recalled, suspended, held back, or
which might otherwise in time to come be disposed of: but these shall ever be
excepted and exempted, and shall for ever hereafter stand firm and
unalterable, and have their full force vigor and perfect effect. And shall be
observed and obeyed infringeable and vnviolable, of all those whom they do
concern, or shall concern hereafter. And thus (and no otherwise) in this
matter afore-sayd shall it be judged, by all Judges, Ordinaries, Delegates, by
the Auditors also of the affairs and matters concerning the Apostollicall
Palace, and the Cardinals of the holy Romish Church: Legates and the Nuntius,
and all others of whatsoever authority or power they are or shall be, in all
Instances and Judgments, depriving them all of all authority and power of
judging otherwise. Wherefore we do declare whatsoever shall be contrary, or
be attempted contrary to this our fore-sayd Edict and Letters, of whatsoever
Authority the same may be found, to be frustrate, quite void, and of none
effect, whether the same be undertaken wittingly or ignorantly.

Furthermore, for the better execution of this our will and pleasure, we do
command by Apostollicall Edict and Writing, all our Reverend Brothers, and
well-beloued Sons, Ours, and the Apostollicall Chaires Nuntius, all
Patriarchs, Superiors or Governors of the Church; Archbishops, Bishops, and
Ordinaries, wheresoever they are seated; that as soon as our present letters
shall come to them, or any of them, or shall any way be made known unto them,
solemnly to publish them, and cause them to be published: and to put the
same, and cause them to be put, in some place fit for that execution, either by
themselves or others, as they shall find fit and expedient in the Lord. Also
We will and command them, earnestly to sensure by sentence, and severely to
punish by Spiritual punishment, and other just and reasonable means, which
may constrain and compel them. All those who are rebellious, gaine-saying,
and will not obey our fore said Edict, debarring them, and depriving them from
all manner and way of appeal, refuge, and recalling, employing to this end,
the Temporal Magistrate, as far as shall be found requisite and necessary.
Notwithstanding (as far as shall be necessary) the Constitutions of Boniface
the eight, our Predecessor, of blessed Memory, instituted one, and the
General Counsel of two days Journey, and all other contrarying.

And to the end that this present Edict, and the Contents thereof may be made
known and manifested to all men, and no man may pretend or plead ignorance,
We likewise will and command, that the same, be by one, or diverse of our
Couriers affixed and published upon the Church door of Lateran, and Saint
Peter the Prince of the Apostles of this City, and of the Apostollicall
Chaunceries. And upon the Corner of the Flower-field. And when the Copies shall
be taken off, reprinted, and distributed abroad, which be thus affixed and
published, all those (within two months after the day of the said Publication)
whom it does concern any way, shall thereby be so tied and obliged, as if
notice of the same were given to their own persons. Also that all the Copies
thereof printed, being sealed with the feale of any Person placed in Spiritual
Dignity, and subscribed by the hand of a Notarius Publicus, shall have so much
credence and belief given thereunto, as ought to be given unto this present,
if so be it were extended and showed.

I^ is not lawful therefore for any one whosoever, to transgress these our
Letter of Suppression, annihilating, subjection, extenuation, and our
Ordinances of Privation, Ablation, Obsolution, Remission, and Our Commandment
of Declaration, Permission, Favor or Grace, Admonition, Desires, Will and
Pleasure; or to oppose the same, or contrary the same, through bold and
impudent presumption. For whosoever shall dare to undertake and presume so
much, the same shall fall into the wrath and indignation of God Almighty, and
of his holy Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul.

Given at Rome by Saint Peter, in the Year 1630. the thirteenth of January,
and the eight Year of Our Papacy. E. Dat. A. Rondininus.
Viewed and examined in the Council. A. Durandus. C. Montanus.

Registered in the Secretary of Roles.
In the name of God, Amen. In the year of our Lord Jesus Christ 1930. the one
and twentieth day of May, being the fourteenth Indiction, in the ninth year of
the Papacy of the most Holy Father in Christ, and our Lord Vrbanus the eight,
by the Providence of God, Pope of Rome.

The fore-sayd Letters were published, and held at the Church door of Lateran,
and Saint Peter the Prince of the Apostles of this City, and of the
Apostollicall Chauncerie: and on the Corner of the Flowerfield; As the manner
is. By me Augustine de Bolis Roman Courier of our most Holy Father the Pope.

Mathias Spada Courier-master. F. Aertsb. of Comp. Nuntius.




FINIS.

