A VERY PROFITABLE AND NECESSARY DISCOVRSE CONCERNING THE observation and
keeping of the Sabbath day, serving as well to confute the superstition of the
Jews, which obstinately urge the strict keeping of the seventh day, as also to
overthrow the vain and godless reasons of others, that stiffely at this day
maintain, that Christians ought to keep no set or appointed time to worship
and serve the Lord in, in his Church and faithful Congregation.

WRITTEN IN LATIN BY ZAcharias Vrsinus, sometimes Reader of the Divinity
lecture in the University of Heidelberg in Germany, and very newly turned
into English, by John Stockvvood Schoolmaster of Tunbridge.

AT LONDON Imprinted for John Harrison the younger 1584.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL AND Virtuous Lady, the Lady Pellam of Laughton in
the County of Sussex, John Stockwood Schoolmaster of Tunbridge, wishes a
plentiful increase of all spiritual and heavenly graces, and in the life to
come, the perfect and full fruition of joys everlasting.
BEing not ignorant (right worshipful and virtuous Lady) of the manifold
disputations not only among the learned, but also of the great variety and
diversity of opinions among the vulgar people and simple sort, concerning the
Sabbath day, and the right use of the same: some with the wayward and
superstitious Jews obstinately and stiffly maintaining the ceremonial
observation of the seventh day, Sundry opinions concerning the Sabbath day.
the which they hold in no wise to be mutable, or to be altered and changed:
others with the Atheists and godless Epicures utterly denying, that there
ought to be any observation and keeping of any day at all as wholly and
dedicated unto the Lord his service: and yet moreover some others, who albeit
they grant it meet and requisite that there should be some certain and set
day of the week severed out from the rest for the use of the ministry and
Church meetings, yea and the same also to be that day which we commonly call
the Sunne-day, or Lords day, yet holding it lawful as well on the same day, as
any other day in the week, to exercise the customable and usual works, every
man of his ordinary trade and vocation: I have thought with my self that I
could not do better the^ to see: out a remedy for the staying of the
consciences of the weaker number in this great variety and doubtfulnes of
assertions, tending to the overthrow of religion and impeachment of gods
service. Meeting therefore with a godly and learned Work of one Vrsinus a
German in the which are profou^dly and pithily handled many theological
discourses and points of religion, and among the rest, this of the Sabbath, in
his exposition of the 4. co^ma^dement, finding the argument sit for the
circumstance of the time, I have turned the same into our mother tongue, for
the further benefit of the godly and christianly disposed, that they may have
in this point wherewith to satisfy both themselves and others. For in this small
treatise is debated the right use of the Sabbath day, The Argument and contents
of this treatise.
what exercises on the same are allowable and what to be refrained, wherein it
is kept, and wherein it is broken: their argument confuted, that think it not
lawful for Christians to keep the the Lords day, and their reasons also
answered, which so stoutly contend for the Jewish observation of the seventh
day: al these things being proved with most strong and evident proves out of
the word of God and holy scriptures, and that in such sort, that the like is
hardly to be met withal in so brief and short a Pa^phlet or treatise. The
necessity heerof is apparent in regard of the time, wherein is so diversely
disputed concerning this question: the profit likewise shall easily (I doubt
not) be reaped of all such as with single hearts and upright minds shall
diligently and without parcialitie peruse the same.

This my small labor, such as it is (simple and slender I confess, in regard
of my pains in tra^slating, but much behoueful and auailable, in regard of the
matter, for the church and people of god) I make bold to offer unto to the
gentle acceptance of your good Ladyship, for many causes.

First, that besides the many other heavenly graces of faith, knowledge of
the will of God, love unto his everlasting truth and holy Scriptures, care to
walk in life and conversation accordingly: with making much of the professors,
and chiefly the preachers of the same: it may be a further spur unto you, to
the stirring up and increasing of your godly zeal for the Lord his service
and careful sanctifying of his holy Sabbath, not only in your own person,
but also in your whole familye: so that it may be truly said of you, to the
glory of God and comfort of his people, as we read of that good and virtuous
captain Iehoschuahh: I and my household will serve the Lord. For albeit the
number be small, and the people few that have a due regard of christian spending
the Lords day, in hearing the word preached, in receiving the sacraments, in
prayer, supplication, and thanksgiving, and in private co^ferring with their
families at home, of the word publiky preached (the greatest multitude both of
men and women of all degrees and callinges, letting loose the raynes, and
giving out the bridle unto all kind of vanities and licentiousness) yet let
this be your crown and glory (good madame) letting these go, to have imitated
and followed the example of those virtuous gentlewome^ of Thessalonica, whose
praise is in the Gospel, Act. 17.2 3.4.
for their great diligence in reverent observing the Sabbath day, and in usual
frequenting and resorti^g to hear the word, for the great comfort of their
souls. And further, in the same place is the example of the godly women of
Beroea commended, who not of custo^e, Act. 17.10.11.12
but of zeal, not of constraint, but with all willingness, not as sad and
heavy, but with all readynesse and ioyfulnesse, not only heard the word
preached by Paul and Silas, at the public assemblies and meetings of the
Church, but also used daily and private conference in their houses at home, in
serching the Scriptures, whether the things were so or no. How comfortable is
that also which we read in the 16. of the Acts, Act. 16.12.13.14.15.
of the practice of the zealous women of Philippos, who in the coldness and
slacknesse of men (as may appear, and very probably be gathered) customablie
assembled to the river without the City, to hear Paul preach on the Sabbath,
where by the opening of the heart of Lydia, it pleased the Lord by the
conversion of one poor woman to begin his kingdom in Macedonia, which woman
is praised not only for religiousnesse in her self, but also for her whole
family, being godly and christia^lie disposed. For the text does mention,
that she was baptized, and all her house: which Sacrament (no doubt) the holy
Apostle would not have administered unto the^, unless he had found in them the
fruits and testimonies of true Christianity: Read the Epistle of S. John
unto the elect lady
And here at no hand may we let pass the worthy commendation, which John
gives unto the most virtuous and worshipful Lady and her children, whose
conversation before the world was agreeable unto their profession, according as
the truth of the Lord requires that it should be. Which singular and notable
example, as it generally concerns al christian and godly women, so does it
most neerelie and properly belong unto your good Ladyship, and all other
gentle women of your place and calling. To. 15.4.
For, if whatsoever examples of the old fathers in the Scriptures are written
for our learning, that by reading their examples, we should express and
follow their virtues, then doubtless are all women of great worship and
dignity of this godly Lady to learn, that it is not sufficient that they be
religious and godly themselves, but that they also labor to have their whole
families and households unfeignedly to fear the Lord, which thing cannot be
performed without the diligent hearing of the word on the Lords day, and other
meetings of the Church, and private laboring in instructing and daily
teaching of our charges at home, the which good exercise, as I can hope for at
the hands of many, so I can promise and assure my self, that it shall be
carefully practiced of your W. of whom I hear so well for zeal and love of
the truth, nothing doubting but that being compassed about with so great a
cloud of witnesses, He. 12.1.2
whose care has been so vehement and earnest for the true spending of the
Sabbath, and Christian education of their famylies, with performance of other
duties of Godliness, all lets and stumbling blocks being removed, you will
daily add unto that great good forwardnes, which the lord has wrought in you
alredie a plentiful increase in all virtues, beautifying and garnishing a
Christian Lady, God by his holy spirit working in your heart a burning
desire every day more and more to imitate the commendable examples of these
holy matrones before alleged.

Secondly, having received many benefits at the hands of that worthy Knight,
sir John Pellam, your late deceased husband, a Gentleman so well deserving of
his common wealth and Country, that very envy her self, if never so feign
she would, shall yet never be able to bury in the dark lake of oblivion his
due deserved praises: I have thought it meet and requisite to give out before
the world some dutiful testimony of a thankful mind in regard of the same,
least I might worthily be condemned of that vice which is both hated of God
and detested of men, I mean the foul stain of ingratitude, which the very
Heathen have recorded to be the chief ringleader unto all filthiness,
Xenopho^ In his first ^ooke of ^he edu^ation of Cyrus.
as being always accompanied with blushles shamelessness, which may easily
persuade unto al kind of wickedness.

Thirdly, in regard of your own W. omitting such good graces, as are
generally known by the working of God his spirit to be in you, to the comfort
of the godly, (because that you of your modesty cannot abide to hear them,
nor I without suspicion of flattery may be thought to name them) the
particular knowledge of undeserved gentleness from your good L. meant unto me,
most worthily craves some dutiful signification of my grateful remembrance
of such most courteous kindness, the which, because my poor ability will
suffer no other way to express, accept (I most humbly beseech you) these
paper thanks, until God shall offer some fitter occasion to testify that
unfeigned thankfulness, which your singular courtesy most justly does
require, praying in the mean season the Lord, most abundauntlie in this life
to direct you in all your ways to his glory, and joy of his chosen, and in
the life to come to make you partaker of those unspeakable blessings, which in
most rich mercy he has prepared for all those that in his Christ do truly
fear and serve him, to whom be all glory both now and for ever Ame^. From
Tunbridge, the 20. of Oct. 1584.

Your W. most humble John Stockwood, Schoolmaster of Tunbridge.

A RIGHT Godly and learned exposition upon the fourth Commandment, concerning
the Sabbath, and right use of the same.
The fourth Commandment. REmember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Six
days shall thou work, and do all thy work: but the seventh day there
shall be a Sabbath unto the Lord thy God. Thou shall do no work, neither
thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy servant, nor thy maid, nor thy
cattle, nor the stranger which is within thy gates. For in six days the
Lord made heaven, earth, the sea, and whatsoever are in them, and rested the
seventh day, and therefore he blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.
The exposition.
THere are two parts of this law, the commandment, and the reason of ye same.
And again, there are two parts of the commandment, of the which the one is
moral or everlasting, namely, that the Sabbath be hallowed, What is moral
and for ever in this commandment. What is ceremonial and for a time.
that is to say, that some certain time be appointed for the ministry of
the Church, or public worship of God. The other is ceremonial, and for a
time, namely, that this time should be the seventh day, and that in it should
be observed and kept the ceremonies of the Leuiticall law. And that this part
is for a time, and the other everlasting, we do understand by the end of the
commandment, and causes of both these parts.

The end of the commandment. The Ministry.
The end of the commandment is the public praising of God in the
congregation, or the conservation or maintenance and use of the ministry of
the Church, which is an office ordained by God, to teach the Church concerning
God and his will out of the word of God delivered by the Prophets and Apostles,
and to minister the sacraments according to the ordinance of God. And God
would have at all times of the world that there should be public assemblies of
the Church, in the which should sound true doctrine concerning God, for these
causes especially.

Causes of ordeining the ministry.
not only privately, but also with the public voice of the Church in this
life, Psalm. 68. In the Congregations bless ye the Lord.

The second: that the public and ordinary He has given some Apostles, others
Prophets, others Evangelists, others Pastors, and Doctors unto the work of
the ministry, unto the edifying of the body of Christ: until we all come
unto the knowledge of the Son of GOD, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of
the stature of Christ full grown, that we be no longer children, which do
waver, and are carried about with every wind of doctrine, etc. The third: that
one should provoke I will show forth thy name unto my brethren, in the midst
of the congregation will I praise thee: ye that fear the Lord praise him, the
whole seed of Jacob The fourth: that consent and agreement in doctrine, and in
the worship of God might be kept in the church. Ephesians. 4. He has given Pastors
and Doctors unto the growing together of the Saints, until that we all
attain unto the unity of faith. The fifth: that the But have they not heard?
yea the sound of them has gone forth into all the earth, and their words into
the ends of the world. 2. Cor. 2. Thanks be unto God, who causes, that we
always triumph in Christ, and by us in all places does make manifest the savor
of his knowledge. For we are the good savor of Christ unto God, in those which
are saved, and in those which do perish: to these the savor of death unto
death, and unto them the savor of life unto life. Luc. 2. Behold he is set up
unto the fall and rising again of many in Israel, and for a sign that shall
be spoken against, that the thoughts may be laid open out of many hearts.

These causes appertain not unto any one certain time, but unto al times of
the Church and of the world. Therefore God will always have the ministry of
his Church preserved, and the use and exercise thereof frequented, practiced,
and haunted: The moral part of this commandment perpetual and everlasting.
and therefore the kind of this commandment, or the moral part thereof, from
the beginning of the world even unto the end, does bind al men, namely that
some Sabbath be kept, yt is to say, yt some time be appointed for sermons, and
public prayers, and ministering of ye sacraments. But contrariwise ye seventh
day was appointed by God unto the ministry even from the beginning of ye
world, to signify, The causes of the seventh day.
that men after the example of God ought to rest from their works, that is to
say, from their daily labors belonging unto this life, but especially from
sin, and give them selves wholly unto the meditation and thinking upon, and
unto the praising and setting forth of the works of God.

And afterward this commandment was rehearsed again in the law of Moses, The
signification of the sanctifying of ye Church
and the ceremony of resting the seventh day was withal made a Sacrament,
that is to say, a token of sanctification, whereby God did signify, that he
was the sanctifier of the Church, that is, to forgive her her sins, to
receive her into favor, to endue and govern her by the holy Ghost, to the
beginning of a new and everlasting life in this life, and afterward to be
perfected and finished for and by the promised Messiah. Exo. 31. Ye shall keep
my Sabboths: because it is a sign between me and you in your generations,
that ye may know that I am the Lord, which do sanctify you. Ezech. 20. And I
have given unto them my Sabboths, that they should be for a sign between me
and them, that they should know that I am the Lord which do sanctify them. The
ceremony of kee ing ye seventh day, ta^e^ away by the coming of Christ.


Forasmuch then as the Sabbath of the seventh day was a figure putting the
people in mind both of their duty, or of godliness toward God, and of the
benefit of God performed toward his people by Christ: it was with other
ceremonies taken away by the coming of Christ, by whom that was fulfilled
the which those ceremonies did signify, which thing also Paul does witness
Colloss. 2. Let no man therefore condemn you for meat, or drink, or in
regard of an holy day, or new moon, or Sabboths, the which are a shadow of
things to come, but the body is of Christ.

The Jews object: Obiectio^s for the seventh day. Objection. The seaue^th day
is the ceremonial part. Answer.
forasmuch as we eue^ our selves confess, that the law of the ten
commandments is perpetual or everlasting: and that the precept touching the
Sabbath is part of the ten Commandments, therefore it is not to be abolished
or taken away.

We answer, that the Decalogue or ten commandments is perpetual or
everlasting, so far as it is moral: and that the additions or circumstances of
the moral commandments for signification sake, were to be kept no longer
then until the coming of the Messiah.

Secondly they reply, Exodus 31. It is an everlasting covenant: it is an
everlasting sign between me and the sons of Israel.

We answer, The Sabbath is euerlast.
first that the ceremonial Sabbath is perpetual unto the coming of Christ,
which was ye end of ceremonies. Ierem. 31. Dan. 9. Secondly, that the Sabbath
is everlasting, concerning the signification, which is a ceasing from sin,
and a rest in the Lord. For so all the figures of the old law are
everlasting, yea, and the kingdom of David it self, the which notwithstanding
was to be destroyed before the coming of the Messiah. Genesis 49. The Scepter
shall not be taken away from Judah until Silo come. And 2. Sam. 7. Thy throne
shall be sure for ever. Ezech. 37. My servant David shall be a Prince unto the^
for ever. In the same place, And the Gentiles shall know, that I the Lord do
sanctify Israel, forasmuch as my sanctuary shall be among them for ever.



Ceremonies even before Moses were figures.
We deny the Mayor, as touching ceremonies: for ceremonies ordained by God
before Moses, because they were figures of benefits to be received in the
Messiah to come, are taken away by his coming, as circumcision given unto
Abraham: as also the sacrifices commanded unto our first parents.

Fourthlie they reply: The Sabbath after the fall is made a figure.
That the laws given by God before the fall, are not figures of benefits to be
received in ye Messiah, and that they do bind all mankind at all times: for
then as at that time the promise concerning the Messiah was not yet given, and
there was one and the same condition and estate of all mankind, ye which was
comprehended in our first parents: but the Sabbath of the seventh day was
ordained of God, after the creation of the world was finished, before ye fall
of mankind: therefore it is universal and perpetual.

We answer by distinguishing of the Mayor: the which is true concerning moral
laws, the natural knowledges whereof were imprinted in the mind of man in the
creation, but is not true as touching ye ceremony or keeping of the seventh
day, as which after the fall in the law of Moses was made a figure of the
benefits to be received in the Messiah, and therefore like as other
ceremonies, either then, or before ordained, was made subject unto change by
the coming of the Messiah. For God would not have shadows of things to come
to remain, the things themselves being exhibited and given alredie. Albeit
therefore that we grant, that the exercises of the worship of God on the
seventh day were to be observed and kept by the commandment of God, as well as
if men had not sinned (like as the exercise of absteining from the tree of
knowledge of good and evil) as after they had sinned: yet after that God
placed this ceremony among the shadows of the Messiah to come, by this self
same new law given by Moses, he made the same chaungeable together with the
other Ceremonies.

The end of this precept may be obtained any day.
If fifthly it be objected: The cause of a law being perpetual, makes the law
also to be perpetual: but the cause of halowing the seventh day, namely the
remembrance and setting forth of the creation, and the meditating and thinking
upon the works of God is perpetual: Therefore the law of the seventh day, eue^
after that Christ is come, is unchangeable, etc.

regard of the cause or end unchangeable, if that cause or end do
necessarilye and perpetually require this law as an effect or means: but not
so, if at other times, and by other means we may better come unto that end, or
if the lawmakers by an other law may as well attain unto the same end.
Forasmuch then, as there may be a meditation and setting forth of the works of
God, as well upon an other day, as upon the seventh day, as at the beginning
for a cause applied unto the first times, God ordained the seventh day for ye
ministry, so afterward for a cause applied unto the times of the Messiah
being come, he abrogated or took away the same law, and left it at liberty
unto the Church to choose other days: Which Church for a probable and
reasonable cause, chose the first day, on the which the rising again of Christ
fell, by the which a spiritual and everlasting Sabbath is begun in us. The Lord
his day ordained in the time of the apostles.
And that this change and alteration was made by the Church in ye times of ye
Apostles, it appears out of ye 20. chapter of the Acts: The first day of the
week, the Disciples being gathered together to break bread, Paul preached.
Apoc. 1. I was taken in the spirit upon the Lords day.

Against the reason of those which dispute against the observation or keeping
of the first day of the week, commonly called the Sunday.


Our observation of the Lord his day differs from the Jewish Sabbath.
Unto these we must answer by the difference of the Jewish and Christian
observation. The keeping of the Lord his day does differ from the Jewish
Sabbath: first, for that the Sabbath of the seventh day, as a ceremonial part
of the worship of God, might not be omitted of ye Jews or changed, because of
the express commandment of God: but the Church of Christ, 1 In respect of
worship and necessity.
whether it appoint the first day or any other day for the ministry, does it
without the breach of her liberty to do otherwise, if there be just cause,
that is to say, without the opinion of necessity or worship. Secondly, 2 In
respect of the figure.
ye old Sabbath was a figure or shadow of things in the new testament to be
fulfilled by Christ: but in ye new testament ye signification has ceased, and
regard is only had of order and comeliness, without the which there can be
either no ministry of the Church at all, or else not ordered well, and as it
ought to be.

As concerning the words of the commandment, Five significations of ye word
Sabbath.
this name Sabbath is first of all peculiarly attributed unto the seventh
day, because of God his resting from Leui. 23. The next day after the Sabbath
the Priest shall offer a Gomer. For the feast of trumpets, in the same place.
In the seventh month, on the first day of the same, you shall have a Sabbath,
a token of sounding with trumpets, an holy convocation or assembly.

Also for the feast of Tabernacles: The fifteenth day of the fifth month ye
shall keep a feast unto the Lord, seven days: on the first day shall be a
Sabbath, and on the eight day also shall be a Sabbath. In this sense and
signification the name Sabbath agrees also unto the days, in which in the new
Testament the Church does exercise the public worship of God.

Synechdoche, they also call a week of days a Sabbath, as Leuit. 23. From the
day in which ye offer a Gomer of lifting up, there shall be seven full weeks,
Math. 28. On the last Sabbath, when as it dawned into the first day of the
Sabboths, that is to say, of the week. Mark. 16. Very early the first day
of the Sabboths, that is, of the week, they came unto the Sepulcher. And from
hence, by a figure called Cathacresis, it is taken also for a week of years.
Leuit. 25. Thou shall number unto thee seven Sabboths of years, that is to
say, s^uen times seven years, the which days of seven Sabbothes of years
will make 49 years.

Leuit. 25. When as ye shall enter into the land, the which I give unto you,
then the land shall keep a Sabbath unto the Lord. Six years thou shall sow
thy ground, etc. but in the seventh year there shall be a Sabbath of rest
unto the land, a Sabbath unto the Lord: thou shall not sow thy field, nor cut
thy vineyard. And Chap. 26. Then the land shall finish her Sabbothes, all the
days in which she has been desolate and wast, because she rested not in your
Sabboths, whilst ye dwelled in her.

Fifthlie, by this word Sabbath is understood A Spiritual Sabbath.
ceasing from sin, or the leaving off of our own works, and the execution
or doing of the works of God, that is, of such as are by him commanded unto
us, and do appertain unto his worship and glory. This spiritual Sabbath is
begun in this life in them that are converted, and is finished in the life
everlasting: and is termed a Sabbath or rest, both because this is indeed a
true rest from labors and miseries, and our hallowing and dedicating unto the
worship of God, and also because yt in times past it was signified by the
ceremonial Sabbath. Heb. 4. There is therefore left some rest unto the people
of GOD. For he that is entered into his rest, rested also himself from his
works, as God rested from his. Let us study therefore to enter into that rest,
etc. Ies. 66. And it shall come to pass, that from month to month, and from
Sabbath unto Sabbath all flesh shall come, and worship before me, says the
Lord.

With this commandment agrees the 1.2. and ^. signification of the word
Sabbath.
Out of these significations of the word, the first and the second have place in
this commandment as concerning the words, and the fifth by an allegory: This
also does the manner of the figures show, in the ordeining of the which God
will always have their signification to be understood and observed. And
Esayas, chapter 28. If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, that thou
do not thine own will on mine holy day, and call the Sabbath thy delight,
that it be holy, honorable unto the Lord, and shall honor it, that thou do
not thine own ways, that thine own will be not found and that thou find not
a word. And therefore with a vehemency he says, as of a thing most
straightly commanded: Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, that
is, that with great care and religion thou hallowe it. And Exodus 31. He
commands him to be put to death, which shall break the Sabbath. Also Ezech
20. and 22. When as he complains of the corruption of the whole worship of
God: he says that the Sabbath is broken: of which straightness in requiring
of the keeping of the Sabbath, there are evidently apparent two causes
especially: The one, for that the neglecting of the idleness, but to have sin
to be avoided, and holy works to be done therein. What it is to keep holy the
Sabbath.
For God is said to halow the Sabbath, because he appoynteth it unto the
worship of God: men also are commanded to halow it, that is to say, to apply it
unto that end whereunto it is ordained by God, or to do those things the
which God has commanded in the same to be done. Hereunto apperteyneth that he
says that it is a Sabbath unto the Lord, that is, dedicated unto his worship.

Six days of work
And therefore appointing six days for other labors, and the seventh unto the
worship of God, his meaning is not that the other days the worship of God, and
thinking upon the works of God should be omitted or left off. For it is said
Deuteronomy. 6. and 11. Thou shall rehearse them unto thy sons, and shall speak of
them, when as thou shall sit in thine house, and when as thou shall walk by
the way, and when as thou shall lie in thy bed, and when thou shall arise. And
Psalm. 1. His pleasure is in the law of the Lord, Two things required. 1
and he meditateth and studieth thereon day and night. But he requires these
two things, the first, that on the Sabbath day, not only the private, as at
other times, 2 On the Sabbath the works of our ordinary calling ought to cease.
but also the public worship of God be exercised in the Church: the other,
that at that time other labors, which on other days every man does exercise
according unto his vocation and calling, should give place as well unto the
private, as public worship of God.

Yet Jewish superstition is to be taken heed off, It is lavvful on the
Sabbath to do works the which do not hinder the exercise of the ministry.
the which also Christ in the Gospel does often confute, namely, that it was
unlawful on the Sabbath day to do any works appertaining unto the
necessity of their own life, or the life of others, for it appears by the
end of the commandment, that only servile works, or such as hinder the
exercise of the ministry, are forbidden by God, and not such as do not
hinder the public worship of God, or else do further, nourish and set forth
the same. So Math. 12. Christ defends his Disciples plucking the e^res of
corn on the Sabbath day to drive away hunger, heals him that had a
withered hand. Luke. 13. Heals a woman that had been sick 18. years. And
Chapter 14. Heals one sick of the dropsy. John. 5. Heals one that had an
infirmity 38. years, and bids him carry away his bed. And Matthew. 12.
Luke. 14. says, That without any sin on the Sabbath day cattle or beasts
falling into a ditch, are thence drawn out, and Luke 13. That cattle are
loosed and driven to water. And Judas Machabeus fought on the Sabbath, that
there might be some to keep the Sabbath. 2. Machab. 15.

And of this and such like acts two reasons are given. 1. Machab. 2. If we so
do, as our brethren have done, that we fight not against the Gentiles for our
life and religion, they will now on a sudden drive us out of the land.
Therefore they appointed within themselves within with these words: what me^ so
ever shall by battle set upon us on the Sabbath day, we will fight with them,
least we all die, as our brethren are dead. For the defense of their life and
religion, they say well, that they may sight even on the Sabbath day. With
the same reasons Christ defends himself and his Disciples. Math. 12.
rehearsing a saying out of the 6. Chapter of Oseas: But if ye had known, what
this is, I will have mercy and not sacrifice, ye would not have condemned
the innocents and guiltless. And Mark. 2. The Sabbath was made for man, and
not man for the Sabbath, that is, the ceremonial works ought to give place
unto the moral, that rather the ceremonies be omitted, then the works of
love, the which either our own necessity, or of our neighbor does require.
And Math. 12. Have ye not read in the law, that on the Sabbath the Priests
in the Temple profane the Sabbath, and are without fault? And I say unto
you, that one greater then the Temple is here. Also John. 7. On the Sabbath
ye circumcise a man. If a man receive circumcision on the Sabbath, and yet the
law of Moses is not broken, are ye offended with me, that I have cured an
whole man on the Sabbath? In which words he teaches that such works, as
hinder not the exercise of the Sabbath, but rather set forth and confirm the
same, such as are ^he works pertaining unto the worship ^f God, or unto holy
ceremonies, or unto ^he love of our neighbor, in such sort, that necessity
will not suffer them to be put off until another time, do not break the
Sabbath, but are especially required to the right observation and keeping of
the same.

Families.
He will have our families also and our children to cease from labors, for
their servants, the which they in bondage wished to be showed unto themselves.
Deuteronomy. 5. That thy man-seruaunt and thy maide-seruant may rest as well as thou:
and remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, and that the Lord
thy God brought thee thence by a strong hand, and a stretched out arm.
Therefore the Lord thy God has commanded thee to keep the Sabbath day.

He commands also strangers to leave off their labors, Strangers.
such as were converted unto true religion, like as Israelites and of the
householde of the Church: and such as were still Infidels he also commands
to cease from labor, not in regard of themselves, but in respect of the
Israelites, and that for two causes: first, Note this well.
the which forbids, not only by our selves, but also by others to do such
works and business on the Sabbath as call men away from the worship of God,
and studying upon the works and will of God.

Three questions
And here out appears an answer unto three questions or objections.







Answer unto the first and second question.
For as concerning binding and constraint, the strangers which dwelled among
the Jews were not constrained either unto al ceremonies, or religion, but unto
the outward discipline, the which was necessary for the avoiding of offenses
of the Church, in which they lived: for the magistrate ought to be the keeper
of discipline, according unto both tables of ye Decalogue, or ten
commandments, amongst his subjects, both to forbid manifest idolatry and
blasphemies: and also concerning forrainers and strangers, so far as he may, to
take heed yt open offenses be not given unto his subjects. Furthermore, as
touching binding there was an especial consideration of the Sabbath, ye which
was not at length by Moses, but even from the beginning of the world,
commanded unto all men by God, and therefore bound all men unto the coming of
the Messiah, albeit that this commandment was so far grown out of use among
them, that it was reckoned among the chief reproaches, wherewithal they mocked
and taunted the Jews. 3 Unto the third. The Sabbath was no Sacrament unto the
Infidells.
But this ceremony was no Sacrament unto the Infidels, because that neither
this promise appertained unto them, that ye Lord would be the sanctifier of
them, neither were they constrained to cease from their ordinary works for
the testifying or professing of this promise, but only to avoid offense and
occasion of sinning, which by them might be given unto the people of GOD: for
so Nehem. 10. The people promise by oath, that on the Sabbath and holy days,
they would not receive any thing of the people of the land, the which
brought merchaundise or victual to sell on the Sabbath day.

And Chap. 13. Nehemias by shutting the gates and garrison of soldiers,
keeps the Tyrians dwelling at Jerusalem, and bringing in wares to be sold on
ye Sabbath, from coming that day into the City, least occasion might be given
unto the Jews to break the Sabbath.

Cattle.
These things are better understood by this, that the Cattle also are commanded
to rest, whose rest had no signification either of the worship of God or any
sacrament, but was commanded in regard of the men, first that occasion of
working might be cut off from them, the labor or use of their cattle being
forbidden: and secondly, that sparing their brute beasts, they might learn, how
great a regard god would have of gentleness and equity to be used toward
men: the which cause also Paul alleges of the commandment of not mus^ing
the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn. 1. Cor. 9 Has the Lord a
care of Oxen? or does he not altogether say this for us? For, for us is this
written, that he which ploweth ought to plow in hope: and he that treads out
the corn in hope, ought to be partaker of his hope, etc.

The reason which is added, The reason of the commandment, the rest of God.
taken from God his resting, apperteineth unto the circumstance or ceremonial
precept concerning the seventh day: God rested on that day: that is to say, he
ceased to make new parts of the world, as which was already perfected and
finished, and such as God would have it for to be. This day therefore he
dedicated or appointed unto the worship of God: first, Why the seventh day
was appointed unto the worship of God.
that by the

Secondly, that this rest of the seventh sake all other things are made and
preserved by God, that out of the same mankind, made and formed after his own
image, he might gather and preserve a Church unto himself, the which in this
life and for ever might praise him.

The resting of me^ tvvo-fold
Now the imitation and following of his rest, unto the which by his own example
he does exhort us, is of two sorts: ceremonial, and signifying: and moral or
spiritual, or signified. For the works, the which are called the works

Both these kinds of works of men are forbidden, but in a threefold
difference of forbidding.

The first is, works are forbidden in a Three differences in works forbidden.
namely so far forth as they hinder the ministry of the church, or give
offense: but sins are forbidden simply.

The second, for that works are only

The third, for that the ceasing from He that is entered into his rest, rested
also himself from his works, as God did from his.

The sum therefore of the commanment is, The sum of the 4. commandment.
that it establishes the public worship of god, or ministry of the church,
and the exercise and honor of the same. For this is ye halowing, or holy of
use the Sabbath, that is to say, of the time appointed unto the ministry,
when as on that day, holy works, the which God has commanded at that time to
be done, are exercised. The works of the Sabbath.
Now the parts of this halowing, or the works of the Sabbath, the which on
the Sabbath ought to be done partly by the Ministers and partly by the Church,
are these especially.

1 To teach ye church.
Truly to teach the Church concerning God, and his will. For in this place is
spoken of the duty of the Ministers of the Church, unto whom it appertains
not only in the public assemblyes of the Church, faithfully to deliver and
teach true doctrine, but as necessity and occasion shall be offered, to
instruct and admonish even particular persons, and to employ themselves unto
the amendment and salvation of all them that are committed to their charge.
Proves for public doctrine.
Concerning doctrine in the meetings of the Church there is spoken Exodus 12.
The first and seventh day of Easter, there shall be unto you an holy
convocation or assembling together. Leuit. 10. That ye teach the children of
Israel all the Statutes which the Lord has spoken unto the^, by the hand of
Moses. Act. 13. They fulfilled the words of the Prophets, the which are read
every Sabbath. And chap. 15. For Moses of old has them in every City, which
preach him, when as he is read in the Sinagogues every Sabbath. And cap. 17.
And Paul, as his custom was, went in unto them, and three Sabbath days
disputed with them, out of the scripture, etc. proves for private instruction
and admonition.
As touching ye office of ministers in private instruction and admonition, we
read. Act. 17. He reasoned in the Sinagogue with the Jews, and religious
persons, and in the market daily with all that he met. And cap. 20. Take heed
therefore unto your selves, and unto the whole flock in the which the holy
Ghost has made you overseers to feed the church of God, etc. Again: Watch
therefore, remembering, that I, by the space of three years ceased not day and
night with tears to admonish every one. 2. Tim. 4. Preach the word, be
earnest in season, out of season: rebuke, reprove, exhort with all mildness
and doctrine. But watch thou in all things, suffer, do the work of an
Evangelist, 2 To minister the sacraments.
give full proof of thy ministry.

To minister the Sacraments according unto the ordinance of God. And as
doctrine, so also the administration of the Sacraments is not tied unto those
days, in which the meetings of the Church are made, but it is sufficient
concerning the public ministration, if it be done by the ministers of the
church, as those which do represent a public person, and room of God in ye
ministry speaking unto men, and that those things be done in the assemblyes
of the Church, the which God has tied unto the ministers. So circumcision was
ministered at any day which was the eight day after the birth of the child:
so baptism may be ministered on any day. Act 8. and. 10. Yet the ministering of
the Sacrament ought especially to be used on the Sabbath day. And therefore
Numb 28. and. 29. besides the daily sacrifices, there are also set forth
certain sacrifices which ought to be used on the Sabbath, and other holy days
And Christ in such sort ordained his supper, as ye which among other ends,
ought also to be the sinowe of the Congregation of the church, that it might be
ministered either in a small or great assembly of the Church.

Matthew. 26. Drink ye all of this. 1. Cor. 10. The bread which we break, is
it not the communion of the body of Christ? Because we being many are one
bread, one body. For all we are partakers of one bread. And chap. 11.
Therefore when ye come together into one place, this is not to eat the Lords
supper. For every one eats his own supper before. In the same place, Therefore
(my brethere^) when ye come together to eat, tarry one for another.

And unto the lawful administration of the Sacraments appertains also the
shutting out of those, Shutting out of the unworthy.
whom God has commanded to be shut out from them.

Like as it was not lawful for strangers from the nation and religion of ye
Jews, nor for the uncircumcised to eat the Paschall Lamb. Exodus 12. so the
Church of God ought not to admit or receive unto the Supper of the Lord, such
as are not baptized, or such as being baptized, yet in doctrine or manners are
strangers from Christianity.

To learn the doctrine of the Church, 3 To learn the doctrine of ye Church.
that is, to come often unto the assemblies of the Church, to hear and learn
the heavenly doctrine, and diligently to meditate and examine the doctrine
being heard, and especially to bestow the days appointed for the ministry,
in reading, studying, and handling of divine matters: for inasmuch as God will
have ministers of the Church to be, he will also that there be hearers of the
doctrine, and the same also diligent. And the desire to learn is not without
private meditation. Therefore they of Bercea are praised, Acts. 17. for that
they received the word with all ioyfulnesse, daily searching the Scriptures,
whether the things were so or no: and especial to such as serve already, or
mean in time to come to serve the Church a diligent study to know the
doctrine is enjoined. 1. Tim. 4. Take heed unto reading, exhortation,
doctrine: foreslow not the gift which is in thee, the which was given th^e to
prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the oldership. Exercise these
things: in these be thou, that thy profiting may be manifest unto all. Take
heed unto thy self, and unto doctrine: in these continue. For if thou do
this, thou shall save thy self, and those that ^eare thee. And 1. Tim. ^. and
2. Tim. 2. P^ule will have a min^ster of the Church to be fit to teach, and to
confute and overthrow t^^ adversaries (...).

To use the Sacraments according unto the ordinance of God. To use the
sacraments
So God commanded the Passover to be kept in the assembly of the people, and
appointed certain sacrifices unto other feast days and Sabboths. Also Act.
20. The first day of the week, when as the Disciples were come together to
break bread, Paul preached, etc. For as God will have true doctrine to be
heard, so he will also have the lawful use of the sacraments to be seen in
the public assemblyes of the Church: because that he will have both these to
be a note, whereby the Church may be known and discerned from other nations
and sects. The sacraments also, like as the word, are an instrument, or
exercise to stir up and maintain faith and godliness in us. They are also a
public profession of our faith and thankfulness unto God, and a part of the
public worship of God in the church. And therefore the use of the^ is most
especialy agreeable unto the Sabbath.

Public calling upon God, whereby we do join our confession, thanksgiving, 5
Public calling on God.
and prayers with the church. For God will be called upon not only privately of
every man, but also publicly by the Church, for his glory, and our comfort,
to wit, that we should not doubt, that we are heard of God, when as he has
promised hearing not only unto us, but also unto others, and unto ye whole
church, praying for us together with us. For to this end he has added a
peculiar promise unto common prayers, Matthew. 18. Again I say unto you, if two
of you shall agree together upon earth, whatsoever they shall ask, it shall be
granted unto them of my father which is in heaven. For where two or three are
gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. And
thanksgiving and the praising of God, is promised unto God as an especial
worship. Psalm. 22. In the midst of the Congregation I will praise thee. Of
thee shall be my praise in a Congregation of much people, I will pay my vows
before them that fear him. And it is commanded 1. Cor 14. Forasmuch as if thou
bless in spirit, he which occupies the room of an unlearned person, how
shall he say Amen unto thy thanksgiving? For he knows not what thou say.
And. 1. Tim. 2. I exhort therefore before all things, that there be made
supplications, prayers, requests, and thanksgiving, for all men, for Kings,
and for all that are set in authority, that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable
life in all godliness and chastity, etc.

Neither does Christ in the 6. of Matthew. condemn and forbid public prayers,
Matthew. 6. Not public prayers, but hypocrisy is forbidden.
but boasting and hypocrisy, saying: When thou prayest, enter into thy
chamber, and shutting thy door pray unto thy Father which is in secret, and
thy father which sees thee in secret, shall reward thee openly. The words
going before do witness this: When thou prayest, be not as the hypocrites. For
they love to pray standing in their assemblies and corners of the streets,
that they may be seen of men. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward.
And hypocrisy is a counterfaiting and boasting and vain showing of godliness
Taring therefore this, Hypocrisy.
he speaks not of the desire to please god, and of praising him as well
publicly as privately, but he will have those also which pray publicly, to
have regard not unto the judgment and eyes of men but of God concerning us,
and not to look unto our glory, but unto the glory of God.

6 The honor of the ministry containing
The honor of the ministry of the Church, which contains many things:
first, reverence, that is an acknowledging of the order and will of God in ye
appointing and preservation of the ministry, and the gathering together of
the church by the same, 1 Reverence.
and the declaration and showing forth of this our judgment of the ministry
both in words and deeds.

1. Cor. 4. Let a man so esteem of us as of the Ministers of Christ, and
disposers of the secrets of God. 2. Cor. 5. Therefore we are Ambassadors in
the name of Christ, as if God intre^ted you by us: we pray you in the name of
Christ, that ye be reconciled unto God.

2 Love.
Secondly, Love, by the which we willingly both resort unto the assemblies of
the church, and do hear and learn the doctrine of the church, and do wish
well unto the faithful ministers of the church, not only in respect of the
duty of love, but also in regard of ye ministry which they execute. Psalm.
84. How amiable are thy Tabernacles O Lord of hosts. My soul longs, yea,
and faints for the Courts of the Lord, my heart and my flesh rejoice in the
living God.

Psalm. 122. I rejoiced with them that said unto me, we will go into the house
of the Lord. Also, For my brethren sake I will now speak peace of thee,
because of the house of the Lord our God, I will seek thy good.

Thirdly, obedience in those things, 3 Obedience
which appertain unto the ministry. Hebr. 4. Obey your Rulers. Hethertoo
appertain the works of love toward God, and toward our neighbor, that is,
the whole life of a Christian, which is the spiritual Sabbath For it is
nothing else to keep a spiritual Sabbath, To keep a spiritual Sabbath.
then in the ordering of our life to obey the voice of God sounding by the
ministry of the Church. For God will have the doctrine learned to this end,
that it may be obeyed. Iam. 1. Perform ye the word in deed, and be not hearers
only, deceiving your selves: because if a man be a hearer of the word and not
a doer, he shall be compared unto a man beholding the countenance of his birth
in a glass, for he has beheld himself, and went his way, and by and by
forgets what manner one he was.

And, for as much as he will have this Sabbath to be kept all our life time,
he will have the examples and testimonies of the same especially to be showed
forth on the outward or ceremonial Sabbath day, that is, at those times which
are appointed for the teaching and learning of the word of God. He that has no
care to serve the Lord on the Sabbath day, will not serve him at other times.
For if a man al ye time do not show forth a desire to obey God, when as the
doctrine ringeth in his ears, and when as other cares being laid aside, God
will have us to think upon godliness and repentance, he sufficiently
declares that he will not do it at another time.

There it has always been the manner in the Church, on the Sabbath day to
give alms, and to exercise ye works of love toward the needy. Nehem. 8.
Send parts unto him for whom nothing is prepared, because it is an holy day
unto our Lord. God himself also does witness Deuteronomy. 5. that he will have the
Sabbath kept, that rest may be given to servant and to our family: least
that with the continuance of labors they should be too much brought down.
And 1. Corinthians 16. Furthermore as concerning the gathering for the Saints, as
I have appointed unto the Churches of Galatia, so do ye also. Every first
day of the week, let every one of you lay a side with himself, laying up
that, which thorough the gentleness of GOD he may. And Acts 2. all these
works of the Sabbath are jointly expressed together: The Disciples were abiding
in the doctrine of the Apostles, and in fellowshippe, and breaking of bread,
and prayers.

Fourthlye, 4 Thankfulness.
honor comprehends also Thankfulness, that is, duties concerning the
preservation of the Ministry and Ministers. For if GOD will have a Ministry
to be in the Church, he will also that every one, according to their
ability, do further the maintenance of the same, that is, that they bestow
their money and travail upon the nourishing and defending of godly Ministers
and teachers.

Hethertoo appertain the laws of Moses, concerning the first borne, first
fruits, tenthes, and very many offerings, the which were appointed unto the
Priests and Levites in stead of a stipend, wherewithal to maintain the life
of them and theirs, that they might attend upon the ministry. Albeit the
circumstaunces of these laws be abolished and taken away, yet the general
remains for ever, because God will have the ministry preserved even until
the end of the world. Deu. 12. Take heed unto thy self that thou forsake not
the Leuite all thy days upon thy land. 1. Cor. 9. Who goes on warfare at
any time upon his own charges? Who planteth a vineyard, and eats not of the
fruit thereof? Or who feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of the
flock? Does not the law also say these things? For it is written in the law
of Moses, Thou shall not musle the mouth of the Ox, that treads out the
corn. Also, If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great matter,
if we reap your fleshly things? Again, Are ye ignorant, that they which serve
about holy things, do eat of the things which are of the altar? And they
that serve at the altar, do take part of the altar? So the Lord has
ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. 1.
Tim. 5. The elders which do rule well, let them be counted worthy of double
honor, especially those that do labor in the word and in doctrine. For the
Scripture says, Thou shall not musle up the mouth of the Ox, that treads
out the corn. And the worke-man is worthy of his hire. Math. 10. He that
receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive the reward of a
Prophet. Hereunto also pertains the examples of the widow of Sarepta,
nourishing the Prophet Elias. 1. King. 17. Of Obadiah saving the Prophets,
whom Iezabel did persecute. 1. King. 18. Of the Church of Damascus, letting
down Paul by the wall Acts. 9.

In this part of the honor toward the ministry is also contained the
maintenance of schools: Schools.
inasmuch as without the studies of learning and arts men are neither fit to
teach, neither can the purity of doctrine be preserved and defended against
Heretics. Therefore Christ Math. 11. promises a reward unto those, the which
for the furtherance and imparting of doctrine do well unto those which do
either already teach, or which are in time to come to teach, or whose travail
does serve, or shall hereafter serve for the preservation of doctrine.

5 Gentleness toward the infirmities of ministers
Fiftlie and lastly, unto this honor of the ministry is also required
vprightnes or gentleness in bearing with the infirmities of the ministers, the
which do not notoriously or manifestly corrupt or forslow their office, and
hurt the Church with offense. 1. Tim. 5. Receive not an accusation against an
Elder, but under two or three witnesses.

Co^traries and repugnant unto the works of the Sabbath.
Forasmuch then as this is the sanctifiing or hallowing of the Sabbath, it
follows that the things wherewith the Sabbath is profaned or broken, are
contrary unto these works.

Against the teaching of doctrine is set the leaving or forslowing of the
duty of teaching, 1 Unto doctrine.
either privately or publicly. Esa. 56. All her watchmen are dumb dogs,
which are not able to bark, sleeping, taking their ease, very diligent to
sleep. And they are ravenous dogs, which know not when they are full, and
the Shepheardes themselves understand nothing, they have all gone aside after
their own way, every one unto his covetousness in his place. Ezech. 34. Woe
unto the Shepheardes that have fed themselves: Do not shepheardes feed
their flock? Ye have eaten the fat, and do cloth your selves with the
wool: ye have killed the fat, but have not fed the sheep: the weak have ye
not comforted, and the sick have ye not healed, and the broken have ye not
bound up, that that was cast down ye have not brought again, and that which
was lost ye have not sought, but ye have reigned over them cruelly and
tyrannouslie.

Also corrupting and mangling of doctrine, or bowing of the same unto the
Corinth. 2. For we do not, as many, make merchaundise of the word of GOD,
but we speak of Christ, as of sincerity, as of GOD, in the sight of God.

Against the administration of the Sacraments is either the leaving or
foreslowing of the exhortation of the Church to use the Sacraments, 2 Unto the
administration of the Sacraments
or an unlawful admistration, when as some thing is either taken from the
ceremonies ordained by God, or when some thing is changed in them, or when as
such are shut out from the Sacraments, as ought to be received, or such
received which by the ordinance of God ought to be kept from them, or when as
the people are not instructed concerning the right use of them. 3 Against ye
desire to learn doctrine.


Against the desire to learn doctrine, is the contempt and neglecting of
doctrine, that is, either not to be present at holy Sermons, when there is no
lawful cause to let us, and on the Sabbath to do works that might be put off
until another time, or to give no ears unto holy Sermons, or not to meditate
and search the doctrine of the Church, but especially negligence to know the
doctrine in the ministers, or in those, which by God are called unto the study
of doctrine, and either ought one day to serve unto the setting forth of
doctrine, or have greater occasion and opportunity to learn the same, then
others. Numb. 16. He that gathers sticks. Death appointed for the Sabbath
breakers.
He that gathered sticks on the Sabbath day, is stoned to death. And Exodus 31.
Pain of death is set down against them that on the Sabbath do works hindering
the ministry. Nehem, 13. They that do such works on the Sabbath are very
sharply chidden. Math. 13. As often as a man hears the word of that
kingdom, and understands it not, then comes that wicked one, and takes
away that which was sown in his heart. This is he which receives the seed
by the way side, etc. Math. 15. Let them alone, they are blind, guides of the
blind: if the blind lead the blind, they both fall into the ditch. Luke 12.
Unto whom so ever much has been given, much shall be required of him again,
and with whom they have laid down much, the more they will ask again at his
hands.

Also curiosity, the which is a desire to Pro. 25 As to eat much honey, is
not good: so the se^rching out of the glory of the divine things is no glory.
Son of Sirach. 3. Search not vnconsideratlie after things that are more hard
then thou art able to attain unto: and concerning things that are above thy
power, foolishlie seek not after them. The things that are commanded thee of
God, the same study thou holilie upon. For it is not needful for thee, to
behold with thine eyes the things that are secret: the things that are not
necessary, but superfluous unto thy talk, meddle not curiously with them.
For mo things are opened unto thee, then the wit of man is able to comprehend.
1. Tim. 4. Give no ear unto fables, and endless genealogies, the which do
rather breed questions, then edifying of God, which is by faith. And Chapter 4.
Profane and old wives fables reject. 2. Tim. 2. Reject or cast away foolish
and unlearned questions, knowing that they do breed strifes. Tit. 3. Refrain
foolish questions and genealogies, and contention^, and strifes about the law:
for they are unprofitable and vain. 2. Tim. 3. There will be a time when as
they shall not abide sound doctrine, but itching in their ears, they according
unto their own lusts, shall heap up unto themselves teachers, and shall
turn away their ears from the truth, and be turned unto fables.

4 (...).
Unto the lawful use and receiving of the Sacraments is repugnant the leaving
off and contempt of the same. Also ye profaning of them, when as they are used
and received, not after that sort which God has commanded, or not of those,
for whom they were ordained. Also superstitious receiving, when as salvation
and the grace of GOD are tied unto the observation of the ceremonies, or else
are used unto other ends whereunto they are not ordained by GOD. Genesis 17. He
that is uncircumcised shall be rooted out from among his people. Exodus 4. GOD
threatens death unto Moses because of his son which was not circumcised.
Malach. 1. The Lord of hoasts says unto you. O Priests, which contemn my
name, and have said, Wherein have we contemned thy name? Which do offer upon
mine altar, polluted bread, and ye have said, wherein have we polluted the
same? etc. Es^^e. 66. He that sacrifices an Ox, does sin as much as he
that slays a man, etc. 1. Corinthians. 11. He that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks unto himself damnation.

Unto the public prayers, 5 Unto public prayers.
the neglecting of them, and the hypocritical being present at them without
eare-giuing or affection. Also the rehearsing of them not serving unto the
edifying of the Church. 1. Cor. 14. If thou bless in spirit, he, which
occupies the room of an ignorant person, how shall he say Amen unto thy
giving of thanks? For he knows not what thou say. For thou give thanks
well, but another is not edified.

In like manner also is against the use and exercise of the whole ministry,
not only the particular leaving of duty in every private person, but by his
example, or any manner of hinderance, by his commandment or persuasion, the
calling away of his children, family, or others, from the use and exercise of
the same.

6 Unto the honor of the ministry.
Unto the honor of the Ministry, the contempt and despising of the same is
contrary, whereby either the ministry of of the Church is abolished and
taken away, or is committed unto unworthy persons, or is denied to be ye
instrument ye which God will use for the gathering together of his Church: or
when as the ministers are reproched. 1. Tim. 5. Lay not thy hands quickly
unto any man, neither be thou partaker of other men's sins. Luke. 10. He that
despises you, despises me. Or when as they are hated, Matthew. 10. and 24. Ye
shall be hated of all men for my names sake. Or when as doctrine is not obeyed
in the leading of our life: but especially when as on the Sabbath day, the
works of love and godliness are neglected, and the time employed unto vain
and wicked things, or spent in lewdness: or when as necessary maintenance is
not given unto the Ministers, defense and other duties of thankfulness and
courtesy are not performed unto them: that I say nothing, when as the
Ministers are wronged and hurt: when as the maintenance of schools and
learning is not cared for: or else when as the infirmities and wants in the
ministers that may be borne withal, are bitterly taunted, or when as because
of them the ministry is despised or neglected.

To God be all praise and glory.
Ierem. 17. ver. 21. THus says the Lord: Take heed unto your selves: and
carry no burdens on the Sabbath day, or bring them in into the gates of
Jerusalem.

22 Neither carry out burdens out of your houses on the Sabbath day, nor do
ye any work: but sanctify and keep holy the Sabbath day, as I commanded
your elders.

23 Who hearkened not, nor bowed their ear: but hardened their neck, not
hearkening nor receiving instruction.

24 For it shall come to pass, that if by obeying ye will obey me, the saying
of the Lord, in not bringing in burdens into the gates of the City on the
Sabbath day: and in sanctifying and hallowing of the Sabbath day, that ye do
no work therein.

A blessing unto the keepers of ye Sabbath.
25 That kings and Princes shall enter into the gates of this City, sitting
upon the throne of David, and riding on chariots and horses, they and their
Princes, and the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and this city
shall remain for ever.

26 And they shall come out of the cities of Judah, and from places about
Jerusalem, and also out of the land of Benjamin, both out of a low place, and
out of the mountain, and from the South part, bringing burnt offerings and
sacrifice, and gifts with franckinsence, and bringing offeringes of
thanksgiving unto the house of the Lord.

27 But if ye will not obey me, A punishment for the breakers of the Sabbath.
to sanctify the Sabbath day, and not carrye burdens entering into the gates
of Jerusalem on the Sabbath day: certainly I will kindle a fire in the gates
thereof, which shall consume the palaces of Jerusalem, and shall not be
quenched.


FINIS.

