CONDITIONS TO BE OBSERVED by the British Undertakers of the Escheated Lands
in VLSTER, Consisting in three principal points, Viz.

1. What the British Undertakers shall have of his Majesty's gift. 2. What the
said Undertakers shall for their parts perform. 3. In what manner the same
performance shall be.
Jmprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. ANNO DOM. 1610.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

CONDITIONS TO BE OBSERVED BY the British Undertakers of the Escheated Lands
in VLSTER, etc.
I. What the British Undertakers shall have.
FIrst, The Praecincts.
the Lands to be undertaken by them, are divided into sundry Praecincts, of
different quantities.

Every Praecinct is subdivided into Proportions of three sorts, The Proportions
Great, Middle, and Small.

The great Proportion contains 2000. English Acres at the least.

The middle Proportion contains 1500. Acres at the least.

The small Proportion contains 1000. Acres at the least.

Unto every of which Proportions such bogge and wood shall be allowed, as lies
within the same, for which no Rent shall be reserved.

The distribution of the Praecincts.
The Praecincts are by name distinguished, part for the English, and part for
the Scottish, as appears by the Table of Distribution of the Praecincts.

Every Praecinct shall be assigned to one principal Undertaker, and his consort,
as will appear by the Table of Assignation of the Praecincts.

The chief Undertakers shall be allowed two middle Proportions, if they desire
the same; otherwise no one Undertaker is to be allowed above one great
Proportion.

Their estates.
They shall have an estate in Fee Simple to them and their heirs.

Power to create Tenures.
They shall have power to create Mannours, to hold Courts Baron twice every
year, and not oftener, and power to create Tenures in Socage to hold of
themselves.

Liberty of exportation.
They, their heirs and assigns, for the space of 7. years next ensuing, shall
have liberty to export out of Ireland all commodities growing or arrising upon
their own Lands undertaken, without paying Custom or Imposition.

They, their heirs and Assigns, Liberty of importation.
for the space of 5. years next ensuing, shall have freedom to import into
Ireland out of Great Britain, victual, and vtensiles for their Households,
materials and tools for their buildings and Husbandry, and cattle to stock
and manure the Lands undertaken, without paying any Custom or Imposition;
which shall not extend to any commodities transported by way of Merchandise.

They shall have allowance of Timber for their buildings to be erected upon
their Proportions, Allowance of Timber.
the same to be taken in any of the Praecincts, by the Assignment of the
Commissioners, without paying anything for the same for the space of two
years; And after that time expired, every Undertaker to hold to his own use
the Timber and Woods remaining upon his own Proportion.

Aduowsons.
The principal Undertaker shall have one Aduowson within his Praecinct, to him
and his heirs.

2. What the said Undertakers shall for their parts perform.
1. Their Rent.
THey shall yearly yield unto his Majesty for every Proportion of 1000. Acres,
five pound six shillings eight pence English, and so rateably for the great
Proportions; The first half years payment to begin at Michaelmas 1614.

2. Their Tenure.
Every of the said Undertakers shall hold the Lands so undertaken in Free and
common Socage, as of the Castle of Dublin, and by no greater Service.

3. Their Building.
Every of the said Undertakers of a great Proportion, shall within 3. years to
be accounted from Easter next, build thereupon a stone house, with a strong
court or bawne about it; And every Undertaker of a middle Proportion, shall
within the same time build a stone or brick house thereupon, with a strong
court or bawne about it; And every Undertaker of a small Proportion, shall
within the same time make thereupon a strong Court or bawne at least.

Every Undertaker shall within three years, to be accounted from Easter next,
4. Their Families.
plant or place upon a small Proportion, the number of 24. able men of the age
of 18. years or upwards, being English, or Inland Scottish; And so rateably
upon the other Proportions; Which numbers shall be reduced into 10. families at
least, to be settled upon every small Proportion, and rateably upon the other
Proportions in this manner; Viz. The principal Undertaker and his family to be
settled upon a Demesne of 300. Acres; Two Fee-fermours upon 120. Acres a piece;
Three Leaseholders for three lives or 21. years upon 100. Acres apiece; And
upon the residue being 160. Acres, four families or more of Husbandmen,
Artificers or Cottagers; their Portions of Land to be assigned by the
principal Undertaker at his discretion.

5 The Building of the vnder-Tenants.
Every of the said Undertakers shall draw their Tenants to build houses for
themselves and their families, not scattering, but together, near the
principal house or bawne, as well for their mutual defense and strength, as
for the making of Villages and Towneships.

6 Arms.
The said Undertakers, their heirs and assigns, shall have ready in their
houses at all times, a convenient store of Arms, wherewith they may furnish a
competent number of men for their defense, which may be viewed and mustered
every half year, according to the manner of England.

7. Oath of Supremacy.
Every of the said Undertakers, before he be received to be an Undertaker, shall
take the Oath of Supremacy, either in the Chancerie of England or Scotland, or
before the Commissioners to be appointed for the establishing of the
Plantation; And shall also conform themselves in Religion according to his
Majesty's Laws; And every of their Vndertenants being chief of a family,
shall take the like Oath before the said Commissioners, or the Justices of
Assize coming into the County, wherein the said Tenants shall be placed at
the next Assizes, after they shall sit down and inhabit in the said several
Counties. And they and their families, shall be also conformable in Religion as
aforesaid.

Every of the said Undertakers for the space of five years, 8. Residence.
to be accounted from Michaelmas next, shall be resident himself in person
upon his Portion, or place some such other person thereupon, as shall be allowed
by the State of England or Ireland, And shall take the Oath of Supremacy; and
likewise be himself with his family conformable in Religion as aforesaid, who
shall be resident during the said five years, unless by reason of sickness
or other important cause, he be licensed by the Lord Deputy and Council of
Ireland to absent himself for a time.

The said Undertakers, 9. Restraint of Alienation to the Irish.
their heirs and assigns, shall not Alien or demise their Portions or any
part thereof to the mere Irish, or to such persons as will not take the said
Oath of Supremacy; And to that end a prouiso shall be inserted in their
Letters Patents, that the parcel of land so aliened shall be forfeited.

10. Restraint of Alienation within five years.
The said Undertakers shall not Alien their Portions during five years, to be
accounted from Michaelmas next; but unto their Vndertenants, in the form
before expressed in the fourth Article.

11. Uncertain Rents.
The said Undertakers shall not reserve any uncertain Rent, but the same shall
be expressly set down without reference to the custom of the Country.

3. In what manner the said performance shall be.
1. To repair into Ireland before Midso^mer next.
THe said Undertakers either in person, or by such Agents as shall be allowed by
the Councels of Estate of England or Scotland respectively, shall before
Midsommer day next, repair into the Realm of Ireland, and offer themselves to
the Lord Deputy and Commissioners for the Plantation; who shall take order with
the said Undertakers for the distribution of the Proportions within every
Precinct, either by Agreement or Lot; So as every Undertaker shall know his
Portion, if the same be not distributed here in England before.

The said Undertakers by themselves or their said Agents, 2. To sit down
before Michaelmas next.
shall take possession of their several Portions, and sit down upon the same
before Michaelmas next.

The said Undertakers shall bring over into Ireland, 3. Time of placing their
Tenants.
and plant and place upon their several Proportions, the several numbers of
men and families aforesaid, Viz. One third part before the feast of All Saints
next, an other third part before the first day of May then next ensuing, and
the other third part before the feast of All Saints in the year of our Lord
God one Thousand six hundredth and eleven.

The said Undertakers shall take out 4. Time of taking out their Patents.
their Letters Patents either in England or in Ireland, at their election,
before Midsommer day next.

5. By what degrees they shall erect their habitations and buildings.
The said Undertakers shall before the feast of All Saints next make their
several Courts or Bawnes upon their Proportions, and erect habitations for one
third part of the men and families which they are to plant thereupon; And
before the first day of May then next ensuing, they shall erect habitations for
one other third part, and provide and bring in place all the materials for
building of their Stone houses; And before the feast of All Saints 1611.
following, they shall erect habitations for the residue of their men and
families, and in the mean time proceed in the building of their Stone-houses,
so as they may be fully finished within three years as aforesaid.

6. Their Bonds or Recognisances for performance of the Articles of Plantation.
Every Undertaker before the ensealing of their Letters Patents, shall enter
into bond or recognizance with good sureties to his Majesty's use, in the
Office of his Majesty's chief Remembrancer in England or Ireland, or in his
Majesty's Exchequer or Chancery in Scotland, to perform the aforesaid Articles
according to the several distinctions of Building, Planting, Residence,
Alienation within five years, and making of certain estates to their Tenants,
viz. The Undertaker of the greatest Proportion to become bound in four hundred
pounds; of the middle, in three hundred pounds; of the least, in two hundred
pounds: which bands or recognizances shall be delivered up after five years
upon Certificate of the L. Deputy and Counsel, that the true meaning of the
Conditions thereof has been performed.


