M. LE HVCHER MINISTER OF AMYENS IN FRANCE COMPELLED to fly from the pure word
of Holy write; struck dumme; and made to run away.

Upon the subject of the B. Sacrament of the Altar.

By F. FRANCIS VERON of the Society of JESUS, encountering him with the Bible of
Geneua only.

In the presence of the Duke de Longueuille.

With a brief and easy means, by which each Catholic may, in like manner,
put to flight any Minister or Sectarie.

Sent from Sieur de la Tour one of the said Dukes Gentlemen, to Sieur de
Rotois, Gentleman of the Kings game.

Printed

Explication of the Title.
This Conference was held three several times. In the first the Father of the
Society; compelled the Minister to abandone the pure word of the holy
scripture; In the 2. he putt him to silence; In the 3. he made him run away.

Testimony of the said conference.
It is signed by the Father of the Society; by the Duke of Longueuilles
Gentlemen who accompanying their Lord were present thereat; and in part by the
Minister, which refused to subcribe to that, which putt him most to confusion.
The subcriptions follow in their proper place.

To the Reader.
TWo things there are (good Reader) which made me (desirous of thy eternal
good) to turn for thy use this little treatise into our language. The one the
breuity and pleasure it yealdeth, the other the easines and perspicuity, with
which it confuteth, it instructs. The first suteth well to that lazy humor,
which heresy has brought into our country, whereby men have little gust to read
ought, that concerns their souls, and scarce ought of that, unless it be well
seasoned with extraordinary delight. The other (supposing thy capacity, and
affection to truth, which if affection misleade me not, is equal to that of
most Nations, and by heresy I hope not maliciously perverted, or at least not
puruersly obstinate therein) makes me presume thou will easily see, and quickly
leave that blind man's maze, of the falsely pure pretended word, wherein thou have
been long led round. Both of them, by Gods assistance, promise unto me no
little fruit of this small work, which is that I heartily desire for thy
souls good, and Gods greater glory. Farewell.

Thy welwiller in JESUS CHRIST. D. V.

A LETTER OF Mr. DE LA TOVR GENTLEMAN TO THE DVKE OF LONGVEVILLE. Written unto
Mr. de Rotois Gentleman of the Kings game.
SIR the ardent zeal I know you have of the good and glory of our Religion,
makes me suppose you will receive a singular content in the relation of a
private conference, had of late in the presence of my Lord the Duke of
Longueuille and his followers, of the Marquis de Boniuet, of the Lady de Bourcq
and diverse others as well Catholics as Sectaries, between Father Francis Veron
of the Society of JESUS, preacher for this present in the great Church of this
City, and M. le Hucher Minister of the Caluinists in the same place, touching
that point of our Faith, of the body of the son of God in the Sacrament of
the Altar. The said Father agreeing to deal with that Minister by the Bible of
Geneua only, and the Confession of faith of the reformed. This conference has
had three sessions, at the first I was not present, not being advertised of the
same. Notwithstanding at the beginning of the second, the acts of the former
session were read, allowed and auowed by both parties as authentical. Wherefore
I will make recital of that which passed in the sight of my Lord, and us that
were attending on him, besides a great multitude of diverse of the one, and the
other Religion. The said Father on the morrow after the last conference which
was Sunday, made an ample narration of the three passed meetings to above eight
thousand persons, assembled in the Church of our Lady to hear his sermon. The
most heerof is signed as you will see after, wherefore no man can justly call
in question a matter so clearly testified.

Our Divine achieved three famous victories. For the Minister having promised
conformably to the 31. and 5. articles of their Confession of their faith, to
show by the pure word of the Bible, that we erred in that belief we have, that
the body of our Lord is in the Eucharist, he was constrained in the first
session and again in the entrance unto the second trial, to sly from his
fortress of the pure word, of force disclaiming from the pure scripture of
Geneua: and withal aknowledged and confessed, that there was no express text
in all the scripture, even by the Geneua translation, which, setting a side all
illations, did condemn us of error. But (quoth the Minister) by necessary
consequence out of the pure word of God I will make it clear that you do err.

The night coming on made our combatant cease the pursuit, and not drive him
farther, who already sheltred himself within the ruinous edifice of a
Consequence. The Father told me, that it was not of small importance, to make
the Sectaries clearly see and confess, that they have not for themselves the
pure scripture, but only certain consequences, for (quoth he) the cause that
makes so many to begin, and continue in their revolt from Gods Church, is for
that they persuade themselves, that they have on their sides the pure word of
God; for so says the 5. article of their Confession, that they admit nothing
for the rule of faith, but the pure word: and they do verily suppose that that
Confession contains nothing, but that which is in the pure word. After the
approbation of that passed before, the Minister at the second session was
admitted to deduce his necessary consequence, by which he would demo^strate how
far we wandered from the truth. He first fetched long vagaries round about,
afterward the Father so dexterously put him beside all his proofs, and in
brief brought him to such pangues, that for the final proposition he had
nothing to say against the Father, but, o you deny to much; after which he
became alltogeather speechles, as I will more largely declare her after. Certes
you would have been extraordinarily recreated to behold, how he that erewhile
made profession to prove by the pure word of God that we were Idolaters, in
lieu of the pure word, had not a word to help himself, save this only, that the
Jesuit denied to much we I am sure had good sport therein. Ours which had thus
chased the Minister, still put him to these pa^gues for a long time still
urging him thus. M. Minister prove your consequence. Neither did he omit to
signify plainly and alowde to the whole assembly, to what exigents the poor
Minister was brought to, who sustained the Confession of the faith of the
reformed Religion, and bragged to discover by the pure word our errors. Had
not the quality of the Ministers cause been such as it was, I should have had
compassion to have seen him in that plight, and so oppressed. He desired they
would give him that night for respite, and to think upon it; but the Father
denied him; he alleged he was suddenly surprised, the other replied that he
had had all the night, and morning before for his proof of that consequence.
It was not need to take pity of the Minister, for his fellow Sectaries had
sufficient co^miseration of him; all of them round about me began to change
color, the Elders and Superintendents stood as it were astonished, and
confounded. You may conjecture easily whether we were joyful thereat or no
Alas (said one) the poor Minister wants a Chirurgian to open him a vain. This
victory was more notorious by this which follows. The conqueror exacted of
the vanquisshed to subscribe to the Acts of this conference, according to the
accord made between them. A lamentable case! that the overcome must subscribe
to the acts of his own condemnation. He refused to perform his promise. The
Father after many instant vrgings of him in vain, turned toward my Lord, and
demanded justice; that the Minister sign according as he had promised. The
Minister desired favor, beseeching him often that he would not command him to
subscribe, after many prayers adding these words. I know how much it stands me
upon not to sign, for if I do so, all will be published: and the Churches
(you understand his meaning at least his lamenting voice discovered his
intention) the poor congregations (he should say) of the pure reformation will
be scandalized thereat. The Father having before desired one of ours to shutt
the door, least the Minister should run away, bid him consult with his
Elders, and Superintendents, whether it were expedient to sign the acts or
no: for which cause drawing them apart it was resolved that he should not sign
them. I will send you shortly more at large this debate, which lasted three
quarters of an hour. In fine, with the consent of the Father, they granted
him this favor that he should not subscribe, but with these two conditions:
the first that he should subscribe the morrow after; the second that he should
continue the dispute. By this refusal to subscribe unto the Acts, it is
apparent how notable the victory was on our part.

In the third encounter our Champion got a third victory, but in an other
kind; will you know what? The Minister shamefully rann away. He was not
willing to be laid again a gasping as before, and therefore thought it better
not to inter into the listes, as I will declare afterward. It was given out
that the Superintendentes had expreslie forbidd him to venture himself with
him, who before had used him so unmercifully, for they well saw the confusion
like to follow thereof, to the great detriment of their Churches.

Your Religious mind makes me presume you take great delight in this chase; I
will therefore give you the whole narration. But yett before hand I will show you
a new manner of hunting, which, though you be most skillful in that sport, is
perchance unknown unto you. The fashion is speedy, with little pains, and
most effectual, by which practice our Huntsman has so happily seized on his
pray: and by the same I assure my self, that even we whose profession is to be
better at our weapon then our pen, may chase out of breath any Minister
soever, and make any Sectarie see how grosllie he is abused. This I have
compiled as a thing I know to be true, and whereof I mean to serve my self on
all occasions. In this Conference I have had experience of this practice, for
therein was held no other method; and to satisfy your desire, who I know are
curious to learn this new manner of hunting, you may read this which
follows, the like whereof was sent unto the Minister as a letter of defiance.
Read it seriously. To me it seems most efficacious and as easy. We shall all
prove hunters of these black beasts, the Ministers I mean of the pretended
Religion. I would to God we could so chase away not their persons, but their
errors, that we could purge all France thereof. This I now send you laid down
at large, you shall shortly have the particulars of the conference above
mentioned, in which you will see it practiced.

A BRIEF AND EASY means by which each one though ignorant of deuinity, may
by the sole Bible either of Geneua, or any other, show apperently to any
Minister how far he is deceived, and to each Caluinist, how in all and
every point of the pretended reformation he is abused.
ENCOVNTRING a Minister or any other Caluinist, you shall proceed in this
manner.

You have in the 31. article of the Confession of your faith these words. In
our days, in which the estate of the Church was dissolved, God has raised men
after an extraordinary manner to repair of new the Church which was ruinated
and desolate. Thus, you say, your Religion comes to reform our errors.

In the 5. article are these words. The word which is contained in these books
(he spoke of the books of Holy Scripture) is the rule of all truth, containing
all that is necessary for the service of God, and our salvation; Neither is it
lawful for men, no nor for Angels, to add, diminish, or change. Whence it
follows that neither Antiquity, nor Customs, nor Multitude, nor humane
wisdom nor Definitions, nor Inhibitions, nor Proclamations, nor Decrees, nor
Councels, nor Revelations, nor Miracles may be opposed to the said holy
Scriptures, but on the contrary all things ar to be examined; ruled, and
reformed by them. These are the words of this article.

So that in the one and the other article mentioned together, you say that
you, or your Religion, or your Ministers (take your choice) are raised and sent
from God, to illuminate us with the light of truth, and to show us our errors
and that by the sole, and pure word of God contained in the holy Scripture.

1. First I might examine the conditions of these Reformers you thrust upon us.
And until you show me your letter patents and commission, I may justly refuse
to submitt my self to be reformed by you. What body politicque will allow the
title of Reformour of their Laws, and Customs (according to which they have
hitherto proceeded in their government) in one who should say he was sent from
the King for that purpose, but had no Commission to show for the same?
Notwithstanding in curtesy I do freely admit you to the dignity and title of a
Reformer, and am content to be instructed by you in the truth, and to be
reformed in whatsoever I do err. I would know of you.

2. According to what rules, by what line does it please you to straighten me,
to show my errors, and illuminate me with the truth of the Gospel? You make
me answer in the 5. article above cited, that you will do all this according
to the pure word of God, set down in Holy writ, laying aside, All
Antiquity, Customs, Multitude, humane VVisdome, Definitions, Inhibitions,
Proclamations, Laws, Councels, Revelations, Miracles. I could refuse this
fashion of reforming. For why should I not, together with the Scripture, help
my self with all other rules to discern the truth thereby? Especially since
that the Scripture no where says, that it self alone is the rule of all
verity. It seems hard to me to renounce al Antiquity, Councils, Miracles, and
all the rest before set down. Nevertheless to join with you in Conference, I
am content of my own accord to grant you the title of Reformer by the pure
written word, and am ready to renounce al those rules specified, provided
allwaies that you keep your promise, to wit that you show me my errors, by
the pure Scripture.

3. There are diverse translations of the Scriptures; by which, I pray you, will
you please to reform me? Perchance you inte^d by that of Geneua. I might
justly refuse to be reformed by that Bible; being it is so curtalled in diverse
places, corrupted, and changed: Yet to have your reformation I will do you this
third favor. I am content to open my eyes and follow your Religion, if you
show my by the pure word contained in the Geneua version, both the truth of the
faith you Euangelize, and also my errors. I have done you three great
favors. 1. to grant you the title of a Reformer. 2. to be a Reformer by the
pure word. The third to make this trial by the pure word of the Geneua
version. But look you bring me nothing else but the pure word; for if in steed
of it you shift me of with your interpretations, you forsake the Confession of
your faith, and break the covenants made between us. For I am not so
unadvised to renounce all Antiquity, Counsels, Miracles and the rest, for your
interpretations and opinions.

Agreeably to this, to your own promise, and that which is set down in your
5. article, I demand two things at your hands. First that you show me by the
pure word the truth of all those articles which you will have me to believe:
which I am ready to do, if I see them in the Bible even of Geneua. Secondly
that by the same pure word you show me my errors. Both of these I demand, for
both of these you profess to do when as you say, that the Scripture is the
rule of all truth, and you acknowledge no other. For put the case I should err
in my faith, I would be loath to leave that, to follow a worse. No wise man, I
take it, though his horse have but one eye will make excha^ge for another that
is blind; I desire therefore to see by the pure word the truth of yours. Which
you cannot refuse to do, for you are sent to illuminate us, and show us the
truth. To be plain therefore, my first demand is, that you show me by the pure
word the Articles of your Confession, by which I must be illuminated, and made
to know the right way.

In the 36. and 37. article you say that we receive by faith, or, to use your
ordinary terms, by the mouth of faith the body of our Lord. Show me this in
the pure word, and that the supper is the figure of his body. Through all the
Geneua Bible I find not so much as mention made of the mouth of faith, neither
do I find any talk of a figure in those places, where it speaks of the
supper. Show me but this, and I will straight believe it and abjure my former
Religion. This if you do not, I must needs hold you, as you ar, for impostours.

In the 11. article it is said. Original sin does continually remain after
Baptism in as much as it is a fault, howbeit the children of God are freed from
the condemnation due for the same, he through his gracious goodness not imputing
it unto them. Show me this in the pure word of Geneua.

In the 24. article. Jesus Christ is given us for our sole Advocate, The strife
between us is about that word Sole, show me that in the Geneua Bible.

In the 20. article. We believe we are made partakers of that justice (to wit
of Christians) by faith alone. All the controversy lies in that word alone,
and whether works done in the faith of Christ be necessary; show me that
word alone in these places, where mention is made of works done in the faith
of JESUS CHRIST, and not in these places, where the Judicial works of the law
are excluded from Christian justification, for of these only do we dispute. I
have turned the Bible for the places cited in the margent for these articles,
but cannot find any of these articles in the pure word.

Having quitt your hands well, in showing me the truth of that which you desire
I should believe, show me as well that other thing I demand, to wit the
errors of those articles which I now believe.

The articles of my faith are for example (to omit that point of the B.
Sacrement already spoken of) That there is a Purgatory, Intercession of
Saints, Auricular Confession, and the like. I acknowledge the Sanctity of
Pilgrimages, of Religious vows. Against which in your 24. article you say.
Intercession of Saints is an abuse, Purgatorrie an illusion and so of religious
vows, Pilgrimages and the like. Show me my error in these points, and that
out of the pure word. In your margent I find no text cited, which is a shrewd
suspicio^ that you have none. Perchance you will aunsweare that it suffices for
a proof of error in these points, that they are not found in the holy
scripture, because nothing must be believed but that which is in the scripture.
My reply to this is to know of you whether this proposition. That nothing must
be believed which is not in the holy scripture be found in the pure word of God
or. If it be not, then you M. Minister in propounding this proposition to be
believed of me, do falsify your own faith, and break your promise; for you
said you would not admit any other rule of truth but the scripture, which is in
effect, that you will bring forth nothing but that which is in scripture, and
now you thrust upon me this proposition, which is not there to be found, and
this as a fundamental proposition upon which are builded many others: but if
this proposition be in the pure word, show it; but take heed you bring
nothing, but the pure word.

When by the pure word you shall show me the truth of your articles, and the
falsehood of mine, as has been said before, I am ready forthwith to acknowledge
my error, and to embrace your faith. But remember, I pray you, your promise,
that you would by the pure word show the truth of your faith and my errors;
and that I renounced all antiquity, Councels, Miracles, Inhibitions, Laws,
visions upon these terms only, and no other. Look that in steed of the pure
word, you do not shift me of with your interpretations or your own
consequences, for either that interpretation is in the Scripture, or no; if it
be there, bring forth the Scripture: and that the Scripture say of each
proposition you interpret, that it is so to be understood, and that you only
are the organe to pronounce the same, otherwise you leave your own faith, and
forge an other to your own liking, of which I shall argue with you after in
the like sort; and besides that you break your promise. I should be esteemed
of small judgment if I forsake Counsels, Miracles Antiquity and the rest for
your interpretation.

If the Minister pretend to warrant his interpretation by some other passage of
the Scripture, for example if he urge that those words (This is my body) must
not be taken properly but figuratiuelie, because these others (I am a vine)
have such a signification: You shall ask him.

1. Before you pass to any interpretation, if he have any plain text, which
abstracting from all interpretation does condemn us of error: for example in
that point of the B. Sacrament, in which we believe there is the true body of
our Savior. If he have any, let him bring that which is clear and plain,
and leave that which is obscure: if he have none, make him to confess
distinctly, that he has no place out of the pure word, by which, without his
interpretation, he can convince us of error; and here you must insist on this
point, till he have confessed this. After this Confession coming to the
interpretation he gives, you shall.

2. Demand, if the Scripture say that these words (This is my Body) are to be
interpreted by these (I am a vine) or no. If it say so, let him show the
place; If not, then the Minister breaks his covenants, and does not serve as an
organe of the Scripture only. And here the Minister is in little ease, neither
can he, without renouncing their Confession, which professes to allow of
nothing to rule them, but pure Scripture, pass any farther. Neither is it
needful to pursue the matter any farther, this being concluded, for here
have you the Minister in the stocks; and perchance it will be better to keep
the Ministre in this trance speechles, then to pass farther. Yet if you
desire an other victory, and that he, which encountreth the Caluinist, be
learned or expert in the Scripture, he may, after the confession of the two
former.

3. Harken to the interpretation the Ministre brings, and aunsweare these
proofs he alleges for that interpretation. But allwaies remember that the
Caluinist, by their Confession of faith, is come to instruct us, and
consequently bound to prove his interpretation; for us, if it convince not, it
suffices to deny, without obligation to give any reasons for our denial: for
by those the Minister will find means to slip away, and will not be so
quickly caught: he will seek many by-waies, therefore as much as may be stop
his passage. Behold how you are to proceed, when the Minister undertakes to
show our pretended errors by text of Scripture, without consequences or
illations.

When he will discover our errors by some consequence, which he deduceth out
of the pure word of God for example, we believe that the body of our Lord is in
the B. Sacrament of the Altar: he will prove by consequence deduced out of the
pure and sole Scripture, that he is not there, after this manner. In the 3. of
the Acts, it is said, that Heaven must contain him until the Consummation of
the world, therefore he is not on the earth. Behold his sillogisme. That body
which is in heaven is not on the earth, the body of Jesus Christ is in heaven,
therefore it is not on the earth. He must put his argument in this form. 1.
Before you come to answer his argument, you must ask the Minister if he have
any plain text, which without consequence does condemn us of error in this
point, or no? If he have, let him bring it out, who professes to reform us
by the pure word; If he have not, make him confess that he has no plain
text, by which (his consequence set a part) we are convinced of error; and
here you must stay, and exact this confession of the Minister before you pass
farther. Having made the Minister acknowledge this, though you may content your
self with this victory (whereby you make him renounce the 5. article of their
Confession of faith, and have overthrown that pillar which detaines most of
the Sectaries, who follow that part in their errors; who imagine they have on
their side the pure word of God, and that they build upon the Scripture only)
and peradventure it will be better to proceed no farther, to the end to make it
echo oftener in the ears of these who are abused by them: Nevertheless he
that will continue the chase, and having rowzed the dear from his lodge pursue
him farther.

2. Giving the Minister leave to deduce his consequence, after the deduction
thereof, the Catholicque must not straight examine the truth of the same, nor
show so quickly that it is false; but first lay hold on him, and make him show,
that his consequence is deduced out of the only pure word of holy Scripture, as
he promissed to deduce the same, and his 5. article does oblige him. You must
therefore proceed in this fashion. It is a thing undoubted, and known to all,
that every consequence, to be good, must be inferred out of two propositions;
If then one of those two, out of which the Minister deduceth his consequence,
be not in the Scripture, (as it happens ordinarily in the arguments of the
adversary against us) here you must demurr, and make it manifest, that the
adversary here abandonnes his Confession of faith, and fayles of his
promise, in not showing our pretended error by consequence deduced out of the
pure and only Scripture. For example, in the syllogism before set down. That
body which is in heaven is not on the earth, the body of Jesus Christ is in
heaven, therefore it is not on the earth: you shall examine the Minister,
whether the first proposition of this argument be in the pure word, or no. If
it be, let him show it. Clear it is, it is not there, but it is a
philosophical proposition, wherefore the Minister, which deduceth his
consequence out of that, and the second adjoined, which is in the 3. of the
Acts, does not prove my error by consequence deduced out of the pure word,
but by consequence deduced out of Philosophy, and out of the word of God, and
makes such articles of faith, as are deduced out of Philosophy or Aristotle.
2. You must declare, that every consequence must be deduced out of two
propositions, placed in the true form of a syllogism, and that the
consequence is inferred both from the propositions, and from the form of the
syllogism; of which form the Scripture speaks nothing, nor prescribes any
rules about that matter, but only Aristotle, and Philosophy. Wherefore the
Minister in proouing his consequence, is not founded upon the Scripture alone,
which treates not of forms of consequences. And because it belongs to
Aristotle, to judge if the consequence be good or no, the Minister building
upon consequence, must admit for his judge, in the controversies of our faith,
not the pure Scripture, but Aristotle: or else at least choose for vmpyre in
this cause the word of God, together with Aristotle. 3. You must demand of the
Minister, if the Scripture do teach that one must believe as an article of
faith, not only that which the Scripture says, but also that, which by
necessary consequence follows thereupon, or no? if he say so, make him show
the text, which without doubt he cannot throughout the whole bible: if no such
be found, then does the Minister build his articles of faith upon a
proposition, which is not in the pure word, to wit upon this. That that which
follows out of Scripture by necessary consequence, must be believed as an
article of says. Howbeit the Scripture frames no such article, but the
Minister only, and that not by the pure Scripture, but by humane reason: from
which notwithstanding in his 5. Article he disclaimed wholly. For he would have
us take at his hands for an article of faith that proposition, which by
consequence follows out of the Scripture, though the terms of that
proposition, deduced out of Scripture for an article of faith, be not there
set down. Hence is it that all the articles of the Confession of these
sectaries, which are founded upon a consequence, are not articles of faith,
being that they have not for them their only rule of truth, the sole Scripture.
Here again you must hold him. They will say perauenture that JESUS Christ,
and the Apostles proved many things by consequence. I grant it. But in so
doing, they themselves made new Scriptures, or holy write: which privilege I
think the Minister have not. But they never taught that the Scripture, which
they alleged, was the singular and sole rule of all truth, and that they spoke
not but by the mouth of the Scripture, as these Pretenders profess, and thyr
poor flock (which think they are as good as their words) persuade
themselves.

3. If he that buckle with the Minister be learned, and will, after he has
often driven the dear from his fortress of the pure word, course him alonge
the plain champion of humane and philosophical reasons (though, according to
my advise, it be ordinarily more expedient, to content our selves with that
before set down) for to cure him, if it be possible, after the above said he
may pass to the examen of the truth, or falshod of his consequence: whether
the propositions, from which it is deduced (be they taken from philosophy or
holy writ) be true or false; and whether the form of the argument be
according to the rules of Philosophy, and so deny that which the Minister
assumed falsely. Still having in mind that the Minister is putt to the proof,
not the Catholic, who bears the person of the party instructed; and be sure
not to change that person. For the drift of all the Ministers fetches is, to
unload himself of that obligation to prove his consequence: which he will
bring to pass by this slight, if he can make him, that defends, the
disputant. For example. In the argument proposed. That body which is in heaven,
is not on the earth; The body of Jesus Christ is in heaven; Therefore it is not
on the earth. You shall deny the first proposition, and let the Minister
prove it. If that his proofs come on to long, and he enter to far into
Philosophical quiddities, let the Catholic note that it is in his free
choice, to curb the Minister short when he lists; demanding him, if all the
propositions which he has brought to prove his consequence, be in the
Scripture, or no. If they be, let him bring them forth. Many of them
questionles are drawn out of Philosophy, or grounded upon humane reasons. If
they be not, the Minister which out of them inferres his consequence, does not
deduce it out of the pure word, or (which is all one) proves not by
consequence deduced out of the pure and only word, that the Catholic erreth,
which was that he undertook; and moreover denies his Confession of faith: for
he draws his consequence jointly out of the word of God, and out of diverse
propositions which are not in holy write. Is not this to flinch from their
word, and to renounce their articles of faith? or rather do not the Minister
and his confession of faith abuse people, in promising that which they neither
do, nor can perform.

Behold a brief, and easy method to encounter all Ministers and Sectaries. Is
it not obuious even for those, who are not students in deuinity, to putt it in
practice? There needs no more but eyes to see, and to understand English, to
know if the pure word without additions, interpretations, or consequences of
others, do say such a thing, or no. Do you not by this means evidently
perceive, that all the Ministers are abusers, and how the whole troop of
Sectaries is misledde? Yea I dare say double abusers. For first the Minister
abuses men, in that he promises by the pure word to show them that, which he
would have them believe: next, that he will by the pure word lay open their
errors pretended, and yett performs neither the one, nor the other. Wherefore
the Ministers promising in their 31. and 5. articles to perform them both, and
yet effecting neither, as by the forsaid practice is made evident; are
impostours, and double impostours: as this method, which every Catholic may
use, does apparently declare. And so I have fulfilled my promise, which was to
lay down a short and easy method, by which all Catholics may evidently
show that each Minister in all, and every point of his pretended religion, is
an abuser, and consequently that all their followers are abused.

This therefore is my advice to all Sectaries, to those especially which seek
sincerly their Salvation. Your Confession promises you the pure word of God,
and you suppose that, according to that promise, there is nothing in your
articles of faith, which is not in the pure word; Practice this method, and
you shall evidently, and easily perceive how you are abused. Place on the one
side the Principal articles of your faith, which I have cited before. That
original sin remains after Baptism as it is a fault. That Jesus Christ is
our only Advocate. That faith alone justifies, and which is chief of all.
That the B. Sacrament is a figure of the body of our Savior, which is eaten by
faith. Then over against each of these articles, set down the textes, which
are cited in the margent for each of them (doubtless if you had any plain text
of Scripture, which taught that which is in that articles, it would have been
coated in the margent) and you shall clearly see, that the pure word, setting
aside interpretations, and Ministerial consequences, has not that which is in
your article: neither is there required ought but your eyes, and skill to
read, to see whether that be in the pure word or no. And that your Ministers
preach, that the Scripture is easy, and that every one there may learn his
own salvation; you understand I am sure signification of English: why then
find you not in the pure word that, which the Ministers make you believe?
Assure your selves if you find it not, it is because it is not there. Confront
therefore the place cited in the margent of the article, with the article, and
you shall see how egregiously you are mocked. And that you may see this more
manifestly, do this following. Write in one line one article, or if it have
many parts, one only clause of the same. And if you find any text of
Scripture cited for that article, or piece thereof, write in a second line the
words of the text cited, under the other line. If you find no text cited (as in
many places there is not) put under the first line a cipher; for that if there
were any text to authorize that article, it would be cited. This being done,
compare the first line with the second: If you find in the second line a
cipher, you are clearly cosened. If you find a text of Scripture, see if that,
being precisely taken without medly of some thing else (that is to say, you must
understand; this signifies; or the like;) contain that article proposed; if
it do not, know that you are deceived. I my self have paralelled these articles
with the textes alleged in the margent; take you but the like pains, and I
will assure you that in steed of the pure word, you shall often times find a
cipher; other times in the text cited you shall not find one word of the
article; and in brief you shall not find there one article, or entiere clause
of those in Controversy between us. Behold how you are deluded.

ARTICLES OF THE CONFESSION OF FAITH OF the pretended reformed Churchs,
confronted with the pure word of holy writ; Where it is evidently showed, that
the textes of Scripture, even in the Geneua Bible, cited in the margent of
these articles, contain nothing of that, which those articles teach against
the Catholic faith.
which is A brief and easy means, by which every Caluinist may manifestly
perceive how he is abused, and whereby each Catholic may show the same unto
him.
To save you the pains (deceived Countrymen) which I wished you to take, I
have here confronted the articles of your faith controuerted, with the places
cited in the marge^t, after the fashion before set down, and have cited these
textes according to the Geneua translation, Compare them with me beginning at
the 24. article.

In this article, these clauses following are set down without any text,
cited in the margent, for proof of any of them; wherefore in steed of
Scripture, I will give you under every clause for proof a Cipher.

Article 24.
1. We hold that Purgatory is an Illusion.

Proof. o.

2. By the abuse and deceit of Satan, Monastical vows were introduced.

Proof. o.

3. Out of the same vvare-hovvse proceeded Pilgrimages.

Proof. o.

4. Out of the same vvare-hovvse was brought in Auricular Confession.

Proof. o.

5. Out of the same vvare-hovvse sprang Indulgenees.

Proof. o.

6. Out of the same vvare-hovvse proceeded all other things, by which we
think to merit grace and salvation.

Proof. o.

7. We reject all others means, which men presume to have, to reconcile
themselves to God, as derogatory from the death, and passion of Jesus Christ.

Proof. o.

8. It is lavvfull for us to pray but only according to that form, which God
set down in his word.

Proof. o.

In the 31. article you say. The estate of the Church in our times was
interrupted, and has failed; that God has raised some after an extraordinary
manner to renew the same, being ruinated and desolate.

Proof. o.

Behold how the Ministers, and their Confession of faith do abuse you, and how
often in one only article. They promise you, not to instruct you but by the
holy Scripture, and proposing unto you all these clauses to be believed, they
prove none of them by any text of Scripture, nor bring as much as one place of
Scripture for confirmation of them. Examine the articles, you will find more
then a hundred clauses as well affirmatiues, as negatiues, for proof whereof
there is no text coated, because in deed they have it not, judge then if you be
abused or no.

And who, I pray you, can in equity accuse another, unless he produce some law
commanding, or prohibiting some thing violated by the party accused? Every
accusation, commended to be truly an accusation, not a calumny, must be founded
upon the breach of some law, and accompanied with it proofs. These Reformers
do not only accuse, but making themselves judges, do condemn of
Superstitions, forgery, and high treason against the divine Majesty, the holy
Fathers, and us all besides in those 8. points set down (and in diverse
others which I omit) pronouncing their bloody sentence, by which they declare
both them and us to be superstitious, deceauers, instruments of satan in the
promulgations of those devilish illusions rehearsed. This sentence pronounced,
for execution of the same they have overthrown our Monasteries; profaned our
holy places; and set fire on our Churches. Of what crime do they accuse us, do
they condemn us? what divine law do they prove to have been violated by us?
They neither prove, nor so much as cite any law, any letter of holy write,
against which the holy Fathers and we have offended. And yet they accuse us,
they condemn us. Shameless wretches! but yet withal impudent liars! They
promise, not to behave themselves but only as instruments of the holy
Scripture, and not to propose ought but that; And yet they pronounce the eight
foresaid sentences, without citing one sole passage of the Scripture. See, o you
sectaries, how palpably they abuse you. But to see this more clearly, and
withal to take away from the Ministers all means to circumuent you to your
utter ruin.

Consider with like attention that which ensues. In the 5. article they would
make you believe, that the pure word, which is contained in the books of holy
Scripture, is the rule of all truth, and that nothing must be believed, but
that which is in the pure word. This article is of great consequence; for
reposing and grounding your selves upon this, and not upon any other thing,
you reject all the traditions of the Roman Church; you give your sentences of
condemnation against us; you will not allow of neither Antiquity, nor Custom,
nor Multitude, nor Humane wisdom, nor Sentences, nor Inhibitions, nor Edicts,
nor Laws, nor Counsels, nor Visions, nor Miracles. And albeit all these make
against your doctrine, you make no bones thereof, you scorn them all, saying
that you will nothing but the pure Scripture, all the rest proceeds from men
subject unto errors; and that all other things must be examined, ruled, and
reformed according to the same pure word. This article therefore is of great
consequence: and with good reason, to be believed, ought to be found in the
holy Scripture; which if the Ministers should frame in the force of their own
brains, they deserve doubtless to be banished all honest company, as men
impudently bold, which seek to make the world renounce all things abouesaid,
for a proposition of their own invention; and contradict themselves: having
before said, they would only carry themselves as the organe of the wholly
Scripture. Let us therefore set down in one line first the article, then under
that the text, cited in the margent for proof thereof.

Article 5.
The written word is the rule of all truth: or else, as you commonly say.
Nothing is to be believed, but that which is in the written word. In the
margent of this article you cite 4. textes for proof of the contents.

1. Text.
You shall not add any thing to the word which I command, nor take any
thing from the same. Says Moses to the people of Israel. Deuter. 4. Verse. 2.

2. Text.
That which I command you, that shall you do, neither shall you add any
thing, nor diminish. Deuteronomy. 12. Verse. 32.

Examen.
Here is not any word of the article in these passages, for you neither find
(written word) nor (rule of all truth) which are the two terms of the article;
wherefore this pure word does not contain that, which the article affirms.
Let us weigh it more exactly. 1. Moses spoke unto the Jews of that only,
which he ordained, to wit of the Judicial law, and of no other. 2. he spoke
not of the written word, of which alone the article is, but universally of the
word. 3. Albeit he spoke unto Christians, and of the only written word: have we
increased the books of Moses? have we added ought unto them? 4. Think you
that the Prophets composing new Scriptures, and joining them with the books of
Moses, have infringed this precept? 5. if Moses forbid to believe any thing
but that, which he ordained; we must neither believe the Psalms of David, nor
the other Prophets, nor the Gospel: for he ordained not that which these
conteyne. Perceive you not how ridiculous a thing it is, to allege this text,
to verify by the pure word your article? which says, the written word is the
rule if all truth. The same article is proved by an other passage. Galat. 1.
Verse. 8.

3. Text.
Although we, or an Angel from heaven preach otherwise, then that which we
have preached unto you, be he accursed.

Examen.
In this text I neither read (written word) nor (rule of all truth) which are
the two terms of the article; wherefore the text has not that, which the
article teaches. Nay it contains not one only word thereof, come to the
examen. 1. Is there in the text any mention of the written word? of which
only we dispute, and the article speaks of no other. 2. Who knows not that
the Apocalipse was revealed, and writ after that epistle of S. Paul? and yet
besides that, which S. Paul euangelized, it also must be believed. Or is he
which preaches, and believes the Apocalipse accursed? Or rather is S. Paul
accursed, who preached many things afterward, which are not in that epistle to
the Galathians? who is there of so small capacity, that in the reading of this
chapter does not see, that the word (otherwise) is the same in sense with
(against.) The Apostle, as it is manifest at the very opening of the epistle,
cries out against those, which together with the law of Christ, would join
Circumcision against the doctrine of the Apostles. The words immediately going
before, make the matter more clear. I marvel says he to the Galat: 1. Verse.
6. 7.8. that leaving him, who has called you unto the grace of Christ, you are
so soon transferred unto an other Gospel: which is not another, unless there
be some that trouble you, and will inuert the Gospel of Christ: But although
we, or an Angel from heaven preach to you otherwise then that, which we have
preached to you, be he accursed. Is it not evident that S. Paul rejects that
only, which is against that which he had preached? Then it is apparent also,
that this text makes nothing for that, which the article contains to wit: That
the written word is the rule of all truth.

The last passage, cited for the forsaid article, is out of the Apocalipse 22.
Verse. 18. in these words.

4. Text.
I testify to every one, hearing the words of the prophecy of this book.
If any man shall add to these things, God shall add upon him the plagues
written in this book. And if any man shall diminish of the words of the
book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life,
and out of the holy City, and of these things that be written in this book.

Neither do I read in this passage (written word of the entyre Bible) of which
only the Article entreats, nor (rule of all truth) wherefore the text says not,
that the pure word of the entire Bible is the rule of all truth, as the Article
auerreth, rather the text consents not in one only term with the article.
Examine it. 1. Is it not manifest, that S. John spoke not but of the word
contained in the Apocalipse? which the Ministers will not allow to be the rule
of all truth; to what purpose then for proof of that Article, That the pure
word of the entire Bible is the rule of all truth, do they bring out this text?
2. if S. John said, that nothing must be added to that word of the Apocalipse
in this sense, and after this Ministerial paraphrase (that nothing must be
believed which is not therein contained) then he which should believe the
Gospel, the Epistles of S. Paul, of S. John, and others, and the old
testament, should be accursed. Where were the Ministers wits, think you, when
to prove that nothing must be bleeued, but that which is in the Bible, they
alleged this passage? 3. To add to the Apocalipse, is to thrust in something
as part of that sacred book: do we do so? What frantik people are your
Ministers? and you, o Caluinists? how grossly does your Confession of faith
abuse you, which treats you in such a fashion, as if you had not eyes to read,
nor judgment to understand the signification of one pure text? How many
Ministerial glosses ar here wanting, to make these textes speak that, which
this article contaynes? Let us go on.

Whence have you, that the books of the old and new Testament are holy
Scripture? how know you that these books are Canonical? By the inward
persuasion of the holy Ghost, so you aunsweare in the 4. article That he makes
us decerne them from other Ecclesiastical books. It is not then by the holy
Scripture that you know this, for your inward persuasion is not the written
word. Consequently it is false, That the pure word is the rule of all truth,
and that all things must be examined, ruled, and reformed by the same. For it
is not the rule of this verity, and that of greatest consequence: to wit, that
the books of the old and new Testament are canonical, and written by divine
revelation. Again, to reject any book from the number of the Canonical (as
for example you do reject that of Tobias, and admit the Gospel of S.
Matthew) you guide not your selves by this rule of the pure word, but, as you
give it out, of the inward persuasion of the holy Ghost. See how your articles
destroy each other. Tell me farther. Do you hold that one may, and ought to
baptize little infants? That we must not rebaptize hereticques, which have been
baptized in the name of the B. Trinity; that we must keep holy sunday, and not
saturday; you believe that the Mother of God remained always a virgin.
Notwithstanding you find not one text of Scripture, to justify any of these
points; why do you then contradict your selves and your article, which
teaches, that the written word is the rule of all truth. Does not S. Paul in
the. 2. to the Thessalon. 2. verse. 15. exhort saying. Stand, and hold fast the
instructions (our translation reads traditions) which you have learned either
by our word, or by our epistle. Note that he makes mention of the word besides
that, which is written in Scripture; and in the 2. to Timothe. 2. Verse. 2. The
things which thou have heard of me by many witnesses, these commend to
faithful men, which shall be fit to teach others also. Do not you perceive a
divine word, taught not by writing, but by word of mouth? In the. 1. to the
Cor. 11. Verse. 34. Other things I will set in order when I come. Such
ordinances by word of mouth, are they not as well divine as those, which are
set down in writing? I omit many other authorities to this purpose, by the
way only citing these, for that it is not my intent to justify, and prove unto
you in this treatise that, which we believe. My only scope is to show unto you,
that you are abused; and that the pure word teaches no such thing, as your
articles report. This have I performed in this article, which I have examined
with the textes cited for the same; for the Article says, that the written
word is the rule of all truth; and in the passages alleged, we neither read
written word, nor the rule of all truth. Wherefore they have not that which the
article says, otherwise, knowing to read, we should see it there. For
conclusion hereof the Caluinists, in this article of greatest importance, are
therefore abused, and by consequence in all the rest I before marked, which are
out of this deduced against us, which are in great number. Reuew them, and in
so many points acknowledge your selves deceived.

I have at large examined this article, as well for that, as has been showed,
it is of greatest importance; as also for that the falsehood thereof being
discovered, the Ministers are bereaved of the most efficatious, and ordinary
means they had to defend themselves, in these conflicts; for they always fly
for refuge to this Proposition, That nothing must be believed, bus that which
is in the Scripture Their custom is to question us, where find you Purgatory
in the Scripture? or the real presence of the body of Jesus Christ in the
sacrament of the Altar etc. For, say they, if it be not there, it is
superstition to believe it. And by this means, in lieu of reforming our
pretended abuses by the pure word, they cunningly engage us to prove our
faith. A wyly devise. Catholics look unto their fingers, and be sure that
when they make you such questions, you take not upon you to be disputants: but
allthough you have many authorities, yett bring no place of Scripture to
justify your cause. Mark well the wilines of the Adversaries. They are bound
by their.31. article to reform us, and by their.5. to do it by the pure word:
by this disguise and fair appearance drawing many to their part. But their
practice is after another fashion. For knowing well that they are never able to
perform that, which they have bound themselves unto, to disingage themselves
from this obligation, by a fine devise they endeavor to make us the plaintifs,
questioning us after the fashion aforesaid. And if in awnswere of their
questions, you bring some express textes for your self, behold, by this the
Minister has got his neck out of the collar, and having before hand quitt
himself of all Anquity, Fathers, Miracles etc. he will turn of the Scripture
at his own pleasure, and in fine delude you, though you have ten clear textes
for your purpose: Of this we have daily experience. Handle him in an other
fashion. You must never let him change his coat. He is obliged by the
Confession of his faith to show you by the pure word your errors; hold him to
it there to his testimonies of the pure word, which must set down your
pretended errors; Do but this, and I warrant you the Minister will quickly be
brought upon his knees; and have a care you release him not, but keep him
down. But how? urge him still with this, that he show you some express text
of Scripture which says, That there is no Purgatory; or That, the body of
Jesus Christ is not in the Eucharist. It is his charge to do it, who has
pawned his word to show us by the pure word our errors. But if he hope to
escape the torture by this slight, saying that he sufficiently shows our
error in that (as he says) we cannot show by the Scripture Purgatory, or the
real presence: Have a care, that though you have many clear textes on your
side, bring none, make not your selves Plaintifs, for so he will be delivered
from the rack; but press him eagrely that he shw you that he promised, or at
least, that nothing must be believed but that, which is in the Scripture (for
by this maxim alone does he argue you of error) And then that after he has
done this, you will produce your places. Not being able to show this
proposition in the whole Scripture (as by the precedent examen I have showed he
cannot) he is driven to a non plus, nor has he any means to escape away. Thus
shall you show breefly and evidently, that their 31. and 5. articles ar false,
which promised to reform our pretended abuses by the pure word, and cannot do
it: And that the Mimisters are egregious impostours, which under such a fair
pretext have seduced so many thowsands of souls. And you of the pretended
religion, put but your Ministers to this trial, and you will see them
presently fall speechles, and your selves apparently abused.

Before we pass any farther, I cannot omit to examine breeflie one clause of
the 24. article, which I before let pass, for that for it there is cited in
the margent a text, which is not done in the other clauses.

An other clause of the 24. article.

Out of the vvare-hovvse of the devil, proceed the forbidding to marry, and
the free use of meats, and the ceremonious observation of some days. Text.
In the last times certain shall depart from the faith, attending to spirits
of errors, forbidding to marry, commanding to abstain from meats, which
God created for the faithful, to receive them with thanks giving, for every
creature of God is good, and nothing to be rejected. 1. Timoth. 4. Verse. 3.

Examen.
By this clause the Article seems to reprehend the Catholicque Church, but
wrongfullie. For. 1. she forbids not to marry, otherwise no Catholic could
be married, but that he must break the precept of the Church; she only
causes that to be kept, which God in his Scriptures commands: to wit, that
men fulfill their vows, and for this cause that Preests, and others which have
vowed chastity, and continency, observe their vows, whereby it follows that
they may not marry. Neither does the text alleged say ought to the contrary.
2. I admire the little judgment of the Ministers; do they think that the
Physicians commanding their patients to abstain from some meats for a time
to recover their health, do go against the Apostle, and teach a deuilish
doctrine?

I am more amazed at the impudency of these men, who reading the prohibition
of some meats made by the Apostles, gathered together in the 1. Council.
Act. 15. verse. 28. in these words It has seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to
us, to lay no further burden upon you, then these necessary things. Among
other things that you abstain from blood and that which is strangled. They
dare, abusing the text cited, say, not without execrable blasphemy, against the
holy Apostles, and against the holy Ghost. That from the ware-howse of the
devil proceeds the prohition of some meats; terming hereby the holy Ghost
satan, and the first sacred Council of the Apostles, the ware-howse of the
devil, and their prohibition an abuse and illusion. S. Paul, which assisted at
that sacred Council, is far of from censuring in that manner that precept,
which he with the rest had decreed to abstain from certain meats. But
forseeing that there would come heretics, that would forbid marriage as a
thing in it self unlawful, and invented by the devil; and some meats as
naught in themselves and of their own nature (so did the Maniche, Marcion and
Tatian, as S. Augustine, with others recounteth) these the Apostle condemns.
The Church is far distant from this error. Thus do S. Augustine, S.
Chrysostom, S. Hierome, and S. Ambrose expound this place; and the reason
which the Apostle brings for his condemnation contained in these words, every
creature of God is good, does authorize the same. And it belongs to the
Minister, who is plaintiff, to prove the contrary. Finally, the Church does
not absolutely command to abstain from meats, for it forbids not fish,
whice is meat; nor at all times, but only certain particular meats, and at
certain times; which thing the Apostle reprehends not, who speaks of these,
who absolutely command to abstain from meats, and that without limitation
to any times. 3. for the proof of the 3. clause of the observation of days,
the article has cited no text, in that therefore it deceaueth.

An other clause of the 24. article.

JESUS CHRIST is given us for the sole Advocate: All that which men have
imagined about the intercession of Saints departed, is naught else but an abuse
and deceit of Satan. Examen.
The only point of controversy between us in the first clause of this
article, is of the word (sole) for these two textes are cited in margent, for
the second clause nothing, the first in the 1. Timoth. 2.5.

Text.
There is one only God, and one only mediator betvveen God and men, man JESUS
CHRIST.

Examen.
I will set down the text entierly, to make it more clear that he says not
that, which the article teaches: behold the Apostles words.

God will that all men be saved, and come to the knowledge of truth, for
there is one only God, and one only mediator betvveene God and men, man JESUS
CHRIST who gave himself for reedmption of all. I find not in this passage
alleged the terms (of Advocate, of intercession) of which we debate, neither
find I thar Saints are shutt out from that office of Advocate, as says the
article. And if the Minister say that the name of mediator, as S. Paul
understands it, is the same with Advocate; I aunsweare first, that the
Minister, or rather his Confession of faith, must prove that the name of
mediator is taken for mediator, and Advocate by intercession, and not for
mediator and Advocate by redemption; He I say must prove this, and that by
the pure word alone, otherwise the place alleged consents not with the
Confession of faith, neither does it reject the intercession of Saints. 2. I
make aunsweare (which by the place entirely cited does appear) that S. Paul
spoke of one Mediator (they are the Apostles own words) who has given
himself a redemption for all: of such a Mediator he says that he is one
alone, neither do the Catholics teach that the Saints are such mediators.
This passage therefore proves nothing against Catholicques, neither does it say
that JESUS CHRIST is given us for our sole Advocate, nor that to believe the
intercession of Saints is an abuse, and deceit of the devil. ^. This word
(sole) has been added by the Ministers in the Geneua Bible for it is neither
in the Greek nor Latin text: and S. Paul to the Galat. 3. calls Moses
Mediator.

The second passage, alleged for this clause in their Confession, is in the
1. epistle of S. John. 2. Verse. 1.2.

2. Text.
These things I write unto you, that you sin not. But and if any one sin,
we have an Advocate with the Father, JESUS Christ the just: for he is the
propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only; but also for those of the
whole world.

Examen.
Is it not manifest, that he speaks not of every Advocate, but of an Advocate
which is a propitiation for the sins of the whole world, to wit by the
effusion of his blood? The Catholicques hold not any other such Advocate, but
our Savior. To what purpose then is it to bring this passage, which touches
not that which is in controversy? And mark well that it is the Ministers
part, who is Plaintiff, to show that the name of Advocate is here taken for
any intercessour, even him, who is not a propitiation for the sins of the
world by his passion; and all this by the pure word. 2. Besides, if the
Minister will pertinaciously understand by the name of Advocate him, who is not
a propitiation for the sins of the world which is of his own head without
the pure word, yea against the pure word alleged.) This word only) of which
we only strive, not being in this text, this place vere^eth not this article
that JESUS Christ only Advocate.

Let us come to the 20. Article.

These are the words.

Article. 20.
We believe that we are made partakers of that justice (to wit Christian) by
faith alone.

Textes cited in the Margent of this Article.

Man is justified by faith, without the works of the law. Romans 3. Verse. 28.

Man is not justified by the works of the Law, but only by the faith of
JESUS Christ. Galat. 2. Verse. 16.

Before faith came we were kept under the law, shut up unto that faith
which was to be revealed. Therefore the law was our Pedagogue in Christ,
that we might be justified by faith, but when that faith is come now we are
not under a Pedagogue Galat. 3. Verse. 23.

Examen.
I read not one word, in all these textes, of the works of Christian faith,
of which alone, and of no others we speak, and hold necessary to
justification. It is manifest that this pure word alleged, speaks of works
of the Judicial religion, styled commonly by S. Paul by the name of the Law,
and not of the works of Christian Religion. These passages therefore say only,
that Christian faith without Circumcision, and other ceremonies of the Jews,
does justify. Who denies this? is this all one, or as much as to say that
Christian faith, without the works, which proceed from the said faith in JESUS
Christ, as is penance, does justify? Which is that the article teaches.
Wherefore this pure word seconds not that which the article says. I am amazed
at the impudency, or ignorance of the Ministers: S. Paul discoursing so largely
in five whole chapters of that epistle to the Galathians, against those which
would join with Christian faith Circumcision, and other works of Iudaisme;
and the very titles of those chapters in the Geneua translation noting the
same: yet the adversaries will allege these against them, who hold that
Christian works are necessary to justification. Open but the epistle, and
thou will detest such abusers; the whole epistle shows that which I say. It
shall suffice for proof hereof to cite the words of the. 5. chapter. 2.
verse. Behold I tell you, that if you be circumcised, Christ shall proffit you
nothing, and I testify again to every man circumciding himself, that he is a
debtor to do the whole law; you are euacuated from Christ, that are justified
in the law. You are fallen from grace, for we by faith exspect the hope of
justice. In JESUS Christ neither circumcision avails ought, uor prepuce, but
faith working by charity. Do not you falsefye? does not S. Paul teach in these
last words the contrary to your article? The Apostle opposes Christian
Religion, which is called faith in Christ, unto the Judicial religion, which
is named the law; and teaches that this later is not necessary to
justification, but that the former suffiseth, and does not oppose Christian
faith to Christian works. The last text cited for the foresaid article, has
as little energy as the precedents. it is this of S. John 3. Verse. 15.16.

As Moses exalted the Serpent in the desert, so must the son of man be
exalted, that every one which believes in him, perish not, but may have life
everlasting. For so God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son,
that every one that believes in him, perish not, but have life everlasting.
The word (only) of which only is our variance, and which is in your article,
teaching that faith only justifies, is not in this text: wherefore this, unless
you add thereto the word (only) makes nothing to your purpose; and how often
does this speech, to believe in JESUS Christ, signify to profess the
Gospel, and live according to the same? for faith, says S. James in the 1.
chapter 17. verse. If it have not works is dead. Does not S. Paul. Galat. 5.
Verse. 6. say that that which justifies is faith, working by charity? Does not
our Savior pronounce this sentence; if thou will enter into life keep the
commandments? But I am not bound to prove, that faith alone without
Christian works does not justify, it is you that are engaged to prove by the
pure word, that that alone does justify; alone, I say, for of that alone do
we dispute. In the 11. article it is said that.

Article 11.
Original sin after Baptism is still sin, as it is a fault; howbeit the
condemnation thereof is taken away in the children of God, who of his
merciful goodness does not impute it unto them.

In proof of this is alleged one only place in the margent. Romans 7. Verse. 7.

Text.
What shall we say then? is the law sin? God forbid, but sin I did not
know, but by the law, for concupiscence I knevv not, unless the law did say,
thou shall not covet.

Examen.
Here is not in the text one word contained in the article; wherefore this
Confession, promising to say nothing but by the pure word, abuses us in this
point. Go on.

Let us examine the 36. and 37. articles, which speak of the B. Sacrament:
which since it is obscurely spoken of, for more perspicuity I will borrow
somewhat out of your Catechism.

The 1. clause of the 36. article.

We testify that the Supper is a testimony of the unity, which we have
with JESUS Christ; whose body (you say in your Catechism in the 53. lesson
or Sunday) is not included under the bread, nor his blood within the chalice,
that we must not seek him in these corruptible elements. For proof you
allege this text. Text.
The cup of benediction which we do bless, is it not the communion of the
blood of Christ? and the bread which we do break, is it not the communion of
the body of Christ? for being many, we are one only bread, and one only
body, for we all partake of one only bread. 1. Corinthians. 10. Verse. 16.17.

Examen.
I read not in this text (testimony of the unity with JESUS Christ) the text
therefore agrees not with the article. But I read communion of blood, communion
of body, which is a different matter from testimony of unity with JESUS Christ,
and shows that the body of JESUS Christ may be found in these corruptible
elements, under the accidents of bread and wine; which this article denies.

An other clause of the same article

In the supper are Signss, which testify that the body and blood of JESUS
Christ, serves no less for the soul to eat and drink, then bread and wine
does for the body. These Articles say not in express terms that the body of
JESUS Christ is not in the Eucharist to cover with obscurity their error; to
disperse this darkness I must borrow some light from their Catechism in the 53.
lesson. we must not (says it) understand that the body is enclosed within the
bread, nor the blood within the chalice; but contrariwise, to have the verity
of this sacrament, we must lift up our hearts on high to heaven, where JESUS
Christ is, and not seek him in these corruptible elements. For this clause you
cite two textes.

1. Text.
I am the living bread, that came down from heaven: if any man eat of this
bread, he shall live for ever, and the bread which I will give is my flesh,
which I will give for the life of the world. John. 6. Verse. 51.

Examen.
First I read not in this text (signs which testify) but this expressly,
that Christ is the living bread, not common bread made of flower, and baked; but
which is his flesh, which says he, I will give for the life of the world; As
also in the giving of it he said, Take, This is my body, which shall be given for
you. Was it a sign, or figure of his body, which was nailed one the cross:
was it not his proper body? This clause then is false. 2. The ministers, who
have promised to propose nothing but the pure Scripture, how do they thrust
upon us this clause so weighty, The body of JESUS Christ is not contained, and
included within the bread, nor the blood etc. Without any written word? see
their fraud, and how well they keep their word in a matter of greatest moment.

2. Text.
JESUS took bread, and having given thanks brake it, and said take, eat.
This is my body, which is broken for you; do this in commemoration of me. In
like manner after supper he took the cup saying, this cup is the new
testament in my blood, this do ye, as often as you shall drink thereof in
remembrance of me. 1. Corinthians. 11. Verse. 24.

Examen.
Who can find out in this text. Signs which testify; figure; sign of the
body of JESUS Christ; which is not in the bread, nor the blood in the chalice?
all which the article teaches. The text then helps them nothing; nay how
could the text more clearly reject the adversaries belief, which is that the
body is not under the bread nor the blood within the chalice. Let the
Caluinistes consider if they be abused or no: The Ministers have entered bonds
to show by the pure word, That the supper is a sign which tesstifieth, a
figure of the body of our savior, which is not under the bread, and of the
blood which is not within the chalice: and to cancel their obligations, they
bring for payment this text of Scripture, in which (being it is written down)
if you read it not, either you want your sight, or they deceive you. Rather
see you not the contrary? then say they are doubled iuglers.

An other clause of that Article.

After affirming that JESUS Christ does nourish, and quicken us with the
substance of his body, and of his blood, that which the Catholics believe
also; they add, (in which we disagree) without aledging any text for the same
(wherefore put underneath for proof a cipher as before.)

1. We hold notvvithstanding, that this is done spiritually.

Proof. o.

2. The supper is a figure of the body, or, In the supper is figured the body
of JESUS Christ.

Proof. o.

3. Because the mystery of this supper is celestial, it cannot be taken but
by faith, or to use their vulgar phrase, by the mouth of faith: Those which
bring with them a pure faith as a vessel, receive truly that which the
signs testify; commonly they say, That in the supper is eaten the body of
JESUS Christ by the mouth of faith and in the 53. Sunday of their Catechism,
it is said, to have the verity of the Sacrament, we must lift up our hearts
to heaven where it is.

Proof. o.

Behold many articles, and of great consequence proved by a Cipher. Behold how
you are abused. The Ministers make you believe all this, not being able to show
for it any text of Scripture. The consequence will be, that your supper is
purely their own invention: This by your principles I show. For you have no
pure textes which say that, which you affirmatively believe of the supper, of
which you hold those three things aforesaid principally. It is figure etc.
that by the mouth of faith the body eateh etc. you should distinctly set
down that, which of our faith you deny in this matter, from that which therein
you positiuely believe: for how be it that we did err (of which I have showed
the contrary) and that your negative propositions JESUS Christ is not in the
Eucharist, and the like were true; it follows not that that, which you
affirmatively believe, most needs be true; and that you err not therein.
Because one goes wrong one way, is he, which takes an other, certain to go
right? may not both be out of their way? Examine therefore your assertions, and
you find not any show of textes that teach, that the supper is a figure of
the body etc. nor which speak of the mouth of faith. Consequently your whole
supper is a humane invention. Which being so, in my opinion in the eating a
good capo^, or a cock, you may more easily remember the death of the son of
God, for that therein is made mention of the crowing of a cock; then in eating
a bit of bread. For which cause you shall do more prudently, to make of them a
figure and memory, then of a piece of bread; which is no more holy, then that
you eat commonly at your table.

It may be that some Caluiniste, thinking himself better skilled in the
Scriptures, then the Ministers which composed the Confession of faith, and
cited for proof thereof those sacred textes they judged most favorable, will
urge, to prove the supper to be a figure, that, which our Savior said John.
6. Verse. 63. It is the spirit which quickens, the flesh proffiteth nothing,
the words which I speak unto you are spirit and life. For awnswere. 1. You
must understand, that your Ministers are at variance, whether in the 6. of S.
John any thing be spoken of the supper. Calvin in the fourth book of his
Instit. cap. 17.. 33. Kemnicius, and Zuinglius deny it. How then will you
establish this firm article of your faith upon so weak a foundation, doubted
of by these of your own faction? How can you serve your selves of that passage
against us, either for your figure, or for your Spiritually? 2. I read not in
this text figure: and if any one say that spirit and figure is all one; I may
not believe him without his proof, and that by the pure Scripture. And who
perceaues not how ridiculous this devise is? the devils are spirits, are they
figures? the Angels and our souls are spirittes? are they also figures? God
himself is he not a most pure spirit? is he a figure? it belongs not to me to
explicate this place. I only show that the pure word says not that, which the
article contains, and consequently the Ministers mock us. Yet by the way,
know that the sense of this text is, that our Savior would not give us to
eat his flesh dead, and in pieces (as we eat of the ordinary flesh, as the
Capharnaites imagined) to eat of flesh in this manner, proffitteth nothing to
salvation; but flesh animated by his spirit, and quickened by his divine life:
in this manner we eat it. In which fashion we cannot eat any other flesh,
for it must first be dead, before it nourish us. Remember finally that I do
not by this Scripture prove my faith, this suffiseth me, that in these words
you read not either figure of body, or that we hold that it is done
spiritually, in such manner that the body is not contained there, this, I say,
suffiseth to make you know you are misledd. For since you read it not, (which
doubtless if it were there, you might) the pure word warranteth not that which
this article contains.

Behold Sir the art, which in this letter I promised to discover unto you: is
it not a rare and worthy hunting-game? have you ere this seen such coursing?
F. Veron in teaching it me, told me that, which I know will give it no small
luster in your eye: that he received the origin, and substance thereof from the
R.F. Gontery, which famous hunter was the author, and inuentour of this so
efficacious, and facile sport; who also used no other in his disputes a-against
the Ministers, judging this the best, and most powerful of all. And you know
well, that that fearful scourge of the Heretic is most expert in these
combats (...) being so beaten a soldiour in those wars, each prudent man will
make a great esteem of his advise herein. He has putt to slight the Ministers
of Dieppe, of Caen, of Sedan etc. and among the rest some Allmaines he found
at Tourlac. But how? Truly by no other means but this, by the pure Scripture
alone, and that after the Geneua Translation, by the practice before set down:
Saving that he brideled them in more shortly, for he never suffered them in any
point debated, to proceed by consequences, which they said they would deduce
out of the Scripture, unless they first subscribed, that they could not enter
combat with us by the pure written word.

I should now send you the relation promised of this Conference, between F.
Veron, and the Minister Hucher, but because the printer, by reason of the great
frostes could not dispatch the same so soon, as I hoped; not to keep you
wholly in suspense, I send you the summary thereof, together with the means to
buckle with the Sectaries. The whole Conference is under the press, you shall
have it within eight days; join it to this fashion of hunting which I now
send you, for in that you will see the practice of this kind of chase, used by
the Father in this conflict. Here will you also see, by this so succesfull and
remarkable victory, the efficacy of this art. It is scarcely possible to putt
a man to more confusion, then the Minister was in. The fame of this victory
struck the sectaries to the heart. Seeing the title of this epistle before it
was printed, they were much offended at it, but all parts thereof are easily
justified, by the Acts of the Conference signed. Behold out of them the
Ministers own words. He having promised to show by the pure word, that JESUS
Christ is not in the Eucharist, after a little pressing said; The truth is,
that these words (the body of JESUS Christ is not in the Eucharist) are not in
the Scripture. And after being urged a little harder, he confessed besides
twice, before all the assembly, that he had not any text in Scripture, which,
setting aside all consequences, contained formally and expressly the sense of
this proposition. JESUS Christ is not in the Eucharist, which notwithstanding
he before undertook to show by the pure word; and so to reform the Jesuit in
his error. Is not this as much as to confess, that he could not by the pure
word reform us in this point? is not this to forsake it? is not this to
renounce the office and exercise of a reformer? think you these fittes
proceed from a merry heart? wherefore with reason the epistle bears for title
The Minister of Amiens constrained to renounce the pure word of holy write:
He stayed so long dumme, and in presence of so many persons, and of such
quality, that there is no tergiuersation: and refused so long time in the third
session, to come to the proof of that, in which the day before he was struck
speechles, or also to deal in any other point; that the flight is as evident,
as the day light. Wherefore the epistle has right unto his title. Within few
days you shall see the narration at large, well subscribed and signed; in the
mean time notwithstanding, for justification of the summary thereof, set
down in the beginning of this letter, I have procured these subscriptions
following.

Subscriptions of the Conference, the sum vvherof is contained in the
beginning of this letter.
WE the subsigned Gentlemen of the Duke of Longueuille, being present with
our said Lord at the Conferences, of which the narration is before set down,
do testify that they have truly passed as it is declared. Given at Amyens the
12. of February. 1615.

Pelletot, Foucaucourt, Le Cheualier de Moyencourt, Gondreuille, Tannere,
Goustimenil, Courtauenel.

Certain poincts collected out of this practice, and other experiences of this
kind, reduced to six heads, for the more wary proceeding of Catholics with
Sectaries of our age.
THE 1. poinct. Seeing that our new Sectaries do suppose us Catholics to be
deceived, in our belief, and that they are sent to reform us by the only
written word of Scripture, er the Catholic enter into conference with any
Sectarie, let him first demand what he understands by the only written
word of Scripture: whither the Old and new Testament, with all the parts of
each both, as we Catholics do; or else what? Then let the Catholic request
the Sectarie to prove by the only written word, as he took upon him, that
the whole Bible, or such parcels as he does admit for holy Scripture, or
reject, ar in deed, or at not holy Scripture. He cannot do it; but by
Tradition, and by the Catholic Church her authority.

The 2. is. No Catholic conferring, must seek to prove our opinions, which
the Sectaries disalowe of; for we are in possession, and defendants, not
plainetifes.

The 3. is. The Catholic must not in any case permit the Sectarie to bring
any proof whatsoever, other then the only written word of Scripture, and
this also without any interpretation, gloss, or consequence of his own brain.

The 4. is Let not the Catholic suffer his Adversary to leap from pale to
perch, and from one Controversy to another, until he be convinced of error
in his belief, and this by the only written word.

The 5. is. The Sectarie not proouing by the only written word, that which
he promised, as not able to perform it; the Catholic must constrain either
him, or some else there present, to subscribe that he could not prove what he
undertook, in such sort, as he ought to have done.

The 6. and last is. The Catholic must confer, and consider with attention
the places of Scripture, alleged by Sectaries to disprove our doctrine; for
ordinarily they make no more to the purpose, then appear to a nut. For
example to prove that we must believe the only written word: they bring
forth these places. Deuter 4. v. 2. Deuter. 12. v. 32. Galat. 1. v. 8.
Apocalip. 22. v. 18. which make nothing against us, or for them. For by the
first and second, we should, according to the sense of our adversaries, believe
naught else, but that which is in the Deuteronomie; by the third, nothing but
that epistle of S. Paul; by the last, naught else but the Apocalipse. See their
madness, and foolery, and look to their water.


