A FRVTEFVL treatise of Predestination, and of the deuyne providence of god, as
far forth as the holy scriptures and word of god shall lead us, and an answer
made to all the vain and blasphemous objections that the Epicures and
Anabaptists of our time can make.

Set forth Dialoge wise, by Ihon Veron.

To the most Godly, virtuous, and mighty Princess Elizabeth, by the grace of
God, Queen of England, France and Irelande, defendor of the faith, and supreme
governor of this realm, as well in causes Ecclesiastical as temporal, her
humble subject Ihon Veron, wysheth grace, long life, and increase of honor
from God the father, through his son Jesus Christ our Lord.
Some peradue^ter (most myghtie princes) will meruail and wonder, that I being
but a pore stranger, dwellinge here within your graces dominion, dare be so
bold to dedicate any manner of book unto your majesty, being so seriously
occupied in the weighty affairs of the common weal, and also so earnestlye
given (and that to the great comfort of all your louinge subjects that
hear of it) to the study of divine letters, and diligent reading of the godly
and learned works of the auncyente fathers of the primitive church. But they
shall I trust, cease from meruailing, when they shall both call to
remembrance this saying of Paul: there is neither Jew nor Grecian, there is
nether bond nor free, Gala. iii.
there is nether man nor womanne: For, ye are all one in CHRIST JESUS: and also
when they shall set before their eyes, the exceadynge great Clemency, and
Princelye goodness, that your grace is most richly endued withal.

Which only at this present have so comforted me, that puttinge all vain
fear a side, I dare now with all due submyssyon and subject like reverence,
offer this my rude labor, unto your soueraygne Majesty, not doubtinge but
that your Grace will, according to your wont and accustomed bountuousnesse,
accept this my good will that I bear, both to your person, and also to the
faithful congregation of Gods people. For whose sake, I have at this time
enterprised and taken in hand to write and setforthe this small treatise of
Predestination and of the divine providence of God, to this end that I might
enarm and fence the true church of God against the pestiferous sect of the
fre will men of our time, Why the free will men are enemies unto the doctine of
Predestination.
which are for non other cause enemies unto the most comfortable doctrine of
Predestination, which is plainlye enough (if men will have eyes to see) setforth
unto us in the infallible word of God, and sacred scriptures, contained in the
canonical books of the old and new Testament, but because that they will have
part of our salvation to be attributed unto our selves, and to the merits of
our own works, and not the hole glory thereof to be given unto Christ, and
unto the merits only of his death, passion, and bloudshedding. Such has
been always the subtyl and crafty wiliness of that most ancient serpente, who
deceived in times past, our first Parents, Adam and Eve, for to make us
before the divine majesty of God rank sacriledges, I mean traitors, robbers
of Gods glory. For, whatsoever of our salvation, we do adscribe either unto
our selves, or unto our own merits and deseruyngs, the same we do most
sacrilegiously pluck and take away from the gratuite and mere mercy of god,
and from the merits of the death, passion, and bludsheding of his son Jesus
christ our lord and savior. I do here let pass, that by thimpugnyng of this
doctrine satan the devil, goes about, as much as in him lies, to overthrow
the infalliblenesse, By what means we are certifed of our election.
and certainty of our election, whereof we be certified by the preaching of Gods
word by thinward workyng of the holy ghost, and also by justification, which
we do obtain freely by faith in the only begotten son of god. For take away the
right understanding of the matter of predestination, the assurance of our
salvation, which springs of the fre election of god, whereby we are chosen in
Christ Jesus before ye fou^dacions of the world were laid, is clean overthrown,
Ephe. i.
and the whole doctrine of justification by faith, as builded up on a sandy
ground, is most easy to be blown down by the dangerous blaste of the
wicked temptation of the spirit of mistrust and misbeleue, or of wavering
doubtfulnes. I know (most gracius princes) that I shall have many ennemies, for
wryti^g of this work but I will desire the^ all, in the bowels of our savior
Jesus Christ, that they will vouchsafe to read the whole tretise through with
patience, sobriety, and judgment, and then I do not dout, but that their a^ger
will be pacified, and their minds satisfied, if at least, they be so
reasonable, that either the scriptures or the authorities of the ancient
fathers, can in any wise satisfy them. And as for those, Answer August de bono
perseuerantia. cap. xiiii.
I will answer them by s. Augustine, who writes on this manner: As though this
doctrine had hindered the Apostle s. Paul to do his duetye, who so often times
did commend unto us and teach the doctrine of Predestination, and yet never
ceased to preach ye word of god. Again: As he that has received the gift
ca^ better exhort and preach, so he that has received the gift does hear
the preacher more obediently, and with greater reverence. And a little after:
we do therefore exhort and preach, but they only, which have ears to hear do
hear us quietly, or obediently, and to their own comfort: and in those that
have them not, this sentence is fulfilled, that hearing with their ears they
do not hear: for, they hear with the se^ce of the body, but not with the
consent of the heart. Now that some have ears to hear and some have not, it is
because that it is given of the father to some of them to come unto the son,
and to the other not given. Romans xi.
Who knew the meaning of God, or who was a counsel with him? What man art
thou that doste answer God? Romans ix.
Must that be denied, which is plain, because, that can not be known, which
is hidden and secreat? And in a other place: I pray you (says this holy
father) if some under the shadow of predestination, Augu. de bono per se. ca. xv.
give them selves to slouthful negligence, and as they are bent to flater their
own flesh, so follow their own lusts, must we therefore judge, that this
which is written of the foreknowledge of god, is false. Now surely this is very
hansome, and to the purpose, that we shall not speak that, which by the
scripture is lawful to speak. But we fear (will some say) least he should be
offended, which is not able to understand and take it. And shall we not in the
mean season fear, least while we hold our tongue, he yt is able to take the
truth be taken and snarde with falshode and error? Moreover thus he does write
in ye same self book: Since the apostles and doctors of the church, Capi. xx.
which came after the^, did the one and the other, both teaching purely and
sincerly the grace of god, which without any merits, is given frelye unto us,
and also reteining or keeping the faithful in godly obedience, life and ma^ners,
what moves these our adversaries (being overthrown with the manifest and
invincible truth) to think they say well, affyrming that although this doctrine
of predestination be true, yet it ought not to be preached unto the people: yea
so much the rather, it ought to be thoroughly preched, that he that has ears
to hear, may hear. Mani other notable sayings might I aledge out of his book,
which is entitled: De bono perseuerantiae except I should fear to be over
tedious unto your majesty. The godly warning of Saint August.
This only will I add, how that this holy ancient father does warn us of
two things in teaching this doctrine of predestination. The one is that we wade
in it no farther, the^ the scripture and word of God does lead us. The other,
that we hide nothing from the true church of god, that is reveled unto us in
the book of God, but faithfully set it forth to ye edifying and comfort of gods
people. Which ii. points, I trust, I have most diligently observed, as it
shall apear unto al the^, that shall with judgment, and with a single eye, read
over the hole book, markinge well the method or order of teachinge, that I
have used throughout the whole work. Thus I make an end, humbli beseching your
most excellent majesty, of your gracious and benygne goodness, to accept this
mi simple travel, waying rather the faithfulness of my true heart toward your
highness, then the smalnes of this my gift, that so it may pass forth,
through your highness name and permissyon, into the hands of your unfeigned and
faithful subjects, to the more full strength in the knowledge of god and of
his holy and divine mysteries, and also to the more perfect assurance of their
salvation in Christ Jesus, who of his tender merci and goodness, vouchsafe to
defend and preserve your most gracious highness from al your ennemies, and
with his holy spirit so to fill, strengthen, and comfort your princely heart,
that ye may at al times, boldly set forth his glory, and maintain it unto your
lives end. Which the Lord long continue to his honor.

A fruitful treatise of predestination, and of the divine providence of God,
as far fourth as the holy scriptures and word of God shall lead us, and an
answer made to all the vain and blasphemous objections that the Epicures and
Anabaptists of our time can make. Set forth Dialoge wise, by Ihon Veron.
The names of the speakers.
Albion. Eutrapelus. Philalethes. Dydimus.
ALBION. I do give God most hearty thanks, that ye are come so sone this
morning. For I have many hard and doubtful questions, to setforthe now unto
you, which have troubled my mind very sore. My mind was, because yt yesterday
we did talk of praying for ye dead, where I did learn that all the good deeds
and prayers that are done and made for them, that was don in the huntinge of
purgatory unto death.
that be once departed and gone, be nothing available before God, nor yet
profitable unto them, that they be done and made for: to have asked you,
whether we ought to pray unto the dead or not, and to call upon them in our
necessities and troubles. For my gentle men did tell me, that we ought to
pray unto the dead saints, as unto the blessed Virgyne Mary, the holy
Apostles and martirs, and that by them our prayers are the sooner hard, and
accepted of God ours heavenly father. But now will I differ that matter til an
other time, wh^ we shall have more leisure, and brin^ forth the questions, that
have troubled me so much, and specially se^ ye went away from me yester nyg^


PHILALETHES. We would b^ glad to know, brother Albion, what is that troubles
your mind so sore For ye shall understand, that we ar^ here most ready to
help and ease yo^ of your trouble, if it can be possib^ by any mean. But were
it not best to pray first unto him that says. Come unto me all ye that
labor and are laden and I will ease you? Math. xi.



EVTR APELVS. your counsel is very good. And therefore I do not doubt, but
that our brother. Albion and our neighbor Dydimus will agree unto it.


DYDIMVS. His counsel in this, as in all other things is so good and godly,
that whosoever would not follow it, I would compte him worse tha^ a Sarazin or a
Turk.


ALBION. Sith then, brother Philalethes, that we be also godly agreed begin
when ye shall think best.


PHILALETHES. O almighty and most merciful lord, The prayer.
in whom all treasures of heavenly wisdom, and godly knowledge are hydden,
vouchafe, we ^eseche the, to open our minds, and to illuminate our hearts,
that understanding ye mysteries contained in thy holy word, we may be able at
al times to stop the mouths of yt ungodly blasphemers of thy divine and
heavenly ordenau^ces grant this, o most bou^tuous and merciful lord, for the
glory of thy name sake.


ALBION. So be it. Now will I declare unto you, what it is that my conscience
is so sore encombred withal. When I do consider with my self, how that the
covenant of life and word of salvation is not preached unto all nations and
peoples in like: and again where it is preached, that skarcelye the tenth part
of them that it is offered unto, do embrace and receive it: I am eue^ at my
wits end, and can not tell what I should say to it. For, it is written, i.
Tim. ii.
that God will have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of his
truth. If he will have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of
his truth, why does he not send his Prophets and messengers unto all men
in like? We read that the sprite of God did forbid Paul and Silas to preach the
word in Asia, Act. xvi.
and that when they sought to go into Bithynia, he would in no wise suffer the^.
Again, where they were appointed to preach, it is a wonder and a meruail^ to
see how few did receive the gospel or glad tidinges of salvation, i^
comparison of those that did reiecte, contemn and despise it. I have heard you
say, and I know that it is written in the gospel of our savior Jesus Christ,
John. vi.
that none come unto the truth except our heavenly father does draw them. When
he him self did make that most wholesome and comfortable sermon of the
spiritual eating and drynking of his flesh and blood, John. vi.
they went all away from him, the twelf only excepted, then did he say: No man can come unto me, except it be given unto him of my father. Whereby I do
learn that they which receive the truth, when it is preached and offered unto
them, do it only through the grace and gift of almightye God our heavenly
father, and not of the^ selves. Why is not then this gift given unto al men in
like. Shall we say that god is a partial god, and an acceptour of persons? But
the holy scryptures do testifye unto us that there is no parcialiatye in him.
Sith then that all men generallye of their own nature, are the children of
wrath and none of them seek after god, Romans iii.
but are al gone out of the wat and made unprofitable: how does it chance, that
some of them, being in the same self corruption that other are, be called unto
the truth, and have grace given them to receive it, and the other left in the way
of perdition? Verily these things do wonderfully trouble my head, when I do
muse or think upon them. Therefore, brother Philalethes, if ye can discuss me
these matters, ye shall do me a great pleasure, for ye shall deliver me from a
marvelous perplexity and trouble of mind. Predestination and the divine
prouyde^ce of God.



Philalethes. Truly brother Albion, these questions are very hard and can not
be discussed, except we do entreat fully of predestination, and of the divine
providence of god, wherewith he does govern, rule, and dispose al things here in
this world, even at his own pleasure, and as he thinks it expedient for his
own glory, and for the salvation of his elect and chosen.


DyDIMVS. M^ think, A common objection of the papists.
brother Philalethes, that this matter of Predestination, does far pass^ the
capacity of ma^s wit, and that it is t^ much presumption to medel with such
high secrets and mysteries of almighty god.


PHI. It is without al doubt that this matter of Predestination is both hard,
and also somewhat perilous, To who^e the Doctrine of Predestinatyon is pearilous
specially if me^ will wade so far in it, which mani times comes of a folish
curiosity of mind, which is never contented nor satisfied with these things yt
be reveled and setforth unto us in the holy scriptures and sacred word of
almighty God our heavenly father, but will still clime up hier and hier, and
leave none of the seacrets of god vnserched. Therefore it is no maruail, that
such men since yt they do so rashly and presumptuously break into the
unsearchable secreates of gods wisdom, do bring the^ selves into an endless
perplexity, from the which they ca^ never be delivered, but shall in their
consciences and minds be miserably tormented all the days of their life, and
never come to the knowledge of the truth. Therefore it is good for all men to
consider ye God has reveled, opened, and declared unto us in his holy and
sacred word, al those seacreats that he will have us to know: and so much will
he have us to know, as he did forsee and think expedient for our salvation.
We are, says S. Augustine come into the way of faith. Let us steadfastly keep
it. August. in ye.xxxv. homelye upon John.
It shall bring us into the kings chamber, wherein all treasures of knowledge
and wisdom are hidden. For the Lord Christ him self, did not envy his great
and chosen disciples, when he did say. I have many things to say unto you but
ye are not hable to bear the^ now. We must walcke, we must go forewardes, we
must increase and grow, that our hearts may be able to receive those
things, yt we be not able to receive now. And if the last day do find us
going forewardes, there shall we learn the things that we could not learn
here. If we could be once persuaded that the word of God is the only way and
mean, we ought to co^tente ourselves with gods word
for to seek and search out those things that he will have to be known of
him, and the only light, for to see, what so ever he will have to be seen of
him, then should no such rashness take place in us. For we should see that
as soon as we be once passed the limits and bounds of Gods word, we must
neades run out of the way, and wander in darcknesse, where of necessytye we
must neades err, stumble, and fall down every foot. Where we ought to seek
for the doctrine of predestination.
Let us therefore have this lesson always before our eyes, that to seek for
any other knowledge of predestination, than is set forth unto us in Gods
word, it is no less madness, than if a man would run through nine walls, or se
in the thick darkness that Egypt was plaged with all. And let us not be ashamed
to be ignarant in those things, that god will have us be ignoraunte in. Yea let
us gladly abstain from searching out of those things, which can not be
searched and sought out without great pearil and ieoperdy. And if the
wantonness of our wit will not so be repressed and kept down, let us call into
our remembrance, the saying of the wise man. where he says: Pro. xxv. Eccle.
iii. chapter.
he that searches out the majesty of God shall be overwhelmed with the glory of
it. And again: Seek not out the things yt are above thy capacity, and search
not the ground of such things, as are so mighty for thee. But look what soever
god has commanded the, think upon that alwai, and be not curious in mani of
his work, for it is not nedeful for thee to se with thine eyes the things that
are secret.


EVTRA. Forsooth, this is the cause, In the vi. Articles.
that some men will have no me^tio^ at al to be made of predestination: yea there
have been laws and statutes made here tofore, yt whosoever did dispute or write
of it, he should be taken for an heretyke. Which, me think was against al
reason, sith yt the scriptures do forbid no man to speak of it, so that it be
don with due submission and reverence, and with such sobriety as is required in
high matters of religion.


PHILA. In this thing they have gone to much on the rightsyde. For as they be
praise worthy in this, yt they will not have men to go rashly about such hie
mysteries and secrets of almightye God: so are they greatly to blame, that
they will not suffer us to go and wade as far as ye sacred word of god, wherein
we have (...) most sure rule of understanding, does lead us. For we must
understand that the holy scripture is ye schole of the holy ghost, The holy
scripture is the schole of ye holy ghost.
and that as in it nothing is omitted or left untaught, yt is profitable and
necessary to be known, so nothing is setforth there but yt it is most fruteful
and profitable to be learned. What so ever therefore, the scriptures do setforth
and say, of predestination, let us beware yt we keep not the faithful from it:
least we seem either maliciously to defraude the^ of so high a benefit of the
lord their god, or to accuse the holy ghost, as though he had set fourth and
published things, which it had been better to keep close. Let us, I say,
permit Christen men to give both their ears and minds unto all the
scriptures and words of God, so that it be done with moderation, that as soon
as the Lord shall stop his holy and sacred mouth, they do al so cease to inquire
and search any farther. This is the best mesure or mean that we can keep, if
in learning we do follow God for our schoolmaster and teacher not desyring to
be wiser than he will have us to be.


DIDIMVS.


PHILALETHES. Nothing is left vnblasphemed of the ungodly.
than when they shall read or hear that God did forsee what should become of man, before he did create him. What will they think or say, I pray you,
when they shall understand that it is but a little more than five thousand
years a goo sens the world was made? Will they not both scornefullye and
also blasphemouslye ask what God did all that while affore? and why his power
and virtue was idle and unoccupied so long? What shall ye be able to say or to
writ, but that they will take occasion upon it, to blaspheme God and his
works? Shall we not therefore say that our savior Jesus Christ, Of this have I
written in my work against the Arrians and the Macedonians.
the only begotten son of God is true and natural God, and the holy ghost,
who proceadeth from them both, likewise? Shall all that is written of the
creation of the world, for auoidinge of such ungodly blasphemies be hidden
from the faithful? The false Aposteles that took occasion upon Paul's
preachinges and sermons, to blaspeme the mystery of our redemption, could not
stop his mouth, nor make him to be a shamed of the gospel of our savior
Jesus Christ. The verity and truth of God, both in this and in all other
things is so mighty and strong, that it needs not to fear the evil tongues
of the ungodly.


ALBION. I do well allow your sayings hitherto. And therefore I will desire you to
go forwards in this matter, and to declare unto us, what ye do understand by
predestination. For it is a thing that I am very desirous to know.


PHILALETHES. Some men paraduenture will think, The fore knoweledge of God.
that it were best to speak first of the foreknowledge of god, whereby he
knows all things before that they be done, or whereby all things that are,
have been, and shall be, are present unto him (for, unto the knowledge of god
all things are most presently present, nothing is passed, nothing is to come)
Some me^, I say, will think yt we should speak of this foreknowledge of god,
er we come to ye matter of Predestination. But sith that they be so ioyntlye
joined together, yt it is impossible for any man to entreat of ye one, but
that he must entreat of the other also, having given already a brief and short
definition of it, which may suffice for this time, I will come to
Predestination, and show, what because that Esaye the Prophet had said: John.
xii.
he has blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts, that they should not
see with their eyes, nor understand with their hearts, least they should be
converted, and so be healed.


ALBION. As far as I can remember, my gentle men did tell me, he determine to
save, whom he knows before, will receive his grace, and live according to
his word and commandments. And them does he appoint and ordain unto death
and condempnation, whom he knows before will not receive his grace, nor live
according to his blessed law and commandments. And for the probation of this,
they did bring in, that place which ye aledged first out of Saint Paul to the
Romans, where it is thus written: Romans viii
Whom he knew before, them did he also ordain before etc. Meaning there by, say
they, that whom he knew before, would receive his grace and the Gospel of his
son Jesus Christ, them he did also ordain to be fashioned like unto the shape
of his only begotten son. Moreover they did tell me, that almost in all ages,
many great learned men have been of this opinion. Answer



PHILA. I do not deny but that at all times, some, even of the best learned,
have maintained this opinion: which thing nevertheless ought in no wise to be
prejudicial unto us. For in this, the truth of god is so sure that it ca^ not
be shaken, and so clear that it can not be darckned, or overwhelmed with the
authoryty of men. When S. Paul does affirm and say that we were chosen in
Christ Jesus, Ephe, i.
before that the foundations of the world were laid, he takes a way al respect
of our own dignity and worthiness. For, it is as much as if he should say:
because that our heavenly father, could find nothing in all the hole sede of
Adam, that was worthy of his election, he did cast his eyes upon his holy
anointed, that so he might choose, as it were, certain members of his body,
whom he should call to the partaking and fellowship of life everlasting. Let
therefore, all the faithful be persuaded, that we are for this one only cause
chose in Christ, for to be heirs of the heavenly kingedome, because that in
our selves there was no manner of thing, that could have moved God, for to
elect and choose us: because, I say, yt there was no manner of thing in us, yt
could deserve any such thing at his hands. Which thing the Apostle does
also singnifye in an other place, where he exhortethe the Collossyans unto
thanks giving, Collo. i.
because that God had made them mete to be partakers of the inherytaunce of the
Saints. If election does, does go before this grace of the Lord, that we may
be made mete to obtain the glory of life everlasting, what shall God, I pray
you find in us, that should move him to elect and choose us? But the whole
sentence, being thoroughly rehearsed, I mean, as it lies in the text, will make
the matter so plain, that the most ignorant in ye world, if they will take a
little head, shall be able to give judgment of the matter, and to understand all the truth of it. God, says the hol^ apostle, Ephesians i. Although we be chosen in
Christ, before the foundations of the world were laid, whereof we be assured by
his word and spirit yet must we beware that we give not our selves to
vnclenelynesse. i. Tim. i.
has chosen us in christ Jesus, before that the foundatio^s of the world were
laid, that we should be holy, and without blame before him through love. And
has ordained us before through Jesus Christ, to be heyers unto him self,
according to the pleasure of his will, to the praise of ye glory of his grace,
wherewith he has reconciled or made us accepted in the beloved. Here does he
set the good pleasure of God, against al our merits. For where so ever this
good pleasure of god does reign, there can no works or merits take place, as
it appears more plainly by that, which he writes unto Timothe, saying: He
has saved and called us, with an holy calling not according to our deeds, but
according to his own purpose and grace, which grace was given us through
Christ before the world was made.


EVTRAPELVS. Me think that where the Apostle says: that we are chosen in
Christ Jesus, for to be holy and blameless in his sight, the same alone were
enough for to overthrow all that they can bring. Paul's saying, being well
considered does over throw the enemies of the free election of god.
For if we should say that god did choose us, because that he did forsee that
we should be holy and blameless, then could not the saying of Paul stand.
Therefore, we may bodily reason after this manner: if god did choose us for to
be holy and blameless in his sight, truly he did not choose us because that he
did forsee, that we should be holy and blameless. For, these two are
utterly repungnaunte one unto an other: to have of gods election, that we be
holy and blameless, and to come unto it, I mean unto the same election, by
reason of our own works and deservings.


PHILALETHES. Your reason is very good. The holiness of the saints has his
ofspringe of the election of god.
For, when it is said that the faithful were chosen, for to be holy and
blameless in the sight of god, it is signified thereby that the holiness that
should be in them, has had his beginnynge and of spring of the election,
whereby they have been chosen in Christ Jesus. For, what reason were it to say,
that those things, which do come and spring of election, have been ye
caussers of it. But he seems afterward to make his argument more strong, when
he says: according to his pleasure, which he had purposed in him self. For,
Where unto our election ought to tend
when it is said, that god did purpose in him self, it is as much as if it
should be said, that god in his election, has respect to no^ other thing but
to him self. And therefore it is added there, that ye hole some of our election,
does tend and pertain to this, that we may be to the praise and glory of the
grace of God. Truly, the grace of God, does not deserve, to be only magnified
in our election, except it be gratuity and free. But how can it be gratuite and
free, if god does consider before and rekene what shall be the works and
merytes of eury man? Wherefore the saying of Christ unto his disciples must be
most true, John. xv.
he says: ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, where he does not only
put away the merits that were passed, or that might have gone before, but also
declare that there was nothing in them, wherefore they should be chosen, except
he had prevented them with his grace. Romans xi.
And so ought the saying of Saint Paul to be understood where he says: who
has given unto him first, and he shall be recompensed again? Signifying
thereby that the goodness of GOD does so prevent all men, that nothing can be
found in them, either passed or to come, whereby he can be reconciled unto them.
But the matter is set forth more plainlye in the ninthe chapyter of the Epistle
to the Romans, mark well this place of Paul, and learn to give to the holy
ghost that spoke in him more credit, the^ to the sinister exposition of ye free
will men.
where the Apostle does describe most liuelye, and as it were, set out to the
eye, the condition of the elect and reprobate under the example of Jacob and
Esau, speaking after this manner: Or the children were borne, or had done either
good or evil, that the purpose of God might stand according to the election,
not by the deserving of works, but by the grace of the caller, it was said:
The greater shall serve the less. As it is written: Jacob have I loved, and
Esau have I hated. Hear do we learn by the words of the holy Apostle, that
the salvation of the faithful is only grounded in the fre election of almighty
God our heavenly father, and that the same favor, is not gotten or obtained by
works, but comes of the free calling of God. We have a most lively
description of all the hole matter set forth here unto us. Esau and Jacob were
brethren, having all one father and mother, being yet in one womb, and not
born into ye world. In them, al things were like (for they had don nether good
nor evil) yet God did give a contrary judgment of them. For, the one of them
did he choose, and the other he did utterly reiecte. There was only the right
of the first borne, wherein Esau did sumwhat exceade Jacob. Which nevertheless
was utterly neglected, and the same given unto the younger, which was denied
unto ye elder. Yea, god did also in many other, neglect and set at naught this
right of ye first born, yt so he might take from men all occasion of bosting.
For, refusinge Ismaell, he gives his mind unto Isaac. Genesis xxi. Ge. xlviii
Also putting a side Manasses, he does prefer Ephraim.


DIDY. I can scarcelye think,


PHILA. wrast the scriptures into a wrong sense in aledging those authorities.
But I answer, that the blessed Apostle S. Paul did nether mistake, nor yet
misuse the same authorities of the holy scripture. For, he did see (which
thing they will neither mark nor consider) that God would declare and bring to
light with an earthly token the spiritual election of Jacob, which elsse was
hidden in the secreates of his judgments. For except we do refer that right of
the first born, which was granted him, unto the world to come, that is to
say: except the right of the first born which Jacob did bie of his brother
Esau, Genesis xxv.
did pertain to a better life, all the blessing, whereof here in this world he
did receive nothing elsse but affliction, trouble, and adversity, must needs
be vain and folishe. Saying then that the Lord had by this outward blessing
testified and declared what manner of blessing, he had prepared for his
servant Jacob in his kingdom, he did not stick to ground his argument upon
it, whereby he went about to prove the spiritual election of the holy
Patriarche: Jacob then is chosen and Esau is refused, and all by the mere
predestination of god, when they had yet done nether good nor evil. And if ye
will know the causes why?

The cause of our election and reprobation. Romans ix. Ex. xxxiii
Saint Paul does answer, that it was done, because that it had been said unto
Moses: I will show mercy to whom I show mercy, and will have Compassyon, on
whom I have compassion. Where the Lord does plainlye declare that he fynedeth
no manner of thing in us, wherefore he should do us good, but that he takes
occasion to do us good of his mercy only. And that therefore our salvation is
his own work and not ours. Sith then that God does appoint thy salvation
none other where, but in him self only, why should thou come down to thy
self? Sith that he does assign unto thee his mercy only, why should thou
run to thine own merits? Content thy self with his mercy, and set al thy
works a side.


ALBION. Yet for all this, both Ambrose, Origene, and Hierome were of opinion,
that God did dispose and divide his grace among men, as he did for se, that
they should use it.


PHILALETHES. I do not deny it, Li. retract. i. Cap. i. Episto. ad sextum.
cix.
yea I say furthermore that S. Augustine was of the same opinion also. But
after that he had profited better in the knowledge of the scriptures, and word
of God, he did not only revoke it, but also did most mightelye confute it, as
false and erroneus. Yea, after his retraction rebukinge the Pelagians, because
that they continue still in the same error, he says plainlye these words:
Against ye Pelagia^s
who would not marvel that the Apostle should have wanted this witty
understanding? For, when he had set forth a matter, which was to be wondered
and meruailed at, touching them that were not yet borne, Romans ix.
and had made an objection to him self, saying: What then? is there any
unrighteousness with God? he had occasion to answer that god had forsene the
merits of them both, yet he did not so, but did fly to his judgments and
mercy. And in an other place, when he had taken away all the merits before
our election, Home. in Ioa. 8.
he says: Here truly the vain reasoning of them can take no place, which
do defend the foreknowledge of God, against his grace, and therefore do say,
that we were chosen before that the foundacions of the world were made, because
that God did forsee that we would be good, and not that he him self, should
make us good. He says not so, that says: Ye have not chosen me, but I have
chosen you. For, if he had therefore chosen us, because that he had forsene,
that we would be good, he should also have known before, that we would have
chosen him. Let this serve for them, They do always a peale unto the fathers,
and yet they will follow none of their wholesome doctrine.
that do so gladly reast upon the authority of the fathers. But go to, let it
be as though, he had said nothing at all, and so let us come to the very
matter it self. There was a very hard question moved, whether God did iustlye
or not, in this that he did give his grace to certain men. Here Paul might
have ryd him self with one word, if he would have had any respect unto the
works and merits. For, he might have answered straighte, that God did so,
because that he did foresee, their merits and works. But why does he not so,
but rather co^tynueth still in a Communicatyon, which is of like difficultye
and hardness? Shall we say, that the holy ghost, which spoke by his mouth,
was obliuious or forgetful? we se, yt he goth not about the bush, but answers
plainly, that God does show favor unto his elect, because that it is his will
so to do, and that he shows mercy because that his pleasure is so. For, when
the Lord says: I will show mercy, to whom I show mercy, and will have
compassion, on whom I have compassion, Ex. xxxiii
it is as much as if he should say that nothing does move him to mercy, but
only because that he will show mercy, that is to say: that the only thing
that moves him to be merciful or to show mercy and compassion, is only his
blessed will and pleasure. Therefore, the saying of Saint Augustine shall remain
most true, Home. in Ioa. 38. Episto. cvi.
where he says, that the grace of God does not find us worthy to be chosen,
but makes us worthy. I do here let pass the vain subtelties of the schole
men, which can take no place among them, that content them selves with the
wholesome doctrine, and heavenly wisdom of Gods word. For, that is very
true, which an old Ecclesiastical writer did write, saying, that they which
do assign, Am. de vo ca. gentium Li. 1. Ca. 1.
attribute and adscribe the election of God unto the merits of men, are wyser,
than it behooves.


ALBION. But what will ye say of the reprobate and damned? For,


PHILALETHES. We need to go no farther, than to the example, Answer touching
reprobation.
that we brought fourth last. For, there Jacob having yet deserved nothing
with his good works is received ^n to favor, and Esau rejected and cast of,
though he had done yet (...) manner of evil. If we should fly unto the works,
that is to say, if ^e should affirm, mayntayn and ^pholde, that God did
forsee the ^orkes of them both, and that in ^especte of them, he did choose the
(...) and refuse the other, Rho. 1.
we should (...) great iniurye and wrong unto Paul as though he had not seen
that, which is so plain and manifest unto us. And verily, it is a token, that
be had not seen it, sith that he does expressly write, that when they had yet
done neither good nor evil, the one was chosen unto salvation, and the other
utterly cast a way, there by to prove that the dyuine Predestination of God is
not grounded in men's works and deseruinges. Predestination is not grounded on
men's works and deseruinges
Again, when he had made this objection, whether there was any unrighteousness
with God, he might for a most plain and sure defense of the justice and
righteousness of God, have answered and said, that God did reward. Esau,
according to his wickedness, which he did forsee, should be in him, but he
flies to a contrary solution affirming boldly, that the wicked are stirred
up, that the power o^ God may be showed on the^, and his glory and name
declared through out all the hole world. And at length brings fourth this
cause: tha^ God has mercy on whom he will, Ex. xxxiii.
and whom he will he makes hard hearted. Ye see how he does attrybute both, to
the only pleasure and will of God. Therefore, if we can assign none other
cause, why God does show mercy on his elect, but only his blessed will and
pleasure, we shall also be fain to confess, that he does reprove the other,
only because that it is his pleasure so to do. For, when it is said, that God
does show mercy on whom he will, and whom he will again, he makes hard
hearted: men are admonyshed and warned thereby, that they ought to seek for
none other cause of his divine Predestination, but only his blessed will and
pleasure.


DYDIMVS. Verily, Where the cause of predestination ought to be sought
this is a very strange doctrine, and which can sarcelye sink in to my head.
For, why should god be angry with his creatures, by who^ he was never offended
before? For, it is ye property of a tiraunt, and not of a righteous judge, to
appoint and ordain unto destruction, whom he will. Therefore, men might have a
just occasion to complain of God, if by his bare arbiterment and will, and
without their own merit and deserving, they should be predestined unto
everlasting death. Answer.



PHI. In deed, such objections are made commonly, for to subvert the doctrine
of predestination, and for to make it to be hated and abhorred of all men, but
we ought not therefore to be affrayed to speak of it, as far fourth as the
word of God, and the scriptures will lead us, and show a light unto us. First
and foremost then, when any such objections be made, or when any such vain
thoughts do arise in our hearts, we musse consider and weyghe with our
selves, that the holy and blessed will of God, The will of God is the most
perfect
is the most consummate and perfect rule of justice and equitye, and that
therefore what so ever, he will, we must compte it most just and righteous,
only because that he does will it. rule of justice.
Therefore, when it is asked, says. Saint Augustyne, why God did this thing,
or that thing? Contra madi. Li. 1. Ca. 3.
We must answer, that he did it, because that it was his will so to do. If
thou ghost any farther, asking, why it was his will so to do? Thou do ask
a thing, which is both greater and higher than the will of God: which thing
can not be found out. Let this suffice us, least seckynge rasshelye that thin
ge, which is not, we do not find out that same thing, which is. Let this, I
say, suffice us, if at least we intend to reason and talk with reverence, of
the secrets of ye lord our god. Which though he ca^ sufficientely wythouste us
defend him self with his justice against the malepartenesse of the ungodly,
which are not affrayed to sklaunder God openly, and to blaspheme his holy and
blessed name: when taking away all manner of excuses from their own
conseyences, he shall prove them giltye, and condemn them: yet least they
should tryumphe to much, he doothe minister unto us both armoure and
weapones against them in his holy word. Therefore, when any of them shall
ask us, why God has from the beginning ordained some unto death, which
being not yet borne nor gotten, could not deserve the judgment and
condempnation of death? For an answer, we will ask them again, wherein they
think that God is bound unto manne, and what they thyncke, he owes unto
him, if he will consider him in his own nature? As we be all infected with
sin, God can not byt has us, not of a tyrannous cruelty, but of a most just
and ryghteous equytye.

Now, if all men be of their own nature subject to the judgment and
condempnatyon of Death, what wrong can it be said, that God does unto
them, whom he does Predestinate unto death? Let all the children of Adam come
fourth, and reasonne with their maker, why they are by his divine providence
made subject unto everlasting miserye. What shall they be able to say, I
pray you, when on the contrary, he shall call them to the knowledge of them
selves, and bid them to behold and look upon their own filthy and corrupted
nature? If they be all taken out of one infected lompe, it is no maruayle,
that they be subject unto dampnation. Of our own nature we be al subject to
death.
Let them not therefore accuse God of iniquity and unrighteousness, because
that by his eternal judgment, they are ordained unto death, which of their
own nature they be subject unto.


DYDIMVS.


PHILALETHES. Answer
As touching the fall of Adam, whereby we are all made subject to everlasting
death and condempnation, Of the fall of Adam.
I will speak of it no farther, that I am able to bring Gods word for my
warraunte. If God did foresee that the fall of Adam should be to his glory,
and that by it, not only his mercy, but also his justice should be known and
declared through out all the hole world, we can lay no unrighteousness to
his charge, though, by his divine Predestination and ordenaunce, Adam did fall.
For, The true end of al creatures
all manner of creatures both in heaven and in earth are made to this end, that
their sovereign creator may be glorified by them. But to prescribe how God
should be glorified by his creatures, it were to much ungodliness.


DYDIMVS Is it to be though that God could be glorified none other way but by
the fall of the most excellent creature that he had here in the earth.


PHILALETHES. That ought we to refer to his incomprehensyble and unsearchable
wisdom, Answer
in comparison of which, all the wisdom of the world, is but mere folishnesse.
So now at this present, many are not a fraid to ask, whether god might not
have redeamed the world by some other way and mean, then by the death and
passion of his only begotten son our souioure Jesus Christ. And so still will
we enter into the unsearchable and incomprehensible judgments of almightye
God, and know the causes of his blessed will, which thing is impossible to
man. But go to, let it be granted by way of reasoninge, that Adam did by the
divine Predestination and ordenaunce of God, fall into the same miserye and
wretchedness: is God to be blamed therefore? or can therefore any
unrighteousness be laid to his charge? What shall either Adam, or all his
posteritye be able to say, when we shall thus answer with Saint Paul: Romans ix.
O thou man, what art thou, that dysputest with God? Does the pot say unto
him, which has made him, why have thou made me after this sort?


DYDIMVS. This is not to defend the justice of GOD, but to seek a startinge
hole, as they be wont to do, that want a just answer. For, what other
thing, seems to be said there, but that God is of such a power, that he can
not be let to do what so ever he will?


PHI. Answer
It is not so, neighbor Dydimus. For, no stronger reason can be brought for
the defense of Gods justice, and for to stop men's mouths, then when we
are bydden, to think, weigh, and consider with our selves, what God is. For,
sith that he is the judge of the world, how could he commit and
unrighteousness? or how could any iniquity be found in him? It is the nature
and propertye of GOD to do Judgment, The nature of God is to do judgment.
therefore he does naturallye love Justice and equytye, and abhoreth
vnryghteousness, and iniquitye. Therefore, the Apostell did fly to no
Startynge holes, as thought he had been caughte in a trappe, or had wanted a
just answer. But he did show that the causes of Gods justice are
incomprehensible, and that they can not be measured by man's reason, nor yet
comprehended by the base Capacytye of any humayne wit.

The holy Apostle does confess there, that the judgments of God are so
unsearchable and so deep, that all men's wits, that will rashlye break into
them, must neades be overwhelmed and swallowed up. But how unreasonable a
thing were it, to have the works of God to be brought under that law, that
as soon as we can not show the causes of them we might boldly accuse and blame
them? Let the Manicheans, and Celestins with all other, We ought not to be over
beasy in seking of the causes of predestination.
that calumniate, backbite, and sclaunder the divine Predestination of God come
fourth, I say with Saint Paul that we must not seek the causes of it,
because that they be incomprehensible, and do far exceade our
understanding. Will we have the power of God to be so limited, and to be so
kept within bonds, that he shall be able to do no more, than our with is able to
comprehend? I say with S. Augustine, Aug. in 106. epi
that God did create some, whom he knew perfectly before should go to
damnation, and that he did it, because that it was his pleasure so to do. But
we must not ask the cause why he woule have it so: For, we can not comprehend
it: Moreover, A most worthy lesson given, by the holy father.
it is not reason that the blessed will of God should of us be called into
controversy. For, when so ever mentyon is made of it, under the name of it, a
most perfect rule of equitye is named. Why is then any question moved of
unrighteousness and iniquity, where a most perfect justice does plainlye
appear? Let us not be ashamed therefore, after the example of Paul to stop
the mouths of the ungodly, how we ought to stop the mouths of the ungodly.
and when so ever they do barcke against the divine Predestination of our
heavenly father, to repeat every fore, and say: What are ye, O wretched and
miserable men, that do accuse God or lay any thing to his charge? Doing it
therefore, because that he does not submit the wondrous greatness of his
works, to the rude capacity of your wit? As though they were unjust
therefore, because that they be unknown unto the flesh, or because that the
wisdom of the flesh can not comprehend the causes of them? If we do proceade
any farther, it shall avail nothing, for, we shall never be able to satisfye
their malepartnesse, and again God neadeth none other defense, than he did use
by his holy spirit, who spoke by the mouth of the blessed Apostle Saint
Paul. And truly, When we cease to speak well. Objection
then do we cease to speak well, when we will speak otherwise, than god does
teach us by his holy spirit and word.


ALBION. I was once in company, where I hard a man speak, eue^ these words: why
should god blame men for those things, that they be fallen into, of necessity, by
his divine predestination and ordenance? for, what should they do? Should they
strive against his decre and appointment? But it were in vain so to do, since
that they could not prevail against them. Therefore they are wrongfully
punished for those things, whereof the predestinatyon of god is the chief and
principal cause.


PHI. Such vain objections, Answer
do the wicked and ungodly make, for to excuse their ungodliness, and
abominable living withal. But all is not worth a good blew pease. For,
Predestination is the executinge of the justice of God.
since that predestination is nothing else, but a disposing, ordering and
executinge of the divine justice of god, (which though it be hidden from us,
and unknown to man's wisdom, yet it remains always blameless) it can not
be said, but they, which are predestined unto everlasting death and
dampnation, are iustlye, deseruingly, and most righteouslye ordained unto it,
so that they have no just occasion to complain of any injury or wrong that is
done unto them. And though it were so, that we should grant, that Adam did fall
by the divine Predestination and ordenance of almighty god, yet could they lay
no blame to God for it, sith that he has made al his creatures, for to be
glorified by them. But, wherefore the fall of Adam serves.
as I said before, to prescrybe unto God, how he should be glorified by his
creatures, it were to much ungodliness. This are we sure of, that the fall of
the first manne, where by he did bring both him self, and all his posteritye
under the thraldom and bondage of sin, does serve for to setforth Gods
mercy, and also for to declare his justice unto all the hole world. Therefore,
though it were so, that God did not only foresee, but also ordain, that Adam
should fall, what blame could we lay to him for it? Shall we let him to be
glorified by his creatures, That were a maddenesse. Pro. xvi.
as he him self list? These are the words of the wise man: Deus omnia
propter semetipsum condidit, impium quoque ad diem malum. That is to say. God
did create all things for him self, and also the ungodly against the evil
day, or against the day of punishemente. Whereby, we do learn, that God does
by his most just and righteous judgment appoynte and ordain some unto
damnation and death everlasting, that by them his might, justice, and power may
be set fourth, and his name declared throughoute all the hole world. But, me
think that it were far better, that leaving such vain suttylties, whereby men
do go about to excuse them selves, and to accuse the justice of God, they
should seek for the cause of their own damnation, not in the hidden
judgments, Where we ought to seek for the cause of our damnation.
and incomprehensible ways of the Lord, but in their own natural corruption,
which they have of their first parent Ada^. For by it, we are all made
naturallye the children of wrath, and consequentely the children of
everlasting death and condemnation. What iniquitye then or unrighteousness
can there be in God, if according to his righteous judgment, he does appointe
and ordain some of this corrupted lompe of damnation, unto death everlasting?
And least we might impute unto God, this natural corruption, that Adam did
wrap him self in, and all his posteritye besides, Genesis i.
he did pronounce him self, that all things, that he had made, were
exceadinge good. This testimonye and praise gave God unto his works and
creatures, that so we might learn that Adam did through his own
malitiousnesse corrupt that same pure nature, that he had received of the
Lord, and that by his fall he had brought both him self and all his
posteritye, in to perdytion. Therefore, as I have said alredye let us rather
behold the euydente and manifest cause of our dampnation, in the corrupted
nature of all mannekynde, than go about to seek it (as it is hydden and
comprehensyble unto us) in the divine Predestynation of almyghtye God. And let
us not be ashamed to submytte our wits unto the wisdom of God, and to be
ignoraunte in those things, that he will have us to be ignoraunte in. For, as
the ignorance of those things, a learned ignorance.
which it is neither given nor permytted unto us to know, may be coumpted a
learned ignorance, so to go about to understand such things and to have a
knowledge of them, may be reckenned a plain furye and maddenes.


EVTRAPELVS. As far as I remember, The answer of ecclesiastical writers.
the Ecclesiastycall writers are wont to answer this obiectyon, that our
brother Albion aledged even now, after this manner: The foreknowledge of God
say they does not let, that a man should be coumpted a sinner, since that
god does forsee in manne the evil he shall do, and not his own evil.

Whereby, I trow, they understand that the foreknowledge of God, does neither
make a man ryghteous nor yet unrighteous: but as the living God does forsee
that men shall be either righteous or unrighteous, so he does ordain the^ either
to life everlasting, or else unto death and condemnation. Wherefore, men have no
just cause to complain of God, if according to their ungodliness that he does
forsee in them, he does ordain them to be euerlastingely damned in hell. For
this foreknowledge of God, works no necessitye, that is to say, man is not
therefore compelled of necessitye to do evil, because that God did forsee that
he should do evil: but the evil that he does, he does it freely and of his
own swing, therefore, he does deseruingly suffer the damnation, that he is
ordained unto, by the righteous judgment of almighty God.


PHI. I know that this answer they be wont to make, A reply.
but it will serve little or nothing against the maleparte and crabbed wits of
the ungodly. For they will by and by replye, that God might had let the same
evil, which he did forsee, if he had listed: and sith he did it not, that man
was of a determinate counsel created for to behave him self so in the earth.
If then, by the providence of god, man is created on this condition, that he
should do afterward, all that he does, why, say they, should he be blamed
for that, which he can not shun, or which he does by the will and appoyntement
of God? Some do answer to this, that the dyuine providence of god, does bring
no manner of necessitye or compulsyon, but that God did rather create them so, I
mean, of such a condytion, because that he did forsee their malicious
wickedness. Some say again, that the ungodly do peryshe by the permyssion,
and sufferaunce of God, and not by his will and appointment. But if one should
ask again, An other replye.
why God does suffer them to peryshe sith that he can let it by his
almightye power? What other answer can all the men in the world make, but
that God does permytte them to go headlong in to destruction, only because
that it is his pleasure and will so to do? We do al our own nature, I mean,
as many as be the children of Adam, run together headlong in to perdition.
But that God does deliver some from it, The will of God is a most consummate
and perfect rule of justice.
and some he suffers to run in to it, what other cause can we assign why
he does so, but only, his blessed will and pleasure? But before, it has been
said, yt the will and pleasure of God, is a most consummate and prefecte rule
of justice and equity. They therefore, that are according to ye righteous
judgment of God, or according to his most blessed will and pleasure, ordained
unto condempnation (of which condempnation they must neades grant their
natural corruption to be the chief and principal cause) have no cause at al to
complain of God, or to lay any unrighteousness unto him, although they were
ordained unto it, before the foundacio^s of the world were laid. No more I say,
have they a just cause to complain of god, or to lay any unrighteousness to his
charge, than the elect and chose^ have to boste of their own righteousness,
or to adscribe any thing to their own merits and deseruinges, because yt they
are chosen in Christ Jesus, before that the foundacions of the world were laid.


DYDI. If the will and pleasure of God, is the only cause, that he does deliver
some, which thing the scriptures do deny utterly. Therefore, I may conclude,
that either the word of God does disagre with it self, or that in the
election of God, there is some respect of merits and deseruings.


PHI. First and foremoste, when the scripture does testifi that there is no
respect of persons with God, How this word person ought to be understood.
For, it signifies not the manne him self, but is taken for those things,
that being seen with the eyes, do either get unto a man, favor, grace, and
dignity, or elsse purchase unto him contempt, shame and hatred, such as be
commonly: richesse, might, nobleness of birth, great offices in the common
weal and other like. Such as do bring contempt, shame and hatred, are
pouertye, bashnesse of birth, beggerlinesse, and other like things, which the
world does commonly abhor. When Peter then, and Paul also affirm, that
there is no respect of persons with God: their meaning is, Act. x. Romans ii.
Gala. i.
that God in choosing of men has no respect to the richesse and birth, or to
the nation and country, or to any other thing that the world has in
admiration, but that he chooses as well the pore as the rich, and as well the
gentil as the Jew. Where unto the blessed Apostle S. James does agree, when he
says, James. i.
that in judgment God has no respect unto richesse. Likewise Saint Paul does
write, Ephe. vi
that what good so ever a man does, he shall receive it again of the Lord,
whether he be bound or free. Therefore, there shall be no repugnaunce nor yet
contrarietye in the scriptures, though we say, that God does of his mere
goodness and mercy, and according to his good will and pleasure, choose some
unto life everlasting, refusing and rejecting the other. How be it the matter
might be answered more plainly thus: They be wont to ask how it comes to
pass, that of two that have deserved in like, or rather that have deserved
nothing yet, God in his election does pass over the one, and choose the other
unto him self? This ought dilygentely to be noted.
I do ask them again, whether they think that there is any thing in him, which
is chosen, yt did move God to choose him, or not? If they confess that there was
or is nothing in him worthy the election of god, which thing they must needs
grant and confess, then it shall follow, that God had no respect unto the man,
but that he did take occasion in his own merci, for to do good unto him That
therefore, God does choose one man, and refuses or reproves an other, it comes
not of any respect that he has unto the person, or unto the man, but of his
mere goodness and mercy, which truly, it is lawful for him, for to show and
declare, where, and whenever, it pleases his divine majesty. Therefore, some
do falsely and wyckedlye accuse god of unrighteous dealing and of iniquity,
because that in his Predestination he does not behave him self a like toward
all men.


DYDIMVS. Wherefore, I beseech you? If he does find al men gilty, Answer



PHILALETHES What means this, neighbor Dydimus? Ye deal with God, as
though ye would that he should put away mercy all together, or if he shows
any, that he should clean put away judgment, equitye, and justice from him
self. What is it, I pray you, that ye do require? If all men be giltye, say
ye, left them all suffer like punishment. We confess that we be all gyltye,
We be al of our own nature the children of damnation.
and do of our own nature deserve everlasting Death and dampnation, but we
say, that the mercy of GOD does succoure and deliver some, even whom it
pleases him.


DYDIMVS. Why then? Let his mercy succoure and deliver all.


PHILALETHES. But we answer again, that it is mete and convenient, Epi. cvi.
did fall into condemnation, the vessels, that are made of it, unto honor,
are not the vessels of their own righteousness, but of the mercy of god. And
that some are made vessels unto dishonor, it ought not to be imputed unto any
unrighteousness or iniquitye, but unto judgment. Again, that God does
recompense due punishmente unto them, De predo. gratia
whom he does reprove and gives undeserved grace unto them, whom he does
choose he is delivered from all blame by the similitude of a creditoure,
similitude
in whose power it lies, to forgive some the hole debt, and to make the other
to pay to the vttermooste farthinge. Therefore, God may give his grace to whom
he will, because that he is merciful, De bone perseue. Cae. xii.
and not give it unto al men, because that he is a righteous judge. In geuinge
that unto some, which they do not deserve, he does show his fre mercy and
grace, and not giving it unto all men, he does declare what we all do deserve.


ALBION. I pray you, brother Philalethes, declare a little more plainly unto
us, the similitude of ye creaditour and of his debtoures.


PHILALETHES. If a man has many debtours, that do al owe unto him the like
sum of monye, does it not lie in his power, to forgive some of them the hole
debte, and to call upon the other, for that, which they owe unto him, even for
the uttermost farthing? Who can lay any thing to his charge if he will do so?


ALBION. No man, I trow, shall be able to blame him for it.


PHI. Then mark this, brother Albion, we are al debtours unto god. For, we have
all deserved everlasting condemnation. That then he does of his fre mercy and
goodness forgive some, and some again, he does deal extremely withal,
according to his righteous judgment, who shall be so bold to blame him for it?


ALBION. This similitude makes the matter very plain, and delivers the
divine predestination of almightye GOD from all manner of blame, that men can
lay unto it.


DYDIMVS. Yet can I not be satysfyed, but that this doctrine of
Predestination does more harm than good.


PHILALETHES. Why say ye so, I beseech you?


DyDIMVS. Because that it takes away al sollycytude and care of godly and
virtuous lyuinge. For,


EVTRAPELVS. In deed, as our neighbor Dydimus does say, ye shall find many,
which when they be exhorted unto good deeds and virtuous living, or elsse
rebuked for their naughtye and abominable doings, are wont to mock away all
manner of godly doctrine, that is brought and preached unto the^, and to say
commonly thus: Thus do the ungodly flatter them selves.
God knows what he has determined to do with us: if he has ordained us
unto salvation, he will bring us unto it at the time that he has appointed him
self, if he has appointed us unto everlasting death and condemnation, we shall
but in vain strive against it.


PHILALETHES. But the scryptures do not speak of the Predestination of god to
this end, Why ye scriptures do speak of predestination.
that we should take boldness thereupon for to live ungodly, but rather that
we should learn thereby, for to fear and dread his most righteous and
incomprehensible judgments, and also for to embrace and love his mercy and
goodness toward us, whom he does freely, and without any of our own merits
and deseruings, choose unto life everlasting, for to be fellow heirs with his
son Jesus Christ, of his heavenly kingdom. This one only thing, do the godly
seek in the doctrine of Predestination. How be it Saint Paul does
sufficiently answer this swynysh grunting of ye filthy Epicures, when he says
that we are chose^ in Christ Jesus before that the foundacio^s of ye world were
laid, for to be holy and blameless in his sight. Therefore, when they shall
pray and tattell, Ephe. i.
that we may wylter our selves here, in all kind of vices, in all kind of
abomination and dyuelishenes, sith that, if we be of the number of the elect,
our vicious lyuinge can not hinder our election, nor yet let us from coming
unto salvation and life everlasting, we shall answer that the end of our
election here, in this world, is that we should be holy and blameless in the
sight of him that has chosen us, and that God has therefore delivered us
from the hands of our enemies (whereby we may well understand: sin, death and
damnation) that so we might serve him all the days of our life, Luc. i.
in such holiness and righteousness, as is acceptable before him. When
therefore, we do hear, that we are, by the divine ordinance and appointment
of God, chosen unto life everlasting, we are admonyshed and warned thereby,
not to give our selves, because that we are assured of the inherytaunce of the
kingdom of heaven, unto all kind of abhominatio^ and diuelishenesse, but
rather that we should lead a godly life, and a Christianlyke conversation,
such as becomes the Saints, remembering always that we are the workmanship
of God, created in Christ Jesus, unto good works, unto the which god ordaind us
before, Ephe. ii Objection
yt we should walk in the^.


DyDI. Yet will they still harp upon this: that Christ has promised life
everlasting unto his sheep, John. x.
and that they shall never perish. Therefore, say they, if we be of Christ's
flock, what so ever we do, we shall have life everlasting, and never pearysh,
for so has our shephearde promised unto us.


PHI. But they should mark the words that go before. Answer
For, Christ speaks there on this manner: My sheape hear my voice, and I
know them, and they follow me etc. Here then first and fore most do we learn,
that they ye be of ye flock of Christ, do hear his voice. But his voice is
that our light ought so to shine before men that they may see our good
works, Math. v.
and glorify our father, that is in heaven. Again this is his voice: that only
they that do the will of his father, Math. vii
shall enter into ye kingdom of heaven. But they cannot say, yt they hear the
voice of this shephard, yt give them selves to all kind of ungodliness,
whereby they cause ye name of our heavenly father, to be blasphemed and evil
spoken of. Therefore, they are none of a sheep. Moreover he says, that his
sheep do follow him. But no man will say, that these swynishe Epicures do
follow Christ. Whereby we may boldlye conclude that they be none of his flock,
and that therefore, they do aledge in vain for them selves, the promyses that
Christ does make unto his true sheep. But to come to our purpose again,
where ye say that the reprobate should lose their labor and pain, if they
should go about to please God with innocence and integrity of life, ye are
greatly beguiled and deceived in that. Whence we have a good will to please God.
For, whence should they have any such mind, but of the election of God, of
the which they be all together void and destituted? For, as many as be of the
noumber of the reprobate, as they be appointed to be vessels of dishonor, so
do they never cease with heapyng sin upon sin to provoke still the wrath
of God against them, and to confirm with evident signs and tokens the
judgment of God, that is already given upon them, and upon such as they are.
It is so far of, that they should strive in vain against it.


ALBION. I beseech you, good brother Philalethes, that ye will now setforth
briefly, and in few words, the hole Doctrine of Predestination, so as it may
easily be remembered and born away. For, all that has been spoken of it
already, although it serves very well for the right understanding of the
matter, yet it is so diffuse and so long that few can well bear it in mind.


PHILALETHES Forsooth I am content to fulfill your godly request. First and
foremost then, A short brief and repeticio^ of that which has been said
before.
we did say, that Predestination is the eternal and everlasting decree of
God, whereby he has from the beginning appointed with him self to save some
men, and some again to condemn and cast away. The end of this predestination
is our savior Jesus Christ, The end of Predestination.
the only begotten son of God our heavenly father. For, god did decre and
apoynt to save al those, that should have fellowship with his only begotten son
our savior Jesus Christ, and to destroy, cast away and condemn all those that
have no fellowship with him, but are strangers from his covenant and gospel.
The faithful have fellowship with Christ, and the unfaithful are strangers
from him. For, as it has been said already, Ephe. i.
God has chosen us in Christ Jesus before that the foundacions of the world
were laid, that we should be holy and without blame before him, through
love.

And has ordained us before, through Jesus Christ to be heirs unto him self,
according to the pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace,
wherewith he has made us accepted in the beloved.

Behold, God has chosen us, before the foundacions of the world were laid, for
to be holy and blameless, that is to say, heirs of life everlasting. Again,
he has chosen us in Christ. But making yet the matter more plain, he says,
that GOD has ordained us before through Christ Jesus, for to be heirs unto
him self, and that freely, that all the glory and praise may be given unto his
deuyne grace: As many therefore as be in Christ, are chosen unto life
everlasting. For, Ihon the Apostle says: He that has the son, has life,
but he that has not the son of God, has not life. And with it does the
Gospel agree.

For, there our savior Jesus Christ says: This is the will of the father,
that has sent me, John. vi.
that who so ever does se the son and believes in him, has life everlasting,
and I shall raise him up in the last day. Behold, this is the eternal will,
and everlasting decree of GOD that we should be saved in his son through
faith. On the contrari, the Lord speaking of them that be predestined unto
death everlasting, and unto condemnation, he says: he that believes not is
already condemned, Ihon. iii.
because that he did not believe in the name of the only begotten son of God.
And this is the condemnation, that the light did come into the world, and men
did love darcknesse more than the light. Therefore, if any man should ask me
now, whether he be chosen to life, or ordained unto death, that is to say,
whether he be of the number of the chosen, or of the number of the reprobate? I
would answer him plainlye out of the Evangelical and Apostolical scripture,
that if he has fellowshyppe with Christ, he is ordained unto life, and is of
the noumber of the elect and chosen, if not: that he is ordained unto death and
condemnation. For, surely all they that have no fellowship with Christ, but are
strangers from him and his covenant, shall utterly be damned and cast away.


ALBION. But our election is hidden in God: Answer



PHILALETHES. God is wont to declare at length this election of ours, where by
he has chosen us unto the partaking of eternal life, when he does call us by
the preachings of his word, and inward working of his holy spirit. And this
calling of god, How god does declare unto us our election.
which does consist in the preaching of the gospel, and in the inward
workynge of the holy ghost, is of some men, called a sign, token, or
testimonye of our eleciyon. For, whom God has ordained before, to be
fashioned like unto the shape of his son, them did he also call, To. viii.
and whom he has called, them does he also justify, for to glorify them
afterward. For, though the living Lord has ordained us before to be his
children by adoption, and heirs of his heauenli glory, yet do we not enter into
the possessyon of these heavenly goods and richesse til we be called. In
deed, when we be called, Ephe. i.
then do we begin to have a certain fruition of our choosing and election. For
this cause, saint Paul does call the spirit that we do receive, the spirit
of adoptyon, the seal and earnest penye of our enheritaunce. Because that he
does with his testimonye stablyshe and seal up in the hearts of the
faithful, the certainty of their adoption. God therefore, does ordain them to
be his children, and apoynteth him self to be a father unto them, who^e he
has chosen, and by calling of them, he does receive them into his family
and household, offrynge and declaring him self unto them. Now, since that the
scripture does after this sort, ioygne the calling of God, unto his election,
it does sufficiently declare thereby, that we ought to require or seek in it,
for none other thing, but for the free mercy of God only. For, if ye should
ask, whom god is wont to call, the scripture does answer you, by and by, that
he does call them, who^e he has chosen before. Nothing else can we find in our
election but the mercy of God.
But if we come once to the election, there can we find nothing else but the
mere mercy of God. So that here the saying of Paul is most truly verified,
where he says: It lies not in any man's will, or renning, but in the mercy of
god.


ALBION. And my gentlemen did tell me, yt by this place of ye Apostle, we do
plainly learn, that there is a certain will and endeavor in man, which except
they be helped by the especial grace of almighty God, can do nothing in deed,
but if they be once aided and helped from above, they do farther very much our
salvation, whereby, as I could understand, they did mean that there is of
nature a certain desire and endeavor in man, to be saved, which being helped by
the the mercy of God, do healpe wonderfully toward the obtaining of
everlasting life: and so they do adscribe part of our salvation unto the
grace and mercy of God, and part of it unto the same will and renewing or
endeavor of man.


PHILALETHES. This doubtless is a mere cauillation. Enchery. ad Laurentium Ca.
xxxi.
Howbe it I have lieuer to confute it with the words of S. Augustine, than with
mine own. If (says he) the Apostle did mean none other thing, but that it
does not only lie in the will and renewing of man, except the mercyful Lord does
healpe, we may also say on the contrary, that it lies not only in the mercy
of God, without the will and renewing of man. But since that it were a plain
ungodliness to say so, let us not doubt but that the apostle did attribute
al things unto the mercy of God, and that he did leave no manner of thing unto
our own will and endeavors. And in an other place these be his words.
Quapropter vt in deum credamus, and pie vmamus, Ad vita. Epi. cvii.
non volentis neque currentis, sed miserentis dei est: non quia velle and
currete non debemus, sed quia ipse in nobis and velle operatur and currere.

That is say: therefore, that we should believe in God, and live godly, it
lies not in the will or renewing of man, but in the mercy of God: not that we
ought not both to will and to renew, but because yt he him self does work in
us, both to will and also to renew. The meaning then of the Apostle was,
because that he did se, that some men did attribute part of their salvation,
unto their own industry, for to reprove their error in the former part of the
sentence, and afterward to adscribe the hole matter of salvation unto the
only mercy of God. Do not the Prophets (I beseech you) generalli in all places
set forth earnestlye the free calling of God? The Prophet does sufficientlye
declare, Esaias. lxv.
whom the Lord does offer his word to, when he says: I am found of them
yt sought me not, and have plainli appeared unto them, that did not ask of me.
Unto the people that did not call upon my name, have I said: Lo, here I am.
Ios. xxiiii
And least the Jews should think that this kindness and mercy did only
pertayne unto the gentiles, he does put them in remembrance, whence he did take
their father Abraham, when he made his covenant with him. The light of gods
word is a sufficient prof of his fre goodness and merci toward us.
Even from the mydst of Idolatry, wherein he was overwhelmed with al his. When
the lord the^ does offer unto us first, the light of his word, there does he
show a sufficient proof, testimony, and sygn of his fre goodness and mercy
toward us. For, this does he unto us having deserved no such thing at his
hands. But least we should boast and crake, that we do of our own accord
follow him, when he does call, or that we do receive of our own swing, his
mercy and grace, when he does offer it unto us, he does plainly affirm that
we have no eyes to see, nor ears to hear, but only those that he does make
and give unto us. And that he does both make and give them unto us, not
according to our gratitude or thankfulness, but according to his election,
and grace. And of this, have we a goodly example in Saint Luke in his book of
the Acts. Acts. xiii
Where both the Jews and the Gentyles did hear together the preachinge of
Paul and Barnabas. For being both taught with one doctrine, I mean, both the
Jews and the gentyles that were there, it is said, that they only did believe,
that were ordained before unto life everlasting. With what face the^ shall we
say, that the calling of god is not free, sith that even unto the uttermost
point, the election of god does reign in it only?


DyDI. By this it should appear, that they do greatly er, yt make man fellow
worcker with God in the matter of his election and calling, It is an error to
make man fellow worker with god in the matter of election.
and that they are also out of the way, that hold opinion and say, that our
election does depend of the preaching of the Gospel. For, as far as I can
perceive, we are only by the preaching of the word, certified of it, and as it
were, put in full possession of it.


PHILALETHES. Ye say the very truth. But as they be begiled and deceived that
say, that our election do the hang altogether and depend of the preaching of
the gospel: so in sekinge the certainty of it, we must content our selves
with these outward signs and tokens, whereby our heavenly father is wont to
certifye his children of their election, and to bring them into ye fruition of
it. My meaning is this. Since that it has pleased God our heavenly father, by
the outward preching of his word, and by the inward working of his holy spirit,
(which is the seal and earnest penny of our adoption and enherytaunce) to
certify us of our election, that is to say, that he has chosen us, for to be
fellow heyers with his son Jesus Christ, of his heavenly kingdom, we ought
to content our selves with these means that he has appointed unto us, for
to come to the sure knowledge and certainety of our election. And none other
means did he apoynte for it, but the outewarde preachinge of his word and
the inward workynge of his holy spyrite, which testifyeth unto our spirit
that we are the children of God. Let us therefore, We ought not to seek the
certainly of our election, in the hydden judgments of the Lord.
content our selves with them, and go no farther. For, they that will go about
for to seek the certaynetye of their election, in the hydden judgments and
incomprehensible ways of the LORD, must needs be wonderfully tormented in
their consciences. Which thing Satan does seek above al other things. For,
there is no nearer way for to bring men in to desperation, than for to make
them to doubt of the favor and love of God toward them or of their election
unto life everlasting. Thus commenly is Satan wont to whysper in to the ears
of ourconsciences: Thou miserable man, whence can thou have any salvation,
but of the election of the Lord thy God? But who has reveled unto the, or
certifyed the that thou art chosen? Now, if we go once out of the right way
for to seek for the certainly of our election (I say, that we go out of the
way, when we go not that way to work, that GOD him self has appointed.) It
is impossible for us, that ever we should be delivered out of his snare. And so
must we needs at length be brought in to the botomelesse pytte of
desperation. Which is the reward of those, that will contrary to the
appointment of almighty god our heavenly father, seek for the certaintye of
their election, in the hidden Judgments and in comprehensible ways of the
Lord, where the farther that a man does wade, the farther shall he be from ye
thing that he does seek, til yt at length he has through his insatiable
curiositye brought him self into vttermooste destruction. Whereas, if we go
that way to work, that God has appointed, sekinge for the certaintye of
our election, where he will have us to seek it, we shall find great
consolation and comfort.


ALBION. Therefore, brother Philalethes, we do all most hartelye desire you
to show unto us, what order it is best to keep in this matter, least for
consolatyon and comfort, we do find desperation and sorrow, with endless
miserye and perplexitye of mind.


PHILALETHES We shall keep a very good order in seking the certainetye of our
election, if we do begin with the calling of God, What order we ought to
keep in seeking the certainety of our election.
and end even in the same. Sith that by it, as by a most infallible sign and
token, the Lord our God does certifye us of his counsel, as much as it is
lawefull for us to know. And least we should think, that this calling of God,
which does consiste in the outward preachinge of the word, and in the
inward workinge of the holy ghost, is but a weak testimonye of our election,
we ought to consider with our selves, how much light and certenty it brings
unto us. First and foremost, if we seek for the mercy and favor of God, we
must fasten our eyes upon Christ, in whom only the father is pleased. If we
long for salvation, life, immortalytye, and the enherytaunce of the kyngedome
of heaven, we must also fly unto him, and to none other, sith that he is the
only fountain of life, the shot anchore of salvation, and the right heir
only of the kingdom of heaven. For, whereunto does our election extend, but
that being chosen of the Lord, and received into the noumber of his children,
we should for the love of his son, obtain saluatyon and immortalitye?
Weighe the matter with your self as much as ye will, and ye shall find,
understand and perceive, that the end of it does extend no farther. Therefore
whom God does take to his children, it is said that he has chosen them, Ephe.
i.
but in his anointed, that is to say, in his son Jesus Christ: For, he
could not love them but only in him, nor yet honor with the enherytance of
his kingdom, except he had made them first fellows with him. Now if we be
chosen in him, we shall not find in our selves, the certayntye of our
electyon, nor yet in God the father, if we behold him without his only
begotten son our sauyoure Jesus Christ. Christ then is the most sure and
infallible glass or myrroure, In Christ only can we behold and see the
certainety of our election.
wherein we may behold and see the certainty of our election, and that may
we do, without any deceit or fraud. For, since that the father has determined
to graffe the^ all in his body, whom he has from the beginning appointed
to be his, and does take the^ al for his children, whom he does recognize or
acknowledge among his members, if we be once graffed in Christ and have
fellowshippe with him, then have we a most evident, plain and infallible
testimonye, that we are written in the book of life. But he did most
certainlye communicate him self unto us, or receive us into his fellowshyppe,
when he did testifye by the Preachinge of the Gospel that the father did give
him unto us. For, to be ours with all his heavenly richesse. John. i.
He, I say, did testifye unto us, that as many as did receive him by faith,
they should of his heavenly father be taken and received for his children. If
ye do require more than to be compted among the children of GOD, and heirs of
his kingdom, ye climb above Christ. Now, if this be our farthest mark, It
is a madness to seek that with out Christ, that we have alredye obtained in
him.
what a madness were it to seek that thing without him, that we have
already obtained and gotten in him, and which can be found in him only?
More over sith that he is the eternal wisdom of the father, and the very
truth it self, we nead not to fear, that he does in his word and Gospel
varye any thing from the will and pleasure of his heavenly father, which we
seek to be certifyed of. For why? he does declare it most faithfully unto
us, assuring us by his gospel, what the will of his father has been from the
beginning and shall be to ye worlds end. But this ought to comfort us most of
al, and to establish our faith in the mercy and goodness of almightye God,
wherbi he has freli chose^ us in his beloved, that the scriptures do every
where testify unto us, that whom so ever Christ does call into the fellowship
of his church, them he does receive into his protection and sauegarde: and
that whom so ever he does receive into his protection and sauegarde, they are
committed unto him of his heavenly father, for to be preserved and kept unto
life everlasting: what will we have any more? John. vi.xvii.
Christ him self cries out with a loud voice and says: that as many as
the father will have to be saved, he has delivered them unto him, to keep. Now
if we will know whether God be careful over our salvation or not, we must seek
in his holy word and scripture whether he has committed us unto his son Jesus
Christ or not, whom he has appointed to be the only savior of all his.
And if we be in doubt, whether the only begotten son of God, has received
us into his protection and sauegard, he him self, John. x.
will put this dout away, since that he offreth him self of his own accord to
be our shepherd, acknowledginge us for his sheape, if we will hear his
voice. Let us therefore embrace Christ, since that he does so gentlelye and
lovingly come forth, and offer him self unto us. And then will he receive us
into his flock, and keep us safely within his shepefolde.


ALBION. But who can do this, except it be given him from above? Does not
Christ him self say, John. vi.
that no man comes unto him, except his father does draw him?


PHI. And ye may well understand, that we speak of none other hear in this
place. For, our hole communication and talcke is of them only that be chosen
in Christ, before the foundacions of the world were laid, whom God does bring
or rather draw unto his son, by the preachinge of his word, and by the
inward workinge of his holy spirit: wherbye he does illuminate, and lighten
their hearts and minds, and does certify them of their election. For, this
holy spirit of God, by whose inward operatyon and working we are drawn unto
christ do testify unto our spirit, that we are the children of God, and does
assure us of our salvation. Such I say, does our savior Jesus Christ receive
into his protection and sauegarde, so that they can never pearishe. For,
these be the words of the high shephearde: John. x.
My sheep do hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, and I give
them life everlasting, and they shall never pearyshe, nor none shall take them
from my hand.


ALBION. To. viii.
Although S. Paul does write, that whom God has ordained before, them be
does also call, Mat. xxii.
yet our savior Jesus Christ shows plainlye, that many are called, and
few are chosen. Therefore, I can not well understand how the calling of God
should be such a certificate, or so sure a testimonye of our election.


PHILALETHES. That this place may the better be understood, Answer
we must note and mark that there be three manners of calling. First and
foremooste, al men be generally called, three ma^ners of calling.
even those that do not hear the word. For, unto them both heaven and
earth, Psalm. xix Romans i.
and all the creatures that be comprehended therein do never cease to preach ye
almightye power of GOD, and also his goodness and mercy, so that by this
mean as the Apostle does testifye, all men are inexcusable, before the
majesty of GOD: And with them, we may well comprehend those, that hear the
word, but because that they are deaf in their hearts and minds, though they
be called, yet they will give nether ears nor heed unto the calling. The
second sort that be called do profess the Christian religion, and receive the
word, Acts. viii
but it has no true root in them. As Simon Magus, which being convinced in
his heart that the Gospel was true, did for a time profess it, but because it
had no rote in him, he did sone fall away from it. Such are they, to whom the
Lord does give his holy spirit, illuminating them for a time, but afterward he
does forsake them, because of their ingratitude and unthankfulness, and does
strike the^ with greater blindness. The third manner of calling, is both
particulare, and also most effectual. For, by it the Lord does only call his
elect and chosen, and whom he has ordained before unto life everlasting,
workinge so in them by the inward operation of his holy spirit, that the word
which is preached unto them, does take rote in their hearts, and brings
forth fruit unto eternal life. He does also by the same spirit testifye unto
them, I mean unto their spirit, that they be the children of God, and heirs
of the kingdom of heaven. But we will come to the parable it self: when our
savior Jesus Christ did see, Mat. xxii.
that the gospel was far spread abroad, and that it was despised of many,
and received of few, he does describe God unto us, under the person of a mighty
king, which ordaining a solemn feast, does send his servants into all
costs, for to call a great multitude unto it. But because that they which
were first bidden did refuse to come, making all, one excuse or other: he was
feign to call them that were behind the hedges and in the Corners of the
streates unto his feast. Hitherto is the parable understood of the outward
calling. Afterward he says: that the master of the feast (which is none
other but God him self) did enter in, for to see and cherish his gestes, and
that whom he did find there without the bridegromes livery, him he did cast
into uttermost darkness, where shall be wepinge and gnashynge of teethe. They
that with their mouths do profess the gospel, and be not inwardelye
sanctified with the holy spirit of god be without the bridgro^es lyuerey.
This part of the similitude, ought to be understood of them, that with
their mouths do profess the Gospel, and the true Christian faith, and so do
associate and a fellowshyppe themselves with the church and congregation of
the faithful, but are not sanctified inwardlye with the holy spirit of god, nor
have put on our savior Jesus Christ. Such spots of his church, the Lord
will not always suffer, but as their stinckinge filthiness does deserve he
will cast them out at length. We say then with Christ, that many are
called, by that general calling of God, which pertains both to the
reprobate and chosen, but few are chosen. And unto these few, doothe the
particulare calling of the Lord pertain only. For, it brings with it self
the spirit of regeneration, which is the earnest penye and seal of our
heavenly enheritaunce, where by our hearts are sealed up against the day
of the Lord.


ALBION. It appears also that al they that be chosen shall not be saved. For,
John. vi.
and one of you is a deuel. And this does he speak of Judas, which was one of
his Apostles, and whom he did send fourth with the other, to preach his
Gospel, and to work miracles, for the confirmation of the same. Again,
where he says, Ioh. xvii.
that none of them did pearishe, that were given him of the father, he does
except the child of Perdityon.


PHILALETHES. It is to be understood, Answer Two ma^ners of chusinge.
that there be two manners of chusinge. The one, whereby the Apostles were
chosen to that most worthy office of Apostleship that they were in, and the
other, whereby they were chosen unto life everlasting. Therefore, when Christ
says, that Judas was chosen with the other Apostles, ye same must be
understood of the office, where unto he was chosen with the other. For, when
he speaks of the electyon that does pertayne unto life everlasting, and unto
the enheritaunce of the kingdom of heaven, he does all together exclude him
from the number of the chosen. John. xiii
I do not (says he) speak of you all I know whom I have chosen. Whereunto
Judas was given unto Christ of his heavenly father.
After the same manner, may we say, that Judas was given Christ of his
heavenly father, not for to be kept and preserved with the other, unto life
everlasting, but for to bear the office of an Apostle for a time. Which
appears to be most true by that, which he says in another place: All that
my father has given me (says he) shall come unto me, and him, that comes I
will not cast out. The like may be said of all those, that for a while do
seem to be very Apostels of our savior Jesus Christ, preaching the gospel,
to men's thinking, most syncerelye and purelye, but at length they do clean
fall away from Christ, and become enemies of the word. Such were Philetus,
Hymeneus and Demas. ii. Timo. ii.iiii.
with many other. These were given Christ, of his heavenly father, for to be
in such high rowmes and offices for a time, but not for to be kept unto
eternal life. Else, how could that stand, where he says: This is the will
of the father, that has sent me, Ihon. vi.
that I lose none of al those, that he has give me: But that I do raise the^
up again in the last dai? Heareby tha^ may we conclude, that they that be given
unto Christ, of his father, for to be fellow heirs with him of his heavenly
kingdom, can never perish, and that the place that ye aleadged, ought to be
understood of those, that be given unto Christ, for to serve him for a time.
And of this sort are they, that turn to their old vomit again, and to their
walowing in the mire: ii. Pet. ii.
or that having ben once lighted, notwithstanding that they have tasted of the
heavenly gift, Heb. vi.
and are become partakers of the holy ghost, and have tasted of the good word
of God, and of the power of the world to come, yet do fall away at length from
the known truth: or that having been righteous for a while, do turn away
unfaithfully, and give them selves to unrighteousness. These folk for a
while, even till they be utterly fallen away from the known truth, Eze.
xviii.
are taken for true Chrystyans, and are reckenned among the sheep of our
sauyoure Jesus Christ, and yet they be none of them. For, if they were his
sheep and of his flock, they could not peryshe. Which thing may be proved
by his own words and sayings, which have been rehearced already before, and
now for to make the matter more plain, may be rehearced again: My sheep,
says he, hear my voice and I know them, John. x.
and they follow me and I give them life everlasting, and they shall never
perysh, and no man shall pluck them out of my hand. My father, which gave me
them, is greater then al, and no man is able to pluck them out of my fathers
hand. Here, we have, The properties of the true sheep of Christ.
as it were, set out before our eyes the propertyes of the true sheep of
Christ. First and foremost, they hear his voice, and follow him. But they that
forsake the known truth, and turn to their old vomit again, do neither
hear his voice nor yet follow him. Again, as Christ gives life everlasting
unto his true sheep, so does he promise, that they shall never perish, and that
no man shall pluck them out of his hand. But they which after that they have
been once lighted, do fall away again from the good word of God, Heb. vi.
whereof they had tasted, have not life everlasting (for, as the Apostle says
it is impossible that they should be renewed unto repentance) they do
pearyshe, and are plucked out of the shepheardes hand. Therefore, they are none
of the true sheape. And the cause why the true sheape can not pearyshe, nor be
pluckte out of the shephardes hand is only this: because that the father
which gave them, is greater than all, and no man is able to pluck them out
of his hand. If Satan than were able, to bring the true sheep of Christ
into perdition, we should be fain to confess that he is greater, than the
heavenly father, and that he is of more power, than the only begotten son of
God: I would would wish that they which do so boldlye affirm, that the
elect and chosen of God, and true sheep of our savior Jesus Christ can
pearysh, would but read this place of the Gospel, where it is said, that there
shall arise many false Christ's and false Prophettes, Math. iiii
which shall do great tokens and wonders, in so much that if it were
possible, the very chosen should be brought into error also. Where we do
learn, that though the elect be many times tempted with erroures, and with
false and lyinge signs, yet they can not be pluckte away from the truth of
our savior Jesus Christ. For, they that are given him of his father, can
never pearyshe, nor yet be pluckte out of his hand.


ALBION. Why does Saint Paul say then: i. Cor. x. Romans xi.
Let him, that thincketh him self to stand, take heed least he fall? And
again: Art thou grafted in the people of God?

Be not thou hye minded therefore, but fear. For, God is able to cut the of
again and to grafte other in. Fear, I say, seeing God has not spared the
natural branches, least he also spare not thee. Moreover our savior Jesus
Christ says, Math. xii.
that when the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, if he chance to come
in again, the end of that man shall be worse than the beginning. Whereby we do
learn, that though a man be sanctified in our savior Jesus Christ, and
delivered from the spirit of infidelitye and unbelief, yet he may fall into it
again. Yea, if the elect of God, can never pearish, what nead they to be
exhorted at any time, or to be admonished and rebuked? What neade have they,
that Gods word should be preached unto them, or that they should make any
prayers unto God?


PHILALETHES. Answer
As for the first place, that ye have aledged out of the tenthe chapyter of
the first Epistle to the Corinthians, it shall easelye be understood, if we
will but mark the circumstances of it. We must consider that there Saint
Paul does write against certain of the church of Corinthus, which did live
in a carnal securitye, and that being puffed up with a vain confidence, did
forget their own infirmity and weakness, and so did fall into horrible
sins. Such vain confidence and carnal securitye did the Prophets rebuke, in
the people of Israel.

But because that Satan the Deuel is wont to wraste this place, for to put
men in dout of their saluatyon, whereby it comes to pass that many men's
consciences are horriblye tormented: we shall note and mark, that there is a
certain security and confidence which is most holy and godly, and which cannot
be separated from the true faith.

By it we do wholelye reast upon the promises of God, being fullye persuaded
in our consciences, that God as a most merciful and louinge father, will
always healpe, aid, and assiste us. Therefore, putting a side al vain dread
and fear, we do rejoice and triumph against satan the deuell, and against
sin. Notwithstanding, remembrynge still our own infirmity and weakness, we
do withal lowliness and humilitye of mind commyt our selves unto the
merciful keeping and protection of almighty GOD our heavenly father, and
abide through faith under the shadow of his wings. Rom viii
Of this sure confidence and trust does the Apostle speak in many places, but
most specially in the viii. chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, where he
says: Who will separate us from the love of God? trouble or anguishe?
persecution or hunger? nakedness or pearill of the swearde? I am sure, that
nether death nor life, neither angel nor rule, neither power, neither things
present, nor things to come, nor yet any creatures either above or beneath,
shall be able to separate us from the love of GOD, which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord. There is an other securitye or confidence, Ungodly securitye and
confidence.
which does rise and come of a luskishnesse, when men being pufte up with the
gifts that they have received, do behave them selves as though they were
without all gonne shot, and were in no pearil at all, whereby it comes to pass
that the enemy has them always at his advantage. Therefore, the blessed
Apostle S. Paul does diligently warn the Corinthians to take heed and beware
of such vain confidence, and carnal security, because that he did perceive yt
some of them were given to it, and did please them selves in their own
conceits and folishe opinions: but he does not bid them to doubt of the good
will of god toward them, or to be in fear, Against whom Paul does speak in
the.x. cha. of.i. Cor. i.
as uncertain of their own salvation, which they have through Christ, in
whom we are chosen before the foundacyons of the world were laid. To be short,
Saint Paul does here speak against those, that were hie myneded and puffed up
with a vain confidence and trust, which was grounded upon men, and not upon
god. But when he speaks of the true securitye or quietness of mind, and of
the true confidence and trust, he says plainlye thus: Stand steadfast, being
grounded and roted in Christ.


ALBION.


PHILALETHES. Although it is impossible, as I have sufficientlye declared
before, Answer
that any such thing should chance or happen unto them, that be chosen in
christ Jesus, to be fellow heirs with him of his heavenly kingdom, yet have
they always nead of such exhortations, The malepartnes of the flesh must be
tamed
for to tame the malepartnesse and pride of the flesh, which as it is always
an ennemy of their salvation, so it deserves to be put in fear of
everlasting dampnation and of hell fire. As far forth then as the true
Christians be illumynated through faith, and have received the light of the
holy spirit of God: for their assurance they be certified in the sacred
scryptures, that the calling of God is without repentance. But as far
fourth as they carye about the flesh, Romans xi
which does kycke against the grace of God, with these sayings.

Take heed that thou fall not and take heed, that thou be not cut of again)
they be taught to humble them selves, and to be lowlye, gentle, and meke, and
not to be puffed up, or swel against any man. But here we shall mark that there
be three kinds of graftinge in, and two manners of cutting of. Three kinds of
graffinge in, and.ii manners. of cutting of.
For, first and foremooste, the children of the faithful, unto whom by the
virtue of the covenant that is made with the fathers, the promise does
pertain, are grafted in. Secondly, they are grafted in, that receive the sede
of the Gospel, but before that it can bring forth any fruit, it is choked in
them. Thirdly they be grafted in, that by the unchangeable purpose or decree
of God, are ordained and chosen unto life everlasting. Now the first are
cut of, when they do vnthanckfully refuse ye promise, that is made unto their
fathers, or else will not, of a certain malitiousnesse of mind receive it. The
second are cut of again, when the sede is choked in them, and because that we
are all, touching our own nature subject to that mischief and most
pearillous evil, therefore, this exhortation and warning does by good right
pertain unto us all. Yet the solution of this argument shall be the more easy,
if we will consider and mark, that the blessed Apostle does most chiefly
speak unto them, Unto whom the Apostell did speak most cheiflye.
that did falsely boaste them selves, that they were grafted in the couenaunte
of life, in stead of the Jews. For, there does he speak to all the hole body
of the gentiles in general, among whom there were many that were but
Christians in name. We must not think then that S. Paul goes about by this
sharp warning to put us in any doubt of our salvation, or to take away the
certainty and infalliblenesse of the true Christian faith, or to annichilate
and abolish that most infallible testimonye of the spirit of God, which
testifies unto our spirit, that we are his children, and heirs through grace
of his heavenly kingdom, but rather that he does declare thereby, speakinge
to the hole body of the gentiles, that there were many among them, that were
vainlye pufte up, and that having an outward show of godliness did deny the
virtue of it. And for their sakes, does he threaten the gentiles that they may
be cut of again. And here unto may be applied the parable or similitude that
ye have aledged out of the twelft chapter of Matthew. For, besides all other
doctrines that may be gathered out of it, Math. xii.
we do learn there, that if our savior Jesus Christ, does of his mere
goodness and mercy deliver us once from the spirit of unbelief, we must not
be pufte up therefore, nor give our selves unto a carnal security, which is
the mother of al mischief, and which making us to forget the judgment of
almighty God, Carnal security, mother of all myschyefe.
does choke up altogether the fear of God in our hearts, but that we ought
rather to watch and pray, acknowledgynge unfeignedly, and even from the
bottom of our hearts, our own infirmity and unableness, and so submytte
our selves unto the mighty hand of our heavenly pastoure. And verelye this
sharp warnyng is very necessary, as long as we carye about this rebellyous
loumpe of flesh, which is always contrary unto the spirit, and an enemy of
our salvation, that by this mean, it may be tamed and kept under, and also
made to shake of, all luskish securitye and vain confidence. But as we must
beware and take bid, that we do not go about by this place, to put men
in any doubt of their saluatyon, or to spoil them of the certaynetye of the
true Christyane Faith, (for Christ our savior goes about no such thing
here) so can we never prove by it, that the deuel or unclean spirit can ever
have again the true elect and chosen of God, in his possession, after ye they
be once sealed up with his holy spirit against the day of the Lord.

What they be that suffer the unclean spirit to come in again. i. John. ii
They therefore, that suffer the unclean spirit to come in again, are of the
number of those, that fall to their old vomit again, or to their walowing in
the mire, and that being once lighted, do most ungodly and most traiterouslye
forsake the known truth. But hear what the holy spirit of God which spoke in
all the holy Apostles does say of such: They went out from us, but they were not
of us. For, if they had been of us, they would doubtless, have continued with
us. As long as they do abide among us, and have all the Common outward
signs of the true election of God, we ought not to judge rashlye of them, but
to commit them unto the unsearchable and righteous judgment of him, that
knows the hearts of al men. In deed by their falling away, they do
manifestlye declare that they were never of the number of the elect and chosen
of God, that they had never the true Christian faith in their hearts, nor were
sealed with the spirit of adoption, which is the earnest penny of our
heavenly enheritaunce.


EVTRAPELVS. That same place, that ye have brought in now, out of the first
Epistle of the blessed Evangelist Saint Ihon, seems unto me to make the
matter very plain. For, thereby do we learn, that they that fall away from
christ though they go away from among the elect and chosen of God, yet they be
none of the number of them.

For, if they were of them, they would continue and abide with them. Since
then that they fall away from the known truth, they do playnelye declare
thereby, that they were none of the true elect and chosen of God, but were
plain hypocrites, which for a time did shine in the church with faygned
holiness, whereas inwardely they were filled with all kind of infydelitye and
unbelief, which they cloked as long as they could, till they were by the
righteous judgment of God, manyfested and opened at length. And such shall
the church have unto the worlds end.


DIDY. Answer by an other question.



PHILALETHES. Now will I ask you a question neighbor Didymus: If ye had a
good piece of ground, which ye knew most perfectely to be fruytfull,
would ye not till it still, and sow it, that ye might have some profytte of
it? Or would ye let it alone because that ye know it to be fruytfull?


DIDYMVS. If I should do so, I should be but a slender husband manne. I would
not only till it and sow it most dilygentely, but also root out all noisome
and hurtefull weeds: I would not leave one bramble or bryer in it.


PHILALETHES Very well. All men of their own nature be a barren ground.
Ye know that al men of their own nature, are but a Barrayne, and an
vnfruytefull ground, and apt to bring forth nothing elsse but Thistles,
Briars and Thorns, and that whom he doothe choose from the whole lompe of
unprofitable Earth, them he doothe make a good and a fruteful ground.


DIDYMVS. I will not be against that.


PHILALETHES. But what should it profytte to have made them a good and a
fruitful ground, except they were continually tilled, and had good sede sown
in them, and except the weeds, thorns and briers, that grow in them, were
continually cut of, with the wedehoke of Gods word? with the whole some
exhortations of the ministers, Wherefore serve exhortations to the elect of
God.
the elect and chosen are, as it were ploughed and tilled, and good sede is
still cast into their hearts, that they may bring forth good and pleasant
fruit unto the Lord: when they are sharplye rebuked by the messengers of God,
The profyt of sharp rebukinge.
the briers, and Thorns that do grow in them, by reason of the natural
infirmitye and weakness, that sticks unto them, as long as they carry about
this body of sin, are weded out, and destroyed. But our savior Jesus Christ
does setforth the matter much more plainlye, when he says: I am the true
vine, John. xv.
and my father is an husbandman. Every brau^ch that brings forth fruit shall
he pourge, that it may bring forth more fruit. Where he does use a very goodlye
similytude. For, as the vine branches ye bring forth fruit are purged, that
they may bring forth more fruit, which thing is done, when such things as be
superflue in them and unprofitable, are cut of, least they should grow to
high, and mar the fruit: even so, the superfluitye that is in our flesh, and
the noisome vices, that do daily bread and grow in it, are to be pourged and
cut of, with the sweard of the spirit, which is Gods word. We may conclude
then, that the true elect and chosen of God, as long as they continue here in
this world, and carye about this body of sin, they have nead still of the
wedehoke of Gods word.


EVTRAPELVS. Me think that by the same reason, whereby they go about to
prove, that ye true elect and chosen of god, have no nead of the preaching of
Gods word, Thabsurditye that do ensue of the fre will men's objection
because that they be sure already of their salvation, they might also maintain
and uphold, that they have no nead of meat and drink, since that they be
assured by Gods word, that they shall not die, before the time, that God has
appointed. The one stands with as good a reason as the other. For look what the
meat and drink is unto the body, Gods word is the same unto the soul.


DIDY. But yet, since that they be so sure of their election,


PHI. Does not our savior Jesus Christ say, Answer
that our heavenly father knows our nead before that we ask any thing of
him? Since then that he knows our nead, Mash. vi.
what nead we to declare it unto him in our prayers, or to desire any thing of
him, sith that he knows what we neade, before we ask him? There have been
some, which have gone about by this saying of our savior Jesus Christ, to make
men to believe, that prayers were altogether unprofitable. But their doctrine
may soon be overthrown. For, we do not pray unto God for to teach him our
neade, but for to desire him, that he vouch safe according to his fatherly
mercy and goodness, to healp and succor us in our necessity and neade, and
also for to acknowledge there by, that all the healpe and comfort that we have,
comes of him only, and of none other.

We do moreover declare there by our obedience toward his holy Institution
and ordenaunce, whereby he has instytuted and ordained, that we should in
our necessitye and trouble call upon him, and so honor him.

In like manner, although we be sure of our electyon, yet ought we, in all
our necessityes and troubles, to fly unto our heavenly father by earnest and
faithful prayers. First because yt it is his commandment that we should so
do. Secondly for to acknowledge thereby, that without his fatherlye healpe and
succor, we be not able to wythstande our ghostely enemy, which goes about
like a raumping Lion, seeking whom he may devour. i. Pet. v.
Was not our savior Jesus Christ most sure of his salvation? And yet we
read in the gospel, that some time he did continue all the whole night in
prayer.


ALBION. This ought to suffyse us. For, if our savior Jesus Christ, which
is the only fountain and well of life, and the shot anchore of our
salvation, being most sure always of the kingdom of heaven, did pray so
earnestly, what ought we to do, that carry about this sinful flesh, and that
be only the children of adoption?

Again, we have learned before, that we are not chosen of God for to break
his commandments, Luc. i.
but for to live in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life, and
also for to be holy and blameless in his sight: since then that it is his
commandment, Ephe. i.
that we should in the day of our necessity and trouble call upon him, Psalm. l.
and so honor him, although we be never so sure of our salvation through
faith in our savior Jesus Christ, yet ought we still, when so ever we be in
any necessity or trouble to call upon him in truth. But yet my gentle men
did aledge Gregory unto me, which says, Home. xxxviii.
Etiam si quales hodie simus sciamus, quales tamen simus futuri nescimus. That
is to say: Although we know what we are at this day, yet do we not know what
we shall be. This seems unto me to be clean contrary unto your doctrine.


PHILALETHES. Answer to Gregorye.
Gregory did speak, as though the electyon of GOD were grounded upon the
works and mearites of men. Which thing we have proved before to be
contrary to all scryptures. And therefore, sith that he had only a respect
to the works and deservings of men, as though the election of God did
holelye depend and hang of them it was easy for him for to put men in
doubt of their salvation, and to make them to be uncertain, whether they were
of the number of the chosen or not.

Which doctrine does not only bring a contynuall tormente of conscience,
but also at length dryueth men to utter desperatyon, as it is dailye seen
by experience where such learning does take place.

But we have proved al ready by many sufficient textes of the scriptures, that
GOD our heavenly father without any respect of our own works or merits
has chosen us in his son Jesus Christ, before the foundacions of the world were
laid: Whereby we do learn that our election is only grounded upon the
mercy of God, declared us in his son Jesus Christ, for whose sake only he
has chosen and ordained us before, to be heirs of his heavenly kingdom, as
the Apostle doothe testify, saying: ii. Tim. i.
He has saved and called us with an holy calling, not according to our
deeds, but according to his own purpose, and grace, which was given us in
CHRIST IESV, before the world was made, but is now declared openly by the
appearinge of our Sauyoure Jesus Christ.

He has therefore of his mere goodness and mercy, and not for our own
works or merits, but for his son Jesus Christ's sake chosen us freely. We
nead not then to be in doubt of our salvation, sith that it hangs not of
the dignity or worthiness of men, but of the fre mercy of God. And what
greater comfort can there be unto the afflicted consciences than to be
certifyed by the infallible word of God, that their salvation does lie and
reast only in the gratuite and free mercy of God, taken hold upon by faith in
his son Jesus Christ our Lord and savior?


ALBION All things being well considered, I do perceive now and understand, A
short collection of the dysputation that goes before
that this your doctrine is most true and also most comfortable, and that
they that will ground our election, whereby we are chosen unto life everlasting
upon our own works and merits, as they be ennemies unto the fre mercy of
God, so they do, as much as in them does lie, pluck away from us the
certainty of our Christian faith, and also the assurance of our salvation,
that we have in the merits of the death, passion, and bloudsheddynge of our
savior Jesus Christ. And in ye same error be they also, that hold opinion, that
the true elect and chose^ of god can perish, which I perceive by the answer
that ye have made to their objections, that they be wont to make for to
overthrow the certainty of our election, to be most false and untrue
altogether. But as our election in Christ Jesus, is most certain, so is it
impossible for us to be certified of it by any other mean, than by the calling
of god, which does consist in the outward preaching of his word, and in the
inward workinge of the holy ghost, wherbi he does illuminate our hearts, and
testifies unto our spirit, yt we are his children, and fellow heirs with his
son Jesus Christ, of his heavenly kingdom.


PHI. It is even so as ye say. For, all the elect and chosen of god, All the
elect and chosen of god before their calling, do go astray with the other.
before their calling which is not al don at one time, for some be called at one
time, some at an other, some in their youth, and some in their old age) do go
astray and wa^der in the common desert with the other, and do differ in nothing
from ye rebrobate, saving only yt by the exceeding great mercy and goodness of al
mighty god, they are preserved and kept from uttermost perdition. If ye look
upon the^, ye shall se in them the natural corruption, yt we all have drawn of
our first parent Adam: and that the pit of ungodliness does not shut up his
mouth upon them, it is only because ye god has alwais an eye unto them and
unto their salvation and holds his merciful hand over them.


DyDI. I have heard some great doctors say, yt they have a certain sede of
their election naturally I mean, even from their birth, grafted in them,
whereby they are alwais stirred up, and moved unto godliness and unto the fear
of god.


PH. They that say so, can bring no scripture for them selves, but only the
imagination of their own heds again, the daily experience teaches us the
contrary.


DyDI. And what say ye of Paul?


PHI. As touching Paul, Answer
we will not greatly strive with them for him: but touching Cornelius they are
greatly beguiled. For, Act. x.
it is most plain, that he was already illumynated and borne of new, and
that he did only want a plainer declaration of the gospel. But what shall they
prove by these few examples? that all the elect and chosen of God, are always
led with the spyrite of godliness. No more shall they be able by those few
examples too prove the same, then showing and declarynge the Innocencye, and
integrity, or virtuous conversation of Aristides, Socrates, Xonophon, Scipio,
Curious, Camillus, and of such like, they shall be able to prove thereby, that
all they that be left in the blind ydolatrye, are lovers of virtue and
godlyenesse. What need we many words? We have the scriptures that teach us
plainly the contrary. For the estate of the Ephesians before their regenetion
or new birth, which Paul does describe and set fourth in the epistell, that
he has written unto them, does declare manyfestely, that there was no such
sede of election in them. Ye were, says he, dead through trespasses and
sins, in the which, Ephe. ii.
in times past ye walked according to the course of this world, and after the
prince that rules in the air, namely after the spyrit that workethe now in
the children of vnbelyef. Among whom we had also our conversation in time
past, in the lusts of our flesh, and did the will of our flesh, and of the
mind and were naturallye the children of wrath, even as well as other. Again:
Remember that ye had no hope, and that ye were without God in this world.
Again Ye were sometimes darkness but now ye are light in the lord, walk as
the children of light.


DIDY. this is to be referred to the ignorance of the true God, which they do
not deny to be in all yt elect, before they be called.


PHILALE. Wherefore then does he by and by conclude upon those sayings, Answer
that they ought to put away lyinge, and to steal no more, as they had don in
times paste? When the blessed Apostell, wrytinge to the Corinthyans had said,
i. Cor. vi.
that neither whoremongers nor adulterers, nor thefes, nor coueteous persons,
should enter into the kingedome of heaven, he did add by and by, that before
they came to Christ, they were defiled with all those detestable and enorme
sins: but that now they were washed clean with the blood of Christ, and
delivered by his spirit. Romans vi.
And again, in the epistle to the Romans like as ye have given over your
members (says he) to the service of vnclenelynesse from one wickedness to an
other: eue^ so now, give over your members to the service of rightousnesse,
that ye may be holy. For, what fruit had ye at ye time in those things, whereof
ye are now ashamed? What seed of election, I pray you, was then in them, when
they did all the hole time of their life, walow them selves, most desperately
in such abominable and filthy sins? If Saint Paul had been of that opinion,
he would have showed unto the^, how much bound they were unto the goodness of
god whereby they had been preserved from such abominable and stynking
filthynesse. Saint Peter likewise ought to have exhorted the^, to whi^ he did
write, unto thanks giving for the continual sede of their election, but rather
he does write to the contrary. For, he says, i. Pet. iiii
that it is enough that we have spent the time past of our life, to fulfill
the lusts of the heathen. But now, Iosu. ii. ii. King. xxi ii. Cron. xxxiii.
let us come to the examples of the scripture. What sede of election was there
in Rachaab the harlot, before she was called? or in Manasses, when he did fill
the streets of Jerusalem with the innocente blood of the prophets? or in the
thief, which being at deaths door, did then repent, and never before? Away
the^ with such folyshe reasonnes and arguments, which curious men be wont
to invent and make without any scripture, and let the same take place with us,
which the prophet did speak, saying: we have al gone astray, like sheep, and
every one of us has followed his own way, Esaias. liii
that is to say, the way of perdition and of death everlasting. But who^ he
has determined once to deliver from this endless perdition, as he does
commonly suffer them for a while, to wander and go astraye withal the
residue, so does he at the time, that he him self has appointed, call them to
his flock by the preaching of his word, and by the inward working of his holy
spirit. Whereas on the contrary, whom he does stir up and appoint to be the
vessels of his wrath, and the examples of his severity and justice, them does
he for the most part deprive of the light of his word, or if he sends them
his word, it is for to blind them the more, yea and for to harden them. We
have many examples of the first: but one, which in deed is most notable,
shall suffice us now. By the space almost of four thousand years, before the
coming of Christ, God did hide the light of his heavenly doctrine, in a
manner from all generatyons and peoples. Now if any would say, that this was
don, because that god did judge the^ unworthy of so great a benefit, How long
the light of Gods word has been hidden al most from all nations of the
earth.
we may right well answer that they, which came after, were as unworthy as
they, yea, and more unworthy to, if ye will go to their outward living and
conversation or to their manners and conditions. Why did then the Lord give
the light of his word rather unto these, than he did unto them before? he
should labor in vain, that would seek out the cause of so high a matter,
which is hidden in the unsearchable judgments and incomprehensible ways of
ye lord. And if any man would go about by the occasion of these our sayings
to blame the justice of God, let him take this one answer for all. An Answer
to the^ that go about to blame the justice of God.
We do affirm and say, that none do perish vndeseruinglye, or without a just
cause, and that again, it comes of the mere mercy and goodness of God that
some are delivered and saved, which ought to be sufficient, for to set forth
and declare the glory of GOD, and also for to stop the mouth of that
godless Porphyrius, How god makes away to his Predestination.
and of all his ungodly Disciples and scholars. The LORD then does make away
unto his Predestynatyon, when he does hide his heavenly light from them,
whom he has once reproved, and leaves them in their blindness still. And
of the second sort, I mean, of those, that are never the better for the
preaching of the word, but rather the worse, we have many examples daily
before our eyes, besides them that be contained in the scriptures. We see that
the word is preached to an hundredth Persons, and that twenty of them do
receive it gladlye, and with an obedient faith, and that all the other do
pass nothing upon it, but rather deride and laughe it to scorn, going away
worse then they came.


DyDI. of that.


PHILALETHES. I do not deanye it. Answer Act. xiii.
But yet this is not a full answer. For, the same naughtiness should be in
them also, that receive the word, except God had taken it away.


DyDI. Why does he give his grace unto these, and not unto the other?


PHIL. Saint Luke shows the cause, when he does say: And they did believe,
that were ordained before unto life everlasting. What shall we than say of the
other, that do not believe? Forsothe, that this come to pass, because that they
be stirred up and or deined for to be the vessels of Gods wrath. Therefore,
let us not be afraid to say with Saint Augustine. posset deus malorum
voluntatem in bonum conuertere, quia omnipotens est, Li. i. de gene ad li
teram. x. Chapi.
posset plane. Cur ergo non facit? Quia noluit. Cur noluerit, penes ipsum est.
Debemus N non plus sapere quam oportet. That is to say: God might turn the will
of the wicked into good, because yt he is almighty, plainly he could do it.
Wherefore then does he it not? Because that he will not. Why he will not, that do
we leave unto him. For, we ought not to be wiser than it be houeth.


DIDI. This then is your meaning, that God is author of no man's damnation, but
that he does only according to his unsearchable and righteous judgment, leave
them, whom he has appointed and ordained before to be the vessels of his wrath,
in their own natural corruption, read more diligentely the scriptures and
thou shall cease to marvel
which they have of their first parent Adam. But I do meruail at this, that he
should send his word unto them, whom he will have to be more blinded.


PHI. And of this we have many examples in the scriptures. For, wherefore, was
Moses sent so many times unto Pharao? was it because that God had any hope,
that he should with so many messages be mollified, and won at length? Yea
rather, er the Lord did begin, he knew the end of the matter, and did also
tell before, what should come to pass. Go thy way, says he to Moses, Exo.
iiii.
and show him my mind. And I will harden his heart that he shall not obey. So
when he does raise up Ezechiell, Eze. ii and. xii.
he gives him warning, that he does send him to a rebellious, and froward
people, least perceiuyng that his preachinge did take no place, he should wax
faynte hearted. Iere. i.
He does also warn Ieremye that his Doctrine shall be as a hot burning
fire, wherewith the people shall be consumed and destroyed as stubble. But yet
the Prophecye and saying of Esaye the Prophet is playnest of all. For, Esaias.
vi.
the LORD doothe send him forth with these words: Go thy way and tell to
the Children of Israel: ye shall hear in deed: but ye shall not understand, ye
shall plainelye see, and not perceive. Harden the heart of this people, stop
their ears, and shut their eyes, that they see not with their eyes, nor hear
with their ears, nor understand with their hearts, least they should turn
and be healed. Behold, he sends his word unto them, but that they may be
the more deaf, he does light the candel, but that they may be the blinder, he
does setforth his doctrine, but that they may be the more beastish, he sends
unto them a remeady, but that they should not be healed with it. And therefore,
Saint Ihon the Evangelist alledginge this prophecy, John. xii.
does plainlye affirm that the Jews could not believe the doctrine of
Christ, because that this maledictyon and curse of God did hang over them:
Again: this can not be denied, but that God does setforthe his doctrine in
parables, to those, whom he will not have to be illuminated least they should
take any profit by it. For Christ our savior does plainly testify, that he
does therefore expound the parables unto his Apostles, because that it was
given them, Mat. xiii.
to know and understand the mysteries of the kingdom of God, but not to them
that were without.


DIDY. Wherefore should GOD teach them,


PHILALETHES. Consider only, whence the faut comes, Answer
and ye shall leave askinge. For what obscuritye or darcknesse so ever, is in
the word, yet there is always light enough for to confound the consciences
of the ungodly.


ALBION. I would judge that God does so, because that with their ungodliness,
ingratitude, and abhomynable wickedness, they have deserved the same at his
hand.


PHILALETHES. This is well and truly spoken. But yet sithe that the cause of
this variety is not yet known, why some being brought unto obedience, the
other do still abide in their stubborn and rebellious hardenesse and
contynuacye, in the discussinge of the matter, we shall be feign to fly
necessarely unto that, Romans ix.
which Saint Paul does note out of Moses, that is to say, that God did from
the beginning stir them up, for to declare by them his name through out
all the hole earth. That therefore, the reprobate do not obey the word, when it
is offered unto them, we do well attribute the same unto the malice and
perverseness of their own heart, so that we acknowledge with it, that they
are therefore given up in to this malytious perverseness, because that they are
by the ryghteous and unsearchable judgment of God, raised or styrred up for to
set fourth his glory by their damnation. In like manner, i. Sam. ii
when it is said that the sons of Helye would give no ears unto the
wholesome counsayll that their father gave them, because that the Lord had
determined to slaye them, we do not deny but that their stubburnesse and
obstinacye did come of their own malice and naughtines: But we must note with
it, why they were left in their obstinacye and stubburnesse, since that God was
able by his almighty power to mollify and turn their hearts: Forsothe because
that they were once by the determinate counsel and decree of God ordained and
appointed unto destruction. When the ungodly hear this, they murmur and grudge
against God, The grudgi^ge and murmuring of the ungodly.
as though he should with his inordinate power, deal cruellye with his poor
and miserable creatures. But we that know, that all men are so many ways
subject unto the judgment of God, that being asked of a thousand things,
they be not able to answer in one, do acknowledge and confess, that the
reprobate do suffer nothing unjustly or vndeseruinglye, but are most justly
condemned by the righteous judgment of almighty God our heavenly father, who
(as it has been said before) did create al things for him self and the ungodly
against the evil day. Pro. xvi. Objection



ALBION. Why does the^ the scripture say, that God has created man to be
undestroyed, if he has made the ungodly against the evil day? Again, in the
viii chapter of the fourth book of Esdras, iiii. Esd. viii. Answer
it is said that it was not the will of God, that man should come to naught?


PHI. In so high a matter as this is, I might lawfully refuse the authorities,
that ye aledged even now. For, the books whence ye had them, are not
authentike nor yet canonical. Howbeit I will not do so, but will make such an
answer, I trust, that al they that aledge such places shall be content with it.
Sapi. ii.
The first place that ye brought in, as far as I remember, is written in the
second chapter of the book of wisdom, where we have these words: god created
manne to be undestroyed, yea after the Image of his own likeness, made he
him. Nevertheless through the envy of the devil, came death into the world,
whereby any man may easelye gather, that the wise man does speak there of Adam
being in the most perfect estate of his first creation, in the which if he had
continued and abiden still, obeying the commandment, that the lord his God had
given him, neither death nor hell could have had any power upon him, he
should have been immortal, he should have lived for ever, no destructyon at
all should have come near him, or touched him.

God then, had created him to be undestroyed, if he had not through
disobedience broken his commandment. For, it is written in the book of Jesus
the son of Syrach, Eccle. xv.
otherwise called Ecclesiastions, yt Lord gave him his commandments, and
precepts, saying: if thou will observe the commandments, and keep
acceptable faithfulness for ever, they shall preserve thee. By this then it
does plainly appear, that by breakinge of the law, that was given him, he did
bring both him self, and all his posterity into utter perdition.


DIdy.


PHILALETHES. No man does deny,


DI. And why did he it not.


PHILALETHES. Because that he would not. But why he would not we leave that
unto him, as we said before. For, we must not be wyser than it behooves. How
be it this matter has been sufficientlye discussed before, therefore we will
come again to our argument. Ye have heard already, that man was created to be
undestroyed, if he had not through dysobedience broken the commandment of
god, and that by his transgression and fall, he did bring both him self and
all that came of him in to utter destruction, so that by reason of it all the
whole lompe of mankind, is subject unto damnation and unto death everlasting.
When we say then, that God did of this lompe of damnation choose some, even
before the foundacions of the world were laid, for to be the vessels of his
mercy, and for to be fellow heyers with his son Jesus Christ of his heavenly
kingdom, and that again he did ordain and appointe some, for to be the vessels
of his wrath and the examples of his justice, we do in nothing varye from the
scryptures that ye have aleaged last. For, those places are to be
understood of man, being as God created him first, and we speak of man
being made through his own folly, We were all in Adams loins when he fell.
transgression and fall, the child of perdition, in whose loins we were all
when he fell, whereby it follows, that we al are naturally ye chylden of wrath.
Therefore when he does raise and stir up some, for to be the vessels of his
wrath (as we have said many times before already) he does the^ no wrong,
nothing can be laid to his charge for it. For, he does but as they do deserve:
and though he should without any exception dampne us all, he should do us but
right.


DIDY. But sith that it was not the will of God (as Esdras says) that man
should come to naught, why did he suffer him to fall after this sort? I can
not yet well understand this.


PHILALETHES. Answer
This place must be understood, as the other, that we expounded even now. It
was not the will of God, that man should come to naught, if he had continued
and abyden still in the same estate, that he was created and put in, at the
first. But sith that man has contrary to the will and commandment of
almightye God, brought him self, through his disobedience and rebellion, to
naught, I mean, to endless myserye and calamitye, God our heavenly father
for to declare his mercy, did choose some, from among his sede, for to enheryte
eternal felicitye and life everlasting. And some again, for to declare and
set fourth his justice, he did appoynte and ordain to be euerlastingelye
dampened in hell fire.


EVTRAPELVS. And what absurditye were it, I pray you, to say: that almyghtye
God our heavenly father, does as a mighty potter, make of one lompe of claye,
which of his own nature is alredye subject unto everlasting damnation, some
vessels to honor, and some to dyshonoure? Does not the blessed Apostle saint
Paul write, Romans ix
that God willing to show his wrath, and to make his power to be known, does
bring forth the vessels of wrath, which are ordained to damnation, that so he
may declare, the richesse of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he has
prepared unto glory?


DyDIMVS. Ye had made me almost to forget a thing, which I thought to have
asked our brother Philalethes.


EVTRAPE. What should that be?


DyDIMVS. He said even now, that Adam did contrary to Gods will, bring him self
to naught, by his own disobedyence and rebellion. But how can this be? For,
is it not written, that no man is able to resist gods will? Romans ix. Objection
Since then that it was not the will of God, that he should be brought to
naught, how could he contrary to Gods will, bring him self to naught?
Answer



PHILA. Ye shall understand neighbor Dydimus, that the holy scripture does
speak of Gods holy will, two manner of ways. First and foremost, The will of
God is two manner of way considered in the scriptures.
it does ascribe unto him, I mean unto God an absolute will. And this will of
God is hidden from us, and can in no wise be resisted. For, what so ever God
does once determine, according to that absolute will of his, it shall never be
altered. Again, all the whole world shall never be able to wythstand it. And
therefore, we say that God is almighty, because that he is able to do
whatsoever he will. Secondly, the scripture does speak of the divine and
blessed will of god as it is declared and setforthe unto us in Gods holy word,
whereby we do learn, what God will have us to do, and what he will have us to
leave undone. We do al contrary to this will of our heavenly father, when we do
break his holy law and commandments.

Sith then that God by giving our first parent Adam a law and commandment,
did declare unto him what he would have him to do, and what he would have
him to leave undone, when he did through his disobedyence break the law and
commandment of God, he did contrary to Gods will, bring him self to
naught, and to utter destructyon, in the which God leaves them, whom he has
appointed and ordained to be the vessels of his wrath, and the examples of his
divine justice, for to be glorified by their damnation.


DYDIMVS. i. Tim. ii
that God will have al men to be saved, and to com to the knowledge of his
truth? Again, does not the Lord say, by his prophet Ezechiell, Eze. xviii
and.xxxiii.
that he has no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but that he turn unto
him and live? Moreover, it is written, that GOD did shut up all men under
unbelief, for to show mercy on all men. Romans xi.
These places, me think, are altogether against you.


PHILA. Some in deed, Answer
when they have once brought in, and aledged these places, thinck verily yt
they have won the victory: but they are far deceived for, these scryptures
being well understood, do make nothing against us, nor yet against our
doctrine. And first of all, where Saint Paul says, that God will have al
men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of his truth, it is most
evident and plain, that he does not speak there of al men in general, but of
al estates, orders, and degrees of men.


DYDIMVS. This is your exposition. But what Scripture do ye bring, for to
prove that it is so as ye say?


PHILA. If ye had suffered me, I would have made all things plain enough, so
that all the company should have been content. Be like ye think, that we are
of the number of those, which when they have a peace of the scripture by the
end, which seems to make for their purpose, they do run away withal, not
considering the circumstaunces of the place, nor to what purpose, the holy
ghost has set it forth or spoken it. The holy Apostle does write thus:
Exposition of the text aleaged out of i. Tim. ii
Exhort therefore, that above all things, prayers, supplications,
intercessio^s, and giving of thanks be had for all me^ for kings, and for all
that are in authority. And because that no man should think that it was
against all reason to pray for such ungodly kings and princes, as were open
enemies of the truth, and persecutors of Christ, and of his church: he does
aledge certain causes, why we ought to do so. First, that we may under them,
live a quiet and peasible life in all godliness and honesty. Secondly because
that the same is good and acceptable in the sight of God our savior, who will
have al men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of his truth.

Whereby the holy Apostle understands none other thing, but that God has his
chosen among all estates, orders and degrees of men, as well among Kings,
Princes, rulers and governors as among the^, that be of an inferior estate or
condition, though it seems never so unlikely unto man's reason. Else if we
should take it universally of all men, as ye will have us to take it, then
shall we be feign to confess that God did against his own will and
appointment, when he would not suffer his word to be preached in Bythinia, nor
yet in Asia. Act. xvi.
And again, when he did almost by the space of four thousand years, keep the
light of his heavenly doctrine from all nations and peoples, saving only that
he did give his law unto the children of Israel, and sent his Prophets unto
them.


EVTRAPELVS. This that our brother Philalethes says, must neades to be most
true. For, sithe that faith is the only mean for to come to salvation (for by
it only do we take hold upon the mercy of God) and that faith comes by
hearing, Romans x.
and hearing by the word: when god does keep his word and gospel from any
nation and people, it is a plain token and sign, that he will not have that
people to be saved, nor yet to come to the knowledge of his truth. How should
then the saying of the Apostle stand, if we should take it, as they do?
Therefore this must be the meaning of the holy ghost: that god has chosen of
every estate, condition, order, or degree of men, whom he will have to be saved,
and to come to the knowledge of his truth. Whereby we do learn, that god does
as well choose the kings as the subjects, and as well the subjects, as the kings:
as well the rich as the pore, and as well ye pore as the rich: and that there is
no estate or condition of life, out of the which, he will not have some to be
saved, and to come to the knowledge of his truth. Yet me think that this
objection might be answered another way.


DI. Which way, I pray you? Although the answer that our brother Philalethes
has made, has in a manner satisfied me thoroughly: yet notwithstanding, would
I be glad to hear, what ye ca^ say besides


EV. Think ye, An other Answer to the last Objection
neighbor Dydimus that this word, all, is always such an universal sign, that
it can not be restreined to some several kind of things?


DyDI. I would feign learn that of you. i. Cor. vi.



EVTRA. When Saint Paul says, that all things are lawful unto him, but
that all things be not expedyente: shall we gather thereby, because that he
uses this term, all things, that it was lawful for him, to play the
whoremonger, to steal, and to rob or to kill and murder?


DIDy. God forbid, that any man should go about to gather any such thing. But
rather we ought to understand, that there, in that place, he speaks only of
such things, as be lawful by the word of God, but yet not alwais expedient. As
for an example, we know that all kind of meats, of them selves are clean unto
them that believe, and that it is lawful for them to eat, what so ever either
is sold in the market, or set before them: yet it is not alwais expedient for
to do it. For, the scriptures bid us to beware that we offend not our weak
brethren.


EVTRA. It is very well marked of you. Why think ye, is the doctrine of the
gospel, which is contained both in the old and new Testament, called of the
ancient writers, catholic, that is to say universal? Is it because that it
is universally received of all men, through out all the whole world? The true
christian faith likewise, is called the catholic faith. Shall we gather
therefore, that al men generally have this faith?


DIDYMVS. We can not so do. Why the true faith is called the Catholic faith.
But rather, ought we to learn there by that it is so called, because that it
does generally and universally pertain unto all the true children of god, of
whom only, it is received and believed. And that likewise the true christian
faith, is called the Catholic faith, because that universally, all the true
chosen and elect of god are endued with it.


EVTRA. In like manner neighbor Dydimus, when saint Paul says, that God will
have all men to be saved, and to come to ye knowledge of his truth: that same
must only be understood of those, who^ god has chosen in his son Jesus
Christ before the foundacions of the world were laid, for to be fellow heirs with
him of his heavenly kingdom of what estate, condition, or degree soever they be,
whether they be kings or subjects, poor or rich, Jews or gentiles.


Die. But this troubles me sore, that the Apostle says, that god has closed
up al under unbelief, that he might have mercy on al. Who would not gather by
these words, that God will have al men to be saved?


PHI. The holy Apostle does sufficiently expound him self in another place,
Gala. iii.
when he says, that the scripture did shut up al under sin, that the promise
by the faith of Jesus Christ, should be given unto them that believe. Here do we
learn plainly, what they be, unto who^ this promise does perteine.


EV. It appears that it pertains unto al them, that take hold upon it by
faith, and unto none other. But only they that be ordained unto life
everlasting, can take a sure hold by faith upon the promises of God, as it
has been already sufficiently proved by many and sondrye places of the
scriptures. Therefore this promise does pertain unto them only: And on all
them that be ordained unto life everlasting, and so take hold by faith upon
the sweet promyses that be offered unto us in the scryptures, God will be
merciful, without dout.


PHILALETHES. More over, we must consider, that there, in that place, the
blessed Apostle S. Paul does speak of the Jews and of the gentiles,
declaringe and prouinge unto them, that they had no cause to boaste one
against an other.

For, by the scriptures and word of God they were convinced and found to be
under sin and unbelief. But least they should despair, he does add by
and by: that God will have mercy on them all: not that he did speak of the
hole body either of the Jews or of the gentiles, but of al them, that should
believe of them both, I mean, from among the Jews and the gentiles.


DIDY.


PHILALETHES. Because, Answer
that the promises of gods mercy, do pertain only unto those, that take hold
upon them by faith. But none do fly unto the mercy of god, and take hold upon
it by faith, saving only those, that god doothe lyghten and illumynate with his
holy spyryt: But none does he illumynate and lyghten, but those only, whom he
has ordained unto life everlasting.

As for the place, An Answer to the place which is aleaged out of Eze. iii
and xxxiii.
that he have aleaged out of the prophet Ezechiel, it does only declare, that
God is ready to pardon and forgive any sinner, and to deliver him from the
death, that he has deserved through his sin and trespace, if he will repent
and turn. But what sinners can repent and turn unfeignedly, except it be
given them of God? Ye know, what Saint James says: James. i.
how that every good gift comes from above, desendinge from the father of
lyghts: but to repent and turn again unfeignedly unto God, and to take sure
hold upon his mercy through faith, is a special good gift: therefore, it
comethe of God, and does descend from the father of lyghtes. But this
special good gift does the Lord give only unto his elect and chosen, I
mean, unto them, whom he has ordained and appointed unto salvation, from
the beginning, even before the foundacions of the world were laid.


EVTRAPELVS. we have a notable example of the same, in the two thieves that hong
with Christ. They both received the like doctrine, and did see the like signs
and tokens whereby they might have known, Luc. xxiii
that Christ was the true Messiah, and the only begotten son of god. Yet one
of the^ only did repent and turn, the other blaspheminge still with the^ that
did put our savior Jesus Christ to death. What other cause can we bring of
this, but only, that the one was chosen, and the other was not?


ALBION. I do perceive by your sayings, that the promyses of God do then
take effect, when they be received and taken hold upon by faith, but where no
faith is, there they be of no valewe. Romans iii.
Why then does Saint Paul say, that the unbelief of men, can not make the
promyses of god to be of no^ effect? Answer



PHI. What say ye, brother Albion, ca^ the blindness of any man make that ye
light of the sun shall be no light?


AL. the light of the sun shall be light, though all men were blind.


PHI. Yet ye will not say, that a blind man, can receive any profit by the
light of the sun.


AL. There is a good cause why, since that he lacks his eyes sight.


PHI. And yet notwythstanding, they that have their eyes sight, do receive
profit of it, I mean they have the fruition of the light of the sun, and enjoy
the commodities of it.


AL. That is most true.


PHI. So judge ye of the promises of God: they that have faith, and take hold
upon them by it, they receive an unspeakable profit of them, and by them, but
they that have no faith, but contemn and despise them, can have no profit by
them, that is to say, the promises of god, are unto the^ of no effect, which
comes not of the nature and properti of gods promises, but of men's
unfaithfulness and unbelief.


ALBION. Now do I perceive, that they only do enjoy the benefit of Gods
promises, that take hold upon them by faith: but this true faith is only
given unto the^, that are chosen and ordained unto life everlasting, whereby we
may well conclude, that the promises of God do only pertain unto the^. This
the^ shall be the sum of al, A short sum of which has been said before.
that has been said before: how that god has from the beginning, ordained
and appointe some, for to be fellow heyers with his son Jesus christ of his
heavenly kingdom, and some again for to be everlastingly dampened in hell
fire: and that whom he has ordained before, to enjoy and possess
everlasting life, them he has chosen in his son Jesus Christ, before the
foundacions of the world were laid, and that of his free mercy and goodness,
and without any respect at al of their own deseruinges or merits, for to
set forth the glory of his grace, and to declare his mercy through out all
the hole world. But whom he has appointed to be the vessels of his wrath, them
he has according to his righteous, and unsearchable judgments stirred up
for to be the examples of his justice, and for to be glorified by their
dampnation, wherein he does them no manner of wrong, sith that he rewards
them according to their natural corruption, which they have of their first
parent Adam, whereby we are all in general, subject to everlasting damnation,
so that if he should dampne us all, he should do us but right, and no just
occasyon at all could we have to complain of him, or of his most righteous
judgment. Secondly, it has been sufficiently declared and proved, yt they
which be once chose in Christ Jesus unto life everlasting, can never pearish,
since that they are committed unto the custodi and keeping of the high shepherd
our savior Jesus Christ, out of whose hands they can not be pluckte nor
taken away, and that therefore, as many as do forsake Christ, and sal away
from the known truth, they are none of the true elect and chosen of God,
though for a time they have all the outward signs and tokens of the true
sheep of Christ, as it does appear by the examples of Judas Iscarioth, of
Simon Magus, of Philetus, Hymeneus, Demas, and Alexander the Copper smith. And
truly this ought to be unto us a great comfort, Our salvation is laid up
in heaven for us.
that our salvation is not left in our own hands, but that it is in the
protection and sauegard of ye highest, bring laid up and reserved in heaven
for us, which are kept by the power of God, as the holy Apostle saint Peter
does witness. i. Pet. i.
For, if it were left in our own custodye and keeping, we should never be
quiet in our consciences, we should never be certain of it, we could none
other but despair still of our salvation, sithe that we have so many mighty
enemies that go about to spoil us of it. But our Sauyoure Jesus Christ
has put us out of all fear, when he did say, John. x.
that the father who has committed us unto his custody and kepinge is greater
than all.

Last of all, ye have showed unto us, that we are assured and certifyed of this
our election, by the calling of almighty God our heavenly father, which
calling, does consiste in the outward preachinge of the word of God, and in
the inward woorkynge of his holy spirit, which does testifye unto our
spirit, that we are the children of God, and wherewith also, our hearts are
sealed up against the day of the Lord.

And this calling of God, which does only pertain unto the true elect and
chosen, is without repentance. These, I think are ye chief points, that ye
have entreated of already. Wherein, I am fully satisfied, thanckes be unto God.
Therefore, The doctrine of gods providence.
I will desire you, to come to the divine providence of god, whereof ye said,
that ye should be feign to speak, for a plainer declaration of the hole matter.


PHILA. By the divine providence of almighty god if it be well understood,
What comfort we have by it.
our faith is wonderfully confirmed and strengthened. For, when we be once
persuaded that the hole gouernmente of al things, both in heaven, and in
earth, does pertain only to God, and that he does rule and govern al manner of
creatures, as it pleases him, and as he thinks most expedient for his own
glory, and for the profit of his true elect and chosen, bringyng al things to
their due end, which he him self has appointed from the beginning: we are
assured, that nothing shall chance or happen unto us, without his will and
appointment, though the deuel and al his angels withal the rulers and princes
of this wicked world, be never so desirous to do us harm: though, I say,
Satan, with all the legions of deuels, and with all the rulers and princes of
darcknesse do conspire against us, yet can they do no more, than God our
heavenly father has appointed and ordained: Mat. x.
in so much that one only here of our head cannot pearish without his will,
permission, and sufferance. There have been many and sundry opinions touching
this divine providence of almighty God. The varietye of opynions touching the
providence of God.
Some do imagine that god has only a foresighte or a foreknowledge of all
things, but not the government of them. Some again, do attribute unto him, a
certain general ruledome, whereby he does rule and govern in general, al
things both in heaven and in earth, in the sea, and in all the depes of it. But
they will in no wise grant, that God should govern every creature
particularly. They are wont to call this the universal providence of God,
whereby (as they say) the creatures are not let to do frelye what so ever
they will, or that things should happen unto them by casualtye or chance.
Here, I do let pass the Epicures, The Epicures do make god an ydell God.
which do dream that God is idle and careless, and also those that say that
God rules all things above the middle region of the air, but that what so
ever is under it, I mean, under that myddle region, it is governed by fortune.


ALBION. Which of the other opinions do ye allow best?


PHILA. That same which speaks of the universal providence of almighty God,
is commonly received, because that it has some outward appearaunce of a
truth: yet it is neither true, nor yet tolerable. For, it makes God ruler and
gouernoure of all things, only in name, and not in deed. For, What it is to
rule and govern.
what is it to rule and govern, but to bring every thing to his due end,
wheranto it is appointed from the beginning? The scriptures speak so plainelye
of the particulare providence of God, whereby he does rule and govern
particularlye every creature that he has made, that I marvel, that any
manne can doubt of it. Hieremy cries out and said: I know O Lord, Iere x.
that it is not in man's power to order his own ways, or to rule his own
steps or goinges.

And Solomon: The LORD (says he) orders every man's goynges: For, what is
he, Pro. xx.
that understands his own ways? If they say, that GOD does move us
according to the inclynatyon of our own Nature, but that we do turre that
same motion or moving, which way we list then, will they nyll they, they shall
be feign to grant also, that it lies in our power to order our own ways,
which thing both Jeremy and also Solomon does deny, attributing unto God not
only the power, but also the election and rulynge. But yet Solomon does
setforthe the matter in an other place much more plainly, when he does rebuke
the rashness and temerity of them that dare enterprise things without any
respect of God, as though they were not ruled and governed by his hand. Pro.
xvi.
A man (says he) may well purpose a thing in his heart, but the answer of
the long comes of the Lord. As if he should say: It is a plain madness,
that men should go about to do any thing without God, sith that they can
speak no manner of thing, but that he will him self, and does appoint them.
Yet, that the scripture might the better express, that nothing at all is done
in the world, without his appointment and ordenaunce, it does adscribe and
attribute unto him those things that seem to be most casual, that seem, I say,
to be of a very chance and fortune. When a man is lopping of a tree, and a
bowghe fallinge down does kill one that goes by, who would not adscribe that
unto fortune, or unto chance? Yet the lord says, that it is even he, Exo. xxi.
that has delivered him which is slain, into the hands of him, that slew
him. In like manner, who would not adscribe the fall of the lottes, unto
blind chance and fortune? yet the Lord will in no wise have it so to be
done, but will have the fall of the^ to be attributed and adscribed unto him self
only. Pro. xvi.
And therefore the wise man says. The lottes are cast into the lap, but their
fall stands in the Lord. He will not have to be adscribed and attributed unto
him, ye that they be cast into the lap, and pulled out of it: but the same,
that did seem most to perteyne unto fortune, that will he have to be adscrybed
unto him.


EVTRA. Ye make me to remember the saying of our savior Jesus Christ, Math.
x.
which is this: Are not two sparrowes sold for a farthing? And yet one of
them, does not fall upon the ground without your father. And now are the
heeres of your head told. This place, me think, ought to be very
comfortable unto us, for since yt the providence of god, does so wait upon such
small birds, which he has created (as al other things) for the use of man,
that not one of them shall be killed without his will and appointment, how much
more will he, even in despite of the devil, and of al his lims, keep and
preserve us, till our end be come, which he him self has ordained and
appointed?


DyDI. And will ye have nothing to be adscribeed unto chance and fortune?


PHILALE. I may answer with Basilius Magnus, ye chance, Basilius Magnus.
The name of fortune is a word of of the heathen.
and fortune, are words of the heathen, and not of the Christians. For sith
that all prosperous success is a blessing of God, and all calamity, trouble,
and aduersytye, a malediction or curse that comethe from him: what place, I
pray you, shall fortune or chance have among men? Yea Saint Augustine in his
books, of retractions, does playnelye declare, that he is not well pleased
with him self, because that in his books, which he wrought against ye
Academikes, he had so many times used this word, fortune. Poenitet me (says
he) sic me nominasse illic fortunam, i. retra. i.
quum videam homines habere in pessima consuetudine, vt vbi dici debet, hoc
deus voluit, dicant: hoc voluit fortuna. That is to say.

I do repent, that I have so named fortune there: because I se, that me^ have
in a very evil custom to say: this was fortunes will, where they ought to say:
this was Gods will. But because that the weakness and imbecility of men can
not well understand or comprehend such high mysteries: we will use a certain
distinction, that the matter may the better be perceived. This then do we
say, that though al things be governed by the divine providence of almighty
God, yet they be unto us fortuite and casual, because that we know not the
causes of them, which for the most part, are hidden in the secreates of God,
and in his unsearchable and incomprehensyble judgments. For, being considered
in their own nature, and according to our own knowledge or judgment, they
have none other likelyhode. As for an example, let us imagine, that some
merchant man being entered into a Forest, does vnwittinglye, and unawares
stray a way from his company, and so fall into the hands of thieves, and be
slain. This man's death was not only forseene with the eye of God, but also
appointed by his eternal and everlasting decree. For, God does not only
foresee how long every man shall live, but also he has appointed the Term
of every man's life, Job. xiiii.
which can not be passed. Yet notwithstanding, as far, as man's reason can
retch and comprehend, there all things do appear fortuite and casual?

What ought a christen manne to judge in this matter then? eue^ that the
providence of God, has brought all these things, which of their own nature
seem to be fortuite and casual, unto their due and appointed end. And as it is
in those things that become to pass already, so is it in those things that
are yet to come. For, though we be uncertain, whether they shall chance this
way or that way: yet ought we to be persuaded that nothing shall happen, but
that which God has alredye provided before.


DIDYMVS. The barking of the ungodly against the prouydence of God.
so that the term of a man's life, can not be shortened, nor yet lengthened
(as it does appear by your sayings) though be study and labor never so
much for it.

Again: why should we be affrayed of any paryll or danger, sithe that
nothing can happen unto us, but as God has ordained and appointed before?

Moreover when one manne does slaye an other, why should he be punyshed sith
that he has done nothing, but as God himself has appointed? Why should
the thief or robber be hanged? Are they not mynisters of the prouydence of God,
for to put that in execution, which he has provided and appointed before?
When the child does see his father or his mother in extreme sycknesse, what
need he to send for physicions, or to seek for any remedy at all, sithe
that no man is able to wythstande the prouydence of God?


PHLALETHES. This your objection, neighbor Dydimus, Answer
is very easy to be answered. For, first and foremoste in things that are
yet to come, we are bound to use those means for (auoydinge parylles and
dangers with other inconuenientes) that God him self has ordained and
appointed: Menes ordained of God must be used.
else we do tempte him.

For, he that has given us our life, and has appointed a certain term of
it, has also prescrybed unto us lawful ways and means for the keeping and
preservation of it, which if we do neglect and despise, we do not only tempte
God, but are also most ungodly despisers and contemners of his divine
providence: Note well
As for an example, GOD has ordained meat and drink for the sustenaunce of
man's life. Now let some mad brain reasone thus with him self: God, does not
only know how long I shall live, but also he has prefixed the term of my life,
which can not be passed, yea I cannot shorten my days though I would, what
neade I then to eat or to drink, and specially sithe that meat and drink
can not be gotten but with the sweat of my own brows? and so pine him self
to death. Would ye not judge this man to be both rebellious against the
ordenaunce of almightye God, and also a murderer of him self? Again, if he
sees poysone before his eyes, which he knows to be such poison, that if he
eat of it, he shall die presentlye the death, and yet will eat of it, saying
that he can not die before the time appointed of God be come: can we say that
this man is obedient unto the deuyne providence of almighty God?


EVTRA. If we should say so, we should be worse than mad. For, why does God
appoint such things for the sauegarde and preservation of our own life, but
that we should use them? or why does he give us warning of so many pearils
and ieopardies, but to this end, that we should shonne them?


PHILALETHES. I would wysh neighbor Dydimus, that both ye, and all other, that
make the like objections that ye made even now, would but mark the example
of king David. David.
It is not unknown unto you, that these be his words: My hope is in thee, o
Lord and I say, Psalm. xxxi
thou art my God: my time is in thy hand. Whereby he did declare, that he did al
togeither depend and hang of the divine providence of almightye God. Yet
notwithstanding, when he heard that Saul had sent his souldioures to his
house for to lay wait for him, and for to kill him in the morninge, he
sought al means possible for to escape out of their hands: he despised not
the Counsel of Micholl his wife, which both told him, that if he should
not save his life that night, he must be slain the next morrow, and also did
let him down through a window, that he might escape the danger that he
was in. He did not say unto his wife. What neade we to care? Let us lie still.

God is able to deliver us either by his almightye power, or elsse by some
miraculous mean: therefore we will let him work, as it pleases him. But
rather, as he did well understand that the divine providence of GOD, did work,
and does dailye work by certain means, so knew he, that it was his duetye
to use them in the fear of God, and with all thanckes geuynge. The LORD had
plainlye said unto Paul: Be of a good cheer. For, as thou haste testified of
me at Jerusalem, Act. xxiii. Paul.
so must thou testify at Rome also.

Although he did doubt nothing of the truth of Gods promises, nor yet of
the divine prouydence of God, yet when his systers son did tell him, how the
Jews had conspyred his death, he did send him pryuely to the captayn for to
give him warnyng of it, and also for to desire him, that he would in no wise
agree to the unlawful request of the Jews. And when the soldiers of the
Romans did carry him to Antypatris, where they delivered him to certain
horsemen, which conveyed him to Cesarea, he was well content with it.
Likewise when he did sail in the sea Adriaticum, and was most like to be
driven to a shypwracke, he did say unto them that were with him, Act. xxvii
which were then fore amassed, and even at their wits end. Now I exhort
you, to be of good cheer, for there is shall none of our lyfes peryshe. For, this
night stood by me, the angel of God (whose I am and whom I serve) and said:
fear not Paul, thou must be brought before the Emperor. And lo, God has
given unto thee, all them that sail with thee. Wherefore, syrs be of good
cheer, for I believe God, that it shall come so to pass, as it was told me.
Yet a little while after, when the maryners went about to fly out of the
ship: Saint Paul did say unto the souldyours and unto their captain:
except these men do remain in the ship, ye can not be saved. Zherefore, the
means whereby God does work, do pertayne unto his divine providence: whereby we
may gather, that the true servants of God do in no wise neglect and dyspise
the^.


ALBION. The examples that ye have brought in even now,


PHILA. But I say plainly, that they do in no wise serve to the will of God,
Answer to the Question
but that they do follow their naughty and deuelish mind. For, they only
obey GOD, that being instructed of his will, do endeavor them selves to fulfill
it.

Who they be that do service unto God.
But where shall we be instructed of his will, sauinge only by his word?
Therefore, whenever we gee about to do any thing, we must have a
respect always unto the will of God, as he does set it forth unto us in his
word.

God does only require that of us, which he does command and bid. Therefore,
if we do any thing against his commandment, it is no obedience, but a mere
transgression and stubbornness. Which ought to be punished according to
that due order, that he him self has appointed, saying by his holy Apostle
Saint Paul. If thou do evil, Romans xiii
then fear the power.

For, he beats not the sweard for naughie. For, he is the minister of God, a
taker of vengeance, to punish him, that does euel.


ALBION. Yet this, they could not do, unless it were the will of god


PHILA. What say ye? could the devil have done the same unto Job, Job. i.
which he did unto him, without the will of God? Or could the legyon of deuels
have entered into the herd of swine, and drowned them, Mat. viii.
except Christ our savior had been wylling and consenting thereto?


ALBION. No verily.


PHILA. As then the Deuell is a minister or instrument of God, for to do what
so ever he wills him and appoynteth him to do, The devil and his members are
ministers of God.
so the limbs or members of the deuell, are the ministers or instruments of
Gods deuyne prouydence, for to serve him in such things, as he him self
thyncketh meet and expedient.

And yet they can not be excused of their naughtiness therefore, no more then
the devil him self can be excused, though he be feign to be a minister and an
instrument of God to do such things as pleases him.

For, whatsoever the deuel and his limbs do, they do it not to please God
withal, but to fulfill their naughtye and deuelishe minds.

And that it is so, their own consciences do bear them record of it. All the
naughtiness then, does lie in them selves, so that no part of it can be
adscribed unto god, Similytude.
no more than the stinche of a dead carkise, which is putrified and resolved
by the heat of the sun, can be adscribed unto the pleasant beams of the
same. For, God only by his unsearchable wisdom does turn their
deuelishnesse to such an use, as he thincketh most expedient for his glory,
and for the profit of his elect and chose. Joseph had a respect unto this, when
he did say unto his brethren: Joseph. ge. xlv
It was not you, yt sold me into Egipte, but I was by the will of God sent
before you, for to preserve your life. Ye thought euel of me, but God has
turned it into good. Also Job, when he had lost both his goods and children,
he acknowledged by and by, that this was the work of the Lord, saying. The
Lord has given it, Job. i.
and the Lord has taken it away, the name of the Lord be blessed.

Likewise when Semei did both reuyle David, ii. Sa. xvi
and also burl stones against him, he would in no wise suffer, that any of his
company should do him harm, but said: let him alone, for the Lord has
commanded him to revile me.


ALBION. Now do I perceive, that he which is thoroughly instructed in the
doctrine of the deuyne prouydence of almighty god, How comfortable the doctrine
of the providence is.
has an exceadinge good occasyon to be always pacyent what aduersitye or
trouble so ever does happen unto him. For, by it does he understand that
nothing can happen unto him. For, by it does he understand that nothing can
happen unto him, without the will and appointment of God, who will suffer
nothing, but that which is just, and expedient.


PHILALE. This is one of the chief causes, why the scripture does travail so
much for to prove it: Amos. iii
as when Amos does plainly affirm, that there can be no plage in the city,
without it be the Lords doing: And also when Jeremy does so sharply rebuke
those, Lament. iii.
that did thyncke that any calamitye could chance without the work of the
Lord. For, when plages and calamityes do come by men's hands, it is said that
they be sanctified for to do the work of the Lord, Esaias. xiii Eze. xii. and
xvii. Psalm. xvii Esaias. x. Iere. i.
and are called nets, sweardes, and axes, which are governed by his hand:
they be also called the instruments of the Lords furye, and wrath, which he
does raise and stir up with his whisteling only. Therefore, when Pilate and
Herod did come together for to put Christ to death. It is said, Act. iiii.
that they gathered together for to do what so ever the hand and the counsel
of the Lord, had determined before to be done. Act. ii.


Item that the Jews did put Christ to death being delivered by the
determinate Counsel and foreknowledge of God, and that so they did fulfill,
what soever was written of him. Which things doubtless are set forth to this
end, that when any calamity does happen unto us by the wickedness of men, we
should lift up our eyes unto God, and learn to acknowledge, that what so
ever they have committed wickedlye against us, it was permitted and sent by
the just ordenaunce of almightye God our heavenly father.

Now, if any calamitye does happen unto us, without the ha^dy work of
men, as barennesse of ground, famyne, sondrye, and diverse kinds of dyseases
and such like, the scripture does call the same the curses or chasteninges of
the Lord. This thing being well considered, Exo. xxvi Deuteronomy. xxviii.
shall not only engender in us an wonderful patience, when any trouble or
adversity does happen unto us, but also a great tranquillity and quietness of
mind.


ALBION. How the doctrine of the dyuine providence of God engenders in us, a
quietness of mind.
I pray you, good brother Philalethes, that ye will declare unto us how the
doctrine of Gods prouydence should engender in us such a tranquillitye, and
quietness of mind, as ye say.


PHILALETHES. What greater comfort, tranquillity or quietness can there be
unto us, than to be thoroughly persuaded by the infallyble word of God that all
men, of what state or condition so ever they be, are in the power and
government of the Lord? that he has their hearts in his hand, and can turn
them which way he lusts? For, whether we must obtain their favor, or else
shonne and avoid their malice and displeasure, we be sure that God is able to
rule the matter, as it pleases him, and as he sees to be most expediente for
his glory, and for our own commodity and profytte. He is able to make us to
find favor not only before them, that be frendely, and bear a good will unto
us, but also in the eyes of the Egiptians. Exo. xiiii
And as for our enemies he can bridell their malice many and sundry ways.
For either he takes a way their right mind from them, so that they can neither
take nor follow good counsel, as when he did send a lyinge sprite in to the
mouths of all the false prophets, yt were in Achabs court, i. Re. xxii i. Reg.
xii
for to deceive him, or when he did blind Rehoboa^ with the counsel of his
young men, yt he might through his folishenesse be spoiled of his kingdom.
Otherwhiles he leaves the^ in their right mind, but he does so sore abashe,
or aston them, that they dare enterprise nothing: or when they have done all
that they can, he does cut them of, and does in no wise suffer the^ to come to
their pretensed purpose, as he did in Achitophell, ii. Sam. xvii.
who had given a most devilish and abominable counsel against David his
anointed. In like manner does he rule and govern al manner of creatures, as he
him self does see to be expedient for our commodity and profyt, yea the very
devil him self, who (as we see) durst attempt nothing against Job, without
his permission and commandment. Moreover consider with your self, how many
parils and dangers we be subject unto, The infynit dangers that we be subject
unto
we do carry about with our selves even in our own bodies and flesh a
thousand kind of dyseases, so that it may be said that we lead a life
wrapped togeyther with death. We can neither be a cold, nor sweat with out
pearyl and ieopardye. Again, which way so ever we can turn our selves,
all manner of things that be about us do threaten us with present death. If we
sail in a ship, we are but one foot from death: If we ride on a horse, our
life does stand in the stumbling of one foot. If we go through the streets of
a cyty or town, as many tiles as ha^g upon houses, so many deaths do hang over
our heds. If there be any tool or weapon in our own hands or in our friends
hands, there is hurt prepared against us. All the wild beasts that we see,
are armed to our destruction. If we will shut up our selves in a closed
garden, where all things seem pleasant to the eye, there may a venimouse
serpent lie lurking in the grass, and among the violets and flowers. Our
houses being continually subject to casuality of fire, do in the dai time
threate^ us with pouerti, and in ye night time with destruction and death. I do
here let pass, poisonninge and robbinge, with other innumerable parilles and
dangers, that do compass us about both at home, and abroad. What shall we do
the^ in this sea of parils and dangers? Are we not, even as though we had
always a naked swerd hanginge over our necks?


DIDY. Answer



PHI. Sith yt we are warned by the examples of other men, that they may also
chance unto us, and that our life ought no more to be accepted than the life of
the^, to who^ they do hapen daily and hourly, we cannot choose but fear least
they do also chance unto us. And what can be more miserable than such
continual fear and dread?


ALBI. Indede, brother Philalethes, if we had none other refuge, but to our
selves, it were better to be out of this life, than in it


PHI. When the godly, than, be once brought to a perfctee knowledge and
understanding of the divine providence of almighty god our heavenly father,
they be not only delivered from this extreme fear and anguishe, but also from
all ungodly solicitude, and care. For why? They dare boldly commit them selves
unto the Lord, whom they see to rule and govern all things after such a sort,
by his almighty power and unsearchable wisdom, yt nothing can happen without
his appoyntme^t. They know yt the lord has given charge to his angels over
them, so yt nether fire, nor water, Psalm. xcl.
nor any other creature can come nere them, for to harm or hurt them, without
gods permissio^ and leave. For, so says the Psalmist: he shall deliver thee,
from the snare of the hunter, and from the noisome pestilence. He shall defend
thee under his wings, and thou shall be safe under his feathers, his
faithfulness and truth shall be thy shield and buckler. Thou shall not be afraid
for any terror by night, nor for the arow ye flies by day. Hereof comes the
rejoicing of the saints, as when they say. Psalm. Cxviii. Psa. xxvii and.lvi.
The lord is my helper, I shall not fear, what flesh can do unto me. The lord
is my defendor, whereof should I be afraid? Though a hole camp do stand against
me, or though I walcke in the myddest of the shadow of death, yet will I not
cease to hope well. Whereof then does it come, that they be never without hope
and comfort: but only because that they se and learn by gods word, that the
devil and all his wicked limbs, are by the almighty power and divine
providence of almightye God, so kept and brideled in, that they can not as
much as move one finger for to do them harm, but as far fourth as God does
either suffer or command them? For, as it lies in the power of the Lord to
arm their fury, and to turn it which way he lusts: Iere. x.
so does it lie in him, to appoynte certain bounds and limits unto them,
which they may not pass. Esaias. vii
For this cause Rasim, and the king of Israel, which seemed to be ii. fire
bro^des for to destroy and consume ye hole land of Judah, are of the Prophet
called smokynge brondes, which can no more but show a little smoke. Eze. xxix.
Likewise Pharao, when he did seem to be most dreadful, by reason of his
great strength and power, he is lykened unto a Whale and his soldiers unto
fyshes. And therefore, the Lord says plainly, that he will with an anglinge
rod, ketche, both the captain and the army, and draw them, which way he will.


AL. Now do I feel and perceive, The ignorance of the dyuine providence of god
is the cause of all myserye.
that they that are ignorant of the divine providence of almighty god are in
extreme misery, and yt in the knowledge and right understanding of it, does
consiste and lie the greatest beatitude and felicitye, that we can have in this
world.


PHI. This doctrine being well understood, must neades move us also, The
profit that ryseth of the doctrine of the divine providence of God.
to be always thanckful. For, if we receive any benefit at men's hands, we
shall thus consider with our selves: Verily it is God, that has inclyned these
men's hearts unto us, and that has moved them to do us good.

Whereof an earnest tha^ckes giving unto god, must neades follow. Yea we shall
also reverence and thancke those, by whom God has done us good, as worthy
instruments and ministers of his goodness toward us. If we receive any profit
of the insensible creatures we shall do the like, as in the plenty and
abundance of fruits, I mean, of corn, and of other like things which the
earth does bring forth for the sustenance and use of men. For, we shall think,
that it is God, that hears heaven that heaven may hear the earth, and that
the earth may hear her fruits, that is to say: we shall think none other, but
that it is God only, that pours the sweet shours down from heaven, that the
earth may be fruteful, and so bring forth in due time and season al manner of
fruits, ye serve for the use and sustenance of me^. In other things, we shall
acknowledge that it is the blessing of god only, yt does prosper us in all that
we go about. Who consideringe all these things, can be unthankful?


DIE. Surely, I cannot choose, but allow your sayings. How be it, there is yet
one thing, that does somewhat trouble my conscience.


ALBI. I marvel what the same could be. For, me think that our brother
Philalethes has spoken already largely enough of predestination, and of the
divine providence of almighty god even as much, as is sufficient for ye
edifying and comfort of al faithful beleuers, but the vain curiosity of men
can never be contented, nor yet satisfied.


DIE. This that I inte^d to set forth brother Albion, comes not of a vain
curiosity, but of a fervent desire yt I have to be instructed in ye truth.
Therefore, I beseech you, to pardone me, if I be bold to move questions in
things that be doutful unto me.


PHI. Say on boldly: what is it that troubles you?


DIE. Genesis vi..i. Sa. xv. Iere. xv.
And in many places ye prophets do testifye unto us ye God will repent of the
plages, yt he has appointed to bring upon his people if after that warning is
given unto them, they will repent and turn. Had not god threatened by the
Prophet Jonas, Iona. iii.
that Niniue should be destroyed after xl. days? yet as soon as they repented,
and brought forth fruits worthy of their repentance, he did withhold the
destruction from them. Moreover, Esaias. xxviii.
had he not signified by ye mouth of his prophet Esaias, unto king Ezechias,
that he should die the death? yet being moved with his prayers and tears, he
did prolong his life: Mani do gather upon these places, that God has not
determined al things from the beginning, but yt he does dispose and order them
every day and every hour as we do deserve, and as he thinks mete and
convenient. Answer



PHI. This must ye mark neighbor Dydi. that we ca^ no more adscribe repentance
unto god, than we can adscribe unto him, either ignorance, or error or
unableness. For, if no man does wittingly the thing whereof he should repent
afterward we cannot attribute repentance unto god, but that we must also
co^fes, yt he knew not before, what should com after, or that he could not
choose but do it, or that he did rashly and unadvisedly a thing, whereof he should
by and by repent. Which is very far from the meaning of the holy ghost, which
testifies unto us eueri where that the ordenaunce of God in the admynystration
of worldly things, is unchangeable and without al repentance: in so much
that his very enemies, Nu. xxiii.
are feign to bear record of the constancy and unchangeableness of it. For,
Balaam, would he nild he, and in despite of his beard, was compelled to speak
these words: God is not a man, that he should lie, nor a man's child, that he
should repent of any thing. Should he say and not do? Should he speak, and not
make it good?


DIE. What does the scripture then in such places, mean by the name of
repentance.


PHI. It is a manner of speaking, which of the greeks is called Anthropopathia,
This figure Anthropopathia is many times used in the scriptures.
whereby the scripture does condescend, and submit it self unto our weak
capacity, describing God unto us, not as he is in him self, but as we feel him
to be. Although he be without al humain passions, yet ye scriptures do testifye
unto us, that he is angry with sinners. As then, when we do hear ye god is
angri, we must not imagine, that he is subject to any passion, but that it is a
manner of speaking, whereby god is set forth unto us, not as he is in deed, but
as he seems unto us to be, when he does put his righteous judgments to
execution, and when he does plage and chastise us: so when we do hear that god
does repent him, we must not imagine straightwais, that there is any such
repentance in him, as is in mortal men, but that by it the change and
alteration of things, such as it does appear unto us, is signified and
betokened. For, since that among men, any manner of change, is a correctinge of
that, which did displease, and that the same amending or correcting does come
of a certain repentance, therefore, by the name of repentance that same is
signified, which god seems to change and alter in his works. In the mean
seson, nether his counsel nor will is changed or altered. The counsel and
will of god is never altered. Question


For, look what he has decreed, provided, allowed and appointed from the
beginning, the same does he bring to pass, though never so sudden a change
does appear unto us to be in things.


DIE. What say ye then of the Ninevites whom he did spare, after that he had
threatened them with destructyon? Or of king Ezechias, whose life he did
lengthen, after that he had caused to be sygnifyed unto him, that he should dye
the death? Do not these examples declare suffyciently, that God does some
times chaung and alter that, which he has determined and appointed before?


PH. They that do either thyncke or say so, Answer to the Question
do not perceive yt in the warninges and threatenings of god, some condition is
always to be understood, although it be not expressed nor mentyoned of, as
it does plainly apear by the end it self, that does commonly follow. For,
wherefore does the Lord send Jonas unto the Ninevites, for to give them warnyng
a fore hand of their destructyon? Or wherefore does he show by his prophet Esaias,
unto Ezechias that he should die? Might not he have destroyed both the Ninevites
and also Ezechias without any warning? he did it not the^ to this end, Why
the Niniuits are warned before of their destruction
that they being warned of their destruction, should see it to come a far of:
but rather because that he would not have them to be destroyed. That therefore
Jonas did prophecye that Niniue should after forty days be overthrown. It was
done to this end yt it should not be ouerthrown. That hope of long life was
taken away from king Ezechias, it was also done to this end, that he might
obtain a longer life. Who does not now see, that the Lord went about by such
threatenings to call and move them to repentance, that so they might escape
the judgment and condemnation, that they had deserved by their sins? Any man
may then se and perceive that there was a certain condition included or
contained in those warninges and threatenings, that we have now spoken of.
Which thing, we be able to prove by like examples of the scriptures.

genesis xxii.
When the Lord did rebuke Abimelech, because that he had taken away Abraham's
wife, he said unto him: Behold thou shall die because of the woman, that thou
have taken away. For, she has a husband.

But after that he had excused him self, these words did the Lord speak unto
him again: Restore the woman unto her husband: For, he is a Prophet, and he
shall pray for thee, that thou may live. Else thou shall die the death, and
all that thou have. Ye may see how sore the first threatninge is, that so he
might move him, to make restitution: and how that he does in the other,
declare plainly his will. After ye same manner ought the other places to be
understood. Therefore, we must not conclude by them, that god did alter any
thing, that he had determined before, because that he did re^oke and call
back that same, that he had published already. For when the Lord with
threatnynge of punishment, How the lord makes a way to his dyuine providence.
does exhort them unto repentance who^ he has determined to spare he does
rather make a way unto his divine providence, tha^ otherwise. For, we must not
think yt he does vary either in word or deed. For, this saying of Esai, must
be verified, where he says: If the Lord of hosts determine a thing, who
will disanull ^t? Esa. xiiii
And if he stretch fourth his hand who will hold it in again?


ALBION. This then have I learned by the wholesome doctrine of the divine
prouydence of God our heavenly father, A short collection or gatheringe
together of the whole doctrine of the dyuine providence of God.
that the whole gouernemente of all things both in heaven and in the earth
does per^ayne unto him only, and that he ^othe rule and govern all manner ^f
creatures, as it pleases him, and as he thinks most expedyente for his own
glory, and for ^he profytte of his true elect and ^hosen, brynginge all
things to their due end, which he him which he him self has appointed from
the beginning, whereby we are assured that nothing can chance or happen unto
us without his will and appointment, though the devil and all his angels,
wythall the princes and rulers of darckenesse be never so desirous to do us
harm. Whereof exceading great patience* with an unspeakable comfort,
tranquillity and quietness of mind, joined with continual thanckfulnesse, must
neades be engendered in all faithful beleuers, which though they do depend and
hang all together of the deuyne providence of God: yet do they in no wise
tempte him, but do thanckfully use al manner of means and orders that he has
appointed for the preservation and sauegarde of our own selves. In all these
things, ye hau^ well satisfied me, I thancke God for it. Therefore, I will
desire yo^ to go take a little repaste with me and then afterward, we will
reason of other things, as we shall thyncke mete and convenient.


PHILALETHES. Since that ye will have it so, we do agree to it.


EVTRAPELVS. Praise, and laud be unto the Lord for this most wholesome and
comfortable talcke.


DYDIMVS. Amen.


Certain arguments against them, that go about to shake the certainty of our
election, which we have in Jesus Christ, before the foundacions of the world
were laid.
Ier. xxxii This promise in the^, that be chosen in Christ Jesus before the
foundacions of the world were laid must be performed.
THey that do not finally fall from the fear of God, cannot perish. The elect
and chosen of God, can not finally fall from the fear of God. (For, these are
the words of the Lord: I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I
will never turn away from them, nor cease to do them good: but put my fear in
their hearts, so that they shall not depart from me.) The elect, therefore, can
not pearish.

They that are always the sheep John. x. They of whom, Christ does speak
here were not yet called Let these things be well noted.
are always the sheep of Christ. (Ih. x. Other sheep, I have also, which are
not of this fold, them also, must I bring, and they shall hear my voice, and
there shall be one sheapefold and one shepherd. Again: my sheep hear my voice,
and I know them, and they follow me, and I give unto them eternal life, and
they shall never pearysh, nether shall any pluck them out of my hand.) It
follows then that the elect ca^ in no wise pearysh.

As many as can not finallye i. Ioh. iii. Here the holy Apostell does
speak of the syn unto death. Otherwise called the sin against the holy
ghost. Ioh. xvii. Ioh. vi.
But the elect and chosen of God can not finally sin. (For, thus it is
written: whosoever is borne of God, sins not, for his sede remains in him,
neither can he sin, because he is borne of God) therefore, we may conclude
that the elect can not finally pearysh.

They, whom the father gives unto the son, shall never pearish. But the
father gives his efect unto the son (for, thus says Christ him self: Thine
they were, and thou gave the^ me. Again: This is the fathers will, that has
sent me, that of al which he has given me, I should lose nothing, but should
raise it up, at the last day) Therefore, the elect shall not pearyshe for ever.

They from whom, God does not Psalm. xlix
and kep^ not my commandments, the^ will I visit their transgression with ye
ro^ and their iniquitye with strokes. Ye my loving kindness will I not take from
him, neither will I falsify m^ truth. My couenaunte will I n^ break, nor alter
the thing, that ^gon out my lips. Again in an other place: The mountains shall
remove and the hyls shall fall down: Esai. liiii
but my mercy, shall not depart from the, neither shall ye covenant of my
peace, fall away, says the lord, that has compassion on the. As for this
last authority, that I have aleaged, no man can deny, but that it must be
understood of the true church of Christ, which is ye congregation of his
true elect, and chosen. And as for the other, as it is to be understood of
Christ, the head of the true elect and chosen of god, so by the words ye go
before, it is evident and plain, that it does pertain also to his lively
members, which being chosen in him before the foundacions of the world were
laid, are graffed in him by faith. And so we conclude that ye chose^ and elect
of god, ca^ in no wiseperish They from whom, god does not finally take away his
holy spirit, ca^ that I shall give him, shall never be more a thirst, John.
iiii This water is the holy spirit of God. Ioh. xiiii Ephe. iiii
but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water, springyng
up into everlasting life. Again: I will pray my father, and he shall give you
an other comforter, that he may dwell with you for ever. And in an other place:
by whom ye are sealed up against the day of redemption. Therefore, the elect
of God can not pearyshe.

Ioh. xvii
(Thou haste loved them, says Christ, as thou have loved me.) It is most
euydent then, that the elect can not pearysh.

Ioh. xiii.
(As he loves his own, which were in the world, says Ihon, so unto the
end he loved the^. Again: Romans viii
None other creature, can separate us from the love of God) whereby it is must
follow that the elect can not be damned.

They that can not finally be deceived, can not finally pearish. But Ma. xxiiii
there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great
signs and wonders, so that if it were possible they should deceive the very
elect. And in the revelation, Re. xvii.
we learn that they only can be deceived, whose names are not written in the
book of life.) It is easy then to perceive that the elect can not pearish.
For their names are written in the book of life, before the fou^dations of the
world were laid.

They to whom life everlasting that can not lie, ii. Ti. i.
before all worlds (he has saved us, says s. Paul, and called us with an
holy calling not according to our own works, Tit. i.
but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given to us, through
Jesus Christ, before the world was. Again: we are under the hope of eternal
life, which God that can not lie, has promised before the world began) The
elect then can in no wise pearyshe.

Augusti. de correptione et gratia.
Not all that be called are chosen. How they that are chosen.
AS many as are chosen, they are also called, but not as many as are called,
consequently are chosen. They, therefore, are chosen which (as it has been often
said) are called according to the purpose which also are predestined and
foreknowen. If any of them do perish, God is deceived, but none of them
pearysheth. For, God is not deceived. If any of them do perish, God is ouercomd
with man's syn or vice. It any who^e god has chosen unto God, life everlasting
can pearish then is God over comde by man's sin Wherefore Judas was chosen.
But none of them pearysheth: for, God can be ouercommed with nothing. They are
chosen to reign with Christ, not as Judas was chosen to the work, that he
was mete for. For, he was chosen of him, that can use well evil men, that by his
dampnable work that venerable work, that he was come for, might be fulfilled.
When therefore, we do hear: have I not chosen you twelve, and one of you is a
devil? we ought to understand, that they were chosen through grace, and that
he was chosen through judgment. He did therefore choose them, that they might
obtayn his kingdom, but him he did choose for to shed his blood, and for to
bring him to his passion.

Other certain arguments whereby it is proved that the reprobate can not be
saved.
Iho^. xvii. The world is here taken for the reprobate and wyeked world linges.
them God will not vouchsafe to save: but Christ does not vouchsafe to pray
for the reprobate, (I says he, do pray for them, I pray not for the world,
but for them whom thou haste given me. For, they are thine.) God therefore
will not vouchsafe to save ye reprobate.

John. vi.
therefore said I unto you, that no man can come unto me, John xii.
except it be given unto him of my father. Again: Therefore, could they not
believe, because that Esaias said: he has blyneded their eyes, and hardened
their heart, that they should not se with their eyes, nor understand with their
heart, and should be converted, and I should heal them.) The reprobate then
can not be saved.

The chosen only shall finallye abide i. John. ii
if they had been of us, truly they should have abyden with us). The
reprobate are not chosen (for they were not of us.) Therefore the reprobate
shall not abide and remain finallye in the church of God. But they that shall
not finally remain in the church of God, can not be saved.

He, that was of God ordained Act. i.
But Judas was such a one (he has says Peter) gone astraye, Act. iiii.
that he might go into his own place. Again: they gathered them selves
together to do what so ever thine hand and thy counsel, had determined
before to be done. Read psalm xlix.) Therefore, Judas could not be saved.

Mat. xi.
I give the thanckes, O father Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have
hidden these things from the wise, and from men of understanding, and have
opened them unto babes. It is so, O father, because thy good pleasure was
such.) Therefore the reprobate can not be saved.

the beast (whose names, says he, Re. xvii.
are not written in the book of life) It follows then that the reprobate can
not be saved.

They that are made to this end, that they should pearyshe, can not Pro. xvi.
and other reprobate, are made to this end, that they should pearish (God,
says the wise man, has created al things for him self, and the ungodly
against the evil day, i. Pet. ii.
or against the day of punishment. Again, he is the stone to stumble at, and
the rock of offense, even to them which stumble at the word being disobedient,
unto the which thing they were even ordained.) Therefore, the false prophets
and other reprobate can not be saved.

They that sin against the holy ghost can not be saved: Mat. xii. Mar.
but the scribes

August. de predestinati. sanctorum. li. Capi. viii.
WHen the gospel is preached, some believe, and some do not believe.

But they that believe, whiles the Preacher, preaches outwardly, do hear and
learn of the father inwardlye.

Whereas they that believe not, do hear outwardlye, but they do neither hear
nor learn inwardlye. That is to say: Ihon. vi.
to them it is given that they believe: but to these it is not given. For, no
man (says he) comes unto me, except the father, that has sent me, does
draw him. Which thing is spoken more plainly afterward: Jesus, says the
Evangelist, knew from the beginning, who they were that did not believe, and
who should betray him. Ihon. vi.
And he said. Therefore, I have told you, that no man can come unto me,
except it be given him of the father.

Therefore, to be drawn of the father unto Christ: What it is to be drawn of
the father or what it is to hear and learn of the father.
and to hear and learn of the father to come unto Christ. It is none other
thing, but to receive of the father a gift whereby we may believe in Christ.
For, he that says no man comes unto me, except it be given him of the
father, does not discern them that hear the Gospel from them that hear not,
but them that believe from them that believe not. Therefore, both the begone
faith and the perfect faith is the gift of God. No man (except he will be
against ye most manifest scriptures) will dout but that this gift is given to
some, and to some it is not given. But why it is not given unto all men, it
ought not to move any faithful man, which believes, that we are all borne of
one man, unto condemnation, being without doubt most just, so that nothing
can rightfullye be laid to Gods charge, though none were delivered from it.
Whereby it does appear that it is a great grace of God, that very many are
delivered, seeing and acknowledgynge in them that are not delivered, what was
due unto them, that they that glory, should not glory in their own merits,
which they see to be like unto the merits of the dampened, but that they
should glory in the Lord.

August. ad Sixtum Rho. presbilcrum Episto. Cv.
IN this that they do imagine and think, that they should make God an accept
our of persons, God is no acceptour of persons.
if they did believe, that without any merytes going before, he shows
mercy on whom he will, and calls whom he does vouchsafe to call, and makes
religious, whom he list: they do smallye regard and consider, that due
punishment is rendered unto him that is dampened, and undue grace, or grace yt is
not due given to him that is delivered, so that neither the one can iustlye
complayns that he vndeseruinglye is damned, God is not unjust.
nor the other glory or boaste that he is deseruingly and for his worthiness
delivered: yea rather that there can be no partiality or acception of persons,
where one lompe of damnation, and offense does wrappe in all men, so that he
which is delivered, may learn by him that is not delivered. What punyshmente
he him self does deserve, except he were helped by grace. If this help
comes by grace: truly it is not to be taken for a recompense of me rites or
deservings, but for a gratuite and fre gift of the goodness of God.

But it is vniustelye done, say they, that in an evil cause, where all things
be in like, one should be punished and the other delivered. Is it not therefore
meet that both should be punyshed? Who would deny any such thing? No man I
trow. Let us then give thanks unto our savior. When we see that thing not
to be rendered unto us which we know be the damnation of the like, to have been
due unto us. For, if both were delivered, it should not be known, what is by
the justice of God due unto sin. If no man were delivered, it should also be
unknown what grace does freelye give. But in this most hard question, let us
rather use the words of the apostle. What and if God would, to show his
wrath, Romans ix.
and to make his power known suffer with long patience the vessels of wrath
prepared to destruction: and that he might declare the richesse of his glory,
upon the vessels of mercy, which he has prepared unto glory. etc. To the, o
Lord God, whose judgments be unsearchable, be all praise, glory, and
honor, world without end. Amen.

Imprynted at London, by Ihon Tisdale dwelling in knighte Riders streate, near
to the Queen's Wardroppe.


