A strong battery against the Idolatrous invocation of the dead Saints, and
against the having or setting up of Images in the house of prayer, or in any
other place where there is any paril of Idolatrye, made dialogue wise by John
Veron

Psalm. ^^
Call upon me in the day of ^hy trouble, and I will hear thee. John. ^
I am the way, I am the truth, I ^m the life, no man comes unto the father but
by me. To the right honorable, sir Nicholas Bacon knight Lord keeper of the
great Seal of England, and one of the Queens most honorable priuye
Counsel, John Veron wyssheth grace, peace of conscience, and increase of
godly honor, from god the father, through his son Jesus Christ our Lord.
SOme be of this opinion, right honorable sir, that those things that be in
controversy, betwixt us and the Catholics are not of so great weighte and
importance that we ought therefore to stir up such tragedies, or make so
much a do, sith that they confess one true lyuinge God with us, and his
son Jesus Christ, The common complaints of many people.
do allow the scriptures of the old and new testament, and all the articles of
our believe: But if al things be considered a right, and wayed with the even
balaunce of gods word, it shall be easy for any man to understand that it is
not without a just cause that we do both dissente from them, and also most
earnestly impugn their pernicious and damnable doctrine: and al their
abominable erroures and devil she opinions. For first and foremost, They do
not confess god which do not confess him as he does reveal himself in his
word.
it can not justly be said, that they do confess the only true living ^od,
since that they do not confess him as he does setforth and reveal him self
in his holy and sacred word, but do so confess him, that they do make of him
a plain e^dole Herin then do we differ from them: that we do acknowledge and
confess him, as he does reveal himself unto v in his holy and sacred word
where he fetteth forth him self unto us an omnisufficient god, and in whom only
we ought to seek all manner of things that are necessary both for our bodies
and souls. Psa. 89
The heavens are thine (say the scriptures) the earth also is thine, Psalm cxlv.
thou haste laid the foundation of the world, and all that therein is: How god
reueleth himself in his word.
all the kingedomes of the earth are thine. And thy kingome is an everlasting
kingdom, and thy dominion endures throughout all ages. Thou fittest on the
round bale or circle of the earth, and the inhabitauntes of it are as
Locustes in thy sight. Thou make to stand, and do put to flight. And
unless thou kepest the city, h^ watches in vain, that does keep it. Al
counsayles and helps are from thee. But do not ou^ adversaries most
sacrilegiouslye, The sacrilege of the adversaries.
robbing go^ of his glory, attribute al those things to hy^ dead creatures, I
mean, to those that be already departed out of this world? what have they ^eft
unto god? what help what aid and succor that they have need of, do they not
crave at the dead: hands? The French men in their perilous wars and
battayles, do rather call upon Saint Denyle, than upon the mighty Ie^ou^h, the
lord god of hoostes. Saint denis of France Saint George of England. S. Andrew
of Scottland. Saint James of Callycia.
The Englysh men had instead of god Mars, whom the heathen worshipped for the
god of Battles, that luster knight Saint George of Cappadocia. The Scotes,
their Saint Andrew. The Spaniardes and Gallycians, have yet at this hour their
holy Saint James, whom they do rather call upon, then upon the eternal and
euerlyuing god, in their most perilous affairs. They that travail by the
Sea, have instead of Castor and Pollux, their Saint Nicholas, The gods of
idolatrous Marinets.
unto whom they ioygne fo a fellow helper that ^itle pretye one Saint
Christophore, who by their description may be likened unto that mounstruous
Poliphemus, which Virgill does speak of. Do they not worship Saint
Valesiane (as they do communely call him) as the heathen had in times paste
woorshipped their Acolus, Valesian.
whom Jupiter had appointed to be king and ruler of storms and tempests? For
they persuade them selves, Acolus.
that if they do diligently worship him, he will keep of the hail from their
corn, and from al other fruits of the earth, he will cease the ragiouse
winds, and appease the tempests. Some other do attribute this office unto
John and Paul. John and Paul.
Saint Agathe must se their houses to be preserved from fire. Saint Agathe
And therefore when there is any ieopardy of fire they do rather call upon her,
than upon him that has all his creatures at his beck and commandment. But
because she is a woman and therefore frail and timorous, Saint Florinian.
they have associated unto her saint Florinian, who being in complet harneyse,
does hold a paile for to cast water upon the fire, for to quench the
burninge? Sebastian and Rock do heal the pesstilence and potches.
when god does by his righteous judgment punish the world with pesstilence
have they not their Saint Sebastian? And when they be smytte^ with botches
sores and boyles have they not their Saint Rock? more trust have they in those
dead creatures, of who^ we do doubt whether they be in heaven or not, than they
have in the living god, the only autour of al health both of body and soul in
their agues and seuers saint Petronille. Petronille. Peter's daughter.
Peter's daughter must be their physician. And no maru^^le. For* when our
Savior Jesus Christ did heal her grand dame, she creping in unawares did
learn the art of medicin. Appoleyne Otilia.
Touthlesse Appoleyne must help the touth ache* as blind Otilia bearinge her
eyes upon her book, being sallen out of her head* must help sore eyes. To be
short, they have for all the parts of the body certain appointed Saints, as
they have for every kind of cattle. Which thing they would not do, if they did
confess and acknowledge god, as he does reveal himself in the scriptures.
For, Deuteronomy. vi.
there we learn, that the Lord our god, is one God: That he does al things with
his divine providence, and that as all things, are of him by him and in him,
so he is the only autour of life and death, of richesse and poverty, of
wisdom and foolyshnes, of health and sickness. And since that we are both his
creatures and servants, and do owe our selves whollye both body and soul
unto him: How god ought to be confessed.
is it not against al reason, that we should turn out selves from the creator
unto the creatures? The heathen do the same. But we ought to be Christians, and
to cleave only to Christ, and by him to be made one with the father. If the
saints do all things, if they have the government, tuition defense and
protection of cities and towns, if the standing manfullye in battle, the
rennyng away, and victory, if the curinge of diseases, if the benefit of
health be in their hands, if they have power over the winds storms and
tempests, if they possess all the lymmes of a man's body, what does god in
the mean while? Where is his divine providence? will they say that god being
wearye, does commit the government of his creatures unto other? But no such
infirmities is god subject unto. It is evident and pla^ne then, right honorable
sir, that they do make of him a plain Idol, yea they make of him no god at
all. For take his divine providence away or make him subject to any
infirmities, and then he is no god. It is far otherwise with us. How the
faithful do confess god.
For being instructed by the scriptures and word of god, we do wholly depend
upon his fatherly providence, using with most hearty thankefulnes, all those
lawful means that he has appointed, and ordained for us, and so give him
only the whole glory of the government of al things, for the commoditye
and profit of his chosen and elect people. A denial of god.
Again: is not this a denial of god, to go about to worship and serve him
otherwise then he himself does appoint, and prescribe in his holy and sacred
word? Socrates being an heathen, Socrates
does plainlye say, that in religion it is requir^d, that every god be
worshipped after his own will, and not after the will of his worshippers. If this
did take place in false religion, how much more ought it to take place in
true religion? I mean in that religion, that god has set fourth unto us by
his eternal and everlasting wisdom? Deuteronomy. xii
These are his words: Ye shall not do every man that thing that seems unto
you best. I am the Lord my god, that thing only, that I command thee, se
that thou do it add nothing unto it, and minish nothing from it. Again: Math
xv
They worship me in vain teaching the doctrines and precepts of men. But how
well these things have been and are observed of our friends the catholics, let
your honor be judge. Those ways that god will be worshipped and served, they
have stoutly contemned, and chose eueri day strange kinds of worshipping and
service, which the Lord does not once mention of in the scriptures. This then
is an other difference betwixt them and us, How the god^y do worship god
that we will have god to be honored worshipped and served, according to his
word, and as he himself does appointe and prescribe in his sacred
scriptures, submitting our selves wholly, our wit and reason, and all the wisdom
that can be in us, unto his unsearchable wisdom and co^tenting our selves with
that form and manner of religyon, that he has set fourth unto us by his
son Jesus Christ, whom he has appointed, by his holy spirit to be the only
teacher and scholemaster of his church, Mat. xvii
we do study and labor to the uttermost of our power and with all due
submission and obedience, to keep our selves within the limits and bounds, of
his prescribed rules and Canons, having always this saying of Samuel before
our eyes: Samu. xv
Has the lord as great pleasure in burnt offeringes and sacrifices as when the
voice of the Lord is obeyed? Behold to obey is b^^ter then sacrifice: and to
hearken is better then the fatt of Rams. Mat xv.
Whereas they neglect nge g^des commandments, that so they may set up their
own traditions, and going about most ungodly to set the wisdom of god to
school do bring in, all manner of tr^ssh tr^ssh, ships full of dombe and
beggarly ceremonies, which they urge with fire and sword, Wherein does
consisterie outward worshipping of god
and maintain them, with all kind o^ cruel t^r^^nye. Whereby the externe and
outward worshippinge of god which consists in the preaching of the doctrine
and in the right and due ministration of the sacraments according to the
institution and ordeynaunce of our savior Jesus Christ, and in the faithful
prayers of the church, is clen abolyshed and put down. Read the overthrow of
the justification of works for that.
How peryllous a thing it is to attempt to serve god otherwise than he
himself does appointe, it is easy to see in the x. Chapyt. of Leuiticus, and
in the ij. book of Samuel and syxt chapt. and in the.i. book of Cronicles, and
xiii chapyter, well this is most sure and certain that they do prefarre their
wisdom before the wisdom of god* which is a plain denial of god. For if he
be not of a perfect wisdom, he is no god. Again, this that they do, is a
manifest forsaking of the covenant of the lord, A forsaking of the couenaunte
of god. How the adversaries do confess christ Math. viii. What it is to
confess Christ aright.
as it may be proved by many places of the scryptures: but specially by the
xxij. chap. of Jeremy the Prophet. But now let us come to their confession of
our savior Jesus Christ. How do they confess him, I pray you? Even as the
unclean spirytes did, who every where acknowledged him to be the son of god,
the son of the highest. To confess Christ a right, then, it is not only to
confess him to be true and natural god, equal and of one substance with the
father, and to be true and natural man equal and of one substance with us,
being in all things like unto his brethren, sin only excepted: But to
confess and acknowledge him, to be an omnisufficyent, and most perfect
Savior of all those that beleaue in his name, and put their whole trust in the
merytes of his death passion and bloudsheddinge, and to be the only mediator
betwixt God and men. For, therefore did he come, Wherefore Christ came into the
flesh. Ioa. iii. T^moth i Hell iu. vii. Acts. iiii.
and did take upon him our frail nature that destroiyng the works of the
devil, he should save sinners, most perfectly and to the uttermost, I mean as
many as come unto God by him, so that there is none other name under heaven
given unto men wherein we must be saved, but the name of our savior Jesus
Christ. This therefore is our confession and believe, that by the merits
only of the death passion and bloodshedding of our savior Jesus Christ,
being apprehended and taken hold upon by faith, we obtain full salvation,
forgeuenes of our sins, and deliverance from eternal, and everlasting
damnation. Whefore we do attryhute unto him the whole glory of the salvation
of mankind, acknoweledgynge him, to be our only mediatoure advocate and
intercessour, according to these scriptures: I am the way, the truth, and
the life* John. xiiii. Io. ^vi
no man comes unto the father but only by me: Whatsoever ye ask my father in
my name it shall be given unto you: It is Christ, which is dead yea, Romans viii.
rather which is risen again: who is also at the right hand of the father,
and makes intercession for us: There is one god, and one mediator betwixt
god and man, i. Timot. ii
which is the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all men the is
able perfectly and sullye to save them that come unto god by him, sith that he
ever lives to make intercession for them. Christ is not entered into the holy
place, Hebr. vii
which is made with hands, but in to heaven, there to appear in the sight of
god for us. Hebr. ix.
And again: These things do I write unto you, i. Io. ii
that ye sin not, and if any man does sin, we have an advocate with the
father, Jesus Christ the righteous. Whereunto the aduersar^es do attribute their
salvation.
But as for our adversaries without any warrant of gods word, yea, against
all scriptures, they do attribute the best part of their salvation, to their
own merits, and to the works of their own hands, yea, to such kind of
works, as never were commanded of god, and for as much as they can not be of
faith, they are mere sins in the sight of god, Is not this most blasphemous
against the blood of christ, that they be wont to singe in their service? Tuper
Thomae sanguinem quem pro te impendit, O plasphemous abomination
fac nos Christ scandere, quo Thomas ascendit. That is: O Christ, do by the
blood of Thomas, which he spent for thee, make us to ascend thither whither
Thomas is ascended. But why should I ^e to tedious unto your honor, in
rehersing many such things, since that all their books are full of such
damnable blasphemies? Do they not attribute more unto their ^oly father the
Pope, More is attributed unto the pope than unto our savior Jesus christ.
than unto our savior Jesus Christ? for they do plainlye affirm that through
faith in our savior Jesus Christ we do only obtain forgeuenes of the coulpe,
fault, or giltines, but not of the pun shment that is due unto vt for our
sins. For that do they reserve to their holy father, who alone for a piece of
money is able to give pardone a poe ^et culpa, that is of the punishment, and
of the fault. If this be not a denial of Christ, I can not well tell, what we
may call a denial of Christ for, therefore came he in to the ^leshe that he
might be our perfect and full savior They then that deny him to be a perfect
and full savior do deny him to be come into the flesh, i. Ioa. iiii.
and so by good right ought to be taken for Antichrists. I do here let pass
that by their sacrilegious and damnable sacrifice of the mass, The sacrifice
of Christ is omnisufficente and can be offered no more.
wherein they say, they offer dailye our sauoure Jesus Christ both god and
man they do all that ever they can, to abolyshe annichilate and put down the
omnisuff^ce^t sacr^fice of our savior Jesus Christ, which as it has been from
the beginning, is now and shall be to the worlds end, of a most perfect
efficacy virtue, strength and power to save al those that put their trust in
it or take hold upon it by faith: Heb. ix.
so can it not be reiterated or offered any more. For, Christ is not entered
into very heaven there to appear in the sight of god for us, to the end
that he should offer him self any more, for then he must have died often lens
the world began. He is that high priest that it became us to have, which being
holy, Heb. vii.
harmless, undefiled, separated, from sinners, and made higher than the
heavens, neded not daily, as those high priests, to offer up sacrifice,
first for his own sins and then for the peoples: for that he did once, when
he offered up him self. How many mediatoures the adversaries have
How many mediators have they imagined and sourged unto them selves besides
Christ the only mediator betwixt god and man. So many as they do imagine to
be saints in heaven, so many mediators have they sourged unto the^ selves,
puttinge more confidence in their intercession* whereof they have no currentye
or assurance at all in gods book, than in the mediation of the only begotten
son of god. Which in so many places of the scriptures we are certified of, that
onles we be worse then brute beasts, we ought to content ourselves with it, and
to seek no farther. Add theru^to, To deny christ to be come into the flesh.
that to acknoweledge more mediatoures besides him, it is also to deny him to
be come into the flesh. For, he did not only come into the flesh for to be our
omnisufficient and most perfect savior: but also for to be our only mediator
betwixt god and us. How the adversaries do allow the scriptures of the old and
new testament.
And as for the scriptures of the old and new testament, if they did from the
bottom of their hearts acknowledge the^ to be the word of god, then would
they also confess and acknoweledge that all things partaynynge to salvation
^are contained in the same. Which thing they will never do, lest their whole
religion which consists altogether in men's traditions, and vain doctrines of
devils should be quite overthrown.

Now to deny that all things peretining to our salvation are comptised in the
scriptures, It is to deny that they be the word of god yea they that do so,
They deny the holy ghost to be god that say that all things partaining to
salvation, are not contained in the scriptures.
do utterly deny the holy ghost by whole inspyratione the scryptures have be a
set fourth and written, to be true and natural god. For it is against the
property of god to make any work of imperfection. But that all things
pertaining to our salvation be not fully contained in the scryptures then are
they a work of imperfection, and consequently the autour of them, which is the
holy ghost, is no true and natural god Do they not besides all this,
assubiectize the scryptures and word of god to the vain glosses, and found
e^positions of their holy father the Pope? so that although their exposityons
be never so ungodly, never so contrary, to the true sense and meaning of the
holy spirit of god: yet we must receive and allow them for curraunt money*
except we will fry a faggot. Even after the same sort, do they confess the
articles of our believe, m^king what gloses they lust upon the^, although it be
nothing according to the analogy of fa th, from the which they do as fa^re
defer, as the heavens are high above the earth. It is then evidence and
plain that we do not without a just cause dissent from the Catholics and so
earnestlye impugn their damnable and wicked opinions. But now to come to our
purpose, here in this my book, I do maintain and defend against them,
that god only in the time of our trouble, ought to be called upon and that
therefore they that in their necessytyes do by prayer fly unto dead
creatures, do robb god of his glory, and do committ most damnable sacrilege
which thing has been sufficientlye proved by manifest textes of the scriptures,
and by strong authorityes of the ancient fathers of the primityue Church, all
the objections that the adversaries can make being mightily auswered and
confuted. The hol^ argument of the book.
Secondly it has been plainly showed, that we ought to acknowledge none other
mediator betvvixte God and man, but our savior Jesus Christ only, whom the
scriptures do appoint unto us for the omnisufficient savior of man kind, and
for our only intercessour advocate and mediator. Making no mention at all of
the intercession or mediation of the dead faintes, which thing the holy ghost
would not have omitted, if the saints departed out of this world, had been
either appointed or allowed of god to be intercessours unto god for us. Thirdly
it has been declared, that as the saints that be already in glory with god
ought in no wise to be called upon, nor to be taken for our mediators: so no
godly honor ought to be given unto the^ forasmuch as it is a service, which is
only due unto god. Where I had an occasion to show how many ways the true and
faithful servants of god, being departed in the faith of his son Jesus Christ
man be honored, and that the greatest honor that we can do unto them, is to
obey their godly and sound doctrine, whereby they have instructed vvin the true
religion and worshipping of the true living God, and also to follow their faith,
and other heavenly virtues, whereby they did glorifye God, whilst they lived
here in this world This also has been done by the infallible word of god, and
testimonies of the holy doctors of the true catholic church, all the
objections of the adversaries: as before being quite overthrown by the same.
Last of all it has been proved that no figure image or likeness of god, nor of
his son Jesus Christ, nor of the holy ghost nor yet of the Saints ought to be
had in the house of prayer, nor in any other place whersoeuer there i^ any
peril of idolatry, and that there can be no use of them in the Oratories or
praying places of the Christians* but rather that they do most hurt
whersoeuer they be used and kept where by the way I have showed, what is the
true cross, that we ought to embrace and have a pleasure in, and that as for
material crosses they do more hurt, than good, and that therefore for avoiding
of offenses they ought to be taken away. These are the chief and principal
content, of this book, which I do most humbly, and with all due submission
dedicate and offer unto your good lordship desiring your honor to accept and
take it in good part, which thing if ye do: it shall encorage me to attempt
greater things* for the aduanceme^t of gods glory* and for the edifieng of his
church.

Thus the lord god of hosts, the autour of all goodness, vouchsafe to preserve
your honor, my good lady your wife, and all your good family and householde.

The Table of this Book.
A True tale. Folio. 101. A worthy history. fol. 74. A good shift of ye
papists. fo. 10 A difference betwixt sinners. eode^ A short exposition of
Cypria^s words. 41. A private man's fact. fol. 31. A place out of the.xxxii.
chapter of Exodus. folio. 51. Abels blood cries for vengeance fo. 24
Absalon, and his history fo. 15. All saints that be in glory, have been saved
only by the mercy of god. fo. 11. Antonomasia, what it is. fol. 53. Ambrose
words fo. 14. 86. 95. 100. Antechrist works signs and miracles. 8. An
history to be marked of Christian kings and princes fol. 33. Applyeng of the
similitude fol. 10. At the day of judgment. folio. 22. Augustines words in so
many places, as he is alleged in this book. fol. 11. 19. 21, 27. 38. 42. 43.
46. 47. 57. 61. 64. 7^ 96. 97. 101. A small shifte. fol. 99. Answer to fond
objections. 78. Athanassus words. fol. 83. A strong argument against the
papists. 86. Angel, the papiste, I would have said the catholic. fol. 95. A
notable history of Antony. fo. 103.
B.
Brazen serpent fol. 80. Baruh, of what dead he speaks of. 59 Beastlynesse of
the papists in alleagyng the scriptures fol. 58.
C.
Christ, why he is worshipped fo. 74 Cross taken for affliction and trouble.
It is also taken for continual repentance and mortifieng of the flesh. fol.
94. Cherubin, why they were made. fo. 81 Christ has spoken never a word of
the invocation of saints. fo. 5. and whom they be that he will save. fol. 19.
Colyridiani, what they be fo. 72. Chrysostom, and his words. 16. 73. Cross,
taken for the death of Christ, and preaching of the same. fol. 94. Cyprian, and
his sayenges. 40. 56. 67. Constantine and Archadius. fo. 58 Cyrillus words.
fol. 73. Concilium To^ctan^^^. fol. 8^.
D.
Damascene, Gardeners chief refuge. folio. 95. 100. Doctrine, scarsly allowed
by the pope. 58.
E.
Ezechias exaumple is to be followed of good princes. fol. 81. Eunomius, and
his heresy. fol. 38. Epiphantus and his words. fol. 72. Epiphanius bishop
of Salamena in Cypres. folio. 92. Erasmus censore upon Saint Hieromes book
against Vigilantius. 30. his Endion. 70. and in his annotations. fol. 86.
Epiphanius in buildyng gods house. 93. Example of the publican fol. 12.
F.
Fond obiectious of the papists. fo. 78.
G.
Gods creatures (all of them) may be the books of the lay people. for.
1^4. God only ought to be called upon. fo. 3. and why he doothe good to men
here, in the earth fol. 29. God will not have us attribute our felicity unto
creatures. fol. 67.
H.
Helias, why he was taken up in body and soul. folio. 35. Helizeus, and why
the dead that was cast into his grave, was raised again. fo. 36. He only
ought to be called upon, in whom we do believe fol. 5. Heresye and schism,
unto whom it is laid. fol. ^. Holy angels will have no sacrifice. 48. How
the name of God was in his aungelles. fol. 47. How the place alleged out of
the.ix. of John ought to be understood. fo. 12. How God does honor his
saints. fo. 71 Hierome, and his words. 25. 29. ^0. 31. 37. 39. 48. 86. 95.
How we may honor the image of God aryghte. I fol. 104. Images, and why the
papists will have them in their churches. fol. 74. 77. 84. Images of the
gentiles. 87. they ought to be put down in all churches. fol. 90. Jacob, and
what his meaning was. 49. Idolaters common complaint fo. 67. Idolaters of our
time. 68. Iosephe, and why he would have his bones brought out of the land of
Egypt. for. 34 Injury that is done by the adversaries both to god and his
saints. fo. 11. Iudes epistle. fo. 34. Images causes of division in the
common wealth of Israel, and also in the empire. fol. 105.
L.
Lactantius, and his words. fo. 45. Luke, why he is called a pei^ter of some.
78
M.
Mary, the virgin is no where in all the scriptures, called the queen of
heaven. 71. Many things did the old aunciente fathers use. folio. 97.
Miracles doothe not prove the invocation of saints. folio. 6. Moses, and the
history of his death and burying. folio. 33. Mischief that the contention
about the Images did breed foli. 106. None can be our mediator, except he be
also our redemer. fol. 18.
O.
Origenes words fol. 61. 96 Our shoot anchor fo. 23. Of the Cross fol. 94.
Osius, a catholic fo. 95.
P.
Paul's answer to their reasons. 89. Papists arguments beaten upon their
own heads. fo. 26. and again in the.55 prayers of the living do not healpe
the dead foli. ^. Prayers yt we make one for an other. 25. Prayers are the
sacrifices of the elect and chosen of God foli. 44. Petrus Crinitus, and his
words fo. 91. Preposterous devotion. fol. 104. Relikes of the dead saints.
fo. 37 Ruffinus, aleaged. 64. 65. Reply of the adversaries. fo. 83.
S
Salomons deed helps the Papists nothing. fo. 81. Saint Nicolas. Saint
Leonarde. fo. 6. Saints that be dead. fo. 28. Similitude. fo. 9. Similitude of
the papist. fol. 16. Spiritual fornication. fo. 66. Socrates saying touching
the woorshipping of god. fo. 74. Serenus bishop of Massilia. fo. 82.
T
Tertullians words. 37. 47. 95. There can be no true invocation without faith.
fol. 4. The subtilty of the devil. fol. 7. The time of grace and the time of
judgment. fo. 22. The cannons and what they affirm. 25. The auctoritye of
gods book ought to be preserred, before the authority of angels. fo. 37.
The angel of great counsel. fo. 47. The place of the first chapter of
Zachary fol. 48. The fondnes of the adversaries. fo. 54. The true meaning of
Jobs words in his.5. chapter. fol. 54. The faithful lyuinge here on the
earth be saints. fo. 57. The doctrine entreated of in this book. 1. The
faithful call only upon god in their trouble. sol. 2. The preposterous
honoring of ye dead. 70 The true honoring of saynctes. fol. 70. The misses
which the enemies do cast before the eyes of the simple and ignorant. 71 The
absurdity of the papists arguments. fol. 7^. The error of the women of
Judah. fo. 72 Theodosius, and what his vision does signify. 64. and of his
prayer. fo. 64. Three sorts of honoring of the saints 69 Two kinds of
prayers. fol. 63. The preachers of the Pope. fo. 77. The righteous judgment of
god. fo. 78. The vanity of the enemies. fo. 79. The son of God, why he took
our frail nature on him. fo. 85. The reason of Paul's adversaries. fo. 89 The
liynge tales touching coniured water. fol. 98. The image of Christ of all other
is most perilous folio. 91. Three great mischiefs that the images do cause.
foli. 1^^. The conclusion of this book fol. 106
W
We have no promise in all the whole body of the scriptures that the dead
saints do hear us. fo. 2. What was the let that this work came forth no
sooner. fo. 1. What properties he ought to have that we must pray unto. fo.
2. Whence the faith of true christians does come, and where upon it is
grounded. fo. 4. Where the spirits of the godly be. fo. 28. Whether the dead
saints ought to be worshipped. fo. 69. Whiles we live in this world we are
bound to pray one for an other. fo. 62. Why the son of god did take upon him
our frail nature. fo. 18. Who they be among whom the devil works
miracles fo. 7. Why the Apostles were sent into the world. folio. 77. What we
do learn by the decree of those emperors. fol. 91. wherefore the Lords
supper was called collecta. fol. 92. why the old christians did use the sign
of the cross. fol. 93
V
Vigilantius and of the difference between him and Eunomins. fo. 39.
Thus ends the Table.
A strong battery against the ydolatrous Invocation of the dead Saints, and
against the having or setting up of Images, in the house of prayer, or in any
other place, where there can be any peril of idolatry, made dialogue wise. By
John Veron.
The speakers.
Albion, Eutrapelus, Philalethes. Dydimus.
ALBION. I remember well, that after we had talked of the Prayers for the dead,
this work was done in the hunting of purgatory.
in which talk, was most learnedly proved by you, that all the Prayers and
good deeds taht the living be able to make or do for them, that be ones
departed out of this world, can profit them nothing at all: We were fully
determined to have talked likewise and reasoned of the prayers that are
commonly made unto dead Saints. But being let by other necessary and
fruitful co^municatio^, ye matter could not yet be discussed. this work was
let by the setting forth of the doctrine of predestination, of free vvil,
and by the overthrow of the justification of works.
Wherein, notwtstandyng, I se very many, shamfully to err: and I my self am
scarcely yet, persuaded in it, by reason of ye manifold textes of the
scriptures, and authorities of the ancient fathers, yt my faithful guides of
the clergy, did allege and bring in, for to prove, yt we ought to pray unto ye
dead Saints that be already in glory with their head our savior Jesus Christ,
and to take them for our mediators, advocates, and intercessors. Therefore, I
shall most hertily desire you, brother Philalethes, yt ye will declare unto us,
your mind, touching ye matter, I mean whether we ought to call upon any other,
The su^me of the hole doctrine entreated of in all this book.
tha^ upon the living God, in the time of our need and trouble. And again,
whether we ought to acknowledge any mediators, advocates, and intercessors
besides our savior Jesus Christ, whom ye do every where affirm, to be our
only mediator betwixt God and us. I would fain be fully resolved in this matter.


Philaleth. As concerning ye first, we do not read in all the whole body of the
scriptures that ever the true and faithful servants of god did in the time of
their trouble, call upon any other, None of the faithefull servants of god
did ever call upon any other in the time of their troubles a^ upon the
true living God
than upon the living God, the father of our savior Jesus Christ. Which
ought to be unto us, a sufficient doctrine. For, it is to be thought, that if
they had had any express word, in gods book that should have commanded the^
otherwise, they would have been obedient unto it. But no such express word
shall ye find in all the scriptures, wherein not withstandyng all things, that
do pertain to the salvation of man, are most sufficiently set forth unto us.
Therefore it were a plain blasphemy in the time of our trouble, to call upon any
other, than upon the living God only, who by his prophet David speaks these
comfortable words unto us: Psalm. 100.
Call upon me in the day of thy trouble, so will I deliver thee, and thou
shalt glorify me. Who, I pray you, having this commandment of the
euerlyuyng and eternal God, joined with so sweet a promise, We have no
promis in all the whole body of the scriptures, that the dead saints do
heat us.
would seek to any other?


Eutrapelus. I would hold him worse thanne mad, that would do it, sith
that we have neither express word, nor promysse, in all the whole body of
the Scriptures, that the dead saints should hear us, or succor us in the
time of our need.


Philalethes. What properties he ought to have that we must pray unto.
Add thereto, that he whom we ought to pray unto, must have all these
properties.

1 First, he must be omnipotent or almighty, that is, able to do what soever
he will, both in heaven and in earth. for unless he were able and of power to
help us out of all manner of troubles perils and dangers that we be in, be
they never so great, it were but labor lost to pray unto him.

2 Secondly, he must be of an absolute and perfect wise dome, that so he may
perfectly know how to help them that call upon him, for help aid and
succor, and how to compass and overthrow the crafty and subtle devises of
the enemies of his people. For many there be, that have might and power, but
for want of wisdom, they can bring nothing to pass, their might and power
profits them nothing.

3 Thirdely, he must not only be almighty, and of a perfect wisdom, but
also willing both to hear and to help us. For what should his great power
and wisdom avail or profit us, except he were willing to do us good?

4 Fourthly he must be such one, as is able to here the prayers of al them that
call upon him, although in one instant, all the nations that be upon the earth,
should make the^r prayers together unto him. Fo: else it should come to pass that
the suite and prayers of the one, should be both hyndred and let by the
prayers of the other: or whiles he should hear the prayers of the one, and
deliver them out of the present danger and peril: the other, their prayers
being not heard, should perish in the same.

5 Fiftely, this propretie also he must have, that is, he must be such one,
as does better know our necessities, and what is expedient for us than we our
selves be able to declare. For, who would commit himself into the hands of
that physician, yt can know no more of ye sycknesse than the pacient can tell
himself. These.v. propreties are necessarily required in him, whom we ought
in the time of our trouble to call upon. Bring one either in heaven or in earth
that has all these things, Rom 10.
and then we may be sure, that it is he, that ought to be prayed unto of all
men. But who can be such, except he be almighty, except he knows all things,
or be of a perfect wisdom, except he be most bou^tuouse, and most willing to
do good unto all them that by faithful prayers do fly unto him, hearing all
them that call upon him, and knwoyng better their necessities, than they their
selves be able to declare?


Didymus. None, I trow, can be such, but the true living and eternal God
only. For none of all the angels nor of the children of Adam can have these
propreties, onelesse we will grant them to be gods.


Philalethes. It follows then by good consequence that none ought to be called
upon, God only ought to be called upon.
but the true living God only. For, he only is almighty, whose spirit is the
spirit of counsel, so that he knowethe how to deliver his out of
temptation, being so mercyful and bounteous, that he does of his own goodness,
call the afflicted unto himself, Psalm. 50.
and promises healpe unto all them that call upon him, saying (as we
alleged before) Call upon me in the day of thy trouble, so shall I deliver
thee, and thou shalt glorify me. Again, he does not only being every where
present, here our words, but also the very desires of our own hearts,
knowing most perfectly the infirmity and weakness of his work, that he
himself has made. There can be no true inuoation without faith. Objection.
1
Moreover, this is most sure, that no invocation or prayer can be made
without faith.


Albion. And do not they, that pray unto Saints, believe that they shall be
heard? Without all doubt they be fully persuaded, that their prayers shall be
heard, and that they shall obtain healpe and succor at the dead Saints
hands. Therefore, it can not be said, that their invocation or prayers be
without faith. Whence the faith of the christians do comme, and vvhervppon
(...) it gronded.



Philalethes. But whence doothe the faith of the christians proceed and
comme, but of the preaching of the gospel? or whereupon is it grounded, but
upon the infallible word of Good, which sends us to none other, but to our
heavenly Father, through his son Jesus Christ, our only savior, advocate and
mediator. This doothe the Apostle write: Who soever shall call upon the name of
the Lord, Rom 10.
shall be saved. But how shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed?
And how shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? And how shall
they hear without a preacher? And how shall they preach except they be
sent? as it is written: How beautiful are the feet of them, which bring
glad tidings of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things. But they have
not all obeyed the Gospel: Esai. ^^. Nauir. ^ Esai ^^. John. 12.
for, Esaie says, Lord, who believes our report? Then faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God. What could (I beseech you) be spoken
more plainly of ye true Invocation and prayers of the Christians? Who sees not
whence it does come? How, says he, shall they call on him, in whom they do
not believe? The true invocation then can not be without faith. And that we
might understand of what says he does speak, he sets forth whence it
comes, that we may know the quality and boldness of it. He shows that it
comes by the preching of the Gospel, which brings unto us glad tidings of
peace, and certifieth us of good things. But the true preaching of the Gospel,
does teach us to believe in God only, and in his only begotten son our
Lord.


Albion. Now I perceive well your meaning: He only ought to be called upon,
He only ought to be called upon, in vvho^ we do believe
in whom we do believe: but the word of God does teach us to believe in God
only: Therefore, he only ought to be called upon.


Philalethes. Ye understand the matter a right. And verily this is the
principal mark, The mark that the hole scriptures doo-shoote at.
that the hole scriptures do shoot at, to make us to put all our whole
confidence and trust in God our heavenly father, and in all our afflictions and
troubles which he sends unto us, for a fatherly chastiseme^t and discipline,
thereby to call us unto him again, boldly to call upon his holy name, through
his son Jesus Christ our Lord and savior.


EVTRAPE. This, me think, ought to suffice us, that our savior Jesus Christ,
whom the heavenly Father has appointed to be our only teacher and
scholemaister, in things that perteyne to the true religion, worshippyng and
service of God did speak never a word of this Invocation of the dead Saints,
Christ has spoken never a word of the invocation of saints.
which thing he would not have done, if it had been according to the will of
him that had sent him. Therefore when he techeth his disciples to pray, he says
these words unto the^: after this manner therefore praiye: Mathei 6
Our Father which art in heaven, halovved be thy name. etc. As he does here
send us to our heavenly Father, and byddeth us to pray unto him, so can not
this prayer, without traitorous sacrilege be said to any other. For unto
whom of the Saints can we without great blasphemy say: Our father which
art in heaven? or give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our
trespasses as we forgive them that trespace against us? Therefore I can not but
meruell at the shamlesse blasphemies of those, that would send the poor
simple and ignorant, after they had had them under their Benedicite, to this
image or to ye image and bydde them to say there knelyng, so many Pater
nosters and Aues.


PHILALE. These may be lykened unto those false Prophets that Hieremie did
speak of) which taught the people to say unto a piece of wood, Thou art my
father, and to a stone: Hiere. ^.
Thou haste begotten me* for what other thing is it to mumble out the Lords
prayer, before dombe blocks and stones, but to commit that shameful
ydolatrie, that the holy Prophet doothe so sore speak against in that place.


Albion. If the dead Saints ought not to be called upon in our
necessities, Saint Nicolas. Saint Leonarde.
have been delivered from bonds and yrons, by S. Leonard. How many, I pray
you, being halt, blind, dombe, and deaf, have been cured and healed by the
help of the Saints? What should I speak of them, that by their helpyng
hands, have been delivered from dangerous agues, pestilence and unclean
spirits? Since then that the dead Saints do help them, that do devoutly
pray unto them, why should we not in the time of our trouble call upon them?


PHILA. The s^e vvy^ge of mira^les is not a su^ficient argument to prove the
invocation of saints
by the same reason might the Idolatry of the Gentiles or heathen be vpholden
as good, sith that many have been cured and delivered among them, by calling
upon their false gods. Whereof it did come to pass, that the hethen did verily
think that they were healed by their gods, whom in their perils and dangers,
they called upon, and whom, leauyng the true living God, they most ungodly
honored and worshipped.


Didymus. I remember yt the lord does in Esaie the Prophet speak these words:
I am he, I am he, Esai. 43
and besides me there is no savior. If there be no savior besides the true
living God, by whose virtue think ye, were so many thousand of sick folks
restored to health again, before the ydols of the heathen?


Philaleth. Without al doubt, they were cured and healed by the power of the
dyuell.


Didym. But how can Satan the dyuell, heal or deliver any man from his
sickness, sith that he is no god.


Philale. He can do it, Who they be ^^ oug whom the li^el vvor^eth miracles.
if God does permit and suffer specially among them, whom he holds subject
to his tyranny: whose eyes he has so betwitched, that they think themselves
to be the true worshippers of the living God, and to be helped by him, for that
wicked spirit is so abhorred, and hated, that being known, no man would call
upon him. He does therefore so blind the hearts and minds of the infidels,
whom he bears rule over, and whom he has under his subjection, that they
think nothing less than to call upon Satan the dyuell, or to be healed by
him. And that this crafty and most subtle deceauer may lurk or be unknown,
he does by the divine permission and sufferance, and by the rightuous
judgment of God, most shamefullye begyle them, that be given over into his
power, doing all that in him lies, to withdraw the minds of mortal men from
the worshippyng of the true living God, that so he may have them fellows with
him of eternal punishementes in hell fire. And for this cause these unclean
spirits do hyde theimselues within the images, Note this dilig ntly
they inspire the hertes of their prophets, they set out oracles or
prophecies, they govern the flyenges of birds, they trouble the life, they
disquiete the sleep, and creepyng in to the bodies, they do fraye the mind,
they bring the lymmes out of fashion, they hurt the health, and vere with
diseases, that they may compel and constrayne the poor sely wretches to the
worshippyng of them, What since till means the dyuell vvoorketh that he may
seem to have cured and he did the sick
and when they have released or leused that which they had bound, they may seem
to have healed* for, this is their curyng or healyng when they cease to do
hurt. All these things are done, at the invocation or calling upon of the gods
of the heathen Would therefore any man being in his right mind, judge this
idolatry to be tolerable or good, because of these miracles?


Albion. ^. Objection
These things have been done among the heathen, whose gods were no gods but
deuyls, and that by the permission and suffrance of God, because of their
horrible idolatry that they did most shamefully wallow in. But it follows not
that the like may be done among the people of God


Philalethes. Deute. 19.
that so he may try and prove his people whether their love him or not? And
whether they will steadfastly cleave unto his laws? And least it should be said,
yt this was don among the Jews, but yt it is otherwise in ye church of
Christ, we have an excellent prophecy of the holy apostle, where he says on
this manner: 2. These. 2
Than shall the wicked man be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the
spirit of his mouth, and shall abolishe with the bryghtnesse of his coming:
eue^ him, whose co^mi^g is by the woorkyng of Satan, with all power and
signs, and lying wonders. And in all deceauablenesse of unrighteousness among
them that perish, because they received not the love of the truth, that they
might be saved. And therefore god shall send them strong delusion, that they
should believe lies, that all they might be damned, which believed not the
truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. Do we not learn by these words of
thapostle, that in the later days there shall be wonders and signs in the
kingdom of Antichriste? And doubtless, There be wonders and signs in the
kingdom of Antichrist
as they are by the rightous judgment of God, ordained for to deceive them
that have a delight in unrighteousness, so do they also take away sicknesses,
and diseases, that the ungodly contemners of the truth may the more be blinded
and confirmed in their error. Are not also these Christ's words? Many shall
say to me in that day: Lord, have we not by thy name prophesied? he we not by
thy name cast out devils, and done or wrought great miracles? And the^ will I
confess to them I never knew you. Depart ye from me, ye workers of iniquity.
Mat. 24.
And in an other place. There (says he) shall arise false Christ's, and false
prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, so that if it were
possible, they should deceive the very elect. It does sufficiently appear,
by this, that many times it comes to pass, not only among the heathen and
Jews, but also in the church of God, that by the invocation of them, that are
no Gods, not a few have been, and are healed. Yet no man ought thervppon to
conclude, that it is laufull in the time of trouble, to call upon any other,
than upon the true living God, all creatures be they never so excellent, being
laid aside. Similitude Procreation of children does not excuse vvhooredome, no
more does the vvorking of miracles excuse the idolatrous invocation of Saints



Eutrepelus. I am of this opinion, that miracles do no more excuse the
invocation and worshippyng of Saints, than the conception, gettyng or
procreation of children, can excuse adultery, and whoredom, although it be a
miracle that the child is conceived in the mothers womb that there it is
norished and fed, and at length in his due time brought forth into the world,
and such a miracle as can only be done and wrought by the divine virtue and
power of God. Likewise he that steals bread or meat if he do eat it, he shall
both take away his hunger, and also feed his body, though this virtue and
power to feed the body does only perteyne to God. Shall we therefore excuse
whooredom, adultery and theft?


Didymus. No man I trow, will be of that mind.


Eutrapelus. How can then, the invocation of Sainces, which the whole
scripture does disauouche, be excused, by showing or workyng of miracles?
Therefore, when they say, why should we not call upon the Saints, sith that
many (as we se daily by experience have been) both healed and also delivered,
from the perils and dangers that they were in, by that mean? It is even, as
if the horemo^ger should say: Why should I not cleave unto a harlot, since ye I do
as well get children of her, as of a laufull wife? or as if yt these should
likewise say: Why should I toil or labor, since that by stealyng, I can help
my necessity and need? As then, it is not laufull for any man to seek to have
children by adultery and whoredom, although me^ may have issu that way, nor yet
by pickyng and stealing to help the necessities of his body, although many do
live by theft, but it is ye part of an honest man to seek to have issue by
honest matrimony and wedlock, and by due labor to get his living: so it is ye
duty of a true christian man, The abolishing of the similitude.
in what trouble, peril, or danger so ever he be, to seek for help and
deliverance, not by ye unlawful calling upon the dead Saints (although many have
received their health by it) but by the faithful invocation only of ye true
living and eternal god. And as an honest man had lieffer to be without
children than to get them in aduoutrie and whoredom: Similitude.
and to byte his bread very nere, rather than to live by theft and other
unlawful means: so he that fears God unfeignedly, has lieffer, to suffer
any kind of affliction, than to seek for healpe and deliverance, by the
forbidden invocation of dead creatures.


Albion. Well, I grant, that the dead Saints, ought not to be called upon
as gods, I mean that they ought not to be called upon, as though they their
selves should help us, A good Chift of the papists*
in our troubles and adversities: but that we ought to call upon them, as
being our mediators, advocates, and intercessors which do make intercession
unto God for us.


Philalethes. Where, I pray you brother Albion, have ye learned this divinity?
So are we wont always to excuse the want or lack of faith. Wh^ do we not
rather pray unto God out heavenly Father, since yt in so many places he will
have us so for to do?


Albion John. 9. Obie. 4.
Because we are sinners. And ye know what the scripture says: Peccatores no^
and^r Deus. God hears not sinners, but them, that are obedient to his will.


Philalethes. That we are sinners, we have that common with all mortal men
For, King. ^ 1 John. 1. A difference bet^ixt sinners.
there is no man that synneth not. And if we should say, We have no sin, we
deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. But this difference, does the
scriptures pu^fe betwixt sinners, that some are always ready to ^^p^nt,
whenever they be, either by the outward preaching of Gods word, or by the
inward motion of the holy ghost, moved thereto, and some again will never
repent, but do stubbrnely unto the end abide in their sins, making a mock
of the threatenings of God, and of his judgments. If we be of the number of
the true repentant sinners, who dares, contrary to all the whole scriptures,
affirm that God will not hear us? Math. 6.
If sinners may not be heard, why does our savior Jesus Christ teach us to
say: forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us?
Again, if God will not hear repentant sinners, but the saints do hear them,
and have pity and compassion on them, then are the Saints mercyful, and God
unmerciful. Therefore the Scripture should have commended and set forth the
mercyfulnesse of the Saints, and not the mercy of God. All saints that be in
glory have been saved (...) the mercy of god.
But let such blasphemy be far from us, that we should take away mercy
from God, and attribute it unto saints, of whom not as much as one has been
saved, but only through the grace and mercy of God. Now if we be unrepentant
sinners, what marvel is it, if we have no boldness at all to call upon God?
Ye know that they that are such, as they be void of a lively faith in our
savior Jesus Christ, so are they most unworthy that they should be her^^


Eutrapelus. Verily, it seems unto me, the greatest folly in the world, to
think or imagine, that the Saints are so far different or disagreyng from
God, that whom he will not hear because of their unrepentant hearts, them they
would not only hear, but also make intercession unto GOD for them. The
injury that is don by the adversaries both to god and to his saints.
Who does not se, that so doing, we do great injury both to God and the
Saints. To the Saints, because that we judge them to be such as will hear an
unrepentant sinner, when he calls upon them, and make intercession for him.
And to God, The enemies harp still upon one string.
because we should imagine, that he will, contrary to his word, admit any
intercessors for such a sinner.


Albion. Yet they will say still that this is the scripture: good hears not
sinners. Here the holy ghost makes no such distinction as ye make.


Philalethes. I may answer you by the words of saint Augustine, August li. 2.
contra episto lam parmeniani ca 9.
who writes after this manner: Hoc a Domino non est dictu^, sed ^b illo, qui
oculos corporis, iam quidem restitutos habebat, sed ei oculi cordis, nondum
patebant, vnde ipsum Dominum adhuc prophetam putabat. Na^ eum postea cognitu^
del filium adorauit. Ipse autem dominus, quum in vno templo orarent Pharisaeus
and publicanus* publicanum confitentem peccata sua magis iustificatum dicit,
quam Phatisaeum ^actantem merita sua. Quanquam, enim iustificatus destiterit
esse peccator, tamen vt iustificaretur peccator orabat, and peccator
confitebatur, and exauditus iustificatus est, vt desinerer esse peccator. No^
vtique desineret esse peccator, nisi prius exaudiretur peccator. That is to
say, This was not spoken of the Lord, but of him, which had already his bodily
eyes restored, Joan. 9.
but the eyes of his heart were not yet open, and therefore he thought yet of
the Lord, that he was but a prophet. For, afterward, Luc, 18.
knowing that he was the son of God, he worshipped him. But the Lord
himself, when tow did pray together in one temple A Pharisei, and a Publican,
does say, yt the publican confessing his sins was more justified, tha^ the
pharisey bostyng his merits. For although being justified, he cessed to be a
sinner: The example of the publicane
yet whiles he was a sinner he did pray, and confess his sins, that he
might be justified and being heard he was justified, that he might cease to
be a sinner. And truly he should not cease to be a sinner, onelesse he were
heard being yet a sinner.


Eutrapelus. As far as we can gather of the text, that they do allege, we
shall not greatly need the help of this holy father: How the place aleageth
out of the.9. of John ought to be understood.
for, let us only mark the circumstances of the place The phariseys did say of
Christ, This man is not of god, for he keeps not the Sabbath day. By which
words, they went about to rob Christ of the glory of the miracle that he
had wrought in making the blind man to see, and to persuade the people that he
was a most abominable sinner, and a despiser of the Lords holy laws and
ordinances. The poor sely blind man, having receued such a benefit at
Christ's hands, did all that in him did lie, to stop their blasphemous
mouths, saying: We know that god hears not sinners, that is, such sinners,
as ye will make him. for it was not heard, sense the world began, that any
did open the eyes of a man that was borne blind. Except this man were of
god, he could have done nothing. It is easy now to understand of what kind of
sinners the scripture speaks there. For, if those words were spoken
generally of all sorts of sinners, what iniurye should this be both to the
word of god, and also to his divine grace?


Didymus. ^ Grounded upon a similitude.



Albion. We do all give you good leave.


Didymus, Who (say our galant champions of the Popes clergy) dare come to an
earthly king or prince, having any suite unto him without mediators? They that
have ought to do with the prince, they will come unto them, whom they know to
be in most favor with him, and them do they make their mediators, that they
may have the better access unto him, and speed in their business. We have
the examples of the same in gods word. 1. King. 2
for was not Berseebah a mediatrix unto her son Solomon for Adoniah? Again
was not Absalon reconciled unto his father David, 2. Sa. 14.
by the means of Ioab? If we may not then come to worldly princes, but that we
must have some, to be means for us: how dare we be so bold, being synful
creatures, to appear before the majesty of God without mediators? But who
should be those mediators but the blessed virgin Mary, the holy apostles and
martirs of our savior Jesus Christ?


PHILA. Esaias. 55.
Number vie meae sicut viae vestrae? Are my ways like unto your ways? if the
same causes could be found in God, why we might not come before his majesty,
without mediators that commonly be found in erthly kings and princes, their
similitude, should have some appearance of a truth. But no such causes can we
find in our heavenly father. First and foremost, if a king be a lover of
virtue, and an ernest maynteyner of justice, as many wicked and ungodly
persons, as he has within his dominions, so many deadly enemies has he. And
therefore it is not meet and convenient, that every manne that would, should
be suffered to come to such a king. For, so he might be murdered under the
color and pretense of suite, Titus linius 1 de ca. li 1. Psalm ^.
as we read of Tarquinius Priscus. But there is no such peril in our heavenly
king. For why? he is in heaven, and has all his enemies in derision, yea he
shall speak unto the^ in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure.
Secondelye we see that at many times happens that worldly princes, do wax so
proud, and so high minded, that they disdain to speak with their great lords,
much less yt they would suffer every rascal, to come unto the^. But our eternal
and everlasting king does call all me^ indifferently unto him, saterig: Math.
11.
Come unto me al ye ye labor, and are laden, and I will refresh you. Thirdly,
let us grant that the prince, is neither affrayde of treason, nor yet pufte
up with such pride, as we spoke of, but is most ready to hear all men's
suite: yet he can here but one man's suite at ones, so that if all men should
be suffered to come in with their suite, he must needs be ouercharged. But the
living god our heavenly father, is able to here at once al men's petitions,
though all nations and peoples, that be under heaven, should in one instant
call upon him, and make their suite unto him. Ambro inco^me^ suis in, 1. caput
ad Domanns,
Unto all these the saying of Ambrose may be added, where he says, Nam and
ideo ad regem, per Tribunos and Comites itur, quia homo vtique est rex, and
nescit quibus debeat Rempub. committere. Ad Deum aute^, quem vtique; nihil
latet, omniu^ enim merita nouit, promerendum, suffragatore non est opus. sed
mente deuota, That is to say: They do therefore come unto a king by his
captains, lords, and waiting servants, because forsothe that the king is a man, and knows not to whom he should commit the commune wealth. But to
get and obtain the favor of GOD, from whom nothing is hidden. for he
knows al men's merits, we have no need of a Mediator, but of a devout mind.
Let your Pope catholics read the words that go before, in the same place of
saint Ambrose.


Albion. But what say ye to those authorities of the scriptures, that our
neighbor Didymus did aleadge? 2 Samuel 4 ^he histoly of Absaron.



PHILE. I will first begin with the history of Absalon. First, it was not
without a just cause, that he did not by himself sue to be reconciled with his
father. It did well appear afterward, that he bare no true heart to the
king his father, but was all drowned in ambition. Again he knew right well,
that his father loved Ammon most entierly, and that therefore it could not
be, but that he was sore offended, for the which cause, he durst not come in
his syghte. And that David would not see him, that ought to be attributed to
the great heaviness and sorrow that he was in for the death of his son
Ammon. But no such humain passions can be applied unto God, unless we will
condemn the scriptures of deceatfulnesse and leasyng. Again, that David
being by the means of Ioab reconciled unto his son, would not suffer him to
come into his sight it was a token that he kept yet some rancor and malice in
his heart. But the reco^ciliacion, whereby the true repentant sinners, are
reconsiled unto god, is full and perfect* for there can be nothing more
acceptable unto him, tha^ the unfeigned conversion or turning again of his
children. for, so does he cry out by his prophet Esaias: Let the wicked forsake
his ways, Esaias 55.
and the unrighteous his own imaginations, and return unto the Lord, and he
will have mercy upon him, and to our god, for, he is very ready to forgive. for
my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways, my ways, says
the lord. When, think ye, would David have said: Let Absalon forsake his
wickedness, and return unto me being his father, and I will have mercy upon him.
for I am very ready to forgive. And as for adoniah, he had conceived treason
against his brother Solomon, whom he sought for to depose, yt he might make him
self king, else he might without any peril have come to the king. 1 King. 2
The history of Adoniah.
Howbeit the history does declare, that the intercession, that Bersebah did
make for him unto her son Solomon, did cost him his life.


EVTRAPE. Use that kind of intercession that list, 2. Sa 19.
me think it is naught for the neck.


Phila. More over if such histories do please them so much: why do they not
bring forth the history of Semei, who although he had most grievously
offended David, yet came by himself without any mediator unto him, and falling
down at his feet, desired him of pardon? why is ye example of the prodigal
son omitted and left of?


Eutra. Luc. 15. The similitude of the papists overthrown by an other
similitude.
As unskillful in divinity as I am, me think I could bring a similitude or
example, which must needs be far better that theirs. If any earthely king or
prince should by act of parliment or by proclamation command all his
subjects in their trouble to come boldly unto him, promysyng to hear them,
and to rydde them out of their trouble, adversity, and affliction: What need
I pray you, should these subjects have to seek Mediators, that by them
they might come to the king and have their matter heard? even so now, sithe
that we have so many proclamations, set out in that most glorious council or
parlensent of the blessed Trinity, whereby we are bydden to come with a
steadfast confidence and trust before the mercy seat of our heavenly king and
father, what should mediators do? First and foremost, Psalm. l.
our heavenly Father sets out this proclamation: Call upon me in the day of
thy trouble, and so I will deliver thee, and thou shall hear me. Math, xi.
The son sets out this, and does proclaim it himself: Come unto me all
ye that labor, To.m 10
and are laden, and I will refreshe you. The holy ghost does by the holy
apostle cry out: Who soever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be
saved. Are not these sufficient proclamations to enbolden us, in all our needs
troubles and adversities to fly unto our heavenly Father, for healpe, aid,
and succor, without spendyng our labor in vain, in seeking mediators
advocates, and intercessors? Chriso. de profectu euangelii. Tomo 6*
Non opus est (says Chrysostom, multis patronis apud Deu^, neque multo
discursu vt blandiare aliis, sed licet solus sis patronoque careas, and per te
ipsum Deum precetis, omnino tamen voti compos eris. Neque enim tam facile Deus
annuit cum alii pro nobis orant, vt cum ipsimet oramus, otia^ si plurimis plene
simus malis, That is to say: we have no need of many advocates before God,
neither of much gaddyng about, for to flatter and speak fair unto other.
For, although thou be alone, and want an advocate, and pray unto God by thy
self, thou shall doutlesse obteyn thy request. For God does not so easily
hear us when other do pray for us, as when we pray our selves although we
be full of many sins. And again in the same Omelie: O woman, Math. 15.
great is thy faith. Thou see, says he, how the woman that was unworthy,
was by her importunate calling made worthy. Will thou also learn, that
prayeng by our selves we obtain more at gods hands, then when other do
pray for us? She cried after Christ, and the disciples came unto him, saying:
Send her away, for she cries after us. And unto them he said: I am not sent
but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel. But wha^ she came her self,
and perseuered crying out, and saying: Lord, do not the little whelps feed of
the crummes that fall from their masters board? he granted unto her the
benefit, that she would have, and said: Let it be done unto thee, as thou will. Thou see how she had the repulse, wha^ other prayed, but when she came
her self praying for the gift: he did grant it. Unto them he did say: I am
not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel. But unto her: Great
is thy faith, says he, let it be done unto thee, as thou will. These are
Chrysostomes words, neither can the ennemies answer ought to these plain
textes.


Albion. Heb. 12.
And shall we have no mediators, advocates or intercessors at all? Does not
saint Paul write thus: Even our God is a consumyng fire, and dwells in the
light that none can attain unto? Who dares then, knowing himself to be a
synnefull creature, approach or come nere unto him? Shall not he, that
presumes to do so, be consumed to naught?


Philalethes. In deed, brother Albion, forasmuch as God is a consumyng fire
and dwells in the light that no man can attain unto, Why the son of god did
take upon him our frail nature.
we have need of a mediator, but not of mediators. And the same mediator is
the only begotten son of GOD, our savior Jesus Christ, who that he might
be our only and omnisufficient Savior, and also the only mediator betwixt GOD
and us, did vouchesafe to take upon him our frail nature. Without him can we
have no access unto that burning and consumyng fire, 1 Timo 2.
nor have any fellowship with God. And of this omnisufficient and only mediator,
the holy Apostle writes on this manner: There is one God, and one mediator
betwixt GOD and manne, which is that manne Christ Jesus, who gave himself a
ransom for all men


Albion. They confess, The cavil of the papists.
that Christ is the only mediator betwixt God and manne. But how ought
this to be understood? Christ, say they, is the only Mediator of
redemption, but not of intercession. For as he only has redeemed us, and by
his death and bloodde sheaddynge, he has made attonemente betwyxte god and
us: Answer to the cavil.
so the blessed virgin Mary and other holy Saints in heaven, are mediators of
intercession, prayeng for us unto God the father, and to his son Jesus Christ
our Lord and Savior.


Phil^lethes. I would feign know where they learn this in the scriptures and
word of God. First, Paul in the place that we alleged last, doothe plainly
show that there can be no mediator, None can be our mediator except he be also
out redemer.
except he be a redeemer also. But they grant, that Christ only has redeemed
us. Whereby it follows that Christ only is a mediator. And so the scriptures
appoint him, I mean, to be our mediator, advocate, and intercessor, even
after his glorious resurrection and ascencion, when he had already by his death
and bloodshedyng fully reconciled God un to us: Roma. 8.
For thus doothe saint Paul write: It is Christ which is dead, yea rather,
which is risen again, which is also on the right hand of God, and makes
intercession for us. Heb. 7.
And in an other place: Among them (says he) many were made priests, because
they were not suffered to endure, by the reason of death. But this man, because
he endures for ever, has an everlasting priesthode. Wherefore he is able also
perfectly to save them, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to
make intercession for us. In this text have we many goodly lessons set forth
unto us: for since he has an everlasting priesthood they must needs confess
that they be all most shameful blasphemors, that either make themselves his
successors, or pretend any other sacrifice, than he himself offered ones
forever upon the altar of the cross. And showing the fruits of this
everlasting priesthode, he says, that he is able by reason of it to save
fully and to the uttermost, all those that come unto god by him* where we learn
who they he, V^hom our savior Jesus Christ vvil save. John. 14.
whom our savior Jesus Christ will save, eue^ those ye seek to com unto god by
him. Which agrees well with that which he says him self in John, where he
speaks those words: I am the way, the truth, and the life. No man comes
unto the father but by me. They than that seek to come unto God by any other
mean or way than by our savior Jesus Christ, can look for no salvation at
his hands. In what case then, are al those yt by ye dead saints do seek to
come to God? But this ought to be most comfortable of al, where he says, Hebr,
9.
that Christ lives for ever, to make intercession for us. Whereunto may be
added, 1 John 2.
that Christ is entered into heaven for to appear in the sight of God for us.
Again, says the holy evangelist saint John: If any man sin, we have an
advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the rightuous, and he is the
satisfaction for our sins. Where besides al other doctrines, we do learn that
Christ is our only advocate and atonement maker. For the office of
intercession, and redemption, ar so jointly ioigned together, out of this
present life, ye mediation or intercession can be ascribed unto none, but ye
redemption must be attributed unto them also. For why is our savior Jesus
Christ our advocate with the father, but because yt he is both rightuous, August
1 John. 2.
and also ye full satisfaction for our sins? S. Augustine writing upon this
text of John says these words: Videre ipsu^ Ioanne^ serua^tem humilitatem.
Certe vir iustus erat and magnus qui do pectore domini mysteriorum secret^
bibebat. Ille, ille qui bibendo de pectore domini diuinitate^ eructauit: In
principio erat verbu^, and verbu^ erat apud Deu^. Ille talis vir non dixit:
Aduocatum habetis apud patrem, sed si quis peccauerit inquit, aduocatu^ habemus
apud parte^: non dixit habetis: nec me habetis, dixit, nec ipsum Christum
habetis, dixit. Sed Christu^ posuit non se, and habemus, dixit, no^ habetis.
Maluit se ponete in numero peccatorum, vt Christum haberet aduoucatu^: quam
ponere se pro Christo aduocatum, and inueniti inter damn^ndos superbos. Which
may be englished thus: Ste John himself keeping his humility and lowlynesse.
Truly he was a righteous and a great man, ^om. 1.
which drank out of the Lords breast the secrets of heavenly mysteries. He
he, who drynkyng out of the Lords breaste, uttered forth the divinity,
saying: In the beginning was the word, and the word was with GOD. He being
such a man did not say: Ye have an advocate with the Father, but if any man
does syn, we have an advocate with the father, He said not: ye have neither did
he say: ye have me, ^ike this ^l.
neither did he say: ye have Christ. But he did put Christ and not him self:
again, he did say, we have and not ye have* he had lieuer to put him self in
the number of sinners, that he might have Christ, to his aduocat, than to put
him self an advocate or intercessor for Christ, and to be found among the
proud damned. Brethern, we have an advocate with the Father, even Jesus
Christ him self. And he is the propitiation or satisfaction for our sins.
He that has holden this faith, has done no heresy, he that has holden this
opinion, has caused no schism or division. For, whence do breed schisms
and deuisions? When men do say, we are just, when men do say, we do
sanctifye the unclean, we do iustifye the ungodly, we ask, we obtain. But
what says John? Si quis peccauerit aduocatum habemus apud patrem Iesum
Christum iustum If any manne does sin, we have an advocate with the father
Jesus Christ the righteous.


Didymus. But now a days among a great many, and specially where Papistry
does reign, Heresy and schism is laid unto them that ^eache the ^rue
inuocat^on of god and the ^nly mediatio^ of his son Jesus Christ
who soever dares affirm ye Christ is our only advocate, mediator, and
intercessour, he shall be taken both for an heretic and for a schismatike. Why
do they not then lay both heresy, and schism to Saint Augustines charge?


Eutrapelus. But that they do fear the people, which begins now to see
without their rustye spectacles, without all peradventure they would do it.


PHIL. This holy father does in an other place, write in a manner the like of
the blessed Apostel. Augu^t li. 2. contra epistolam parmenia ni ca 8.
S. Paul: Christen men (says he) do pray one for an other in their prayers.
But he for whom no man does pray, but he for all men, is the only and true
mediator. Paul the Apostell although he was a chief member under the head,
yet because that he was a member of ye body of Christ, and did know that the
high and true priest of the church, was entered not into the holy places that
are made with hands but into the very heaven, he does also commend him self
unto the prayers of the faithful. Neither does he make him self mediator
beetwixt god and the people, but desires yt all the members of the body of
Christ do pray one for an other: since that the members are careful one for an
other: and if one suffers, they do all suffer with it: So then let the
mutual prayers of all the members, that be yet here laboring upon the earth,
ascend up unto the head, which is gone before into heaven, in whom is the
satisfaction for our sins. Nam si esset mediator Paulus: essent vtique and
reliqui Apostoli, and sic multi mediatores essent, nec constaret ipsius Pauli
ratio qua dixerat: Vnus enim deus, 1. Tim. 2
vnus mediator dei and hominum, homo Christus, in quo and nos vnum sumus, si
seruamus vnitatem fidei, in vinculo pacis, That is, for if Paul were a
mediator, truly the other Apostles should be mediators also, and so there
should be many mediators. Neither should Paul's reason stand, where he says:
for there is one God, one mediator of GOD and men, that manne Christ in whom we
also are one, if we keep the unity of faith in the bond of peace. But what
need we so many words? When Paul did speak these words: There is one God,
one mediator of God and men, that man Jesus Christ had he not a respect unto
the prayers that he spoke of before? For after that he had bidden the faithful
congregation to make prayers and intercessions, for all estates and degrees of
men, for a confirmation of his saying, he did add by and by: for, Ob^ect 7
there is one God, and one mediator betwixt God and men.


Albion Sith that Christ is appointed of the Father to be our judge how can he
be our mediator? For these two can not stand together,


Philalethes. They that have put this into your head, can not tell what
they say. The time of grace and the time of judgment.
For we must make a distinction betwixt the time of grace, and the time of
judgment. In the time of grace, Christ is both our sovereign priest and
also our only mediator between GOD and us, At the day of judgment all
mediation and intercession making shall cease.
as it is sufficientely declared in the Epistle to the Hebrews. But in the day
of judgment, be shall come to be judge of the quick and of the dead. At that
time, mediation and intercession making shall cease. Again, we must make a
distinction betwixt the elect and the reprobate. for, he is the savior and
mediator of the elect and chosen, and the judge of the reprobate. For, none
shall come into judgment, for to receive condemnation but the reprobate only,
for as much as none shall be condemned but the wicke and such as will not believe
in the son of god. These are the words of our savior Jesus Christ. John 5.
Verily verily, I say unto you, He that hears my word, and believes on him,
that has sent me, has life everlasting, he shall not come into judgment or
into condemnation, but is past from death to life. And in an other place: god
says he, sent not his son into the world, that he should condemn the world,
John. 3.
but that the world through him might be saved: he that believes in him shall
not be condemned, but he that believes not, John. 12
is already condemned, because he believes not in the name of ye only begotten
son of god. Again: if any man hear my words and believe not, I judge him
not. for, I came not to judge the world, but to save the world. He that
refuses me and received not my words, has one that judges him the word that
I have spoken shall judge him in the last day. By these words of Christ it does
plainly appear, first that as long as Christ, is in his priesthode, and
sits in ye throne of grace he does not execute ye office of a judge, but the
office of a priest and mediator, and secondly that the faithful beleuers are
delivered from the streightnes, rigor, and severity of the judgment, whereby
Christ shall judge the world in the last day. Therefore those scriptures, that
do set forth unto us Christ's priesthood and the fruits thereof, ought most
diligently to be considered, borne in mind and remembered. Them shall ye have as
it has been already declared before in the 7. and 9. chapter of the epistle to
the Hebrews, in which epistle, Hebr, 5. What ought be our shoot anchor.
the Apostell does ernestly exhort us, to come unto the throne of mercy, and
grace. This then ought to be our shoot ankre, that our savior Jesus Christ,
is not only appointed of the father, to be our judge but also to be our
mediator, advocate and intercessour, and that therefore we must endeavor our
selves to be of the number of the faithful beleuers, unto whom by the blood
of our savior Jesus Christ, Math. 11
the way is open into the holy place, and unto ye seat of grace, which is
set forth of God, for all them that are laden, and do labor in this peynfull
way of sin, wretchedness, and misery, so that they will take hold upon the
promises of God, sealed up unto us by the blood of his only begotten son our
savior Jesus Christ.


Didy. Question
We read and hear that our savior Jesus Christ makes intercession for us:
how I beseech you, ought this to be understood? Is it to be thought that he
is kneling before the majesty of god his father, and that holdyng up his
hands, and showing his wounds unto him, he does pray for us? for such
doctrine have we ben taught heretofore.


Philalethes. Answer to the question.
We must have no such gross imagination of the intercession of the son of
God. But with the apostle we ought to understand that Christ doothe so
stand or appear before the face or in the sight of GOD, that the virtue of
his death shall stand and be unto us for a perpetual and everlasting
intercession. Heb. 12.
And for this cause, it is said, that his blood speaks better things, The
blood of Abel cries for ve^geaunce. Gene. 4.
than the blood of Abell. for the blood of Abell, being shed with the
hands of his cruelle brother Cayne did from the earth cry unto the. LORD
for vengeance: but the blood of our savior Jesus Christ, being ones shed
for us upon the aultare of the cross, and where thorough an everlasting
Testament and priesthood is confyrmed, and sealed up unto us, is in perpetual
remembrance before GOD, and does of him obtain continually, mercy unto us.


Albion. James. 5.
as James does bid us, saying, Pray one for an other, that ye may be saved.
Now if according to James saying, we may godly pray one for an other, who
shall let,


Philalethes. All that has been said hitherto, does only tend to this, that
we may understand that in the time of our trouble, we have access unto the
father, through our only mediator, Jesus Christ. Now, the prayers that we do
here in this life, of a brotherly charity and love make one for another, be
not repugnant unto that, but the doctrine of the invocation of dead Saints is
all together repugnant. And as for the place, How the pla^e of James is to be
vnderstaded
that ye have aleaged out of James, be says not there: Let some pray for the
other, but, pray one for an other, that ye may be saved. whereby he requires
of us, an assured affiance, trust, and confidence in our heavenly father
through his son Jesus Christ, and such an earneste love toward our
neighbor, that we countyng his miseries troubles and adversities our own, we
should at all times, with a good confidence commend his salvation unto God
our heavenly father. The which thing, that form or manner of prayeng, which
the eternal wisdom of the Father has prescribed unto us, does most chiefly
req^^^ of all his faithful congregation, biddyng us to pray after this sort:
Our father which art in heaven. etc. Who can say this prayer, but that he must
pray for all the members of the same body, that he is of? Again, do not the
other like wise in this prayer, commend his salvation unto God? Moreover, the
words of James be so, that by them we are bound to pray for those that
pray for us. If the dea Saints than do make intercession for us, we are
bound also to pray or make intercession for them. But that were to do the
saints great injury and wrong. For thus it is written in their own canons,
The canons do plainly affirm that to pray for the saint which be in heaven
it is to do the^ injury.
Iniutiam f^^it martyri, qui orat promartyre. He do^he wrong unto a martyr,
that prays for a martyr. Secondely, we are commanded to pray one for an
other, that we may be saved. Whereby it does appear, that we ought to pray one
for an other, whiles we are yet in the way of salvation, that we may spedily
o^^ne to our ways end. But the dead Saints ar already at their journeys end. The
prayers that we make one for an other while we live what they do require
and what they vvor^
In fine, this prayer that we make one for an other, whiles we are yet a live,
first it requires a confidence or boldness to pray unto god the father, and
it is so far of that is should stop that access or way that by the blood
of his son Jesus Christ, is opened for us unto him, that rather it makes it
ye easier. Secondlye it does kin^ell, nouryshe, and increase in us a brotherlye
love. But the invocation of dead saints, does quench them both.


Albion Hierony. contra v^gila^tium.
I pray you, these Hieromes words against Vigilantius: Dicis in libello tuo,
quod dum viuimus, (...) pro nobis orato possimus, post quam autem mortui
fuerimus, nullius sit pro ^ocxaudienda oration, praesertim cum martyrs, sui
sanguinis ^tionem obsecrantes, impetrate non quluerunt. That is: Thou say in
thy book, that whiles we live, we may pray one for an other but after we be
dead, Reave. 6.
no prayer that is made for an other, shall be heard, specially since that the
martyrs praiyng for the vengeance of their blood, could not obtain their
petition. If the Apostelle^ and martyrs, can pray for other, when they ought
yet to be careful for them selves, how much more do they pray after their
crounes, Exodus 3^. Act. 7.
victories and triumphe^? Moses being one man does obtain pardon for.vi.
hundred thousand harnessed men: And Stephen being follower of his master and
the first martyr in Christ does pray for his persecutors, Act 27.
and after that they begin to be with Christ, shall they be of less
ableness? Paul the Apostell says ye lxxvi. souls were given him in the
ship. And shall he now being after his resolucion with Christ hold his
peace. and not be able to open his mouth for them that in all the whole
world, did through his preaching believe to gospel? By these words of Hierome
we do learn, that if the dead Saints whiles they were yet in the earth,
did of a compassion and love, pray for their poor brethren whom they saw
to be in misery,


Phialethes. It is easy to say, that the dead Saints do of a love that they
bear unto us, being yet in the co^bate make intercession for us: but how can
that be proved by the scriptures and word of God, without the which no manner
of doctrine, ought to be received of the faithefull congregation of God? If ye
argue or reason after this sort: The dead Saints do love us, and therefore
they pray for us: for, when they were yet in this life, they prayed diligently
for their brethren, The argument of the p^p^sts beaten upon then own heads.
whom they loved, by and by it may be answered, that they also did weep with
them that did weep, shall we say, that they do now the same in heaven? for
christen and brotherly love does not only pray for the afflicted, but it does
also weep with them that do weep.


Didymus. I am afraid brother Albion, that ye shall be feign to seek an other
argument, for to prove that the dead Saints do pray for us?


PHIL. Again, if they pray how do they pray I beseech you? whether do they
particularly pray and make intercession for them, of whom they be called upon,
A^gu li. de cu^a pro mor his agenda.
and prayed to, or do they generally pray and make intercession for all us?
Saint Augustine does plainly affirm that the souls of the saints that be
in heaven do not know what the living do here in earth. His words are these:
If the souls of the dead were present in the matters or businesses of the
living, or should talk with us, when we se them in our sleep (that if I should
hold my peace of the other) my godly mother would never a night forsake me,
which followed me both by sen and by land, that she might live in my company.
For, God forfend, that she should in the blessedfull life be made more cruel:
in so much that when any thing troubles my heart, she would comfort me her son
being in heaviness, whom she loved entierly, whom she would never see to be
stricken in sadness. But verily the same, which the sacred psalm doothe sound
or set out, is true. Psalm. ^
My father and my mother have forsaken me, but the Lord has taken me up. If
then our parents have forsaken us: how he they present in our affairs, and
carfulness, or in our ears? Now, if our parents be not present, who of the
other dead, do know what we do, or what we suffer? Osaie the Prophet
says: Esa. 63.
Thou art our father. Abraham was ignorant of us, and Israel knew us not. If
these great Patriarchs were ignorant what was done unto the people, that
descended of them, unto whom beleuyng in God, promise was made, that the same
people should come of their stock, how are the dead present for to know and
help the affairs and doings of the living? How shall we say that they have
a good turn or are well provided for, which dyed before the calamities did come,
Note.
which ensued and followed after their death, if after their decesse they have
also a feelynge of those things that do chance in the calamity of man's life:
Or do we peradventure through error speak these things, and judge them to be
quiet whom the troublesome life of the living do unquiet? What is it then,
that god does for a great benefit promise unto that godly king Josias, that he
should die before, lest he should see those calamities, plages, and miseries
which be threatened, should come upon ye place and upon ye people. These are
gods words: Thus says ye Lord god of Israel. 2. Kin. 22. 2 Chr 34.
The words yt thou have heard shall come to pass. But because thine heart did
melt and thou did humble thy self before god, wha^ thou heardest his words
against this place, and against ye inhabita^tes thereof, and hu^blest thy self
before me, and tarest thy clothes, and did weep before me, I have also heard
it, says ye Lord. Behold I will gather thee to thy fathers, and thou shalt be
put in thy grave in peace, and thine eyes shall not se all the evil, which I will
bring upon this place, and upon the inhabitants of the same. He being frayed
with the threatenings of God had wept, and torn his clothes, and therefore, he
was certifyed that he should be taken away by death, and so rest in peace,
that he should not see all those euylles. Ibi ergo sunt spiritus Defunctorum,
vbi non vident quaecunque aguntur aut eueniunt in ista vita hominum, VVher the
spirits of the godly be.
There, therefore are the souls of them that be departed, where they do not
see all those things that are done, or do chance in the life of men. These
are saint Augustines words, who does plainly deny, that the blessed souls of
the dead, do entermedle them selves to know and healpe the affairs of the
living, yea he does plainly affirm, Since that the dead saints know
nothing of all that is done here it is in vain to pray unto them Question
that they be utterly ignorant what is don in the life of men. If this be true
(as that can not be false which is proved by the holy scriptures) truly the
salvation and necessity either of the dead or of the living is in vain
committed to the intercession of them that know nothing thereof. We do believe
in vain, that they do pray unto the Lord for our present necessite, which
know not that we are in any peril or danger.


Didy. And may not they have intelligence and understanding of our affairs,
either by the angels, or by them that go away hence from us, or else by god
himself?


Philalethes. most uncertain: Why should we, It is folishnes to fly from that
which is certain to that which is vncer^a^e.
I pray you, fly from those things that are most sure, most certain, and
infallible, unto that which is doubtful, and not ones mentioned of in all the
whole body of the scriptures. Ye have heard how that this most holy father
saint Augustine does plainly confess, that the dead saints do not know
our estate, or the case that we be in, nor yet be careful over us. Leaving
then, that which is without any ground of the scriptures, let us steadfastly
cleave unto that which is most surely grounded in gods book, wherein we are
taught, that the blessed souls of the elect and chose^ of God, do rest in
peace, being in glory with their head our savior Jesus Christ, who alone is
appointed of god to be our mediator, advocate, and intercessor.


Albion. But what will ye say to Hieromes clerkly sayenges? ye see that he
does plainly hold opinion, that the dead saints do pray for us.


Philalethes. As for Hierome, How Hierome did ouershote himself in this matter.
I do with all due reuerento: acknowledge him to do a most worthy instrument
of God, howbeit in this master he has declared him self, that he was a man.
And verelye I do marvel that being so great a cleark as he was, would buyld
the doctrine of the praisyng of the dead saints for us, upon such weak
arguments: For, who will say that the Saints do now the same in heaven, that
they did in the earth? But Hierome says none other thing, neither does he with
any other arguments, prove yt the saints do pray for us in heaven. Hieromes
vveake arguments.
If (says he) they did pray for us in the earth, how much more shall they do
it now after their crounes, Act. 27.
victories and triumphs? If two hundred. lxxvi. souls were given unto Paul
praiyng: here in the earth, how many mo shall be given unto him praying now in
heaven? I grant that god has done good unto men here in the earth through
the ministry and prayers of his servants, Why god did good unto men here in
the earth by the ministerye and prayers of his servants.
but to what end, I pray you? even to this end that they should believe the
word of god set forth by his true ministers? But the ministers did all with
one doctrine teach us to call upon god only in all ^^re necessities. Now the
doctrine of the prayers of the saints, and of their intercession for us in
heaven does pull us away from god, Hiero in L^c, 14.
and causes us to put some trust, hope and confidence in the creatures. Which
Hierome him self does stronglye impugn, saying: The righteousness of the
righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall remain
upon him. Every manne shall dye through his own syn, and every man shall
live through his own righteousness. John. 8.
The Jews do say in vain* Abraham is our father sith that they have not the
works of Abraham. If we should put our trust in any, let us put our trust in
god. liere 17. Psalm 146.
Cursed be every man, that puts his trust in men, although they be
saints, although they be prophets. We read, Put not your trust in men.
Again: better it is to trust in god, than in princes. Not only in the princes
of the world, but in the princes of the church, which if they be righteous,
they shall deliver their own souls only. These are Hieromes words. Let
us, therefore, hope, in the lord our GOD, and since that we have not one jot
in the Canonical Scriptures of the intercession of the Saints for us in
heaven, nor any example, that they do pray unto the father for us, let us
boldly rejecting this idolatrous invocation of the dead saints, and the
vain and fond doctrine of their intercession for us unto God, call upon our
heavenly father, through his son Jesus Christ, though an angel from heaven
should teach the contrary. I do here let pass that in the book, which this
holy father did write against Vigilantius, there is more furious bitterness
to be found than either modesty or learning, which may be proved by the
censure of Erasmus, The censure of Erasmus upon Hieromes book against
vigilantius.
which is this: lo vigilantium ita conuitiis debacehator Hieronymus, vt
plusculum in eo modestiae eogar desyderare: Vtinam argumentis dunta^at egisset,
and a conuitiis temperasser. That is, Hierome doothe (...) with reuilyng
words rail against Vigilantius, that I am feign to find a lark of modesty
in him, would god he had only soughten with arguments, and had refrained from
reuilynge and opprobrious words. For, take away these railyng words: Caupo
Calagutitanus, Dormitantius, Herculis monstra, Louiathan, and Behemoth, The
taunces of Hierom against vigilantius.
take away his chi^yng, brawling, and scoldyng, take away his subtle
conue^ance in the torrke. Take away his exclamations, translations, tragical
amplifications, his swellyng and braggyng words, and nothing almost shall be
left unto the reader, that has any savor of the prophetical and apostolical
simplicity.


Albion.


Philalethes. As touching the first, out because of saint Andrews dry
bones, VVhythe devil did roa^ ou^e at saint An drevves reli^es.
but because of Christ, whom the holy Apostle Saint Andrew had preached.
And as touching ye miracles, and wonders, that he does speak of, who does not
see, yt thin good man having forgotten him self, did attribute the same unto
ye dead bones of the Saints, which the true servants of god, being alive would
never have suffered to be attributed unto them? Neither ought his examples to in
due us any thing For in receiving or setting out religion, The fact of a
private man in matters of religion proves nothing.
the private fact or deed of men, proves nothing, unless it be manifest,
that it is well done. But that only is well done which is boon by the authority
of the scriptures, and not against the law of God. Now if we should read the
whole Bible over, and call to remembrance all the examples of the true and
faithful servants of God, mentioned of in the scriptures, A poor help in
time is much vvaith.
we shall not find there one only jot or syllable of the gatheryng
translatyng, or honoring of the relikes of the Saints.


DIDYMVS. It seems, that ye do now condemn Constantine, and Archadius, and
those godly bishops, with Helen^ the mother of Constantine the great, whose
examples Hierome does bring forth for the probatio^ of his doctrine.


Philalethes. It follows not, because I do disalow their fact in this point,
that therefore I do utterly condemn them, or lay any sacrilege to their
charge. The holy Apostle does write after this manner of his contreymen the
Jews: Romans 9.
I bear them record that they have a zeal of God, but not according to
knowledge. And I do not doubt, but that they did of a zeal that which they
did, but in the mean while they did minister a great occasion of stumblyng to
them that came after. Whereby it follows that they sinned grievously against
the Lord. 1 Chapter ca 17
The holy scripture doothe say thus of Iosaphat. And the Lord was with
Iosaphat, because that he walked in the first ways of David his father, and
sought not Baalim, but sought the Lord GOD of his father, and walked in his
commandementes, and not after the trade of Israel. Again, 1 Cht 20.
he walked in the way of Asa his father, and departed not there from doing
that, which was right in the sight of God. Howbeit the hye places were not
taken away. For the people had noy yet prepared their hearts unto the god of
their fathers. Who would utterly condemn this holy prince for that error, or
lay any sacrilege to his charge? But who would again allow that which he
did? So we ought not by and by to condemn those godly princis Constantine and
Archadius, Constantine Arc^^dius
with the bishops, much less to lay sacrilege to their charge, whom we
believe to be in blessedfulnes with their head and king our savior Jesus Christ.
Yet in the mean while we may not allow that fact of theyrs, for as much as it
was without any warrant or example of the scriptures. Gedeon, Gedeon.
among the Judges of Israel was coumpted most upright and most godly: and yet
being carried away with to great a zeal toward religion, he sinned most
greuouslye against the Lord his God: For, having gathered together of the
pray of the ennemies, earerynges and other like iewelles of gold, he did make
unto himself an Ephod, Would god al kin^e, and prin^es that in profe^ Christ
vvoulde man this history.
not for to set up a new religion (...) strange worshipping, but for a
memorial of the great victory, that god had given him against his enemies.
At the first it did not seem to be any great offense, but at length by the
reason of it, great Idolatry was committed in the land, as the holy scripture
does testify, saying: And all Israel went a whoring after it in Ophra, which
was the destruction of Gedeon, and his house. if Gedeon had been wise, he
should have asked council of gods word, and not followed his good intent.
If those godly bishops, and emperors that Hierome does speak of, had asked
counsel of the scriptures, and had been ruled by them, they would not have
opened the sepulchers or graves of ye dead, nor yet set forth their bones to be
worshipped. For, unto whom of the Saints either in the new or in the old
Testament was ever this done?


Eutra. If men would have contented them selves with the same rule, that God
has prescribed unto us in his word, and with the laudable examples of the
same such inconveniences would not have growe^ in ye chirch nor yet could such
abominable idolatry have taken place among christen me^, as we se, now to
reign almost in all places.


Ph This shall we find written of Moises: Den. 34. The history of the death
and buryeng of Moses.
So Moses the servant of the lord, died there in the land of Moab, according
to the word of the lord, and he buried him in a valley in the land of Moab,
over against Bethpeor, but no man knows os his sepulcher unto this day. If
the taking up and translating of dead men's bodies had been expedient for the
glory of God, and for the salvation of men, verily the lord would not have
hidden such precious relikes of his well beloved and faithful servant: For,
without all controuersye Moses was the chiefest among all the prophets, of
who^ we do read after this manner: Nume. 12
If there be a prophet of the lord among you, I will be known to him by a
vision, and will speak unto him by dream. My servant Moses is not so who is
faithful in all mine house. Unto him will I speak mouth to mouth, and by
vision, and not in dark words, but he shall see the similitude of the lord.
This place does the holy Apostle aleadge in his epistle to the Hebrews. And
yet for all this, Moises being such a man, is neither translated, nor laid
up in a golden or silver shrine, there is no chapel nor church builded for him,
he is not carried about in processio^ among a sort of superstitious men. There
were some at that time, yt would gladly have done it, and would have spared
no cost at all. Do we not read in the Apochryphes that there was a strife
betwixt the aungelles and the devil about the body of Moses, whereof Jude
makes mention in his Epistle? And doubtless, Iudes p^stle.
this was because that the devil would keep above the ground the body of the
faithful servant of god, and bring it forth unto superstitious men for to be
worshipped* which thing, the good angels perceauing what abominable idolatrye
would have risen thereupon, would in no wise suffer, having a respect unto the
glory of God, and to men's salvation, which next unto gods glory, they do seek
above al things.


Albion. Do we not reed in ye first book of Moses, yt the Israelites, did
enba^^ the body of Joseph and did put it up in a cheste in Egypt. This, I am
sure, is an exaumple of the Canonical scriptures.


Ph^ (...)
^ouching the land of be heste. For, so does Joseph say to his brethren: I am
ready to dye and god will surely visit you, and br^ng you out of this la^d,
unto the land, which h^ swear unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob. And
Joseph took an other of the children of Israel saying, God will surely visit
you, and y^ shall carry my bones hence. Paul beyn^ a faithful expositour of
this fact or deed of Joseph by faith, Hebr ^1
says he, Iosephe, when he died made mention of the departing of the children
of Israel, and gave co^^aundement of his bones. That is, because he doubted
nothing of the word and promise of god therefore did he command his brethern
at their going out of Egypt to carry out his bones into the land of Chanaa^. So
sure was he that the lord would according unto his promises, bring the children
of Israel out of Egipte into the land, that he had promised unto their
forefathers. After Moses, there were none among the prophets more samous (...)
of greatter renoune than Samuel, and H^lias were. Samuel. Helias. (...). 5 2
K^n, 2.
Yet we do not reed that any memorial was appointed or set up for him. For
the holy scripture does plainly speak of his death and buriyng after this
manner: Samuel died and all Israel did gather them selves together, and did
weep for him, and did bury him in his house in ^ama. (...)
As for Helias he was taken up in a sy^e chariot not into a temple made with
hand^s, but into heaven, partly that in that ex^mple we might have a most
infallible testimony of our immortality, and of that most excellent re^a^de,
that GOD has prepared and laid up for his faithful prophets, and partelye
that by this mean all occasion of worshipping this holy prophets body might
be taken away. Some of the anciente writers are of opinion, that the body of
the blessed virgin Marye, Epiphani
was either by the angels carried up into heaven, or else by their ministry,
buried in such a place, as is known unto no man unto this day, because that
god would not have that chosen vessel, the temple of his holy spirit, and the
mother of his only begotten son, to be made anidole of superstitious and
evil disposed persons. The holy scripture does speak thus of Eliseus the
prophet: Elizeus ^. Kin, 13.
And Elizeus died and they buried him. And certain bands of the Moabites came
in to the land that year. And as they were burying a man, behold they saw the
soldiers, therefore they did cast, ye man into the sepulcher of Elizeus, and
when the man was down, and touched the bones of Elizeus, he revived or lived
again, and stood upon his fete. And yet we read not, that after this miracle,
the bones of Elizeus were taken up, and translated, or that there was any
pylgrimage appoyncted unto them, or a church of. S. Elizeus builded and set
up. We read in Ecclesiasticus, or in the book of Jesus the son of Syrach
that after Elizeus death, Eccl. ^8
his body prophesied and that as he did wonders in his life, so in death were
his works merueylous. And that yet for all this, the people repented not, nor
departed from their sins. Why the dead that ^^a. cast in to ^ Elizeus ^^au^
ta^e^ again.
It does appear the^ that this miracle was not done, for to teach the people,
to worship or to give godly honor unto the faithful servants of god, but that
thereby, the auctoritye of Elizeus, whose doctrine in his life they conte^ned,
might be confirmed, and that at this sight they might embrace the same
doctrine, and turn again unto the lord their god, with all speed, and so
escape the destruction that honge over their heads for their stubburnesse
disobedience and rebellion. 1. Kin. ^^.
Under that most holy and godly prince Josias, when ye bones of ye falls
prophets were bre^t, ye sepulcher of ye man of god was not ones touched: and
yet we read not yt there was any pilgrimage used to it. Ob^e. 12.
D^. All these examples, are only examples of ye old Testament: But what
exaumples can ye bring out of the neue?


PHILA. Math. 11. Math 14. Act. ^.
Among them the are borne of women, there arose not a greater (as our savior
Jesus Christ does testifye him self) than John Baptist. But the holy evangelist
S. Matthew writes thus of him: And when John was beheaded, his disciples came,
and took up his body and did bury it. Of Stephen the first martyr of Christ,
Luke in the Acts of the Apostelles does write on this manner: And certain men
fearing god, carried Stephen among them to be buried, and made great
lamentation for him. If the taking up or translating of the bodies of the dead
Saints had been profitable unto the church of Christ, neither the old
ancient church that was before him, nor yet the primitive church that was next
after him, should have wanted it or been without such honoring of the
faithful servants of god if god would have them to be honored after the same
sort. Therefore let no man marvel that I will in no wise allow the doings
of kings, and princes, and of bishops, which be contrary to the scriptures
and word of god, and that I do utterly reiecte the arguments of Hierome, The
aucto^^ of ^od (...)
as both weak and repugnant unto gods holy and sacred book, the warraunt
and auctoritye of which, ought to be preferred before the authority of angels,
much more, then, before the authority of corruptible and mortal men. I would
wyshe, that leaving the bodies of the dead Saints in the place appointed of
God for them, there to rest in peace, and in hope of their glorious rising
again, we should have in due reverence their true reliks which are, (...).
the exaumple of their steadfast faith and belief, their godly life and
conversation, and their sound doctrine that they have left behynd them for our
instruction, and the edifiyng of the true church of god.


Albion. I marvel, that ye do so stoutly defend Vigilantius. Does not this
holy father and doctor of the holy catholic church, I pray you, lay to his
charge, that he did raise up again, and revive the heresy of the Caines,
which as a Scorpion, did venime the whole body of the church? It appears by
the book which Tertullian did write of heresies, Te^^. li. ha^^.
where he speaks of the errors of the Ophites, and Chaldeis, which were
Cains, or Cainites, that ye same heresy did deny the resurrection of the
flesh. Hierom contra Vigilantium. Hierome does that Vigilan^ with many
heresies, but how timely ye shall after wards know.
And therefore Hierome says: Mortuum suspicaris, and ideirco blasphemas. Lege
euangelium, Deus Abraham, Deus Isaac, and Deus Jacob, non est deus mortuorum,
sed viuentium. Thou do (says, he) suspecte that he is dead, and therefore
do thou blaspheme. Read the gospel: The God of Abraham, the god of Isaac,
and the god of Jacob. He is not the GOD of the dead, but of the living.
Again, does he not charge him with the heresy of the Eunomia^s, his words are
these: Rides de reliquis martyrum, and cum autore huius haereseos Eunomio,
ecclesus Christi calumniam struis, nec tali societate terreris, vt cadem contra
nos loquaris, qux ille contra Ecclesiam loquitur? Omnes, enim, sectatores cius
Basilicas Apostolorum and martyrum non ingrediuntur, vt scilicet mortuum
adorent Eunomium, cuius libros maioris autoritatis arbitrantur, quam euangelia.

That is to say, dooest thou make a laughing stock of the relykes of the
martyrs, and with the auctoure of this heresy Cunomius, bring a calumny or
sclaunder upon the churches of CHRIST, neither art thou frayed with such
felowshyppe, that thou dareste speak the same against us, that he speaks
against the Church? For, all his dysciples or sectatoures and folowers, do
not enter into the churches of the martyrs and Apostelles, that so they may
worship Eunomius being dead, whose books they do judge to gee of
greater auctority than the Gospelles. If these things be true, small credyte,


PHILALETHES. And I wonder and meruaylle that this holy Father durst say any
such thing to Vigilantius charge. How falsely Hierom d^i lay those heresies
to Vigilantius charge.
For as touching the first, Vigilantius never denied the resurrection or
rysynge again of the flesh, nor yet the Salvation of the same, but did
only resyste the superstitious worshyppynge of it in the dead creatures.
Does he I pray you, deny the resurrection of the flesh that does forbid the
superstitious worshipping of it? Sai^^ August^^* (...) heresies of the C^ (...)
Saint Augustine in his book of heresies, says, that the Caines were smitten
with such blyndenesse, that they worshipped that wicked man Cain, and Hierome
is not ashamed to call them Cainites, which will not worship men, nor the
bones of men.

This foul name ought rather to be given unto them that teach and maintain
the idolatrous woorshypping of dead men. Eunomius and (...).
Now as touching the second. Eunomius was a great portion of Arrius, and
therefore he did deny the divinity or godheade of Christ, whereof it came to
pass, that he did utterly despise the testimonies of the Apostles and martyrs,
which they hare unto our savior Jesus Christ: yea he contemned also the bodies
of the saints, and the miracles that virtue of Christ did work about them
for a testimony and proof of his godhead. He had written books against Christ,
The d^^^rence is (...)
and did attribute the miracles of the holy Apostles unto the power of Satan.
But Vigilantius did neither deny the godhead or Christ, ^ilantius and ^uno ^^s.
nor yet did in any wise contemn the bodies of the saints, nor ye miracles
that were wrought and done about them, as Eunomius, according to his damnable
heresy, had done, but he did teach to worship one God, who^ the martyrs did
preach, and whereunto the miracles that were wrought did lead us: how beit he
did catholikely forbid, that the bones of the dead should in no wise be
worshipped: and yet being of so an upright and sound judgment, he is of
Hierome most shamefully condemned of heresy, though he could not be ignorant,
that there was great difference betwixt the faith and religion of Vigilantius,
and the abominable heresy of Eunomius. Where ^^e o^e ^^d ^^ara^ the ^tick that
^e (...) against ^i^i^antius.



Eutrapelus, This had Hierom learned of his Rhetoricians, which do teach that
we must with odious names and titles urge them, whom we can not overcome with
just arguments.


Philalethes All men I trust, do well s^t* what weak arguments Hierome did
bring, and how that he did wrongfully burden Vigilantius with the heresy of the
Cainites and of Eunomius, since yt he did both confess Christ his divinity and
godhead, and also the resurrection or risyng again of the flesh. Therefore,
fearing nothing such odions titles and names, that the enemies of the truth
be wont to defame us with all, let us attribute more to the insallible
testimonies of the scriptures, then to the weak reasons and arguments either
of Hierome, or of any other besides, though he were an angel that came down
from heaven, sith that in the mattiers of religyon, we ought to believe or
credit no man, because that he is either learned or holy, but because that he
does strongly prove by the undoubted and infallible tertes and authorities of
the scriptures the thing that he doothe take in hand to teach. Nothing is
here spok^ in the dispraise of Hierome.
I have not spoken this, of any affection, or in the dispraise of that holy
father, but in the defense of the truth, and for the edifying or profit of
the faithful congregation. I gladdely always acknowledge and reverence in him
the excellent gifts of GOD, but in the mean while we do also confess,
that he did as man write and set forth many things, which we can not with
a safe conscience receive or allow.


Albion. Cypri li^e pi. prima.
Thus, I am sure, does the holy martyr S. Cypria^, write in his Epi. 10
Cornelius: Memores nostri inuice^ simus co^corders atque vnanimes vtrobique pro
nobis semp oremus, pressuras and angustias mutua charitate releuemus, and si
quis hinc nostrum prior diuinae dignationis celeritate praecesserit, perseueret
apud Deum nostra dilectio, pro fratribus and sorotibus nostris apud
misericordiam patris non cesset oration, That is to say: Let us be myndefull
one of an other, and being of one heart and mind both where, let us always
pray for each other, and with mutual charity and love, releue our
afflictions and troubles or anguysshes: And if any of us do by the divine
calling of God, or by the celeritie or quickness of his divine dignation,
will, or pleasure, depart hence before, ^ette our love persevere or continue
with God, and our prayer in no wise cease unto the mercy of GOD, for our
brethren and sisters, whiles they are here. These words of the holy martyr do
plainlye testify, that the dead Saints do pray for us, Cyp^^ de lapsis.
as long as we be here in this vale of miserye.


Phila. None can better make answer to that, which ye have aleaged than
Cyprian him self. For, in his sermon de lapsis, he says plainly thus: God
only can have mercy. He only can give pardon, to the sins, that are
committed against him, which did bear our sins, which did sorrow for us, who^
god did deliver for our sins. Man can not be greater than god, nor yet remit
or forgive yt by his own indulge^ce or pardon, which with a heinous fault is
committed against the lord, lest this also be imputed unto him for a greater
crime or offered, if he should be ignorant, that it has been said before: Huc.
^ Math. ^ Mat. 8. luke 9
Cursed be every man that puts no trust in man. The lord ought to be
prayed to, the lord ought: by our satisfaction to be pleased, which says,
that he will deny him, of whom he is denied, and which alone has received
all judgment of the father. And to those does he add by and by: Although the
works of the rightuous, do avail much before the judge, yet the same
which is promised by man's promise, is not by and by granted by the divine
majesty of GOD. Noah. Gene. 6. Daniell Danie. 6.
What was more rightuous then Noah, who when the earth was replenished with
sin, was sound alone to be righteous. What was stronger than Daniell, to
suffer martyrdom, through the constancye and steadfastness of his faith, more
fortunate through the favor of God, who as often as he did combat, he did
overcome, and when he did overcome, he did ouerlyue? what was more prompt and
ready in works than Job, Job.
stronger in tentation, more pacient in sorrow, more lowly and humble in fear,
truer in faith, and yet, if they had prayed, God said, he would not have
granted them their petition, for, when Ezechiell prayed for the sins of the
people. When a land, says he, synneth against me by committyng a trespass,
then will I stretche out mine hand upon it, Eze. 14.
and will break the staff of the bread thereof, and will send famine upon it,
and I will destroy man and beast forth of it. Though these three men, Noah,
Daniel, and Job, were among them: they should deliver but their own souls
by their own righteousness: they should save neither sons nor daughters, but
they alone should be saved. And so al yt is asked, is not in the prejudice and
power of him that asks but in the will of him that gives, neither does
man's sentence or judgment challenge or claim here any thing unto it self,
unless the divine censure does grant it. And a little after: They can do
nothing against the Gospel which for the gospel are made martirs. Let no man,
well beloved brethern, defame the dignity of martirs, let no man destroy
their glories and crounes. The strength of the incorruptible faith remains
safe, neither can he say or do any thing against Christ, whose whole hope,
faith and glory, A short exposition of Cyprians words.
is altogether in Christ.


Eutrape. If the Lord only can give pardon of sins: if the servant can not
forgive that which is committed against ye master: if he be accursed ye
puts his trust in man: if ye Lord, and not a creature ought to be prayed
unto: if that which is asked, does not slande in the will of the asker, but in
the will and pleausre of the geuer: if they that are most righteous shall only
deliver them selves, and not their sons and daughters: if the martyrs say or
do nothing against Christ: how much (I beseech you) can they gather out of
the authorite of Cyprian for to confirm their doctrine of their idolatrous
invocation of the saints. If all things be well considered, this seems
rather to have escaped him tha^ otherwise, This is much like unto the comm^ne
saying ^od have mercy on his soul. Au. de pastoribus. cap 8. Psalm. 121.
when he did thus of a fervent love write to his friend and brother in Christ
Cornelius. The fervent love I say, that he bare unto him, did by a certain
violence extorte this of him.


PHILALE. Ye shall also hear what Saint Augustine in his book De Pastoribus
says: There be also (says he) good mountains. I have lyfted up mine eyes
unto the Mountains, from whence help shall come unto me. My help (says he)
is from the LORD, which made heaven and earth. Do not think that thou do
any injury unto ye holy mountains, when thou say: My help is not in the
mountains, but my healpe is from the Lord, which made heaven and earth.
The mountains their selves do cry out the same unto thee. He was a mou^tain
yt did cry out: I hear that there be scismes or divisions among you, so that
every one of you does say: I am Paul's, I am Apollos, 1. Corin. ^
I am Cephas, I am Christ's. List up thine eyes unto that mountain, hear what
he says, and remain in him. Hear also what folowethe. Whether was Paul
crucified for you? Therefore when thou haste lifted up thine eyes unto the
mountains from whence help comes unto thee, that is, unto the authors of
the scriptures, harken unto him, that with all his marow, that with all his
bones does cry out. Lord, who is like unto the? that thou being sure or
certified, may without any injury of the mountains say: My help comes
from the lord which has made heaven and earth. It shall be so far of, that
then the mountains will be angrye with thee, that then they will both love and
favor thee ye more. If we put our trust in the faith^^l servants of god then
will (...) be in^^ with (...). Reave. 12.
If you do put thy hope in the^, then will they be sorry. The angel which did
show many heavenly wonderful things unto man, was worshipped of man but ye
angel reuoking him unto the lord, as he was lyftynge up his eyes unto a
mountain, said: Do it not, worship him. For, I am thy fellow servant, and of
thy brethren. Au. con^^^ faustru^ M^^i^n. Answer. (...) in my book (...) ^^lle^
the oue^th^ (...) the (...) of vv^^kes.
if thou put thy confidence in them, they are sorry.


Alb. Yet this holy father writing^, Cotia Faustum, Manichaeum does say, that
the christian people did celebrate and keep together the memories of martirs
both to stir them up to ^^^ation or following of them, and that they might
have fellowship with their merits, and be helped by their prayers.


PHILA. As concerning me^^^s ^e have sufficiently spoken of them in our
communication and talk, that we have had already touching the overthrow of the
Justification of works, and of the vain and fond doctrine of the Merits of
men, and therefore we will come to this, where he says: And that we may be
helped by their prayers.


Didy. There (me think) Augustine doothe plainly affirm the invocation or
calling upon, of the dead saints. For why should he else say, that the chirsten
people did keep the me^ories or remembra^ces of the martyrs, that they might
be helped by their prayers.


Philaleth^* But how does this agree with that, which he writes both in
this place, and also in the two and twentieth book De ciuitate Dei, and tenth
chapter. He says plainly in the place before alleged, that they did not set
up altars, nor yet offered up sacrifices unto the martyrs. And in the book De
ciuitate Dei, which we spoke of eue^ now, he writes thus: The Gentiles have
builded temples, and set by altars, and ordained priests, and offered sacrifices
unto their gods. But we do not buyld up temples unto our martirs, as unto gods,
but remembrances as unto dead men, whose spirits and souls do live with God.
Neither do we there set up aultars, in the which we should offer sacrifices
unto martires, but we do offer sacrifices unto ye only God of the martirs, and
ours, at the which sacrifice, as men of God, which have ouercomed the world
with their confession, they are in their place, and in their order named. And
yet they be not called upon, or prayed unto, of the priest, that offreth the
sacrifice. For, Prayers are ^^e sacrifi^es of the ele^^ and ^^osen of god.
he is the priest of god, and not theirs. Now this is most evident and plain,
ye prayers are the sacrifices of the saints, I mean of the elect and chosen
people of God, being sanctified in the blood of his son Jesus Christ: we may
conclude then, eue^ upon the words of S. Augustine, that prayers ought to be
offered unto God only, and not unto the dead saints, that is, that God only,
and not the dead saints, ought of all the godly to be called upon. Hereunto
does that belong and pertain, which he speaks also in that place, saying
Sancti vel homines vel angeli id sibi tribu^ nolunt, quod vni deo deberi
no^unt. Holy men or holy aungelles, will not have the same to be attributed
unto them, which they know to be due unto God only. We may gather by this,
that they will none of our prayers, nor of our invocation. The proud and
diuelishe spirits do usurp that which does perteine unto God only.
Therefore, as Daniell would ask nothing of any man, Danie. ^.
but of God only: so all the godly will in their prayers call upon none other,
but on the true living God thorough his son Jesus Christ our lord, and of him
only ask all things that they have need of. Now as touching his opinion,
whereby he doothe think and suppose, that the souls of the righteous do pray
for us in heaven, for as much as it is only grounded upon conjectures or
gessyng, and not upon the infallible word of God, nor upon any strong
arguments or reasons taken out of the same, we may without any peril of our
salvation, reject or refuse it, cleaving unto that which we have alleged
before out of his book De cura pro mortuis agenda, where he gou^deth himself
altogether upon the holy scriptures, affirmyng that the blessed souls departed
be paste all solicitude and care for the living.


Albion. Now sith that the sayings of the fathers will not help, ^h ect 15
e^. 48
I will come to the plain scriptures. These are Jacobs words. The angel
which has delivered me from all evil, bless the children, and let my name be
called upon them, and the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac. In this
autoritye of the scriptures, they note two special things. First how that
Jacob does confess, that he was delivered by the angel, and that this
aungel does bless. Secondly how that his name and the name of his fathers
should be called upon those children, which is as much, as if he should have
said: They shall call upon my name, and upon the name of my forefathers.
^ach^. 1.
Herunto do they add this place of Zacharye. And the angel of the Lord
answered and said: O Lord of hosts, how long will thou be unmerciful to
Jerusalem, and to the cities of Judah, with whom thou have ben displeased now
these three score and ten years. Hereby do we plainly learn, say they, that
the angels do care for our miseries, and pray for us. They be also kepers
and guides of me^, yea they be appointed to wait upon them. For thus we read
in Exodus: Exodus ^3.
Behold, says the lord, I send mine angel before thee to keep thee in thy way,
and to bring thee to ye place which I have prepared. And in the psalms: Psalm
91.
for, he shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways.
They shall bear thee in their hands, that thou hurt not thy foot against a
stone. Dani. 10.
The angels be also called presidents of realms, because that unto them whole
contreis be committed.


Phil. First and foremost, as touching those things that be generally objected
or brought against us of the angels, Lactanti insti. 2. li. ca 17.
Neither has God need of any name, since that the is alone, nor the angels,
since they be immortal, will suffer themselves to be called gods, whose one
and only office and duetye is, to be at the commandment and beck of GOD.
For, we say that the world is governed of god, as a province is by a ruler,
whose apparitours, and officers no man will call his fellows in the government
of the province. And yet they may do many things besides the commandment of
the ruler, through his ignorance which is an humayne infirmitye. But the
ruler and governor of the whole world, who knows all things, and from whose
eyes nothing is hidden, has alone with his son, power over all things,
neither is there any thing in the angels but a necessity to obey. Therefore,
they will have no honor to be attributed unto them, whose honor is in god. But
they which are revolted and fallen away from the ministerye and service of
god, do go about to challenge unto them selves, the name of god, and the
worshipping of the gods. Saint Augustine, Au. lib. 10 de ciuitate dei. ca. 12.
does in all things agree with Lactantius. What miracles soever (says this
holy father) be so divinely wrought and done, either by angels or by some other
mean that they do commend the religion and worshipping of the only god, in whom
only the blessedful life is: we must believe that they are truly done of them or
by them which do love us according to the truth and godliness, God him self
working in them. And (when the angels do hear us, god him self does hear in
them, as in his true temple not made with hands. Ibi. ca. 16.
And in an other place, if therefore any angels will have sacrifices to be offered
unto themselves, they that will have the sacrifice to be offered not unto them
selves, but unto god the creator of all things, whom they do serve, are to be
preferred before them. For, hereby do they show how syncerely they love us,
when by the sacrifice they will assubiectize us, not unto them selves, but unto
him, by the contemplation of who^, they are blessed, and seek that we should
come unto him, from whom they never went away. Although this had been
sufficient for to answer all the objections, that ca^ be made of the angels,
yet will I for to make the matter more plain, add these few words, that is to
say, how that the same is many times attributed unto angels, as unto ye
farther cause, which in deed does properly perteyn to god only, but is
attributed unto ye angels, as to ministers, instruments and means.


Di. I do not well understand what your meaning is. Exodus 23. How the name of
god (...) in h^^ ^^^ed.



Philalethes. I shall make you anon to understand it. In Exodus, the lord
does with exprsse words speak thus of his angel. My name (says he) is in
him, that is, I will give him mine autoritye, and whatsoever he shall do, he
shall do it in my name, he shall do it by my virtue and power. So does holy
Stephen speak also: And when forty years were expired, Actu. 7.
there appeared to him, in the wilderness of Mount Syna, an angel of the
lord. Exo, 3.
Then, by and by, does he add: And the voice of the lord came unto him,
saying: I am the god of thy fathers, the god of Abraham, the god of Isaac, and
the GOD of Jacob. Lo, he does expresselye call him GOD whom he had
already called an aungel, because that he understood, that the angel did
all which he did in the name of God, and at his commandment.


EVTRAPELVS. Since that this angel does call him self God, I do
stedfastelye beeleue that he was Christ, The angel of the g^^ c^unsaile, the
ange^^ of the testament. Augu. l^ que. ^^ ex od^ 2. c. 3.
the mediator, who is the eternal God, and who in the scriptures is called
Angelus magni consilii. and angelus Testamenti, that is to say: the angel of
great counsel, and the angel of the Testamente.


Philalethes. Ye do not believe amysse: For, Saint Augustine, in his questions
upon Exodus, does write of it on this manner: The Lord cried unto him out of
the bushe: The lord in the angel, or that lord and ye angel, which is
called the angel of great counsel* Tertull^^ contra ^^xeam.
and so Christ is understood, whereunto may be added the sayings of
Tertullian in his book contra Praxeam. It is the son (says he) who at the
beginning did condemn that most proud tower, dashyng out and destroying
the tongues punnishyng the whole world, with violence of waters, raynynge fire
and brymstone upon Sodom and Gomorre, being GOD of God. For, he did always
come down to speak with men from Adam unto the Patriarchs and prophets in
vision, in dream. etc. Since then that this angel of the testament, which is
Christ, was promised unto Abraham: Israel could no better express the faith
of his mind, than with these words: The angel which has delivered me from
all evil, bless these children. For, he understood the angel of great
counsel, even the Lord Jesus, who alone is the blessyng, salvation,
righteousness, and sanctification of his people.


Albion. But what say ye to that which I alleged out of Zachary? For, there
he doothe with express words testify, that the angel prayed unto God for
the delyueraunce of the people: if the angels do pray for us, The place of the
first chapter of zachary.
why should not the blessed souls departed, pray also for us?


Phil. What if by the same angel we should understand our savior Jesus Christ,
who as mediator prayed for the salvation of his Church, which was then
troubled, when all the countries about them, Hieron in zacharia.
were at rest? Hierome him self writing upon this place, doothe by the angel
of the Lord, who stood among ye myrre trees, and who upon the occasion of the
answer which they had made, whom the lord had sent throughoute all the whole
world, began so ernestly to pray for Jerusalem, and the cities of Judah,
understand the angel of great counsayl. Again, let us by way of disputation
grant, that the angels do pray or are careful for us. Shall ye be able to
prove by it, that we ought therefore to call upon them, and displacyng Christ,
the only mediator bewixt god and men, to make them our mediators,
advocates and intercessors, or that the blessed souls departed do make
intercession for us, unto our heavenly father? Ye have learned before out of
Saint Augustine, that the holy angels will in no wise suffer that any
sacrifice should be offered unto them, The holy angels vvil have no
sacrifices to be offered unto them, ergo they vvil not be prayed unto.
but will have all sacrifices to be offered unto him only, whose servant they
are. Now it is most plain, that the prayers of the faithful congregation,
are called sacrifices, the angels then, who do only seek the glory of him,
whom they do serve, will in no wise suffer yt ye faithful congregation,
should ma^e any prayers unto them. Moreover what should the carefulnes or
prayers of the aungelles profit us, except we be first reconciled unto god.
Exo. 33.
The lord said unto Moises: Depart, go up from hence, thou and the people,
(which thou have brought up out of the la^d of Egypt) into the land, which I
promised unto your forefathers: and I will send mine aungel before thee. For,
I will not go up with thee, because thou art a stifnecked people, lest I
consume thee in the way. Here the lord promised unto Moises and unto the
people his an^el, but hear what follows straight ways after. And when the
people heard these evil tydinges, they sorowed, and no man did put on his best
raymentes. The scriptures do call the help and assistaunce of the angels,
evil tidings as long as god is angry with us, and not yet reconciled.
Therefore, Moses does labor, as much as in him lies, yea it is all his study
and care, that god may be reconciled unto his people.

Which thing, he goes not about to obtain by desiring the aungelles to
pray for him and the people, but by pouring out his whole heart before God.
Now they that are reconciled unto God, do understand, that they are through
Christ reconciled to him. Therefore, they do whollye depend upon God only,
in him only do they rejoice, in him only have they their hole affiance and
trust, they have no need of the intercession of angels, but do offer unto
God only, their troubled spirit, their contrite and humbled heart. Which
pleases the angels excedingly well, Christ him self saying in his gosspel,
that the angels do rejoice at the conversion of sinners. Let us therefore
endeavor our selves, that we may turn a right unto the Lord, and be reconciled
^^^o him, which thing must be done not by the intercession of angels, but by
the grace only and intercession of our savior Jesus Christ. Are not all angels
ministering spirits, Hebr 1.
sent forth to minister for their sakes, that shall be heirs of salvation? Why
do we not then rather worship, and call upon the lord of angels and of men,
than upon men's fellow servants? Reave. 22.
When John had fallen down at the feet of the angel, this do oath he hear
of the angel: Se thou do it not for I am thy fellow servant, and of thy
brethren the prophets, and of them that keep the words of this book*
worship God.


Albion Ye have not yet answered to the words of Jacob, where he says: And
let my name, and the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac be called upon them.
My faithful guydes did say unto me, that this is as much as if he should have
said: And they shall call upon my name, and upon the name of my forfathers.
Again: They did allege, that when Moses prayed for the people, he did speak
these words: Exo. 34,
Remember, O Lord, thy servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, unto whom thou did
dest swear by thine own self. Lo (say they) Moses prayenge for the people,
does pray by the name of the holy patriarchs that were dead. 4. Kin. 1^
These ar also the words of the Lord. I will defend this City, and save it,
for mine own sake, and for David my servants sake. Is it not most plain by
this, that for the prayers and merits of the Saints, sinners are spared,
wholle nations and cities saved and preserved?


PHILALE. Your blind guydes through ignorance of the holy tongue gather of a
thing misvnderstanded, Why Jacob willed that his name should be called upon
Ephraim and Manasses and vvh^t his meaning was Esa 4.
a folishe and fond conclusion, or rather a false and erroneous doctrine.
Jacob, otherwise called Israel did by adoption receive Iosephes children in to
the number of his own children, that they might have equal or even portion
of the land of behest with them. And therefore (says Jacob) they shall bear
my name, and not the name of my son Joseph: they shall be called Jacobs or
Isreal's children and not Joseph's. This shall we find written in Esaias the
prophet: Then shall seven wives take hold of one man, and say, we will lay
all our meat, and clothing together in commune: tantum nomen tuum inuoce tur
super nos, only let thy name be called upon us, that is, only let us be
called thy wives, and bear thy name, and so take away from us our
opprobiousnes and shame. By as good reason may we by this text of Esaias, prove
that women ought to call upon the names of their husbands, when they be
dead, as they can by the text that they do allege prove that Ephraim and
Manasses Joseph's children ought to have called upon the name of Jacob, Danic. 9.
Abraham and Isaac. Dominc (says Daniel) respice ciuitatem, super quam
inuocatu^ est nomen tuum: lord look upon the city, that thy name is called
upon, that is which is called by thy name, I mean the city of god. In like
manner do they declare their blind ignorance, when they do bring in for the
mayntenance of their idolatrous invocation of the dead Saints, How the place
brought out of the 32. chap. of Exodus ought to be ^nderstanded.
these words of Moses: remember, O Lord, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
asthough this were like unto that which they have continually in their mouths,
saying: Saint Abraham, ora pro nobis, saint Abraham pray for us, or obtain
by thy prayers and merits, yt god vouchesafe to forgive us our sins. Esa.
63.
It is easy to see in the prophet Esaias how little they did trust in the
merits and intercessions of the forefathers. For there the hole church cries
out, saying: Where is thy zeal and thy strength, ye multitude of thy mercies
and of thy co^passions? they are restrained from me. Doubtless thou art our
father. For, Abraham knows us not, neither is Israel acquainted with us, but
thou Lord, art our father and redemer, and thy name is everlasting.

Therefore, Moses did not call upon them, whom he know right well to be
ignorant of the estate that they were in but upon the true living God our
heavenly father, puttyng him in remembrance of his promises. For, with express
words he says: Remember thy servants, unto whom thou have sworn by thy
self, and unto whom thou have said: he says therefore, remember our fathers
because ye God had with an oath promised unto the fathers, that he would be the
god of their sede: And of this promise does he put god in remembrance, now at
this present. And hereunto seems that to pertain, which the Lord himself
does speak in Exodus. The Lord god of your fathers, Exodus 3.
the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, has sent me unto
you. This is my name forever, and my memorial from generation to generation.
Therefore, God would be so called and prayed unto, that is, he would be put in
remembrance of his promises, not for his own, but for our own sake. But now
that we have our savior Jesus Christ, in whose blood, both the promises and
covenant be established and sealed up, in whose name should we offer up our
prayers unto God, but in his only?


Albion, What say ye to the last sentence? ye have not yet answered to it.


Philalethes. It may be answered two manner ways. First, The exposit^^ of the
place that (...) ale a^^ out of. 4. K^^. 19. 2 Samuel 7.
we must consider the promise of God, that he made unto David, touching ye
seed that should come of him, and the stablenesse and eternity of his
kyngedome. The words of the promise are these: Whenne thy days be fulfilled,
thou shalt sleep with thy fathers, and I will let up thy sede after thee,
which shall proceed out of thy body, and will establishe his kingdom. etc.
These things are expounded by many, of king Solomon, and of his reign or
kyngdomme, but no man will deny, but that the same may be vnder^^anded of
the sede of David, or of his posterity or other kings yt o^ follow after him.
For, this is most manifest and plain, that for this promise sake, many kings,
and the whole realm were spared. 1. Kin. 15.
In the history of Abiah, this promise was renewed. For so we read there.
And the heart of Abiah was not perfect with the Lord his God, as the heart of
David his father. But for David's sake, the Lord his god, did give him a light
in Jerusalem, and did set up his son after him, and established Jerusalem.
Now, this is as much, as if he had said: Therefore, God did not destroy Abiah,
his kingdom, and the city of Jerusalem, because that God had promised, that
he would not take away his mercy from the house of David, nor suffer that he
should want sede or posterity, or that his kingdom should utterly decay. It is
then evident and plain, that Abiah was spared, for the promise sake, that was
made unto David: 4. Kin. 19
therefore it must follow necessarily that Ezechias was also spared for this
promise sake, and that these sentences or sayenges: I will defend this city
for mine own sake: and for David my servants sake: and I will defend this
city for mine own sake, and for mine own promise sake, which I made unto David,
be equipollent or of one force. Secondly thus may the answer be made: that God
did spare both yt city and realm for his own sake, and for his Christ's sake.
For, the Prophets are wont by a figure called Antonomasia, to call our savior
Jesus Christ, David. Antonomasia.
And the promise, whereof we spoke before, was in very deed completed or
fulfilled in Christ. Thus does the Lord speak in Ezechiell: I will, says
he, raise up a shepeheard over them, Eze 34.
and he shall feed them, even my servant David, he shall feed them, and he
shall be their shepherd. And I the Lord will be their God, and my servant David
shall be the prince among them, I the Lord have spoken it. Hie. 23.
The like place shall ye find in Jeremy. But none of all the expositors did
expound these places otherwise than of Christ, and the Gospel of John doothe
manifestely declare, that these Scriptures ought to be expounded of Christ.
Therefore the Lord spared Jerusalem, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, whom
it behooved to be manifested in that city, and his name and doctrine, from
thens to be published throughout all the whole world. Therefore, Daniell the
prophet prayeng unto the Lord for the repairing of the city and of the
temple, Danie. 9.
makes his prayer after this sort: Hear, O our God, the prayer of thy
servant, make thy face to shine over the sanctuary, which is destroyed, for
the lord sake. As if he should say: Our manners, our life and conversation
did deserve other wise, but yet remember the lord thy Christ, whom thou have
promised unto us. Esa 2.
For by Esaie and Micheas he had made this promise: It shall be in the last
days, that the mountain of the house of the lord, shall be prepared in the
top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above all the hills, and all
nations shall slow unto it. And many people shall go and say: Come, and let
us come up to the mountain of the lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and
he will teach us his wais, and we will walk in his paths, for the law
shall go forth of Sion, and the word of the lord; from Jerusalem. Whenne
we do then by David understand our savior Jesus Christ, who in Esaie is of
GOD called his servant, we bring no new exposition, nor yet wraste the
Scriptures, but set forth the plain sense and meaning of the holy ghost,
to the great commendation of the glory of our Savior Jesus Christ.


Albion. Job. ^.
These words shall ye find written in Job: Call now, if any will answer
thee, and turn thee to sum of the Saints. Here are we expressly
commanded in our troubles and afflictions to turn our selves to the saints.


Didymus. I thought that there had been no place in all the whole scriptures so
plain for the praying unto the Saints as the sames is. Answer. The fondnes
of the adversaries in aleaging of the scriptures.



Philalethes. And I thought that ye ennemies of the truth, had never ben so
foolish as to have aleaged that place for the maintenance and confirmation of
their doctrine. For there they shoot altogether besides the cusshion, not
marking to what end Eliphas does speak those words. Ye shall therefore
understand that Job did affirm, that plagues and calamities did not always
happen for sin: which thing he proves by his exaumple. The true sense of
the place, that they do aleadge out of the.5. of Job
For the Lord, says he, has not brought me into this calamity because of my
sins, but according to his good will and pleasure. This will not his
adversaries admit, and specially Eliphas, who goes about to prove, that no
calamity happens to any man, but only for his sins, and that no man is
punished but only for his fault, prouyng besides that all men are sinners,
and that no man is clean in the sight of God, although few do acknowledge the
same (geuyng in the mean while a privy nippe unto Job, although he did not
acknowledge himself to be a sinner, and this was because he understood not
Jobs meaning) and therefore they were taken away and cut of, in their ignorance.
That this might be made more plain and manifest, he speaks unto Job after
this manner: Call any man, that is name me any man. As if he should say: Bring me
any man, that has not by his wickedness and heinous sins deserved the
calamity that is com upon him: turn thee to any of them that be called
Saints, meaning, that it was impossible, for to find any in all the whole
world, which did not deserve by his own sins to have trouble, adversity,
and affliction.


Albion. Hiero. 15.
What will ye say to these words of Hieremie? Though Moses and Samuel stood
before me, yet have I no heart to this people. Why, say my ge^tylmen, should
Hieremie speak so of the dead, except be know that they made intercession
for the living?


Philalethes. it is most lykely then that none at all did make intercession
for them, The (...) m^^^t of the papists (...) and beaten (...) on ^^eir
heads.
sith that Moses did pass al men, in humanity, gentilnesse and mercy. The
meaning of the prophet, then, was this: that God was so offended with the
people, that he would in no wise spare them though Moses and Samuel, whose
prayers he was wont to hear above all other, should make intercession for
them. The like in a manner have we in the prophet Ezechiell, Ez^ ^4
where the lord speaks on this manner: If Noah, Daniel, and Job were in the
city, as truly as I live, they shall deliver neither sons ne daughters, but
save their own souls in their rightousnesse. As if he should say: Though
Noah, Daniell, and Job, were then alive again, and made intercession for the
people, they should not deliver their own sons and daughters, but should
save only their onwe lives, in they: righteousness, my wrath, and
indignation, is so kyndeled against that stiffenecked people. And so the before
alleged place of Hieremye ought to be understood. For the words are as
much, as if he should say: Though Moses and Samuel were now alive and
stood before me, making intercession for this people, as they were wont to
do, yet would I not for their sake, withdraw my plagues from this wicked
and froward generation, I would not hear them, nor give ears unto their
prayers, but would in my furye destroy this rebellious and styffenecked
people.

Read and mark diligentely the circumstaunces of both places, and ye shall
find, that this is the true sense and meaning of them.


ALBION. Psalm 3^.
Now will I come to the holy Psalmist. These are David's words, I am sure: I
said, I will confess my sin unto the LORD, and so thou forgauest the
wickedness of my sin. Pro hac orabit ad te omnis sanctus, in tempore
oportuno. For this shall every Saint make his prayer unto thee, in a time,
whenne thou may be found. Again, Psalm. 150.
doothe not he write thus: Laudate Dominum in sanctis eius, Praise god in his
saints?


Philalethes. How the place aleaged out o the (...) p^a^ ought ^o be taken
For, when David had reasoned of the remission of sins, and had appointed him
self an example unto other, and had said: I have confessed my sin unto the
lord, and thou have forgeuen the wickedness of my sin: he did add by and
by: Many holy and godly men, shall be provoked by this example of mine to call
after the same sort upon god for the pardonne and forgiveness of their sins,
in a time when thou may be found. Cypr an co^tra d^metrianum.
For Cyprian writing against Demetrianus, did say very godly: Quando isthinc
excessum fuerit, nullus iam locus poenitentiae est, nullus satisfactionis
effectus. Hic vita aut amittitur aut tenetur. Hic saluti aetern^ cultu dei, and
fructu fidei prouidetur.

That is to say: After that we be departed hence, there is no place of
repentance, no effect of satisfaction. Here the life is either loss, or
holden: here by the worshipping of god, and the fruit of faith, everlasting
salvation is provided for. Whereby we do learn, that as long as we be in this
life, we may through faith in our Savior Jesus Christ, pray unto God for
the remission of our sins, and that so long, God may be found, but after
that we be ones gone, neither repentance nor yet praying unto God for the
remission of our sins can profit us nothing.


Didymus


Philalethes. And in this do also the champions of the Romish church declare
their wylfull blyndenesse. The faithful living here on the earth are Rom 1.
Act 9.
Paul does write to the saints yt were at Rome. These be also Ananias words
in the Acts of Apostels: Lord, I have heard by many of this man, how much
evil he has done to thy Saints at Jerusalem, and here he has power of the
high priests to bind all those, that call upon thy name. The time would not
suffice to rehearse all places of the Scriptures, where the faithful, living
yet here in the earth be called Saints. But ye shall hear what Saint Augustine
says concerning this matter. Augu. ii. Psalm. 86.
He writing upon the psalms, does aleadge these words of the Apostell: And
some of you were such, but ye ar washed, but ye are sanctified. Si ergo eos
sanctificatos dicit, dicat vnusquisque fidelium, Sanctus sum. Non est ista
superbia elati, sed confessio non ingrati. Si enim dixeris te sa^ctum esse ex
te, superbus ex. Rursus fidelis in Christo, and membrum Christi, si te non
dixeris, esse sanctum ingratus es. That is, if he calls them sacntified,
let every one of the faithful say: I am a Sayncte. This is not the pride of
him, that is pufte up, but the confession of him, that is not ingrate or
unthankful.

For, if thou say, that thou art a Sayncte of thy self, thou art a proud
manne. Again, being faithful in CHRIST, The pope will scarcely alovve ^his
doctrine for he is wont to canonize his saints an hundred years after they
be dead.
and a member of Christ, if thou say, that thou art not a Sayncte, thou
art ingrate and unthankful. Say unto thy God: I am a Saint, because thou
haste sanctified me, because I have received it, not because I had it:
because thou have given it, not because I have deserved it. For, on the other
side thou beginnest to do injury unto thy Lord IESV CHRIST. For, if al
Christians and faithful, and all they that be baptized in him, have put him
on, or are apparailed with him as the Apostell does say: As many as are
baptized in CHRIST, are apparayled with CHRIST. If they be made members of
his body, and say, that they are not saints, they do injury unto the
head him self, whose members are not hollye. Now see, where thou art, and
take dignitye of thy head. Let therefore, every Christian say: yea let the
whole body of Christ cry out, whenever it suffers afflictions, diverse
tentations, and innumerable sclaunders: Preserve my soul, for I am a saint.
Those words of saint Augustine are so plain, that they need no exposition at
al.


Eutrapelus. Some there be which to show a difference betwixt the Saints,
that are already in glory, with their head our savior Jesus Christ, and the
Saints that be yet alive here on the earth, do in the Latin tongue call the
one Diuos, (these are they that be already in heaven) and the other Sanctos,
which are they, that be yet compassed about with the body of sin.


Albion. Well, be it so as ye say. But wherefore does the Psalmist write on
this manner: Laudate dominum in sanctis eius, that is to say, Praise God in his
Saints? The be^st li^^s of the papists in aleaging the scriptures.



Philalethes. Who would not laughe at the beastlynesse of these blind
bussardes? for if they will have this saying: Praise the Lord in his saynctes
to be like unto this: Call upon the sa^nctes of the Lord: then by as good
reason we may say: That the trumpette, the viole, and the harp. etc. ought to
be called upon. For, it follows immediately after: Praise him in the sound
of the trumpette, in the violle, and in the harp. But the Catholic verity
and truth, does both read and understand the words of the prophet after
this sort. Praise the Lord in his sanctuary, or in his hoynesse, that is:
Praise him that dwells in heaven. Psalm. 134.
For in an other place he says: Lift up your hands unto the sanctuary, and
praise the lord. Which is as much as if he should have said: Lift up your
hands unto heaven, and praise the Lord, and give him thanks for his
benefittes.

Whereunto the adds with what instruments they were wont to stir up ye hertes
of the people to sing praises, and to be thankful unto the Lord. But now
under Christ, such ceremonies of the old law are clean abolyshed. Ob e. 20
a^^. 3,



Didy. I remember that ones this place of Baruch was alleged for the
mayntenaunce of the invocation of the Saints: O Lord god almyghtie, the God
of Israel, hear now the prayers of the dead Israelites, and of their
children which have sinned before the, and have not hearkened unto the voice of
thee, their God, therefore these plagues hang upon us.


Albion. If ye had not prevented me, Of what manner dead Baruch does speak



Philalethes. Ye must mark brother Albion, that Baruch in his prayer, speaks
not of them that were dead with the bodyly death, but of the wicked, which
living unto the world were dead unto God, which figurative manner of
speaking, is oftentimes used in the scriptures. For, in the gospel our
savior Jesus Christ doothe say: Math. 8.
Suffer the dead to burye their dead. As if he should say: Let the
worldlings that be dead to God and good works burye them that be departed
out of this life, (for that is an office most mete for them) but do the
things that be for the living. The like phrase or manner of speaking does the
holy apostle use, 1. Tim. 5.
when he says: A wydowe living in delitiousnesse, though she be alive, yet she
is dead: It is also oftentimes seen, that in the third person we be wont to
speak of our selves. Baruch besides, by such kind of words doothe set
forth the miserable estate of the childerne of Israel, which were even as
dead men here in the world, because of their captivity and thraldom and
straicte bondage or slavery that they were in, which was unto them as a grave
or pytte that the dead be buried in. Weyghe and consider well the
circumstances of the place, and ye shall find it to be so.


Didymus. 2. Match. 15
And what will ye say to this place of the second book of the Machabees: where
we read that Judas Machabeus did see in a dream Onias the priest and
Hieremie the prophet praying for the people, whereof he was so sure, that he
told his dream to the people to encourage them withal, against the terroure
of their enemies.


PHILALETHES. himself unto the prayer of Onias and Hieremie. which thing he
does note but in his great danger and peril, he flees unto the true living
God only, saying: O Lord, thou that did send thine angel in the time of
Ezechias king of Judah, who in the host of Sennacherib slew an hundredth
fourscore and five thousand. Send new also thy good angel before us, O Lord
of heavens, The prayer of Judas Machabaeus.
for a fear and dread unto them. And let them be disco^fited by ye strength of
thine arm, which come against thine holy people to blaspheme. Howebeit no
man could justly blame me, if I should utterly reiecte the place that is
alleged out of Baruch, and out of the second book of the Machabees, sith
that they be no Canonical books but plain Apocryphes, as in our talk of
purgatory it has been sufficientely proved, Read the 3 dialogue of my
huntyng of purgatory unto death.
and specially in the beginning of the third communication, so that I shall
have no need to repete the thing any more, sith that all our talk touching
that matter is set forth in print.


Eutrapelus. Me think it were a fond thing, to ground any doctrine upon a
dream, It is no vvisd^m to ^round any doctrine upon a dream.
and specially upon such a dream as the like is not ones mentioned of, in all
the whole body of the Canonical scriptures. Judas Machabeus did think also in
this his dream, that Hieremye did deliver unto him a golden sword, wherewith
he should wound the adversaries. As he then received a golden sword of
Hieremie, so did Onias and Hieremie pray for the people: but he received only
the sword in a dream: it follows then that the prayers of these holy men
were also dreamish.


Philalet. Add thereto these words of saint Augustine, Augu cont a gauden^^
(...) li. 2. cap 1^.
Non debemus quicquid in sc^ipturis etiam dei testimonio laudatos homines
fecisse legimus, consentiendo approbare, sed consyderando discernere,
adhibentes iuditium non sanc nostrae authoritatis, sed scripturarum diuinarum,
That is to say we ought not to approve by consentyng, what^oeuer we read to
have been done by men, though they be praised by the testimony of the
scriptures, but with consyderyng to discern it, bringing the judgment not of
our own authority, but of the holy scriptures. By these words we do learn
yt we are not bound to follow, whatsoever we find in the Scriptures to have been
don by ye men of God, but first we must try by the word of God, whether it be
well done or not.


Albion. Sed and omnes sancti, Origenes super cant^ca de precibus sanctorum in
coelo.
qui de hac vita decesserunt, habentes adhuc charitatem erga eos, qui in hoc
mundo sunt, si dicant^r curam gerere salutis eorum, and iuuare eos precibus
sanis atque interuentu suo apud Deum. Non erit inconueniens. Scriptum nanque
est in Machabeorum libris ita: Hic est Hieremias, propheta Dei, qui semper orat
pro populo. That is to say: But it shall not be inconueniente, if it be
said, that all the Saints, which be departed out of this life, having yet a
love and charity toward them that be in the world, be carefulle over their
salvation, and healpe them with their prayers, and intercession unto God. For
in the book of the Machabees it is thus written. This is Hieremie the Prophet
of GOD, that prays always for the people. These words seem unto me very
plain.


Philalethes Now those, that we have at this present under the name and title
of Origene, are not called books but homelies, where as in the mean while he
wrote none but those.ii. which Hierom did translate. But put the case, that
they be Origenes, shall we set more by the authority of man, than by the
authority of the Canonical scriptures? Lu. 7. Math. 15. Obie. 2^,



Albion It is written in Luke, that the Centurion did send the elders of the
people unto Christ, beseching him that he would come and heal his servant? And
why? because that he thought not himself worthy to come unto him. Did not the
the Apostles likewise make earneste suit unto Christ, for the woman of
Chanance? why should we not likewise thynking our selves unworthy by reason
our sins, to come unto God, pray unto the dead Saints that be already in
heaven with their head, our savior Jesus Christ, to make intercession for us?


Philalethes. Answer. vvhiles we live in this world we are bound to pray
one for another
We have already declared, that whiles we yet live in this world, we may pray
one for an other: yea, we are bound by gods word so for to do. But that we
should do the like, after we be ones deceassed or departed out of this life,
and have fulfiled our course: we have not one only jot in all the whole body
of ye scriptures that testifies any such thing unto us,


Albion. Revel. 5
Ye shall not need to make any repetition of that, which has been said
already. For I do well bear in mind the whole matter. Therefore I will com to
the Apocalipse or revelation of John There, we have these words: And when he
had taken the book, the four beasts, and the four and twenty elders, fell
down before the lamb, having every one harpes, and golden viols full of
odours, which are the prayers of the Saints. And in an other place of the
same book he says. Reave 8.
And an other angel came and stood before the altar, having a golden censer,
and many odoures were given unto him, that he should offer of the prayers of
the Saints upon the golden altar, which is before the throne. These places
do seem unto me to prove manifestly the invocation of the dead Saints.


Phila. Answer. Two ^yndes of prayers.
Ye must understand, that there be.ii. kinds of prayers, the one is invocation
or petition, and the other is, geuyng of thanks, laud and praise. This
petition if need were might be proved by the iiii. chapter of the epistle to
the Philippians we call that invocation, when we desire some good thing to be
given unto us, or some evil to be taken away from us. Geuyng of thanks does
contain the praising and lauding or magnifieng of the name of god for his
exceading great benefyts, which we receive daily and hourly at his hands. It
is manifest by that which does immediately follow, that the Apostle does speak
of this last, and not of the first. These be the words. And they sounge a
new song, Reuela 5.
saying: Thou act worthy to take the book, and to open ye seals thereof because
thou wast killed, and haste redeemed us to God, by thy blood out of every
kynred, and tongue, and people, and nation, and haste made us unto our God
kings and prestes, and we shall reign on ye earth. Therefore, what does this
make for ye intercession of the blessed spirits or souls, that the saints do
sing praises unto god in heaven? In the other place, none other thing is meant,
Reuela. 8
but that the angel did ioygne his lauds and praises which he gave unto God
with the himnes and songs of the elders. Saint Augustine, August.
expoundyng this place writes thus: Alius angelus, ipse est Jesus Christus
habens thuribulum aureu^, quod est corpus sanctum. Ipse enim dominus, factus
est thuribulum, ex quo deus odorem suanitatis accepit and propitius factus est
mundo, quia obtulit seipsum modore^ suauitatis. Et accepit angelus thuribulu^
and impleuit illud ex igne altatis. Accepit Jesus corpus, id est ecclesiam, and
perficie^do patris voluntatem, illam igne spiritus impleuit sancti, That is to
say: The other angel is Jesus Christ, having a golden censer, which is an
holy body. For the LORD him self was made a censer, out of the which (GOD
received a sweet odor, and was made merciful unto the world: For, he offered
him self a sacrifice of sweet smell. And the angel did take the censer, and
did fill it with the fire of the aultare. JESUS took a body, that is to
say the church, and did fill it, with the fire of the holy Ghost.


DYDIMVS. R^ff^ l^^ Eccle. historiae.
I perceive brother Albion, that ye must seek for help some other where, than
in the scriptures of the old and new testament, since that your invocation of
the dead Saints is already driven out of the Apocalypse or revelation of John.


Albi. I have yet sum what in store. These words we do read of Theodosius
the emperor, in the eleventh book of the ecclesiastical history, which one
Ruffinus did write: Ciren nibat cum sacerdotibus and pop^lo omnia orationum
loca, ante martyrum and apostolorum thecis ^acebat cilitio prostratus, and
auxilia sibi, fida sanctorum intercessione poscebat, That is, he did with the
priests and the people go about all the places of prayers, and did lie
prostrate in suckeclothe before the shrines of the martirs and Apostles, and
did require help for himself, by the faithful intercession of the Saints.
What will ye say now to this? No man can deny, but that this is a most
ancient history. Answer. Antiqu^^^^ without truth proves nothing.



Eutrapelus. I have many times heard our brother Philalethes say, that
antiquity without a truth, or without a good foundation or ground in gods
book, proves nothing. Again, when certain arguments of Hierom were
discussed, it was by sufficient testimonies and authority of the scriptures
proved, that the examples of such kings and bishops, which are brought
forth without any authority of the scriptures, do in such weighty matters
prove nothing. Ye do not read in all the book of God, that any of the godly
and faithful kings did ever lie prostrate before the shrines of the
righteous, and did crave for help by the faithful intercession of the dead.
For, they did all cry out, My help is from the Lord, which made both heaven
and the earth. The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil, the Lord shall keep
thy soul. The Lord shall keep thy going out, and thy going in, from
hensefoorth world without end. The exposition of Ruffinus vvor^^^.



Philalethes. Besides Ruffinus words do appear to be such, that they ought
rather to be understood of the intercession of the saints that were in the
earth For, it seems that the prince went about all the oratories or prayeng
places where the congregation of the saints was assembled, and that he did
desire the faithful to pray most earnestly unto god, that he would vouchsafe
to give him the victory, and to preserve his empire to the commodity profit
and utility of many men. The like in a manner have we in the said Ruffinus.
li. 10. ca. 8 where we have these words: In the mean while Constantinus
trusting in godliness, did even in their own country subdue ye Sarmatia^s ye
Goths, and other Barbarous contreys and nations, those excepted, which either
by frendeship, or by yelding of them selves did preuente peace. And the more
deuoutely and humbly he did submit him self unto god, the more God did
subdue all things under him. He did also send letters to Antonie the first
inhabitaunt of the wilderness, as unto one of the prophets, desiring him that
he would pray unto the lord for him and for his children. So he did not
only study to be made commendable unto god by his own merits and by the
devotion of his mother, but also by the intercession of the Saints. Mark how he
did here take the intercession of the saints: neither do I see any cause why
we may not expound that place touching Theodosius, What the vision of
Theodosius does signify
of the intercession of the saints that were alive here on the earth. And where
as they say that the Apostles John and Phillip did appear unto Theodosius the
emperor, what shall they gather by it: But that he was by such a vision
certified of the victory, as Judas Machabaeus was before by ye appearing of
Onias and Hieremy. And therefore as Judas Machabaeus did not call upon Onias
and Hieremie, when he should ioygne in battle with his enemies, but upon the
mighty Lord of hosts: In like manner Theodosius, when he saw his soldiers
turn their backs, he prayed not unto the Apostelles, but unto god, saying: O
almighty god, The prayer of Theodosius.
thou know, that for to revenge the just quarrel of thy son Jesus Christ I
have taken in hand these wars, if it be otherwise, pour thy vengeance upon
me. But if trusting in thee, and upon a just cause I am come hither, retch
forth thy right hand unto thine, lest the gentiles do say: where is now their
god? Whereunto the same does well agree, which Saint Augustine in his fyfte
book of the city of god and.26. chapter doothe write of this most holy
prince, how that he did put his whole confidence and trust in God as in his
most strong shield and bucklar, and strong bulwark against his ennemies.


Didymus.


Philalethes. Hiere. 44
The like were they wont to lay to Hieremies charge, using these stout words
against him: The word that thou haste spoken to us in the name of the Lord,
we will not here it of thee: but we will do whatsoever thing goes out of our
own mouth, as to burn incense unto the queen of heaven, and to pour out
drink offringes unto her, as we have done, both we and our fathers, our
kings and our princes in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem,
for, then had we plenty of vitailes, and were well, and self none ill: but
sens we lest of, to burn incense to the queen of heaven, and to pour out
drink offerynges unto her, we have had scarceness of all things, and have been consumed by the sword and famyne. Do not I pray you the worshippers of
dead Saints make the like complaints, praisyng the felicity of the old
world (as they do term it) when al kind of idolatry did reign? The common
complaint of idolaters.
But this is ye commune complaint of idolaters. For both Demetrianus and the
commune sort of the heathen, did lay to the christians charge, that it was
long of them that such cruel wars did arise among them, that their catell
dyed of the moreyn, that they were plagued with pestilence and famyne, and that
they had unseasonable weathers, yea that all manner of plages that the world was
plagued withal, ought to be impuded unto them. Cypr cont^^ demetrianum.
But Cyprian doothe so answer to al these vain objections, that his answer
may serve us for to stop the mouths of the vain Papists, which now do
make so great a brag of the felicity of their idolatrous time. But leaving
men's auctorities, I will show, how the lord him self does answer or rather
handel this objection of the adversaries in his prophet Osee. For, Osee. 1.
he says, your mother has played the harlot: for she said: I will go after my
lovers, that give me my bread, and my water, my wol, and my star, mine oil,
and my drink. And she did not know, that I gave her corn, and wine and oil
and multiplied her silver and gold, which they bestowed upon Baal. Therefore,
will I return, and take away my corn in the time thereof, and my wine in the sea
son thereof, and will recover my wol, and my flax lent, to cover her shame with
all, and I will cause all her myrthe to cease: And I will also destroy her
vynes, God will not have us to attribute our felicit^ unto creatures 1. Tim 6.
and her fygge trees, whereof she said, these are my rewards, that my lovers
have given me. Hereby do we learn how much God is dyspleased, if we do
attribute unto false gods or unto creatures, the felicitye, wealth, and
prosperity of the world: For as god alone does give us all things abundantly
to enjoy them, so will he be acknowleged to be the only geuer of good things.
He calls ye same fornication, which they do call devotion. God has ioygned
our souls unto him with the bond of matrimonye, to the end that we should
depend of him only, as the spouse or wife ought to depend of her husband.
Therefore, ^pirituall fornication.
we do commit fornication, when we do attribute the gifts, which have been
given us of our husband, unto I cannot tell what lovers, I mean, unto Idols
or dead creatures. It is god, that gives unto us all things necessary, meat,
drink and clothe, and moderate pleasures, not that we should bestow them upon
Idols, but that we should enjoy and have the fruition of them, and so give
thanks unto the lord and geuer of the^. But ye idolaters say these are my
rewards, which my lovers do give unto me. The idola^ers of our time.
The idolaters of our time, say, these benefits have we received of the
liberality of god, but through the merits of the saints. Yea, many forgetting
the lord al together do attribute al their felicity unto the dead saints Unto
both ye lord does say, I will return and take away my corn etc. He does
threaten them with the barennesse of the ground and with famyne, it is so far
of, that they should prove any thing by their objection. Therefore we ought
rather to believe the prophet speaking of the true felicity on this manner.
Blessed is the man that fears the lord, he shall have great pleasure in his
commandments, wealth and richesse shall be in his house, and his righteousness
remains for ever. The eyes of all things do look up, and trust in thee,
thou geuest them meat in due season, thou do open thy hand and fillest
with thy blessing every living thing. The lord is nerre unto them that call
upon him, that call upon him in truth. He shall do the will of them that fear
him, and he shall hear their cry and save them: The lord does preserve them
that love him, The fountains of true felici^ye.
and shall destroy all the ungodly. These are the fountaynes of true
felicitye, of the which if any man does drink he will attribute all his whole
felicitye unto god and not unto creatures.


Albi. Now, I have hitherto ben sufficiently instructed that the dead Saints
ought not to be prayed unto and that we ought not to use them as mediators,
but that we ought to content our selves with the mediation of Christ, who by
the word of god, is appointed to be the only mediator betwixt god and men.
Whether the dead ^mi^ ^ught to be wor hip^ed.
But will ye say that they ought not to be worshipped. My gentill men, have
told me, that they ought in any wise to be worshipped. Else great injury should
be done unto the friends of god.


Philalethes. This is the greatest honor, that we can give unto the true and
faithful servants of god, if we do give all honor, praise and laud unto
him, whom they did faithfully preach, whose doctrine they did ernestly
publish, and seal with their blood. We may well, as other holy and godly men
have don before us, assign and allow three kinds or sorts of honoring of the
Saints. Three sorts of honoring of the saints.
The first, is giving of thanks. For, we ought to give god thanks, that he
did vouchesafe to show exaumples of his mercy, and that he did signify by
them that he will save men, and yt therefore he did give sundry gifts unto
his church, and specially teachers. Math. 25.
These exceadynge great gifts ought to be amplified, and the holy men of
God also to be praised, that they did use faithfully the gifts of God, as
we see that our savior Jesus Christ did praise those, that had faithfully
employed and bestowed the talentes that were lent them. Their doctrine whereby
they did commend unto us the woorshyppyng and invocation of one God only,
ought to be urged and with diligente earnestness to be set forth. We ought
with all thankfulness to judge well of such worthy vessels of God, to
commend them, and to defend their good name and estimation against the
ungodly. The second is the instruction of our faith, ii.
as when we see that the denial of Peter was forgeuen him, and the adultery
and murder that David committed, was also pardonned him, and the blasphemy,
persecutions, and slaughter of the saints was not imputed unto Paul, and the
covetousness, frauds and usury of Matthew put out of remembrance: we are
wonderfully erected and confirmed, and do more and more believe that the grace
of God does far pass all sins. iii.
Thereof does spring the third kind of honoring, which is the imitation or
following of the Saints, first of their faith, and afterward of all their
other virtues, which every man ought, according to his vocation and calling,
for to follow.


Eutrapelus. Ye put me now in remembrance of a thing, which I have read in
a book of Erasmus which is called Enchiridion. Enchiridio^ ^rasmi.
Thou do (says he) honor the Saints, thou art glad to touch their
relikes: but thou do contemn the best thing, that they have left that is,
the example of pure and clean life. The preposterous honoring of the dead.
There is no worshipping more acceptable unto Marye, than if thou do follow
her humilitye and lowliness. There is no religion more propre and acceptable
unto the saints, than if thou do labor to express their virtue. Will thou
please both Poter and Paul? follow the faith of the one and the charity of
the other, The true honoring of the Saints.
and thou shall do more then if thou should run ten times to Rome.


PHILALETH. We have manyfeste textes of the scriptures whereby we are able to
prove ye no godly honor ought to be given unto the saints Act. 10.
For Cornelius falling at Peter's fete, would have honored him, not as a God, but
as he had learned of the angel as a minister of God. But Peter did take him
up, and said: Arise, for I my self am a man. And that which Peter did
rebuke in Cornelius, the same did the angel afterward reprove in John the
Evangelist. Apo. 22.
This great Apostle being already well stryken in years knew right well that
no godly honor ought to be given unto creatures, but unto god only, yet would
he have worshipped the angel, for the excellency of his ministry, but he
was put back of the angel. Farthermore when they of Lystra did bring forth
crounes and sacrifices, Act. 14.
that is, externe and visible gifts or presents, which they were appointed, to
have offered unto Paul and Barnabas. As soon as the apostles Barnabas and Paul
saw it, they rent their clothes as at a manifest blasphemy, and ran among
the people, cryeng, and saying: O men, The words of the Apostle to the
people of Lystra.
why do ye these things? We are even men, subject to the like passions
that ye be. etc. If they did this, whenne they were yet compassed about with
the synnefull body of the flesh: is it to be thought that being now in
heaven, where they have fruition of Gods glory, they would have such godly
honor to be given unto them? When they were yet alive and subject to all
manner of infirmities that we be subject unto, they could in no wise abide,
that GOD should be robbed of his glory: And now that they be delivered
from all manner of infirmities, and are already in glory with their head our
savior Jesus Christ, would they commytte such trayterouse sacrilege? These
things being well considered, it shall be easy to see, that all which they
do prattle of their Lattia, Dulia, The m^les wh ch (...) before ^h^ eyes of
the ^m^le and ignorant.
and Hyperdulia, are nothing else but stinkyng mystes. In the which the
wayfaring men are seduced and deceived, and fall into the hands of
murderers and robbers, which as they do sacrilegeously rob GOD of his
glory, so they do with their poisoned doctrine of this idolatrous
woorshyppynge of the Saynctes, murder the souls of all them that being
blinded with their misty sophistications, do fall in to their hands.


Albion. John 12 Math. 25.
What will ye then say to these arguments: whom God does honor, them ought
me^ for to honor; but god does honor the Saints, therefore, the saints ought
to be honored of men. Again: what soever (says Christ) ye do to one of these
littell ones, ye do it unto me, what honor soever then we do give unto the
Saints, God will impute it to be done unto him.


Philalethes. How god does (...) his sain^^s.
Therefore, if ye should thus make up your argument: Whom god does honor,
them ought men also to honor But god honors his saints, that is, he does
croune them with immortal glory and life everlasting. Ergo, the saints must
be honored of men, that is, they must receive of men immortalitye,
eternal glory and everlasting life: Who would not deryde and laughe to
skorne this manner of reasonynge? Again: if by this word, to honor, they
will understand, The absurdity of the papists arguments.
to bough the knee, and to make supplication, they shall make a very foolysshe
and fond argument: except they show first, that GOD did boughe his knee,
and did make supplication unto the Saints. But if by the honor they do
understand, the praise of their virtues, and the imitation or following of
their godly life, and sincere faith, the matter goes well: In the mean
while, GOD honourethe the Saints after his manner and fashion, geuynge them
eternal glory, and everlasting life, and we honor them after ours, by
praising the gifts of God in them, and by following their virtues, and
steadfast faith. After the same manner do they deprauate the words of our
Savior Jesus Christ, where he says: Math. 25.
What soever ye do to one of these litell ones ye do it unto me. For, there
our savior does speak of the beneficence and liberality, and of the offices
and duties of life, yt the saints do exercise one toward an other, whiles they
be yet in this present life, and these corrupters of the scriptures, do
wraste it, for to make it to serve for their idolatrous woorshyppyng of the
dead Saints. Well ^a^d^ Dydi^^^.



Didymus. Me thinks, that it is against al reason, that the blessed virgin
Mary the mother of our savior Jesus Christ, should not be worshipped, sith that
she is the queen of heaven


Eutrape. Belyke, neyghbor Didymus, The^^^^ of the (...) of ^^da.
ye will bring in again, the old error of the idolatrous women of Judah, which
worshipped the moon, and making of the good creature of God, an ydole, did
call it the queen of heaven: After the same manner as Epiphanius does testify,
(...).
certain women in Arabia did worship the virgin Mary, making unto her fine
cakes, and calling her the queen of heaven: which thing as that same most
ancient writer does declare was done by the subtle and crafty procurement of
Satan the devil, that so the idolatry that was committed about the moon,
might be translated and turned upon that most holy vessel of god the mother
of our savior Jesus Christ, and that so for the hatrede that he bare unto
Christ, and unto his members, he might dishonor her, and make her an
abominable ydole, and a stumblynge block unto all christendom, where as God
has appointed her for to be unto us (next unto her son Jesus Christ) a most
perfect example of all godliness and v^rtue, and of a most pure and sincere
faith in his promises touching his Messiah and anointed, that should for the
salvation of the world, be borne of her. This am I sure of, that no where in
all the scriptures, The virgin Mary is no where in all the scriptures called
the queen of heaven.
the virgin Marie is called the queen of heaven. Therefore, I do meruail at
the ungodly fondness of them that will have her to be so called, making most
sacrilegeous and blasphemous hymns unto her, which they do violently intrude
or thrust into the church with fire and swerd.


Philalethes. If ye will not content your self with that, which has been
said already, ye shall hear Epiphanius very words: In his third book ^ontra
Antidicomarianitas, and cultores virginis Mariae, writes on this manner: He
(speaking of Christ) as being the potter him self, and having the power of
the thing, did form and fashion himself of the virgin Mary, as of the earth
who came down from heaven, and being both God and the word, did put on
flesh of the vyrgin Marye, but not that the virgin should be worshipped, or
that he would make her a God, or that we should offer in her name. For, he
neither did suffer her to give or minister baptism, nor to bless the
Apostels, neither did he command her to bear rule in the earth, but will have
us to know, that he alone is the sanctification, and that she is made worthy
of the kyngedome of heaven. whence does this rolling serpence or dragon come
unto us? Whence are these lewd, and wicked counsels renewed? Let mary be in
honor, let the Father, the son, and the holy ghost be worshipped. let no man worship Marye. And by and by after: Let no man eat of the error which
is for the holy Marye. Although it be a goodly free, yet it is not for meat
to be eaten of: Although, Mary he most beautiful, holy, and honorable, yet
she is not appoyncted to be worshipped. Let therefore the error of the
deceived cease. For, neither is Marye a God, neither has she her body from
heaven, but of the conception of man and woman, howbeit, disposed according
to the promise as the conception and birth of Isaac was. And let no man offer
in her name. For, he that does it, does cast away his soul. Again: let no
man rail against her nor blasphem ye holy virgin, god forfende. For, she was
not coupled unto man, neither after the birth, nor before the birth of the
Savior. And in the same book, contra Colyridianos, Coly^^^ (...) the^ (...)
offe^e (...) the (...) Mar. ^ Aug^^^ ra^^^^ ^e (...) ^mo.
these are also his words: In deed the virgin was a virgin and honorable,
but not given unto us for to be worshipped, but rather she does worship him,
that took his substance of her, that is to say, of her flesh. Augustine in his
book De vera religione, Let not the worshippyng of dead men, be a religion
unto us: for, if they have lived godly, they be not so taken, as though they
do seek for such honors, but they will have him to be worshypped of us, by
whose illumination they rejoice, yt we should be partakers of their merit: By
their merit he does understand ye croune of immortality, which they do obtein
through faith in the merits of Christ) Therefore they must be honored through
imitation and following, and not be worshipped through religion. Again in the
same book: we ought, says he, to believe, that the most bountefull angels,
and the most excellent ministers of god, will have us to worship one god with
them, by whose contemplation they are blessed. Neither do we build temples
unto them: For, they will not so behonoured of us, because that they know,
that when we are godly, we are the temples of the most hye god. ^. Cor. 6. 2
Cori. 6.
Therefore, it is well and rightly written, that man was forbidden of the angel
to worship him but one god, under whom he was his fellow servant. In the
third book against the.ii. Epistels of the Pelagians unto Bonifacius, he
writes also on this manner: All the saints that have been either from the old
Abell unto John Baptist, or from the Apostels unto this time, and afterward
unto thend of the world, are to be praised in God and not in them selves:
For, this is the voice of them that were before. My soul shall be praised in
the Lord. And this is the voice of the latter: Thoroughe the grace of God I am
that I am. And this is the voice both of the first and of the last: He that
glories, Cyrillus.
let him glory in the Lord. Cyrillus in his sixth book contra lulianum,
has plainly these words: we neither say, that the holy martyrs are gods,
neither are we wont to worship them: but rather we do honor them with lauds
and praises, because that they did stoutly fight for the truth, that they
might keep the sincerity of faith. Hereby do we learn, that in the primitive
church the honor that was given unto martyrs, was to praise, commend, and set
forth their constancy and stedfastnes, their strong faith and patience in
adversity and persequution, that so God who had for the profit of his
church, endued them with such excellent virtues might be glorified, and the
rest exhorted, following their exaumple, to fight manfully in the quarrel of
the truth, and courageously to shede their blood for the sealynge up of the
same. Chrysostom.
Likewise Chrysostom in the xlv. homily upon Matthew, writing against the^
their yt would seem to honor the martirs with their substance, by making unto
them gorgeous tumbes, and by buildyng up in the honor of them costely
oratories or houses of prayers, does say these words: Neither do the martirs
rejoice, when they are honored, with the same money, for the which the poor
do weep. What is that virtue of righteousness, to reward the dead, and to
spoil the living? The same author doothe plainly teach in an other place,
that the true honor of the Saints, is to follow their faith and other
heavenly virtues. But what need we the authority of men, Math. 4. l. 11.4.
sithe that we have so plain scriptures? Thou shalt woorshyp the lord thy
God, and him only shall thou serve, says our savior Jesus Christ, whereupon I
may make this argument: Who soever is neither our Lord, nor our God, to him
ought we in no wise to give godly honor, nor yet to woorshyp him: But neither
the angels nor the dead Saints are our Lords and gods, but are ministers of
our Lord god, and under him our fellow servants: To them therefore ought we in
no wise to give godly honor, nor yet to worship them. Neither do we honor
and worship Christ, Christ is ^ot vvor^hipped be cause he is ^an, but be cause
he is ^^ue and ^aturall and Obie. 29
because that he is holy and righteous: or because that he is well-beloved of god
but because that he is true and natural God, of one substance with the father
and the holy ghost.


Albion. They say that they do honor and worship god as well as ye do: and
that they do not honor and worship the Saints or angels as gods, but as
the trends of god. Again, they do not worship the gods of the gentiles which
were either devils or wicked men.


Philalethes.


Eutrapelus. I do now remember a thing, which I have read in saint Augustine,
where he does dispute, why the Romans, worthy history.
sith that they did worship the gods of all nations, could never abide to
worship the LORD God of Israel. And he does aleadge the reasonne, which
Socrates does bring in also, that in relygion it is required that every God
be worshipped according to his own will, Socrates sayng touching the
worshipping of god
and not according to the will and pleasure of the worshippers. But false gods
as filthye fornicatours do require no such thing of their worshippers, that
they should be worshipped alone, Since then that the true living god, the god
of Israel will be worshipped alone, it did come to pass that the Romans
would in no wise receive and allow his religion. For, they could not abide,
that for one only gods sake, all the other gods should be rejected and put
down.


Albion. Of images.
did say that ye do wonderfully hinder the devotion of the people, Why the
p^^istes will ^aue ima^es in their ^hurches.
in this that ye will have neither the image of Christ, nor of his mother the
virgin Marye, nor of the holy saints to stand in the churches nor in the
places of prayer. For, first and foremost, they be the books of ye lay people,
where by the simple and ignorant do learn many goodly things, which
without them, they could not learn. When ye take them away, then (say
my gentill men) ye take away the books of the lay people,and so cause them
still to remain in blindness and ignorance. Secondelye, they are goodly
means to stir up the hearts of the people to devotion. And ye know that the
more means we have to stir up our hearts and minds to devotion, ye better it
is. And therefore to put down the image of Christ, the image of ye vyrgin Mary,
and to put down the images of ye saints is to less or rather to put down
the means yt our forefathers have appointed and ordained for to stir up the
hearts and minds of the simple and ignorant people unto devotion.


Phila. I will be the shorter in this matter, because that a godly learned man
and faithful brother of ours, has set forth three godly and learned
homelies, where in this argument to so learnedly handeled, and all things
perteininge unto it, so profoundely discussed, that it will be in a manner thought
to be but labor lost, to meddell any more in this matter.


Albion I pray you brother Philalethes, to tell me, who it is, that has done
it.


Philale. Hark in your ear.


Albion. I know him very well. We have to sewe of such men in this realm. The
lord god shall reward him, for this his good travail and labor. But in the
mean while, let us hear, what ye are able to say to this, that they do
bring for the maintenance of their images.


PHILALETHES. damascene gardiners chief refuge.
book de orthodoxa fide, and.17. chapter, and also Gregorye the great, in
his Register or book of Epistels. 10. part, and fowerth Epistell, but how
well and agreablye to the Scriptures, let all the godly judge. First these are
the words of the holy prophet Abakuk: what profitteth the image? ^ba. 2.
For the maker thereof has made it an image, and a teacher of lies. Whereby it
follows, that images are the books of lies, and that they comme of him, who
is a liar from the beginning, and the father of lies. Now well then, are
the simple and ignoraunte, for whom our Savior JESUS CHRIST, did
vouchsafe to shed his dear heart blood, The simple and ignorant are well
provided for under the pope. Hiere 10.
provided for, when such books are delivered unto them, in stead of the
liuelye preaching of gods word? It is not, for naught that Hieremye does cry
out. They altogether dote, and are foolish, for the stock is a doctrnne of
vanitye.


Dydimus. What means he by that?


PHILALETH. Because the people thought, that to have images was a mean to
serve GOD, and to bring them to the knowledge of him, he shows that nothing
more displeases God, nor brings man into greater errors, and ignorance of
GOD, therefore he calls them the doctrine of vanitye, and the work of
errors, as Abakuk (as ye heard before) callethe them, the teachers of lies.
Who in the same Chapter, thundreth out against the wicked opinion of them
that call them the books of the lay people, on this manner: Woe unto him,
that sayethe unto the wood, awake: and unto the damme stone: rise up.
Should the same teach? Beeholde, it is laid over with gold and silver, and
there is no breathe in it. But the lord is in his holy temple. As if he
should say: There is no breathe, no life nor moving in the images. How should
they teach then? Therefore it is a mere vanitye and fondenesse, to set forth
images unto the people, for their teachers and scoole masters: sith that the
living god, who is the true teacher, is in the myddest of his temple, that is
in the heart of the faithful, teaching those things that are both
profitable, and everlasting. Whereunto may be added this saying of Saint Paul:
2. Cor. 6.
What agreement has the temple of god with images? but ye are the temple of
the living god: who lives and works in you. More credit ought to be given
to these testimonies of the prophets and of the Apostels, thanne to the vain
gloses of all Gregory's and Damascenes in the world.


Albion. Yet ye can not deny but that they be means to stir up the hearts of
the simple and ignorant people unto devotion.


Philalethes. This is but a vain saying. For, the hearts of the faithful,
are only stirred up to godlynes, by the holy spirit of god, which as he
works inwardelye in the heart, having these externe and outewarde means,
that is to say, the preaching of gods word, Images are means to stir up
the hearts of men not to devotion but to idolatrous superstition.
and the right ministration of the Sacraments: so did he never coumpt images
among his means but rather in all places does straightly forbydde them, with
terrible and dreadful threatenings against them, that of a self will, will
still (for the causes by you rehearsed) have and maintain them to the great
hyndraunce of true godliness, and to the advancement, not of devotion, but of
diuellishe and ydolatrous superstition.


Eutrape. All men, that have any spark of sound reason and judgment in their
heads, must needs marvel at the beastlynesse of these men: for I would
feign know of them, when our savior Jesus Christ did send his Apostles
forth into the world, whether did he send them to be paynters, caruers,
and makers of images, and not rather to preach the gospel unto every
reasonable creature. Why the apostelles were sent into the world.
We do read no where that they did carye about images, or that they did use
any other outward signs thanne the right and due ministration of the
Sacraments, according to the institution and ordaynance of their master and
savior Jesus Christ. Saint Paul in the iii. chapter of the epistle to the
Galathians, does with an exclamation speak thus unto them: O foolyshe
Galatians who has bewitched you, that ye should not obey the truth? before
whose eyes Jesus Christ was before, painted out, and crucified among you? that
is, To whom Christ, was so lively preached, as if his lively image were set
before your eyes, or as if he had been crucified among you? I am sure, that
Paul did all these things with the pencell of his tongue, and with the lively
preaching of the gospel. But these good fellows because they will not be
troubled with to much preaching, Th^^ preachers of (...) pope do appoint mete
vicars under them.
nor break their brains about ye study of ye scriptures nor yet take to much
pain in teaching of the people, in exhorting and comforting the faithful
congregation, yt so they might live at ease, and in continual idleness, they
have appoincted unto us meet vicares, for to supply their roumes, and to
preach unto the people for them, that is, dumme images, domme stocks and
stones, which have mouths and speske not, which have eyes and see not which
have ears, and hear not. etc. And truly we are worthy of such preachers.
For, we can not abide the lively voice of the faithful ministers of God when
they do sharply rebuke our sins whenne they do lively disclose and bring
to light our hypocrisy and dissimulation, The righteous judgment of God.
or when they do ernestyle exhort us to repentance and amendment of life. And
therefore by the righteouse judgment of God such preachers are appointed unto
us, Fond objections of the papist^
as will suffer us to run headlong into everlasting perdition both of body
and soul.


Dydimus. I have heard some of them say, that the holy evangelist Saint Luke
did paynte first the image of the virgin Mary, and did set it forth with
lively colors. And also that Nichodemus, who came unto our savior Jesus Christ
by night, had ye image of Christ being crucified, whereof father Athanasius
makes mention, describyng the miracle yt was wrought about it in Berythus
which is a famous city of Phenicia. Do we not read that Abagarus the king
of Edessenes did send our savior Jesus Christ a painter, for to bring his image
unto him? And when he could not do it, because of the exceadynge great
brightness^ of his face, Christ him self took his cloth, that he would have
painted him on, and did wipe his face with it, and so gave him in the cloth a
lively image or resembla^ce of his face, sending it to Aba^arus, who was
desirous of it. The like say they, did happen unto the Veronike, whenne she
did retche her fine cloute unto our savior Jesus Christ to dry his face with all that did run full of sweat. Answer to these fond^ obiecti^ns. Saint Luke
phi^icio^ and not a painter.



Eutrape. By my brother Philalethes leave, I think, I am able to answer to al
these objections. First and foremost, touching the holy evangelist saint Luke,
we read no where that ever he was a paynter: we read in deed that he was a
physician by his science, Why Luke ^s called a (...) paynter of ^ome.
and yt afterward he was of god called to be a physician of the souls as he
had been before the physician of the body. But these beasts do not make,
that he is called a painter because of the playnesse of his style, and also
because that of all to her evangelists, he did set fourth most lively, the
strong faith, humilitye and lowlynesse, and all oher heauely virtues of the
blessed virgin Mary, whereof it did come to pass, that some did affirm, that
Luke painted out the virgin Mary. And as for the cross and crucifix of
Berythus, whereof Nychodemus is a witness, and Athanasius the writer, we do by
good right reject the whole history as most lying and fabulouse, and which is
most falsely fathered upon the the holy father Athanasius which thing any man,
yt is of any sound judgment may easelye smell out. And verily I marvel, that
they be nothing ashamed to adscribe these vain trifles, wh ch are without
wit and learning unto such godly ancient fathers. The vanity ^f the enemies
in a^^gi^g they c^re not what.
The like may we say of the history of Abagarus, and of the Veronike, for if
any such thing had been done and wroughte, the holy evangelists would not
have passed it over, sith that they did most diligently set forth things of
smaller importance. They did describe the messages of private persons unto
Christ, and should they have holden their peace of the Ambassades of kings?
They did diligently write of the hemme of Christ's garment, and of the touching
of it, and what miracle was the^ wrought, Math. ^. Mar. ^. Lu. 8.
by the virtue that proceeded from Christ: but not one word did they speak of
ye napkin nor of this marvelous image of Christ's face. Therefore, such vain
and fond histories, in these high points of our religion, ought in no wise
to take place.


Dydimus. Sithe that our brother Philalethes, and our brother Albion, do give
us leave, I will utter forth all yt I have heard. I was not long sens, in a
place, where we fell into disputation concerning images, and when I did aleadge
ye law of god which did expressly forbid images, which is: Thou shalt not
make to thy self any graven image, Exodus 20
nor any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or in ye earth beneth
or in the water under the earth, you shall not bow down to them nor worship
them. Again: Take heed to your selves. For, ye saw no image in the day, Deuteronomy.
4.
that the lord spoke unto you, in Horeb, out of the mids of the fire: that
you corrupt not your selves, or make you a graven image, or representation of
any figure: Whether it be the likeness of male, and female. The likeness of
any beast that is on the earth, or the likeness of any feathered foul,
that flies in the air. Or the likeness of any thing that crepeth on the
earth, or the likeness of any fysh, yt is in the waters beneth the earth. etc.
Answer was made me, Number. 21*
that the law does not forbydde all manner of images, and that therefore their
images are laufull. be better instructed by you that I may be the more able to
answer them an other time.


Eutrape. The brsen serpent John. 3.
saying: As Moses exalted the serpente in the wilderness, so the son of man
must be exalted, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life: there was an express commandment touching it But no such
thing can they aleadge for their images. Again, at the beginning, whiles Moses
and certain godly judges did live, no man did worship the brazen Serpent, no
man did offer ince^se unto it: but at length by process of time, it did
grow in to an wonderful superstition. Which thing being perceived by that
most holy king Ezechias, 1. Kin ^8.
he did not send prophets, for to admonyshe and warn people that the
brazen serpent was not set up of Moses for to be woorshipped, but for to be a
memorial or remembrance and yt therefore it ought not to be worshipped, howbeit
it ought to be kept still, and the abuse to be taken away, but did cause it
to be put down, to be beaten in to powder and to be cast into a river. He did
not pass for the long obserua^ce and that it had continued about seven
hundred years or more, and that there had been many holy and godly kings
before him, which did wink at the matter. And yet we read that he was greatly
praised for this act. Would god al princes of his (...) ^ome (...) for (...)
^^chias.
Let all princes in Christendom do the like unto these images that idolatry
has been committed unto, although at the beginnynge they were not set up
for to be woorshypped, but for to be monumentes or remembraunces. Now (...)
^on did not therefore bring into the temple, oxen, lions, The (...).
likenesses of birds with such other things, that by th^i^ he might
represente GOD or admonysshe the people of holy things, or that ^^y should
be books unto the ^^mple and ignoraunte, but that therewith he might adorn
and beautify the vessels of the temple. And therefore they were made for a
trymmyng and deckynge, and not for to be worshipped.


DYDIMVS. And may we not do the like for to trymme and deck our churches
with all?


EVTRAPF. If ye had said for to bring in gaynes and lucre, than had ye told
the truth. The temples of the christians do require an other manner of deckyng
or t^immynge. Be it so, that Cherubin, which are likenesses of aungelles were
set about the mercy seat, what does that make for their idolatry, or what
does that prove that images do teach. For, neither do we read that any godly
honor was done unto them, nor the arc set forth abroad unto the people, but
kept secretly in the holiest place. For it was not lawful for to behold it
with profane eyes, as we may see in the iiii. chapter of the Numbers and
second Paralypomenon, and fifth chapter. Cherobin why they were made
Moreover the Cherubin were nothing else but signs of the presence of GOD and
a certain peculiar institution and ordeynaunce of God

But no man will say, that the peculiar ordinances of God are prejudicial to
his universal laws. Elias did set up an altar in Carmelus against the
written law of god, and yet he did not offend. Certain other did the like,
and yet they may not upon these peculiar acts gather an universal conclusion
against the law of set forth in the.xii. chapi. of Deuteronomie. For, the
universal law is not abrogated by certain privileges and dispensations
granted of god. The like may we say of the titles, which Iosuah and Samuel
did set up against the written law, according to the quality of the
present state, of the times, and of the persons. In the mean while the
universal law of god, which forbids all men to make images, or to
worship them, stands still immovable, and is always of like force and
strength.


Dydimus. Why then, An other (...) ob^^ (...)
if they be not woorshypped, or if no godly honor be done unto them, they
may be had. But who would think that men are so bulleheaded, yt they will
worship dumme images, signified and represented by them?


Eutrape. Ye have learned already of our brother Philalethes, that God only
ought to be worshipped. Deuter ^
But God can be represented by no manner of similitude or image, yea there is
an express law that does forbid us to attempt any such thing. And where as
ye say that men are not so dul^e headed, that they will worship dumme
images, the experience has taught us the contrary. For, above a thousand
years ago, the people did thorough ygnoraunce of the law of God, and the
negligence of bishops, begin to worship dumme images. ^erenus bi^hop of
ma^^ilia.
I have for a witness of this thing, Serenus bishop of Massilia, who did
in his city break down the image of Christ, and the images of the Saynctes,
because that he saw them to be worshipped of the people I know well that
Gregorye did sore impugn that fact of his: but what Scripture does he
bring for to improve S^renus dead? None at all.

Moreover if (as ye say) they did not worship the images, but the things
represented by them: Why, having the roode and image of the vrygyne Ma^ye at
home in her own churches, Let the enemies aun^^er to this ^^^ction of every
can.
did they go a gaddynge to our Lady of Wilsdone, to our Lady of
Walsingame, to the holy roode of Bostonne? Was not this a prayne and a
manifest token and sign that they were wedded to the images, and that they
thought more holiness to be in the one thanne in the other? Else would
they have contented them selves with those images, that they had at home in
their own churches, and spared both co^^ and labor which they bestowed upon
then idolatrous pilgrimages.


PHILALETHES. Saying a littell before that GOD can be represented by no
manner of similitude, and image, ye did put me in mind of the words of
Athanasius, Athana. in ^bio cont^a gentes.
which are these: Let them tell me (I pray them) how GOD does answer
or is known by such things? Is it by the matter or stuff that is about them,
and whereof they be made, or by the form and shape that is given them? If it
be by the stuff, what neade is there of the form or shape? And why did not
God rather, before they were fashioned and shapen, appear, and manifest
himself, by the universal stuff? But if the form or shape that they have
received, is the cause of the knowledge of God, what need is there of gold, or
of any other stuff? Mark vvei these words of Athanasius.
or why is not God rather revealed by the true living creatures, whose shapes
and forms the images are, for truly, according to their own reason, the
glory of God should better be known: if god were manyfested and revealed
rather by the living and reasonable creatures, than by the vnlyuyng and
unreasonable. Wherein they do work great ungodliness to their own
destruction.


Albion. I heard ones this place alleged but answer was made again, Replye
of the adversaries. Aunsvvere to it.
that Athanasius did write against the Gentiles and heathen. And that therefore
this place makes nothing against them.


Philalethes. And I say, that as these words are written against the heathen,
so may they be alleged against them, that do bring in, the gentilisme or
heathenyshe fashyons. And what is seen, I pray you, in our pictures and
images besides the stuff that they be made of, and shape that is given unto
them? They say, that the form or shape, that is given unto them does signify
and teach. But I would feign know of them, The images do neither teach he
learned not yet the unlearned Ergo they ^e unprofitable.
whom their images and pictures do teach, the learned or the unlearned? I am
sure they can not teach the unlearned, onelesse they have an interpreter
behynd them. For, the unlearned, without a teacher, shall never be able to
learn, what is signified or represented by the image of the virgin Mary, nor
yet by the image of the Crucifixe. The learned has no need at all to learn
of pictures and images, the same which he has most certaynely learned by
gods word. What shall they be able to say to his, that the chiefest
mysteries of our religion can be expressed with no colors. For with what
pencelle shall they be able to express the virtue of our redemption, The
chief mysteries of our salvation can not be expressed by any image.
the glory of the life to come, the imitation of virtues, and the obedience of
the word? Let us therefore content our selves with the most true
Teacher, I mean, ye holy ghost, which does teach us with the word of life,
and with the Sacraments ordained by the eternal wisdom of god: Whereby all
things perteining to our salvation, my plainly be set forth unto us, and
received or understood of them, that be not void of the spirit of god.


Dydimu Yet no answer has been made to this their objection, where they say
that although it was not lauful in the old time, to express God with an image,
because he was not yet seen in a humain form or shape yet since being
incarnated, he was made like unto us in all things, sin only being
excepted, it is laufull for to have an image of him.


Philalethes. Dan. c 7.
What will they say to this place of Daniell? The ancient of days did sytte,
whose garment was white as snow, and the hears of his head like the pure
wolle. And by and by after: As I beheld in visions by night, behold, one like
the son of man, came in the clouds of heaven, and approached unto the ancient
of the days, and they brought him before him. Read ye besides the 33. and
four and thirty chapter of Exodus. and the sixte chapter of Esaie. In the
mean while none of the ancient prophets, or of the holy men of god did set up
an image unto the father, or unto the son, neither did attempt to represente
him by any symilitude or shape made after the likeness of man. And what other
thing did let them to do it, but the playnenesse of the commandment of God,
The son of god did not take upon him our frail nat^re to the end that he
should break gods law or be painted.
and the reverence that they bare unto it? Neither did our savior Jesus
Christ, take upon him our human nature, for to break the law of God, or
for to give unto paynters a pattern or proof of their art: but for to be the
pledge of the grace of GOD, of the eternal covenant and of the conjunction
that is betwixt GOD and us, and that he might have what to offer for us, for
the price of our redemption, and declare what we mortal me^ ought to hope for.
For therefore did he rise again, and did carye up into heaven the body that he
took of us, that we should believe, and be fully persuaded, that our bodies
shall ones be translated, and taken up from this vale of myserye being
glorified into the everlasting kyngedome of heaven. Now, as much as the body
doothe excel, or is better then the shadow, so much doothe the thing which
is represented by the sign, better than the sign. Note this
But the flesh of our savior Jesus Christ, if it had remained here, after
the mystery of our salvation was fulfilled, had profited us nothing, much
less should the liniamentes, picture, or image of the body of our savior Jesus
Christ do us any good: As touching his divine nature, he is coequal, and of
one substance with the father. But Esaie in the.xl. chapter: All nations,
says he, before him, are as nothing, and they are counted to him less than
nothing, and vanity. To whom then will they like God, or what similitude
will ye set up unto him?


Dydimus. difference betwixt them. For, by this word, eidole, they do
understand ye representation of a thing yt is not, but this word, Image, which
sometimes of the Latins is called simulachru^, is the representation of a thing
which is in deed.


Phila. cidolum ydole Hierom did translate it, simulachru^, an image. And in
his eleue^th book of his commentaries upon Esaie, Hierome
upon these words of Ezechias prayer: Thou only art the God of all
kingdoms, Their gods are no gods, but the works of men's hands, wood and
stones: He did says he, boldly pray unto the Lord, and doothe affirm him
to be the only living God. Whereby we do understand, that eidoles are the
images of dead men. So far Hierom. A strong argument again t the papists.
Now will I thus reason with them: Are not their images, ye images of dead me^,
but eidoles, ar ye images of dead men, therefore, their images are but eidols.
It is plain tha^ ye eidolu ^ simulachru^, yt is, an idol and an image be all
one thing. Erasmus.
Erasmus in his annotations yt he did make upon ye new Testament, which work
is so hyghly commended by their holy father pope Leo the tenth, writes on
this manner: Thomas de Aquino, doothe bring a new difference betwixt Id^lum an
ydole, and simulachrum, an image, because yt an image is the repres^ntation of
a natural thing, but an ydole, is as if an horsehead should be put to a man's
body. Which distinction whether it be true or not, let other judge, but it
seems unto me to be more worthy, to be ascribed to that Lexicon, or
^i^tionarie which is called Catholicon than otherwise. Ambrose
Truly, Ambrose does make no difference betwixt an ydole and an image,
neither do I se any, saving only that the one is a greek word, and the other a
latin word. By these words of Erasmus, we do easily understand, what is the
signification and use of both the words. But this is most handsome, that they
will not have their images to be lykened unto the idols of the Gentiles, Psalm
115.
because it is written by the prophet: Their idols are silver and gold, the
works of men's hands. They have mouths and speak not, they have eyes and
see not: ears have they, and hear not: they have nostrells and smelle not,
hands have they, and feel not, feet have they and walk not, neither do
they speak through their throat. Now, if they will not have their images
likened unto the ydols of the gentiles, they must prove, that their images be
not the works of men's hands, that they can speak, see, hear, smell, feel,
and walk, The images of the gentyl, and the images of the idola^^^us christ^ns
be a^ (...) Obie. 34.
and that they can bring forth a voice from their throat. If they can do none
of these things, and yet have mouths, eyes, ears, nosethrills hands and
feet, if they be the works of men's hands, it must needs follow, that the
images of the idolatrous christians, and of the Gentiles be all one.


Albion. Well, we grant it is so. Are not these saint Paul's words? And ydole
is nothing in the world: if an ydole nothing in the world, what harm can it
do, to keep ydols, specially among them, that know that God only ought to be
honored and worshypped?


Philalethes. And we will set against them, did find the idols of the
gentiles in the common temples? Why did the holy martyrs of God, the prelates
of chirches, the christian princes and judges break down the idols and
images of the gods, Concilium Toletanu^ 3
and did scrape out all heathenyshe pictures? The third council of Toletum
did make this decree: Because almost throughoute all Spain or Gallicia the
sacrilege of idolatry has taken place, the holy Synod with the consent of
the most glorious prince has ordained, that every pressed within his cure shall
together with a judge of the territory search out diligentely the forenamed
sacrilege, and when it is found out, in no wise to make any taryeng, or a
puttyng of from day to day, utterly to banishe it away: and let them with
such punishment, as they may, bridell all them that run unto such
error: which thing if they do neglect, let them know that they both shall
incur the peril of excommunication. What neded I pray you, this
constitution, if to keep idols, is not hurtful unto them, which know, that God
only ought to be honored and woorshipped? Did not those ancient bishops believe,
yt god only ought to be honored and worshipped? Yes verily. But in ye mean
while they did break down all ye idols: whereof it follows, that the saying of
Saint Paul has an other meaning: Let us see therefore what is the right sense
of it. The right exposicion of the place taken out of. 1. Cor. ^
Theophilactus did expound and set forth the occasion of this place on this
manner: There were some perfect among the Corinthians, which were of opinion
that man could not be defiled with any thing yt went into the bealy: and,
which did undoubtedly understand and know, that ydoles are made of wood or of
stone, and that they can hurt no man: and therefore going indifferently to the
temples and altars of such idols: they did gredily eat of ye things that were
offered unto idols, when they which were of a weaker faith did see this, some of
them went with the rest unto the idols temples, and did eat with them of
those things yt were offered unto ye idols, but not with a like mind and
opinion, as they which believed ye idols to be unworthy to who^ any sacrifice
should be offered. This their dooyng did move Paul to be angrye. And why not?
For it hurted them both meruailously. It hurted them that were more perfect,
because it made them partakers of the deuyls boorde: It hurted them that were
loss perfect, because it moved them to idolatry. Paul therefore goes about
to remedy this evil, and so omyttyng or leauyng them (as many times he is
wont to do) that were of less perfection, he speaks unto them that were more
perfect, and does most chiefly repress and beat down that vain pride,
which they had conceived of their human knowledge and science. So much
does Theophilactus write of the occasion and argument of this present pl^^e.
How Pau^ ^oth ha el ^im self in ^ls matter.
Saint Paul does handle the whole matter after this sort: first in the
beginning, he does with a goodly crordium, touch the arrogancy of the false
Apostels, teaching that any manner of knowledge be it never so excellent, if it
be not moderated and ruled by charity, is not only unprofitable, but also
most pernitions and hurtefull. Afterward he does rehearse the arguments and
objections of the adversaries, which he answers by and by. This his saying,
1. Cor. 8.
We know that an ydolle is nothing in the world, doothe pertayne to the
declaration of the adversaries argument: for, they that gloried in their
knowledge went about to prove that it was laufull for any man to eat of those
things, that were offered unto ydoles, after this manner: The gods of the
gentiles are nothing: Therefore their images and sacrifices are nothing also.


Didymus. How did they prove their antecede^t, or the first part of their
argument?


Philalethes. They did prove it thus: There is but one only God: whatsoever
then is spoken of the gods, it is both vayn and false. The conclusion is proved
after this sort: The ydole or image does represent him whose yamge it is. But
it is most evident and plain, that the gods are nothing. Whereupon it must also
follow yt their idols are nothing. His meaning is not, that the idols that be
in the world, be nothing at al. For, they are wood and stone, but because that
they be of no value, force, The reason or P^u^e. ^uersaries
or strength. Now Paul's adversaries taking occasion of this, reasonned on this
wise: Since that it is most certain, that ydoles are vayn, it is evident and
plain that the worshippyng of them is vain also. If it be vain, and the
godly whithe confess, that god only ought to be worshipped, do believe it to
be vayn: the godly may without any scrupulositie of co^sci^ece be present at the
sacrifices of ye gentiles, and sit with them at their feasts and banketts,
which they do keep in the honor of their idols. For, the mind being restored
unto it self, does honor and worship the true living God alone: therefore it
contemns ydoles, and can not sith it is purified by faith, be polluted or
defiled with those things that be offered unto them. Paule^ auns^vere to
their reasons.
Unto all those, Paul makes this answer: Although thou do believe, that
there is but one God, and do therefore understand, that both the idols,
the worshypping of them, and the sacrifices offered unto them, are but mere
vanity, yet all men do not see so much, neither do they comme to the
sacrifices, with the same conscience. He that is weak, and has not yet clean
put away his old inueterate error, which he had sucked of his forefathers,
does with a conscience sit at such meats, and according to his old
superstition, which he has no fully shaken of, does fear and dread those
gods, specially when he sees thee, whom he takes to be of a found
judgment, to sytte at such profane meats. For, he does suspecte, that thou
do eat with none other conscience, than he does, and so he is not smally
offended with thy bold exaumple. Both Ambrose, Theophilactus, and also
Erasmus, do allow this exposition. Now if ye will apply this to our
purpose, ye shall find nothing that doothe more strongly impugn the images.
For, although he, which is of strong faith, knows the image to be
nothing, yet another which has a weaker faith, will not so judge. But as
long as he shall se them thus to stand in the Chyrches: He will reasonne thus
with him self: Idolatrye, is not so damnable as the preachers do say it is,
sithe that they are yet kept in the chyrches, and are tolerated or borne
withal of some learned men: so they that from their cradell have been
nouseled in superstition, and have been persuaded, that there is some holy^^sse
in the images are kept still in error, and can never come to a perfect and
pure faith. Images ought to be pardoun in all churches.
Therefore it is a most wise point to pull down all images, sithe that it is
against all reason, that a thing of naught should stand in the house of God,
in the place of prayer, and thereby had in reverence. But the Apostell does
briefly and shortly conclude or knit up the whole disputation saying: Therefore
well beloved, fly from idolatry.


Albion. The dulne^ of men in ^^ings tha^ ^erta^^e t^ ^ut salvation



Eutrapelus. I find now by experience that the same is most true, which our
brother Philalethes does many times repete in his sermons, that is, how that a
good thing has need to be repeted and spoken of, many times, and often,
else it will not be remembered. Ye heard a little before, that the means
appointed of god, for to put us in mind of our Savior Jesus Christ, and of the
salvation purchased by him, are the preaching of the gospel, and the right
and due ministration of the sacraments, according to the institution and
ordeina^ce of the eternal wisdom of God, and that we are assured by gods
promises that the holy ghost does with these means work in the hearts of the
elect and chosen: but as for images, they be expressly forbidden in gods
book, it is so far of, that they should be appoincted for to be means,
whereby the holy ghost should plant faith in our hearts, or stir up our
minds to the knowledge of god, and to the imitation of his saints. And
because above al other ye would have the image of Christ, The image of ^he^^
of all other is most perilous.
I let you to understand, brother Albion, that of all other the image of
Christ is most perilous. For, the holyer the person is, which is represented
by the image, ye shall find the greater peril of ydolatrye to be in it.
Therefore it was not without a just cause, that those godly Emperors, Valens
and Theodosius, did set forth this godly decree: Sith that this is our
chiefest care, above all things to mayntaine the religion of the high god, we
grante to no man, Pertus Crinitus li. 9 de hone^ta di^ciplina, ca. 9.
to grave or paint the image of our savior Christ, neither to paynte it with
colors, nor to grave it in sons, or in any other matter. But where soever it
is found, we do bid ^t to be taken away.
being determined to punish greuouslye those, that will attempt any thing
contrary to our decrees. Wherein, if any man perchance does require an
author, let him read the edictes and decrees of Emperors, which have been
gathered by these great learned me^ Tribunianus, Basilides, Theophilus
Dioscorus and other, and most chieflye by the commandment of Iustinianus the
Emperor. Hereby do we learn that it perteyneth to the mainteynaunce of true
religion to put ^oune all images, yea the image of our Savior Jesus Christ,
What we do learn by the decree of those e^^perours.
because that in it there is most peril of idolatry. And again that V^lens
and Theodosius did not this alone but many other Emperors, whose decrees and
edictes by the commandment of Iustinianus, have been collected and gathered
together, by these great learned men before rehearsed.


Philalethes. Unto these worthy Emperors, will I join a most godly ancient
bishop, whose greek Epistle being sent to John, bishop of Jerusalem,
Hierome did translate into latin, his name is Epiphanius. The words of the
epistle are these, Epiphanius ^ishop of ^alamena ^ 1^ Cypius. The ministration
of the supper of the Lord was called collecta, most chefly because, that the
gathe^^^ges were made for the ^o^c^.
When we were going together to the holy place, which is called Bethel, there
to celebrate the communion with thee, according to the Ecclesiastical manner,
and was come to a ferm place called Anablatha, and did see there, passing by a
light burning, and did ask what the place was, and had learned that it was a
church, and had gone for to pray, there I found, as it were a veil died or
painted, and having the image as it were of Christ, or of some saint. For I do
not well remember whose image it was. Therefore, when I did see that the image of
man, did hang in the church contrary to the scriptures, I rent it, and did
rather give council to the wardens of the place, that they should wynd some
poor dead body in it. And a little after: Bid I beeseeche thee, the elders of
that place to receive of the bearer, the veil that is sent by us: and charge
them, that from henseforth no such vailes be hanged in the church of Christ,
that are contrary to our religion. For, it be comes thine honesty, to have
chiefly this solicitude and care, that the scrupulosity unseemly for the
church of Christ, and the people committed unto thee, should be taken away.
Wherein we do learn all these godly lessons. Eight godly lessons we learn
by ^^pipha^^' 2
First, that no place ought to be given in the church of Christ to those
things yt are against the Ero. 20.
that the images ought to be cast out of the church of Christ, not only
by sedulitye and diligence of doctrine, but e^conoclastae, that is, image
breakers, than to be called eiconoplastae, that is, image makers, and that we
do approach nerer to the example of the old ancient church than they do,
although they brag and boast them selves to be catholyke and Apostolyke.


Eutrapelus. I would fayn it now of them what those churches, over whom
Epiphanius was appointed superindente^t or bishop, did want to the right
edifying of true godliness.


Philalethes. As ye say, for, he was a Christian bishop, he did preach,
that Christ was the savior of the world, he did dispose the mysteries of his
kingdom unto the faithful, and did build the house of god, without images, of
wood, of stones, of silver and gold, Epiphaulu^ in buil^ing god* house
followed the steps of the ancient bishops.
or without any painted, graven or molten images, following in this the steps
of the patriarchs and Prophets, of Christ, and of his Apostelles. Which all
did plant religion and the true worshyppynge of GOD without images.


Dydimus. If we had many Epiphanius in this realm, not one church wyndowe
should be left hole thorougheoute all England, there should be neither
cross nor crucifixe left.


EVTRAPELVS. Would God that we christians would labor and study to know the
true cross of Christ. Of the cro^ Math. 16.
Our Savior Jesus Christ does say, He that will come after me, let him
forsake him self, take up his cross and follow me. Here, in this place by the
cross, he does understand, Cross taken for affliction and trouble.
the affliction trouble and persequution, that all they that will live godly in
our savior Jesus Christ are subject unto. But the most part of those that
delight so much in material crosses, do take good heed, that they shall not be
fayn to bear this cross of Christ. For, they flatter to with the world,
swimmyng still betwixt two waters, that howsoever it goes with religion,
they think to escape free, and to be without all troubles. Paul writing to
the Galathians makes mention of an other cross, Galati 5.
affyrmynge that they that be of Christ, have crucified the flesh with the
lusts and concupiscences of the same. Cross taken for cont^nual repe^t^unce
and mortifie^g of the flesh
Whereby he does mean, the continual repentance that ought to be in us,
the mortifyinge of the flesh and of the lusts and concupiscences of the same,
and the brydelyng of our corrupted and poisoned nature, and of our inordinate
passions. There is also an other cross, 1. Corin 1
which saint Paul does speak of, in the first epistle or the Corinthians,
saying, Christ has not sent me to baptize but to preach the gospel, not with
persuading words of worldely wisdom, lest the cross of Christ should be
abolished. For, the word of the cross is a foolyshenesse to them that
perish, Galat. 6.
but to us that obtain salvation, it is the power of god. And in an other
place, God forbid that I should rejoice, but in the cross of our lord Jesus
Christ, whereby the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world. In
these last textes, by the cross he does understand, the death and passion of
our savior Jesus Christ, Cross take for the death of (...) for the preaching
of the same.
and the preaching of the same. As if Paul should say: I seek none other
where for the free pardonne and forgiveness of my sins, and for my
delyueraunce from eternal death, and from the power of Satan, but in the
merytes of the death, passion, and bloudesheadynge of our Savior Jesus
Christ: Neither do I delyghte to preach and set forth any other thing,
for to declare the goodness and mercy of God, and the salvation of mankind,
but the death of his only be gotten son. These kinds of crosses, ought the
true christians to delight and glow in.


Dydimus. I read but a while ago, Aungeli.
a certain book, made in time of persequution, where wonverfull many doctors
of the primitive church, are aleaged, which do al maintayn the sign, Osius.
and as he says, the image of the cross. There is also one Osius, which
has written lately against the religion that is now, and he does also bring
many doctors which do hold with the sign of the cross.


EVTRAPELVS. As for ye first I know him full well. In deed we have many such
evil and wicked aungelles, that go about to peruerte the sinceritye of
Christ's religion, and that they may do it with a better color, they will
aleadge the fathers where they have no warraunt at all of gods word, and where
they speak as men. Galati 1.
But what shall they win by it? If an angel from heaven should preach
unto me any other Gospel, than has been preached, he shall be unto me Anathema
that is to say: Tertullian de praese iphaereticoru^.
accursed. Are not these Tertullians words: We ought to indulge or bring
nothing of our own head, neither to chose that which any man has brought in
of his own head, or of his own brain. We have the Apostelles for our
authors, which did not those of their own brains, what they should bring in,
but did faithfully assign and deliver unto nations that, which they received
of the Lord. Therefore, if an angel from heaven should preach any other
Gospel unto us, we would pronounce it to be accursed. Are not also these
Hieromes words. Hiero. in Ma ca 23.
Quod de scripturis non habet autoritatem, eadem facilitate contemnitur, qua
probatur. That is: That which has no auctority out of the scriptures, or by
the scriptures, may as easily be contemned as it is proved. Ambro. de
virginibus lib. 4.
Ambrose also writes on this manner. We do by good right condemn all new
things, that Christ has not taught. For, Christ is the way unto the
faythefull. If therefore, CHRIST has not taught that, which we do teach,
we do also judge it execrable* hear also what Origene says. We have
need to bring the Scriptures for a witness. Orige. ho. ^. in ^^e.
For our meanynges and exposicions, without these witnesses have no credit.
These testimonies and autorities of the forefathers do sufficientlye prove that
the old aunciente writers ought no farther, to be beeleued than they do
bring Gods word for their warraunte. But in all these auctorities that
both your angelical writer, and also Ossus does bring, what warraunt of
Gods word have they?


DYDIMVS. Augu. 11 ^ct^. 118. in Ioannem
I do think none other, but that ye will attribute much to Saint Augustyne,
as to him whom all men do acknowledged to be one of the chief pyllours of
the church. But these are his very words: What is it, that all men do
know the sign of Christ? Which sign, if it be not made either in the
foreheades of them that do beeleue, or in the water, wherewyth we are
regenerated, or in the oil wherwyth we are annoyncted, or in the sacrifice
wherwyth they are fed and nourysshed, none of all these things is rightly
done. What could be spoken more plainly than this?


Eutrapelus. Augu. episto ad fortuna. 111.
how catholic soever and commendable they be, as the Canonical scriptures,
as though we may not, safe the reverence that is due unto such men, improve
and refuse any thing of their writings, if we find that they have meant
otherwise, than the truth does allow, being by the help of God, found by us
or by other And in an other place: I am not moved with the authority of this
epistle. For I do not take the letters of Cyprian as the canonical scriptures.
but I do try his writings by ye canonical scriptures, Contra Cres^on. g^^ma^^
(...). 2. c 32.
And whatsoever in them does agree with the authority of ye holy scriptures, I
do receive it with his commendation, and what so ever doothe not agree with
gods word, I do by his good leave refuse it. Manny other places might I
allege out of this ancient Father, but these with the rest alleged before,
shall suffice to prove, how farrefoorthe men, be they never so excellent,
ought to be credited. Now let us cope sommewhat nearer with our enemies:
where, in all those places, that they both do allege, is there any jot or
syllable of gods word? But the Doctoures will be believed, but as far
forth as they do bring Gods word for their warraunt: therefore in all
those authorities that they have brought, I may choose whether I will believe
them or not. How many things have been used by those forefathers, which
afterward have been abolished? In Tertullians time, Many things did the old
mei fathers use v^hich by good right are now out down.
milk and honye was given and offered unto them that were baptized. Both in
Cyprians and in saint Augustine time they mynistred the communion unto young
infantes and babes. But yet all these things have been by good right
abolysshed, so may it be of all other things that have been used without
the word of GOD, as is their consecrated or holy oil, which which they
called Chrisme, the sign of the cross, and other like things, that have no
express commandment in Gods book.


Dydimus.


EVTRAPELVS. Chr. 49 in Ma. 24. ca Augu. lib 1. ^etract. ca. 23.
but now, yea a great whiles sens, as both Chrysostom and Augustine does
testifye, the woorkynge of miracles is ceased. So that now we ought rather
to take good heed unto our selves, lest we be seduced and deceived by Satan
the dyuell, and made to put our trust where no trust is to be put. What
crossynge, I pray you, do the coniurers, charmers, and sorcerers of our time
use? I do not deny, but that the unclean spirits, make sometimes as though
they were wounderfullye scarred with their crossynge? But wherefore is this,
but for to bring their diuellyshe art, whereof the unclean spirits their
selves, are authors to greater credit. To be short, they go about by this
doctrine, to make us to lean that wherein our whole trust ought to be, and
to put our trust in things of naught. Ye know, what lyeng tales we have
heard of their coniured water, of what virtue, power, The lvinge ^ales
touching coniured water.
and strength, it has been for to drive away unclean spirits, where soever
it should be sprinkeled: so that they did most sacrilegeously attribute
unto their beggarlye inventions the same, that ought only and solely to be
attributed unto the blood of our savior Jesus Christ, being thorough faith,
and by the mighty operation of the holy ghost, sprynkeled in our
consciences. Exo. 12,
For as the blood of the lamb being stryken on the two poastes, and upon
the upper post of the door of the Hebrews houses, did keep of the
destroyer, not because that the bloudde of a brute beast had any such virtue
of it self, but because it was the Lords Instytution, builded on his word,
and thorough faith obeyed of the Hebrews. Even so, the blood only of our
savior Jesus Christ (whereof the blood of the Paschall Lamb was a figure)
being by the myghtie operation of the Holy ghost, and thorough faith (as I
said before) sprynkled in our consciences, can keep and preserve us from
the destroyer, that is, from the ennemie of our salvation, Satan the dyuell.


Dydimus.


Eutrapelus. Ye may also add, that the old ancient christians when they went
forth, were wont commonly to make the sign of the cross upon their
foreheades. But what makes this for your purpose? Why the old Christians
did use the sign of the cross.
They did it, neither for to put them selves in remebraunce of the passion
of Christ (for they had then the word of God lively preached unto them,
and the sacraments rightely mynistred) nor yet for to drive away unclean
spirits, but for to declare unto all the holle world, that they were nothing
ashamed of Christ crucified: and that they were at all times ready to bear
his cross, whenever it should please him to lay it upon them, and to live
and die in his quarrel. But now sithe that we all profess Christ, and glory
in his death, which he suffered upon the cross, what need have we of such
ceremonies, sithe that they were never commanded of God, and much ydolatrie
at length has grown about them, in so much that the same which ought only
to be attributed unto the preaching of the gospel, and to the right
ministration of the sacraments, and consequently unto the death, passion, and
bloodsheadyng of our Savior Jesus Christ, offered and represented unto us by
the same, has been most ungodly attributed unto the works of their own
hands. Whereby they do well deserve to be put down, and to be clean
abolished. The brazen serpent (whereof we spoke before) was erected and set up
by the express commandment of God, it was unto the hebrews a monument,
memorial, or remembrance of the benefits that they had received at gods hands
in the wilderness, wha^ they were delivered from the styng of the fyry
serpents, and a figure of our savior Jesus Christ Yet as soon as the people
began to abuse it, good king Ezechias did not stick to break it down. How
much more ought christian princis to do the like in those things, which god
never commanded, and by the means whereof, the world has been filled with
idolatry?


Dydimus. Ye can prove no such thing by the sign of the cross.


Eutrapelus. No? Besides all that has been said already: it is not unknown
unto you, what knelyng, knockyng, and creepyng to the cross, has been used
among the idolatrous christians, and what godly honor has been given unto a
piece of metal, or of wood, and stone, being fashioned after the likeness of
a cross.


Didymus A small shift
This was not done to the cross, but to him that did hang on the cross.


Eutrapelus. So did the heathen go about to excuse their idolatry, saying,
that they did not worship the ydoles that were made of wood and stone, of
silver and gold, or of some other metal, but them, that the images did
represente. I marvel that the christians be not ashamed in this point to be
like unto the idolatrous heathen.


Dydimus. Damascene.
Does not that good doctor Damascenus, affirm plainly, that the sign of the
cross ought to be worshipped? I do the boldlier allege him, because that he
is of no small antiquity.


Eutra. Am. de obi* Theodosii.
speaking of the finding out of the holy cross by Helene Constantines
mother, he says these words: Inuenit ergo Helena titulum, regem adorauit, non
lignum vtique, quia hic Gentilis est error, and vanitas impiorum, sed adorauit
illum, qui pependit in ligno, scriptus in titulo, That is: Helene therefore,
did find the title, she woorshypped the king, and not the woodde verylye.
For, this is an error of the Gentiles, and a vanytie of the ungodly: But she
woorshypped him that hong on the wood, which was written in the title. Here do
we learn, that to worship even the very cross that Christ did hang upon, it
is an error of the gentilles, and a vanitye of the ungodly. Now, if the
cross that Christ did hang upon, and did embrewe with his blood, may not
be worshipped, unless we will run into the error of the idolatrous heathe and
into the vanity of the ungodly: Note this argument.
how much less ought the other crosses that are only made after the figure
and likeness of it to be worshipped? It is a wonder, to see your great
learned rabbis, to be fallen into such a dotage, or rather to be grown into
such arageous madness, that they will with fire and sword compel men to
worship a piece of metal, of wood or stone. But this is most to be abhorred
of all, that they have given unto it, the honor of invocation (which as it
has been sufficiently proved before, It begins Ve^il la regis prodeunt.
does perteyne only to god) For, thus shall ye find written in the hymn,
which they do singe on passion sunday. O crux aue spes vnica, hoc passionis
tempore, auge p^is iustitiam, reisque dona veniam. That is: O cross, being
our only hope, at this time of the passion, augmente and increase
righteousness in the godly, and give pardonne to them that are gilty. What
could be spoken more blasphemouslye than this? I do here let pass that
ydolatry of the good friday, as they do term it, when they be wont to roar
out in a foren tongue, their crucem tuam adoramus Domine we do worship thy
cross O lord, whiles the people as amassed geese are crepynge on their knees
unto a piece of metal.


Dydimus.


Eutrapelus. purelye and syncerely preached every where, to keep the people
from woorshyppyng of the cross, whersoeuer it is set up. What will it be,
where the Gospel is not preached? or where it is not set forth accordyngly?


Philalethes. Three great mischiefs that the images because Wis. 14.
They say, that images may be had, so that they be not worshypped, but I am of
a contrary opinion. For, I can not se but that they do much harm at all
times, and cause great myschiefe. First and foremost. The sight of them does
allure men unto idolatry, which of our own corrupted nature we are from our
cradell inclyued unto. For, thus we read in the book of wisdom: of the
creatures of God, they are become abomination, and stumblyng blocks, unto the
souls of men and a snare for the feet of the unwise. for the inuentynge of
images is the beginning of whooredom, and the fyndyng of them, the corruption
of life. By these words, we do learn, that the good creatures of god, as
gold, silver and other like, are by the bryngyng in of images, made an
abomination before god, and yt where as they be appointed, for the serve men,
they are by such means made stumbling blocks and snares unto their souls, yt
I should in ye mean while speak nothing of ye tilthy whooredom yt under ye
pretense and color of their pilgrimages unto this idol or ye idol, has been
committed in the world: which was and is a just punishment of god for ye
breakyng of ye spiritual wedlock whereby god has coupled us unto him. Wisd. 15
In an other place of ye same book it is laid to the images charge, yt they
do lead into error, that the work of them is wthout fruit, and that thy
move the minds of the unwise unto concupiscence.


Eutra. We read in the histories of the greeks, that a certain image of Venus
was so cunningly made, and so gorgeously trimmed, that many young men were
inflamed and set on fire with ye love of it, so yt many times ye idol was
found in the morning polluted and defied with the sede of man. And do they not
now a days, where papistrye does yet reign, set out the images of their holy
women, as very brothels, strompets and whores? Again, when they see such
precious, iewelles hangyng about them, are they not rather moved to
covetousness, than to any godly devotion. Not far hense it happened, that a
certain goldsmithe was very sick, and at the point of death, A true tale
his curate then came unto him, and brought with him a cross of fine silver
being double gilted, and when he had after his manner given him some
exhortation, he did show unto him yt cross with the crucifix hangyng upon it,
saying, now, sir, I have brought you here your maker, your savior, and
redemer, look upon him. The goldesmythe, said nothing a great while, but when
he had well beholden the cross, he did suddenly ask the priest: What is the
price of an ounce? was not this manne well edified by the sight of this goodly
cross, think ye?


Philalethes. Saint Augustine in his Epistle to one called Deogratias, writes
on this manner: Who doothe doubt, Augustine
but that ydoles and images are without all sense or felyng? But when they are
set up in hye and honorable places that they may be beholden of them yt do
either pray or offer: They do with the similitude and likeness of lively and
sensible members, although they be both insensible and without life, move
the weak minds, so that they seem to be alive and to have breath. Here, we see
to be attributed unto images, that with the likeness of lively members, they do
move weak hearts. And yt therefore they are perillously set forth unto the^,
whose books they are thought for to be, and specially, if they be put in high
and honorable places, where prayer and ye common exercises of religion are
used Secondly, ye images have always this harm annexed unto them: they do with
draw and pluck away the hearts and minds of men, from the earnest beholding
of the majesty of god, shining most brightly in his living creatures, which are
always, and every where seen with the eye, whereas images are the dead works
not of god, but of mortal men, and are not to be seen every where, but are
kept in corners and secret places. They that gave after images, are not moved
with the liuelye work of God, made to set forth his glory, but they are moved
with the dead work of a mortal man, which does only commend and f^tte
forth the vain and unprofitable science and c^nnyng of the word man. We see
a living man, and we do never a whitte the more remember the commune Creator
of us all, nor yet be moved to celebrate, and set forth his divine majesty.
But let the image of a dead man be seen, by and by the mind is moved with I
cannot tell what, devotion or rather superstition. The heavens do set forth the
glory of god, and the firmament the works of his hands, says the prophet
David. But how deaf, blind and insensible, are the worshippers of images, unto
those works of God? The wyseman says not: go unto this image or that image,
Prove. 6.
O sluggard, but go unto the Pismyre, and behold her ways and be wise. For,
she having no guide, governor nor ruler, prepares her meat in the summer, and
gathers her food in harueste. There is more to be learned at one of the
smallest creatures of God, A notable history of Antony.
than at all the images and ydoles of the world. Lucca. We read that Antony
the holy Hermit, who lived in wilderness, being so far unlearned yt he
could not read, was ones asked of a friend, how he passed the time away, since
he lived alone and had no books: Yeas said Antony, I want no books. For,
all the creatures of god are my books. I read and learn his maiestly out of
his creatures, as ye do out of your books. And truly they are goodly books
to look on, and to behold, All the creatures of god may be the books of the
lay people.
I mean the sun, the Moon, the stars, birds, fishes, beasts, herbs, corn
and grass, trees, hills, ryuers. And verily he is worse than a brute beast,
that can look at all these things, and not love, praise and wonder at his
strength power, wisdom, and goodness, which has made all these things to
serve us. The heavenly lights do keep so good an order, and course intheir
mouynge the virtue of herbs, is such to cure and heal diseases, and all
fysshes, fowls, and beasts do feed and serve man which things do come from
him, who is LORD of nature.


ALBION. I confess and grant that these may better be called lay men's
and the unlearned peoples books, thanne images and ydoles, which be like
unto whom soever it pleases the painter to make them like.


PHI. The third harm that the images do bring, is this: Those things, that
should be bestowed upon the living images of god, I mean upon the poor
and n^^y, the same is bestowed upon dead and dumme images. Scarcelye one
halfepeny is given to Christ, being an hungerd in his poor lymmes: but men can
will find in their hearts to give whole hundreths of crounes, toward the
setting up and trimmyng of images.


DYDIMVS. Oh preposterous devotion.
I know a church, where the roode and roode lofte, did cost eleven score
pounds.


Philalethes. But if they had bestowed but half that money upon the poor of
their parish in the time of the great dearth, that was then or there about:
they would have thought them selves undone. Let them read Clemens fyft
book, which they say, he did write to James the brother of the lord. If ye
will (says he) worship truly the image of the lord (we show that unto you,
How we may ho^^ the image of god a right.
which is true) do good unto man, which is made after the image of God, honor
and reverence him, feed him, whenne he is an hungered, give him drink when he
is a thyrste, clothe him being naked, harbor him, being harbourlesse, visit
him, whenne he is sick a^^n prison, and minister unto him th^^e things that
he has need of. It follows: what honoring of god is this to run agaddyng,
to wooden and stonye images, and to worship insensible and lyuelesse ydoles,
and in the mean while to despise man, in whom is the image of god? Understand
therefore that this is the persuasio^ of the serpent, that lies hid within,
who persuadeth you that ye shall seem godly, when ye do honor and worship
insensible idols, adn that ye shall not seem ungodly, when ye hurt the
sensible and reasonable creatures.


Eutr. Who hearing and markyng all these things, and waying the harms that
come by images would not be at defyaunce with them? Every man I trow. But
yet, this is not all.

For what hurt and loss has all Christendom received by the occasion of
images? For, as the images, which Solomon did in his old age, erecte and
set up, were the cause of the schism and division that was after his
death in Israel, I mean, that at one clap, Images causes of division in the
common vvelthe of Israel, and also in the empire.
whole ten tribes did fall away from the house of David, and did chose unto
theimselues a king, Hieroboam the Ephraimite, who setting up the golden calves
in Dan and Bethel, caused all Israel to commit most detestable ydolatrie,
whereof utter destruction of both the realms did ensue and follow: so the
contention that did rise about images betwixt the east and west churches, and
the damnable stoutness of the bishop of Rome with his adherentes in
mainteinyng and defendyng not only the images, but also the ydolatrous
woorshyppyng of them did breed a very hurtefull diuysion in the Empire,
whereby all Christendom was wonderfully weakened. For, after that Rauenna with
rest of Italye, and all France with Germany, were by the subtle and wylye
means of the bishop of Rome, revolted and fallen away from the Emperor of
Constantinople. The Sarasens and Mahometistes did ware wonderfully strong, and
at length did meruaylously prevail. For, they subdewed mighty peoples,
Realms, and Cities, defacyng and putting down every where the true religion
of Christ, The mischief that the contention about the ymage^ did breed
and setting up the Mahometishe religion. This was the goodly fruit, of the
setting up of images, of the mainteynyng of the ydolatrous woorshyppynge of
them, and of the contention that did rise about thym, whiles the one did
affirm, according to the scriptures, that images ought in no wise to be
had, and the other against the express word of God and commandment, that
they ought not only to be had, but also to be woorshypped: whereof such an
envy and hatered did rise betwyxte them, that they would in no wise
healpe, aid and succoure one an other against the commune enemy, being in
this point most like unto Judah and Israel, which after their dyuision,
which chanced by reason of Idolles, never loved or trusted one an other,
seeking the frendshyppe and amity of forayne kings and princes, now of the
Assyrians, now of the Babylonians, now otherwhyles of the Egyptians, that so
they might the sooner destroy one an other: till at length by the righteous
judgment of God, they were both delivered up into the hands of their
enemies.


Dydimus. I would fayn hear the whole history, if it were not tedious unto
you.


EVTRAPELVS. The history is very long, and therefore I will hereafter send it
unto you by writing.


Dydimus. I hold my self well content with it, and specially sithe that
both our brother Philalethes, and you, have so well satisfied our minds in
this matter.


Albion. In deed I was never better satisfied in this point thatn I am now, I
thank God most heartily for it. First and foremost we have learned, that God
only ought to be called upon, and prayed unto: ^he conclu^on of the ^hole
book
And that therefore they that in their necessities do by prayer fly unto dead
creatures, do rob God of his glory, and do commytte most damnable
sacrilege. Which thing was sufficientely proved by manifest textes of the
scriptures, and by strong authorities of the ancient fathers of the primitive
Churches all the objections that the adversaries can make, being mightily
answered and confuted. Secondly, ye have plainly showed unto us, yt we ought
to acknowledge none other mediator betwixt god and man but our Savior Jesus
Christ only, whom the Scriptures do appoyncte unto us, for the
omnisufficient savior of mankind, and for our only intercessoure, advocate,
and mediator, making no mention at all, of the intercession or mediation of
the dead Saints, which thing the Holy ghost would not have omitted, if
the dead Saints, or the Saints departed out of this world had been either
appoyncted or allowed of god to be intercessors unto him for us. The textes of
the scriptures, and the authorities of the ancient writers by you alleged,
are so many, are so myghtie and strong, that the enemies of ye truth may be
ashamed to maintain still their gross and idolatrous opinion. Thirdely, it
has been declared, that as the saints, that be already in glory with God
ought not to be called upon, nor to be taken for our mediators, so no godly
honor ought to be given unto them, forasmuch as it is a service, which is
due only unto God. Where, ye had an occasion to show how many ways, the
true and faithful servants of God, being departed hence in the faith of
his son Jesus Christ, may be honored, and that the greatest honor that we
can do unto them, is to obey their godly and sound doctrine, whereby they
have instructed us in the true relygyon and worshipping of the true only
god, and also to follow their faith and other heavenly virtues, whereby they did
gloryfie God, whiles they lived here in this world. This also was done by the
infallible word of God, and testimonies of the holy Doctors of the true
Catholic church, all the objections of the adversaries being quite overthrown
by the same. Last of all, ye have proved, that no figure, image, or likeness
of God, nor of his son Jesus Christ, nor of the Holy ghost, nor yet of the
saints, ought to be had in the house of prayer, or in any other place,
where so ever there is any perille of idolatry.

And that there can be no use of them, in the Oratories or prayeng places of
the Christians, but rather that they do most hurt, where soever they be used
and kept. Ye have showed by the way, what is the true Cross, that we ought
to delight and have a pleasure in, and that as for the material crosses they
do more hurt than good, and that therefore for avoiding of offenses, they ought
to be taken away. These things have been so substantiallye done, that I hold
my self satisfied in all points, and I do gene God most hartye thanks, that
we have so well spent this day.


Dydimus. In deed this day was frutefully spent. Laud and praise be unto god
therefore for ever and ever.


EVTRAPE. Amen.


FINIS.
IMPRINTED AT London by Henry Sutton for Thomas ^acket. There. day of March.
In the year of our Lord God 1561.


