A profitable Treatise of the Anatomy of man's body: Compyled by that excellent
Surgeon, M. Thomas Vicary Esquire, Seriaunt Surgeon to king Henry the
eight, to king Edward the. vj. to Queen Mary, and to our most gracious
Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, and also chief Surgeon of S.
Bartholomewes Hospital.

Which work is newly reuyued, corrected, and published by the Chirurgions of
the same Hospital now being. An. 1577.

Imprinted at London, by Henry Bamforde



Now he that is the perfect guide,
does know our helps were here alone,
By homely style it may be spyde,
for rules in Rethorike have we none:
Our heads do lack that fyled phrase,
whereon fine wits delight to gase.
If any say we deserve here blame,
we pray you then amend the same.
TO THE RIGHT-Worshipful, Sr. Rouland Haiwarde Knight, President of little
Saint Bartholomewes in Dest Smithfeelde, Sr. Ambrose Nicholas Knight, Master
Alderman Ramsey, with the rest of the worshipful Masters and Governors of the
same William Clowes, Will. Beton, Richard Story, and Edward Bailey, Chirurgions
of the same Hospital, wish health and prosperity,
THe People in times past did praise and extol by Pictures and Epigrames, the
famous deeds of all such persons, who so ever in any virtuous quality or
Liberal Science excelled. Sulpitius Gallus among the Romans was highly
renowned for his singular cunning in Astronomy, by whose means Lucius
Paulus obtained the victory in his vvarres against Percius. Pericles also
among the Athenians was had in great admiration and honor for his profounde
knowledge in Philosophy, by whom the whole City of Athens was from care
and vvoe delivered, when they supposed their destuction to be near at hand,
by a black darkness of some admiration hanging over their City. How honorably
was Apelles the Paynter esteemed of mighty king Alexander, by who^ only he
desired to be painted. But amongst all other Arts and Sciences, whose praise
in times past flourished and shined most brightly, Chirurgerie among the wise
Grecians lacked not his praise, honor, and estimation. For did not that
worthy and famous captain of the Greeks Agamemnon love dearly, and reward
bountifully both Podalerius and Macham through whose cunnings skill in
Surgerie, thousands of worthy Greeks were saved alive and healed, who else
had dyed and perished. And further here to speak of Philoneter, of Attalus,
of Hiero, of Archelaus, and of Iuba, kings of famous memory, who purchased
eternal praise by their study and cunning in Physic and Surgery. But now in
these our days envy so rules the roast, that Physic should be condemned,
and Surgerie despised for ever, but that sometime pain bids battle, and
care keeps skirmishe, in such bitter sort, that at the last this Alarm is
sounded out, Now come Physic, and then help Surgerie. Then is remembered
the saying of Jesus the son of Sirache which is notable, Honor the Physician
and Surgeon for necessity, whom the almighty God has created, because
from the highest comes Medicine, and they shall receive gifts of the King.
Wherefore we exhort the wise man that he in no time of prosperity and
health, neglect these noble Arts and mysteries of Physic and Chirurgerie,
because no age, no person, no country can long time lack their helps and
remedies. What is it to have lands and houses, to abound in silver and
gold, to be decked with pearls and Diamondes, yea and to possess the whole
world, to rule over Nations and countries: and to lack health, the cheifest
Iuel and greatest treasure of man's life and delight.

Consider then we beseech your Worships, what praises are due to such
noble Sciences, which only work the causes of this aforesaid health, and
how much the weal public are bound to al them, whose cares and studies
daily tends too this end. Amongst whom here is to be remembered Master
Vicary Esquire, Seriaunt Surgeon to Kings and Queens of famous memory:
Whose learned work of the Anatomy is by us the forenamed Surgions of Saint
Bartholomewes in Smithfeelde, newly revived, corrected and published abroad to
the commodity of others, who be Students in Chirurgerie: not without our
great studies, pains and charges. And although we do lack the profound
knowledge and sugared eloquence of the Latin and Greek tongues, to deck and
beautify this work, yet we hope the studious Reader shall thereby reap
singular commodity and fruit, by reading this little Treatise of the Anatomy
of man's body, the which is only grounded upon reason and experience, which
are two principal roots of Physic and Surgerie. As it is granted by Galen
in his third Book De Method medendi: and we who daily work and practice
in Surgerie, according to the deepnes of the Art, as well in grievous vvounds,
Ulcers, and Fistules, as other hyd and secret diseases upon the body of man,
daily used by us in S. Bartlemews Hospital, and other places. etc. Those poor
and grieved creatures, as well men and women, as children do know the profit
of this Art to be manyfolde, and the lack of the same to be lamented. Therefore
Galen truly vvriteth, saying, That no man can work so perfectly as
aforesaid, without the knowledge of the Anatomy: For (says he) it is as
possible for a blind man to carue and make an Image perfect, as a Surgeon
to work without error in man's body not knovving the Anatomy. And further,
for as much as your Worships are very careful for those poor and grieved
creatures within the Hospital of S. Bartlemevves. etc. whereof Master Vycarie
was a member: We are therefore now encouraged to Dedicate this little
work of the Anatomy, being his and our trauayles, to you as Patrons of this
Book, to defend against the ravening Jaws of envious Backbyters, which
never cease by all unlawful means to blemishe and deface the works of the
learned, expert, and well disposed persons. Finally, we do humbly crave of
your Goodnesses, to accept in good part this Treatise concerning the Anatomy,
as the fruits of our studies and labors, whereby we shall be much better
encouraged to set forth hereafter other profitable works for the common
wealth. Herein if your VVisedomes do vouchsafe to hear our requests, and
to alovve these our dooinges, as did noble Amasus king of Egypt accept the
labors of his payneful Artificers, we have not only to thank your Worships
for so doing, but also to pray always for you unto the almighty God to requite
your goodnesses, receiving you into his protection and keeping.

Amen.
To the Reader.
DEAR Brethren, and freendly Readers, we have here according to the truth and
meaning of the Author, set forth this needeful and necessary work concerning
the Anatomy of man's body, being collected and gathered by master Thomas
Vicary, and now by us the Chirurgions of Saint Bartholomewes Hospital
revived, corrected, and published. And albeit this Treatise be small in Uolume,
yet in commodity it is great and profitable. Notwithstanding, if the things
therein contained be not discretly and wisely studied and applied, according to
the true meaning of the Author, We have to tell you hereof, that therein is
great peril, because through ignorant Practicioners, not knowing the Anatomy,
commonly does ensue death, and separation of soul and body. Furthermore,
whereas many good and learned men in these our days, do cease to publishe
abroad in the English tongue their works and trauayles, it is, for that if
any one fault or blemishe by fortune be committed, either by them or the
Printer escaped, they are blamed, yea and condemned for ignorant men, and
error holders. But now we here cease from these points to trouble the gentle
Reader with longer discoursing, for whose sakes and commodities we have taken
these pains: Wishing that men more skillful and better learned would have
borne this burden for us. Craving only thus much at your hands, for to
correct our faults favorably, and to report of the Author courteously, who
sought (no doubt) your commodities only, and the profit of the common
Wealth, without praise and vayneglory of him self. Thus we the Chirurgions
aforesaid, commit you to the blessed keeping of Almighty God, who always
defend and increase your studies and ours. Amen.

O Lord which made the lofty Skies,
work in our Rulers hearts,
Always to have before their eyes
safegarde to godly Arts.
Thomas Vycarie to his Brethren practicing Chirurgerie.
HEREAFTER follows a little treatise of the Anatomy of man's body, Made by
Thomas Vycarie Citizen and Surgeon of London, for all such young Brethren
of his Fellowship practicing Chirurgerie. Not for them that be expertly seen in
the Anatomy: for to them Galen the Lantern of all Chirurgions, has set it
forth in his Canons, to the high glory of God, and too the erudition and
knowledge of al those that be expertly seen and learned in the noble Science
of Chirurgerie. And because all the noble Philosophers writing upon
Chirurgerie, do condemn al such persons as practice in Chirurgerie not
knowing the Anatomy. Therefore I have drawn into certain Lessons and small
Chapters, a part of the Anatomy, but touching a part of every member
particulerly: Requiring every man that shall read this little Treatise, to
correct and amend it where it shall be need, and hold me excused for my bold
enterprise, and accept my good will toward the same.

A brief Treatise of of the Anatomy of man's body: Compyled by me Thomas
Vycarie Esquire, and Sargeant Surgeon to king Henry the eight, for the use
and commodity of al unlearned Practicioners in Chirurgerie.
IN the name of God, Amen. Here I shall declare unto you shortly and breefly
the sayings, and the determinations of diverse ancient Authors, in three
points* very expedient for all men to know, that entende to use or exercise
the mystery or art of Chirurgerie. The first is, to know what thing
Chirurgerie is: The second is, how that a Surgeon should be chosen: And the
third is, with what properties a Surgion should be endued.

THE first is to know what thing Chirurgerie is. Herein I do note the saying
of Lamfranke, whereas he says, Al things that man would know, may be known
by one of these three things: That is to say, by his name, or by his working,
or else by his very being and showing of his own properties. So then it
follows that in the same manner we may know what Chirurgerie is by three
things. First by his name, as thus, The Interpreters write, that Surgerie is
derived out of these words, Apo tes chiros, cai tou ergou, that is too be
understood, A hand working, and so it may be taken for all handy arts, But
noble Ipocras says, that Surgerie is hand working in man's body, for the very
end and profit of Chirurgerie is hand working. Now the second manner of
knowing what thing Chirurgerie is, it is the saying of Auicen to be known by
his being, for it is verily a medecinal science: and as Galen says, he that
will know the certentie of a thing, let him not busy him self to know only
the name of that thing, but also the working and the effect of the same thing.
Now the third way to know what thing Chirurgerie is, It is also to be known
by his being or declaring of his own properties, the which teaches us to
work in man's body with hands: as thus, In cutting or opening those parts
that be whole, and in healing those parts that be broke nor cut, and in taking
away that that is superfluous, as warts, wennes, skurfulas, and other like. But
further to declare what Galen says Surgery is, It is the last instrument of
medicine: That is to say, Diet, Pocion, and Chirurgerie: of the which three,
says he, Diet is the noblest, and the most virtuous. And thus he says,
whereas a man may be cured with Diet only, let there be given no manner of
medicine. The second instrument is Pocion: for and if a man may be cured with
Diet and Pocion, let there not be ministered any Chirurgerie. The third and
last Instrument, is Chirurgerie, through whose virtue and goodness is removed
and put away many grievous infirmities and diseases, which might not have been
removed nor yet put away, neither with Diet, nor with Pocion. And by these
three means it is known what thing Chirurgerie is. And this suffiseth for us
for that point. Now it is known what thing Chirurgerie is, there must also be
chosen a man apt and mete to minister Surgerie, or to be a Chirur gion. And in
this point al Authors do agree, that a Surgeon should be chosen by his
complexion, and that his complexion be very temperate, and al his members well
proportioned. For Rasis says, Whose face is not seemly, it is impossible for
him for to have good manners. And Aristotle the great Philosopher writes in
his Epistles to the noble king Alexander (as in those Epistles more plainly
does appear) how he should choose al such persons as should serve him, by
the form and shape of the face, and al other members of the body. And
furthermore they say, he that is of an evil complexion, there must needs
follow like conditions. Wherefore it agrees that a Surgeon must be both of
a good and temperate complexion, as is before rehearsed. And principally, that
he be a good liver and a keeper of the holy commandments of God, of whom
comes al cunning and grace, and that his body be not quaking, and his hands
steadfast, his fingers long and small, and not trembling: and that his left hand
be as ready as his right hand, with all his lymmes able to fulfill the good
works of the soul. Now here is a man meet to be made a Surgeon. And
though he have al these good qualities before rehearsed, yet is he no good
Surgeon, but a man very fit and meet therefore. Now then to know what
properties and conditions this man must have before he be a perfect Surgeon.
And I do note four things most specially that every Surgeon ought for to
have: The first that he be learned: the second, that he be expert: the third,
that he be ingenious: the fourth, that he be well manered. The first (I said)
he ought to be learned, and that he know his principles, not only in
Chirurgerie, but also in Physic, that he may the better defend his Surgery.
Also he ought to be seen in natural Philosophy, and in Gra^mer, that he
speak congruitie in Logike, that teaches him to prove his proportions with
good reason. In Rethorike, that teaches him to speak seemly and eloquently:
also in Theorike, that teaches him to know things natural and not natural,
and things against nature. Also he must know the Anatomy, for all authors
write against those Surgions that work in man's body not knowing the Anatomy,
for they be likened to a blind man that cutteth in a vine tree, for he takes
more or less then he ought to do. And here note well the saying of Galen the
prince of Philosophers, in his Estoris, that it is as possible for a Surgion
not knowing the Anatomy, to work in man's body without error, as it is for a
blind man to carue an Image and make it perfyt. The. ij. I said, he must be
expert: for Rasus says, he ought to know and to see other men work, and after
to have use and exercise. The third, that he be ingenious or witty, for all
things belonging to Chirurgerie may not be written, nor with letters set
forth. The fourth I said, that he must be well manered, and that he have al
these good conditions here following: First, that he be no spousbreaker, nor no
drunkarde. For the Philosophers say, amongst all other things beware of those
persons that follow dronkennes, for they be accounted for no men, because they
live a life bestiall: wherefore amongst al other sorts of people, they ought to
be sequestered from the ministering of medicine. Likewise a Surgeon must take
heed that he deceive no man with his vain promises, for to make of asmal
matter a great, because he would be counted the more famous. And amongst
other things they may neither be flatterers, nor mockers, nor privy
backbyters of other men. Likewise they must not be proud, nor presumptuous,
nor detracters of other me^. Likewise they ought not to be too covetous, nor no
nigarde, and namely amongst their friends, or men of worship, but let them be
honest, courteous, and free, both in word and deed. Likewise they shall g^ue no
counsel except they be asked, and then say their advise by good deliberation,
and that they bewel advised before they speak, chefly in the presence of wise
men. Likewise they must be as privy and as secret as any Confessor, of al
things that they shall either hear or see in the house of their Pacient. They
shall not take into their cure any manner of person, except he will be obedient
unto their precepts, for he can not be called a pacient, unless he be a
sufferer. Also that they do their diligence as well to the poor as to the
rich. They shall never discomfort their pacient, and shall command all that
be about him that they do the same, but to his friends speak truth as the
case stands. They must also be bold in those things whereof they be
certain, and as dreadful in all perilles. They may not chide with the sick,
but be always pleasant and merry. They must not covet any woman by way of
vylanie, and specially in the house of their Pacient. They shall not for
covetousness of money take in hand those cures that be incurable, nor never set
any certain day of the sickemans health, for it lies not in their power:
following the distinct counsel of Galen, in the amphorisme of Ipocras, saying,
Oportet seipsum no^ solum. By this Galen means, that to the cure of every
sore there belongs four things: of which, the first and prin cipal
belongs to God, the second to the Surgion, the third to the Medicine, and
the fourth to the Pacient. Of the which four and if any one do fail, the
Pacient can not be healed: then they, to whom belongs but the fourth part,
shall not promise the whole, but be first well advised. They must also be
gracious and good to the poor, and of the rich take liberally, for both. And
see they never praise them selves, for that redoundeth more to their shame and
discredit, then to their fame and worship: For a cunning and skilful
Surgeon need never vau^t of his doings, for his works will ever get
credit enough. Likewise that they despise no other Surgeon without a great
cause: for it is meet that one Surgeon should love another, as Christ
loves us al. And in thus doing they shall increase both in virtue and cunning,
to the honor of God and worldly fame. To whom he bring us al. Amen.

Hereafter follows the Anathomie of the simple members.
AND if it be asked you how many simple members there be, it is to be answered,
eleven, and two that be but superfluities of members: and these be they, Bones,
Cartylages, Nerves, Pannykles, Lygaments, Cords, Arteirs, Weines, Fatnes,
Flesh and Skin: and the superfluities be the hears and the nails. I shall
begin at the Bone, because it is the fundation, and the hardest member of all the body. The Bone is a consimile member, simple and spermatike, and cold and
dry of complexion, insencible, and inflexible: and has diverse forms in man's
body, for the diversity of helpings. The cause why there be many bones in man's
body is this: Sometime it is needeful that one member or one lymme should move
without another. Another cause is, that some defend the principal members, as
does the bone of the breast, and of the head: and some to be the fundation of
diverse parts of the body, as the bones of the Ridge, and of the legs: and
some to fulfill the hollow places, as in the hands and feet. etc.

The Grystle is a member simple and spermatike, next in hardness to the bone,
and is of complexion cold and dry, and insencible. The grystle was ordained
for six causes, or profits that I find in it: The first is, that the
continual moving of the hard bone might not be done in a iuncture, but that the
grystle should be a mean between the Lygament and him: The second is, that
in the time of concussion or oppression, the soft members or limbs should not
be hurt of the hard: The third is, that the extremity of bones and Joints
that be gristly, might the easelyer be folded and moved together without hurt:
The fourth is, for that it is necessary in some mean places to put a grystle,
as in the throat bowel for the sound: The fyfth is, for that it is needeful
that some members be holden up with a grystle, as the liddes of the eyes: The
sixth is, that some limbs have a sustayning and a drawing abrod, as in the
nose and the ears. etc.

The Lygament is a member consimple, simple, and spermatike, next in hardness to
the gristle, and of complexion cold and dry, and is flexible and insensible,
and byndeth the bones together. The cause why he is flexible and insencible is
this: If it had been sensible, he might not have suffered the labor and moving
of the joints: and if it had not ben flexible of his bowing, one lymme should
not have moved without another. The second profit is, that he be joined with
sinews, for to make Cords and Brawnes: The third help is, that he be a
resting place to some sinews: The fourth profit is, that by him the members
that be within the body be sustained, as the matrix and kidneys, and diverse
other. etc.

The Sinew is a consimiler member, simple and spermatike, mean between hard
and soft, and in complexion cold and dry, and he is both flexible and
sensible, strong and tough, having his bes ginning from the brain, or from
Mynuca, which is the marow of the back. And from the brain comes. vij.
pair of Nerves sensatiues, and from Mynuca comes. xxx. pair of Nerves
motius, and one that is by him self, that springs of the last spondel. All
these senews have both feeling and moving, in some more, and in some less. etc.

A Cord or Tendon is a consimple or official member, compounde and spermatike,
synowy, strong, and tough, meanly between hardenes and softnes, and meanly
sensible and flexible, and in complexion cold and dry. And the Cord or Tendon
is thus made: The synewes that come from the brain and from Mynuca, and go to
move the members, is intermingled with the Lygamentes, and when the Synewes and
Lygamentes are intermingled together, then is made a Cord. And three causes I
perceive why the Cords were made: The first is, that the Synewe alone is so
sensible that he may not suffer the great labor and travel of moving, without
the fellowship and strength of the Lygament that is insencible, and that lets
his great feeling, and brings him to a perfect temperaunce, and so the Cords
move the limbs to the will of the soul. And this Cord is associated with a
simple flesh, and so thereof is made a brawne or a muskel, on whom he might rest
after his travel. And this Brawne is called a Muskle. Then when this Cord is
entered into this brawne, he is departed into many small threeds, the which be
called will. And this will has three properties: The first is in length, by
whose virtue that draws it has might: The soconde in breadth, by whom the
virtue that casts out has might: The third in thwartnes, in whom the virtue
that holds has might: and at the end of the Brawne those threedes be
gathered together to make another muskel. etc

Now I will begin at the Artere. This Artere is a member consimyle, simple
and spermatike, hollow and synowy, having his springing from the heart,
bringing from the heart to every member blood and spirit of life. It is of
complexion cold and dry. And al these Arteres have two cotes, except one that
goth to the Lunges, and he has but one cote that spreads abroad in the
Lungs, and brings with him to the Lunges blood, with the spirit of life to
nourishe the Lungs withal: and also that Artere brings with him from the
lunges air to temper the fumous heat that is in the heart. And this Artere is
he that is called Arteria venalis, because he has but one cote as a vain, and
is more obedient to be delated abroad through all the lunges, because that the
blood might the sooner sweat through him: whereas al other Arters have two
cotes, because one cote may not withstand the might and power of the spirit of
life. Diverse other causes there be, which shall be declared in the Anathomie of
the breast. etc.

The Ueyne is a simple member, in complexion cold and dry, and spermatike,
like to the Artere, having his beginning from the Liver, and bringing from the
Liver nutritive blood, to nourishe every member of the body with. And it is so
to be understood that there is no more difference between these two vessels
of blood, but that the Artere is a vessel of blood spiritual or vytal. And the
Ueyne is a vessel of blood nutrimental, of the which Ueynes there is noted two
most principal, of the which one is called vena porta, the other is called
venacelis, of whom it is too much to treat of now, until we come to the
anathomie of the womb. etc.

The flesh is a consimiler member, sim ple, not spermatike, and is engendered of
blood congeled by heat, and is in complexion hot and moist. Of the which is
noted three kinds of fleshes: that is to say, one is soft and pure flesh: the
second is muskulus or hard and brawny flesh: the third is glandulus, knotty,
or kurnelly flesh. Also the commodities of the flesh be indifferent, for some
be common to every kind of flesh, and some be proper to one manner of flesh
alone. The profytes of the flesh be many, for some defend the body from
cold as does clothes: also it defends the body from hard things coming
against it: also through his moisture he rectifieth the body in summer, in time
of great heat. Wherefore it is to be considered what profitablenes is in every
kind of flesh by him self. And first of simple and pure flesh, which
fulfylleth the concauities of void places, and causes good form and shape:
and this flesh is found between the teeth, and on the end of the yard. The
profit of the Brawny flesh or muskulus flesh, shall be spoken of in the
Anathomie of the arms. The profits of the Glandulus flesh are these: First,
that it turns the blood into a color like to him self, as does the flesh
of a woman's paps turn the menstrual blood into milk: secondly, the Glandulus
flesh of the Testikles, turns the blood into sparme: thirdly, the Glandulus
flesh of the cheeks, that ingendreth the spittle. etc.

The next is of Fatnes, of the which I find three kinds: The first is
Pinguedo, and it is a consimilar member, not spermatike, and it is made of a
subtyl portion of blood congeled by cold: and it is of complexion cold and
moist, insencible, and is intermedled amongst the parts of the flesh. The
second is Adeppes, and is of the same kind as is Pinguedo, but it is departed
from the flesh besides the skin, and it is as an oil heating and moysting
the skin. The third is Auxingia, and it is of kind as the others be, but he
is departed from the flesh withinforth about the kidneys, and in the
intrayles, and it helps both the kidneys and the intrayles from drying by his
vnctiositie. etc.

Then come we to the Skin. The Skin is a consimile member or official,
partly spermatike, strong and tough, flexible and sencible, thin and
temperate, Whereof there be two kinds: One is the Skin that covers the
outward members: and the other the inner members, which is called a Pannicle,
the profitablenesse of whom was spoken of in the last Lesson: But the Skin
is properlye wouen of Threedes, Nerves, Ueyne^s, and Arteirs. And he is made
temperate, because he should be a good deemer of heat from cold, and of
meystnes from drynes, that there should nothing noye nor hurt the body, but it
gives warning to the common wits thereof. etc.

The Heirs of every part of man's body are but a superfluity of members, made
of the gross fume or smoke passing out of the viscoues matter, thickened to
the form of heir. The profitablenesse of him is declared in the Anathomie of
the head. etc.

The Nails likewise are a superfluity of members, engendered of great earthly
smoke or fume resolved through the natural heat of humors, and is softer then
the Bone, and harder then the Flesh. In complexion they be cold and dry, and
are always waxing in the extremity of the fyngers and toes. The utility of
them are, that by them a man shall take the better hold: also they help to
clawe the body when it needs: Lastly, they help to divide things for lack
of other tools, etc.

Hereafter follows the Anathomie of the compound members, and first of the
head.
BEcause the head of man is the habitation or dwelling place of the reasonable
soul of man, therefore with the grace of God I shall first speak of the
Anatomy of the head. Galen says in the second Chapter De iuuamentes, and
Auicen rehearses the same in his first preposition and third Chapter, proving
that the Head of man was made neither for Wits, nor yet for the Brains, but
only for the eyes. For beasts that have no heads, have the orgayne or
instruments of Wits in their breasts. Therefore God and nature have reared up
the head of man only for the eyes, for it is the highest member of man: and as a
beholder or watchman stands in a high Tower to give warning of the enemies,
so does the Eye of man give warning unto the common Wits, for the defense of
all other members of the body. Now to our purpose. If the question be asked,
how many things be there containing on the head, and how many things
contained within the head? As it is rehearsed by Guydo, there be but five
containing, and as many contained: as thus, The Heir, the Skin, the Flesh,
the Pannicles, and the Bone, neither rehearsing Ueyne nor Artere. The which
Anathomie can not be truly without them both, as thou shall well perceive both
in this Chapter, but specially in the next. And now in this lesson I shall
speak but of Heir, Skin, Flesh, Ueines, Pannicles, and Bones, what profit
they do to man, every of them in his kind. Of the Heir of the head (whose
creation is known in the Anatomy of the simple members) I do note four
vtilities why it was ordained: the first is, that it defends the Brain from
too much heat, and too much cold, and many other outward noyances: The
second is, it makes the form or shape of the head to seem more seemelyer or
beautyfuller. For if the head were not heyred, the face and the head should
seem but one thing, and therefore the heir forms and shapeth the head from
the face: The third is, that by the color of the heir is witnessed and
known the complexion of the Brain: The fourth is, that the fumosities of the
brain might assend and pass lyghtlyer out by them. For if there were a sad
thing, as the skin or other, of the same nature as the heir is, the
fumosities of the brain might not have passed throw it so lightly, as it does
by the heir.

The Skin of the head is more lazartus, thicker, and more porrus, than any
other Skin of any other member of the body. And two causes I note why, One
is, that it keeps or defends the brain from too much heat and cold, as
does the heir: The other, it discusseth to the common wits of al things
that noyeth outwardly, for the heir is insencible: The third cause why the
skin of the head is more thicker then any other skin of the body, is this,
that it keeps the brain the more warm, and is the better fence for the
brain, and it binds and keeps the bones of the head the faster together.

Next follows the Flesh, the which is al Musculus or Lazartus flesh, lying
upon pericranium without mean. and it is made of subtle Will, and of simple
flesh, Synewes, Ueines, and Arteirs. And why the flesh that is al musculus or
lazartus in every member of a man's body was made, is for three causes: the
first is, that by his thicknes, he should comfort the digestion of other
members that lie by him: The second is, that through him every member is made
the more formelyer, and takes the better shape: The third is, that by his
means every member of the body draws to him norishing, the which others
withholde to put forth from them: as it shall be more playnlyer spoken of in
the Anathomie of the womb.

Next follows Pericranium, or the covering of the bones of the head. But
here it is to be noted of a Ueyne and an Artere that comes between the
flesh and this Pericranium, that nourishes the utter part of the head, and so
enters privily through the commissaries of the skul, bearing to the Brain and
to his Pannikles nourishing: of whose substance is made both Duramater, and
also Pericranium, as shall be declared in the parts contained in the head,
Here it is to be noted of this Pannikle Pericranium, that it binds or
compasses all the bones of the head, unto whom is adjoined the Duramater, and
is also a part of his substance, howbeit they be separated, for Duramater is
nerer yt brain, and is under the skull. This Pericranium was made principally
for two causes: one is, that for his strong bynding together he should make
firm and stable the feeble commissaries or seames of the bones of the head:
The other cause is, that it should be a mean between the hard bone and the
soft flesh.

Next is the Bone of the Pot of the head keeping in the Brains, of which it
were too long to declare their names after al Authors, as they number them and
their names, for some name them after the Greek tongue, and some after the
Arabian, but in conclusion al is to one purpose. And they be numbered seven
bones in the pan or skul of the head: the first is called the Coronal bone, in
which is yt Orbyts or holes of the Eyes, and it reaches from the Brows unto
the mid dest of the head, and there it meteth with the second bone called
Occipissial, a bone of the hinder part of the head called the Noddel of the
head, which two bones Coronal and Occipissiale be divided by the Commissaries
in the mids of the head. The third and fourth bones be called Parietales,
and they be the bones of the sideling parts of the head, and they be divided by
the Co^missories both from the foresaid Coronal and Occipissial. The fyfth and
the syxth bones be called Petrosa or Mendosa: and these two bones lie over the
bones called Parietales, on every side of the head one, like skales, in whom be
yt holes of the ears. The seventh and last of the head is called Paxillarie,
or Bazillarie, the which bone is as it were a wedge unto all the other seven
bones of the head, and does fasten them together. And thus be all numbered: the
first is the Coronal bone, the second is the Occipissial, the third and the
fourth is Parietales, the fyfth and the sixth is Petrosa or Mendosa, and the
seventh is Paxillari, or Bazillari. And this suffiseth for the five things
containing.

In this Chapter is declared the five things contained within the head.
NExt under the bones of the head withinfoorth, the first thing that appears
is Duramater, then is Piamater, then the substance of the Brain, and then
Uermy forms and Retemirabile. But first to speak of Duramater, whereof, and
how it is sprung and made: First it is to be noted of the Ueine and Arteire
that was spoken of in the last Chapter before, how priuyly they entered
through the commissoris or seames of the head, and there by their union
together, they do not only bring and give the spirit of life and nutriment,
but also do weaue them selves so together, that they make this pannicle
Duramater. It is holden up by certain threedes of him self coming through
the said commissories, running into Pericranium or pannicle that covers the
bones of the head. And with the foresaid Ueyne and Arteire, and these threedes
coming from Duramater, is wouen and made this Pericranium. Also why this
panicle Duramater is set from the skul, I note two causes: the first is, that
if the Duramater should have touched the skul, it should lightly have been
hurt with the hardness of the bone: The second cause is, that the matter that
comes of wounds made in the head pearsing the skul, should by it the better
be defended and kept from Piamater, and hurting of the brain. And next unto
this panicle there is another pannicle called Pia matter, or meek mother,
because it is so soft and tender unto the brain. Of whose creation it is to
be noted as of Duramater, for the original of their first creation is of one
kind, both from the Heart and the Liver, and is mother of the very substance of
the brain. Why it is called Piamater, is, for because it is so soft and
tender over the brain, that it nourishes the brain and feeds it, as does a
loving mother unto her tender child or babe, for it is not so tough and hard
as is Duramater. In this panicle Pia matter is much to be noted of the great
number of Ueynes and Arteirs that are planted, ramefying throughout al his
substance, giving to the brain both spirit and life. And this Pannicle does
circumuolue or lap all the substance of the brain: and in some places of the
brain the Ueynes and the Arteirs goo forth of him, and enter into the
divisions of the brain, and there drinks of the brain substance into them,
asking of the heart to them the spirit of life or breath, and of the Liver
nutriment. And the aforesaid spirit or breath takes a further digestion, and
there it is made animal, by the eleboration of the spirit vital is turned and
made animal. Furthermore, why there be moo pannicles over the brain then
one, is this, If there had been but one pannicle only, either it must have
been hard, or soft, or mean between both: If it had been hard, it should
have hurt the brain by his hardness: if it had been soft, it should have
been hurt of the hard bone: and if it had been but meanly neither hard not
soft, it should have hurt the brain by his roughnes, and also have been hurt
of the hard bone. Therefore God and nature have ordained two Pannicles, the
one hard, and the other soft, the harder to be a mean between the soft and
the bone: and the softer to be a mean between the harder and the brain it
self. Also these Pannicles be cold and dry of complexion, and spermatike.

Next is the Brain, of which it is marvelous to be considered and noted, how
this Piamater deuideth the substance of the Brain, and lappeth it into certain
selles or divisions, as thus: The substance of the brain is divided into
three parts, or ventrikles, of which the foremost part is the most: the
second or middlemost is less: the third or hindermost is the least. And from
each one to other be issues or passages that are called Meats, through whom
passes the spirit of life too and fro. But here ye shall note that every
Uentrikle is divided into two parts, and in every part God has ordained and
set singular and several virtues, as thus: First in the foremost Uentrikle God
has founded and set the common Wits, otherwise called the five Wits, as
Hearing, Seeing, Feeling. Smelling, and tasting. And also there is in one part
of this Uentrikle, the virtue that is called Fantasy, and he takes all the
forms or ordinances that be disposed of the five wits, after the meaning of
sensible things: In the other part of the same Uentrikle is ordained and
founded the Imaginatiue virtue, the which receives of the common Wits the
form or shape of sensitive things, as they were received of the common
wits withoutfoorth, representing their own shape and ordinances unto the
memoratiue virtue. In the midst sell or ventrikle there is founded and
ordained the Cogitatiue or estimatiue virtue: for he rehearses, she weth,
declares, and deemeth those things that be offered unto him by the other that
were spoken of before. In the third Uentricle and last there is founded and
ordained the virtue Memoratiue: in this place is registered and kept those
things that are done and spoken with the senses, and keeps them in his
treasury unto the putting forth of the five or common wits, or orgaynes, or
instruments of animal works, out of whose extremities or sowar parts
springs Mynuca, or marowe of the spondels: of whom it shall be spoken of in
the Anatomy of the neck and back. Furthermore it is to be noted, that from
the foremost Uentrikle of the brain springs seven pair of sensatiue or
feeling senews, the which be produced to the Eyes, the Ears, the Nose, the
Tongue, and to the Stomach, and to diverse other parts of the body: as it shall
be declared in their anatomies. Also it is to be noted, that about the
midst ventrikle is the place of Uermi formis, with curnelly flesh that
fills, and Retemirabile, or wonderful caul under the Pannicles, is set or
bounded with Arteirs only which come from the heart, in the which the
vitayle spirit by his great labor is turned and made animal. And ye shall
understand that these two be the best kept parts of all the body, for a man
shall rather dye, then any of these should suffer any manner of greefes from
withoutfoorth, and therefore God has set them far from the heart. Here I
note the saying of Haly Abbas, of the coming of small Arteirs from the heart, of
whom (says he) is made a marvelous net or caul, in the which caul is
enclosed the Brain, and in that place is laid the spirit of feeling, from
that place has the spirit of feeling his first creation, and from thence
passes to other members. etc. Furthermore ye shall understand that the brain
is a member cold and moist of complexion, thin, and meanly viscous, and a
principal member, and an official member, and spermatike. And first why he is a
principal member, is, because he is the governor or the treasury of the five
wits: And why he is an official member, is, because he has the effect of
feeling and stering: And why he is cold and moist, is, that he should by his
coldness and moystnes abate and temper the exceeding heat and drought that
comes from the heart: Also why it is moist, is, that it should be the more
indifferenter and abler to every thing that should be reserved or gotten into
him: Also why it is soft, is, that it should give place and favor to the
virtue of stering: And why it is meanly viscous, is, that his senewes should
be strong and meanly toughe, and that they should not be let in their
working through his ouermuche hardness. Here Galen demands a question,
which is this, Whether that feeling and moving be brought to Nerves by one or
by diverse? or whether the aforesaid thing be brought substancially or
radically. The matter (says he) is so hard to search and be understood,
that it were much better to let it alone and pass over it. Aristotle
entreating of the Brain, says, The Brain is a member continually moving and
ruling al other members of the body, giving unto them both feeling and moving:
for if the Brain be let, al other members be let: and if the Brain be well,
then al other members the body be the better disposed. Also the brain has
this property, that it moves and follows the moving of the Moon: for in
the waxing of the Moon the Brain follows vpwardes, and in the wane of the
Moon the brain discendeth downwardes, and vanishes in substance of virtue:
for then the Brain shrinketh together in it self, and is not so fully
obedient to the spirit of feeling. And this is proved in men that be lunatike
or mad, and also in men that be epulentike or having the falling sickness,
that be most grieved in the beginning of the new Moon, and in the latter
quarter of the Moon. Wherefore (says Aristotle) when it happens that the
Brain is either too dry or too moist, then can it not work his kind: for
then is the body made cold: then are the spirits of life melted and resolved
away: and then follows feeblenes of the wits, and of al other members of the
body, and at the last death.

Hereafter follows the Anatomy of the Face.
THE Front or the Forhead conteyneth nothing but the Skin and Musculus
flesh, for the panicle underneath it is of Pericranium, and the bone is of the
Coronal bone. Howebeit there it is made broad as yt there were a double bone,
which makes the form of the Brows. It is called the Forhead or Front from
one Ear to the other, and from the roots of the Ears of the head before unto
ye brows. But the cause why the Brows were set and reared up, was, that they
should defend the Eyes from noyaunce withoutfoorth: And they be ordained with
hear to put by the humor or sweat that comes from the head. Also the Brows
do help the Eyeliddes, and do beautify and make fair the face, for he that
has not his Brows heyred, is not seemly. And Aristotle says, that over
measurable Brows betokens an envious man: Also high brows and thick
betokens hardness: and brows with little hear betokens cowardnes: and
meanly sigfieth gentleness of heart. Incisions about these parts ought to be
done according to the length of the body, for there the Muscle goes from one
Ear to the other. And there if any incision should be made with the length of
the Muscle, it might happen the Browe to hang over the Eye without remedy, as
it is many times seen, the more pity. The brows be called Supercilium in
Latin, and under is the Eye liddes, which is called Cilium, and is garnished
with heirs. Two causes I find why the eye liddes were ordained: The first is,
that they should keep and defend the Eye from duste and other outward
noyances: the second is, when the eye is weery or heavy, then they should be
covered and take rest underneath them. Why the heirs were ordained in them,
is, that by them is addressed the forms or similitudes of visible things unto
the apple of the eye. The Ear is a member semely and grystlye, able to be
folden without, and is the orgayne or instrument of hearing: It is of
complexion cold and dry. But why the ear was set up out of the head, is
this, that the soundes that be very fugitive, should lurk and abide under his
shadow, till it were taken of the instruments of hearing: Another cause is,
that it should keep the hole that it stands over from things falling in
that might hinder the hearing. The senewes that are the Orgayns or Instruments
of hearing, spring each from the Brain, from whence the seven pair of senewes
do spring, and when they come to the hole of the Ear, there they writhe like a
wine press, and at the ends of them there be like the head of a worm, or
like a little teat, in which is received the sound, and so carried to the
common wits. The Eyes be next of nature unto the Soul: for in the Eye is
seen and known the disturbances and greefes, gladness and joys of the Soul,
as love, wrath, and other passions. The Eyes be the instruments of sight. And
they be compounde and made of ten things: that is to say, of seven Tunicles or
Cotes, and of three humors. Of the which (says Galen) the Brain and the
head were made for the Eye, that they might be in the highest place, as a
beholder in a tower, as it was rehearsed in the Anatomy of the head. But
diverse men hold diverse opinions of the Anatomy of the Eyes: for some men
account but three tunikles, and some six. But in conclusion they mean all one
thing: For the very truth is, that there be counted and reckoned seven
Tunikles, that is to say, Sclirotica, Secondyna, Retyna, Vnia, Cornua, Arania,
and Coniunctiua: and these three humors, That is to say, humor Vitrus, humor
Albigynus, and humor Crystallinus. It is to be known how and after what manner
they spring: You shall understand that there springs of the brayny substance
of his foremost Uentrikles, two senewes, The one from the right side, and the
other from the left, and they be called the first pair, for in the Anatomy
they be the first pair of senewes that appear of al seven. And it is showed
by Galen, that these senews be hollow as a reed, for two causes: The first
is, that the visible spirit might pass freely to the Eyes: The second is, that
the form of visible things might freely be presented to the common wits.
Now mark the gooing forth of these senewes: When these senewes goo out from
the substance of the Brain, he comes through the Piamater, of whose
substance he takes a Pannicle or a Cote: and the cause why he takes that
Pannicle, is to keep him from noying, and before they enter into the skul,
they meet and are united into one senewe the length of half an inche: and
then they depart again into two, and each goes into one eye, entering through
the brain pan, and these senews be called Nerui optici. And three causes I
find why these Nerves are joined in one before they pass into the Eye: First,
if it happen any diseases in one eye, the other should receive all the visible
spirit that before came to both: The second is, that all things that we see
should not seem two: for if they had not been joined together, every thing
should have seemed two, as it does to a worm, and to other beasts: The
third is, that the Senewe might stay and help the other. But heerevpon
Lamfranke accords much, saying, that these two Senewes come together to the
Eyes, and take a Panikle both of Piamater and of Duramater, and when they enter
into the Orbyt of the Eye, there the extremities are spread abroad, the which
are made of three substances: that is to say, of Du ramater, of Piamater, and
of Nerui optici. There be engendered three Tunikles or Cotes, as thus, Of the
substance that is taken from Duramater is engendered the first cote that is
called Secondina: and of Nerui optici is engendered the third cote that is
called Retina: and each of them is more subtiller then other, and goes about
the humors without mean. And it is to be understood, that each of these
three Tunicles be divided, and so they make sire: That is to say, iij. of the
parts of the brain, and three of the parts outwardes, and one of Pericranium
that covers the bones of the head, which is called Coniunctiua. And thus you
may perceive the springing of them: as thus, Of Duramater springs Sclirotica
and Cornua: of Piamater springs Secondina and Unia: and of Nerui optici
springs Coniunctiua. No we to speak of the humors which be three, and their
places are the middle of the Eyes: Of the which the first is Humor Uitrus,
because he is like glass, in color very clear, read, liquit, or thin, and
he is in the inward side next unto the brain: and it is thin, because the
nutritive blood of the Crystalline might pass, as water through a sponge
should be cleansed and made pure, and also that the visible spirit might the
lightlyer pass through him from the Brain. And he goes about the Cristaline
humor, until he meet with Albuginus humor, which is set in the uttermost
part of the Eye. And in the myddest of these humors Uitrus, and Albuginus, is
set the Crystalline humor, in which is set principally the sight of the Eye.
And these humors be separated and inuolued with the Pannicles aforesaid,
between every Humor a Panicle. And thus is the Eye compound and made. But to
speak of every Humor and every Pannicle in his due order and course, it would
ask a long process, and a long Chapter, and this is sufficient for a
Surgeon. Now to begin at the Nose: You shall understand that from the
Brain there comes. ij. Senews to the holes of the brain pan, where
begins the concauitie of the Nose, and these two be not properly senewes,
but organes or instruments of smelling, and have heads like teates or pappes,
in which is received the virtue of smelling, and representing it to the common
wits. Over these two is set Colatorium, that we call the Nose thrils: and it
is set between the Eyes, under the upper part of the Nose. And it is to be
noted, that this concauitie or ditche was made for two causes: The first is,
that the air that brings forth the spirit of smelling might rest in it,
till it were taken of the organ or instrument of smelling: The second cause
is, that the superfluities of the Brain might be hydden under it, until it
were cleansed: And from his co^cauitie there goes two holes down into ye mouth,
of which there is to be noted three profits: The first is, that when a man's
mouth is close, or when he eats or sleeps, that then the air might come
through them to the Lunges, or else a man's mouth should always be open: The
second cause is, that they help to the relation of the form of the Nose: for
it is said, a man speaks in his Nose when any of these holes be stopped: The
third cause is, that the concauitie might be cleansed by them when a man
snuffeth the Nose, or draws into his mouth inwardly. The Nose is a member
consimple or official, appearing without the face, somewhat plicable, because
it should the better be cleansed. And it is to be perceived that it is
compounde and made of shinne and Lazartus flesh, and of two bones standing in
manner trianglewise, whose extremities be joined in one part of the Nose with
the Coronal bone, and the nether extremities are joined with two grystles, and
another that divides the Nose thrilles within, and holds up the nose: Also
there be two concauities or holes, that if one were stopped the other should
serve: Also there is in the Nose two Muskles, to help the working of his
office. And Galen says, that the Nose shapeth the Face most: for where the
Nose lacks (says he) all the rest of the face is the more unseemly. The Nose
should be of a mean bigness, and not to exceed in length, or breadth, nor in
highness. For Aristotle says, if the Nose thrills be too thin, or to wide,
by great drawing in of air, it betokens great straightnes of heart, and
indignation of thought. And therefore it is to be noted, that the shape of the
members of the body, betokneth and judges the affections and will of the Soul
of man, as the Philosopher says. The temples be called the members of the
head, and they have that name because of continual moving. And as the science
of the Anatomy means, the spirit vital is sent from the heart to the brain
by Arteirs, and by veins and nutrimental blood, where the vessels pulsatiues
in the temples be lightly hurt. Also the temples have dentes or holes
inwardely, wherein he takes the humor that comes from the brain, and
brings the eyes asleep, and if the said holes or dentes be pressed and
wroung, then by trapping of the humor that continues, he makes the tears to
fall from the Eye. The Cheeks are the sideling parts of the face, and they
conteyne in them Musculus flesh, with Ueynes and Arteirs, and about these
parts be many Muscles. Guydo makes mention of. vij. about the chekes and over
lyp. And Haly Abbas says, there be. xij. Muscles that move the nether Iawe,
some of them in opening, and other some in closing or shutting, passing under
the bones of ye temples, And they be called Temporales: And they be right noble
and sensatiue, of whose hurt is much peril. Also there be other Muskles for
to grind and to chewe. And to al these Muscles comes Nerves from the brain
to give them feeling and moving: and also there comes to them many Arteirs
and Ueines, and chiefly about the temples, and the angles or corners of the
Eyes and the Lips. And as the Philosophers say, the chief beauty in man is
in the cheeks, and there the complexion of man is most known, as thus, If
they be full, ruddy, and meddled with temperate whitnes, and not fat in
substance, but meanly fleshly, it betokens hot and moist of complxion,
that is, sanguin and temperate in culler. And if they be white colored,
without meddling of rednes, and in substance fat and soft, quauering, it
betokens excess and superfluity of cold and moist, that is flematike: And
if they be brown in color, or cytrin, yelowe, read, and thin, and lean in
substance, betokens great drying and heat, that is cholerike: And if they be
as it were blown in color, and of little flesh in substance, it betokens
excess and superfluity of drynes and cold, and that is melancholy. And as
Auicen says, the Cheeks do not only show the diversities of complexions,
but also the affection and will of the heart: for by the affection of the heart,
by sudden joy or dreede, he waxes either pale or read. The bones or bony
parts, first of the cheeks be two: of the Nose outwardely, two: of the upper
Mandibile, two: within the Nose, three: as thus, one dividing the Nosethrilles
within, and in each Nosethril one, and they seem to be rolled like a wafer, and
have a holownesse in them, by which the air is respyred and drawn to the
lunges, and the superfluity of the brain is purged into the mouth wards, as
is before rehearsed. But Guydo and Galen say, that there be in the face nine
bones, yet I can not find that the nether Mandible should be of ye number of
those nine, for the nether Mandible accounted there, proves them to be ten in
number, Of which thing I will hold no argument, but remit it to the sight of
your Eyes. The parts of the mouth are five, that is to say, the Lips, the
teeth, the tongue, the Uuila, and the Pallet of the mouth. And first to speak
of the lips, they are members consimile or official, full of Musculus flesh,
as is aforesaid, and they were ordained for two causes, one is, that they
should be to the mouth as a door to a house, and to keep the mouth close till
the meat were kindly chewed: The other cause is, that they should be helpers
to the pronouncing of the speech. The teeth are members consimile or official,
spermatike, and hardest of any other members, and are fastened in the cheek
bones, and were ordained for three causes: First that they should chewe a man's
meat, or it should pass down, that it might be the sooner digested: The
second, that they should be a help to the speech, for they that lack their
Teeth do not perfectly pronounce their words: the third is, that they should
serve to beasts as weapons. The number of them is uncertain, for some men have
mo, and some less, they that have the whole number have. xxxij. that is to
say. xvj. above, and as many beneath, as thus, two Dvvallies, two Quadripulles,
two Cannines, eight Morales, and two Cansales. The Tongue is a carnous member,
compounde and made of many Nerves, Lygamentes, Ueines and Arteirs, ordained
principally for three causes: The first is, that when a man eats the Tongue
might help to turn the meat till it were well chewed: The second cause is,
that by him is received the taste of sweet and sour, and presented by him to
the common wits: The third is, that by him is pronounced every speech. The
fleshly part of the tongue is white, and has in him nine muskles, and about
the root of him is Glandulus, in the which be two wells, and they be ever
full of spittle to temper and keep moist the tongue, or else it would wax dry by
reason of his labor. etc. The Uuila is a member made of a spongeous flesh,
hanging down from thy end of the Pallet over the goulet of the throat, and is
a member in complexion cold and dry, and oftentimes when there falls rawnes
or much moystnes into it from the head, then it hangs down in the throat,
and lets a man to swallowe, and it is broad at the upper end, and small at
the nether. It was ordained for diverse causes, One is, that by him is helped
the sound of speech, for where the Uuila is lacking, there lacks the
perfect sound of speech: Another is, that it might help the prolation of
vomites: another is, that by him is tempered and abated the distemperaunce of
the air that passes to the Lunges: another is, that by him is guyded the
superfluities of the brain that comes from the coletures of the Nose, or else
the superfluities should fall down suddenly into the mouth, the which were a
displeasure. The Pallet of the mouth conteyneth nothing else but a carnous
Pannikle, and the bones that be underneath it have two divisions, One along the
Pallet from the division of the Nose, and from the opening of the other
Mandible unto the nether end of the Pallet, lacking half an inch, and there
it divides overthwart, and the first division is of the Mandible, and the
second is of the bone called Paxillarie or Bazillarie, that sustayneth and
byndeth al other bones of the head together. The skin of the Pallet of the
mouth is of the inner part of the stomach and of Mire, and of Ysofagus, that
is the way of the meat into the stomach. The way how to know that such a
pannicle is of that part of the stomach, may be known when that a man is
touched within the mouth, anon he begins to tickle in the stomach, and the
nearer that he shall touch unto the throat, the more it abhors the stomocke,
and often times it causes the stomach to yield from him that is within him, as
when a man does vomit. Also in the mouth is ended the vppermoste extremity of
the Wesande, which is ca led Mire or Isofagus. And with him is contained
Trachia arteria, that is, the way of the air, whose holes be covered with a
lap like a tongue, and is gristly, that the meat and drink might slide over
him into Isofagus: The which grystle when a man speaks it is reared up, and
covers the way of the meat: and when a man swaloweth the meat, then it
covers the way of the air, so that when the one is covered the other is
discovered. For if a man open the way of the air when he swalloweth, if there
fall a crum into it, he shall never cease coughing until it be up again. And
this suffiseth for the neck, face.

Hereafter follows the Anatomy of the Neck.
THE Neck follows next to be spoken of. Galen proves that the Neck was made
for no other cause but for the Lunges, for all things that have no Lungs have
neither neck nor voice, except fish. And you shall understand, that the neck
is all that is contained between the head and the shoulders, and between the
chinne and the breast. It is compounde and made of four things, that is to
say, of Spondillus, of Seruicibus, of Gula, and of Gutture, the which shall be
declared more plainly hereafter, and through these pass the way of the meat
and of the air, but they be not of the substance of the neck. The Spondelles
of the neck be seven, The first is joined unto the lower part of the head,
called Paxillarie or Bazillarie, and in the same wise are joined every Spondel
with other, and the last of the seven with the first of the Back or Ridge:
and the Lygamentes that keep these Spondels together are not so hard and tough
as those of the back: for why? those of the neck be more feebler and
subtiller: The cause is this, for it is necessary otherwhile that the head move
without the neck, and the neck without the head, the which might not well
have been done if they had been strong and boystrous. Of these aforesaid
seven Spondels of the neck, there springs seven pair of Senewes, the which
be divided into the head and into the Uysage, to the shoulders, and to the
arms. From the hole of the first spondel springs the first pair of senewes,
between the first spondel and the second, and so forth of all the rest in like
manner as of these. Also these senewes receive subtle will of the senews of the
Brain, of the which will, and senewes, and flesh, with a pannikle, make the
composition of Muskels, Lazartes, and Brawnes, the which three things be al
one, and be the instruments of voluntary moving of every member. The Muskles
of the neck after Galen are numbered to be. xx. moving the head and the neck.
Likewise it is to be noted, that there be three manner of fleshes in the neck:
the first is Pixwex or Seruisis, and it is called of Chylder Gold heir, or
yellowe heir, the which are certain longitudinales lying on the sides of the
Spondels from the head down to the latter Spondel. And they are ordained for
this cause, that when the Senewes be weery of over much labor with moving and
travail, that they might rest upon them as upon a bed. The second flesh is
musculus, from whom springs the Tendons and cords that move the head and
the neck, which be numbered twenty, as is before declared: The third flesh
replenisheth the void places. etc.

The third part of the neck is called Gutture, and it is the standing out of
the Throat boll. The fourth part is called Gula, and the hinder part Ceruix,
and has that name of the Philosophers because of the marowe coming to the
Ridge bones, It is so called, because it is as it were a servant to the
brain: For the neck receives and takes of the brain influence of virtue of
moving, and sends it by senewes to other parts of the body downwardes, and to
al members of the body. Here you shall understand, that the way of the meat,
and Mire or Isofagus is al one thing, and it is to be noted, that it stretches
from the mouth to the stomach, by the hinder part of the neck inwardly,
fastened to the spondels of the neck, until he come to the fyfthe spondel, and
there he leaves the spondel and stretches till he come to the foremost part of
the breast, and passes through Diafragma till it come to the mouth of the
stomach, and there he is ended. Furthermore it is to be noted, that this
Wesande is compounde and made of two Tunikles or Cotes, that is to say, of the
inner, and of the utter. The utter tunikle is but simple, for he needs no
retention but only for his own nourishing: but the inner Tunikle is compounde
and made of Musculus Longitudinal Will, by which he may draw the meat from the
mouth into the stomach, as it shall be more plainly declared in the Anatomy of
the stomach. Furthermore Cana pulmonis via trachia arteria, al these be one
thing, that is to say, the throat boll, and it is set within the neck besides
ye Wesand toward Gula, and is compounde of the grystle knytte each with
other. And that pannikle that is mean between the Wesand and the throat bol,
is called Ismon. Also ye shall understand, that the great Ueines which ramefie
by the sides of the neck to the upper part of the head, is of some men called
Gwidege, and of others Vena organices, the incision of whom is perilous. And
thus it is to be considered, that the Neck of man is compounde and made of
skinny flesh, Ligamentes and bones. And this suffiseth for the neck and the
throat.

The Anatomy of the Shoulders and Arms.
AND first to speak of the bones: It is to be noted, that in the shoulder
there be two bones, that is to say, the Shoulder bone, and the Cannel bone, and
also the adiutor bone of the arm are joined with ye shoulder bones, but they
are not numbered among them, but amongst the bones of the arms. In the
composition of the shoulder, the first bone is Os spatula, or shoulder blade,
whose hinder part is declined toward ye chinne, and in that end it is broad
and thin, and in the upper part it is round, in whose roundnes is a co^cauitie,
which is called ye box or coope of the shoulder, into which enters the
Adiutor bones, and they have a bynding togethers with strong flexible Senewes,
and are contained fast with the bone called Clauicula, or the Cannel bone: and
this Cannel bone stretches to both the shoulders, one end to the one
shoulder, and another to the other, and there they make the composition of the
shoulders. The bones of the great arm, that is to say, from the shoulder to
the fingers ends, be. xxx. The first is the Adiutor bone, whose upper end
enters into the concauitie or box of the shoulder bone: It is but one bone
having no fellow, and it is hollow and full of marowe, and it is also crooked
because it should be the more habler to grype things, and it is hollow
because it should be lighter and more obedient to the steering or moving of the
Brawnes. Furthermore, this bone has two emynences, or two knobs in his nether
extremity, or in the iuncture of the Elbowe, of the which the one is more
rising then the other, and are made like unto a Polly to draw water with, and
the ends of these bones enter into a concauitie proportioned in the vppermoste
ends of the two Focel bones, of which two bones the less goes from the
Elbowe to the Thombe, by the vppermoste part of the arm, and the greater is
the nether bone from the Elbowe to the^ little finger. And these two bones be
contained with the Adiutor bone, and be bound with strong Ligamentes, and in
like manner with the bones of the hand. The which bones be numbered. viij. the
iiij. uppermost be joined with the. iiij. nethermost toward the hands: and
in the third ward of bones, be. v. and they are called Ossa patinis, and they
are in the palm of the hand. And to them be joined the bones of the Fingers
and the Thombes, as thus, in every finger. iii. bones, and in the thombe two
bones: that is to say, in the fingers and thombe of every hand. xiiij. called
Ossa digitoru^, in the palm of the hand. v. called Patinis, and between the
hand and the wryste viij. called Racete, and from the wryst to the shoulder.
iij. bones: al which being accounted together, ye shall find thirty bones in
each hand and arm. To speak of Senewes, Lygamentes, Cords and Brawnes: Here
first ye shall understand that there comes from Mynuca through the Spondels of
the neck four senewes, which most plainly do appear in sight, as thus, one
comes into the upper part of the arm, another into the nether part, and
one into the inner side, and another into the utter side of ye arm, and they
bring from the brain and from Minuca both feeling and moving into the arms,
as thus, The senewes that come from the Brain and from the marow of the back
that is called Minuca, when they come to the iuncture of the shoulder, there
they are mixed with the Lygamentes of the self shoulder, and there the
Lygamentes receive both feeling and moving of them, and also in their meddling
together they are made a Cord or a Tendo^. Three causes I find why the senewes
were meddled with the Lygamentes, The first cause is, that the excellent feeling
of the senewes, which many ways be made weery by their continual moving,
should be repressed by the insenciblenesse of the Lygaments: The second is,
that the littleness of the Senewes should be fulfilled through the quantity
of the Lygaments: The third is, the feebleness of the senewe, that is
insufficiente and too feeble to use his offices, but by the strength and
hardness of the Lygamentes. Now to declare what a Cord is, what a Ligament,
and what a Muskle or a Brawne, it is enough rehearsed in the Chapter of the
Simple members. But if you will thorough the commandment of the Will or of the
Soul, draw the arm to the hinder part of the body, then the utter Brawne is
drawn together, and the inner is enlarged: And likewise inwards, when the one
brawne does draw inwardes, the other does stretche, and when the arm is
stretched in length, then the Cords be lengthened: but when they pass the
iuncture of the shoulder and of the Elbowe, by three fingers breadth or
thereabout, then it is divided by subtle will, and meddled with the simple
flesh, and that which is made of it is called a Brawne. And three causes I
find why that the simple flesh is meddled with the Cord in the composition of
the brawne: The first is, that the aforesaid Will might draw in quiet
through the temperaunce of the flesh: The second is, that they temper and
abate the drought of the cord with his moystnes, the which drought he gets
through his manifold moving: The third is, that the form of the brawny
members should be the more fair, and of better shape: wherefore God and nature
have clothed it with a Panikle that it might the better be kept. And it is
called of ye Philosophers Musculus, because it has a form like unto a Mcuse.
And when these Brawnes come near a Joint, then the Cords spring forth of
them, and are meddled with the Lygaments again, and so moves that Joint. And
so ye shall understand, that always between every two Joints is engendered a
Brawne, proportioned to the same member and place unto the last extremity of
the fingers, so that as well the least iuncture has a proper feeling and moving
when it needs, as has the greatest. And after Guydo there be numbered. xiij.
in the arm and hand, as thus. iiij. in the Adiutor, moving the upper part of
the arm: and. iiij. in the Focels, moving that part of the arm: and five in
the hand, moving the fyngers. Now to speak somewhat of the Ueynes and Arteirs
of the arm: It is to be understood, that from Venakelis there comes two
branches, the one comes to the one arm pyt, and the other comes to the
other. And now mark the spreading, for as it is of the one, so it is of the
other, as thus, when the branch is in the arm pyt, there he is divided into
two branches, the one branch goes along in the inner side of the arm until
it come to the bought of the arm, and there it is called Bazilica or ^patica,
and so goes down the arm til it come to the wryst, and there it is turned to
the back of the hand, and is found between the little finger and the next, and
there it is called Saluatella. Now to the other branch that is in the arm
hole, which spreads to the utter side of the shoulder, and there he deuideth
in two, ye one goes spreading up into ye carnous part of the head, and after
discendeth through the bone into the Brain, as it is declared in the Anatomy
of the head: The other branch goes on the outward side of the arm, and
there he is divided in two also, the one part is ended at the hand, and the
other part is folded about the arm, till it appear in the bought of the arm,
and there it is called Sephalica, from thence it goes to the back of the
hand, and appears between the thombe and the foremost finger, and there it
is called Sephalica occularis. The two branches that I spoke of, which be
divided in the hinder part of the shoulders, from each of these two (I say)
springs one, and those two meet together and make one vein, which appears
in the bought of the arm, and there it is called Mediana, or Cordialis, or
Commine. And thus it is to be understood, that of vena Sephalica springs
vena occularis, and of vena Bazilica springs vena Saluatella, and of the two
veins that meet springs vena Mediana, and in ramefying from these five
principal Ueines springs innumerable, of the which a Surgeon has no
great charge, for it suffiseth us to know the principals.

To speak of Arteirs, you shall understand, that wheresoever there is found
a Ueine, there is an Arteire under him: and if there be found a great Ueyne,
there is found a great Arteir, and where as is a little Ueine there is a little
Arteir: For whersoeuer there goes a vein to give nutriment, there goes an
Arteir to bring the spirit of life. Wherefore it is to be noted, that the
Arteires lie more deeper in the flesh then the Ueines do: for they carry and
keep in them more precious blood then does the Ueine, and therefore he has
need to be further from dangers outwardly: and therefore God and nature have
ordained for him to be closed in two cotes, where the Ueine has but one. etc.

The Breast or Thorax is the Arc or Chest of the spiritual members of man, as
says the Philosopher, where it is to be noted, that there be sour things
containing, and eight contained, as thus, The four containing, are, the
Skin, Musculus flesh, the Pappes, and the Bones: The parts contained, are,
the Heart, the Lunges, Panikles, Ligamentes, Nerves, Ueines, Arteirs, Mire or
Isofagus. Now the skin and the flesh are known in their Anatomy. It is to
be noted, that the flesh of the Pappes differs from the other flesh of the
body, for it is white, glandulus, and spongeous: and there is in the^ both
Nerves, Ueines and Arteirs, and by them they have Coliganes with the heart, the
liver, the brain, and the generatiue members. Also there is in the breast, as
old Authors make mention, lxxx. or. xc. Muskles, for some of them be common to
the neck, some to the shoulders, and to the spades, some to Diafragma or ye
Mydriffe, some to the Ribs, some to the Back, and some to the breast it
self. But I find certain profitablenes in the creation of ye Paps, as well in
man as in woman: for in man it defends the spirituals from annoyannce
outwardly: and another, by their thicknes they comfort the natural heat in
defience of the spirits. And in women there is the generation of milk: for in
women there comes from the Matrix into their Breasts many Ueines which bring
into them menstrual blood, the which is turned through the digestive virtue
from red color into white, like the color of the Pappes, even as Chylley
coming from the stomocke to the Liver is turned into the color of the Liver.
Now to speak of the bones of the Breast: They be said to be triple or
threefolde, and they be numbered to be seven in the Breast before, and their
length is according to the breadth of the breast, and their extremities or ends
be grystlie, as the ribs be. And in the upper end of Thorax is an hole or a
concauitie, in which is set the foot of the Furklebone or Canel bone, and in
the nether end of Thorax, against ye mouth of the stomache, hangs a gristle
called Ensiforme: and this grystle was ordained for two causes, One is, that it
should defend the stomach from hurt outwardly: The second is, that in time
of fulness it should give place to ye stomach in time of need when it
desires. etc. Now to speak of the parts of the back behindefoorth: There be.
xij. Spondels, through whom passes Mynuca, of who^ springs. xij. pair of
Nerves, brnging both feeling and moving to the Muscles of the Breast aforesaid.
And here it is to be noted, that in every side there be. xij. Rybbes, that is
to say. vij. true, and. v. false, because these. v. be not so long as the
other. vij. be, and therefore be called false Rybbes, as it may be perceived by
the sight of the Eye. Likewise of the parts that be inwardly, and first of
the Heart, because he is the principal of al other members, and the beginning of
life: he is set in the midst of the breast severally by him self, as Lord and
King of al members. And as a Lord or King ought to be served of his subjects
that have their living of him: So are al other members of the body subjects to
the Heart, for they receive their living of him, and they do service many ways
unto him again. The substance of the Heart is as it were Lazartus flesh, but
it is spermatike, and an official member, and the beginning of life, and he
gives to every member of the body both blood of life, and spirit of breath
and heat: for if the Heart were of Lazartus flesh, his moving and steering
should be voluntary and not natural, but the contrary is true, for it were
impossible that the Heart should be ruled by Will only, and not by nature. The
Heart has the shape and form of a Pyneapple, and the broad end thereof is
vpwardes, and the sharp end is downewardes, depending a little toward the
left side. And here it is to be noted, that the Heart has blood in his
substance, whereas al other members have it but in their Ueines and Arteirs:
also the heart is bound with certain Ligamentes to the backepart of the breast,
but these Lygamentes touch not the substance of the Heart, but in the ouerpart
they spring forth of him, and is fastened, as is aforesaid. Furthermore the
Heart has two Uentrikles or concauities, and the left is hyer then the right,
and the cause of this holownesse is this, for to keep the blood for his
nourishing, and the air to abate and temper the great heat that he is in, the
which is kept in his concauities. Now here it is to be noted, that to the
right Uentrikle of the heart comes a vein from the great vein called
Venakelis, that receives all the substance of the blood from the Liver. And
this vein that comes from venakelis enters into the heart at the right
Uentrikle, as I said before, and in him is brought a great portion of the
thickest blood to nourishe the Heart with, and the residue that is left of this,
is made subtle through the virtue of the heart, and then this blood is sent into
a concauitie or pytte in the myddest of the Heart between the two Uentrikles,
and therein it is made hot and pured, and then it passes into the left
Uentrikle, and there is engendered in it a spirit that is clearer, brighter, and
subtiller then any corporal or bodily thing that is engendered of the four
Elements: For it is a thing that is a mean between the body and the soul.
Wherefore it is likened of the Philosophers, to be more liker heavenly things
then earthly things. Also it is to be noted, that from the left Uentrikle of
the Heart springs two Arteirs: The one having but one cote, and therefore it
is called Arterea venalis: and this Arteir carries blood from the Heart to the
Lungs, the which blood is vaporous, that is tried and left of the Heart, and is
brought by this Artery to the Lunges to give him nutriment: and there he
receives of the Lunges air, and brings it to the heart to refreshe him with.
Wherefore Galen says, that he fyndeth that man's heart is natural and friendly
to the Lungs, for he gives him of his own nutrimental to nourishe him with,
and the Lunges reward him with air to refreshe him with again. etc. The
other Arterye that has two cotes, is called vena Arterialis, or the great
Artery that ascends and dissendeth, and of him springs all the other Arteirs
that spread to every member of the body, for by him is vnified and quickneth
all the members of the body. For the spirit that is retained in them, is the
instrument or treasure of all the virtue of the soul. And thus it passes until
it come to the Brain, and there he is turned into a further digestion, and
there he takes another spirit, and so is made animal, and at the Liver
nutrimental, and at the Testikles generatiue: and thus it is made a spirit of
every kind, so that he being mean of all manner of operations and workinges
takes effect. Two causes I find why these Arteirs have two cotes: One is,
that one cote is not sufficient nor able to with stand the violent moving and
steering of the spirit of life that is carried in the^: The second cause is,
that the thing that is carried about from place to place, is of so precious a
treasure that it had the more need of good keeping. And of some Doctors this
Arteir is called the Pulsatiue vein, or the beating vein: for by him is
perceived the power and might of the Heart. etc. Wherefore God and Nature have
ordained that the Arteirs should have two cotes. Also there is in the Heart
three Pelikels, opening and closing the gooing in of the Heart blood and
spirit in convenient time. Also the Heart has two little Ears, by whom
comes in and passes out the air that is prepared for the Lunges. Also there
is found in the Heart a Cartilaginus auditament, to help and strength the
self Heart. Also the Heart is covered with a strong Pannikle, which is called
of some Capsula cords, or Pericordium, the which is a strong case, unto whom
comes Nerves, as to other inward members. And this Panicle Pericordiu^
springs of the upper Pannicle of the Midriffe. And of him springs another
Panikle called Mediastinum, the which departs the Breast in the midst, and
keeps that the Lunges fall not over the Heart. Also there is an other Pannikle
that covers the Ribs inwardly, that is called Plura, of whom the Midriffe
takes his beginning. And it is said of many Doctors, that Duramater is the
original of all the Pannicles within the body: and thus one takes of another.
etc.

The Anatomy of the Lunges.
THE Lunges is a member spermatike of his first creation, and his natural
complexion is cold and dry, and in his accidental complexion he is cold and
moist, lapped in a Nerueous Pannikle, because it should gather together the
softer substance of the Lunges, and that the Lunges might feel by the means
of the Pannicle, that which he might not feel in him self. Now to prove
the Lunges to be cold and dry of kind, it appears by his swift steering,
for he lies ever wauing over the heart, and about the heart. And that he is
cold and moist in reward, it appears well, that he receives of the brain
many cold matters, as Cataries, and Rumes, whose substance is thin. Also I
find in the Lunges three kinds of substance: One is a Ueyne coming from the
Liver, bringing with him the Crude or raw part of the Chylle to feed the
Lunges: Another is Arterea venalis, coming from the heart, bringing with him
the spirit of life to nourishe him with: The third is Trachia arteria, that
brings in air to the Lunges, and it passes through all the left part of them
to do his office. The Lunges is divided into five Lobbes or Pellikels, or five
portions, that is to say, three in the right side, and two in the left side.
And it was done for this cause, that if there fell any hurt in the one part, the
others should serve and do their office. And three causes I find why the
Lunges were principally ordained: First, that they should draw cold wind,
and refreshe the heart: The second, that they should change and alter, and
purify the air before it come to ye heart, least the heart were hurt and noyed
with the quantity of the air: The third cause is, that they should receive
from the heart the fumous superfluities that he puts forth with his
breathing. etc. Behind the Lunges toward the Spondels, passes Mire or
Isofagus, of whom it is spoken of in the Anatomy of the neck. And also there
passes both Ueynes and Arteirs, and al these with Trachia arteria, do make a
Stoke, replete unto the Gullet with Pannikles, and strong Lygaments, and
Glandulus flesh to fulfill the void places. And last of al is the Midriffe,
and it is an official member, made of two Pannikles, and Lazartus flesh, and
his place is in the midst of the body, ouerth wart or in breadth under the
region of the spiritual members, departing them from the matrix. And three
causes I find why the Midriffe was ordained: First, that it should divide the
spirituals from the nutrates: The second, that it should keep the vital
color or heat to dissende down to the nutrates: The last is, that the
malicious fumes reared up from the nutrates, should not noye the spirituals or
vytals. etc.

The womb is the region or the city of all the Intrils, the which reaches
from the Midriffe down unto the share inwardly, and outwardly from the Reins
or Kydnes, down to the bone Pecten, about the privy parts. And this womb is
compounde and made of two things, that is to say, of Syfac and Myrac. Syfac is
a Paunicle, and a member spermatike, official, sensible, senowy, compou^d of
subtle Will, and in complexion cold and dry, having his beginning at the inner
Pannicle of the Midriffe. And it was ordained because it should conteyne and
bind together all the Intrals, and that he defend the Musculus so that he
oppress not the natural members. And that he is strong and tough, it is
because he should not be lightly broken, and that those things that are
contained goo not forth, as it happens to them that are broken. etc. Myrac
is co^pound and made of four things, that is, of skin outwardly, of fatnes, of
a carnous pannicle, and of Musculus flesh. And that it is to be understood,
that all the whole from Sifac outward is called Myrac, it appears well by the
words of Galen, where he commands, that in all wounds of the womb to few
the Sifac with the Myrac, and by that it proves that there is nothing without
the Sifac but Myrac. And in this Myrac or utter part of the womb, there is
noted eight Muscles, two Longitudinals, proceeding from the sheelde of the
Stomach unto Os Pecten: two Latitudinales coming from the back wards to the
womb: and four Tranuerse, of the which two of them spring from the Ribs on
the right side, and go to the left side, to the bones of the Haunches, or of
Pecten: and the other two spring from the Ribs on the left side, and come
over the womb to the right parts, as the other before does. Here it is to
be noted, that by the virtue of the subtyl will that is in the Musculus
longitudinal, is made perfect the virtue attractiue: and by the musculus
Tranuerse is made the virtue retentiue: and by the musculus Latitudinale is
made the virtue expulsive. It is thus to be understood, that by the virtue
attractiue is drawn down into the Intrals al superfluities, both water,
wind, and dyrt: By the virtue retentiue all things are withholden and kept,
until nature have wrought his kind: And by the virtue expulsive is put forth
al things, when Nature provoke any thing to be done. Galen says, that
wounds or incisions be more perilous in the midst of the womb then about
the sides, for there the parts be more tractable, then any other parts be.
Also he says, that in wounds persing the womb there shall not be made good
incarnation, except Sifac be sewed with Myrac. Now to come to ye parts
contained within: First, that which appears next under the Sifac is Omentum,
or Zirbus, the which is a pannicle covering the stomach and the Intrals,
impla^ted with many Ueynes and Arteirs, and not a little fatnes ordained to
keep moist the inward parts. This Zirbus is an official member, and is
compound of a vein and an Arteir, the which enters and makes a line of the
utter tunikle of the stomach, unto which tunikle hangs the Zirbus, and
covers all the guts down to the shayre. Two causes I find why they were
ordained: one is that they should defend ye nutratiues outwardly: the second
is, that through his own power and virtue he should strength and comfort the
digestion of all the Nutrates, because they are more feebler then other members
be, because they have but a thin womb or skin. etc. Next Zirbus appears
the Intrals or guts, of which Galen says, that the Guts were ordained in
the first creation to convey the dross of the meat and drink, and to cleanse
the body of their superfluities. And here it is to be noted that there be six
portio^s of one whole Gutte, which both in man and beast begins at the
nether mouth of the stomach, and so continues forth to the end of the
Fundament. Nevertheless he has diverse shapes and forms, and diverse
operations in the body, and therefore he has diverse names. And here upon the
Philosophers say, that ye lower womb of a man is like unto the womb of a
swine. And like as the stomach has two tunikles, in like manner have all the
Guts two tunikles. The first portion of the Guts is called Duodenum, for he
is. xij. inches of length, and covers the nether part of the stomach, and
receives all the dross of ye stomach: The second portion of the Guts is
called Ierunium, for he is evermore empty, for to him lies evermore the chest
of the Gal, beating him sore, and draws forth of him all the dross, and
cleanses him clean: The iij. portion or gutte is called Yleon, or small gutte,
and is in length. xv. or. xvj. Cubits. In this gutte oftentimes falls a
disease called Yleaca pas^io. The iiij. gut is called Monoculus, or blind gut,
and it seems to have but one hole or mouth, but it has two, one near unto
the other, for by the one al things go in, and by the other they goo out
again: The fyft is called Colon, and receives all the dross deprived from al
profitablenesse, and therefore there comes not to him any veins Miseraices,
as to the other: The syxte and last is called Rectum, or Lo^gaon, and he is
ended in the Fundament, and has in his nether end four Muscles, to hold, to
open, to shut, and to put out. etc. Next is to be noted of Mesenterium, the
which is nothing else but a texture of innumerable veins Miseraices, ramefied
of one vein called Porta epates, covered and defended of Pannicles and
Ligamentes coming to the Intrals, with the back full of fatnes and glandulus
flesh. etc.

The stomach is a member compound and spermatike, senowy and sensible, and
therein is made perfect the first digestion of Chile. This is a necessary
member to all the body, for if it fail in his working, all the members of the
body shall corrupt. Wherefore Galen says, that the stomach was ordained
principally for two causes: The first, that it should be to all the members of
the body, as ye earth is to all that are engendered of the earth, that is, that
it should desire sufficient meat for all the whole body: The second is, that
the stomach should be a sack or chest to all the body for yt meat, and as a
Cook to all the members of the body. The stomach is made of two pannicles, of
which the inner is Nerueous, and the utter Carneous. This inner panicle has
musculus longitudinales that stretches along from the stomach to the mouth,
by the which he draws to him meat and drink, as it were hands. Also he
has Tranuers will, for to withholde or make retention. And also the utter
pannicle has Latitudinal will, to expulse and put out: and that by his heat he
should help the digestive virtue of the Stomach, and by other heates given
by his neighbors, as thus, It has the liver on the right side, chafing and
heating him with his lobes or figures: and the Splen on the left side with his
fatnes, and veins sending to him melancholy, to exercise his appetites: and
above him is the Heart, quickening him with his Arteries: Also the brain,
sending to him a branch of Nerves to give him feeling. And he has on the
hinder part, dissending of the parts of the back many Lygamentes, with the
which he is bound to the Spondels of the back. The form or figure of the
Stomach is long, in likeness of a gowrde, crooked: and that both holes be in
the upper part of the body of it, is, because there should be no going out of
it unadvisedly of those things that are received into it. The quantity of the
stomach commonly holds two pitchers of water, and it may suffer many
passions, and the nether mouth of the stomach is narrower then the upper, and
that for three causes: the first cause is, that the upper receives meat great
and boystrous in substance that there being made subtle it might pass into
the nether: The second is, for by him passes all the meats, with their
chilositie from the Stomach to the Liver: The third is, for that through him
passes all the dross of the Stomach to the guts. And this suffiseth for the
Stomach. etc.

The Liver is a principal member, and official, and of his first creation
spermatike, complete in quantity of blood, of him self insencible, but by
accidence he is sencible, and in him is made the second digestion, and is
lapped in a Senowy pannicle. And that he is a principal member, it appears
openly by the Philosophers, by Auicen, and Galen. And it is official as is the
stomach, and it is of spermatike matter, and senowy, of the which is engendered
his Ueynes. And because it was little in quantity, nature has added to it
cruded blood, to the accomplishment of sufficient quantity, and is lapped in a
senowy pannicle, And why the Liver is cruded, is, because yt Chile which
comes from the stomach to the Liver, should be turned into the color of
blood. And why the Liver was ordained, was, because that all the nutrimental
blood should be engendered in him. The proper place of the Liver is under the
false Ribs in the right side. The form of the liver is gibbous or bunchy on
the backside, and it is somewhat hollow like the insyde of an hand. And why it
is so shapen, is, that it should be plycable to the stomach, like as a hand
does to an apple, to comfort her digestion, for his heat is to the stomach
as the heat of the fire is to the Pot or Cauldron that hangs over it. Also
the Liver is bound with his pellikles to the Diafragma, and with strong
Lygamentes. And also he has Colyganes with the Stomach and the Intrals, and
with the Heart and the Raines, the Testicles and other members. And there are in
him five Pellikles like five fingers. Galen calls the Liver Massasanguinaria,
containing in it self four substances, Natural and Nutrimental. The naturals
is sent with the blood to all parts of the body to be engendered and nourished.
And the nutrimentals be sequestrate and sent to places ordained for some
helpinges. These are the places of the humors, the blood in the Liver, Choler
in the chest of gal, Melancholy to the Splen, Phlegm to the Lunges and the
Iunctures, the watery superfluities to the Reins and the Uesike. And they goo
with ye blood, and sometime they putrify and make Fevers, and some be put out
to the skin, and be resolved by sweat, or by skab, by Pushes, or by Impostumes.
And these four natural humors, that is to say, Sanguin, Choler, Melancoly,
and Fleme, be engendered and distributed in this manner: First ye shall
understand that from the Spermatike matter of the Liver inwardly, there is
engendered two great veins, of the which the first and the greatest is called
Porta, and comes from the concauitie of the Liver, of who^ springs all the
small veins Miseraices, and these Miseraices be to Vena porta as the branches
of a tree be to the stock or tree. For some of them be contained with the
botome of the stomach, some with Duodenum, some with Ieiunium, some with
Yleon, and some with Monoculus, or Saccus. And from al these guts they bring
to Vena porta the succozitie of Chiley gooing from the stomach, and distribute
it into the substance of the Liver. And these veins Miseraices be
innumerable. And in these veins is begone the second digestion, and ended in
the Liver, like as is in the Stomach the first digestion. So it proves that
Vena porta and vena Miseraices serve to bring all the succozitie of the meat
and drink that passes the Stomach to the Liver, and they spread them selves
thorough the substance of the Liver inwardly, and al they stretche toward the
gibbos or bowing part of the Liver, and there they meet and go al into one
unity, and make the second great vein called Venakelis or Concaua, or Vena
ramosa, al is one, and he with his roots draws out all the blood engendered
from the Liver, and with his branches ramefying vpwardes and downewardes,
carries and conueyeth it to al other members of the body to be nourished with,
where is made perfect the third digestion. And also there goes from the Liver
veins bearing the superfluities of the third digestion to their proper
places, as it shall be declared hereafter.

Now to speak of the Gal, or the chest of the Gal: it is an official member,
and it is spermatike and senowy, and has in it a subtle will, and it is as a
purse or a pannicular vesike in the holownesse of the Liver, about the middle
pericle or lobe, ordained to receive the Cholerike superfluities which are
engendered in the Liver. The which purse or bag has three holes or necks: by
the first he draws to him from the Liver the choler, that the blood be not
hurt by the choler: by the second neck he sends to the bottom of the
stomach Choler to further the digestion of the stomach: And by the third neck
he sends the choler regularly from one gutte to another to cleanse them of
their superfluities and dross: and the quantity of the purse may conteyne in
it half a pint. etc.

And next is the Splen, or the Milte, the which is a spermatike member, as are
other members, and official, and is the receptory of the melancolious
superfluities that are engendered in the Liver. And his place is on the left
side, transuerslye lincked to the stomach, and his substance is thin. And
two causes I find why he was ordained there: The first is, that by the
melancolious superfluities that are engendered of the Liver which he draws to
him, he is nourished with: The second cause is, that the nutritive blood
should by him be made the more purer and clean, from the dross and thicking
of melancholy. etc.

And next of the Reins and Kidnes: It is to be understood, that within the
region of the Nutrites backwardes, are ordained the Kidnes, to cleanse the blood
from the waterie superfluities, And they have each of them two passages, or
holes, or necks: by the one is drawn the water from Uenakelis by two veins,
which ar called vena emulgentes, the length of a finger of a man, and issues
from the Liver: and by the other is sent the same water to the Bladder, and is
called Poros vrithides. The substance of the Kidnes is Lazartus flesh, having
Longitudinal will. And their place is behind on each side of the Spondles, and
they are two in number, and the right Kidney lies some what hyer then the
left, and is bound fast to the back with Lygamentes. The Philosopher says,
that man's kidneys are like to the kidnes of a Cow, full of hard knottes,
having in him many hard concauities, and therefore the sores of them be hard
to cure. Also they are more harder in substance then any other fleshy member,
and that for two causes: one is, that he be not much hurt of the sharpness
of the vrin: The other is, that the same vrin that passes from him might the
better be altered and cleansed through the same. Also there comes from the
heart to each of the kydnes an Arteir, that brings with him blood, heat,
spirit, and life. And in the same manner there comes a vein from the Liver,
that brings blood to nourishe the kydnes, called blood nutrimental. The
grease of these kydnes or fatnes is as of other inward members, but it is an
official member, made of thin blood, congeled and cruded through cold: and
there is ordained the greater quantity in his place, because it should receive
and temper the heat of the kydnes, which they have of the biting sharpness of
the water. Now by the kydnes upon the Spondels passes Venakelis, or venacaua,
which is a vein of a great substance, for he receives all the nutrimental
blood from the Liver: and from him passes many small pypes on every side, and
at the Spondel between the Shoulders he deuideth him self whole into two
great branches, the one goes into the one arm, and the other into the other,
and there they divide them selves into many veins and branches: as it is
declared in the arms.

The Anatomy of the Hanches, and their parts.
THe Hanches are the lower part of the womb, joining to the Thies, and the
secret members. And three things there are to be noted thereof: the first is
of the parts containing: the second is of the parts contained: and the
third is of the parts proceeding outwardes. The parts containing outwardly,
be Myrac and Sifac, the Zirbus, and the bones. The parts contained inwardly,
are, the Vezike, or bladder, the spermatike vessels, the Matrix in women,
Longaon, Nerves, Ueynes, and Arteirs dissending downwards The parts proceeding
outwardes, are, The Buttockes, and the Muscles dissending to the Thies, of
which it is to be spoken of in order. And first of the parts containing: as
of Myrac, Sifac, and Zirbus, there is enough spoken of in the Anatomy of the
womb. But as for the bones of the Hanches, There be of the parts of the back
three Spondels of Ossa sacri, orof the Hanches, and three cartilaginis spondels
of Ossa caude, called, The tail bonne. And thus it is proved, that there is in
every man, woman, and child. xxx. spondels, and thus they are to be numbered:
In the Neck, vij. in the Ridge, xij. in the Reins, v. and in the Hanches, vj.
And it is to be noted, that every spondel is hollow in the midst, through
which holownesse passes Nuca from the Brain, or the marowe of the back. And
some Authors say, that Mynuca is of the same substance that the Braene is of,
for it is like in substance, and in it self gives to the Nerves both the
virtue of moving and feeling. And also every Spondel is holed on every side,
through the which holes both Arteirs and veins, do bring from the heart and
the Liver both life and nourishment, like as they do to the brain: and from
the pannicle of Minuca or the marowe of the back, through the holes of the
sides of the spondels, springs forth Nerves motives, and there they
intermedle them selves with the strong Lygamentes that be insencible, and so
the Lygamentes receive that feeling of the Nerve, which the Nerve takes of
Mynuca. And by this reason many Autors prove, that Mynuca is of the same
substance that the Brain is of, and the panicles of the Nuca is of the
substance of the pannikles of the Brain. etc. And each of these spondels be
bound fast one with another, so that one of them may not well be moved without
another. And so al these spo^dles together, contained one by another are called
ye Ridgbone, which is the fundation of all the shape of the body. They with the
last spondel be contained or joined to the bones of the Hanche^s, and they be
the vpholders of all the spondles. And these bones be small toward the tail
bone, and broad toward the Hanches, and before they join and make Os
pectinis. And so they be broad in the parts of the Isles, and therefore some
Authors calls it Ilea. And each of these two bones toward the liver has a
great round hole, into the which is received the bone called Vertebra, or,
The whorle bone, Also besides that place there is a great hole or way, through
the which passes from above Musculus, veins, and Arteirs, and go into the
Thees. And thus it is to be noted, that of this bone Pecten, and the bone
Vertebra, is made the iuncture of the Thye.

Now to speak of the parts contained, The first thing that comes to sight,
is the Bladder, the which is an official member, compounde of two Neruous
Pannicles, in complexion cold and dry, whose neck is carnous, and has
Muscles to withholde, and to let go: And in men it is long, and is contained
with the yard, passing through Peritoneum, but in women it is shorter, and is
contained within the Vulua. The place of the bladder is between the bone of
the Share and the tail gutte called Longaon, and in women it is between the
foresaid Bone and the Matrix. And in it is implanted two long Uessels coming
from the kidnes, whose names be Porri vrichides, bringing with them the Urin or
water from the kidnes to the bladder, which privily eutreth into the holes of
the pannicles of the bladder, by a natural moving between tunicle and tunicle,
and there the vrin fyndeth the hole of the nether tunikle, and there it enters
privily into the concauitie of the bladder, and the more that the bladder is
filled with vrin, the straighter be the two tunicles comprised together, for
the holes of the tunicles be not even one against another, and therefore if the
bladder be never so full, there may none go back again. The form of it is
round, the quantity of it is a pitcher full, in some more, and in some less.
etc. Also there is found two other vessels called, vaza seminaria, or the
spermatike vessels. And they come from Uenakelis, bringing blood to the
Testikles, as well in man, as in woman, in the which by his further digestion it
is made sparme or nature in men. They be put outward, for the Testikles be
without, but in women it abides within, for their Testicles stand within, as
it shall be declared hereafter.

Next follows the Matrix in women: The Matrix in woman is an official member,
compounde and Nerueous, and in complexion cold and dry. And it is the field of
man's generation, and it is an instrument (...), that is to say, a thing
receiving or taking: and he proper place is between the bladder and the gutte
Longaon, the likeness of it is as it were a yard reuersed or turned inward:
having testikles likewise, as aforesaid: also the Matrix has two concauities
or selles, and no more, but al beasts have as many selles as they have pappes
heads. Also it has a long neck like an vrynal, and in every neck it has a
mouth, that is to say, one within, and an other without. The inner in the time
of conception is shut, and the utter part is open, as it was before: and it
has in the midst a Lazartus pannicle, which is called in Laten Tentigo. And
in the crea tion of this Pannicle is found two vtilities: The first is, that
by it goes forth the vrin, or else it should be shed throughout all the Vulua:
The second is, that when a woman does set her thies abroad it alters the
air that comes to the Matrix for to temper the heat. Furthermore, the neck
that is between these two foresaid mouths, in her concauitie has many
inuolutions and pleates, joined together in the manner of Rose leaves before
they be fully spread or ripe, and so they be shut together as a Purse mouth,
so that nothing may pass forth but vrin, until the time of chylding. Also
about the middle of this neck be certain veins in Maidens, the which in time
of deflouring be corrupt and broken. Furthermore, in the sides of the utter
mouth of the mouth are two testicles or stones, and also two vessels of sparme
shorter then man's vessels, and in time of coyt the woman's sperme is shed down
into the bottom of the Matrix. Also from the Liver there comes to the Matrix
many veins, bringing to the child nourishing at the time of a woman's being
with child: and those veins, at such time as the Matrix is void, bring
thereto superfluities from certain members of the body, whereof are engendered
women's flowers. etc.

And forasmuch as it has pleased almighty God to give the knowledge of these
his mysteries and works unto his Creatures in this present world, Here I
purpose to declare what thing Embreon is, and his creation. The noble
Philosophers, as Galen, Auicen, Bartholomeus, and diverse other writing upon
this matter, say, That Embreon is a thing engendered in the mothers womb, the
original whereof is ye sparme of the man and the woman, of the which is made by
the might and power of God, in the mothers womb a child, as hereafter more at
large shall be declared. First the feelde of generation called the Matrix, or
the mother, is known in the anatomy, whose place is properly betwixt the
Bladder and Longaon in the woman, in which place is sown by the tillage of man
a couenable matter of kindly heat, for kindly heat is cause efficeens both
of doing and working, and spirit that gives virtue to the body, and
governs and rules that virtue: the which seed of generation comes from all the parts of the body both of the man and the woman, with consent and will of
al members, and is shed into the place of conceyuing, where through the virtue
of Nature it is gathered together in the selles of the matrix or the mother, in
whom by the way of the working of man's seed, and by the way of suffering of
the woman's seed mixte together, so that each of them works in other, and
suffers in other, there is engendered Embreon. And further it is to be noted,
that this sparme that comes both of man and woman, is made and gathered of
the most best and purest drops of blood in all the body, and by the labor and
chafing of the testikles or stones this blood is turned into another kind, and
is made sparme. And in man it is hot, white, and thick, wherefore it may not
spread nor run abroad of it self, but runs and takes temperaunce of the
woman's sparme, which has contrary qualities, for the woman's sparme is
thinner, colder, and feebler. And as some Authors hold opinion, when this
matter is gathered into the right side of the matrix, then it happens a male
kind, and likewise on the left the female, and where the virtue is most,
there it sauoureth most. And further it is to be noted, that like as the Renet
of the Cheese has by him self the way or virtue of working, so has the milk
by way of suffering: and as the Renet and milk make the cheese, so does the
sparme of man and woman make the generation of Embreon, of the which thing
springs by the virtue of kindly heat, a certain skin or caul, into the
which it lappeth it self in, where with afterward it is tied to the mothers
womb, the which covering comes forth with the birth of the child, and if
it happen that any of the skin remain after the birth of the child, then is
the woman in peril of her life. Furthermore it is said, that of this Embreon
is engendered the Heart, the Liver, the Brain Nerves, veins, Arteirs, Cords,
Lygamentes, Skins, Gristles, and Bones, receiving to them by kindly virtue
the menstrual blood, of which is engendered both flesh and fatnes. And as
writers say, the first thing that is shapen be the principals, as is the Heart,
Liver, and Brain. For of the Heart springs the Arteirs, of the Liver the
Ueynes, and of the Brain the Nerves: and when these are made, Nature makes
and shapeth Bones and grystles to keep and save them, as the bones of the head
for the Brain, the Breast bones and the Ribs for the Heart and the Liver. And
after these springs al other member one after another. And thus is the child
bred forth in four degrees, as thus, The first is, when the said sparme or
seed is at the first as it were milk: The second is, when it is turned from
that kind into another kind, is yet but as a lump of blood, and this is
called of Ypocras, Fettus: The third degree is, when the principals be shapen,
as the Heart, liver, and Brain: The fourth and last, as when all the other
members be perfectly shapen, then it receives the soul with life and breath,
and then it begins to move it self alone, Now in these four degrees
aforesaid, in the first as milk it continues, vij. days: in the second as
Fettus, ix. days: in the third as a lump of flesh ingendring the principals
the space of, ix. days: and the fourth unto the time of full perfection of all the whole members, is the space of, xviij. days: So is there, xlvj. days from
the day of conception unto the day of full perfection and receiving of the
soul, as God best knows.

Now to come again to the Anatomy of the Hanches: Then come we to Longaon,
otherwise called, The tail gutte, whose substance is panniculer, as of all the
other bowels, the length of it is of a spanne long, stretching nigh to the
Raynes, his nether part is called Annis, that is to say, The towel. And about
him is found two Muscles, the one to open, the other to shut. Also there is
found in him five veins or branches of veins, called vena emoraidales, and
they have coliganes with the bladder, wherefore they are partners in their
greeues. And when this Longaon is raised up, then ye may see the veins and
arteirs, and senowes, how they be braunched and bound down to the nether
parts. The parts proceeding outwardly, are, Didimus, Peritoneum, the Yard,
the Testikles, and the Buttockes. And first it shall be spoken of the yard, or
of man's generatiue members, the which dureth unto that part that is called
Peritoneum, the which place is from the Coddes unto the Fundament, whereupon is
a seame. Wherefore says the Philosopher, Man's yard is in the end and term of
the share. The yard is an official member, and the tyller of man's generation,
compounde and made of skin, brawnes, Tendons, veins, arteirs, senewes, and
great Lygaments: and it has in it food passages, or principal issues, that is
to say, one for the sparme, and another for the vryn. And as the Philosophers
say, the quantity of a common yard is viij. or, ix. inches, with mesurable
bigness proportioned to the quantity of the matrix. This member has, as says
Auicen, three holes, through one passes incensible polissions and wind, that
causes the yard to rise: the other two holes be declared before. Also the yard
has a skin, and about the head thereof it is double, and that men call
Prepusium, and this skin is mouable, for through his consecration the
spermatike matter is the better and sooner gathered together, and sooner cast
forth from the Testicles: for by him is had the more delectation in the
doing. And the foremost part of the head of the yard before is made of a subtle
brawny flesh, the which if it be once lost, it is never restored again, but
it may well be skinned. etc.

The Coddes is a compounde member, and an official, and though it be counted
amongst the generatiue members, yet it is called a principal member because of
generation. This purss was ordained for the custody and comfort of the
testikles and other spermatike vessels. And it is also made of two parts, of
the inner, and the utter. The utter is compound and made of skin, and
lazartus, longitudinal, and transuersal, in like manner as is the Myrac. The
inner part of the Coddes is of the substance of the Sifac, and are in
similitude as two pockets drawn together by them selves, and they differ not
from the Sifac: and there be two, because if there fall any hurt to the one, the
other should serve. The Testikles or stones be two, made of gla^dulus flesh or
curnelly flesh. And furthermore, through the Didimus comes to the Testikles
from the Brain, Senowes, and from the Heart Arteirs, and from the Liver veins,
bringing unto them both feeling and steering, life and spirit, and nutrimental
blood, and the most purest blood of al other members of the body, whereof is
made the sparme by the labor of the Testicles, the which is put forth in due
time, as is before rehearsed.

The Groynes be known: they be the emy iunctures or purging place unto the
Liver, and they have curnelly flesh in the plying or bowing of the Thyes. The
Hippes have great brawny flesh on them, and from thence dissende downwards
brawnes, cords, and lygaments, moving and bynding together the thies, with the
Haunches themselves.

The Anatomy of the Thyes, Legs, and Feet.
THE Leg reaches from the Joint of the Thie unto the extremity of the Toes,
and I will divide it in parts, as the arms were divided: One part is called
Coxa, or Thigh, and that is all that is contained from the joint of the Haunche
unto the Knee: The second part is called Tibia, and that reaches from the
Knee to the Ankle: The third is the little foot, and that is from the Ankle,
unto the end of the Toes. And here it is to be noted, that the Thigh, Leg,
and Foot, are compounde and made as the great arm or hand, with skin,
flesh, veins, arteirs, senewes, brawnes, tendons, and bones, whereof they are
to be spoken of in order. Of the skin and flesh there is enough spoken of
before. And as of veins and arteirs, in their discending downewardes at the
last spondels they be divided into two parts, whereof the one part goes
into the right Thye, and the other into the left: and when they come to the
Thye they be divided into other two great branches: the one of them spreads
into the inner side of the Leg, and the other spreads into the utter side,
and so braunching dissende down the Leg to the ankles and feet, and be
brought into four veins, which be commonly used in letting blood, as
hereafter follows. One of them is under the inner ankle toward the heel,
called Soffena, and another under the utter ankle, called Siattica, and another
under the hamme, called Poplitica, the fourth between the little Toe and the
next, called Kenalis. And it is to be noted of these four great veins in the
legs of the manyfolde dangers that might fall of them, as often it happens.
There be many other branches which a Surgeon needs not much to pass upon.
The Senewes spring of the last spondel, and of Os sacrum, and passes through
the hole of the bone of the Hippe, and dissendeth to the Brawnes, and moves
the Knee and the ham, and these dissende down to the ankle, and move the
foot, and the brawnes of the feet move the Toes, in like manner as is declared
in the bones of the hands. The first is called Coxa, that is The thye bone,
and he is without a fellow, and is full of marow, and is round at either end:
The roundnes that is at the upper end is called Vertebrum, or Whurle bone, and
boweth inwardes, and is received into the box or hole of the hanche bone: and
at the lower and toward the Knee there it has two roundes, which be received
into the concauities of the bone of the leg at the knee, called the great
Fossels. There is also at the knee a round bone called, The knee pan. Then
follows the leg, wherein is two bones, called Focile mayor, and Focile minor,
the bygger of them passes before, making the shape of the shinne, and it is
called the shinne bone, and passes down making the inner ankle. The less
passes from the knee backwardes, dissending down to the utter ankle, and
there forms that ankle. etc. The bones of the foot are, xxvj. as thus,
First, next the ankle bone is one, called in Laten Orobalistus: next under that
toward the Heel is one, called Calcany: and between them is another bone
called Os nauculare: In the second ward there be four bones, called Raceti,
as be in the hands. In the third and fourth ward be, xiiij. called Digitori:
and. v. called Pectens at the extremities of the Toes, next to the nails. And
thus be there in the foot, xxvj. bones, with the Leg from the Ankle to ye
Knee, two in the Knee, and one round and flat bone, and in the Thye one. And
thus shall you find in the whole Leg and Foot, xxx. bones. And this
suffiseth for young Practicioners.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Henry Bamforde. 1577.


