ENGLANDS Hallelu-jah. OR, GREAT BRITAINS Grateful Retribution, for Gods
Gracious Benediction.

In our many and most famous Deliverances, since the Halcyon-Dayes of
euer-blessed Queen ELIZABETH, to these present Times.

Together, with diverse of David's Psalms, according to the French Meter and
Measures.

By I: V:

Psalm, 103.1.2. Bless the Lord (o my Soul) and all that is within me,
bless his holy Name. Bless the Lord (o my Soul) and forget not All his
Benefits.

Non est dignus dandis,
Qui non est gratus pro datis.
Printed at London by The: Purfoot, for Henry Seile, and are to be sold at the
Tigers Head in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1631.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful his most worthy and highly honored Friends, Sir Hugh
Hamersley Knight, and Mr. Alderman Parkburst, Two of the principal Governors
of Christs-Hospitall; I: V: wishes the Kingdom of Grace here, and the
Kingdom of Glory hereafter.
THis Poem (Right Worcester:) being intended as a promoueing Spur and incitemen^
to that most excellent and amiable duty of Gratitude, of which, sweetly says
St. Augustine, Quid melius animo geramus, aut ore promamus, ant calamo
pingamus, quam Graetias? Hoc, nil breuius dici, nil suauius andiri, nec
fructuosius ab bominibus agi potest. What (says He) can we better bear in
our mind, or utter with our tongue, or set-forth with our pen? than
Thanksgiving: a man can speak nothing more succinct, hear nothing more sweet,
nor do any thing more aduantageous, than This of Thankfulness. I, therefore
(most worthy Sirs) knowing my Self deeply indebted to your Worships for many
former Favors and continued Courtesies toward me, was duly incited yea
stimulated to apprehend this fit and fair opportunity to intimate my long
obliged Gratitude, by an humble Dedication of this small Symboll of my sincere
Thankfulness to your good Worships. Which (had not the malignity of the Times
prohibited) was intended for the year of your, as pious as prudent honorable
Maioralty of this City, whose Gates, at this day, do bless you (as
Ierusalems did good Nehemiah; Nehem: the 13.22.) for your (then) honorable and
godly care of the Lords sacred Sabbath. Accept (worthy Sirs) I humbly pray you,
This poor Presentation of my obliged service (now) for, though it comes
lately, yet it comes loyally; and from his heart, who, in all due and true
observance desires most respectively to Rest.

Your good Worships, ever to be commanded, John Vicars.

To the Christian Reader.
SVch (good Reader) are the Crimes
Of these graceles, gratelesse Times,
Such, man's gross Ingratitude,
For Gods mercies multitude:
So forgetful of his Kindness,
So possessed with carnal Blindness,
That we need, King Phillips-Boy,
Every morning to employ:
At the Door of each man's Heart,
To perform the Aduisers part,
Long, and loud, and often to cry,
Man, Remember God on high.
I, considering This great Need,
And, how few, thereto proceed;
Have (for want of One more fit,)
Bouldly undertaken It:
Even a Monitour to be
To the Soul of Thee and Me,
Daily, duly to repeat,
Past, and Present Mercies great;
Counting it the Queen of Labors
To re-count Gods boundless Favors*
Wherein, if Thou give consent,
I enjoy my Hearts content,
I obtain what I desire,
Having kindled This blessed Fire:
Which, thus, kindled, o I pray
It may never dye, decay,
But, burne-forth, with Zeales bright Flame
To the Praise of Gods great Name:
This, This only, seeks and prays
He, that truly rests, always.
Thine in the Lord Jesus, John Vicars.

TO HIS SINGVLAR good Cosen MR. JOHN VICARS. The most Praise-worthie Author
OF Englands Hallelu-jah.
THese Lines and Lays, once, twice, De^repetita placebunt*
again, o're-read,
Refresht my Soul, and ravished have, my Heart;
So great Content and Comfort, in Me, bred,
I could not choose, but to your-se^fe, impart:
They have Me changed, for once, and made me Poet,
Your Muse, Nought-els, that I do know, could do it.
I Will Say in Prose, what you do Sing in Verse
Most Christianly; The Lord is to be praised;
And in a home-spunne Speech, I Will still rehearse,
What you most sweetly, soundly, here, have phrased.
In this Angellike Song, a part I Love;
And though I say it but Here, I Will Sing't Revel cap, 19. verse 1.
Above.
Thomas Vicars. B: D:

Englands Hallelu-jah.
1.
MY thankful heart and hand do undertake
To write, indite, some holy heavenly Song;
Some sacred Song of Love and Land to make
Which may to Englands Lord alone belong:
O that my Pen were prompt as that sweet writers,
That sacred, sugared, Kingly Praise-Inditers!
2.
O, everliving, euerlouing, Lord,
Father of Mercies, Fountain of all Grace;
Whose noble Name and Fame, Heaven, Earth, record
Glorious in Heaven, in Earth, in every Place:
Who art far fairer in thy beauteous praise,
Than is the Sun, in all his brightest rays.
3.
Thou art most glorious in the Worlds Creation,
Wherein are various Works of wonder shown;
But, much more glorious in Man's Restoration, Gods Me^cies.

Wherein was Mercies-Miracle well known:
Thy works (o Lord) indeed are wondrous great,
But yet, thy Mercies must have supreme seat.
4.
The Heavens declare thy handy- works, o Lord,
1. To Man.
The Earth is full of Creatures admirable;
The Sea, a Sea of Wonders does afford,
Full fraught with Fishes, huge, innumerable;
But yet thy Love to Man amongst them all,
I justly most admire, and ever shall.
5.
Man, out of Dust (base dust) at first created,
Yet after thy blessed Image, blestly made;
Man, Lord of all thy Creatures ordinated,
Man, by them all, in Earth, Air, Sea, obay'd:
Yet, Man, by Pride and Hells malignity,
Deprau'd of Bliss, Deprived of's Royalty.
6.
To Man, much blessed, in his pure Generation,
To Man, most cursed, in his Degenerous-case;
2. To the elect in general.
To Man, best blessed, in his Re-generation,
By Christ, Man's sole Peacemaker, Spring of Grace:
To Man (I say) and of all Men, to Those,
Whom, He, by Faith, to be his Flock has chose.
7.
And, of all These, to Us his Little-flocke,
To Us (I say) his English-Israelites;
3. To us of England in particular.
To Us, ingrafted, on, old Isreal's stock,
And to Our Land of Goshen; whom the frights
Of foreign Foes and homebred Enemies,
By force and fraud, have, often, sought to surprise.
8.
Thy Love (o Lord) I say, to Our poor Nation,
Beside Spirituall-Graces, largely given;
Thy Word and Sacraments, Food of Salvation,
The best Highway for us to walk to Heaven:
Thy many Temporal Protections great,
From all the dangers, which fell Foes did threat.
9.
From all the Terrors of our Foes without us
From all the Horrors of our Foes within;
From all that rose against us, round about us,
From Truth, to Error, us to work and win:
This thy great Love, our great Deliverance,
This, would my grateful Voice and Verse advance,
10.
That (maugre all the might and spite of Spain,
And Antichristian Balaam of Rome,) Balaam of Rome.

Thou have and wilt thy Churches right maintain,
And turn Romes Curses to her own dire doom:
Blessing, whom he would Curse, crossing the hate,
Of Spaines proud Amalecke, that Scourge of State. Amalecke of Spain^*

11.
And, as hard hearted Pharaoh and his Train,
In Egypt, by Gods fearful Plagues, often, smarted;
But, still his Goodness Goshen did sustain:
And to his people Light and Love imparted:
Propping, protecting These with sweet aspection,
Cropping, Correcting Those, with foul infection.
12.
Even so proud-hearted Antichrist of Rome,
And ^is Crowne-thirsting Paramour of Spain,
Heavens, just displeasure has with heavy doom
Often, foiled, spoiled, with their impious Train:
Our English-Goshen being still protected,
Such was his Goodness, So, he us affected.
13.
Witness, o ever witness, may those days,
Those Malcyon-Dayes of sweet Eliza's Reign;
Eliza, worthy Englands endless praise, Queen^ ^lizabeth*

That Friend to Faith, That Scourge to Rome, and Spain:
All present, past, and future Ages Glory,
Worthy prime Place and Grace in datelesse Story.
14.
By whom, the Lord so many wonders wrought,
To whom the Lord so great deliverance gave;
For whom in their own Snares her Foes he caught,
In whom his Church (poor Church) he often did save:
By wondrous, glorious, world-admir'd protection,
Such was to Her and Hirs, Heavens firm affection.
15.
Witness (I say) the Treasons often contrived
Bishop of Chi^^ester in his Tha^kfull Remembrance.
By Westmerland, Northumberland, and Poole;
Stukely, and f^lse Mendoza; yet none thriued,
For Heaven did see, and smile, and Them befoole;
That impious person Parsons, Irish- Sanders,
Campian, Romes Champion, All full fraught with slander*
16.
Troops of Traitors.
Creitons Torne-Papers, Allines impudence,
Englefields Plott, and Rosses enterprise,
Parries pernicious practiced Jnsolence,
Savages savage plotted Villainies:
Babingtons barbarous Treason, Percies Spleen,
And Jewish Lopez, All to kill That Queen.
17.
Throgmorton, Stafford, Stanly, and Tyrone,
Implacable Conspiratours, were, All;
Like Sampsons Foxes tide by the Tails in One,
All ran like Firebrarnds fierce to work the fall
Of that rare Queen, Christ's Church to ruinate,
As Reverend Carleton sweetly does relate.
18.
Some sought and wrought, with Poisons, Pistolls fierce,
Romes Rhetoric.
With Daggers, Daggs, and such like Instruments;
Her harmless Heart injuriously to pierce,
Some by Rebellions aimed at foul Intents:
All aimed, amiss, and All did miss the White,
And Law and Vengeance paid them All their right.
19.
But, if you will see, Sisera's Pride at height
Against that English Deborah most sweet;
And how the Lords strong Arm did for Her fight, Spaines Armado. 1588.

Behold it in his Eighty-Eights great Fleet:
His great Armado, ships most huge and tall,
Which, He, Invincible did fondly call.
20.
This Fleet did floate upon our English Seas,
With This, he had even swallowed up, in hope,
Our Albions Island, Nothing, Les^e, could please
The hungry Appetites of Spain and Pope:
And This fierce Force, and factious Parts within,
Promised, assu^'d, they should the Conquest win.
21.
Thus Phillip having with insulting Pride,
On every part, beset us with his power;
Gaping (but fondly gaping) every tide,
Our Lives and Lands like Quicke-sands to devour:
Even then, the Wooden-walles of Jericho,
The breath and blast of Gods wrath down did blow.
22.
Then did the Lord, arise a Lord of Hoasts,
And all our Foes disperse and dissipate,
Then did he drench and drown their Spanish boasts, Mr. Wards Difflo, Dissipo.

And to us did their Captains captiuate:
The raging waves their ships did sink and batter,
And all their formidable Forces scatter.
23.
Then was our Englands Deborah most dear,
(By Gods all-potent power, all-patent Grace)
Made most triumphant over foes and fear,
Heaven did from Her, proud Sisera quite chase:
The stars in order, winds, waves, seemed to fight,
To vindicate her Innocence and Right.
24.
Thus, for that time, the insatiate thirst of Spain,
Was quenched, to his cost and high disgrace;
Most of his mighty ships spoiled, sunk and taken,
Those that escaped, crept home in shameful case:
But spite of Homebred Traitors, foreign Foes,
Eliza lived and died a fragrant Rose.
25.
This was the Lord; Let thankful hearts declare it,
For, it is exceeding wondrous in our Ears;
That year of Eighty-Eight, o never spare it,
To blaze the praise of That year, all thy years:
Let English Isre'll, sing and say all ways,
Not unto us, but to the Lord be praise.
26.
But, what? had Romes inueterate spite and spleen
King James.
An End, with sweet Elizaes blessed End?
Oh no: King James succeeding that fair Queen,
Against Him, they their Plotts again did bend:
The Cause continuing works the same Effect,
And Spain and Rome their Dagon must erect.
27.
Then, for the advancement of their Cath'like-Cause,
Romes apish Popish Priests are firebrands, first,
Watson and Clarke.
Watson and Clarke, encourage, with applause,
A Romish-proiect, Treason most accursed:
But, if you will see a Mapp of All, in One,
Look on their Pouder-Plot, oh There it is shown.
28.
A Plott of Treason, hatched, first, in Hell,
The Papists Pouder-Plott. 1605 No. 5.
I mean the Hell of Romish He^rts most base;
Bred and brought forth, by Men, like furies fell,
Incarnate Devils, only Men in face:
Nourisht, and cherisht, by Romes Man of Sin,
By Whom, all Treasons End or else Begin.
29.
A Treason 'twas, transcending all compare,
Though True, yet Strange to all Posterity;
Such, as whose fullness, foulness to declare,
Would seem to exceed the bounds of Verity:
Yea, no true story from Earths first Creation,
Could ere relate so cursed a Coniuration.
30.
A Priest was Provost in this foul design,
Hellish incarnate Garnet, this was He;
He prompts, prouokes, The Earth to undermine, Garnet the Jesuit.

And with Gun-Pouder, then, It, stuffed must be:
Wherewith, King, Queen, Prince, Prophets, Peers, and All,
Should with One Blow, have had One fatal fall.
31.
The mixture of Nocents with Innocents,
Would naught avail; All should have drunk One Cup;
High, Low, Rich, Poor, None were impediments, Nocents and Innocents.

With Powder, All, at Once had bin Blown up:
Hearts worse then Neroes, void of mercy quite,
Whole Kingdoms Heads, at One stroke, off to smite.
32.
But our supernall Isre'ls Shepherd good,
Who never sleeps nor slumbers over his flock,
Close by us (by his Providence) then, stood;
He sat, and saw, and smiled, and them did mock:
Turning the Counsel of Achitophell,
Into mad Folley, Folly fecht from Hell.
33.
And, in the Snare, which they for us had made,
Perillus-like, Themselves were justly snared;
Our Souls did by Gods goodness, safe euade,
Whilst They, amongst themselves, their mischief shared:
Haman, and all his Popish impious Fellows,
Were hanged, All, upon their own high Gallows.
34.
Oh here were Work for endless Meditation,
To make the thankful Heart break forth in Praise;
With fire of zeal and holy exultation,
To live, to love, and laud the Lord always:
His endless, boundless Goodness to proclaim,
And cause our Childrens Children do the same.
35.
But yet, o English heart, go one with me,
And taste and see that God was yet more gracious;
His neuer-emptied Hands still forward, free,
To fill thy Soul, with blessings, specious, spacious:
Blacke-Fryers.
To leave Blacke-Fryers fatal fearful doom,
A Type of Justice on the Rabble of Rome.
36.
Whose circumstances, (yet) considered right,
May justly move us to admire the Lord,
In all his works of wonder, grace and might,
And matter of much thankfulness afford:
To see Romes forward Pride and Impudence,
By Gods own Hand, receive due recompense.
37.
Nouembers 5t. with Us, Their Pouder-Plott;
Memorable Notes.
Nouembers 5t. with Them, Their Fatal Fall:
In This, or Plott or Powder, there was not,
No Powder. No Plott.
In This and That, GODS Finger seen to All:
This to disgrace, That, to destroy our Church,
But in Them Both, Heaven left them in the Lurch.
38.
In That, They sought our guiltless blood to spill,
But We escapt and They were paid with Blood;
In This, Themselves were Authors of their ill,
Whiles They, our Gods and Nations Laws withstood:
Their woeful Ends, I meddle not withal,
For, Both, did to their Mr. stand or fall.
39.
But, leaving Them (I say) to God most just,
And yet most gracious, to true Penitents;
I, yet a little farther lead thee must,
To see Gods Love, in yet more large extents:
That so thy, Heart, with David's may say well,
Truly the Lord is good to Israel.
40.
O whoso'ere had (not long since) but eyed,
Of True Religion, the strange tottering state; 1623.

How Hollow Hearts ('among us) swamme with the tide,
How Popish Priests durst boldly to us prate: Romish Foxes came out of their
Holes.

Out-beard, out-braue us, yea and to our face
Contest, contend, Christ's Gospel to disgrace.
41.
Who ere (I say) did This, then see, did say,
Or (at least) Fear, Religion was nigh dead;
That all her Beauty, almost buried lay,
Romish Recusants had got such a Head:
And, quite (all most) to let Hopes Lifeblood out,
See, what, it pleased the Lord to bring about.
42.
Our (then) Prince Charles, our staff of future joy,
Now, under God, the Crown of our Content; Prince Charles in Spain.

Unto our sudden, All-suppos'd annoy,
From Albion fair, to black Iberia went:
Our Day was darkened with the Fogges of Spain,
(...) quite disheartened, till it cleared again.
43.
Our Pearl of peerless price, was locked up fast,
In a polluted Cabinet, too-sure;
Over our Sun, a Spanish Cloud was cast,
Which did our English Light, delight, obscure:
(Under pretext of a mis-matched Match)
Till Matchiuill of Rome and Spain could hatch
44.
Could hatch (Isay) their Eggs of Policy,
To wind and bind to Theirs, Our Church and State;
To weaue Their Web of Europes Monarchy,
Wherein, They (then) seemed workmen fortunate,
So cunningly They had contrived each thing,
That Hope and Hap, seemed Both, to Crown them King.
45.
Spaines As, one most wittily did Anagra matize on the Name of Gondamore
Roman Dog, that sly Fox-Populj,
With Craft, lay closse, his Eggs to heat and hatch;
His M^, on Ambitions Horse, did hie,
No less, than our Great Britains Crown to catch:
But, when This thought himself safe set in the Saddle,
His haste, made waste, Tothers Eggs All, proved addle.
46.
Gods Goodness and Wisdom ouer-matched Machiuil of Spain.
Our God, (good God) Those Machiuillians great,
In their own Counsels, strangely did besot;
His love to us, made them, themselves to cheat,
What they had got, they stupidly forgot;
What they so long did long for, thirst, affect,
Then, put upon them, they did slight, neglect.
47.
O, here, I cannot, but admire, adore,
The wondrous Wisdom of the Lord, alone;
Oh, here, I may not easily passe-ore,
The Contemplation of Gods mercy shown
To England, happy England, in This Act
Of Mercy, wherein, Many are compact.
48.
For, first, Had Spain, like Saul, his Micholl wedded
Saul's Michol, Spains Infanta.
To our dear David, We had wedded bin
To many Woes, of All-Wisemen (then) dreaded,
By false feigned Friends, mere Foes, without, within:
What might That Saul have cared to have spared a Daughter?
Whereby he thought t'hau^ wrought good David's slaughter.
49.
Some Troian-Horse, by Spaines Pelasgan Art,
With sacred show, our Kingdom might have entered;
A Spanish Fleet (at least) t'vphold the part,
Of urged Reformation had bin ventred:
A Fleet (I say) full fraught with armed protection,
To bring the Puritans to due subjection.
50.
Again, had Spain never meant to make the Match,
(As that is most sure) yet, had they still protracted,
Protested, vowed, advantage (still) to watch,
(Which part they often have finely, falsely, acted)
With sly delays, to have wyer-drawne their wiles;
What might they not have wrought on us, the whiles?
51.
Might they not, thus (at least) have bound our hands,
From least assistance to our Neighbour-Friends;
Till they had ouer-run the Netherlands,
And every where obtained their proud Ends:
Whilst we (alas) stood looking at all This,
And, in Them, saw, for Us, Rods laid in piss.
52.
Oh then, that royal King and Queen of Hearts,
Bohemiaes Princely Pair and pleasant Plants,
Had found Afflictions added to their smarts*
Had then bin drowned in helpelesse woes and wants:
Had bin a prey fit for those hungry Jaws,
which, long, had gaped to gripe them in their Paws.
53.
Then, oh then had Religion restlessely,
And helpelessely, yea hopelessely bin baited; Venatio Catholica.

Then Edoms Sons had raisd a cruel Cry,
Like bloody Bloodhounds vndefatigated:
'Downe with it, down with it, even to the ground, Psalm 13^

'^et no memorial of it, ere, be found.
54.
But see, oh see, how our good God arose,
Like a most glorious Sun with gracious Rays;
At whose vp-rise, that monstrous Cloud of woes,
Was quite dispel'd, dispersed; And to Heavens praise,
Those threatened storms of Spaines, Romes Rain and thunder,
Were turned into a Calm to our great wonder.
Prince Charles returned out of Spain.
55.
For why, Gods Love, led, yea pull'd-forth our Prince,
From Spaines foul Fogges: So that our Sun most fair
Has clearly, cheerely, on us, ever since
Shined, and shut-out all our deep despair:
Suddenly, sweetly, to our admiration,
He came to us, to our Hearts exultation.
56.
He came, came safely, yea, he solely came,
Solely (I say) free from all Spanish voake;
Yea, which is most and best, (blessed be Gods name)
He came untainted of least smell of smoke,
Of Romish, Spanish Coals of Heresy,
Gods Grace did guide, guarde, his Sincerity.
57.
The Prince in Spain. Joseph in Egypt.
Yea, He (with Joseph) seemed to before-sent,
Into That Egypt by his God and King;
Those many growing Mischiefs to prevent,
Which through all Europe, rank began to s^ring:
To shield us from a Famine, not of Bread,
But of Gods Word, which most men, most did dread.
58.
For why? Romes S^uen Lanke-Headed hungry Beast,
Hungring for Blood, yea Blood of Gods blessed Saints;
Had his devouring Rage, so much encreast,
And our fair Peace brought to so hard constraints,
That all our former Full-felicity,
Was nigh deuourd, throughout all Germany*
59.
But, as I said, What our false fears of strife,
Like Joseph's Brethren, did misterme, mistake;
And what Spain, Rome, like Potiphars base Wife, Spain and Rome, Potipha^s
Wife.

Wrought on good Joseph, spoil of him to make:
That did the Lord convert to our great good,
And well he went, as then our Cases stood.
60.
Oh England, England, What can Thou repay?
What Retribution have Thou for thy God?
Thy God, who, Thus, has bin thy staff and stay,
And freed Thee, thus, from Spanish, Romish, Rod:
From cruel Men, which are Gods Sword, indeed,
Whose Mercies are but Mischiefs bloody Seed.
61.
O what can thou to God, thy God, repay?
Which wondrously, Life out of Death has brought;
Light out of Darkness, from black Night, bright Day,
Which from such Bondage, has such Freedom wrought:
Which has thy stooping, drooping, Heart revived,
And of their impious Ends thy Foes deprived.
62.
A thankful Heart, Gods mercies often to mind,
A thankful Tongue to preach abroad his praise; A triple, true Tha^^esgiuing.

A helpefull Hand, to his poor Members kind,
This triple-Tye, is All; yea, This, a^waies,
He most expects, he best respects, requires,
This p^yes all Debts, This props all new de^ires.
63.
With holy David, thankefully to take
The Cup of Saving Health, to bless the Lord;
Recital, is Requital thou must make,
His many Mercies, to recount, record:
Yea, All his Blessings, often, to ruminate,
Is thy best means, Then to remunerate.
64.
But, how unthankful, England, have Thou bin,
For These, all these, Gods Mercies unto Thee?
Englands Ingratitude.
Amongst thy many others, This One Sin,
Of gross Ingratitude, may justly be
A woeful witness, how thou have neglected,
Thy God, and all his Goodness, disrespected.
65.
How bruitishlie, how like a sottish Swine.
Have thou, the Akornes of Gods mercies free,
Simile.
Most rudely rauen'd up, Never cast thy Eyne,
Up to the Oak of Grace, Life-giuing Tree:
Of Gods mere Mercy, Bounty, whence alone
All these great Goods, like Floods, have to thee flowne
66.
How-farre unlike the little Chickin, grateful,
Another.
Which, every drop it drinks, looks up to Heaven,
As if, by Nature, taught to hold most hateful,
Ingratitude, even for least Blessings given:
But Thou, than any Creature, more unkind,
Gods many, mighty Gifts, blot'st out of mind.
67.
For, whereas He has Loaded Thee with Love,
(Witness those wondrous Mercies, pre-recited)
Plenteouslie poured, showred from Above,
Only because his Love in thee delighted:
Yet Thou, thy Lord have Loaded with thy Crimes,
With Sins transcending Those of elder Times.
68.
And, as himself, b^'s Prophet does complain,
Amos 2.13.
He, like a Cart, pressed down with she^ues of Corn:
Long time, has scarce bin able to sustain
The weight of thy innumerous sins forborne;
Forborne (I say) with wondrous patience,
Not laying on thee Sins due recompense.
69.
With such paternall Longanimity,
Each day, week, month, yea Year by year expecting
Thy due Conversion, with Sincerity,
Thy Souls salvation Fatherlike affecting:
But all in vain his gracious expectation
Was frustrate still, by thy ill provocation.
70.
So that (as by another Prophet, He,
Protests) He is most weary of Repenting; ^eremie 15.6.

And can, no longer, linger, patient be,
From strict, exact, judicial, Conuenting
Of England and her Sons foul sins before him,
Who thus forgot, for's Goodness to adore him.
71.
And since the Music, of his mercies sweet,
Could neither thy dull Heart, nor deaf Ears charm;
To cause thee with due Laud his Love to greet,
And so prevent, the event of future harm:
Therefore the Thunder of his Judgments fierce,
He now does vow, thy Heart shall plague and pierce.
72.
His prudent Justice therefore thought not fit,
To Cockney or to Cocker thee in Sin;
With too indulgent Silence, still, to sit,
But now to judge thee justly will begin:
For strokes of Love, to give thee stripes of wo^',
To make thy Cup with bitterness oreflow.
73.
Which, how effectually it came to pass,
Oh London, London, Thou can witness be; The las^ great Plague.

When thy incensed God did (late) alas,
With a fierce Plague, in justice vifite thee:
Thy Beauty into Baldness quickly turning,
Sweet tunes into sad tones; Mirth into mourning
74.
If ever Ieremies loud Lamentation,
For Captiuated Salems pitteous plight,
Londons lamentable Estate.
^id, in a City, find equiparation,
Were personated, pattern'd-out, most right:
Oh then, who Salems sorrow heard or knew,
Might thereby Londons loud Lamentings view.
75.
London, I say, which (as Jerusalem)
Was Queen and Lady of all other Cities;
Great Britains Pride and precious Diadem,
A Subject fit fot Panegyricke Ditties:
This fair Metropolis, object of Eyes,
Abject, by sin, filled with sad Elegies.
76.
How did thou London, solitary sit,
VVhi^h formerly with people full wast filled?
How did thou London, sadly Widow it,
Who wast of Provinces, the Princess held?
How did thou wail all day, weep sore all night,
Both night and day thy Cheeks with tears bedight
77.
Yea, how wast thou, by thine own Sons forsaken,
How were thy neighboring Friends become thy Foes?
By frights and fears how wast thou overtaken?
Oh how had thou want added to thy woes:
At home, by Epidemicke Plague, infected,
Abroad, b' vnhospitable Friends neglected.
78.
Thy Gates and Streets most desolately left,
Gods fierce Destroying Angel smiting dead;
Whereby were Thousands of their lives bereft,
Thy Priests and People from thee frighted, fled,
Thy Priests (I say) whose piety and Pity
Should have redrest, and dressed thy wounded City.
79.
But These and Those like heartlesse Hearts were fled,
Spiritual Plastures, Pastures thee denying;
Nothing more heard than Knells of Bells for Dead,
And cries of Watery-Eyes for friends a dying:
For Friends, yea Fathers, whom they durst not see,
Nor, as they would or should, assistant be.
80.
Oh, who is able rightly to relate,
Thy sad thy bad condition to condole;
When Death-Tryumphant sat in Chair of State,
When his Dead-wounding Weapon, Sick and whole;
Yea Poor and Rich did to the Grave annexe,
Without distinction of or Age or Sex.
81.
When naught was heard, but loud alarm's for death,
When naught was seen but Trophies of his Spoils
When naught was felt or found but stifled breath
To put a period to Lives restless Toils:
When all our Gallants-Coaches gave large room
For ghastly-Coarses passage to the Tomb.
82.
When Tombs into wide-gaping Pitts were turned,
When wearing-Cloathes were Coffins made for many; Bishop Hall in his Sermon
of Thanksgiving.

When Parents, Children, Youngmen, Maids, All mourned,
When All were frighted, free from Fear not Any:
Whenas, instead of Signs, each Houses door
A Red-Crosse and a Mournefull-Motto wore.
83.
When buried Bodies in their Beds of Clay,
Were piled-vp on heaps, like Fagot-stackes;
Where All they mingle, None they single lay,
Yea, some Dead Corpse due Dormitorie lackes:
When None suruiu'd, but might with David say
Thousands, Ten Thousands, Dead about him lay.
84.
When thus (I say) thy City populous,
By that fierce Epidemicall destruction,
Wa^ made, all most, a Desert ruinous;
A Golgotha, a Chaos o^ Corruption:
When passions and Compassions reluctation,
Was tenter'd-vp to highest aggrauation.
85.
When these, all these, yea more than these mishaps
Came flocking, fl^wing, flying, round about thee;
Besides, worse fears, of yet-worse After claps,
When horrou^s, terrors, were within, without thee:
When ^uery minute, every Man did look,
From hopeless Life, to be soon snatched and took.
86.
The^, oh, even then, London, like Niniuie,
In ^able Sackcloth, sobbing, sighing, satt;
In Fasts and Prayers* a loud to Heaven did cry,
Wi^h conscio^s Co^sterna^ion falling flatt:
With ^^e Sub^ission, true Contrition bending,
And up to Heaven, her pressed petitions sending.
87.
And Then, even then, o see, and to admire,
The wondrous mercy of our Lord of Love;
(...) did thou supplicate, desire,
Me^^y and gracious pardon from above;
Nay, sooner than thou calldst, He, answer gave,
And while thouspak'st, He heard and did thee save.
88.
Yea, He was found of Thee that sought'st Him not,
He ran to thee, who from him fast did fly;
He minded thee, though thou had him forgot,
And though thou would not, cured thy Malady:
Yea, though thou Him prouoked'st to his face,
Yet, He prevented Thee, with his good Grace.
89.
'Twas not thy Fasts (faint Fasts) that he respected,
'Twas not thy hollow, half- Humiliation;
To be, a day or two, in Soul, dejected,
Or, rather, seeming so, for oftentation:
In Sackcloth sadly, down thy self to spread,
Or like a Bull-rush to hang-downe thy Head.
90.
Was This the Fast, which God of Thee would have?
Was This the humble-contrite Heart he asked?
Was This the true Repentance God did crave?
Oh no: yet, under Onely-This, was masked
Thy seeming sorrow, weak Humiliation,
Yea, in the midst of This, much Provocation.
91.
So, that the Lord, This just complaint might make,
Of Us, and our best Acts iniquity;
Oh England, what should I do for thy sake? Hosea 6.4.

Oh London, what could I do more, for thee?
Thy Goodness being, but like Clouds in the day
Or Mornings-dew, which passes soon away.
92.
Oh 'twas the Lords mere Mercy plenteous,
That We, all we, were not consumed quite;
Because his sweet Compassions fail not Us,
But, are renewed, eued every Morn and Night:
For, when we call, or Cry, he hears us strait,
Yea, He on our Repentance (often) does wait.
93.
Oh Lord, though our perverse Iniquities,
Our great Transgressions, against us testify;
Though our Backslidings, foul deformities Lamenta^^ 22.23.

Are grown unto strange multiplicity;
Yet, for thy Names-sake thou have mercy shown,
In time of trouble, We thy Truth have known.
94.
Thou, that acceptedst Ahabs faind Submission,
Thou that even pittiedst Hypocrites false Fears;
Have kindly taken our but mean Contrition,
And botled-vp our few, unworthy Tears:
Thou, Israels-Keeper, steadfast Hope most kind,
To do us good, have had us still in mind.
95.
If, what Benhadads Servants said, was true,
1 Kings 20.31.
That Israells Kings, were kind and gracious Kings;
How much more sure, can Thou both say and show,
That from Heauens-King, All Grace and Goodness springs,
Our Isr'ells King, That He Is most kind and sweet,
When Sinners, Him, with true Repentance meet.
96.
Witness, and ever witness may That love,
That wondrous Love of His, to Thee (late) known
That most admired Mercy from above,
To London, lately lovely, seen and shovvne:
To thee o London, in thy woeful state,
When Death and Dearth sought Thee to ruinate.
97.
When suddenly, beyond all expectation,
The Lord in Love, did look upon thy woe;
And to his Glory and thy Admiration,
Th'ore flowing Floodgates of his Grace let-goe:
Whereby full Streams of mercy issued out
And soon refresht thy City round about.
98.
The wonder full anasedaine ceasing of the Plague.
Whereby (I say) thy weekelie Thousands were
Brought down to Hundreds, Hundreds, brought to Ten;
Thy Ten, to One, thy One to None, thy Fear,
To safe Security was turned, and Then;
For Mourning, thou had Mirth, for sorrow, Joy,
For Sickness, Health, svveet Solace for Annoy.
99.
Thy Streets, were then re-peopled and replenisht,
And Girls and Boys within thy Walls re-sporting; Z^cha. 8.5

Thy tears dry'd-vp, thy fears were from thee banished,
Thy late fled-Sonnes and Daughters home resorting:
To their long-hoped Homes flocking amain.
Thy Houses, yea Gods Houses, filled again.
100. Zacha. 8.15

Then thy sad Fasts into glad Feasts were turned,
Thy City fraught with Her Inhabitants;
Then, Joy possessed the Hearts of those that mourned,
Plenty supplied the place of vvoefull wants:
This was the Lord, and it was most admirable,
This was our God, whose Mercies are most stable.
101.
Nay, yet a little stay and stand amazed,
In admiration of more Mercy, yet;
Wherein the Lord is, yet, more to be praised,
For (yet) another wondrous Benefit:
Wherein we may most visiblie perceive,
God leaves not giving, till to ask we leave.
102. England still vngra^full.

But first, (oh and it is worst) consider well,
How well, thou England did requite thy God?
Whose Grace, whose Goodness, thus did flow, excel,
So soon, so sweetly laying by his Rod:
Did thou requite Him as he merited?
VVast thou made better, humbler-spirited?
103.
Nay did thou not ( Backsliding England) rather
Rebelliouslie back to thy Vomit hasten?
Did thou not seem to re-collect and gather,
More strength, thy self to Sin more firm to fasten:
And like the Snake late f^stred at the fire,
Have festred All, and re-incens'd Gods Ire.
104.
And since thy Heart grew so obdurate, hard,
That Pharao-like naught but the Rod could tame thee;
That thy late pricking Plague thoudst not regard,
That neither Words, nor Wounds would yet ^e-clame^t
That nothing could thy hard heart mollify,
But thou grewst worse and worse rebelliouslie.
105.
Since thou thy self, thy Sins would not bewail,
And we^ thy Heart, and weep thy part in tears;
But would by Sin, thy Self, thy Soul assail,
And block it up, with black affrighting Fears:
Such Fears therefore forthwith upon thee came,
As able were a stoutest Heart to tame.
106.
Famine feared.
A Fear (I say) of Famines scarefull Fangs,
Of piercing Death, by pining Dearth made have;
With macerating, fierce and pinching pangs,
Our Sins fat fulness, foulness, to lay waste:
Their Prouinder from pampered Colts to take,
More tame and tractable them th^s to make.
107.
Mighty and ^n^essant Shewers of ^ai^. ^.
God, to this End, did send upon the Earth,
Such sad, incessant Shewers unseasonable,
Whose rainey Influence did menace Dearth,
And (for our Sins, unkind, unreasonable)
Did pour upon our Corne-fields most fair,
Fierce frequent Floods their beauty to impair.
108.
Wherewith they (waxing to the Harues^ white,
And almost ri^e and ready for the Sickle)
Were, all, so drencht, nigh drowned (a pitteous sight)
With Heauen-shed-Teares, which did in streams downet^
That our glad Hope of Harvest justly left us,
Sad Fear of Famine, thereof quite bereft us.
109.
A dreaded Deluge, on us therefore growing,
And we with doubtful Danger all-su^rounded;
Huge Shewers of Rain from the angry Heavens flowing,
And all our Grain with Rain like to be drownded:
Then, not till then our heart the Rods smart felt,
Our Rockey-hearts, then into tears began melt.
110.
Then like stiff-necked Israel we did stoop,
Then our distress forced us to cry and call;
Then sighs and sorrows made us drop and droope,
Then were we humbled and did humbly fall
Before Gods Footstool, at his Mercy-seate,
And weep and vvaile for our offenses great.
111.
Yea, then (I say) our King religiously
Published, proclaimed a Fast throughout the Land; A general Public Fast.

Then, All were ordered in Humility,
With broken-hearts before the Lord to stand:
Mercy to crave and Reconciliation,
On true Repentance and due Reformation.
112.
And see (oh see and never cease to admire)
Gods infinite, ineffable compassion;
Readier to give, than we are to desire,
Yea, even upon appearance, shape and fashion
Of Penitence, Humility, and Fear,
See, see how soon, He lends and bends his ear.
113.
No sooner did our Grief, his Grace entreat,
No sooner did we, prostrate, promise make,
Sin to forsake, but He, in mercy great,
His Wrath forsook, his Kindness did re-take:
And on bare-promise (oh it was bare indeed)
He did no farther in his wrath proceed.
114.
August 2. 1626.
For why, Behold (it is worth an Ecce, truly)
That very-day on which that Fast was kept,
Whereon, the Kingdom was assembled duly,
Mr Burton, in his Popes Bul-baiting
Wherein they All for Sin sincerely wept:
God graciously, the Sluice of Heaven did stop,
Immediately it ceast to rain, one drop.
115.
When we began weep, the Heavens began to smile
When we were sad and sorrowful for Sin,
The Sun began to laugh on us the while,
As if, with us, it n'ere had angry bin:
The Heavens grim cloudie Countenance grevv clear,
And did our Hearts with happy Change re-cheere.
116.
A sweet and strange change.
From That day forward, even That very day,
Most extraordinary clear and fair,
It constantly continued* to display,
(Without least intermission) Sunshine rare:
Till, by Gods goodness and his favor great,
It banished Fear and made our Joy complete.
117.
Until (I say) our Harvest happily,
Not only in due season was possessed;
But (o the Lords boundless Benignity)
Our Rarnes were All with great abundance blessed:
A Copious Croppe of every kind of Grain,
Did unto All men, Every where, remain.
118.
And is thy God (o England) so propitious?
So prone, so pressed, with mercies to embrace thee?
Unto thee still so lovingly auspicious,
With so sweet Favors graciously to grace thee?
How gratefully should thou such Grace repay?
How should thy Heart thy thanks express always?
119.
O how much care and Conscience should be showed,
So many marchlesse mercies fair to write
In datelesse Rubrickes of pure Gratitude?
And there to keep of them perpetual sight.
And at so sweet a sight, amazed to stand,
Admiring Gods great Love unto thy Land,
120.
And in this contemplating Admiration,
To praise the Lord and promise faithfully,
To walk more worthy of so great Salvation;
To hate, those Sins, with zealous feruencie,
Which are the cursed Cause of all this Ill,
Which force perforce Gods anger against thee still.
121.
But, oh, o woe, I tremble to relate it!
O yet, not yet, do All these Mercies move thee;
And as for Judgment, Thou even seem to hate it,
Nothing avails to reclaim, reprove thee:
Thou neither wilt for Judgments or for Love,
Forsake thy Sins or fear the Lord above.
122.
Well, if his Rod may not reform thy Riot,
Take heed and tremble, for He has an Axe;
Wherevvith he can thee quickly quail and quiet,
If thou in Sin, vvilt worse and worser wax.
And if his Axe be laid to the Root 'oth' Tree,
O then without redemption, vvoe is thee.
123.
Then, He, that with such Longanimitie,
Has stood and knocked at thy hard-Hearts door;
Will stay no longer, but most angrilie,
As thou have grieved his Spr'it, He Will grieve thee more:
Then thou shall cry but He will give no care
Because when He did call, Thou would not hear.
124.
Then, may Thou fear, least in his high displeasu^
In stead of thy late dreaded Dearth of Bread,
He send a Famine fearful, out of measure,
Even of his Word, whereby the Soul is fed:
Without which Food the Soul will starve and die,
And be exposed to utmost Misery.
125.
Oh then I say (but, ah, good Lord forbid)
Our Candlestickes being from us taken away,
Our Souls caelestiall Light would quite be hid,
Our Feet at every step would slip and stray
Into the mire and Mudde of odious Error,
And we made Subjects of all woe and Terror.
126.
Then, since we did our Fathers stripes deride,
He Will give us over to his Servants Rage;
A gap, a gate, He (then) will open wide,
To let in Foes, whose fury to assuage:
Naught shall suffice, till they Us quite devour,
And Captiuate our Princes to their power.
127.
O England, England, call to mind these things,
Recant, repent, thy great Ingratitude;
Cease to incense Heavens glorious King of Kings,
B^times return, before He thee exclude;
Oh yet it is time, now then return with speed,
Before his wrath to This extent proceed.
128.
Return, Return, I say, Break off thy Sin,
Why will thou perish, English Israel?
Oh, now, to sue for Saving Grace, begin*
To cease from Ill, and truly to do well:
And which is most and best, obedient be,
To All, thy God, in Ought commands thee.
129.
And, what (o England what does God require?
What special Thing does He from Thee expect?
O He has told, and taught thee his desire
What Sacrifice his Soul does most affect:
Justly to deal, and Mercy to embrace,
Humbly to walk, before his sacred Face.
130.
Justice (I say) to Love and do what is Right,
To do to All, what Thou'd'st have done to thee;
To have a pious and a pitteous Sprite,
Wrongs to forgive, as thou would forgiven be:
To walk before the Lord with Constancy,
And a pure Heart, in true Humility.
131.
To pay those Vows which Thou to God did make,
In bitterness and sorrow of thy Heart;
That thou would Sin, yea All thy Sins forsake,
Yea, from Sins Least Appearance to depart:
Sins nauseous Vomit to euaporate,
And n'ere, with Dogs, It re-ingurgitate.
132.
To search thy Heart, to search and seek, and find
That traitorous Achan, Sin-bane of thy Soul
To pay and punish it, in Jts due kind,
The pride thereof to pull-dovvne and control:
Thy self, for Sin, to judge, condemn, arraigne,
So, God, thy Judge from judgment will abstain.
133.
That so, thou turning from thy Paths perverse,
Thy God from thee may turn his Plagues away;
And his vindicatiue Verdict reuerse,
His heau'd-vp Hands from striking strokes may stay:
That thou returning to his Courts of Grace,
He may return to thee with Loves embrace.
134.
That, as thou yerst in Sin did take delight,
So, now thy Love may on the Lord be set;
That so thou mai'st be gracious in his sight,
Thy Savior having satisfied Thy Debt:
And by his Merits made Redintegration,
Twixt God and Thee for thy poor Souls salvation.
135.
He has not dealt with every Nation, thus,
Nor have the Heathen knowledge of his Law;
He has not loved them, as he loves Us,
Nor wrought or sought so many ways, to draw
Them from their Lusts unto his Love and Lure:
As unto Us, Us to protect, secure.
136.
For which, even These, All these blessed Arguments,
These good, these great, these gracious signs of Love;
For these, All these vnpatternd Presidents,
Of boundles Bounty, Mercy from above:
A holy Life, an upright Conversation,
And thankful Heart is best retaliation.
137.
These are the Twins that wins his Love and favor,
These only make a Complete Sacrifice;
This Franckincense and Myrrh has sweetest savor,
These make most aimable in Gods Eyes,
The Person and the Present, Abel-like,
And into God, new force of favor strike.
138.
The 5 Senses.
This Mu^icke in Gods Ear does sound most sweet,
This Picture pleases most his sacred sight;
This sauourie Meat is for Gods Palate meet,
This fragrant Po^ie does his smell delight:
This siluer-tuned-string to strike and touch.
God most affects, besides These, there is none such,
139.
O then, that We had Hearts as full of Praise,
As God has Hands full fraught with blessings store,
O that our Hearts and Hands would join always
Gods Goodness, Greatness, duly to a door:
Like Jonathan and David faithfully,
Two individual Friends in Loyalty.
140.
To publish and proclaim in Verse and Voice,
In Words and Works the Mercies of the Lord;
With grateful Hearts (Gods, only lovely Choice)
His works of wonder truly to record:
O that our Tongues, our Hearts, Hands, Lives and All,
In Gratitude, could be reciprocal.
141.
That so the Lord might still more pleasure take,
Daily to Load us with his Gifts of Grace;
To Crown us with new Comforts and to make
Our Nation, the only Station and prime Place,
Wherein to show the Sunshine of his Love,
Whereon to shewre his Blessings from above.
142.
To make our Land the Land-marke and example
Of Mercy, Plenty, Peace and Victory;
Under our Feet our Foes to tread and trample,
Which at his Sion, have an evil Eye:
Out of their Heads to make the Eye to fall,
That longs and looks to see his Israells fall.
143.
Mean while, Let Us and all the World accord,
Let Heaven and Earth, and Sea, with us combin^
Let all our Fellow Creatures, help afford,
Let Winds and Waters, with us all conioyne;
To sing and sound, to preach and to proclaim,
The Lords victorious, euer-glorious Name.
144.
Let Kings, Peers, Prophets, People sing his praise,
Let Old and Young, Let high and Low, Rich, Poor;
Let Fishes, Fowls, and Beasts his bounty blaze,
Let Wells, and Woods, let Hills and Dales, adore
The sacred Name of God our Lord supernall,
For All his Mercies, Temp'rall and eternal.
145.
Let Men, Let Saints and Angels, bless the Lord,
And, Him, for ever praise and Magnify;
Let All that is in Heaven and Earth record
The Name and Fame and matchless Memory
Of our eternall-ternall heavenly Lord:
Let England, and All English-Hearted, then
With Me, bless God, and say, Amen, Amen.
FINIS.
Gloria in excelsis Trin-Vni Deo.
Diverse of DAVID'S Psalms, According to the French Form and Meter.
Psalm the 1.
1.
Happy, thrice happy is that holy Saint,
Which does Himself with no bad Course acquaint:
Nor in the ways of wicked-workers walks,
Nor Sits in the Seat of Him that proudly talks.
But in Gods Laws, Gods Holy Word most bright,
His Soul does choicely, chiefly, take delight;
Prizing This Pearl, above all Earthly Treasure,
And, Herein Night and Day, planting his Pleasure.
2.
He, surely He, justly compared may be,
Unto a fair, a fruitful spreading Tree,
Planted by Springs of Grace, Fruit (timely) bringing:
Ever in All-Things blessed, in Goodness springing.
But for the rotten Root and tainted Stem,
Of wicked Workers, It Is not So with Them;
For, when with worldly Hopes, Themselves they flatter,
The Wind of Gods Wrath, Them, like Chafe shall scatter.
3.
The Wicked, therefore, (oh most wretched case)
Shall never be able to approach the Face
Of God, in Judgment, and just indignation;
Nor Sinners come into Saints Congregation.
For, God does like, allow-of, much respect,
The Ways and Works of All his Saints Elect;
But, He, the Paths of Peruerse-Men rejects:
Perish they shall, For, He, them All, neglects.
Psalm 2.
1.
Why did the godless, graceless Heathen Crew,
So rage and rave with furious Indignation?
Why did the faithless Pharisaicke Jew
Strive to make thrive his vaineimagination?
Why did Earths P^inces, Potentates, with Might,
So bend and band, Themselves, with wrath appointed?
So troop together, armed with deadly spite,
Against the Lord and Christ, his dear Anointed?
2.
Let us say They, (ah fond and foolish choice)
With our strong Hands their Bands and shackling Fetters,
In pieces break; And disobey their voice,
And shake their Yoke from Us, and our Abettours.
But God, whose habitation is on High,
On his caelestiall Throne sits, sees, derideth
Them and their Counsels: And (then) angrilie
To Them, He Will speak, when is Wrath on them resideth.
3.
Then, to their shame and sorrow, thus He Will say;
J, yea even J, have on My sacred Syon,
Set and Set fast my King, to rule, for Aye,
(On this blessed Mount) All, which do Him relie-on.
Now I will show Gods Counsel and Decree,
Which He, to Me, in Mercy has expressed;
Thou art my Son, I have begotten Thee,
This Day and in my Kingdom interessed.
4.
Ask of Me, then, and I Will on Thee bestow,
All Pagan-People, with their Pomp and Treasure*
All Crowns and Scepters of the Earth below,
To stoop and stand at thy Command and Pleasure.
Thou them shall manage, master, curb and crush,
As, with an I^on-Mace, with Princely-Power,
As, Potters Vessels, Those thy Vassalls, hush,
Thy Might shall make most meek, or soon devour.
5.
Be wise, therefore, ye Potent Princes, All,
Ye Judges grave, be prudent, provident,
In awful reverence, at Gods Footstool, fall,
Serve Him, with humble-Ioy, most diligent.
With kindly Kisses (signs of Homage true)
Salute the Son, Least his just indignation,
Being soon enflamed, ye meet Death as your Due:
Blessed, then, are They, in Christ that seek salvation,
Psalm the 3.
1.
O Lord, what Numbers rise
Of armed-Enemies,
With Wrath and rage incited,
How many furious Foes
Me compass and enclose,
Against Me, All United.
How many say and swear
My Soul to fright and fear
That God is from me parted,
And that I am (now) left
Of hope, of help bereft
And shall be soon subuert^d.
2.
But, They themselves deceive
My God will me never leave
But be my strong Defender:
My Sword and shield of might
My Glory and Delight
Thou, Lord, my Life do tender.
Therefore with Heart and Voice
I made the Lord my Choice
And called upon Him solely;
And He in wonted Love
Did hear me from above
Out of his Mountain holy.
3.
I, thus most safely kept,
Lay-downe and sweetly slept
And rose, much recreated;
For, God, my gracious Guarde
Did 'bout me watch and ward
And me in safety sta^ed.
Though, then, Ten-Thousand Foes
Should me surround, oppose,
With might and mischief armed:
I would not be afraid,
Nor any whit dismaide.
For I could not be harmed.
4.
Rise-vp, therefore, o Lord,
Thy gracious help afford
For, Thou my Foes have foiled;
And broke the Teeth and Cheek
Of wicked men that seek
My Life to have quite spoiled.
Thee only, Lord therefore,
My Soul does pressed adore
And praise for my Salvation:
Thou do thy Folk defend
And all good Graces send
To thy blessed Congregation.
Psalm the 4.
1.
O Lord my God my Rights defender,
O hear my call attentively
Thou of my Liberty art lender
And in disgrace my case did tender,
Have mercy (then) and hear my cry.
O Sons of mortal men why muse you?
To turn my Glory into shame;
Why, fondly, vain devises choose you?
Why, forged, fained, Lying vse-you?
And so your-selues deface, defame.
2.
Know this, and be thereof assured,
That God above in Love does choose
The man to Piety inured;
By his good Grace to be secured,
And will not his Request refuse.
To sin, therefore, oh shame, oh shake-you
To search your Hearts most seriously
Into your Clossets close betake you
In Bed to God, petition make-you
With silence and Sincerity.
3.
Then, give to God a blessed Oblation,
A Sacrifice of Righteousness
A ^erfect-Hearts Humiliation,
And free from anxious Dubitation,
Trust in the Lord, in All distress.
Most men, for, Wealth make inqui^itio^,
And Goods, as Gods, do most embrace;
But, as for Us, our pressed Petition,
Is, for a free and full fruition,
Of Gods blessed Beams of heavenly Grace*
4.
For, This, This brings to Me, more Pleasure,
My Heart, Herein, takes more delight,
Than They can find in all their Treasure
Their Oil and Wine in wondrous measure
Whereon they plod to please their sight.
I being (therefore) safe secured,
Will rest in peace and sweetly sleep
Because I know and am afsured
Gods Goodness has me round-immured,
And He, He only, will me kee^e.
Psalm 5.
1.
Unto my submisse Supplication
attend, Lord lend thy gracious Ear;
be pleased, be pressed, my voice to hear,
Regard from Heaven, thy Habitation
My Meditation.
2.
O hearken to my poor Petition,
my sacred God, my sovereign King,
for, only unto Thee I bring,
In humble, hearty, due submission,
My Souls Contrition.
3.
Lord, timely, let me be respected,
for, tim^ly, I to thee will call;
betimes, o hear, and help withal:
On thee I wait to be protected,
And safe direct^^
4.
For, Thou, o God, all gods excellest,
in Goodness and in Faithfulness,
and love not least Wickedness,
With wicked- Workers, Thou n're dwell,
But, Such repellest.
5.
Fond Fools, Thou evermore reiectest,
they dare not stand in thy blessed sight,
and all that do in Sin delight,
Thou, utterly, o Lord neglectest,
And dis-respectest.
6.
The smoothing Flatterer, soothing Liar,
that calls Good, Evil; Evil, Good:
The Homicide that thirsts for Blood,
God will (in fine) confound with Fire,
In his fierce Ire.
7.
But, I will in thy Congregation,
in thy blessed Temple, Thee adore;
and trusting on thy Mercies store,
Express my Hearts Gratification,
With due Prost^^tion.
8.
Lord, guarde, and guide, and safe protect-mee,
in wonted Love from all my Foes,
their Stratagems and Plots disclose,
In thy plain Paths, o Lord direct-mee,
And still affect-mee.
9.
For, in Them, lightness, lewdness reigns,
their Hearts are fraught with fr^ud and guile
their Throat a gaping Grave most vile,
Theit lying Tongue no Truth retains*
But falsely f^ineth.
10.
Lord, therefore, let them quite be quelled,
let all their Counsels come to naught;
despise, disperse, their ill-workes wrought,
For, they against thee have rebelled,
And proudly swelled.
11.
But, Let all those whose expectation,
is fixed on Thee, in Thee rejoice,
and let thy Love lift up their voice,
In triumph and true admiration,
Of thy Salvation.
12.
For, Thou, thy Saints and Sons defendest,
and with thy Grace as with a shield;
to Them do saf'ty, succor, yield,
On them, Thou all thy blessings sendest,
And kindly tendest.
Psalm the 6.
1.
LOrd, in thine Jndignation,
And just exasperation,
Correct not mine offense:
And though, I blame do merit,
Yet, let me not inherit,
My Sins just Recompense.
2.
But, in thy Mercy rather,
Entreat me as a Father,
And mildly with me deal:
For, all my Bones do quiver,
My flesh for fear does shiuer:
My so^es Lord (therefore) heal.
3.
My Soul is also troubled,
My sorrows, thereby doubled,
With inward Grief and Pain;
But, oh good God be speedy,
To help Me, poor and needy,
Oh do not, long, refrain.
4.
In wonted Grace be pleased,
To see my sorrows eased;
Return and pity take:
No merit in me, count-I,
But, for thy boundles Bounty,
And thy mere mercies sake.
5.
For why? If Death once take-vs,
And vitall-Breath forsake-vs,
Thy fame we cannot blaze:
And in the Pit infernal,
Who can extol the External,
And his due Glory praise.
6.
My Soul, with inward anguish,
In sighs and sobs does languish,
And ready is to faint;
And, for sweet Rest and Sleeping,
My Bed even swinnes with Weeping,
Salt-shewers in Singes complaint.
7.
Through my incessant crying,
My Heart is often near dying,
My sight grows dim and old;
In high despite, displeasure,
To see, in such high measure,
My foes, so bad, so bold.
8.
But, now away ye wicked,
Which at Gods Grace have kicked*
Be packing every one;
For, God is pleased in Pity,
To hear the doleful Ditty,
Of my deep sighs and moan.
9.
The Lord, to my Petition,
Has granted kind admission,
And heard me from on high,
He did not only hear me,
But graciously did cheer me,
And grant me full supply.
10.
An^ now my Foes are frighted,
Wh^^^ Me so much despighted,
And causelessly did wrong:
^^ey suddenly are wounded
And shamefully confounded
By God my Guardian strong.
Psalm the 8.
1.
Omnipotent Lord God, most great, most glorious
Whose noble Name and Fame is most victorious
Above the spacious, specious Heavens high,
Yea, all the World throughout thy praises fly.
2.
Yea, even by the mouths of Babes most tender
Thou have made known thy might and glries splendor,
And by their, mouths have stopped the mouths of those
Which were both Thine and Their reuengefull Foes.
3.
And when I see (as often I see, admiring)
The Heavens most fair, in all their rare attyring,
The splendent Sun, the Moon and Stars most bright
Those twinckling-Spangles, ordered All aright.
4.
Lord, ^^^nke I then (as well I may, amazed)
Oh what is Man, whom thou so high have raised?
Or what is the silly Son of all mankind?
That thou art pleased to have him so in mind.
5.
For, Thou, o Lord, our good our great Superior
To Angels, haste him made, not much Inferior:
And have him Crowned with dignity and Grace
And in thy arms of Love do him embrace.
6.
He is made Lord of all thy Works of wonder
He, solely, wholly, is to keep them under;
As, their great-Master, Earths-Monopolite,
To crouch and creep at his most awful sight.
7.
Oxen and Flocks of Sheep, on Mountains straying*
And Beasts in woods and Wildernesses preying;
Birds, Fowls, and Fishes, which in the Ocean play,
And All that there do cut and keep their way.
8.
Therefore (o Lord) I must reiterate
Thy glorious Name, thy Fame perpetuat^;
And sing and say; of how rare excellence?
Is thy due Praise, through Earths circumference.
Psalm the 10.
1.
Why stand thou (o Lord) aloofefrom Thine*
Why art thou not more near, propitious*
Oh let thy lovely Beauty on us shine*
Now at this time, a time so perilous:
Thy Presencath^^r^s, thy Abse^ce troubles us
For, wicked-Men, in pride, pursue the Lowly;
But, let their Craft, be their confusion wholely.
2.
Of his lewd Lusts he has a high conceit,
And thinks his own Inventions, fine and fair
The Covetous accounts Himself most great
Hold himself blessed and best, a man most rare:
But, He to leave, neglect the Lord does dare
His impious Pride, his Heart, so eleuateth,
God he forgets, on God, never meditateth.
3.
Because his ways, always, do prosper well
He (therefore) Thee and all thy Laws neglects;
Because thy Will, his Wit does far excel,
Therefore thy Hests he hates and dis-affects:
Defies his foe which friendly Him corrects;
In Heart, he says, no change can ouerthrow-me*
My state no fate can fell, no Fear o'reflow-me.
4.
His mouth with curses is both foul^ and full,
His Tongue is tipped with fraud and flattery,
He is most prompt, Goodmen, with Guile to gull*
And in his Lips lies mischief secretly:
And still he travails with Iniquity,
For guiltles blood, he waits in privy places
The Poor to spoil, into his Toil, He chaces*
5.
And like a Lion lurking in his Den,
He secretly and slily spreads his nets;
To catch and crush, poor, silly, simple men
Whom, he by craft and couzenage to him gets,
And with his smoothing, soothing, on them sets
Thus, multitudes of Poore-men, he betrayeth,
And pitiless, on them he proudly preyeth.
6.
And then He fondly, falsely, says in heart
Tush, God regards not, what we do or say,
He has forgotten or is gone a part,
He neither sees, nor knows our work, or way:
Arise, therefore (o Lord) make no delay,
Lift up thy hand, let Ill men be distressed,
Guarde and regard the Poor, by them oppressed.
7.
O why should bold blasphemous Imps, most vile,
Falselie affirm that thou regardest not?
Yet Thou do sit and see and at them smile,
And pai'st their Vice with Vengeance, their just Lot:
But friendlesse Orphans, thou have not forgot;
And since, they solely, wholly, Thee rely-on,
Thou'^t be their Helper, from thy sacred Syon*
8.
Pernicious and malicious men convince,
Their Arms and Harms, their fraud and force destroy;
For, Thou art our eternal Lord and Prince,
Let not the Heathen, thy sweet Land enjoy;
Lord bear the Poor and clear them from annoy:
Yea, thou do hear and help, at need do render,
And right the wrong of Poor and Orphans tender.
Psalm the 15.
1.
O Lord of Love what Man shall rest*
Within thy Tabernacle?
Or, who (o Lord) shall be so blessed*
Of Syon-Hill to be possessed
For's happy Habitacle.
2.
The Man whose gracious Guide thou art,
In Paths of sure Sincerity;
Whose words and works, whose Hand and Heart
In equal balance bear a part,
Whose Tongue speaks all pure Verity.
3.
Who takes no pleasure or delight
In false Calumniations;
Who, in Himself, does not backbite,
And suffers none, his friend to smite,
By forged Defamations.
4.
Who does condemn, contemn, despise,
The proud, profane, malicious;
But, in his heart does praise and prize
The, Godly, Gracious, Grave, and Wise,
And is, to These, propitious.
5.
Who Pays (though to his prejudice)
Things promised, or protested:
Who hates Vfurious-Auarice,
Who loves all Virtue, loathes all Vice;
Shall be in Heaven invested.
Psalm the 23.
1.
Isr'ells great Shepherd is my Shepherd kind,
In him (therefore) All needful things I find;
Corporal Comforts, aliment external,
Spiritual Dainties, Manna, Food supernall:
In Fields He foulds Me, full of tender Grass,
Where siluer-streames do smoothly, sweetly pass.
2.
And, when my Soul with sorrow seems deprest,
The Lord re-cheeres It,, with sweet Peace and Rest,
And me with Rules of Righteousness instructs,
And me (in Goodensse, graciously conducteth:
So that in Deaths dire Dale I walk secure,
Thy Rod, thy Staff, supporting Me most sure.
3.
And, maugre all the malice of my foes,
My Cup, with All choice Blessings ouerflowes,
My Table is with Dainties well appointed,
My Head with Oil of Gladness is anointed:
And, all my days, Gods Grace shall me defend,
And in his holy-House, my Life I Will spend.
Psalm the 51.
1.
OH, Everliving, Euerlouing Lord,
Compassionate Me wicked Wretch of Wretches,
And in thy Mercies boundles, endless Riches
Remit, remove my Sin, thy Love afford:
Oh wash and rench and drench and cleanse my Soul*
From this my crying Crime, my fact most bloody,
Which, in Sins slime, and puddle myrie, muddy,
My Soul with soil, has made both full and foul.
2.
Deserved shame and sorrow, me compel,
To make patheticall complaint, confession,
And, to recount, recant, my gross transgression
Which in my presence, present, still does dwell.
Against Thee Lord, against Thee most of might,
I, surely, ^orely, solely, have offended
If Thou (therefore) against Me, All-Plagues had bended,
Yet, had thy Doom bin duty, truly, right*
3.
In Sin (alas) I was both Borne and Bred,
From Parents paps, the milk of sin, I sucked,
And from their Loins, the seeds of sin have plucked,
And, still, on Weeds of Wickedness have fed.
But, Thou (o Lord of Truth and Right,
Do like and love plain Truth in pure affectirn,
And in me have infused, for my direction,
Internal Wisdom, my best Light, Delight.
4.
With Mercyes-Hysop, purge and purify,
My Sin-full, Sin-foule Heart, most blackly blotted,
Wash me, ^h wash me, all with sin bespotted;
So s^all I pass white Snow in Purity.
So shall I re-enioy a joyful Voice,
My Malady, to Melody be turned:
My broken Bones, which have, with Groans, even burned,
For Tones of Moan, in Tunes of Mirth rejoice.
5.
Oh, no more chide, but hide thy frowning Face,
From This my heinous, hideous, horrid Error;
One-smile re-cheeres, One-frowne renewes my Terror*
My sin from Thee' my shame from Me (then) chase.
In me, create, oh re-create, I prays
A pure, a perfect Heart, an upright Spirit;
From me transplant, what-ere thy Wrath may merit,
And in me plant, whatf'euer please thee may.
6.
Oh do not, as an Abject, Me reject;
Nor Me from thy Heart-Cheering Presence ^euer,
Thy Grace-inspiring Spirit, from me, Never
O Lord remove, which should me (safe) protect*
Restore, repair in me, such sacred Joy,
As may assure my Soul of sure Salvation;
In me, let thy free-Sp'rit find Habitation,
Me to instruct; Sin, in me, to destroy.
7.
Thus, I my-selfe having thy ways well known,
Shall, Others, well instruct, conduct, therein;
Sinners, to Thee Conformed, reformed from Sin,
Thy perfect Pathway, shall, by me, be shown.
Oh quit, oh quite remit my bloody Crime,
O God, my Souls best Guide, my Guardian blessed,
My Hope, my Help, when I am most distressed,
So shall I sing thy Praise in sacred Rhyme.
8.
Unlock my Lips (o Lord) my Tongue untie,
(Thou keep'st the Key which opes and shuts, at pleasure)
So shall my Voice in most melodious measure,
^hy peereles Praise, make known and magnify.
For, Thou have no desire and less delight,
(...) burnt Oblations, outward Sacrifices;
In Hecatombes, of n'ere so precious-prices,
Though These, all-These, to Thee, I offer might.
9.
But, Thou do tender, a most tender-Heart,
A broken-Spirit, full of true Contrition;
A Soul that sues, and shows Its due submission,
With This, This offering, Thou best pleased art.
To Syon (therefore) Lord propitious be,
Jerusalems weak walls re-edifie;
Not for their Merit, but thy Mercies free,
So, we with Hearts most free, most thankefully,
Shall, our Oblations to thine Altar bring;
Peace Offerings due to Salems peaceful King.
Psalm the 52.
1.
OF wicked Works, thy Heart intends,
Why vaunt'st thou, Tyrant vile?
Since Gods love lasts, never ends:
Thy Tongue with mischiefs file,
Like Razor sharp, does deadly wound,
Fraud, in thy Facts, is found.
2.
Thy Mind all mischief meditateth,
Thou will not walk upright;
Thy Tongue untruth, still machinateth,
In Lies is thy Delight:
With Wiles and Guiles, o double- Tongue,
Thou, ready art, to wrong.
3.
Therefore shall God supplant, displace-thee
Out of his Holy Land;
Finally, fearfully, deface thee,
Not suffer thee to stand:
The Righteous shall see thy decay,
And fear and scorn and say,
4.
This Man, his Goods as Gods adored
And on his own strength stayed,
Gods help and Aid, he never implored,
See (now) his folly paid;
But I, who trusted God my King,
Shall like an Olive spring.
5.
For ever (therefore) I will praise thee,
My Heart, my Verse, my Voice;
For These thy wondrous Works shall raise thee,
In Thee now to rejoice:
Yea, in thy Saints most sacred fight,
For, This is my delight.
Psalm the 53.
1.
THe faithless Fool in Heart his God denies,
Their Facts are sull of foul Abomination;
Ill, is the end of all their Consultation,
None of them will good Actions exercise,
All are unwise.
2.
On Man below, God looked from Heavens high Throne,
To see, if Any wisely Him affected;
But, All were naught, All had the Lord neglected,
Goodness was gone, Good men (alas) were None,
Oh no, not One,
3.
The wicked Workers of Iniquity,
Know not, that They, like Caniballs detested,
As Bread, My Peoples Flesh, have eat, digested,
Not minding Me: And, when no-cause was nigh,
Fear made them fly
4.
The Lord has broke thy bold Bestiegers bones,
And them destroyed* which never God rely-on;
But, thy Salvation, out of sacred Syon,
Give, to thine Ir'ell mitigate their moanes,
Their Sighs and Groans.
When God in Goodness, and his own free-Choice,
His People-Captiu'd, Captains makes, victorious,
And with firm freedom makes them glad and glorious;
Then, Jacobs Heart and Isre'ls shall rejoice,
With cheerful Voice.
Psalm the 55.
1.
LOrd look upon my poor Petition,
Hide not thine Eyes at my Contrition;
But, grant my Suite, my Supplication;
Attend, o bend thine Ears to me,
My doleful cries, my sorrow, see,
Oh see and send me thy Salvation.
2.
For why, my furious foes take pleasure,
To vex, perplexe me without measure;
The wicked work me vile-vexation:
With most malicious madness, They
Foul blots and spots upon me lay,
With much despite, much Molestation.
3.
My Soul with fear does faint and tremble,
The pains and pangs of Death assemble,
And me (o me) have so surrounded;
That dreadful, direful shiuerings make;
My heart, each vital Part, to quake;
In woe I am wound-vp and wounded.
4.
Then* thus I wished, wi^h sorrow stinged,
Oh that I were with Doue-wings, winged;
Swi^tly ^o fly, sweetly to ease me;
Oh (...) I would fly far away,
Then would I in some Desert stay,
This, in this case, would somewhat ease me.
5.
Then from these Storms and Blasts loud-blowing,
Fast would I fly, swiftly be going;
Timely to seek some safe Protection;
Their Tongues (o Lord) divide, forth-pull,
For, I have seen their Cities, full
Of Rage and Wrongs most foul Infection.
6.
With wickedness, like Walls, it is closed,
Within, without, of Si^ne composed,
They, Day and Night are 'bout it walking:
All Guilt and Guile are in their streets,
Deceit, Debate, (There) slilie greets,
There, sin, and shame are stoutly staulking.
7.
Had open-Enemies thus vs'd-me,
Or had my foe, I know abus'd-mee;
I could, their wrong have shunned or shielded;
But it was Thou, my Bosome-friend,
Which friendship, favor, did ptetend,
Whose company much comforr yielded.
8.
With whom in Public, private talking,
Abroad, At-home I often was walking,
And frequently Gods House frequented:
Since (therefore) craft and mischief^ dwells,
Within their Cities and their Cells,
Let them be with Hells-plagues tormented.
9.
But I, with Hearts low consternation,
Will call to God my Souls salvation,
For, He will soon succor and save me:
At Morning, Evening, and Noone-tyde;
When instantly to God I cride,
He heard, and what I craved, He gave me*
10.
Though, Wars and Jarres me sore assailed,
Yet, against me have they not prevailed,
For Heavens Angellicke-Hoaste stood by me;
The Lord that reigns both first and last,
Shall Me lift-vp and Them Downe-cast,
His mercy he will nere denie-me.
11.
Because they see no change, mischances,
Because their fate, their state aduances,
Therefore they have the Lord neglected:
On friends they lay injurious Hands,
Of f^iendship, they do break the Bands,
To be Peace-Breakers most affected.
12.
With smoothing, soothing, Honey-speeches,
With cr^oching, creeping sly beseeches,
Their Hearts of Gall, like swords have wounded:
But, cast thy Care upon the Lord,
For, He sweet succor will afford,
The Just shall never be confounded.
13.
Blood-thirsty-Homicides pernicious
Deceitfull-Iuglers, sliely vicious,
Thou Lord wilt bring to dire Perdition;
They shall not liue-out half their Days,
But, thy sure Help, my Hope shall raise,
And I will trust in thy Tuition.
Psalm the 56.
1.
A Gracious Guardian, Lord, be thou to me,
Least I by wicked men ingulfed be,
Who me with War, incessantly molest;
My furious foes each hour,
Addressed are me daily to devour,
Huge hostile-Heapes, of foes most fearful power,
(Oh supreme Lord, my strong defensive Tower)
do fight and me infest.
2.
When of my foes I was (at first) afraid,
To thee, o Lord, alone, I looked for Aid,
And on thy mercy, meerelie, did depend;
And did rejoice in thee,
For, in thy Word, as in a Glass to me,
Thy promise of protection I did see;
Therefore, of flesh afraid I will not be,
For, God, will me defend.
3.
Mine own advise, has daily ill-successe,
My foes also, full fraught with wickedness,
Set all their Thoughts a work, to work me ill;
With joint consent they join,
And secretly, and slily they combine,
And privately they pry to undermine,
My ways and works, that so they may infine*
My Soul ensnate and kill.
4.
They think (but falsely-thinke) they shall escape,
And though they swim and swell in Sin, they gape,
And fondly dream, after Impunity;
But, oh my God arise,
In wrath confound thy foes, mine enemies,
Recount, record, my many miseries,
And bottle-vp the Tears of my sad Eyes,
In Records let them lie.
5.
When I the Lord my God do invoke,
My foes in flight from me do properate,
This firm, I find, for, God is on my side;
In God, I joyful trust,
In him I joy and in his promise just,
Upon his Word, my Self I therefore thrust;
And say and shall, I fear not Worms and Dust,
For, such is Man's best Pride.
6.
My Vows (therefore) which I o Lord have made,
Shall duly, truly, unto Thee be paid;
Praise will I render, tender, in thy sight;
Especially because,
Thou have my Soul redeemed from Deaths Jaws,
And staide my straying feet from Errors claws;
That so I might, upright, walk in thy Laws,
With such as live in Light.
Psalm the 101.
1.
OF Mercy and of Judgment, I am writing,
Thy most due Praise, my Lays are now inditing;
For unto thee (o Lord) alone belongs,
Such Psalms, such Song
2.
In prrfect ways my feet shall walk precisely,
And I, at home, my works will order wisely,
Until my Soul sincere, aproach thy sight,
All-blest, all-bright.
3.
By me, bad works shall not be imitated,
By me, Back-sliders Actions, ever hated
These, All of these, my Heart shall quite disdain,
refuse, refrain.
4.
My upright Soul shall never be acquainted,
With Wicked men, whose works with sin are tainted;
From me, a Peevish and a perverse heart,
Shall pack, shall part.
5.
Back-biters Tongues that with wickedly have wounded
Neighbors Good name, by me shall be confounded;
I never could a supercilious look,
Once b^are, once brook
6.
Mine Eyes of Love shall ever be reflected,
On faithfull-men, to be by me protected;
With me The man that lives religiously,
Shall Live and Dye*
7.
A Fellow fraught with sly Dissimulation,
Shall never have, with me, cohabitation;
A Liar, from my Presence, presently,
Shall fall, shall fly.
8.
I will destroy (and that, with Expedition)
All wicked-wilfull-workers of Transgression;
Not one of These, in Gods most Holy Land,
Shall stay, shall stand.
Psalm the 103.
1.
MY Soul, laud thou the Lord of thy salvation,
And be thou filled with humble exultation;
Praise him, my Heart, and every part within:
O praise the Lord, for all his Gifts be grateful,
Which hides and heales All thine offenses hateful,
Enormities, Deformities, of Sin.
2.
Whose Love, my Life from dreadful Death protecteth,
Who me with matchless mercy still affects,
Who has me filled and fraught with All good things:
Whereby my youthful years seem fresh renewed,
Like Eagles, having their old Bills eschewed,
Gods justice to the oppressed, comfort brings.
3.
His Paths and Praecepts, Moses well has learned,
His wondrous works, his Isr'll clear discerned;
The Lord, is like a Fountain full of Grace;
Most slow to wrath, most swift to love and favor,
Most ready to remit remiss Behavior,
He chides not long, nor to his Ire gives place.
4.
Our ill-wrought works, he has not ill-rewarded,
Nor with sins due our sinning-Soules regarded;
But, As Heavens bright starre-glorious Curtain fair,
Is, in unknown, vnshowne, Sublimity,
Full distant from Earths deep Profunditie,
So, to his Saints, much more his mercies are.
5.
God does remit to us, our foul offenses,
God does remove from Him our negligences,
Even full as far as the East is from the West;
And, as a Father, to his Child extends,
Paternall Pity, though he Him offends;
Like Love, the Lord, has to his Saints expressed.
6.
For, God, the great Creator of each Creature,
Does know our mould our fashion and our feature;
His All-seeing Eye does spy-out every part;
How fickle and how brittle is our Nature,
How soon cast down in our most stable stature,
Once struck with Deaths All chilling, killing Dart*
7.
He also knows that Man is altogether,
Like Grass or Hay, which instantly does wither;
Such is his Time, such his condition true:
And that the fragrant-flower which shows most brightlie,
Our fading Person personateth, rightly,
Now fair, now foul, dispelled like mornings Dew.
8.
For, As when mighty storms do blow and bluster,
Upon fair flowers and Blossoms in their cluster;
They fall and fade, and are not (after) seen:
So, is man's fairest form transformed quickly,
Assaulted, by distemp'ring Tumors sickly,
And now He fades, who yerst was fresh and green.
9.
But, as for God his Goodness, aye, remains,
And his dear Childrens Childrens state sustaineth,
Even All that worship him Religiously:
Which in their Breasts, his Hests and statutes treasure,
And truly know and duly do his pleasure,
With Hand's and Hart's intact Integrity.
10.
Within the azure starry-skye supernall,
The Lord has placed his Regall-Throne eternal,
And rules the World by his Emperiall-might,
Ye potent Angels, who are most obedient,
To work his will in All-Things, most expedient,
Publish, proclaim, his Honors glorious; Right.
11.
O ye his Hoasts, most valiant, most victorious,
Officious Servants, Praise his Name all-glorious;
You, which are pressed, addressed, to do his will:
Let All his Works, in Euery-place applaud-Him,
Yea, let my Heart, my Mind, my Spirit, La^d-Him,
And All, within me, prize and praise Him, still.
Psalm the 105.
1.
O Laud the Lord with Invocation,
Amidst his holy Congregation;
Shew-forth his Works, set-forth his Fame:
Sing praise, sing praise, unto his Name,
And let the Heart, the Tongue and Voice,
Of Them that love the Lord, rejoice.
2.
O seek the Lord our God eternal,
O seek and search his Power supernall;
O seek and sue to come in sight,
Of his most lovely Beauty bright;
Of his most aimable Face,
Full of refulgent heavenly Grace.
3.
Keep still in due Commemoration,
Recount with true gratification,
The wondrous Works which God had done:
By famous facts, His Honor won,
Let not his Judgments just depart,
From your most mindful, thankful Heart.
4.
Ye sacred Sons re-generated,
Ye Saint-like Seed, first propagated,
From Abraham, Gods Servant dear:
Which, Him in Faith does love and fear,
Ye Sons of Jacob, his Delight,
Extol the Lords maiesticke Might*
5.
For, He which safely Us preserves,
He only, of Us best deserves,
To be our Lord and Sovereign blessed:
Haning apparently expressed,
His Judgments just, his Equity,
Which all the World can testify.
6.
What he has promised and protested,
To All that on his Promise rested,
Even to his Saints, a Thousand-fold;
Which, on Him, with Faiths-Hand lay-hold,
Unto his everlasting Praise,
His Word he has made good always.
7.
Even, That blessed Promise once compacted,
That Cou'nant-good, once, prae-contracted,
To Abraham and Isaacs Seed;
And so to Jacob was decreed,
And unto Jsr'ell stablisht sure,
To Times last period to endure.
8.
When, in these words the Lord affirmed,
And (thus) to Those, his Truth confirmed,
Behold, I Canaan, freely give,
To you, and yours, therein to live;
The Lot of your Inheritance
My Name and Fame (their) to advance.
9.
And, though the number of that Nation,
Was, yet of slender valuation,
Did, yet, but very small appear:
When (thus his Love esteemed Them dear,
And that, Beside their Number small,
They, in the Land were Strangers-All.
10.
Walking from Nation unto Nation,
Without all settled Habitation,
Now Here, now There; Conducted still,
By their all-prudent Pilots will;
Who suffered No-man wrong to take,
But plaug'd great Princes for their sake.
11.
And, where they came, Thus, charged, appointed.
Let None offend My deare-Annointed,
Nor use my Prophets spightfullie!
For, These are precious in mine Eye;
Fierce Famine (then) the Land ore-laide,
Whereby Their Staff of Bread decaide.
12.
But, God, good Joseph, then ordained,
By whom (fore-sent) They were sustained,
Though thither, He a Slave were sold:
Though Foes in fetters, Him did hold,
Until, in Heavens appointed time,
God heard his Cause, cleared him of Crime.
13.
Pharao him found a faithful Liver,
And him from Prison did deliver,
The Egyptian King was to him kind:
And in him did such wisdom find,
That of his Kingdom and whole state,
He made Him Lord, prime, Potentate.
14.
That All his Peers might be instructed,
And to his Lore and Lure conducted,
His Senators by Joseph raught:
Then Jacob was to Egypt brought,
In The Land of Ham (then) Israel,
Did as a harbored stranger dwell.
15.
His flock his stock (there) fructified,
And to great Number multiplied?
And, thus their foes did far transcend:
Which inly did their foes offend,
Which turned their Love to Hatred great,
Their Smiles to Guiles and sly Deceit.
16.
Mild Moses, then, the Lord elected,
And holy Aaron much respected,
Both-whom to Egypt soon he sent:
There to declare his great intent,
And in the Land of Ham, to show,
His signs and wonders to their woe.
17.
Darkness, strange Darkness, his Commission,
Did, them, obey, with expedition,
And ouer-spread All Egypt Land:
And by Heavens All-ore-ruling Hand,
Their Waters-All, gore Blood became,
And slew all Fishes in the same.
18.
With croaking Frogs He them infested,
Their Land and Lodgings where they rested,
Not sparing Pharaoes Chamber neat:
He sent huge Swarms noisome and great,
Of crawling Lice and stinging Flies,
Amongst their hard-hearted Enemies.
19.
Instead of Rain, Haile-stones he rained,
And with fierce flames of fire, them bained,
And thereby totallie ore-threw:
Vines, Figtrees, yea, All Trees that grew
Then Caterpillars did abound,
Great Grasshoppers their fruits confound.
20.
Their firstborn Babes he deadly wounded,
And strongest of their Land confounded,
Yea, even the prime of all their strength;
And led his Servants forth at length,
All, fraught with Gold, and Silver, store,
Not One was feeble, faint or poor.
21.
The Egyptians Hearts were then revived,
Being of their Presence (thus) deprived,
Such fear of Them had broke their Heart;
And as they thus did thence depart,
A Cloud by Day, hid them from Heat,
Their Guide by Night, a Fire most great.
22.
At Their rebuest, He, Quails downe-rained,
With Manna sweet, their state sustained,
Whiles, through the Wilderness they went:
And then the rigid Rocks he rent,
From whence did Floods of Water flow,
To quench their thirst, as they did go.
23.
For, as he ever was delighted,
With mindfulnesse of Promise plighted:
So (then) the Lord did mind the same:
And to his everlasting fame,
He brought them fo^th with mirth and Joy,
Whence, they had lived in dire Annoy.
24.
Yea, such, to them was his good Pleasure,
That, all the Labors, Lands, and Treasure,
Of Heathen-folke, his flock did take;
That they might not his Laws forsake,
But faithfully observe his Lore,
Oh let us praise the Lord therefore.
Psalm 107.
1.
Our good GOD everliving,
O laud and magnify;
For, He delights in giving,
Good Gifts incessantly;
Let Those, preach and proclaim,
Gods powerful Preservation,
Whose fierce foes he did tame,
Freeing them from Vexation.
2.
Them, scattered, He collected,
From the East unto the West;
And brought them (thus affected)
From North and South All-blest:
Yeo, when in Wilderness,
Bereft of House or City,
They wandered in distress,
He showed Paternall Pity.
3.
When fearfully they fainted,
All pined with Penury;
With thirsty Drought even tainted,
And ready for to die:
With sorrow, thus, o're-charg'd,
Heavens help they then implored,
Then God his Love enlarged,
And them to Joy restored.
4.
And from their Desolation,
He led them like a Guide;
Unto a Habitation,
Where they might safe abide:
Let thankful Persons, then,
The Lords great Love be telling;
And to the Sons of Men,
His wondrous Works excelling.
5.
For, He in bounteous measure,
The hungry Soul has filled;
And his caelestiall Treasure.
On thirsty Hearts have stilled.
But Those that do reside,
In Deaths dark Habitation,
Fast fetter'd-vp and tide,
With Chains of Desolation.
6.
Because they had rebelled,
Against Gods Holy-writ;
And against his Counsels swelled,
Esteeming them no whit:
Yet, when his heavy Hand,
Had brought them in Subjection;
When they in woe did stand,
Quite frustrate of Protection.
7.
Then with much Lamentation,
Gods help, they did implore;
Who, from deep Desolation,
Did them to Joy, restore.
And from the gloomey shade,
Of Death, where they were closed;
In Jron-fetters laid.
He powerfullie them losed.
8.
He snapt their Snares a sunder,
Their Bolts and Bars of Brass;
And opened their Gates with wonder,
To ^et the People pass:
^e^ thankful Persons then,
The Lords great Love be telling;
And to the Sons of Men,
His wondrous works excelling.
9.
Fond Fools hy their Transgression,
And foul Deformities,
Are forced to feel oppession,
And many Miseries:
Their Soul in Languishment,
Sweet Nutriment distasted,
In this sad Exigent,
Even to Deaths door, they hasted.
10.
Then, Aid, they impetrated,
In this their deep distress;
And were commiserated,
And found a full redress:
The Lord sent forth his Word,
With potent operation,
Which, did them Help afford,
Unto their Souls Salvation.
11.
Let grateful Men be telling,
The Lords great Goodness, then,
His wondrous Works excelling,
Unto the Sons of Men.
Let them with joyful Hearts,
Prepare a sweet Oblation,
And praise Gods glorious Parts,
And Works of Admiration.
12.
Such as use Navigations,
In Ships to Sea being sent,
With indefatigation,
Their Merchandise to vent;
Those men see and behold,
The wonders of the Ocean;
Gods maruailes manifold,
In Sea's most mighty motion.
13.
For, at his Voice, like Thunder,
The Waters rise and rage;
Winds blow, Floods flow, with wonder,
Their Surges None can swage:
Alo^t, they lifted rise,
That Heaven they touch, They think;
Strait plund'g in woeful wise,
They seem to Hell to sink.
14.
Then, to and fro, they tumble,
Like men in drunken-fits;
They, Art-lesse, heart-lesse stumble,
Bereft of Sense and wits.
Then cry they to the Lord,
With loud eiaculation,
Who quickly does accord,
To send them Preservation.
15.
For, at his Beck and Pleasure,
The sturdie Storms lie still;
The Waves in wondrous measure,
Obey his Word and Will:
The Mariners thereby,
Are filled with Joy and Gladness;
That their wished Haven they spy,
In safety free from Sadness.
16.
Let grateful Men be telling,
The Lords great Goodness then;
His wondrous Works excelling,
Unto the Sons of Men:
And let them laud his Might,
In the great Congregation;
And in great Princes sight,
Proclaim his sweet Salvation.
Huge Waters-Inundation,
He makes a Desert dry;
And with strange alteration,
Dries-vp Springs presently:
And, for the sinful Band,
Of bad Inhabitants;
He makes a fruitful Land,
Fruitless and full of Wants.
18.
Again, dry Wildernesses,
Huge flowing Floods he makes;
And dry-Lands He redresses,
To Springs, and Pooles, and Lakes.
And, for Poor People, there,
Prouides an Habitation;
Where they may Cities rear,
With pleasant Situation.
19.
Where, they infruitfull measure,
May sow and Vineyards plant;
And so augment their Treasure,
That None need live in want:
And God does bless them so,
In time of Peace or Battle;
That they most Wealthy grow,
In Coin, in Corn, in Cattle.
20.
But, when his Saints are wronged,
Diminisht and brought low;
And, what, to Them belonged,
Are forced to for-goe:
Then, their proud Enemies,
Though Princes, He distresses;
And does so blind their Eyes,
To err in VVildernesses.
21.
Yet, out of all their Troubles,
Poor Humble-Hearts he frees;
Their stocks and flocks he doubles,
Like Sheep or Swarms of Bees:
The Righteous this shall see,
And joy with hearty Gladness;
But, Bad-mouthes stopped shall be,
With most malicious Madness.
22.
Oh, who is godly, wise,
And free from wilful Blindness;
To mark and memorize,
The Lords great Love and kindness.
Psalm the 123. Paraphrased by way o^ thanksgiving for our great deliverances
from the Papists Pouder-Plot. King David against the Philistims; King James
against the Antichristians.
1.
NOow may England
Confess and say surely;
If that the Lord,
Had not our Cause maintained,
If that the Lord,
Had not our State sustained;
When Antichrist,
Against us furiously,
Made his proud Brags,
And said, We should All die.
2.
Not long ago,
They had devoured us All;
And swallowed quick,
For ought that We could deem:
Such was their Rage,
As We might well esteem:
And as proud Floods,
With mighty force do fall;
So their mad-Rage,
Our Lives had brought to Thrall.
3.
Our King and Que^ne,
The Prince and Princely-Race;
Their Counsel grave,
And chief Nobility;
The Judges wise,
and prime Tribe of Leui;
^Vith all the prudent,
^tates-men of the Land,
B^ Powder fierce,
Had perished out of hand.
4.
The raging streams,
O^ Rome with roaring noise,
Had with great Woe,
Ore-whelm'd us in the Deep:
(...) blessed Lord,
Thou did us safely Keep,
from bloody Teeth,
And Their devouring Jaws;
Which as a Prey,
Had griped us in their Claws.
5.
(...), as a Bird,
Out of the Fowlers Grin,
Escapes away:
Right so it fared with Us;
Broke were their Nets,
And We have escaped, Thus,
God that made Heaven
And Earth was our Help
His mercy saved us ( then)
From these wicked Men.
6.
O let us therefore,
With all thanks and praise,
Sing, joyfully,
To Christ our heavenly King;
Whose Wisdom high,
This fact to light did bring:
Grant then o Lord,
We do thee humbly pray,
^e may accord,
(...) thy Name always.
Amen.
(...) shall see, Gladness Theodorus Beza, In Hispanorum Classem, Diuinitus Ab
Anglis prostigatam. Anno Domini. 1588.
STrauerat, innumeris Hispanus Classibus Aequor,
Regnis iuncturus Sceptra Britanna, Suis.
Tanti huius rogitas, Quae motus Causa? Superbos,
Impulit Ambitio, vexic A^aritia.
Quam been, Te Ambitio mersit, Vanissima, Ventus,
Et tumidos tumida, Vos superastis Aquae!
Quam been Raptores Orbis totius Iberos,
mersit inexhaustiiusta Vorago Maris!
At Tu, cui Venti, cui totum militat Aequor,
Regina, o Mundi totius Vna Decus!
Sic, regnare Deo, perge, Ambiti^ne remota,
Prodiga, sic opibus, perge, iuuare Pios:
Vt Te, Angli longum, longum Anglis, Ipsa fruaris;
Quam dilecta Bonis, Tam metuenda Malis.
Thus Englished, by I. V.
PHillips huge Fleet did Floate upon the Maine;
Laboring to link fair Englands Crown to Spain:
Do ask, what Motives, moved Him to This Ill?
It Was His Ambitious, Auaritious Will.
Well, was His Puff of Pride, by Winds, ore-blowne;
His swelling Will by swelling waves, ore-flowne:
Well was His Hope of Earthes whole Monarchy,
Ingulf'd in Seas immense profundity.
But thou (o Queen) Worlds-Wonder, sole Delight,
For Whom, the Heavens, Earth, Seas, Winds, Waves, do ^ight;
Still Rule, still Reign, from foul Ambition, free,
Grateful to God, Helpefull to Good-men, be.
That England Thee, Thou England, Long mai'st nourish
Foes to Confound* Friends graciously to Cherish.
De Strage, Classis Hispanicae Anno. 1588. Incerto Authore.
VNde Haecatra Maris Facies? Tantae vnde Procellae?
Et pro caeruleo Spuma, color tumens?
Hispanum vasto, Nune, gurgite, mergitur Agmen,
Quot vix submersos, aequoris Vnda capit.
Sie Tharao commissa petens sacra Agmina Mosi,
Factus Erythraei, Piscibus Esca, Maris.
Hostis vterque Dei, Sanctorum et Gentis vterque,
Curribus, Hic, multis, Nauibus, Ille, potens,
Exitio, Currus, Nauesque feruntur, eodem,
Sanguinis vt satiet purior Vnda, Sitim,
Et regredi vt posset (Quoniam est Aggressor vterque)
Neutri, commoti Numinis Ira dedit.
Sic, reliquas Auidus Mundi sibi subdere Gentes,
Subijcit Anglorum Colla superba Iugo.
Quique alios spreuit, Vulgi fit Fabula, Vt alta
Qui viuens perijt, mortuus ima petat.
Quinetiam ardenti medijs occurrit in Vndis,
Non minus ardescens et ferus Ille DRACO.
Iste, quidem Paetriae succensus amore tuendae,
Ille, Anglas, sitiens, totus Auarus, Opes.
Sic, Flammae Vltrices, Flammas supera'^tis auaras;
Et Deus est Flammis, est quoque Victor Aquis.
Thus Englished by I: V.
What means the Maines Foule-face, strange stormy-state,
And foamy Floods, whose Hew was Blew, of Late*
The Reason's ready: Phillips Fleet, of Spain,
Is drowned i'^^' Deep, whose like, never sunk, in the Maine.
Thus Pharao following Moses Holy-Band,
Was swallowed-vp in the Sea, by Heavens Command.
Both, were both GODS and his deere-Saints Foes vowed;
His Chariots, Pharao; Ships made Phillip proud,
But, Ships and Chariots, in the Gulf were drowned;
Their Thirst of Blood, the Flood did quench, confound.
And, since, Those bold Assailants malice great,
Had Heaven incensed, Neither, made safe Retreat.
For, Spain, that would imperiously rule All,
Was forced under Englands yoke to fall.
And, This proud Scorner, was to All a Scorn,
His high-built Hopes, in the Deep were left forlorn.
For, dauntlesse Drake, with martiall-fire enflamed,
Affronts the Fire of Spaines Rage, timely tamed.
He full of zeal his Countries Foes to foil;
Spain spurred with Heat of Hate, our State to spoil.
But, Flames of just Revenge, Prides Flames ore-came,
Thus, GOD was GOD both of the Floods and Flame.
FINIS.
Omnis, Trin-Vni Deo soli, sit Gloria.

