

THE HISTORY of the Modern Protestant Divines, Containing their Parents,
Countries, Education, Studies, Lives, and the year of our Lord in which they
dyed.

With a true register of all their several Treatises, and Writings that are
extant.

Faithfullv translated out of Latin by D. L.

The Righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance.

LONDON: Printed by N. and John Oaks, 1637.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Knights, Sir PAUL PINDAR, Sir JOHN WOLSTENHOLME, Sir
ABRAHAM DAVVES, Sir JOHN JACOB, Farmers of the Custom House to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, all happiness wished
Right Worshipful*

THAT my Intention was devoted to your Worships, appears by this Presentation,
and that my Intention has rightly directed my Presentation, will easily be
seen; for where could these faithful Witnesses that are dead, have had fairer
hopes of Tuition, than by you who are living Witnesses of the same Truth most
of them have constantly suffered for: some of them were Exoticke, some Natives,
all of the same Faith: GODS Word commends the protection of the former; Grace
and Nature both plead for the other: Some of them that were Strangers, had
fair protection and good provision in this Kingdom, and were publicly graced
and allowed in the famous Schools of our Universities; and some of ours, upon
the change of Religion, found presently a Reciprocal requital in their
chiefest Hans towns: Both one and the other were worthy Agents in the Church of
GOD; and their Works (the never dying Monuments of their Fame) will praise
them in the Gates; they were so eminent Lights, that my Encomium will rather
seem to lessen than augment their luster; however, I have striven (as much as
I could) to revive their Memories from the grave of Oblivion.

And (Right Worshipful) if you but receive as much comfort by Reading of their
Works, as I have done by the Edition, I am fully persuaded, your Worships will
rest satisfied, and I shall not be taxt for presumption: Disdain not
therefore, I pray you, to Patronize those, whom I do believe ere this, GOD,
the Father of the Faithful, has registered for his own Sons in the Book of
Life.

I need not blazon your Worthy and Religious actions to the World, when as
both Church and State adorned, and greatly beautisied by them, does, and will,
for ever eternize your Piety and Virtues to succeeding posterity. I only wish
the rich men of this age, either to imitate your doings, or be ashamed that
they follow not such Eminent examples: Go on still I exhort you, and in due
time you shall reap the recompense of reward.

Your Worships that so much love GODS Temple, I hope, will vouchsafe to receive
and entertain these famous men, who have been the Lords Ambassadors in his
Church here, and are in the Celestial Temple with him in Glory: So wishing all
your Worships the like happiness with his Saints, when you shall be dissolved:
and praying for your prosperity on earth, with length of days; I refer my
self, and all my endeavors to Him and your worthy selves, being,

Your Worships in all Christian Offices,

Donald Lupton*

To the Christian Reader.
I Have here sent to the view of the World, the lives of these Reverend Modern
Writers, whose Actions in their Studies do sufficiently declare what they did;
and what they suffered in the cause of our Savior JESUS. I found them in
Latin, and I thought it might be some profit to our times to make them speak
English: They were in their times great Antagonists to the Roman cause, and it
is pity their Memories should perish, or that they should not be generally
known, who generally did so much good in the Church of God, against all
oppositions in their days.

For their Effigies or Icons, they are not of my Invention, but taken to the
Life: Some by Albertus Durerus, and the others by that Famous Henry Hondius:
only I desired to have them done in lesser Plates, for the profit of the
Buyer. Read their lives without prejudicate Opinion, admire their Diligence
and Vigilance, imitate their Virtues and Pious performances, praise GOD for
raising such stout Champions for defense of the Truth, and blame not me, who
have labored thus much for your sakes, and will (with GODS Blessing) do more
for your profit: Who am

Yours,

D. L.

A CATALOGUE of all the names of the Modern Divines mentitioned in this Book.
Outlandish Writers.
BErengarius. page 1 John Hus. p. 1 Hieronymus Pragnensis. 8 Erasmus
Roterodamus. 14 Martinus Lutherus. 21 Philippus Melancthon. 30 Hulricus
Zuinglius. 40 Johannes Eoculampadius. 50 Paulus Fagius. 60 Martinus Bucerus. 68
Andreas Gerardus Hyperius. 81 Wolfgangus Musculus. 90 Ioannes Calvinus. 99
Augustinus Marloratus. 108 Petrus Martyr. 115 Hieronimus Zanchius. 122 Martinus
Chemnitius. 132 Aretius Benedictus. 140 Henricus Bullingerus. 147 Rodolphus
Gualterus. 158 Theodorus Beza. 166 Franciscus Junius. 178
The English Writers follow.
John Wickliffe. pa. 190 John Bale. 197 John Collet. 207 William Tindal. 214
John Bradford. 221 Hugh Latimer. 226 Nicholas Ridley. 231 Thomas Cranmer. 237
Edwine Sands. 246 Alexander Noel. 251 John Juel. 258 Matthew Parker. 269 John
Fox. 276 Edmond Grindal. 286 Laurence Humphrede. 293 Gervase Babington. 299
Thomas Holland. 304 Robert Abbat. 311 John Whitguift. 319 Thomas Becon. 330
James Montagu. 339 William Perkins. 347 William Whitakers. 356
BEREN GARIVS

BEhold the Effigies of this great and worthy Scholar, whose hand and eye
point toward Heaven, whither his Savior Jesus is ascended, in the sight of
his Apostles, and shall be there until his second appearing to judgment: he
is placed first, in time, amongst these famous witnesses: this is that
Berengarius, a French man, and Archdeacon of Gant, who was powerful in the
Scriptures, and expert in the writings of the ancient Fathers of the Church,
and who with admirable wit and wisdom did prove, that Christ was not carnally
in the Blessed Sacrament, and so hindered mainly that gross error of Popish
Transubstantiation, which Doctrine he confuted out of Gods Holy Word, and by
the authority of the sincere Fathers, so that his writings went far and
near, with approbation and admiration, to wit, into Italy, Germany, France,
and other Territories; and this was in the year of our Lord, 1020.

Whereupon, Leo the ninth called a Council at Vercellis, and did in it condemn
this Doctrine of Berengarius, so also when Nicholas the second was Pope, he was
called to a Council held in Rome, where by the bitter menacings of that Pope, he
was compelled to a recantation: which did mightily rejoice the Pope: insomuch,
that he sent his recantation to the Cities of Italy, Germany, France, as it
plainly appears in that noted Chapter, which begins, Ego Berengarius de
consecratione distinct secunda. Wherein, these words, full of Blasphemy, are by
the consent, judgment, and prescipt of that Council to be read, I do believe,
that the Body of our Savior Jesus Christ is sensibly in the Sacrament. Et in
voritate manibus sacordotum tractari and frangi, and fidelium dentibus a^teri.

But it is not the malice of thy Adversaries (oh Berenga^ius) that can wrong
thy innocence, for thou have by holy Scriptures and Fathers confirmed thy
words, and convinced their madness; the purity of it appears, even in the
writings of thy Adversaries, even by Lanfranck himself, that Longobard, who
was a man so full of subtilty and policy, especially in School Divinity, that
it took name from him: nay, he was so eminent in learning, that the learning
of St. Augustine and Hierome, was not esteemed of, and so this Lanfrank proved
the Popes Champion, in this question of Transubstantiation, which is the soul,
as it were, of the Mass, and thereupon he had the Arch-Bishopricke of
Canterbury given him; nay, for defending this so stif^ely, Pope Alexander the
second, the successor to Nicholas, did rise up to honor this Lanfranck, and
indeed the upholders of the Romish cause do all mainly bustle to defend this:
so that Pope Urban the fourth, in the year 1264 did appoint a solemn Feast
for it, with Processions, Torches, Banners, and all other solem^ities, and did
give upon that ^ay many Indulgences, and ^ut Thomas Aquinas to prove ^t to be
necessary by Tipes, Figures, and shadows out of the Old Testament.

But Berengarius testified sufficiently his grief and wonderful sorrow, and
assumed new courage, and so defended to the last what formerly he had written,
and so departed this life a famous champion of Christ Jesus: he sleeps in
peace till the last Trumpet shall awake him to meet our Lord at his coming to
Judgment. And his Effigies as you see, was had by the help of Master Francis
Molineus, who was a Deane, a learned man, and studious of Antiquities.

Berengarius writ a Book of the Body and the Blood of Christ in the Sacrament,
in which he defends and confirms his Tenants by the Scriptures and Fathers;
and in the same book he does write of the Antichristian Church, and renounces
his former yielding absolutely, and terms that Council plainly, Consilium
vanitatis.

For so Benno a Cardinal in Hildebrands life, says, that then the Romish
Clergy, was full of treachery and avrice.

IC^ANNES HVS.

THIS Famous instrument of GODS Church, seems to have taken his first vigor
and courage from our English Wickliffe: he was borne in Prague, the Metropolis
of the Kingdom of Bohemia, and proved a famous preacher in that slourishing
University, he was Pastor of a Church in that town, called the Bethleemish
Kirch, where his Doctrines did iudicially oppose the Popes proceedings; hence
Pope Alexander the fifth, condemned him for an Heretic. In his time things
took not good success in the Church of Rome, for the Cardinals falling out
amongst themselves, they chose three Popes: diverse Kings took it ill that the
Church of Rome should be thus divided. Then in the year of Grace, 1414. there
was a Council held at Constance, for the redress of these mischiefs, which
now were got into the Roman Church. To this Council was John Hus called, by
the Authority of the Emperor Sigismund, who had past his word faithfully for
his safe coming thither, and for his return from thence; he obeyed the
Emperor, and trusted to his promise; but coming thither, neither was the
Emperor Sigismunds promise availeable for his safety; for it was contradicted
by that Council, and he cast into prison, with this censure. First, that faith
in promises was not to be kept with Heretics, and that though Sigismund
promised him safe conduct thither, yet he promised not to safe guard him at his
departure, and if he had, it was of no validity or force. The Bohemians
intercede for him, but in vain; with such eagernes and zeal did those Roman
Agents prosecute their cause, and therefore adjudged both his person and his
works to be burned: and when some of them would have had him shaven, and
others denied it* so that they could not agree: Hus pleasantly turning to the
Emperor Sigismund, said, Though all these my Adversaries be cruel enough, yet
they cannot agree in the manner of the performing it. At the last, they set a
triple Crown of Paper upon his head, and so upon the sixth day of July, the
year following being 1415, this great scholar was burned.

The Bohemians upon his death rose in Arms, and their General was Ziska, a
slout and valiant Captain, and they had admirable success. This John Hus did
write diverse works. They are Printed at Nurenburgh, in Montanus and Nuberiis
Shop. 1558.

1. An explication of the Lords Prayer, the Creed, the ten Commandments, of
Sin, Marriage, of the Knowledge and Love of God, of the seven deadly finnes,
of the Lords Supper, etc. 2. Of Peace, 68. Epistles written a little before the
Council of Constance. 3. A Treatise of Tithes. 4. A Treatise of the Church. 5.
A book of Antichrist. 6. Of the Kingdom, people, life, and manners of
Antichrist. 7. Of the unity of the Church, and of Schisms. 8. An History of
the Acts of Christ, out of the 4 Evangelists. 9. An History of the passion of
Christ, with Notes. 10. Explication of the 7 first Chapters of the 1 Ep. to the
Cor. 11. Upon the Canonical Epistles of the Apostles, 7 Commentaries. 12. Of
worshipping of Images.
He spoke at his death, that within a hundred years, God would call them to
account for his sufferings.

HIERONYMVS PRAGENSIS

THIS worthy Instrument, has his name from the place of his birth; for he was
a Bohemian by birth, and as you view the Effigies, so may you conclude of his
Physiognomy; there is one that commends him deeply, and yet not without cause;
the words he uses of him, after he had praised his outward liveliness, are,
Erat Hieronymus vir animo, Corpore, forma, eruditione, virtute, and eloquentia
insignis, id est, Hierome was a man famous for spirit, Comeliness, Learning,
Virtue, Eloquence: His place of abode was at Iberling, not past a Dutch mile
distant from Prague: When he stood in defense of Hus and his Country, he
could not get protection from the Emperor, but in his travail was taken by one
Croft, and so bound was carried to Constance; here the whole troop of his
adversaries being met, furiously set upon him.

1. Gerson, that noted Chancellor of Paris, publicly produced many things, and
objected some new tenants and propositions, which he had formerly delivered in
the City of Paris, and that by those his new conclusions, he had disturbed the
whole University.

2. The Chancellor of the University of Collen objected ^ginst him, an Oration
which ^e had formerly delivered in that place.

3. The Master of the V^iversity of Heidelbergh, carrying himself loftily in
his Chair, declared that he had uttered some strange opinions in that
Accademy, and so did diverse others.

This Hierome of Prague thundered against the ill lives of the Romish Monks
and Friars, demonstrated their Pride, Covetousness, Lusts, etc. of that state:
whereupon he was condemned to be burned, for which he was resolutely prepared,
as it appeared by his valou^ and contempt of death, (eve^ at the stake it
self) for stan^ ding at the stake bound, the Executioner kindling the fir^
behind him, Hierome called to him, and bade him kindle i^ before his face, for
(said he) I am not afraid of it; for had I, I had not come hither at this
time, having had so many opportunities offered me to escape it. The whole City
of Constance admired this man's constancy, and Christian-like magnanimity in the
suffering this death. It is not certain, whether he set out any thing in print
or not, but certain it that many brave Manu^ipts, and worthy Orati^s, had in
sundry Vniversi^s, with his Letters, and ^nclusions, went to the fire ^s well as
tho Author, who de^ivered up himself a pleasant ^acrifice into the hand of his
Savior Jesus, whom he so dearly loved, for as one sung of him, that he
should say at the giving up of the Ghost.

Hanc animam in flammis offero Christ tibi. ERASMUS ROTERDAMVS

H^e was borne at Roterodam, upon St. Simon and Judes Eve, and lived 57 years;
his Mothers name was Margaret, at Zevenbergen: His fa^hers name was Everard: He
had two unckles almost ninety years old a piece: his education was at Deventer
School nine years; Peter Winchell being his Tutor, once chief Schoolmasters
at Goud, so sent to St. Hertogen Bosch: here he was solicited to enter into a
Cloister to turn Monk, they gave him time to resolve, he answered, He was
too young to know the world, un^itter* to know a Cloister, because as yet, he
knew not himself: yet at last he had bound himself to that life, being drawn
by the strong persuasions of one Corneliu^ his Chamber-fellow at Deventer,
living then at Stein, nere Goud; he told him the holiness of that kind of
life, rich furniture and copiousnesse of Books, the rest and tranquillity of
mind, with the Angel-like society of the Brethren: The first that took notice
of him, was Henry Bishop of Bergh; but this Bishop missing (for want of means)
a Cardinalship, gave leave to Erasmus to travel to Paris, with promise of
yearly maintenance, but failed, a fault too frequent in great men. Here
falling sick by ill diet, he returned to his Lord Bishop, and was nobly
entertained, and recovering health, he went amongst his own friends again
into Holland, but staid not, but departed again for Paris: he was afraid to
study Divinity, least mistaking the grounds, he should be termed Heretic.
But the Plague raging in Paris a whole year, he went to Lovaine: but he had
seen England before, and his noble Maecenas, the Lord Montioy, where he was
wonderously entertained, and writ a Book in the praise of the King and all
England, he^ he had the favor of the Archbishop of Canterbury but from hence
he went into Italy, and stayed at Bononia Now he was almost forty years old;
hence he went to Venice, where he printed his Adagies, so he passed to Patavia,
thence to Rome, where he was much esteemed of by Raphael Cardinal of St.
George; he had means enough if Henry the 7. K. of England had lived: at last
he returned for Brabant, and was admitted into Charles the 5. Emperors
Council, by the help of John Silvagius great Chancellor.

All his works are printed ^t Basil, sold by Hierome ^roben. 1540 in Folio,
being ^. Tomes.

1. Contains those things which ^onduce to the Latin and Greek tongues.
Diverse Translations of Greek Orators, Poets, Tragedians, Morals, Similes,
Colloquies; Declamations, Epigrams. 2. 1000 of Proverbs, his Attica Musa, and
Cornucopia full of all manner of learning. 3. His Epistles. 4. Contains
institutions of Manners, Apothegmes, Institutions of princes, with diverse
others. 5. Enchyridion of a Christian soldier: his Commentaries upon some
Psalms, Prayers, institution of Christian marriage: many Treatises
Theological. 6. The New Testament, with Annotations. 7. Paraphrases upon the
New Testament. 8. Some things translated out of Greek into Latin out of St.
Chrysostom, Athanasius. Origin. Basil. 9. Many Apologies against detractors
of his works.
Fabricius. Clauditur exigua Rotorodomus Humo. MARTINUS LVTHERVS

THis Luther was borne in a Dorpe in Saxony, named Isleben, his parents were
not eminent, either in wealth or honor; he was brought up carefully in the
liberal Arts, and being of an excellent wit, and a great courage and
magnanimous spirit, he left the Cloystered life, being graced with the style,
of Doctor in Divinity, (not unworthily) having a charge of souls in Saxony: he
preached Gods Word constantly and zealously: He spoke much against Indulgences
and Popes Pardons, and Bulls sold by Teccelius: He received his degree of
Doctor, by the entreaty of the Duke of Saxony, and the University, being then
of the Order of St. Augustine, by the hands of Doctor Stupitius, who seeing
Luther something willing to refuse that degree, told him, that God had much
work to be performed by the wisdom of Learned men, and intended to use his
labors in that kind. Maximilian the Emperor reading with great delight the
disputations of Luther against Teccelius, gave special command to Doctor
PfEfinger, that he should defend this man safely: for he saw that his Labors
and works would in short time be very necessary and useful against the
injuries and contrivings of the Bishop of Rome; but Luther going on, did write
courageously and sharply against that See; insomuch, that he is reputed of many
to be carried with too much zeal: I lee was called to appear at Worms, but
being dissuaded from the iourny by some of his friends, in regard the Adverse
part were strong, he answered resolutely, that he would appear in that place,
Though all the Tiles of Worms were Devils. Luther spoke some things, which he
said should come to pass, and so indeed they fell out. Onewas, which he writ
to Scnepfius Doctor of Theology, that after his death, many of his followers
would fall away; and that, what neither would be done against the Church of
God, by the Turk nor the Pope, should be done by some of his followers: who
hating those of the Reformed Religion, did maintain thar vain Idol of
Vbiquity with Brentius and Smedelinus, and lean to the Romish cause: Another
was, that when Charles the Emperor should oppose against the Gospel of Christ,
that then he would lose all his domiminions in Low Germany, and so it came to
pass in his son Philips reign, who striving to advance the Roman cause, lost
the Spread Eagle, for thereupon the united States revolted, and defended their
own liberties against the houses of Spain and Austria. Well, after a great
deal of labor to advance the Gospel, and to abate the power of Rome, this
great Heroicke spirit, gave up his Spirit into the hands of his Maker. All or
the most part of his works are printed in High Dutch and Latin by Sigismund
Sueve: most of those that are extant, are here numbered.

1. Proposition of Penitents and Indulgences. 2. A disputation of the Popes
power. 3. An Epistle to Silvester Cajetan. 4. Epistles to them of Breme, to the
Brethren in Holland, Brabant, Flanders, and to Charles the fifth, Duke of Saxony
5. An Appeal from the Pope to a Council. 6. Of the freedom of Monks. 7. The
difference betwixt true Bishops and those of the Romish Church. 8. Of the
Priest hood, Laws, and Sacrifices of the Pope, against Henry the eight King of
England. 10. Against those who deny marriage to Priests. 11. Axioms of Erasmus
for Luthers cause. 12. Confession of faith exhibited to the Emperor at the
Commencement at Augusta. 13. An Apology for the Augustan confession. 14.
Epistles to his Friends, to Princes, to diverse Commonweals, to Cities, to
Churches. 15. To Counsels. 16. Disputations. 17. Sermons. 18. The whole Bible
tran^ated out of Hebrew into high Dutch.
-- -- Men's queis, Impura venite, Hic etenim (...) sordida corda lavat.
PHILIPPUS MELANCTHON

FITLY may this man follow Luther, being both at one time famous; and indeed
Luther could never have found a more faithful and trustier friend, than this
Melancthon: For Luther was vehement, Melancthon mild; Luther courageous,
Melancthon warily fearful; Luther was fit for the Pulpit, Melancthon for the
Schools; Luther only for plain Divinity, Melancthon was excellent in all
manner of Philosophy; so that his fame was only among such as were full of
zeal that way, but Melancthon was renowned of all that heard him, or reads
his works: For his learning was not only Theology, but Philosophy, and even
an Encuclopaedia of all variety of learning: By these two Wittenbergh was as
famous as Rome it self: These Learned men fetched Students from several
quarters to hear them: Melancthon bred up many a rare Schoolmaster, and
excellent Theologues, which furnished most part of Germany: his fame was not
only great for Learning in the City of Wittenbergh, but also in foreign
parts, nay with his very Adversaries, who not only praised him for that, but
also for moderating his spirit, and for his dexterity in the managing all his
actions and Disputations, so that King Francis, the first King of France,
(whose name will be ever fresh among the Learned) sent an Ambassador and
Letter, in which, and by whom, he earnestly desired Melancthon to come into
France, that by his Conference and Council, matters pertaining to the Church
and Religion might be fairly decided, and determined, where he used such
affability and sweetness of behavior and carriage, that he wrought there very
effectually, and gaind the love, even of his opponents: he was the most earnest
against that point of Transub^tantion, and no waves favored that point of the
Lutherans, either of the Vbiquity, or Consubstantiation. So when this learned
light had labored hard to reform both Doctrine and Discipline of the Church;
and when he had exercised his Pen to the publishing of many rare and
profitable works to the Church of Christ, he yielded up his soul to God: All
his writings were printed at Basil, in the year of Grace, 1544. and 1545. by
Hervagius, being 5. Tomes, the names of which, I have here inserted.

Tome 1.
1. Commentaries upon Genesis. 2. Upon the Proverbs of Solomon. 3. Brief
explications upon some Psalms. 4. Annotations up St. Matthew. upon St. John. 5.
Upon the first Epistle to the Corinths. 6. An apology for Luther, against
those Parisians. 7. Against Anabaptists. 8. Sentences of the Fathers of the
Lords Supper. 9. Of the qualification of Princes, of the Law-suites of
Christans. 10. Of the Tree of Consanguinity and Affinity of the Church of
Synods, and of Ecclesiastique writers.
Tome 2.
1. Commentaries on the Epistle of St. Paul to the Romans. 2. Another on the
same. 3. School notes on the Colos. 4. Common places of Divinity.
Tome 3.
1. A Confession of Faith. 2. A Catechism. 3. A brief method of Preaching: of
the office of a 'Preacher, and of attaining to skill in Divinity. 4.
Theological disputations. 5. An Epistle to Carthusianus of vows. 6. An
Epitome of the Doctrine of the 'Reformed Church. 7. An Epistle to John Earl of
Weda.
Tome 4.
1. Philosophical works. 2. Commentaries upon the soul, called De Anima. 3.
Upon Aristotle's Ethics. 4. Epitome of Moral Philosophy. 5. Upon Aristotle's
Politiques.
Tome 5.
1. A Latin Grammar. 2. A Greek Grammar. 3. Logic. Rhetoric. 4.
Enarrations on Hesiods works. 5. Words fit for measures and Arithmetique. 6.
Epigrams.
These were Printed by Hervagius; but there are diverse others set forth by
Christopher Pezzelius professor of the School of Breme.

1. An Admonition and Premonition to those that read the Alcoran. 2. A defense
for the Marriage of Pri^sts. 3. Commentaries on Daniel. 4. A discou^se on the
Nicene Creed. 5. Upon Luthers life and death. 6. Many School notes on Cicero's
Epistles. 7. Translations of Demosthenes and P^utarch. 8. Greek and Latin
Epigrams. 9. Two Tomes of Epistles. 10. Cario^ his Chronology enlarged, with
many Histories.
By these it is evident, that this worthy Instrument did not hide his Talent,
but did employ it to the glory of God, and the profit of his Church, and so
dying in the Lord, he rested ^om his labors.

HVLRICVS ZVINGLIVS.

AS all Germany admired their Luther, so all Sw^zerland this Zuinglius: He was
as famous at Tigurum, as the other at Wittenbergh. Zuinglius, as himself
testifies in his work of Articles, which is full of learning, began to preach
the Gospel in the year of Christ, one thousand five hundred and sixeteene: he
spoke much against the Popes Pardons and Indulgences: This point he learned
well of his Tutor Doctor Thomas Witenbach of Biele, when he read upon it, at a
public Session of Divines at Basil. Zuinglius was solid in all manner of
learning he was a diligent searcher of the Scriptures, which he might the
easlier do, because he was so expert in the Holy Tongues: he was admirable for
refining his own language; he was such an Engine against the Popes unjust
proceedings, that their side wanting ability to hurt, did as to Luther, by
great gifts and presents, as so many baits, strive to allure him to their side
and cause, and these enticements proceeded not from mean persons* but from
Cardinals themselves, who lay at Basil as Ambassadors: There fell betwixt
Luther and Zuinglius a sharp contention, about the Vbiquitary presence of
Christ in the Eucharist. Zuinglius constantdenyed: and it is thought since, it
had been better for the Church of God, if Luther in that point had wanted a
pen to write, or a tongue to speak; but such insirmities accompany the best of
men. This Zuinglius feared neither dangers nor death, so that he might preach
the Word of God. He stirred up the courages of the soldiers for the cause of
Christian liberty, maintaining at that time a sharp war: h^ put them in good
hope of immortality; he exhorted, he comforted them, nay, he accompanied them,
and dyed in the head of the battle. So that one truly says of him, Quod pro
Aris and focis sanguinem profuderit. But his Enemies cruelty toward his
carcass, is remarkable, that when he was killed, they took his body and cut it
in four pieces, and committed it so to the fire. This Battle in which
Zuinglius fell, was on the 11. of October, in the forty fourth year of his
age, and of our Lord, 1531. His works are contained in four Tomes, which are
large witnesses for him, and will in all ages speak to his commendation, which
are here reckoned.

Tome 1.
1. A work of Articles. 2. An exhortation to the whole state of Switze^land.
3. A supplication to the Bishop of Constance. 4. An Epistle to the Senate,
people, and Church of Toggia. 5. Of the certainty and purity of Gods Word. 6.
An answer of the Tigurines, to the Bishop of Constance, of Idols and Masses.
7. An answer to Valentine of the authority of the Fathers and Doctors of the
Church, of Images and Purgatory. 8. Institutions for youth. 9. A good
shepherd. 10. Of twofold Justice, Divine and Humane. 11. Of the choice and
free use of meats, and of scandal. 12. Of the Virgin Mary. 13. Some treatises
of GODS providence.
Tome 2.
1. Of Baptism against Anabaptists. 2. Epistles to Ecchius Faber, and
Balthazar Hubmeir. 3. Of Original sin, to Vrbanus Regius. 4. Of the Authors
of Tumults and Seditions. 5. To Matthew Albert of the Lords Supper. 6. Of true
and false Religion to King Francis. 7. A sermon of the Confession of his faith.
8. Another to persuade to perseverance. 9. An account of his faith to Charles
the 5. 10. An Epistle to the Princes of Germany, of the reproaches of Ecchius.
11. An Exposition of Christian Faith, written to Francis the French King, a
little before his death. 12. Acts and Conclusions of some Disputations.
Tome 3.
1. Commentaries upon Genesis, Exodus, Isaiah, Jeremiah. 2. Psalter, out of
Hebrew into Latin. 3. An Apology for translating of it.
Tome 4.
1. Annotations upon the 4. Evangelists, and the history of our Saviors
passion. 2. Upon the Epistles of St. Paul to the Romans, Corinthians,
Philippians, Colossians, Thessalonians, Hebrews, 3. Upon St. James, and first
Epistle of St. John.
These are the Catalogue of this Famous instruments labor: his time was short,
but he put it out to the best use: so that though his years were but few, yet
they were well employed: One gives him this Eulogie.

Pastorem piet as fletque virum patria. (...) OECV^AMPADIVS.

I Should here have placed Zuinglius, but I do not strictly observe the Series
of time; as the one, so this was famous in the City of Basil in Switzerland:
He was a German by birth, in the town of Winsperg, which is a City of note in
the Francs: he took the degree of Master of Arts in Heydelbergh, and applied
himself to the study of the Civil Law in Bononia: he learned Greek of
Capnio or Ruetline, who is not much affected, and he got his Hebrew from a
certain Spaniard: when he supplied the place of a faithful Shepherd in
Germany, he was called to Basile: Erasmus of Roterodam in making the
Annotations upon the Now Testament, took his advice, and used his help much
in that work, and thus much he does ingenuously confess, that by the help
and industry of a great Divine, (viz. OEcolampadius) not only eminent for
piety, but also excellently well seen in 3 languages, did he set forth to the
world that book. OEcolampadius being urged much by his friends, admitted that
degree of Doctor in Divinity. Some Roman Sophisters at Basil could not affect
him: he read public Lectures in that City, at the desira of the Senate upon
the Prophet Isaiah: when he applied himself to preaching, he did perform that
office with singular meekness and learning: He turned St. Chrysostom into
Lat^e in this place, and Theophylact, whom he styles, Chrysostomes little Be,
for gathering such choice Flowers and sweet sentences, from that Mellifluous
Father of the Church. he defended the truth against Ecchius and Faber; in which
controversies, he gained love and commendation, even from his Adversaries: many
famous Cities sent to him for advise in the ordering of the Churches affairs:
witnesses of this, are the Cities of Berne and Vlmes; he was admirable
successful in appeasing Sects and Contentions that arose in the Church: ^ake
in particular, these commendations of him, for godliness of life, and
sweetness of behavior, for writing, for his Commentaries, for his Preachings,
for confutations and translations; he got not only a great renown to
himself, but also brought singular profit to the Church of God. This
OEcolampadius so holy for life, so learned, so qualified in affairs
Ecclesiastical lived not long, but at the age of 49. years, within a few
weeks after Zuinglius departed from Earth to Heaven, and dyed at Basil in the
end of November, in the year of Grace, 1531. his works are these that follow.

1. Annotations on Genesis.* 2. Exegesis upon Job. 3. Commentaries upon Isaiah.
4. Commentaries upon Jeremiah. 5. Enarrations upon the Lamentation of Jeremiah.
6. Homilies upon the same in high Dutch, translated into Latin. 7.
Commentaries on Ezekiel. 8. On Daniel. 9. Annotations on Hosea, Joel, Amos,
Jonas, and on 2 Chapt. of Micha. 10. Commentaries on the three last Prophets.
11. Certain Sermons on the Psalms. 12. Annotations on Matthew, John, Epistle
to the Romans. 13. Explanations on the Hebrews. 14. 21. Sermons upon the 1.
Epistle of St. John. 15. A book of the Genuine sense of these words, This is
my Body. 16. An exhortation to the reading of Gods Word. 17. Of the dignity of
the Eucharist. 18. Of the joy of the Resurrection, and the Mystery of the
Trinity. 19. A speech to the Senate of Basil, for the reducing of
Excommunication. 20. Diverse Sermons upon several occasions. 21. That the mass
is not a Sacrifice, against Images. 22. A Catechism. 23. Annotations upon St.
Chrysostom. 24. Little Treatises of Prosper. Augustine and St. Ambrose against
free will. 25. Enchyridion to the Greek Tongue. 26. Treatises against
Anabaptists, as Charles N. Balthazar Hubmeir. 27. Genesis turned out of the
Septuagint. 28. 66. Homilies of St. Chrysostom upon Genesis. 29. Annotations
upon the Acts, Corinthians. 30. A Treatise of Almse-deeds. 31. A Treatise
against Julian the Apostata. 32. Of true faith in Christ. 33. An Epistle of
Gennadius the Patriarch of Symony. 34. Of the praises of St. Cyprian, of the
love of the poor, of the praise of the Machabees. 35. Gregory Nyssen of the
life of Moses. 36. An Epistle of Nicephorus, of the power of binding and
loosing. 37. Enarrations of Theophylact upon the four Evangelists. 38. A Tract
of St. Basil against Usury. 39. A Metaphrase of Gregory's Bishop of
Neo-Caesaria, upon Fcclesiastes.
Most of these latter works were translations out of Greek: all these do
lively show, that this O Ecolampadius was a painful labourer in the Lords
Harvest, during the time of his pilgrimage; and so having finished his work,
he went to rest in the Lord.

PAVLVS FAGIVS.

IT is very sit, that Paulus Fagius should be reckoned amongst the Famous
Protestant writers, having done and suffered so much for the cause of Jesus: He
was Bucers colleague, they both came out of one and the same City into England
at one and the same time, he was borne in a Town of small repute in* the
Palatinate, and Tabernis Rhenanis.
both Bucer and he had but low estates; but by study and labor this raised
his name* and maintained himself: He got the skill of the Hebrew admirably
well, by the frequenting of Capnioes Lectures, and afterward became excellent
in it, by the means of Capito, public professor of the same tongue in the
famous University of Strasburgh; he proved so rare in this language, that few
hitherto have gone beyond him: this Fagius was called from Strasburgh to
Heidelbergh by the Count Palatine of the Rhine, to order the Churches affairs,
and to preach the Gospel, which he performed with good success; but in those
civil turmoyles, in which the Emperor had the upper hand, all came to nothing*
at which time the face of the Church was disconsolate in Germany, but in
England it did flourish wonderfully; the Emperor bringing that Idolatry and
superstition into his Land, which was driven forth of England, so that those
Doctors which the Emperor disliked and hated, were welcome and joyous to King
Edward the sixth, and to his Nobility and people. This Fagius teaching in
Cambridge, but even a short time, was admired of the whole University, for this
Fagius when he had long bin Pastor in Strasburgh, came with Martin Bucer into
England 1549. and dyed in November, whom presently after Bucer followed, not
without the great grief of all learned and pious men; there are some who
think them both to be poisoned, but as they both lived alike, so they were
both alike in their deaths; and in Queen Mary's Reign they were both digd out
of their graves, and were burnt, finding the cruelty of the Romish sect, even
when they were laid to rest. This Fagius dyed at forty five years of his age,
whose loss both Church and Commonwealth felt, and mourned for: His works
which he writ, are these that follow.

Out of the Hebrew Tongue Imprinted, translated by Fagius, are these following.

1. A work called Thisbi, from the Author This bites Elias, containing 702.
words, explained in this work. 2. Two short Chap. or Apothegmes of the
Fathers, which contain godly and profitable Sentences of the old wise Hebrews,
with some Schoole-notes. 3. Moral Sentences of BenSyra Alphabetically, the
Nephew (as the Jews believe) of Jeremy the Prophet, with a Commentary. 4.
Tobias the Hebrew sent new from Constantinople, translated. 5. Hebrew Prayers
used by the Jews at solemn Feasts, by which we may see the old Rites of that
people, which both Christ, and the Evangelists have performed. A little
Treatise of Faith, of a certain Jew turned to Christianity, 200. years since.
7. A Literal exposition of the Hebrew sayings in the four first Chapters of
Genesis, with a Chaldaick Paraphrase of Onkel on the same. 8. A Book of the
truth of Faith, full of Learning, written by an*. Israelite many years since,
to show the perfection* of Faith of Christians. 9. The 4. first Chapters of
Genesis, with the German Version for young Hebricians with Schoolenotes. 10.
Commentaries on some of the Psalms by R. David Kimhi. 11. An Hebrew Preface to
Elias a Levite, his Chaldee Lexicon. 12. Thargum, or a Chaldaick Paraphrase
upon the five Books of Moses, translated with short and learned Annotations.
13. A Collation on the chief translations which are in use upon Genesis. 14.
An Isagoge, or short Introduction to learn the Hebrew Tongue.
These are the Labors of this learned man, which are great, if you either
weigh the Languages, or the shortness of his life.

MARTINUS BVCERVS

ALthough Luther in his time was very eminent in the Church, yet this Bucer for
his Piety, Learning, labor, care, vigilance, and his writings, is little
inferior to him; both of them were singular Ornaments to the Gospel; both High
Dutch, the one of Isleben, the other of Selestadt; both of them Monks, the one
of the Order of Saint Augustine, this a Dominican. He was stiri'd up first by
Luthers Sermon, preached before the Emperor at Worms, and so of a Dominican,
was turned to a famous Protestant: What labors he sustained in. propagating
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, those that read his Books, (the never dying
Monuments of his Care) may easily judge: his Works and his Ecclesiastical
History does declare how far he excelled in Judgment for writing, for
Prudence in counselling, for his happiness in settling Churches, for Dexterity
in compounding controversies, for his Moderation in Disputations: who, although
he was Pastor of a Church in Strasburgh, and taught Divinity there for the
space of twenty years, yet other Churches, Meetings, Commencements, and
public Acts did experimentally feel his Wit. I would to God, he could have
taken away that contention betwixt Zuinglius and Luther, which he did strive to
effect; and I wish, that those of Collen (at the earnest, and often entreaty of
Herman Veda ArchBishop) had admitted this man to have taught Theology there, it
would certainly have proved to the overthrow of the Roman cause in that City;
which thing had been effected, had that Westphalian Gropper kept his Coop, and
had not been admitted into the Court of that Prince; for he could not endure
either the Arch bishop, or Bucer, and so did endeavor to betray them both: but
what the Archbishop of Colen desired, but could not effect, was done by our
Reverend Archbishop of Canterbury, Tho. Cranmer, Primate, and Metropolitan of
all England, a man singular for Learning and Piety; for he endeavored greatly
by often sending of Letters, to bring first Bucer, and then Paulus Fagius from
Strasburg into England, Edward 6. that pious Prince, being then King of
England, of whom an Historian has given this Encomiasticke Line, Tantae Regem
expectationis Europa saeculis nunc aliquot nullum habuit: That is, That Europe
in long time had not such a King for great hopes. Well, that Bucer which Colen
rejected, England entertained, and the famous University of Cambridge with
great applause admitted into her Schools, in the year of our Lord, 1549 who,
when he had for the space of two years, with the general approbation of all
learned Divines, professed in public Commencements, the last but one of
February he departed this frail life, being in the year 1551, and of his age
61. He was bravely interred, and had many learned Epitaphs made of him; his
body after it had been buried 5. years, was taken up, and burned in Q. Mary's
Reign at Cambridge. The Church of God felt, and lamented this man's loss, if
we may believe Calvine in his Epistle to Viretus, writing thus of him, Quam
multiplicem in Bucero iacturam fecerit Ecclesia Dei, quoties in mentem veni^,
cor meum prope lacerari sentio: As often as I do think what a manifold loss
came to the Church of Christ by losing this Bucer, my heart almost does rent in
pieces. This Testimony proceeding from such a Man as Calvin, does sufficiently
declare the worth of this Bucer. I have here to his life, set down his Labors
in writing, Arguments sufficient, and strong enough to prove his worth and
Wit, which if all were put together, would make Nine large Tomes.

1 The (...) translatidon^ of Hebrew into Latin, with a double Exposition of
matter, and words: wherein so^e ^ommon places are handled ou^ of the
Scriptures, and Fathers. 2 Enarrations upon the 4. Evangelists. 3. Metaphrases
upon the Epistles of St. Paul. 4. Decisions, and reconcilement of hard places
of Scripture, and of those that seem^ to be rep^gnant o^e to another. 5
Commentaries on the Romans, and Ephesians. 6 Sophonias out of H^brew, with a
Commentary. 7 A Preface to the fourth Tome of Luthers Postills. 8 Of the true
Doctrine, and Discipline, and Ceremonies of Churches. 9 Acts of the conference
had at a Commencement at Ratisbone. 10 A Defense against the Bishop of Abrince.
11 Writings of Bucer and Bartholmew Latonius. 12 Things disputed at Ratisbone,
in the year 1546. 13 Treatises of the reconciling of the Churches had at
Ratisbone, 1541. at Spires, 1544. at Worms, 1545. and at Augusta, 1548. 14 A
Gratulatory Letter to the Church of England. 15 An answer to two Epistles of
Stephen Gardener, Bishop^ of Winchester, concerning the single life of Priests.
16 Answer^ to the Objections of Murnerus, and some others, concerning the Lords
Supper. 17 Of the best way to have Counsels. 18 A Treatise of restoring
Churchgoods. 19 Translation of the greater Postill of Luther, and Pomeranius
his Commentaries on the Psalms into Latin. 20 An Apologeticall Epistle to
those of East Frisland, and other parts of Low Germany. 21 An Apology against
Brentius of the Lords Supper: that Images are not to b^e had in Churches, out
of the Scriptures, Fathers, and the Edicts of the most Religious Emperors. 22
An Epistle to the University of Marpurgh, of Heresies, and Heretics. 23 The
Confession of the four Cities of Stra^burgh, Constance, Menning, and Lindare.
24 Of the Baptism of Infants. 25 Of the mystery of the Eucharist. 26 Of a
National Synod. 27 Of a Council against Coccleius, and Gropperus. 28 Of the
false and true administration of the Lords Supper. Of offering Masses. Care of
the dead. Of Purgatory against Latomus, 2. Books. 29 Causes of the absence of
famous Divines from the Council of Trent. 30 Of the Kingdom of Christ to King
Edw. 6. 31 Lestures at Cambridge upon the Ephesians, set forth by Tremelius. 32
Of the power and use of the holy Ministry. 33 A Treatise that none ought to
liv^ to themselves. 34 Answers to his Adversaries Objections. 35 An exposition
of the Disputation between (...) Tegerius, and the Ministers of Strasburgh. 36
An (...) to the Ministers of Switzerland. 37 Psalter translated into Dutch. 38
The Causes of the Reformation a^ Stra^burgh, with an admonition to Frederick
Count Palatine. 39 An admonition to the Ministers of Strasburgh, to beware of
the Articles of James Cautius, which t^nd to Anabaptisme. 40 Acts of the
Disputation of those of Strasburgh, against Hofman. 41 A pr^paration to a
Council. 42 A greater Catechism. 43 A lesser (...) into Latin by by Sleidan.
44 A (...) to the Book^ of the Office of Magistrates. 45 Colloquies of the
Ministry of the Church. 46 Of the true office of a Pastor, and of the cure of
Souls. 47 Three S^rmons upon the Gospel, Come unto me all, etc. 48 Colloquies
upon the peace of Religion at Nurrenburgh, and Francford. 40 Of the Jews,
whether, and how far to be suffered among Christians. 50 Of Church-goods, and
who are the right Possessors of them. 51 An Answer to a Dialogue against
Protestants. 52 All the Acts and writings for the reconcilement of
controversies in Religion, from the Emperor, other Princes, and the Popes
Legates, faithfully collected, and expounded. 53 The Reformation at Colen. 54 A
first and second defense of the ^eads of Religion, handled at Bonna, and other
places in the Archbishopric of Colen. 55 A Consutation of the new Faith set
forth at Lovaine, in 32. Articles. 56 A defense of the Colenish reformation. 57
A defense against Gropperus. 58 Against the Bull of Paul 3. and his Legates
demands. 59 A godly admonition to the Emperor, Princes, and other States of the
Empire assembled at Worms, about reformation of the Church. 60 Against the
restoring the Mass, and the other Sacraments, and Cerem^nies of the Roman
Church. 61 Impediments of reformation. 62 Against the Sophisters of Colen. 63
Of the Conference of Ratisbone. 64 An exposition upon the 120. Psalm. 65 A
Treatise of afflictions of our times. 66 A refutation of Calumnies. 67 A Sermon
at Berne. 68 Of the Ministers, and Sacraments. 69 Luthers Commentaries upon the
two Epistles of Peter, translated into Dutch. 70 Some writings of Sturmius, of
the Eucharist in Latin. 71 Retractations with Commentaries on the Gospel. 72
Other Manuscripts of his which he writ in England.
All these his Works do show, that he was a painful Wo^kman in Gods
Vineyard, and did all he could, to propagate the Gospel of our Savior.

ANDRE^S GERARDVS HYPERIVS.

THis Gerard takes part of his name from the place of his birth, being Hyperia,
a fair and strong Town in Flanders, amongst the Dutch Divines he is one of
the most elegant, when he was a youth he was of an excellent wit, and addicted
to study, he left not, till he had the Encuclopaedia of Sciences and Arts: his
father was a Lawyer: he got much by ^oachim Ring^lbergh of Antwerp, a youth of
excellent endowments, whose praise this Gerard set forth in a speech made to
the Parisians; when this Gerard had studied at Paris and Lovaine, he took a
view of Italy, France, Germany, Spain, and England: at last being appointed
Professor of Marpurgh, he there settled himself, which University first found
him an excellent Philosopher, and afterward a rare Divine: his skill in
Philosophy, is seen by his succinct, perspicuous, and learned Exposition upon
Aristotle's Aethicks, pleasant and profitable, to be read both of Divines and
Philosophers: he propounded it to the Students of Marpurgh. Even as Melancthon
was for Saxony, so was Hyperius for Hassia, he was well read in the Histories
Ecclesiastical and Polyticall, both of Fathers, Schoolmen, Sophisters, but
most of all, he gave himself to the reading of St. Chrysostom, in whose
sentences, examples; figures he took singular pleasure, and made singular
profit: He is commended for his mode^y, patience, and constancy, which do
appear in his writings, for he seems not to be at any time carried away with
^pleene or affected zeal; and these three he termed his Warlicke Engines, by
which he did resist his Adversaries, defend himself, and conquer them, TACEO,
FERO, SPERO. He dyed at Marpurgh, in the year of the Worlds Redemption, 1564,
and of his life 53. in the Calends of February, when he had professed 22.
yeare^ in that City: One has wittily cut his Epitaph in this verse.

Flandria quem genuit, Hassia n^stra tegi^. His writings which he left to the
World, as a rich Legacy, are these here set down.

1. A Commentary on the 20. Psalm, of the honor *due to Magistrates. 2. On
the 12. Psalm. 3. A Method for a Preacher and study of Divinity. 4. Upon the
Romans. 5. Of the reading and meditation of the Scriptures. 6. Method of
Theology. 7. Theological Topics. 8. Chatechisme.
Works in two Tomes.
Tome 1.
1. Of the study of the Scripture. 2. Of the Institution of Colleges anew. 3.
A trial of Students in Divinity. 4. Of Chatechising. 5. Of justification by
faith, and of the faith and works of a man justified. 6. Of Beneficence to
poor. 7. Of ^easts, their lawfulness, and unlawfulness.
Tome 2.
1. Of the duty of hearers. 2. Of Gods providence. 3. Of examining our selves.
4. Of the marriage of Ministers. 5. Whether their opinion be to be received,
that hold Babylon in the Apocalips to be (...). 6. The opinion of the (...),
Greeks and Latins, of the digestion of the Decalogue. 7. Some things of the
truth of Apostleship, Doctorship, and other degrees. 8. Of the Sacraments. 9.
Upon that of the Romans 1. God gave them up to a reprobate sense; and how God
punishes one sin with another.

10. School notes upon 10. books of the I thicks of Aristotle. 11. Physics.
12. Logtcke, Rhetoric, Arithmeticke, Geometry, Cosmography, Optics,
Astronomy.

After his death, his son Lawrence Hyper and John Mils put forth these in
Print.

1. Short Annotations on the Prophet Isaiah. 2. Commentaries on the
Gallathians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, and Theslalonians. 3. Upon
Timothy, Titus, Philemon, Jude, upon the Hebrews.
So that he prosited not only the Church of God in his life time, but he also
is useful being dead, so that both in life and death I may say of of him, that
he lived and dyed to the glory of God, and the good of his Church.

WOLFGANGVS MVSCVLVS.

AMongst other famous Lights of GODS Church, this Musculus is not of least
rank or dignity: his Parents were but o^ mean conditions, and low fortunes;
he was borne at Dusa, a Town of Lorraine, near to Alsatia: by labor, study,
and industry he became excellently qualisied in the knowledge of the
Scriptures, and so entered into the ministry. From 15 years of age to thirty,
he lived in the Palatinate: in his first proceedings, he was protected as it
were, under the wings of Reinhard of Rotenbergh, chief Governor of
Litzelstein; those his adversaries had then crushed his hopeful proceedings,
by the authority of the Elector of Mentz, but that they durst not then meddle
in the jurisdiction of the Palatinate, for which he gives thanks, in his
Dedicatory Epistle to his common places, which he writ in his old age to
Frederick Count Palitine of Rhene, being for holiness and piety, called by
the name of Pius: he was called to exercise his Ministry in the City of
Strasburgh; he was a most welcome colleague to Bucer: Thence he went to preach
at Augusta: He was much supported by Vrbanus Regius a learned Divine, in the
year 1531. which was the next year after the declaration of the Augustan
Confession; in this Church of Augusta he exercised his gifts, and gave himself
to the study of sacred Letters, and Ecclesiastical Histories, by turning those
ancient Doctors and Fathers out of Greek into Latin, and also by setting
forth Commentaries, which in those times gave much light to the ignorant. But
Musculus, by the command of the Emperor, was forced to leave Augusta, and by
reason of civil war, in which turmoyles he came to Berne; here he had most
Christian entertainment, and was received courteously: here he was a public
professor of Divinity for 14 years; he was always either writing or printing
some things which did conduce to the enlargement of Christ's Kingdom, till at
last, in the year of his age 66. and of the Incarnation of Christ. 1563. he
changed this life for a better, not dying without sufficient testimony both of
great labor and learning in his never dying works. A catalogue of them, I
have here presented to your view.

1. Commentaries on Genesis. 2. Enarrations on the Psalms. 3. Commentaries on
Matthew in ^hree Tomes. 4. Upon John. 5. Upon the Romans and Corinthians. 6.
Upon the Philippians, Colossians, Thessalonians, and the first of Timothy. 7.
His Common places. 8. Upon the Commandments. 9. A Book against Coccleius. 10.
A Treatise whether a raw Christian may Communicate with the Papists or not, in
4 Dialogues. 11. How far injury is to be suffered of a Christian. 12. Of
Oaths against Anabaptists. 13. Of the Germane war 1546.
Translations of Greek Authors.
1. Commentaries of St. Chrysostom upon Saint Paul's Epistles. 2. Epistles of
St. Basil, and Nazianzen, and some other Fathers. 3. Ethics of Basil. 4. Of
solitary life. 5. Many Homilies. 6. School notes of Basil upon all the
Psalter. 7. Thirty nine Epistles of Cyril. 8. A Declaration of those 12.
Anathemaes in the Ephesine Council. 9. Opinions of Nestorius confuted by
Cyril. 10. Synopsis of the Scriptures, out of Athanasius. 11. One hundred and
forty questions out of the old and new Testament. 12. A Synopsis of Theodore
Bishop of Tire.
Ecclesiastical Histories.
1. Ten books of Eusebius of Ecclesiastical affairs. 2. Five books of
Eusebius of the life of Constantine. 3. Eight books of Socrates, the
Ecclesiastical Historian. 4. Nine books of Zozomen. 5. Two books of
Theodore. 6. Six books of Euagrius the Monk. 7. Out of profane Histories,
five books of Polybius.
Berna professor publicus occubuit. IOANNES CALVINVS.

HE was born in France, the breeder of many great wits, and was endued with
excellent parts, both of Nature and learning, which appears by his
indefatigable Labor, Cares, Studies, Watchings. The sirst piece that gave the
World notice of his ability, was his Institutions, dedicated to Francis the
first, King of France: Philip Melancthon called him The Divine, by way of
excellency: at first he addicted his studies to the Civil Law, under the
government of Peter Stella at Aurelium, who was then counted the ablest
professor of that way, in the study of this Calvine prosited exceedingly, so
that h^e might have had fair preferment by it: but he intended another course,
for he was bent to study Divinity, which he did at Biturigum, under Volmarus a
Germane, who loved Religion, and favored the professors of it: he also learnd
the Greek tongue and the Hebrew at Basil, by the company of Simon Grynaeus,
and Wolgangus Capito; you shall have his commendation, in a few lines bestowed
upon him by a* great Divine: For a piercing ludgement, for stating Divinity
questions, for experience in Church affairs, for Readiness and Purity in his
Writings and Preachings, for Labor and Study, for resolving of doubts, for his
Disputations, for Constancy in Adversity, Humility in in Prosperity; for
despising Honor, Promotions, for Parsimony, Continency, Sobriety, Piety, few,
or none have paralleld, or out-stript this man. His labors are so well
approved of in the Church, that his writings are extant almost in most parts of
the Christian World: Witness France, Germany, Italy, Transylvania, Poland,
England, Scotland, Spain, and other Kingdoms, Provinces, and Commonwealths:
he did stiffely write against the Papists, so that it is said of him, as St.
Augustine was famous in the old Church, so Calvine in the modern. Campian the
Jesuit was a bitter adversary to him, he wanted not diverse others, for it has
always been known, that the upholders of truth never wanted enemies. He dyed
of a Consumption, contracted by extraordinary fastings and watchings, in the
year of Gra^e 1564. and of his age 54. being borne in the yea^e 1509. on the
tenth of July, his works are here registered.

Commentaries on the Old Testament.
1. Upon Genesis. 2. Harmony upon the four Books of (...). 3. Upon Iosuah. 4.
Upon all the Psalms. 5. Upon Isaiah.
Lectures.
1. Upon Jeremiah. 2. Upon the 21 Chapt. of Ezekiel. 3. Upon Daniel. 4 Upon the
lesser Prophets.
Upon the new Testament.
1. His harmony on the Evangelists, upon John, Acts: all the Epistles, to the
Hebrews, Peter, John, James, Jude.
Sermons.
1. Upon Deuteronomy, upon the Decalogue, Job, 119. Psalm, Canticles, Isaiah,
38. Chapters, on the eight last Chapters of Daniel, upon 10. 11. Chapters of
the Epistle to the Corinthians, upon the Galathians, Ephesians, Timothy, Titus.
Of the Nativity, Passion, Death, Resurrection Ascension of our Savior Christ:
Upon Gods Election and Providence: Upon Genesis, upon 1. and 2. of Samuel, upon
the 18. Chapt. of the 1. of the Kings. Upon many Psalms, upon Iosuah, Isaiah,
Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and lesser Prophets: upon 123. Psalms.
Other Works.
1. Institutions. 2. Of the Eucharist. 3. Upon the victory of Jesus 4. Genevas
Chatechisme. 5. Of Reforming Churches. 6. Of scandals, a form of confession of
Faith: his answer to Sadolets Epistle: Of Free Will against Pighius: Against the
Articles of the Sorbonists. Acts of the Synod of Trent. Against Anabaptists.
Against Libertines. Of superstition. 4. Sermons of flying Idolatry, of bearing
Persecution, of the beauty of Gods House. Of Gods Worship. Against Judicial
Astrology. A defense of the Orthodox Faith, ^oncerning the Trinity; of
Pre^estination: the Ministers of Tigurium and Geneva their agreement about the
Sacrament, a means to preserve Concord, a true Communicant. Epistles, Answers,
Councels. Seneca of meekness enlarged with a Commentary.
AVGVSTINVS MARLORATVS

THis famous Scholar was borne in the Dukedom of Lorraine, and was a Monk of
the Order of St. Augustine, but at length coming from that profession, he
proved a very famous Shepherd in the Church of Christ Jesus; his manners,
modesty, piety, watchfulness, learning, were singular ornaments: he having
studied the body of Divinity in France, came to Lausanna, which is a famous
Town of the Lords and States of Berne, situated hard by the Lake of Lemana,
and is a place famous for Divinity, and excellent rare Printing. This place
Marlorate thought very convenient to settle in; then entering into the
Ministry, he preached hard by that famous Lake of the Allobroges, in the Town
of Geneva: he profited much in the knowledge of Sacred Letters, as appears by
his studies and writings: who almost knows not that hard piece of work? his
Commentaries, or a Catholic exposition upon Genesis, Psalms, Isaiah, and the
whole new Testament, including the sentences of the Ancienter Fathers of the
Church with wonderful Skill, Order, Brevity, and perspicuity; so that his
labors may be termed, as one says not unfitly, A Library for Divines. He
brings in so many of the Fathers opinions, as ornaments, and at last adds his
own: the Gospel was preached by him all along the River Rhodanus, and the
Lake Lemana, and the west parts of France: This Marlorate (amongst other
Divines) was called to the conference of Possen, 1561. which though it did not
work that reformation in the Church, which was wished, yet it made the cause of
the professors of the Gospel, not to be so odious as formerly it was, and many
did love the truth, being by these means discovered, which ignorantly before
hated it, and the professors of it. In the year 1562. the City of Roan was
besieged by the Adverse part and won, wherein Marlorate was planted; but he,
with three other principal Citizens were put to death, not unworthily
deserving the name of a Martyr. This was done the thirtieth of October., of
his age the 56. whose works being ever living Monuments, are preserved to the
benefit of the Church of God, and are here set down.

1. A Catholic and Ecclesiastical Exposition of the new Testament. 2. An
Exposition upon Genesis. 3. An Exposition on the Psalms of David. 4. An
Exposition upon the Prophecy of Isaiah. 5. His Thesaurus, or Treasurehouse of
the whole Canonical Scripture, digested into common places: Also the hard
Phrases Alphabetically Printed, which usually are met withal in the
Scriptures, by the care and industry of William Feugerius of Rohan professor of
Divinity, to whom Marlorate left this Work, being not altogether perfected at
the time of his Dissolution.
And thus this famous Scholar, having been a painful Writer, and afaithfull
Preacher, finished his course, and expects the second coming of his Lord Jesus.

PETRVS MARTYR.

THis Martyr was a Florentine: his Fathers name was Stephen Vermilius, and Mary
Fumantine was his Mothers name, both of ancient extraction, and good means: So
also they both had a great care that his youth should be well seasoned with
Letters, being their only child: His Mother understanding the Latin,
interpreted Terences Comedyes to him: imitating those worthy Matrons of Rome,
as the Gracchi, Lelii, Catuli: so also others of latter years have been
renowned for this act, as Olympia Morata an Italian, Jane, Duchess of
Suffolk: but especially the Lady Bacon, who turned into English the Apology
of the Church of England made by worthy Jewel Bb. of Salisbury. This Martyr in
his youth followed not the vain pleasures and delights of Italy, but followed
virtues Lore, and addicted himself to a Monks life which then was held holy
and blameless. So he was admitted into the house of the Cannons Regular of the
Order of St. Austin, which for Learning and discipline was at that time held
the purest in all Italy, he studied at Patavia, and was very able in
Philosophy, School Divinity, Greek and Hebrew: being a Monk Regular he
preached at 26. years of his age at Brixia, then in the most famous Cities of
Italy and France on this side the Alps, at Rome, Bononia, Pisa, Venice,
Mantua, Bergom, in the Colleges of his order he expounded Philosophy, and
sometimes Homer, and Divinity also. He was made Abbat of Spoletto for his
learning, then Pr^efect in St. Peter's College at Naples, then Visitor General
of his order, and last he was designed Prior of of St. Fridrian at Luca. But
leaving Luca he came to Tigurum, where Bullinger, Pelican and Gualter, did
give him free intertainment. Then he was called to Strasburg, at the entreaty
of Bucer, where he professed Divinity five years. Thence at the instance of
Archbishop Cranmer, and by the will of King Edward 6. he was admitted into
England, and so to Oxford, where he read the Divinity Lecture. Here he did
great good while he stayed, but in the days of Queen Mary, he was expeld
England, and returned to Strasburg; but contentions arising there also, he with
Iuell went to Tygurum, and at the last there as in a Haven he laid himself to
rest. 1562. 11, of November. of his age 63. What he was, his works will
declare to all that will read them, which I here have placed.

1 A Cathechisme or exposition of the Creed. 2 Commentaries on the first
Epistle of Saint Paul to the Corinthians, at Oxford. 3 Upon Judges. 4 Upon the
Romans. 5 A defense of the Doctrine of the Eucharist, as it is approved by Gods
Word, ancient Fathers Councels. 6 A disputation of the Eucharist at Oxford.
After his death these Books are extant.

1 Commentaries on the first of Kings, and on the 12. first Chapters of 2.
Kings, 2 On Genesis. 3 A little book of Prayers out of the Psalms. 4 A
Confession of the Lords Supper to the Senate of Strasburg 5 His Common places,
distributed into four Classes. 6 Orations, Sermons, Questions and Answers. 7
Epistles Theological. 8 Commentaries on Exodus. 9 Commentaries on the lesser
Prophets. 10 Commentaries upon the 3 first books of Aristotle's Ethics, with
some reserved Manuscripts.
HIERONYMVS ZANCHYVS.

THis Zanchy followed Peter Martyr, being bred in the same College, this
Martyr was so Eminent for his gifts, that he drew by his Example and Piety
many worthy men, to leave that state of life under Popery, and to embrace the
Gospel. Amongst other, Lacisius, first Professor of Latin in Italy,
afterward of the Greek Tongue at Strasburgh: that worthy Gentlman Celsus
Martingen, being extracted from a noble family, having had Earls of that Name,
which professed the Greek tongue in his College, and after governed the
Italian Church in Geneva discreetly: and so Emanuel Tremelius, that famous
Interpreter of the Hebrew Tongue. And this Zanchy, who together with Peter
Martyr taught the Word of God in the City of Strasburgh, was excellently well
seen in the writings of the Ancient Fathers of the Church, and in Philosophy;
which, when he prooved against the Omnipresence of Christ's Body against the
Ubiquitarians, was not approoved by some of that Sect; for which cause Zanchy,
as well as Martyr, left this City, and came unto the famous University of
Hydelbergh, where the whole University, together with the godly Prince
Frederick, showed their love and favor. But this point of Ubiquity then
prevayling, those that withstood it, were forced to remove. So Zanchius came to
be Pastor of Clavenna, which is a Town of Rethia, indifferently famous, not
far off from the Lake of Comen, through which the Merchants of Italy, and
other places, bring their Wares, and expose them here to sale. Which place
lying near to Italy, and pleas nt for its situation, many Italians, who
quitted themselves from the Sea of Rome, lived here.

At last he preached the Word of God at Newstadt, a Town of the Palatinate,
under the protection of that Religious Prince Cassimere: At length Age and
infirmities accompanying it, coming on, this Prince provided fairly for
Zanchius his maintenance: A Prince he was addicted to Religion, and the quiet
of the Churches.

Zanchius and Sturmius mainly opposed Ubiquity, and strongly defended the
Augustan Confession; they were both very old, and a little before Zanchius
dyed, he used this speech to Sturmius: Oh worthy Sturmius, if ever, now is the
time for us to open our eyes, and turn to the Lord; and look up to Heaven,
where our blessed Redeemer Jesus reigns with the blessed spirits, knowing, and
hoping assuredly, that shortly we with those Saints, shall also be with the
Lord Jesus. A worthy Divine Speech, and fulfilled shortly after in Zanchy; for
he dyed in the year of Christ, 1590. in the Calends of November, in the City
of Heydelbergh; being aged 76. and Sturmius was 80. whom he followed.

Zanchies Works are these that follow.
1. Divine Miscellanies, with with the explication of the Augustan Confession.
2. His Judgment of the controversies about the Lords Supper. 3. Of the Sacred
Trinity, Books 13. in 2 parts: in the first, the Orthodox Doctrine of this
Mystery is proved, and confirmed by Gods Word. In the latter* all Oppositions
of the Adversaries are answered. 4. An Answer to a little book of an Arrian.
5. An Answer of William Holdet, of the visions of Christ to St. Stephen and St.
Paul after his Ascension. 6. Of opening Schoolmen in the Church, with a Speech
to the study of the sacred Scriptures. 7. Of Christian Religion and Faith, to
Ulysses Martengius, Earl of Barch; and Patritius Venetus. 8. A Compendium of
the chief points of Christian Doctrine. 9. A perfect Treatise of the sacred
Scriptures, proved succinctly out of the Ancient Fathers. 10. Of the
Incarnation of Christ, wherein both his Omnipresence is handled, and Vbiquity
confuted accurately in two Books. 11. Of the Divine Nature, and of his
Attributes. 12. Of the Works of God in six days. 13. A work of Man's
Redemption. 14. A Commentary upon the Prophet Hosea. 15. Commentaries upon the
Epistle to the Ephesians, Collossians, Theslalonians, and Saint John. 16. Some
observations of Physic, Printed with Aristotle's Works in Greek, found in
that part which treates of Hearing.
And thus after many labors, and diligent travel in the Work of the Lord for
many years together, did this Noble Zanchius commend himself to his Savior
Jesus Christ. His Motto upon his Coat was,

Sustine, and abstine. MARTINUS CHEMNICIVS.

THis Name of Martine has opposed the proceedings of the Church of Rome much,
especially three; viz. Martine Luther, Martine Bucer, and this Martine, who did
chiesly oppose the proceedings and determinations of the Tridentine Council.
In his first proceedings he followed Luther and Melancthon; he was well
furnished in the knowledge of the Liberal Sciences; by the study of the
Mathematics and Philosophy, he found an easier passage to Theology.

He was much addicted to a Kinsman of his, George Sabine, who professed at
Regio Montane, where he made this Chemnitius Chief over the Library of the
Prince of the Borussorum. When he had exercised himself a while at
Wittenbergh, he was called to Brunople, a free and famous City of Saxony. This
man by his Learning and Preaching made the City of Brunople as famous for
Piety, as Trent was for her Council. This was he that examined the Decrees of
the new Fathers of Trent, by the writings of those Ancient Fathers of the
Church, and laid them to be tried by the rule of Gods Word: This work made him
famous, and disparaged the Adversaries proceedings and conclusions. Many others
have done well upon that Subject, but his it was that most wounded and galled
that side. Hence they have been striving to answer it, but have not been as
yet able; but have left it off, as too hard a task for them to perform. This
was he that stood up among the first, to discover the Nature, Arts, and
plottings of the Monks and Jesuits of Germany, as may appear by his writing
to Joachim, Marquess of Brandenburgh, Elector of the Roman Empire, Interest
Principum Germaniae, etc. It stands the Princes of Germany in hand to look
well what new Sect of professors the Bishop of Rome does send into their
Dominions and Territories, and well to consider what will be the issue and end
of their proceedings. And a little before, he speaks that these were at first
only busied in building, and making their nests and holes: and lest that great
Sorcerer should bewray himself before he was well placed, and settled; he, and
his followers writ nor printed any thing; or if they did, they set it forth
with so many general ambiguities and doubts, that it was very hard to say what
was peculiar to this Sect alone; but now they have disclosed themselves fully.
So this Chemnitius having proved himself an undaunted Soldier of Jesus Christ,
departed this life at Brunople, in the year of Christ, 1586. and in the 64. of
his age, not without the great grief of that City. I have here set down his
works.

1. Of the Original of the Jesuits, and by what policy that Sect came first
up. 2. The chief heads of their Divinity set forth by themselves at Collen,
1560. with Kemnitius his addition of Annotations on the same. 3. An Explication
of the Doctrine of the two Natures in Christ. 4. The Grounds of the true
Doctrine of the Substantial presence, exhibition, and taking of the Body and
Blood of Christ in the Lords Supper. 5. A Form, or Index; or rather an
Enchyridion of the chief points of Heavenly Doctrine by questions and answers
declared out of the Word of God. 6. Of Original sin against the Manichees.
7. A Sermon of Baptism. 8. A trial of the Decrees of the Council of Trident,
explicating the chief places of Christian Doctrine in 4. parts.
And so he having fought the Lords battles courageously, laid down himself
quietly, expecting a joyful Resurrection.

ARETIVS BENEDICTVS

THough this famous and strong City of Berne may be justly commended for many
worthy actions of Peace and War, yet neither of those makes it so renowned as
Piety, and Love showed, and afforded to the professors of it: For this is the
Basis, and sure groundwork of all policies, and State-affaires, which will
soon fall, if not maintained by this supportment. It so fell out, that in the
year of Jesus Christ's Incarnation, 1528. there was a great Disputation at
Berne, performed by many grave Divines, approved for Learning, and truly
Orthodoxe, about some controversies in Religion; by which means those of Berne
were greatly enlightened in the points of Religion and the Word of God (...)
preached not only in (...) City, but in the (...) Countries.

Amongst other Divines (...) Note, this Aretius was not (...) least; who was
public Professor of Divinity in that City: He is famous for his Endowments
of Meekness, Piety, Learning, Labor, and especially for his dextrous Method
in Reading, and Preaching, so that he did truly divide the Word. Diverse other
Theologues took their Method from him, and would not make trial in lick of
their own parts, before they had heard his public Exercises. He was so
famous for his writings, that his Labors in Divinity brought no small gain to
the Printers. One of his Books was printed in the space of three years,
twelve times, called his Examen Theologicum, which does show not only the
profit of it, but also the Excellency; being a work fit for all who int^nd the
study of Divinity.

When this Aretius had continued his Labors in the Schools and Pulpits of
Berne for many years, with singular approbation and profit, he left this City,
and was enrolled a Citizen of Heaven, not without the grief of his Auditors,
nor without a sufficient testimony of his pains and travailes, as may witness
these Works of his now extant in Print, and here Registered.

1. A form for Students. 2. Two Tables of the Hebrew Grammar. 3. His Trial
for Divines. 4. The History of Valentine the Gentile, beheaded at Berne, with
an Orthodoxe Defense of the Article of Faith, concerning the Trinity, against
his blasphemies. 5. A censure of the Propositions of the Catabaptists of
Poland, denying that Baptism succeeded Circumcision. 6. Two Treatises, one of
the reading, the other of the interpreting the sacred Scriptures. 7. His common
places, containing all the heads of Divinity explaind. 8. Eight Lectures on the
Lords Supper. 9. Commentaries on the four Evangelists. 10. Upon the Acts of
the Apostles. 11. An Introduction to the reading of St. Paul's Canonical
Epistles. 12. Commentaries on all Saint Paul's Epistles. 13. Commentaries on the
Apocalypse. 14. Some Physical Works of compositions, and their degrees.
HENRICUS BVLLINGERVS.

ABout the same time that Zurich lamented the death of Zuinglius, God brought
this Bullinger into place: He was a Switzer of the County of Bremogarts. There
is also a Town called by this name, seated two great Miles from Lucerne, and
has been in former Ages, one of the Cities tied to the Roman Empire, which
appears (as Simler testifies) by the large privileges which it has;
Bullinger was borne hee^e, who being a youth, was excellently well qualified in
the Liberal Arts, and taught them with profit and commendation to diverse
others; but he leaving the Schools, entered into the Church, and exercised his
Gifts in ^is own Country. But Zuingliu^ being dead, he was sent for to
Tigurine, where he preached the space of so many years as Zuingliu^ was borne,
except only one.

These Churches flourished in his time, and were happy by his Judicious
Government; many famous Doctors were not ash^med to follow his Method in his
Lectures, Sermons, Writings, Commentaries, controversies; he was beloved of his
Adversaries for the moderating of his spirit at all times. He labored chiefly
to procure the Churches quiet, and for this purpose was very able in the
Ecclesiastical Histories, and Ancient (...), w^ose steps he approved, and
imitated. This famous Bullinger, when he had faithfully, painefully, and
dexterously ma^aged the affairs of the Church of Zurich the space of 44.
years, and instructed them in all manner of Learning, having made himself
also renowned in the Churches abroad, departed hence, giving his Soul to his
Creator. He dyed in Zurich, having exercised his gifts 50. years, and being
aged 71. in the year of Grace, 1575. September 17. and lies ingrav'd by Peter
Martyr, as one expresses it ^n an Epitaph.

--. -- -- quiescit
Contiguus Petri Martyris exuvijs.
His Works are contained in 8. Tomes, which do sufficiently commend their
Author: they are here digested orderly.

Tome 1.
1. A Catechism for the Tigurine Schoolmasters. 2. An Epitome of Christian
Religion in 10. Books, to William Landgrave of Hessen. 3. Decads of Sermons
upon the chief heads of Christian Religion in three Tomes.
Tome 2.
1. Confession and Exposition of the Orthodoxe Faith. 2. Declaration proving
the Protestant Church to be neither Heretical, nor Schismatic. 3.
Comp^ndium of the Popish, and Protestants Tenants. 4. The old Faith and
Religion. 5. Instruction to those that shall be examined by the Inquisitors. 6.
A Treatise of Gods eternal Covenant. 7. An Assertion of the two Nain Christ.
8. Five excellent Books of Vigilius, Martyr, and Bishop of Trent, five hundred
years since written against Eutiches, with Bullingers Notes. 9. Institution of
Christian Matrimony. 10. Institutions for sick men. 11. Declarations of Gods
great benefits to the Switzers, and Exhortations to Repen^ance.
Tome 3.
1. A Treatise of the Sabbath, and Christian Feasts, 24. Sermons. 2. Two
Sermons, of the Office of Magistrates, and of an Oath. 3. Three Homilies of
Repentance. 4. Six Sermons of conversion to God, out of Act. 8. 5. Daniels
Prophecy explained, with the excellency of Gods Word. 6. Of the Office
Prophetical, and how to be performed. 7. Exhortation to Ministers, to leave
controversies and contentions. 8. Of the Original of Mahometanisme. 9. Of the
persecutions of the Church.
Tome 4.
1. A Preface to the Latin Bible, Printed at Zurich 1544. 2. Sixty six
Homilies on Daniel. 3. Epitome of the times, from the Creation, to the
destruction of Jerusalem.
Tome 5.
1. One hundred and ninety Homilies on Esaias. 2. One hundred sixty Sermons on
Jeremy. 3. A brief exposition on Ieremies Lamentation.
Tome 6.
1. Twelve Books, Commentaries on St. Matthew. 2. Six Books on St. Mark, on
St. Luke, 9. on St. John 10. on the Acts of the Apostles. 3. A Series of times,
and Actions of the Apostles.
Tome 7.
1. Fourteen Commentaries on the Epistles of St. Paul. 2. Seven more
Commentaries on the same. 3. Sermons on the Apocalypse, translated out of Latin
into Dutch, French, English, Polish.
Tome 8.
1. A Demonstration of Christian perfection to Henry 2. King of France. 2. Of
the Authority of the Scripture, certainty, absolute perfection, stability, and
of the Institution of Bishops, and their Function, with some others.
Thus this glorious Ornament of the Church having finished his course, and kept
the Faith, after long travel and labor in Gods Vineyard, was laid down to
rest.

RODOLPHVS GVALT^ERVS

Virtue and Learning are attained unto by diligence, as appears in this Man:
He was richly adorned with abilities in all Sciences, especially Latin, and
Greek; he was a very exquisite Orator, and a dainty Poet: so being furnished
with these endowments, he entered into the study of Divinity. He was holy in
life, and grave in his carriage, and singular for his Learning; he was Pastor
of the Church of Zurich above 40. years, which he supplied faithfully, and
with good success, not only to the benefit of the Tigurines, but also to many
strangers who came to hear him. So it does appear, that he desired to do
good to the Church of God by his Homilies, which he set forth upon all the
Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, whose labors serve Students to this day as a
Library; Printed by Froschover with great pains and diligence. Well, when this
Gualter had raised up the the Cause of Christ, and opposed that See of Rome,
having painefully discharged his Office in the Church of the Tigurines a
longtime, he gave up his Spirit to God, and lies buried in this City, having
lived 74. years, and in the year of Christ, 1586. His works are many, and
those profitable to be read: a Catalogue of them I here present to your view.

1. The combat of David and Goliath, set forth Allegorically in Heroicke
Verses. 2. Epiceds of Marg. Blaurer, upon Peter Martyr, Bullinger, Parkhurst,
Bishop of Norwich, Symler, Gualter. 3. Arguments of all the Chapters in the Old
and New Testament in Verse Elegiack. 4. A Collation of the New Testament to the
Greek Copy. 5. An Apology to the Catholic Church for Zuinglius. 6. Orthodox
confession of faith by the Ministers of the Church of Zurich. 7. A sacred
Comedy of Nabal. 8. Of the Offices of Ministers. 9. Of the antiquity of
Schools, with the praise of their Founders. 10. Five Homilies of the last
times, and of Antichrist. 11. Homilies on St. John's Epistles, upon Zacharies
Song, of the Nativity of Christ: of the slavery of sin, and freedom of the
faithful. 12. Of the Original, Dignity, and Authority of the Holy Scriptures:
of Christ's coming, and of our preparation: upon the 113. Psalm. 13. Three
Homilies upon the Ascension of Christ, and sending the Holy Ghost. 14. The
Christians Lookingglasse. Two Homilies. 15. Homilies upon the twelve (...)
Prophets. 16. Homilies upon St. Math. Mark, Luke, John, Acts, Romans Corinth.
Galath. 17. Nineteen Homilies on ^entations. 18. Ten Homilies of the Bread
of Life. 19. Three hundred and twenty Homilies on Esaias. 20. Translation of the
five Books of Moses. 21. Twenty four Books of Zuinglius, translated out of
Dutch into Latin. 22. The Psalter into Dutch. 23. Ten Sermons of Theodoret of
Divine Providence. 24. Upon Ciceroes Works de Lege Agraria. in Verrem. 25. Of
the quantity of Syllables and Verses. 26. An Elegy on the studies of the German
Nobility. 27. Many sorts of Verses ancient and learned, to John Frisius a
Tigurine.
And so having spent his spirits to the good of the Church, and terror of his
Adversaries, and to the sweet content and comfort of his own Soul, he had
his desire fulfilled, which was, To be dissolved, and to be with his Savior;
free from further troubles and miseries, which this Life was full of.

THEODORUS BEZA.

BEhold the grave countenance of this Man, who seems to be alive, though
dead: This Beza is famous through all the Christian world, borne of Noble
Parents, who did enlarge Christ's Kingdom wonderfully by his Virtue, Piety,
writings, and holy labors; he was excellent in Learning in his youth,
especially for Latin, and Greek; as also for the Politiques, as appears by
those famous Monuments set forth by him. His Tutor which he had first, was at
Aurelium, then at Zurich, who was called Melior Volmarus, a German by Nation, a
godly man, well learned, and excellent for the Greek tongue; to whom in the
year of our Redemption, 1560. Beza dedicated the Confession of his Faith, a^
unto a Parent, or Patron; with which also he expressed the whole course of his
former life.

At twenty years of Age he was Licenciate in the Civil Law; he had two
Uncles, one of them was a Senator, or Alderman as it were of Paris; the other
was Abbat of Frigimontan; both these did mainely desire to have this Beza, nay,
this Abbat so greatly loved him, that he had designed him next successor in
that Abbey, which was worth five Thousand French Crowns yearly: howsoever, he
had two Benefices, of which he had no skill to govern; so that he had full
friends, Moneys, and ease; and being enticed with the fullness and splendour of
these, he did suspect that Satan had laid snares for him: Therefore being
mindful of Holiness, and thinking of his good Tutor, and the change of his
life, he fell into a Sickness, which was the cause of his spiritual Health
and welfare (as he would say.) So recovering his health, he forsook all, and
came to Geneva, as to the safest Haven for his goods, in the year, 1548. Hence
within a while, he went to Lausanna, a Town of the Lords of Berne, where he
was called to be public Professor of the Greek tongue: but after 10. years
he returned to Geneva again, dedicating himself wholly to the study of
Divinity, and under-went the charge of a Shepherd of Souls faithfully and
labouriously, to the great pro^it of the Church of Christ: but the Piece that
made him most Eminent in the Church, was his Translation of the New Testament
with Annotations. He lived to 83. years; he was reported by Clemens Puteanus
a Jesuit, to be dead, and dyed a Romish Professor* which accusation and lie
was most excellently well answered by Beza himself; in which answer this is
one Clause, Vos autem, etc. but you in this one thing, when you report me to be
dead, and that I renounced the Faith and Truth, do manifestly show, that your
Father is the Devil, who is the father of lies: and thou Puteanus, especially
do show thy self one of those that come from that pit, Apoc. 19. So having
labored much in the Cause of Gods Church, he gave his Soul to his Creator in
peace. His Works are here registered.

1. Poems Printed by H. Stephan. 2. Psalms printed with Buchanans. 3.
Schoole-notes on the Greek Alphabet, and of the Dutch pronunciation of the
Greek. 4. Abraham's Sacrifice, a Tragedy.
In Theology.
1. New Translation of the New Testament, with Annotations. 2. Confession of
Christian Faith, with comparing it with the Popish Heresies. 3. Another short
Confession. 4. Of the punishing Heretics by the civil Magistrates, against
Martin Bellius. 5. The sum of Christianity. 6. The Doctrine of the Sacrament.
7. A plain Treatise of the Lords Supper against Westphalus. 8. His Cyclops
against Heshusius. 9. The Defense of the Church of Geneva, against his
calumnies. 10. An Answer to Sebastian Castalio, concerning Predestination. 11.
An Answer in defense of his Translation against Sebastian Castalio. 12. An
Answer against the Renewers of Nestorius, and Eutiches Sect, of Omnipresence of
the Flesh of Christ. 13. Of the Hypostaticall Union of the two Natures in
Christ, against Jacob Andrees. 14. Of the Unity of the Divine Essence against
Arrians. 15. Theses of the Trinity of Persons, and Unity of Essence. 16. A
little Book of Christian Questions and Answers. 17. Of the Sacramental
conjunction of the Body and Blood of Christ, with the sacred Symboles against
Illiricus. 18. An Apology for the Calvinian and Bezan Doctrine of ^e LORDS
Supper. 19. An Answer to the Reprohes of Francis Baldwin. 20. Against Selneuer.
21. A Treatise of Poligamy, and Divorce. 22. Theological Epistles. 23. Calvin's
Life. 24. Dialogues of Athanasius, ^f the Trinity: of Anastasius and Cyrill, of
the explication of Faith: of Basil against Eunomius. Four Books in Latin,
set forth both in Greek and Latin, with Feobadius against Arrians 25. Psalms
of David, and five Books of the other Prophets with Latin Paraphrases. 26.
French Psalms to sing i^ Meter. 27. Upon St. Paul's Epistles to the Romans
Galath. Philip. Colos. with Olevianus Notes. 28. Icones, or Pictures of many
learned men, especially Protestants. 29. Pictures, or Emblemes. 30. Moral,
Ceremonial, Judicial Law of Moses. 31. Of the Hypostaticall union of both
Natures in Christ. A Dispute with Doctor John Pappius. 32. A Preface to
Hesiander, of the Omnipresence of Christ. 33. A Translation of Theodores Greek
Book against Heretics, denying the Hypostaticall Union, into Latin. 34.
Questions and Answers of the Sacrament. 35. An Answer to Iodic Harch, of the
Lords Supper. 36. Of the *Pestilence, 2. questions: one of the con^agion of it,
two of flying in that time. 37. Salomons Song in Latin verse. 38. Of the
pronunciation of the French tongue. 39. Homilies on Christ's Resurrection.
Tertullian is expected to be set forth.

FRANCISCVS JUNIUS.

THough France has abounded with many Professors of the Gospel, and those
rare Scholars: yet there are very few that have out-stript this worthy Juni^.
He was of the City of Biturigum, one who was well descended; famous for Verue,
holiness of life, and learning: he had through the whole course of his life
several crosses, as exercises of his Virtues, in which he admired the
singular providence of God, and his special mercies for his deliverances. He
was borne in the year of Jesus, 1545. at thirteen years old, he studied the
Civil Law, ^n which he spent 2. years: In which time, in his own Country,
in the University of Biturigum, those famous and religious men of that
Profession, Francis Duaren, Hugh Donellus, Antony Contius, and Jews Russard
did interpret the Civil Law unto him: when as the variety of several*
Sciences invited this Junius to the study of them, he determined with himself
to set upon, and to follow that which was the most excellent.

In the year of our Lord, therefore, 1562. he came to Geneva, where when he
had exercised himself in the sacred Letters, and tongue, he was esteemed very
able to take the Ministry upon him: Those then of Antwerp being destitute of a
Minister for the French Congregation, Junius at the persuasion of Crispine, and
the necessity of the Church so requiring, came to Antwerpe 1565. in which City
there were many spiritual Merchants, that sought after those Celestial
Treasures: but with what hazard and danger he exercised his Ministry here, and
in other Towns of the Low Countries, it is to be easily seen in the Histories
of those times. He preached a Sermon at Brussels, where the Sermon ended, they
went into consultation, how to stop and pull down the Spanish too too bloody
Inquisition, whereat Junius held his peace; these things were first determined
in the House of the Earls of Colenburgh: Whereupon the House, two years after
was laid level with the ground, not without fearful cursings and
execrations. That bloody Duke of Alva then swaying in those parts with his
Spanish Tyranny, for all these tempests, Junius did great good in his
Preaching, and was well approved of many of the Lords, who liked not the
Spanish Servitude.

This Junius taught long in the Palatinate under Frederick Cassimeire, called
Pius; and his Nephew Frederick 4. both in Church, and Schools. That
Translation of the whole Old Testament often printed, and now used, got him a
great name. He had great knowledge in the Scriptures, and in Tongues,
Philosophy, and History, as appears in his Notes upon Bellarmine, of the
translating of the Roman Empire. He taught, and writ in the University of
Leyden for ten years, and upwards. His Works are many, and are here registered.

1. A Speech in French to the Spanish King for defense of the Low Countries. 2.
An Answer to Sandwich his brethren in England, of Images. 3. The Translation of
the Old Testament, with Immanuel Tremelius, out of Hebrew. 4. Acts of the
Apostles, and Epistles to the Corinthians out of Arabicke. 5. Confession of
Faith of Frederick Count Palatine 3. 6. Apocrypha translated with Notes. 7.
Johannes Tilly of Kings, and of the Kings of France, translated into Latin. 8.
A Speech of the Hebrew Tongue. 9. An Hebrew Grammar. 10. Ecclefiasticus Latin,
and French. 11. A Looking-glass of Tremelius against Genebrard. 12. Twelve
Orations for the reading of the Old Testament. 13. An Oration of Vrsinus life.
14. Upon Gregory 13. his Cursings against Gebbard, Bishop of Colen. 15. Upon
St. Iudes Epistle. 16. Four Speeches for reading the Old Testament. 17. Upon
the 4 first Psalms. 18. A Catholic Apology in Latin. 19. An Hebrew Lexicon.
20. His table of Purgatory. 21. A Christian admonition against John Haren in
French. 22. A book called the Academy. 23. His (...), Greek and Latin. 24.
Translation of 2. Epistles of the Kings, and one of Plessis in Latin. 25. His
sacred Paralels. 26. Upon the Prince of Anhalt his death. 27. Notes upon the
three first Chapters of Genesis. 28. A confutation of some Arguments of the
Creation. 29. Notes upon the Apocalypse. 30. Second Edition of his Lible. 31.
Manilius with corrections and Notes. 32. His first defense of the Catholic
Doctrine of the Trinity. 33. A Commentary on Daniel. 34. The King of France his
confession in French. 35. Upon the Death of John Cassimeire, Count Palatine.
36. Commentary on Psalm. 101. 37. Exposition upon the Apocalypse in French. 38.
Commentary on Jonah the Prophet. 39. An Analysis upon Genesis. 40. Ciceroes
Epistles to Atticus, and Q. his brother, with Corrections and Notes. 41. A
defense of the Catholic Doctrine of Nature and Grace. 42. A praise of Peace.
43. The peaceable Christian in French. 44. Of the observation of Moses policy.
45. Of Divinity. 46. An Oration against the Jesuits in Latin. 47. Notes upon
Tertullian. 48. Notes and Animadversions upon Bellarmine, of the Translation of
the Roman Empire.
These be this painful Laborers fruits: more he writ, which are not come
forth, and some things by the injury of times, are lost; these be sufficient to
show his pains and labor, and will for ever eternize his Name.

These are the Names and Lives of the Foreign Divines, those that follow, are
of our own Nation.
(...) WICKLIFEE.

AMongst many famous Writers of this Nation, as Beda, Alckvine, John
Carnotensis, Girald, Nigellus, Neckam, Sevall, Bacanthorpe, Ockam, Hampoole of
Armach, this Wickliffe is not the least of worth, he was famous both for
Life's, and Learning; he was brought up in the famous University of Oxford, in
Merton College; he gave himself, after he was Master of Arts, to the study
of School Divinity, wherein having an excellent acute wit, he became
excellently well qualified, and was admired of all for his singular Learning,
and sweetness of behavior: He preached the Gospel under that famous King
Edward the third, who always favored and protected him from his raging
Adversaries.

The Bishop of Rome lost by his Doctrine the power of making and ordayning
Bishops in England, and the Tenths of spiritual promotions, and also the
gains of his Peter Pence. The Popes ever since pretending to be Imitators of
St. Peter, have still desired to fish in this Island, knowing how profitable
this Kingdom has been to that See of Rome.

In the time of King Richard the second, this Wickliffe was banished, in which
misery and affliction, he showed a singular spirit of courage and constancy,
wheresoever he ^vent, or whatsoever he suffered. At last returning from Exile,
he died in the year of our Savior Jesus, whom he had Preached, 1398. and was
buried the last day of December in his Parish Church of Lutterworth in
Leichestershire. But in the year 1428. which was 41. years from the time of
his death, his dead body was by the Decree of Pope Martin the fifth, and the
Council of Seen, dig'd up, and burned with the Execrations of that fiery Pope;
thus he found the cruelty of them being dead, whom he had being living, taught
to be so He writ (as Pius Aenaeas testi* fies) more than two hundred fair
volumes, most of which were burned by Subinck Archbishop of Prague in Bohemia*
The Catalogue of his Works you may read in the Centuries of John Bale, some of
them, I have here set down.

1. Of Christ and Antichrist. 2. Of Antichrist and his members. 3. Of the truth
of the Scriptures. 4. Of the fountain of Errors. 5. A book of Conclusions. 6.
7. Of Ecclesiastical and Civil government. 8. Of the Impostures of
Hypocrites. 9. Of Blasphemy. 10. Lectures on Daniel. 11. On the Apocalypse. 12.
Of the marriage of Priests. 13. The Devils craft against Religion. 14. His
policy to overthrow faith. 15. Of Apostasy. 16. Two books of Metaphy* sickes,
one containing 12. Books. 17. Glosses upon the Scripture. 18. Of falling away
from Christ. 19. Of truth and lying.
Besides these, he writ many of Philosophy, and translated the Bible into the
English tongue, making Prefaces and Arguments to every Book: he also
translated the twelve Books of Clement, the Parson of Lan^hon, containing the
harmony of the Evangelists: And thus went out this Lamp of England: of whom
one thus has said.

Mortuus est, p^sthac ^ssa cremata sua. JOHN BALE

HE was an Englishman, borne in Suffolk, fitted and furnished with all manner
of learning at Cambridge. His Parents had many Children, and were Papists. This
Bale being a boy, was shut up 12. years in a Cloister of Friars, Carmalites;
he was first brought from that darkness to light, by the Right Honorable, the
Lord Wentworth, but he was troubled first under the government of Leo at York,
and afterward under Stokesley at London, being Archbishops. But Bale got his
freedom by the means of Cromwell, who was privy Councellor to King Henry the
eighth, for some dain^y and elegan^ Comedies, which he composed; yet he was
forced to fly, and remained in Lower Germany eight years, in which he writ
many works. He was called home by King Edward the sixth, and was made Bishop
of Ossar in Ireland; where he preached: But in Queen Mary's days Ireland was
too hot for him, and so left it, but after many dangers, he was taken by
Pirates, stripped, mocked, and vncivilly handled, at last was sold, but his
ransom being paid, he returned into Germany, which was at that time the safest
receptacle for distressed Christians; living at Ba^ile he compiled that work of
his 13 Cen^uries of all the famous writers of Great Britains, in all ages, to
the year, of Christ 1557. He was much helped by Leland, living in Germany,
his special friends were Alexander Alerius, a Scottish man, where he writ the
like Catalogue of the famous men of that Nation, likewise Gesner, Simler, and
Lycosthenes loved him dearly: He was a powerful engine against the Roman
Church, as appears by that Distiche of Lawrence Hum^hred.

(...) Lutherus patefecit, Platina multa.
Quadam Vergerius, Cuncta Balaeus habet.
Englished thus.
Full much did Luther, Platin^ did well,
So did Vergerius, Bale does all excel.
This worthy Scholar dyed in Ireland in the year of our Redemption 1558. and
of his troublesome life 67. His works are these that follow.

1. His Heliads of English. 2. His British writers. 3. 3 Tomes upon Walden. 4.
Upon the invention of things by Polydore. 5. Upon Capgraves Catalogue. 6. Upon
the lives of Bishops. 7. An Epitome of Leland. 8. The acts of the Romans Bishops.
Two Comedies in several sorts of verse^.
1. The life of St. John Baptist. 2. Of Christ. 3. Of his Baptism and
Tentation. 4. Of Lazarus raised. 5. Of the high Priests Council. 6. Of Simon
the Leper. 7. Of the Lords Supper, and washing his Disciples feet. 8. Of the
Passion of Christ. 9. Of his burial and Resurrection. 10. Upon the marriage of
Kings* 11. Of the Popish sects. 12. Against Detractors. 13. Papists
treacheries. 14. Against ad^lterating Gods Word. 15. Of Ioh. King of England.
16. Of the impostures of Thom. Becket. 17. Of the promises of God. 18. Of the
preaching of St. John. 19. Corruptions of Divine Laws. 20. Pammachius
translated.
Books in prose in English.
1. Upon the Apocalypse. 2. Against Standish. 3. Against the custom of
swearing. 4. Mystery of iniquity. 5. Against Antichrist. 6. The trial of Sir
John OldCastle. 7. Some Dialogues. 8. Against Baals Priests. 9. Apology for
Barnes and Gray against Smith. 10. Against persuasion to Popery. 11. Upon Anne
Askew. 12. To Elizabeth, after Queen. 13. Upon the single life of Clergy men.
14. Lelands Journall. 15. Of true Heretics. 16. Expostulations of Popery. 17.
Upon Mantuan of death. 18. Against the Popish mass. 19. Of the calling to a
Bishopric. 20. Against Bonners Articles. 21. Upon Luthers death. 22. John
Lambards Confession. 23. A weeks work to God. 24. Thorpes Examination
^ranslated into Latin. 25. John Pomers Epistle to ^he English men. 26. Of the
writers of England, and Scotland, enriched with 500 Authors. 26. Abreviations
of Leland. While he lived among the Papists, he collected these and writ them.
1. A bundle of all writers. 2. Writers from Helia. 3. Writers from Bertholde.
4. Additions to Trytemiu^ Germane collections, Fren^ collections, and English.
5. The spiritual war. 6. The Castle of Peace. 7. To the Synod of Hull. 8.
The History of St. Br^ chard. Of Simon, an English man. 9. Prefaces upon
Mantua^ It does by all these appear^ what an industruous labourer Bale was in
his time* whose memory is yet fres^ amongst us.

JOHN COLLET

THIS Collet was son to Henry Collet Knight, and twice Lord Mayor of London,
he was Doctor of Divinity in the University of Oxford, and Deane of St. Paul's
in London, he was a great Scholar, living in the dark time of Popery: he
embraced true Religion in the reigns of Henry the 7. and 8. Kings of England:
His sincerity was seen in his extraordinary and laborious Sermons, but
specially in that which he preached to Henry the eighth, at his siege of
Tournay: His Argument was styled Christianus Miles, or the Christian Soldier:
whereupon, he being called to trial by the Kings Counselors: The issue
proved happy, for he gave great content to the King, insomuch, that the King
taking a cup of Wine, said, Deane. I drink to you, let every man take whom he
will for his Confessor, you only shall be my Doctor.

And truly, this great Deane of St. Paul's, taught and lived like St. Paul: He
was expert in St. Paul's Epistles, and illustrated them with his Commentaries:
He preached against the worshipping of Images, concerning Justification by the
Merits of Christ freely; against idle Priests: against those that were married,
and yet lived inordinately: His nature was against those which persecuted the
professors of truth: He derided one that thought St. Paul meant by those words
an Heretic after the first and second admonition Devita, that he should be
cut off, taking the verb to be a substantive, De vita, ac si de vit a
tollendu^: He founded and built that famous Grammar school; called Paul's
School, where an hundred fifty and three poor men's sons should be taught
freely, and a fine house of dwelling for the Schoolmaster, which School
bears this inscription in Latin, Schola Catechisationis puerorum (...) Christi
Opt. Max. side and bon^ ^tteris, Anno Christi M. D. X. which does evidently
prove, ^at he was a true Religious ^an: He assigned a large ^nnuall stipend
to the head ^choole-master and Usher, he ^ft rents and houses, which ^e
committed to the care of ^e Worshipful company of ^ercers in London: That
lear^ed William Lylly, the Author ^f the Latin Grammar, was ^e first
Schoolmasters of ^is place. Doctor Collet lies ^mously buried in the Ca^drall
Church of St. Paul, upon whose Tomb, Lyly has engraven Latin verses, and
this Motto.

Disce muri mundo --
-- Vivere disce Deo.
His writings were these.
1. Of the institution of youth. 2. Of Manners, Lib. 1. 3. Fourteen books
upon St. Paul. 4. One book on the Proverbs. 5. One book of St. Matthew. 6.
One book of the fear of Christ. 7. One book of the twelve Articles of Faith.
8. Upon the Lords Prayer. 9. Ordnary Sermons. 10. Extraordinary sermons upon
special occasions. 11. Of the sayings of Christ. 12. Disputation: against
Erasmus Roterdamus. 13. One Sermon to the Clergy in English.
WILLIAM TINDALL

THIS famous Scholl^ was borne in the co^fines or borders of Wales, (...) had
his youth trained (...) in Oxford, in Magdalen College in the liberal
Sciences, where he attained to great skill in the Tongues, when he had
gathered great knowledge of Gods Will, as it was revealed in his Word: He
dedicated his first fruits of learning to the College, and then entered into
holy Orders. In that dark time of Popery having embraced the Truth, he also
instructed his wife, and div^rs others in the knowledge of it: Furthermore, he
turned many famous books and writings into English, and namely, Erasmus, his
Enchyridion of a Christian Soldier. But his name being grown somewhat famous,
he was vexed by his adversary* the Adherent^ of the Bishop of Rome, and whereas
he studied the quiet of his own Conscience, h^ left this Land, and went into
Germany, and had great conference with Martin Luther, and John Frith in Saxony;
by whose help he set upon the translation of the Scriptures into English
tongue, for the go^d and prosit of the rude and ignorant people, and having
translated the New Testament, and the Pentateuch, or five books of Moses, and
caused them faithfully to be imprinted at Hamburg, with learned Prefaces to
each of them, and sent them into England: He writ many other famous pieces in
English, and when he had staid a good while in Germany, he came down to
Antwerp in Brabant, where he did much good by instructing the Merchants, and
enduing them with the knowledge of the truth; but he had not traveled long,
before his adversaries had laid him out for the fire; therefore, being by
Letters and Messengers sent out of England taken, he was led as a Prisoner to
Filford Castle in in Flanders, where for the testimony of Jesus Christ, and for
the Profession of the Gospel, he suffered constantly, a cruel Martyrdom,
being burnd to Ashes: His last words he spoke, were these, Open oh Lord the
Kings eyes of England: He was through the whole course of his life
unblameable. Master Fox in his History of Martyrs says, he might be called
Englands Apostle, the works which he writ, besides the translation of the
Scriptures, are these that follow.

1. A Christians obedience. 2. the unrighteous Mammon. 3. The practice ^f the
Papists. 4. Commentaries on the seventh Chapter of St. Matthew. 5. A discourse
of the last will and testament of Tracij. 6. An answer to Sir Thomas Mores
Dialogues. 7. The Doctrine of the Lords Supper against More. 8. Of the
Sacrament of the Altar. 9. Of the Sacramental signs. 10. A foot path leading
to the Scriptures. 11. Two letters to John Frith.
All these are extant together, with the works of two Martyrs, Barnes and
Frith, in English, in Folio, and thus after much labor and persecution, this
worthy member of Christ, yielded to the flames, expecting a ioyf^ll
resurrection.

JOHN BRADEFORD

THIS Scholar was not inferior in parts, either of doing or suffering to
others, he was borne in the County of Lancaster: in that famous Mart Town of
Manchester: He was by his parents brought up from his Cradle to learning, and
he was singular for docility and diligence, so that he profited admirably, in
his studies and exercises which he undertook, then he was sent to Cambridge,
and was admitted into Queens College, where he took all degrees, so that
he was made Master of the same College, which he governed with great
dexterity and sincerity. Afterward in the reign of King Edward the ^xth, he
was appointed Di^inity Lecturer in the Cathe^rall Church of St. Paul in London,
which task he performed not without admirable demonstration of la^our and
learning. But in the time of Queen Mary, the state of Religion altering, and
the Protestant professors being hated, this famous Bradford among the rest, for
the love of Jesus and his Gospel, which he had faithfully preached, was
consumed in the fiery flames of Persecution, and so was crowned with that
glorious name of Martyr. This he suffered the first of July 1555, in that
noted plac^ called West Smithfield, London the last words that he wa^ heard to
utter, were, O^ England repent, he left behind him his famous disputation^
which he had with the Papists, which are extant at large in Foxes History of
Martyrs. He had a famous Epitaph written of him: His works which he writ in
English are these.

1. Two Sermons, the first of Repentance, the second of the Lords Supper. 2.
Some letters to his fellow Martyrs. 3. An answer to ones letter, desiring to
know whether one might go to Mass, or not? 4. The danger ensuing the hearing
of Mass. 5. His examination before the officers. 6. Godly Meditations made in
Prison, called his short Prayers. 7. Truths Complaint. 8. Melancthon translated,
of Prayers.
HVGH LATYMER

THis worthy Divine was borne in Leicester shire, brought up to learning from a
youth, afterward he was ^laced in Cambridge, where ^e took (not without
de^ert) the eminent Title of Doctor of Divinity: his as^ect did promise much
sin^erity and ingenuity, and he was of Candid manners, and ^f courieous and
meek car^iage: for his singular lear^ing, he was by King Edward ^he sixth,
made Bishop of Worcester, where, while he ^ate in that See, all good men
^erceived his singular care and dexterity, in managing that weighty function:
He was always ready and forward to propagate the truth. But he also in the
time of Queen Mary's Reign, was both d^ prived of his Bishopric, an^
ministerial function, an^ being cast into prison, w^ condemned to the fire: H^
was much like that old an^ cient Father of the Primitive time, St. Polycarpus:
(...) either you look upon the form of his Martyrdom* or weigh well the
saying (...) them both at the time (...) their sufferings. That old Polycarpus
being fourscore and above, a little before his death, uttered that sweete^
saying of St. James, Fideli^ est Deus, qui non sinit nos tentari^ supra quod
possumus, that is, God is faithful, who will not suffer us to be tempted
above our strength: And a little after he said, Pater Celestis suscipe spiritum
meum, which is, Oh Heavenly Father receive my Spirit. In like manner, this
Father Latimer, for so he was called, was a constant and stout Martyr of Jesus
Christ, and was burnd at Oxford, the sixeteenth day of October, in the year of
Grace, 1555. he left his Sermons behind him, wherein we may read his
sincerity and piety, many of them were preached before King Edward the sixth,
and the Illustrious Lady Katharine Duchess of Suffolk, and a^ now to be had
in any one^ hands almost, having been^ so many times imprinted* with the
Public approbation of all learned and judicious Divines, and to the comfort
of all well dispose^ Christians, who may gathe^ great profit out of them: Hi^
life actions, and sufferings, are at large to be read, in Master Foxes History.

NICOLAS RIDLY

LEarning did not only adorn this worthy Divine, but also parentage, being
well descended, he was borne in the Bishopri^ of Durham: In his youth he was
endued with many singular virtues, and his Parents spared no cost to have him
well and Christian-like educated: well, knowing the power of good education to
help much, he was sent to Cambridge, to study where he took degree of
Bachelor of Divinity, and presently he was made Master of Pembrook Hall: but
his parts and gifts were so eminent (as appeared by his wife and religious
deportment in that preferment) that, that religious and pious King Edward the
sixth took notice of him, and being ful^y certified of his integrity of life,
and excellent schol^ership, made him Bishop of Rochester, nor did his hand
stay, until he had called him from that See, to the Bishoppricke of London,
where he showed the parts of a true Bishop and shepherd of souls by his
painful watching, prayings, preachings.

But these Halcyon days of the Churches peace, lasted not long, but King
Edward paying Natures debt, and Queen Mary coming to the Crown of England,
this worthy Pr^late sat not long quiet, for religion being altered, and the
Bishop of Romes authority coming in again, he was removed and cast both from
his Ecclesiastical dignity, and wholly from the Ministry, and was condemned
to be burnd as an Heretic. This English Father might fitly be compared to
that old Father of the Church, St. Ignatius, not only for his famous writing
upon the Lords Supper, but also for his suffering so constantly and zealously
in the cause of Christ.

Well, this man was a choice flower of Christ his Church, and therefore is not
unworthily styled a Martyr, for in the same day, and same hour, was he, with
Father Hugh* Latimer burnd to ashes in the University of Oxford, over against
Baliol College: his last words in the flames that he was heard to utter were
these, Into thy hands O Lord do I commend my Spirit: His works, besides that
Treatise of the Lords Supper, are extant in English, which follow.

1. A Conference with Father Latimer. 2. A right form of celebrating the Lords
Supper. 3. A friendly farewell to his loving friends and favorers, being in
Prison at Oxford. 4. With a mournful Lamentation of the deplored estate of the
Church of England being fallen to Popery.
His writings could not be many, because his time was but short, and he
employed it most in preaching.

THOMAS CRANMER

THIS reverend and grave Archbishop was borne in the County of Notingham,
sprung from an ancient and worthy family. He was brought up to study in the
University of Cambridge in Jesus College, in which he made a wonderful
progress in learning, and proved in a short time an excellent and useful
member in the Church, for his rare endowments, he was by that potent Prince
Henry the eight, King of England, made Archbishop of Canterbury, after the
death of his predecessor Warran, in the year 1532. All the time of King Henry
his Reign, he shaved his beard, but that King dying, he let it grow greatly,
as you see him here lively presented: he was the first Archbishop, except only
one, which was Richard Scroope, Archbishop of York, that was adjudged to death
in England by formal course of Law. But this Cranmer, was and underwent two
years and an half imprisonment, with much sorrow, in darkness, nastinesse,
and want: Certain it is, that he was a man devoted wholly to Religion and
Godliness, for he in the time of King Edward procured many Divines to repair
from foreign parts into this Kingdom, and saw that they were supplied with
necessa ries, among whom was M^ tine Bucer, Paulus Fagius, Io hannes Lascus,
and Peter Martin If he had not loved the Go^ spell of Jesus, he would no^ have
so friendly relieved and cherished his followers. He needs no other
commendations, than those which are given him by Andreas Osi^der, and Peter
Martyr, in K. He^ the eighth his reign. Osi^der in his preface to his
Evangelicall harmony thus speaks of him, Amote, etc. I love your Grace, not
only for those endowments which are common to others, as greatness of birth,
comeliness of person, sweetness of carriage, charity to all, especially ^o
Students and professors of Gods Word: but much more for those Abstrusiores ac
plane ^ leroicas animi tui virtutes, those are his very expressions in English,
Abstruse and plainly Heroical virtues of your mind, together, with your
Visedome, Prudence, Fortitude, Temperance, Justice, care for your Countries
good, Loyalty to your Sovereign, contempt of worldly wealth, love of heavenly
riches, love of the truth, Gospel, and professors of it. This Encomium is
large and true, proceeding from the pen of such a Divine: and Peter Marter
gives him as much praise in his Epistle to his book of the Eucharist. Quem
enim potuissem, etc. Whom could I find so true a Bulwark for the truth, and
especially Huius Eucharistici Sacramenti, For the Sacrament of the Eucharist,
than your sacred self nay, he says, Q^is sanctior? firmior? Doctior? Who so
holy? whose steadfast? who so generally learned^ It is your Grace that are
expert in all the Writings of the Fathers, Councels, Canons, Popes Decrees,
Controversies, of these (says he) I am an eye witness, or else I should
scarce have believed ^t: Ye for all these parts, this famous Father of the
English Church, was adjudged to the sire, and suffered it at Oxford, 1556. the
21. of March, and of his age 72. in which weighty charge of governing the
affairs of the Church. He writ many things which are here to his eternal
praise truly registered.

1. A Catechism of Christian Doctrine. 2. Ordinations of Churches reformed. 3.
Ofordaining Priests. 4. Of the Eucharist with Luther. 5. A defense of
Catholic doctrine. 6. To the professors of the Truth. 7. Ecclesiastical
Laws, in Edward the sixth his reign. 8. Against Gardners Sermon. 9. Doctrine
of the Lords Supper. 10. 12 Books of common places, out of the Doctors of the
Church. 11. Christian Homilies. 12. To Richard Smiths Calumnies. 13.
Confutations of unwritta^ truths. 14. Of not marrying one^ sister, two Books.
15. Against the Popes primary, two books. 16. Against Popish Purgatory, two
books. 17. Of Justification, two Books. 18. Epistles to Learned Men.
Out of Prison he writ these.
1. Against the sacrifice of the Mass. 2. Against adoring the Host. 3. To
Queen Mary, with others. 4. Emendations of the Translation of the English
Bible, and added Prefaces to it.
EDWIN SANDS ARCHBI.

THIS Worthy Doctor of the Church of England, proceeded of a good house and
family, and took his degree of Doctor in the famous University of Cambridge,
he was Master of Katharine Hall; and Vice Chancellor of the said University the
same time. When John Duke of Northumberland passed by that way with his Army,
to oppose the proclaiming of Mary Queen of England, he caused this Sands to
preach for, and in defense of the Lady Jane Gray, which was declared Queen,
which he performd, with that modesty, gravity, and wisdom, that he satisfied
Northumberlands Duke, and did not much incense the other party, for when there
was a sudden change of things, so that the next day the great Duke and
himself were both taken Prisoners, this worthy Sands at the intercession of
many friends, was acquitted and fully set free, and so together, with his wife,
went into Germany, (a good policy to shun a coming and threatening storm)
where he kept himself close during the reign of Queen Mary; but that Queen
dying, he was called home into England in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, and was
declared Bishop of Worcester, and was consecrated ^e one and twentieth of
December in the year of our Lord, 1559. He did succeed that famous
Archbishop Grindall in two places, to ^it, in the Bishopric of London, and
the Archbishopricke of York, the one in ^570. and the other in six years
after; and when he had enjoyed that spiritual promotion of Archbishop 12.
years, he departed this life the eighth of August, 1588. about the age of
threescore, and lies buried in the Collegiate Church of Southwel ^in Notingham
shire, a man, of whom it is hard to be said, whether more famous for his
singular virtues and learning, or for his Noble Parentage and Offspring which
he left behind him: for he left many Children, of which, three were Knights,
and excellently well qualified gentlemen, either for body or mind. But his
son Sir Edwine Sands proved the learneder, and more famous and dear to his
Country. There is a book of famous sermons extant in Print of this Prelates,
which is counted a worthy piece of work, and does sufficiently declare his
Piety and Schollership to succeding Ages.

ALEXANDER NOWELL

THis Effigies speaks Christian Meekness and gravity, and he was, as this
shows him to be, borne he was in Lancashire of an ancient family of the
Nowels. He took the degree of Doctor in Divinity; and in Queen Mary's days,
he (as many other famous Divines were forced to do) departed this Land, to
shun the troubles of those times, and to secure their own persons from their
Adversaries. He was Deane of the Famous Church of St. Paul in London: He was
the first that returned from Foreign parts; he presently writ two books of
true Religion against the Papists, and also of his first and last Lent Sermons.
He was for thirty years together Preacher to Queen Elizabeth of blessed
memory: He was likewise Patron of Middleton School. He gave to Brazen-nose
College, in which he studied from the thirteenth of his age, till twenty
six, to thirteen Students to be maintained, two hundred pounds of English
money, being at the same time principal of the same College. He was the
Author of much good to Paul's School: He did propagate godliness by his
frequent Preachings, and Catechismes: He had the testimony for abilities and
rare parts of both Universities and of Foreign Churches, and of those happy
Prince, King Edward the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth, as also of their true
hearted Nobles. He was a special maintainer of the Poor, and more specially
of learned Scholars. He was a comforter of the afflicted, both for their
bodies and souls, and he was an especial reconciler of contentions and Law
suites, witness for ever to his praise; that agreement and unity, which he
alone procured between Sir Thomas Gresham, and Sir John Ramsey, being fallen
out, and fully intending to prosecute their causes at Law, but by this reverend
Divines persuasion, and meditation, were made Friends, and so continued to
their dying day. He sat long the Deane of St. Paul's, and lived till he was
ninety years old, and yet then had his perfect sight. He dyed in the year of
our Lord, 1601. on the thirteenth of February, and lies buried in the Famous
Cathedral Church of St. Paul in London, with this Epitaph upon his Tomb.

(...) os ^vestigia Evangeliza itium pacem. With some Verses also annexed, this
being the last of them.

Sic oritur, floret, demoriturque Deo. His Works set forth, are as followe^h.
1. Against Thomas Dorm^n, an English Papist, in two bo^s in quarto English. 2.
Another Book against Dorman and Sanders of Transubstantiation in quarto
English. 3. His greater Catechism in Latin, in quarto. 4. His lesser
Catechism in Latin, in Oct^. 5. The same in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew.
JOHN IEVELL..

THIS famous Instrument may truly answer to his Name, for he^ was a rich
Jewel both t^ Church, and Commonwealth: He was borne in Devonshire, and
brought up to ripeness in that flourishing University of Oxford, first in
Merton College, and afterward in Corpus Christi College, where, with the
approbation of all the Learned he took the degree of Bachelor in Divinity.
In his time he was a famous, and no less painful Preacher of the Gospel of
his Savior. In the Reign of Queen Mary, he fled into Germany, to enjoy the
liberty of his Conscience, and to avoid those snares that were laying for him,
in which he had been intrapped, had he stayed; but the days of Queen Mary
ending, and famous Queen Elizabeth coming to the Crown, this worthy Scholar
returned to England, and at his coming was joyfully received of his Mother,
the University; who bestowed upon him the famous Title of Doctor of Divinity:
And not long was it before that renowned Queen Elizabeth, for his singular
learning, and knowledge in all the Sciences and Tongues, made him Bishop of
Salisbury, which Diocese he governed with wonderful care and vigilance, not
only feeding the souls of his people, but also at all times distributing food
to the bodies of the poor and distressed: And as he was admirable for his
dextrous and pious government of the affairs of the Church, so was he also
renowned far and wide for his learned works and writings, which foiled the
Adversaries, and quite stopped their mouths, and rest yet unanswered, which did
mightily disparage their Cause. He writ both in Latin, and English; for he
was excellent in the knowledge of the Tongues: but that piece which most
wounded the Roman Cause, was his Apology for the Church of England, which work
is piously reserved, as a memorial of him, in all our Churches; so that it may
be said of him, he is daily read in our Meetings, and whose fame is through
all the Churches. Peter Martyr for this his work gave him great commendations
in these words: Apologia tua Frater charissime, etc. Your Apology ( most dear
Brother) has not only afforded me content and satisfaction in all respects,
but it is approved of for a learned, eloquent work, of Bullinger, and his
followers, also of Gualter; so that they cannot praise you enough; neither do
they believe that any work in this time has been set forth fuller of all
manner of learning, and entire perfection: those be Martyrs very expressions.

This worthy and Reverend Juell of our English Church, did as it were foretell
in part his Dissolution, as appears by two Letters sent by him to the Reverend
Father in God, the Lord Bishop of Norwich, which Doctor Lawrence Humphred does
set forth. This worthy Instrument yielded to Death at his Palace in
Monktonfarley, the Citizens of Salisbury did greatly bewail his death; it was
in the year of our Lord, 1573, and of his Age the 50th, and lies buried in the
Cathedral Church of Salisbury, in the middle of the Quire, under a fair^
Marble-stone, with this Inscription in Latin, which I have Englished, because
it sets forth his praise.

To John Juell, an English man, in the County of Devon. sprung of the ancient
Family of the Juels of Buden, of the University of Oxford: ex^ed in Queen
Mary's days into Germany, but ^n Queen Elizabeth's Reign, was Bishop of this
Diocese, where he sat Eleaven years, and Nine Months, ruling faithfully,
and with great Integrity; a Man religious, learned, sharpe-witted, solid in
Judgment, endued with Piety, and singular Humanity: An expert Divine, a Jewel
of Jewels; dyed at Monktonfarley, buried at Salisbury, being a Citizen o^
Heaven, Laurence Humphred has consecrated this Monument, in witness of his
favor and love, in the year of Salvation, 1573, IX Kalends October.

Psalm 112. The Righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance. He also
made a Monument himself, which will last longer than that of Marble, which are
his Works that ^ollow.

1. A Synopsis of that seditious Bull of Pius quintus, sent into England 1569.
in English. 2. A short treatise of the Scriptures. 3. A Treatise of the
Sacraments. 4. A Sermon preached in King Edwards Reign, upon 1. Pet. 4. 11. 5.
Six Sermons before Queen Elizabeth at Paul's Cross in English. 6. The Apology
of the Church of England. 7. A Volume against Thomas Harding, wherein 77 q^
stions are discussed, and decid^ by Scriptures, Councels, and A^ cient Fathers:
translated into L^ tine by William Whittaker. 8. His Reply against Harding,
turned out of English in to Latin by Tho. Bradocke.
John Wolley, Secretary to Queen Elizabeth, made some Verses upon his Death;
these are the two last of them,

Moribus, ingenio ^octrina, relligione,
Nulla ferent tale^ saecula longa viru^*
For manners, Wit, Learning, Religion,
Like him these times will yield us few, or none.
MATTHEW PARKER

This countenance speaks Gravity, and he was no less than he appears: He was
borne in the City of Norwich, furnished with Learning in the University of
Cambridge: He was BibleClarke in Corpus Christi College, and after he was
made Fellow of the same College: but he was called from hence to be Chaplain
to Queen Anne, Wife to Henry 8. King of England. He took degree of Doctor in
Divinity, and first he was made Deane of Stoake; and Queen Anne dying, the
King made him one of his Chaplains; and that King dying, he was reputed worthy
to be Chaplain to King Edward the sixth; he obtained no mean preferments and
dignities under both Kings, as the Mastership of that College in which he was
bred: He was Prebend of Ely, and Deane of Lincoln; all which promotions in
King Edwards days he did quietly possess, until the second year of Queen
Mary; then he was, for marrying a Wife, stripped from all his preferments, and
lived an obscure, and poor life. But that storm being over, and the
Archbishopricke of Canterbury being void by the death of Cardinal Poole,
Queen Elizab. judged none fitter for this eminent preferment for Life and
Learning than this Grave Prelate, and so did bestow the Archbishopricke upon
him. He was installed the 17. of December, and sat Primate and Metropolitan
of all England the space of 15. years, in which space he did many famous
works of Charity: As first, he gave to the City of Norwich, the place of his
birth, a Silver Basen and Eure double guilt, weighing an hundred and threescore
and ten Ounces, to this he gave 50. Shillings yearly, to be distributed to the
poor of that City: He took care also for six anniversary Sermons, ^o be
preached in five particular Parish-churches in Norfolk. He built a fair
Grammarschoole at Rochdale in Lancashire; he gave to Corpus Christi, or
Bennet-Colledge, of which he was Head, Thirty Schollerships; he builded the
inward Library, and furnished it with many fair Books printed, and
Manuscripts rare and scarce for worth and antiquity. Moreover, he gave to the
Students of the same House, a piece of Plate of 30. ^unces of Silver, double
guilt, and withal, gave the perpetual Advouzon of the Parsonage of Saint Mary
Abchurch to the College; these, with many other deeds of Charity, this
Reverend Prelate freely did perform.

But one thing I cannot omit of him, which was his great care for the
preservation of ancient Histories, whose names before this time had perished,
but that that fastened a Nomenclature, or Catalogue of the Authors. This Father
of the Church deceased in the year of Jesus Incarnation 1574, being 70. years
old, and lies buried in the Ch^ppell at Lambeth, covered with a Marble, and an
engraven Epitaph: his works are these that follow.

1. A Sermon when Mar. Bucer was buried, out of Wisdom, Cap. 4 ver. 7. to 19.
2. A book of the Antiquity of the Church of Canterbury, and of 70. Archbishops
of that See. 3. The History of England of Matthew Paris. 4. The flowers of the
History of Matthew of Westminster. 5. The History of Gyrald the Welchman, of
Tho. Walsin^, (...) (...)*
(...) (...) (...) famous Father, of whom it is said,

Integer, and vera Relligionis amans. JOHN FOX

BEhold this Man, and thou can not choose but wonder at his extraordinary
labor and travail, to gather together so many of Gods servants in a bundle:
he was borne in the County of Lancaster, his young years showed that he was
laid out for a Scholar, and so he had education accordingly in a famous
School. After being ripe, he was sent to Oxford, and was admitted into
Magdalen College, where he gave himself strictly to study, and then professed
Divinity: he attained to an excellent skill in the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew
Tongues in King Edward 6. his Reign, and for his better safety and security,
left this Kingdom in (...) (...) days, and lived in the Low-c^untries. But
when the Date of that Q^eenes days were expired, he cam^ back^ into England,
and proved a famous Divine. H^ had an exc^llent faculty in preaching, and added
^o painefulness^ constancy and willingness; but that work o^ his called The
History of the (...), made his name fam^us in this Kingdom, and else where,
and will for ev^r (...) his praise. He was a man of an humble spirit, and h^d
t^uely lea^n'd tha^ Doctr^ne of St. Paul, In what estate soever he was in,
therewithal to be content. He was one that had, as it seemed, crucified
himself to the world, and its vanities, as it may appear in a kind and
fatherl^ reprehension of his eldest son, who having a great mind to travel
into foreign parts, which when he had p^rformed, he came to his Father in
Oxford, then being old, and he being a^tired in a loose outlandish fashion,
who are you said his Father not knowing him? to whom his son replied, I am
your son: to whom this Master Fox answered, Oh what enemy of thine has
taught thee so much vanity? which speech of his showed, that his mind was
weaned from the love of the world. And indeed, I cannot conceive how he could
have any liberty to addict himself to follow delights and pleasures, doing so
exquisi^ely such rare pieces of Schollership, which took up all his time: nay,
it is rather to be wondered, how he performed so great labors in so short a
time; which he could not have done without long and tedious watchings, and
fastings; which three, study, fasting, and watching, will subject the flesh to
the Spirit; and this course took ^ee.

This man never sought after greedily any promotions or preferments, but held
and ^pproved of that estate in which he dyed: He departed ^his life in London,
and lies ^uried in the Church of Saint Giles without Cripple-gate, upon whose
Marble Monument his Son Samuel Fox has caused to be engraven this
Inscription,

Christo, S. S. To John Fox, his honored Father, the faithful Martyrologian
(...) our English Church, a mos^ disert searcher into the Antiquities of
Histories a most stiff Bulwark and fighter for the Evan gelicall Truth, which
has revived the Martyr^ as so many Phoenixes, from the dust of Oblivion, is
this Monument made: He dyed 18. of April, 1587. and of his age 70.

He writ and set forth these things that follow.

1. Meditations on the Apoca^ps. 2. A Treatise of Christ crucifi^, Lat. 3. Of
Christ try^mphing, in (...). 4. The continuation of Willi^ Haddon against
Osorius. 5. Against the Pope, Lat. 6. Short and comfortable ex^rtations to the
afflicted, Angli^. 7. Short notes of Election in English. 8. The four
Evangelists in Saxon-English. 9. His History of Martyrs. 10. A Sermon made at
the baptizing of a Jew, the Text out of the 11. to the Romans, in L^ tine. 11.
Vrbanus Rhegius (...) Faith, translated. 12. One hundred and fifty Ti tles and
Orders of Common places 13. A supplication to the English Lords for the
afflicted brethren. 14. A Gratulatory to the English Church, and to her
Pastors. 15. Of the Eucharist. 16. Of receiving those that are fallen. 17.
Expostulation of Christ with Mankind. 18. Against the Calumnies of Del-Rius.
19. Of Excommunication.
These be the fruits that this ^ighteous Tree, planted in Gods Church, did
bring forth, which do sufficiently declare him.

WIL^IAM GRINDALL

THis great Divine wa^ borne in Cumberland* he studied the Liberal Art^ and
Sciences at Cambridge i^ Pembrooke-hall, of which Society he was first made
Fellow, and afterward Master. After this he was taken of Nicolas Ridley, the^
Lord Bishop of London, to be his Household Chaplain, which worthy Prelate
commended him to King Edward 6, but the unwished* for death of that King
hastening, he did miss of preferment that way.

Then he, in the Reign of (...) Mary, went into Germany, and lived there till
that Queen dyed; but she being dead, he returned home again, and was chosen
by Queen Elizabeth to that preferment, which King Edward the sixth had laid out
for him, 1550. that was the Bishopric of London; which See he did wisely and
religiously govern about 11. years, and then 1570. he was made Archbishop of
York, where he was Archbishop 6. years; from whence for his singular Piety
and Learning, he was in the year 1575. installed Archbishop of Canterbury,
where he ruled the affairs of the Church of England the space of 7. years
dexterously, and religiously: Two years before his death he lost his sight;
but Death coming, took away this glorious Lamp of our English Nation; and
he lies buried at Croydon, 1583. and of his age 64.

This Prelate was not void, but plentiful, and abounding in good works, and
charitable actions: witnesses are first that free Grammar school, which he
built at St. Bees, or Bege in Comberland, a little town, which school he
endowed with the yearly revenewes of thirty pounds for ever. He tied upon
Pembrook-hall, lands worth twenty two pounds yearly for ever, for the
maintenance of a Greek Lecturer, and for the sustenance of one fellow and two
Scholars, which should be sent from Bees School: He also gave to the same
Hall diverse worthy and rare books, and a piece of Plate, weighing forty ounces
of silver.

He granted likewise to Magdalen College in Cambridge a yearly pension for
ever, for the maintenance of one Fellow, which should be taken from his School
at St. Bege in Comberland: He gave also to Christ's College in Cambridge, a
place of excellent literature and piety, from which has sprung many a famous
Divine and Statesman, a piece of plate, weighing forty sive ounces: He gave
likewise to Queens College in Oxford, the yearly revenewes of twenty pounds
for ever, to the maintenance of one Fellow and two Scholars, to be chosen out
of the aforesaid School; and at his death he bequeathed to the same Queens
College in Oxford a great part of the books in their Library, and a piece of
Plate, and forty pounds in money: He likewise gave to eight poor almes-men at
Croydon, means valued yearly at 50 pounds: Lastly, he gave to the City of
Canterbury 100 pounds of English money, to be for ever for a stock for to set
the poor of that City on work, and to keep them from idleness and beggary:
And so having done such, and so many remarkable passages of Charity, this
reverend Metropolitan is laid to rest in the Lord. There is a Sermon of his,
which he preached at St. Paul's Cross, when the Funerals of the Emperor
Ferdinand were celebrated, in English.

LAVRENS HVMPHERDE

THis Worthy Divine was borne in the County of Buckingham, studied in the
famous Nursery, and seed-plot of learning, the University of Oxford, in
Magdalen College: he departed this land, as many other great Divines, and
Religious professors did in Queen Mary's Reign, but in the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth, he returned home, and was excellent for the Pulpit, or the
schools, and took his Degree of Doctor in Divinity; he by his great abilities
of learning, set fo^th Gods glory, and mightily discovered that dangerous nest
of Jesuits, with their close and politic practices against Princes and their
settled governments, if they were not (...) to the Roman Bishop. His Books
which he has ^et forth, do evidently decla^e, and manif^ly prove, with what
diligence and study he found out the frauds and impostures of the followers of
Rome, by ancient histories: he was made public professor of Divinity; or
else Doctor of the Chair in Oxford, and President of Magdalen College, which
dignities and preferments, he did many years with great commendation and
approbation keep and enjoy: He ended his life at Oxford, and was there buried
in the year of Christ's Incarnation, 1589, the whole University deploring and
lamenting deeply the loss of so famous a governor, and did see that his
funeral rites were with all solemnity duly pe^formed ^ answerable to his place
and office: He was intimate with Bishop Iuel, and grieved for his death; and
the Church of England missed them both: this Humphred was at the time of his
death, little less than seventy years old: his works are here faithfully
^ecorded.

1. Of Nobility, and the ancient original of it. 2. A little book of the
Conservation of true Religion. 3. Consent of the Fathers of Justification. 4.
Interpretation of Tongues. 5. Of Iesuitisme, 1. part of the practice of the
Roman Court against Commonwealths, and Princes, with a premonition to English
men. 6. Iesuitisme; 2 part of Puritan-poperie, or the Doctrine Jesuitical,
against Campian, and John Duraeus, also Harding, a confutation: Also
Pharisaisme, old and new: a sermon in Oxford, Anno 1582. 7. Of the life and
death of Iuell, with the defense of his Doctrine, and refutation of objections
of Harding, Sands, Cope. etc. 8. Origin of true faith translated, with a
Preface to the same Author and Doctor. 9. St. Cyrills Commentaries upon Isaiah
into Latin, translated. 10. An Index to Forslers He* brew Lexicon, by him
made.
(...) BA^INGTON

THis Prelate as he was excellent for his parts, so was he of a very fair
descent, being borne in the County of Nottingham, of the ancient family of the
Babingtons in the said County, where he drew in the first rudiments of
Literature, till by his worthy Parents he was sent to Cambridge, and was
admitted into that worthy Society of Trinity College, Doctor Whitguift being
then Master.

This Babington proved so famous in Schollership, that having his degrees, he
was made Fellow of the same College; and giving himself to the study of
Divinity, he proved a worthy Preacher in that University. After, being Doctor
in Divinity, he was called by Henry, that noble Earl of Pembrooke, to be his
Chaplain, by whose favor he was first made Treasurer of the Church of
Landasse in Wales, after he was elected Bishop of the same, 1591. and when he
had sitten 4. years in that See, for his singular Piety and Learning, he was
by Queen Elizabeth translated to the Bishopric of Exceter, where he scarce
stayed 3. years, but he was made Bishop of Worcester, and in the midst of
all these preferments he was neither tainted with idleness or pride, or
covetousness, but was not only diligent in preaching, but in writing books,
for the understanding of Gods Word; so that he was a true pattern of Piety to
the people, of Learning to the Ministry, and of Wisdom to all Governors:
Whereupon he was made one of the Queens Council for the Marches of Wales. He
was Bishop of Worcester about the space of 13. years: He dyed of an Hecticke
Fever, and so changed this frail life for a better in the year of our Lord
1610. not without the great grief of all, and had all funeral Rites bestowed
on him, befitting so great and so grave a Governor, and Father of the Church;
and was buried in the Cathedral Church of Worcester, in the Month of May. His
works extant are these that follow.

1. Consolatory Annotations upon Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and
Deuteronomy. 2. Upon the 10. Commandments, the Lords Prayer, and the Articles
of the Creed. 3. A comparison or collation between humane frailty and faith.
4. Three worthy and learned Sermons.
THOMAS HOLLAND.

THis worthy Instrument of our Church, was borne in Shropshire, in the Marches
of Wales, and studied in that flourishing University of Oxford in Exeter
College: I have placed him among these famous Divines for his excellent
knowledge and learning, and admirable indowments of his mind: He was graced
with the style of Doctor in Divinity by the University his Mother: he long time
professed Divinity in the same Academy, and at last, with the general
suffrages of all, he was placed Doctor of the Chair, in which he succeeded
Doctor Humphred, which place, this Doctor for many year together held with the
general acclamations of all, as well of our own, as foreign Divines: but his
disputations in public, which are yet in Coppies in some Scholars hands, are
demonstrations sufficient to set forth his Schollership: He that preached his
funeral Sermon, does praise him sufficiently, tearming him another Apollos
powerful in Scriptures. He was admirably well read in the Fathers: so that he
was as it were familiar with them; and he was excellent for Schoolmen: so
that he was of some, called the Seraphicke Doctor. He was subtle in his
Arguments and disputations, and quick at resolving doubts and questions, so
that with great applause he was Doctor of the Chair for twenty years
together, how many famous glistering stars proceeded from him into our
Church? so that he was truly (as Gregory Nazianzen spoke of his Father) an
Abraham, the Father of many children: to wit by scholasticall creation, and
even to the highest degree that the University does afford. I pass over many
reverend Scholars, and some Bishops of this Kingdom, that were his sons
this way, but yet I cannot pass over those two famous pillars and supporters
of our Church, those reverend pair of Fathers, George Abbat, Archbishop of
Canterbury, and John King Bishop of London: In brief, he was not only a
sincere preacher of Gods Word, but a faithful and constant practitioner: he
was zealous for Gods honor, and always hated idolatry and superstition: as
appeared by his speech to the fellows of this College, when he at any time
went into the country, I commend you to the love of God, and wish you to hate
Popery and superstition: he was for holiness of life a pattern to all. The
whole time of his sickness he was fervent in prayers and eiaculations, full of
ardency: when his breath grew short he uttered this speech in Latin, Veni,
oh! veni Domine Jesus, stella matutina veni Domine Jesus, cupio dissolvi and esse
tecum: which is in English, Come, oh come Lord Jesus, the bright morning Star,
Come Lord Jesus, I desire to be dissolved and to be with thee, and having
spoken these words, quietly surrendered up his soul into the Lords hands,
leaving this life for a better^ He dyed and was buried in Oxford, according to
the honored custom of the University, with all Funeral rites that were to
be performed for so famous a man in the month of March, 1612. being then
littles less than threescore and thirteen years of age.

ROBERT ABBAT

THE place of this famous Scholars birth was Guilford in Surrey, a Town of
good repute; and his Parents were honest and virtuous and not obscure. He was
^nished with Learning (...) ^orts (...) that ancient College in Oxford, called
B^l, because builded by one of that name, a King of Scotland. He was Doctor in
Divinity, and Master of the said College; in which government he s^ed what a
worthy Prelar^ (...) would prove to our English Church: he was not only thus
adorned, but he was made Doctor of the Chair, which place Doctor Holland had
kept with great praise the space of twenty years.

This our learned Abbat, after that he had 20. years proved himself a famous
and painful Divine, and by his writings set forth, had learnedly opposed his
Adversaries of the Romish Church; he was by King James of blessed memory,
consecrated Bishop of Salisbury the third of December, in the year 1615. and
in this regard he may justly be said to equallize Seffred once Bishop of
Chichester, because that this as well as he, lived to see his brother Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate, and Metropolitan of all England.

While he sat Lord Bishop of this Diocese, he brought forth that learned and
solid piece of Divinity, concerning grace and the perseverance of the Saints,
which was termed his Vox Cygnea, because he presently after dyed; that speech
which he made to the University of Oxford, is also full of Schollership, which
begins thus in Lattine: Salva veneranda Matter, Ac^demiarum decus and gloria,
and so goes on with expressions of his care and love to her: All haite, oh
reverend Mather, the glory and grace of all Universities: I cannot. contain
(...) self, but I must needs rejoice and be glad that I have sucked thy
breasts, and not only have had time to learn, but also to teach publicly in
thy Schools: I will never rest to wish thee ^ thousand happinesses and
blessings, and all successful prosperities; but the business that I am now
to deliver, to thee from my Sovereign, is, that thy Students would be careful
to avoyde those Bertians, Grevincovians, Thomsons, and the like writers, who
never are content with the old paths, but are inventing new ones, and think
that they do nothing well, unless they be singular: Oh I desire thee to
retain thy old piety and sincerity: I hope this of thee, and I wish that thou
may for ever flowrish and increase, and be a Pillar and groundwork of
truth, until the second coming of the Lord Jesus.

He lived not long in that See, till death took him from us, for he sat but
two years and three months, but he did mainly employ his time, both in
public and private, and so by reason his life was sede^tary, he was troubled
with the stone, and at 58. years of his age departed, not without the grief of
the whole Clergy and people, but specially of the inhabitants of Salisbury: at
the instant hour of death, he called his servants and with great pains declared
his faith and told them they should find in his writings; he sealed up his
writings with these words, That faith which I have set forth, is the truth, and
in that faith I dye, and so gave up the Ghost in March, 1618. and lies buried
in Sarisbury Cathedral Church. His works are here set down.

1. The reformed Catholic in 3. Tomes in English, against Will. Bishop, an
English Papist in the defense of William Perkins. 2. A demonstration of
Antichrist, against Cardinal Bellarmine, and other Papists in Latin. 3. A
defense of his books against the Cavils and Sophistications of Eudaemon-Iohn,
for Isack Causabon, and against the Apology of the said John, for Garner. 4.
The old way: A Sermon in Latin at Oxford, set forth by Thomas Drax.
JOHN WHITGIFT

Look upon, and wonder at the Effigies of this reverend Prelate, who was so
eminent a governor of our English Clergy: He was borne in Yorkshire, of an
ancient family of the Whitguifts, and was the eldest son of Henry Whitguift,
of great Grimsbey in Lincolne-shire, Merchant: he had an uncle called Robert
Whitguift Abbat of Wellow Monastery in Lincolnshire, of which uncle he had
education, who was wont to say, that neither he, nor the Popish religion would
long continue, and used this saying of our Savior, Matthew. 15. 13. Every Plant
which my heavenly father has not planted, shall be rooted up.

His uncle seeing his forwardness to learning, sent him to London to School:
(in St. Annes School) where prositing much, by the advice of his said uncle,
he was sent to Cambridge: he was at first admitted of Queens College; but
not liking that house, he removed to Pembrooke Hall, Nicholas Ridley being then
Master; who being certified of Master Bradford of this Scholars forwardness
and poverty, (for his Father was decayed by losses at Sea) he gave him a
Schollership in that Hall, and 1555, he was made Fellow of Peter-house, Doctor
Pearne being then President, or Master, who favored him in Queen Mary's days.

He having before taken 3. Degrees, went forth at last, Doctor of Divinity, and
canvas'd this Question, That the Pope is Antichrist: being also a famous
Preacher: he succeeded Doctor Hutton, who was ArchBishop of York, from a
Fellow, to be Master of Pembrooke Hall, and was Doctor Coxes Chaplain, the
Bishop of Ely.

He was likewise made the Lady Margaret Countess of Richmond her Lecturer, or
Professor; which he performed with such praise, that he was made in short
time the Queens Doctor of the Chair: he coming to preach before Queen
Elizabeth, was so well approved of her, that she made him Master of Trinity
College, and was sworn her Chaplain in the year, 1567. He was for ten
years master of that famous society, with the approbation of all the
University: except Thomas Cartwright, and some few others, who did oppose the
rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, which this Whitguift maintained.

The Queen called him to be Deane of Lincoln, which he held 7 years; while he
staid in Cambridge, by his excellent learning and moderation, he bred up many
brave Pupils, of which he saw 5. come to the dignity of Bishops, to wit,
Redman, Bishop of Norwich; Babington, Bishop of Worcester; Rudd, Bishop of St.
David's; Golsborough, Bishop of Gloucester; and Benedict, Bishop of Hereford: As
also many Lords, as the Earls of Worcester and Comberland, Baron le Zouch,
Baron Dunboyr, of Ireland, Nicholas Bacon, and Francis Bacon, and the Farle of
Essex, and diverse others.

Having been Deane of Lincoln seven years, the Queen gave him the
Bishopric of Worcester. 1577. and he taking his farewell of the University,
chose those words of St. Paul to the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 13. 11.

Within a year after, he was made Vice President of Wales, Sir Henry Sidney
Knight, being then he Lord President: In the year 1583. upon the death of
Grindal, Archbishop of Canterbury, he was by the Queen chosen for ArchBishop,
and presently one of the Lords of her Maiestics honorable privy Council.

During the reign of this Queen, he was in high esteem, insomuch, that the
Queen would familiarly call him, Her black Husband: and when this Queen was
on her deathbed, he was admitted still to pray by her; and when she was
speechless, yet she showed by signs of her liking his prayers, and departed,
March 24. 1602.

Then King James, of blessed memory, coming to the Crown, he anointed him,
and set the Crown upon his head, and was always high in the Kings favor, but
he grieved inwardly for Queen Elizabeth's loss, and outlived her but a few
months; for in February next, 1603. he dyed; but his sickness, King James
hearing of, came to Lambeth, and visited his ArchBishop, and after many sweet
words spoken to him, told him, that he would pray to God to give him life: The
Archbishop strove to speak in Latin to the King, but his words could not be
understood; only he often repeated this, pro Ecclesia Dei, that is, for the
Church of God, which were his last words, and so within few days after dyed,
being aged 73. and Archbishop more than 20 years: He was buried in the south
side of the Church at Croydon, where there is a fair Tomb in memory of him:
He performed many worthy charitable deeds in all places where he lived; as at
Lincoln, Worcester, in the Marches of Wales, in Kent, and Surrey, but the
chief of all, is that famous Hospital or Almeshouse at Croydon, dedicated to
the Sacred Trinity, in which a Warden and 24. Brethren and sisters are
nourished: To which he adjoined a fair Free-schoole, with a house for the
Schoolmasters, and endowed those places with a sufficient yearly revenew.
Many of his Chaplains came to be Bishops: he set forth no books, but only
one great volume in English, of the Rises, Ceremonies, and Ecclesiastical
polity of our Church defended, and one Sermon preached before Q. Elizabeth, 24.
of March, 1574. Text Ioh. 6. ver. 25, 26, 27.

THOMAS BECON.

THE life of man upon Earth is a real pilgrimage, and seldom is so settled or
certain, but each moment, may, and does oftentimes induce a mutation: and
wonder not that he is placed here, living so long before, but then I had not
his Effigies. This worthy and reverend Clergy man had real experience of
changes; for in the reign of King Edward the sixth, he did profess Divinity
in the flourishing University of Oxford, without impeachment, or molestation:
but in the time of Queen Mary, he, as well as diverse others, left this
Kingdom, to enjoy the liberty of their consciences, and to avoid, if possible
they could, a storm that fell in that Queens government, and so traveled
into Germany, but Queen Mary dying, he returned to this Land again, and
proved a diligent Shepherd, and an eminent Writer, as may be proved by his
very many Treatises, worthily famous, and full of excellent Divinity, which are
extant, and to be sold in English, the Catalogue of which, I have joined to his
life; there are none of his works in Latin that are to be had, except on
learned Disputation of the Lords Supper, which he composed in the time that he
was ahroad: by which it does easily and evidently appear, how dearly he
embraced and loved the Protestant Religion: he was chosen into the number of
the Prebendaries of Canterbury, and kept it until his dying day: He paid
Nature her debt about the eight year, 1570. being 60 years old: John
Parkhurst the Bishop of Norwich has written verses in the Commendation both of
this man, and of his works and writings.

His works are contained in three Tomes, with study, diligence, piety, I have
here set them in order.

The first Tome contains.
1. News from Heaven. 2. A banquet of Christ's birth. 3. A Quadragesimal feast.
4. A Method of praying. 5. A bundle or posie of Flowers. 6. An invective
against swearing. 7. Discipline for a Christian Soldier. 8. David's Harp. 9.
The government of virtue. 10. A short Catechism. 11. A book of Matrimony. 12.
A Christians New-yeares gift.
2. Tome contains.
1. A Jewel of Mirth. 2. Principles of Christian Religion. 3. A Treatise of
Fasting. 4. The Castle of comfort. 5. The souls solace. 6. The Tower of the
faithful. 7. The Christian Knight. 8. Homelies against Whooredome. 9. The
Flowers of Prayers. 10. A sweet box of Prayers. 11. The sick man's Medicine.
12. A Dialogue of Christ's Nativity. 13. An Invective against Adultery. Volumes
in English, full fraught with learning and judgment, as they are divided.
3. Tome contains.
1. An Epistle to the distressed servants of God. 2. A supplication to God for
the restoring his Word. 3. The rising of the Popish Mass. 4. Common places of
Scripture. 5. A comparison betwixt the Lords Supper, and the Papal Mass. 6.
Articles of Religion confirmed by the authority of the Fathers. 7. The
monstrous wages of the Roman Priests. 8. Romish Relics. 9. Difference
betwixt Gods Word, and Humane inventions. 10. Acts of Christ and Antichrist,
with their lives and Doctrine. 11. Chronicles of Christ. 12. An abridgement of
the New Testament. 13. Questions of the Holy Scripture. 14. The glorious
triumph of Gods word. 15. In the praise of death: all these were Printed in the
year 1564. 16. Postills upon all the Sundays Gospels, in quarto. 17. The
Medicine for the Sick, often Printed in octavo by it self.
JAMES MOVNTAGV

WHen you shall read this worthy Prelate to be Bishop of Winchester, and Dean
of the Kings Chapel, and Prelate of the noble Order of the Garter, and privy
Councellor to King James, know that he obtained these Titles and honors by his
virtue and learning. To pass by his noble descent from the Montacutes, Earls
of Salisbury: His Father was a Knight, that famous Sir Edward of Boughton in
Northampton shire. His Grandfather was Councellor to King Henry the Eight; his
Mother was the Sister of the elder famous Lord Harington: He had education in
Cambridge answerable to his birth, where his learning was such, that the
University bestowed both his Title, Master of Arts, as also Doctor in Divinity
before the set time: And the University gained by him for that Sidney-colledge
founded by Francis, Countess of Sussex, his Aunt: he being Master of it, when
as there were ill sents by the grounds lying about, dangerous and noisome, he
brought Trumpinton water through a new-cut way into the Garden of the said
College, both to the health of that College, and the whole University. His
young years were admirably well seasoned, which made him prove so famous
afterward: For King James taking notice of him, presently swore him Chaplain^
in ordinary, and was made Deane of Liechfield, of the Kings Chapel, and
presently after of Worcester, and not long after Lord Bishop of Bath, and
Wells. In which while he sat for eight years, he seemed to have those honors
bestowed on him for the public good, rather than for himself; so rev^rend
was his carriage, and pious his life, and charitable his hands. The poor in
that Hospital lost a good maintainer, and all good men of that place a true
Bishop. He repaired the Bishops Palace almost ruined, and furnished it with a
Chapel, and gardens. His house at Banovell speaks his praise, and posterity
will never forget his charity to the Church of Bath, begun one hundred years
since by Oliver a Bishop, and chiesly now at his cost and charges finished. If
death had not prevented, here he had placed a Deane and Choyristers, and his
two worthy brethren, Henry and Sidney did provide that his purpose should not
be void. At last translated he was to Winchester, where he did not so much
look after new honors, as new burdens.

The House called VVinchester-house on the Thames side, speaks his praise for
her beauty, which he bestowed on her almost decayed. Farnham Cas^le also is
not filent of his worth and praise, which did so much partake of his bounty.

He also adorned the Tower in the Castle of Windsor, being his lot, as P^elate
of the Garter; so that it is easily known, that in these works he l^id out
above 5000. pounds sterling. He dyed at Greenwich of a Dropsy, being aged 49.
on the 13. of the Kalends of August, 1618. leaving behind him four famous
brethren, Knights; Sir Edward the eldest, Sir Charles, which buried him; Sir
Henry, and Sir Sidney now living, Master of the Requests. He was not unmindfull
of Sidney College, but gave a yearly stipend to the Library. He desired to be
buried in Bath, where his Tomb is to be seen of Marble, and Alabaster: his
family did not only miss him, but the Universities, the Court, and Church;
and his death grieved the King mainely, for he loved him dearly for his care,
integrity, sweetness of carriage, and learning. In a word, having lived a
Reverend Father of our Church, and always imitating the Piety of those
renowned Fathers, Bishops, before him in the Primitive times, he is with them
laid to rest, expecting the reward of the just, at that great day of Jesus
coming.

WILLIAM PERKINS.

THe place of this Divines birth was Marf^, not far from the City of
Coventry, in Warwickshire: he was brought up and polished in learning in the
University of Cambridge, where he made in short space excellent proof and
demonstration both of learning and piety; so that he was not only an excellent
and diligent Preacher, but also a quick and dextrous writer of many Treatises
and Commentaries, which, for their worth were many of them translated into
Latin, and sent beyond Sea, where they were, and to this day are well approved
of: so that his fame was not only in this Kingdom, but also in France,
Germany, and the Low Countries, and in some parts of Spain: for his works
many of them are in French, in high Dutch, and low Dutch, and his Reformed
Catholic translated into Spanish, rests yet unanswered by any of that side.
This Divine was lame of his right hand, so that it was unfit to write withal,
but what famous things he did write with his left hand, not only the
Corporation of Christ's College, but also the whole University of Cambridge
afford long and sufficient testimonies: But alas! he was taken from us in the
vigor and strength of his age, being indeed, more fit for heaven than earth:
he sickned and dyed at Cambridge, in the year of Grace, 1602. not without
many tears, and the grief of all good men, being but aged 44. and had all the
funeral solemnities and rites of the University, as did befit so learned a man.

His Works are here in order set down.
1. A foundation of Christian Religion. 2. His Golden chain, or a description
of Divinity. 3. An Exposition on the Apostles Creed. 4. An Exposition of the
Lords Prayer. 5. A Declaration of the state of Grace and Condemnation. 6. Cases
of Conscience. 7. A discourse of the Tongue, done into Latin by Thomas Draxe.
8. Of the nature and practice of Repentance. 9. Of the means to dye well, in
all states and times. 10. Of the combat of the flesh and spirit into Latin by
Drax. 11. Of the course to live well. 12. A Treatise of Conscience. 13. The
Reformed Catholic. 14. Of the true means to know Christ crucified, and the
Grain of Mustard Seed into Latin, by Thomas Drax. 15. Of true Wealth. 16. Of
the Idolatry of the last times. 17. Of GODS free grace, and of free will in
Men. 18. Of men's callings. 19. Of Predestination in Latin by the Author. 20.
His Bible harmony. 21. A Dialogue of the worlds dissolution.
These that follow, were set forth after the Authors death.
1. Three books of the cases of Conscience, translated into Latin by Thomas
Drax and Meyer. 2. Commentaries on the five first Chapters on the Galathians.
3. Of Christian Equity by Crashaw. 4. Of Man's Imagination, set forth by Thomas
Peirson. 5. Problemes against Coxe, in Latin by himself, set forth by Samuel
Ward. 6. The key of Prophecy, set forth by Thomas Tuke. 7. Commentaries upon
the fifth, sixth, and seventh chapters of Matthew set forth by Thomas Peirson.
8. Commentaries on the three first chapters of the Apocalypse, by Robert Hill,
and Tho. Peirson. 9. Of the tentation of Christ, Matt. from the 1. ver. to the
12. of the 4. chapter. 10. An exhortation to repentance. 11. Two excellent
Treatises of Ministers calling, set out by Master Crashaw. 12. A commentary on
Iudes Epistle, by Thomas Pickering. 13. Of poisoning a Treatise. 14. Against
Prognostics: an answer to a Country fellow. 15. Of the household Discipline,
in Latin by the Author, now Englished.
WILL: WHITAKER.

ALthough those of the Church of Rome have had many rare Scholars which have
confuted their erroneous and superstitious Tenants, yet of late, scarce any
have so convinced them as Iuel and VVhittakers. He was borne in Lancashire, and
was sent to the University of Cambridge, and was admitted into that famous
society of Trinity College, where he proved a famous Scholar, both in
Tongues, and all manner of Theology; and so was made the Kings Professor of
Divinity, and Master of Saint John's College, which preferment he long held;
and in that space he had often combatings with many great Romish Priests and
Jesuits; as Stapleton, Sanders, Reinolds, and Campian; with what success any
man of judgment or discretion can easily discern, and not daunted with these
combatants, he set upon their chief Goliath, and Champion himself, even great
Bellarmine the Cardinal, whose Arguments and Objections he has so succinctly
and solidly answered, that all the Divines of Europe give him great praise; and
if he had not been taken away by death, he had answered all the Tomes of
Bellarmine exquisitely: However, I have heard it confessed of English Papists
themselves, which have bin in Italy with Bellarmine himself, that he procured
the true Portraicture and Effigies of this Whitaker to be brought to him,
which he kept in his study; for he privately admired this man for his singular
learning and ingenuity, and being asked of some of his friends Jesuits, Why
he would have the picture of that Heretic in his presence? he would answer,
quod quamvis Hereticus esset and Adversarius, esset tamen. Doctus Adversarius:
That although he was an Heretic and his. Adversary, yet he was a learned
Adversary: To which I may justly say, that he was a pious man, and a solid
Teacher, and dyed in peace and quietness of Conscience, to the grief of all
England, and especially of the University of Cambridge, in the year of our
Lord, 1595. and of his age forty seven, and was buried at Cambridge, in St.
John's College, with great solemnity and funeral ornamenns befitting so great
a learned man as he was, where in the same place you may read his Epitaph,
engraven, and set in Golden letters upon the Wall by his Sepulcher, in the
Chapel of St. John's College: His works are famous, and follow here truly
registered.

1. Against Thomas Stapleton a Papist his defense of Ecclesiastical authority
in three Books, with an authority of the Scriptures. 2. A solid refutation of
Nicholas Sanders, his forty Demonstrations, that the Pope is not Antichrist,
because he is but one man, and there ha^ing been two hundred Popes. 3. A
Christian Answer to the ten reasons of Edmund Campian the Jesuit. 4. A
defense of John Harding the Jesuit answered, and the ten reasons of Edmund
Campian, which he offered to the Ministers of the Church of England. 5.
Fragments of the old Heresies, which help to make up the Roman Church. 6.
Theses propounded and defended at the Commencement at Cambridge, 1582. The
sum of which was, that that the Pope is the Antichrist spoken of in Scripture.

7. A disputation of the ^ly Scripture against the papists of this time,
especially against Robert Bellarmine and Stapleton. 8. Certain Lectures of the
controversies of the Church, distributed into seven questions; a work set
forth after his death, by John Allenson. 9. A controversy of councels against
Jesuits, especially Bellarmine, in six questions. 10. A Treatise of Original
sin, in three books, against three books of Thomas Stapleton, of Universal
Justification. 11. Lectures upon the controversy of the Roman Bishop,
di^ibuted into eight questions, chiefly against Bellarmine. 12. His Cygnea
Cantio, or his last Sermon to the Clergy at Cambridge 1595. with a true
description of his life and death. 13. A translation of a book of Iuel against
Harding, in Latin.
FINIS.

