THE FOUR books of Flauius Vegetius Renatus, briefelye contayninge a plain
form, and perfect knowledge of Martial policye, feats of Chivalry, and
whatsoever pertayneth to war.

Translated out af lattine, into English, by John Sadler. Anno. 1572.

Seen and allowed, according to the order appointed.

Imprinted at London in Fletestreate, near to Saint Dunstones Church by
Thomas Marshe.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable and his singular good Lord, the Lord Russell, Earl
of Bedforde, one of the Queens maiestyes most honorable priuye counsel, and
Knighte of the honorable order of the Garter. John Sadler wysheth perfect
felicitye.
AFter I had first taken in hand (right honorable and my singular good
Lord) the translation of this worthy and famous writer Flauius Vegetius, at
the request of the right worshipful sir Edmo^de Brudenell knight: I thought I
should have had no further labor, but that the said translation being so
diligently and plainlye handled according to the authors meaning, as my simple
wit and knowledge could do it, should have contented and satisfied the said
sir Edmonde only for his own private use and readinge. But he being a man
always studious, not so much to pleasure himself, as to benefit his
country, and also desirous to make all men partakers of such commoditye, as he
himself alone, or a few besides him, might take by readinge of the same: did
afterward purpose to cause the said work to be printed. And although the
rude and simple translation thereof, might worthelye have withdrawn him from
his said intent: yet nevertheless consideringe what profitable things are
therein contained: how wise and prudent counsels for all governors and
Captains are there declared: how expedient and necessary the knowledge of
these things may be for all times and seasons, and especially for this our
time wherein we now do live: he thought it better to cause the said work to
be openly set forth and published, although in a very base and homelye style,
then that this worthy author, whom not only the Italians, Almaines and
Frenchmen, but also many other Nations, have most diligently translated in
their own peculiar languages, should any longer be hid and kept from all
his native country men: Geuinge thereby occasion to such as shall think the
said work to homelye and baselye handled, being yet, as it were, but hewn out
of the rough, to plane and polishe the same, if they will be disposed more
curiouslye, and to set it forth with finer and purer eloquence. Which thing
so much the better may be done, that the Ise is now cut up before, and the way
made open, which at the first might seem more hard and dangerous to pass.
The weaker that any thing does appear, the more expedient and necessary it is
to seek for help and succor for the same: the more simple that this
translation is, the more need it has of sure protection and defense.
Wherefore when as sir Edmonde Brudenell, the chief causer and doer in
settinge forth of this work, had conferred together with me as concerning the
publishing hereof, and had not yet determined to whom chiefelye it might most
conveniently be dedicated: your honor amongst al others came to our
remembrance, for many and sundry causes, as most worthy of so excellent and
passinge knowledge therein contained: Not that these things may seem
unknown to your honor, but being ouerseene perused and allowed of the same,
might more safely come abroad and thereby deserve the better favor and
acceptance of all the Readers thereof: as allowed of him, whose noble acts as
well within the Realm as with out on every side, have always from time to
time so well appeared. Pleases it your honor therefore to accept in good
part this homelye and simple work, offered by us of very true and hartye
love: on sir Edmondes behalf, as a declaration of the inward and unfeigned
good will that he does bear toward your honor: and on my behalf as a
testimonial both of like good will, and also of my very bounden duty: which
now many years latelye passed, have received a liberal annuitye or stipende
of your honor, whereby I have been the better able to express such poor
knowledge as I had, or at least my good will, not only in setting forth of
this present work, but also in that trade, which I have professed a long time,
as I trust to the honor of Almightye God, and also to the benefit and profit
of my country. And whereas here I have communicated the settinge forth of this
treatise with him that has been the only and chief occasion of first taking
the same in hand, I think he may of very right challenge the greatest
commendation thereof (if any be) who aided me not only with his good aduyce,
but also with Books, which else where I could not have had for the
accomplishme^t of the said translation. And to speak unfeignedly my own
labor and travail can look for no manner of praise at all, except
peradventure the only commendation of painful and faithful diligence,
which as Vegetius says himself, is h^re more requisite, then elegancye and
finenes of words* not addinge thereunto any thing of mine own, after the
manner of a Paraphrast to dilate the matter more at large with a curious and
eloquent style: but vsinge only the office of a translatour, plainlye and
compendiouslye expressing so near as I could, the true sense and meaning of
the Author. Wherefore if this my endeavor may be accepted of your honor, I
think it a greater commendation, then either I can deserve or iustlye look
for: as thereby much boldned and encouraged to take like pains hereafter, if
good and meet occasion may serve thereunto.

From Oundell the first day of October 1571. Your honors most humble,
faithful, and continual Oratoure: John Sadler.

A Preface to the Reader.
THe difference of peace and war is apparent to all men. How much the one is
to be desired, the other to be eschewed (except in some respects hereafter
declared, no man I think is ignorant. It I should but touch the gaynes and
commodityes of peace: The commodityes of peace.
how quietlye and pleasantly men do live together: how al things on the earth
do increase and multiply: how wealth and riches do abound: how all manner of
sciences and good learning do flourish, with other innumerable effects there
of toiling here now to be recyted: it would require a large and a great volume;
The calamytyes of War
not a short and compendious preface. Again, how great-calamities and
destructions through wars have happened, not only to Cittyes, towns and
fortresses, but also to mighty Princes with their armies, great multitudes of
people, and whole nations and countries: a man might spend a good part of his
time to read through the books that has been written thereof. But the more
commodious, precious and necessary that pleasant and joyful name of peace is
to be accounted, so much more earnestlye it ought to be sought for, obtained
and preserved: the greater dangers harms and losses that are by wars
sustay^ed, the greater heed foresighte and pollicye to withstand the same, is
to be used. Neither has there been, that I have heard or read of, any
common wealth or Realm fo fortunate and blessed, that it has enjoined
continual peace and quietness any long time, except the Prince of peace, even
God himself, which also is the Lord of Hosts, have taken in hand the defense
thereof. Which thing no doubt of his abundant goodness he sheeweth upon
certain people and countries, when as he ^endes them good and gracious
Princes, wise and godly governors. Which ruled by the spirit of God, may so
order and keep the whole common wealth and state of their Realm, through
their great wisdom learning and pollicye, that no disobedience of subjects
to their Prince may be found uncorrected, no disquietnes or trouble amongst
them unappeased, no force of foreign enemies vnforeseene, vnwithstoode,
vnrepelled. In which happy estate that this our Realm of England at this
present is, The happy estate of England, under (...) Elizabeth.
and has also continued even from the first beginning of this our most noble
and gracious Queens maiestyes reign: All true and faithful English hearts to
their great joy must needs acknowledge, yeldinge to God the only Author
thereof, most manifoulde and hartye thanks for the same: most humblye
besechinge his eternal goodness long to preserve her excellent majesty to
rule over us: whose most noble raig^e being not only most happy through the
lightsome shyninge of gods most holy word, the zealous setting forth thereof,
and prosperous success of the same: but also fortunate and blessed, as well
with great abundance and plentye of all kinds of fruits of the earth, as the
continual quiet and safe enioyinge of them, may be to all good English men a
sure and euiden^e token of Gods high favor and especial grace declared over
this Realm: and to all the world a spectacle of most wise and polliticke
gouernmente. Whereas contrariwyse it is not unknown how that a great part
of the world nighe unto us, has these years late passed, either been
cruellye afflicted with grievous wars, or not altogether free and clear from
great vexations and tro^bles. And although some of la^e here in this Realm
has gone about by rebellion to impair this state: Rebellion never prospered
yet as neither they which have attempted such enterprises in former times
have been known or hard tell of at any time to have prevailed: so neither
these, nor whosoever hereafter will be so mad to tread in such like steps,
can escape either like success as they have had, or rather worse, to speak
more truly, which they seem iustlye to have deserved. Saying therefore that
the good pleasure and providence of God has so prepared for us, and bestowed
upon us such a pearelesse Prince, so noble and worthy cou^sellers, that except
men will be wilfullye blind, they all may see with their eyes the goodness of
their gouernmente: let all us Englishem^n as true and faithful subjects
apply our selves by all means possible to obey her majesty* to keep her
laws, to be ready always at her commandment. Who cease not to provide,
foresee, and care for our safegarde, wealth and quietness, as well in time of
peace as in war. Which things partlye I touched before, and now occasion
s^rueth to speak more of the same again. For although the one seem more to
be wyshed for then the other, yet be they both, by the will and pleasure of God,
left in the hands of princes to be used as time and other cyrcumstances shall
require. And for that Pax, Pax derived A pactione.
seems to be derived a Pactione, as some do write: what time as Princes have
agreed and concluded of good and wholesome conditions of peace, so long does the
league of peace endure, as such conditions are well observed and kept: but if
the same be ones violate and broken, then commonly do wars ensue: which
although they seem never so troublesome and full of danger, yet must they
needs be taken in hand, not only with strength and manhood, but also with
skill and pollicye. For as after calm and pleasant weather when suddenly a
tempestuous storm does rise, Peace resembled to fair weather, w^^ to foul
weather.
then by proof does appear what the governor of the ship is able to do: if
he lack skill and knowledge, the ship and all therein is like to perish:
if he be cunning and expert, he may deliver it from shipwreck: even so when
after long continual peace, grievous wars do fortune, then do valiante
Captains show their worthy manhood, not with hardines alone but with
policy and knowledge. Seeing therefore that as fair weather many times is
altered with storms and tempest, so peace oftentimes is changed with wars:
what thing can be more expedient and necessary to the common wealth, then to
have in readiness, pollitike and valiante Captains, expert and manlye
soldiers? which with their skillful experience and tried knowledge, may in
dangerous times of wars do high service to God, their Prince, and their
country, while they fight not only for their own lives, their wives and
children, but also for the common liberty and wealth of al, the honor of
their Prince, the defense and sauegarde of the whole estate.

For which intent and purpose the readinge not only of the best historical
writers both in Greek and latin, The reading of historyes and other writers of
War not v^^eete for Captains.
wherein most noble acts of famous Captains are lively set forth as notable
examples to be followed: but also of such worthy Authors as have with great
study and travail, gathered out of the best historyes the chiefest points
and devices of wars: and being dispersed far abroad in many diverse and
sundry books, have brought the same into a certain form and knowledge of
the feats of arms: may seem to all men of war, and namelye to such, to
whom the charge of great multitudes oftentimes is committed, neither unworthy
the reading, nor altogether unprofitable. Wherein in mine opinion this our
Author Flauius Vegetius obteyneth the chiefest praise: Uegetius the chiefest
writer of war.
who being commanded by Valentinianus Augustus, to put in writing the
practices and devises of Martial pollicye, has framed and compacte together
such a work, which he calls Institutio^s, that it may be accounted, as it
were a very method or most ready and compendious way to the right knowledge
and science of the feats of war. And although the wars in these our
days seem much unlike to the Roman wars before Vegetius time, An
objection answered.
by reason of a great number of engines and other feats then used, whereof
now many are out of use, and many mo now invented which then were unknown: yet
may this work appear not altogether unworthy to be known of our men of
war, wherein as it were in a glass they may most clearelye see, not only
how that the Romans through such skill and k^owledge, and continual
exercise thereof as is herein declared, have vanquished and overcome so many
barbarous and strange Nations, subdued so many provinces, and become Lords
and rulers of the most part of the world: but also may gather and choose out
the best a and chiefest points of all their knowledge, which nevertheless may
be used so far forth as shall seem expedient, The conten^es of the.iiii.
books of U^getius.
and as occasion may serve and time require. Wherefore whereas the whole work
of Vegetiu^ is divided into four Books, I think it not unmeet to show
briefelye what is chiefelye entreated in every one of the same.

In the first book he sets forth two things principallye. The. 1. book
First the musteringe, chosinge, and appointinge of young soldiers: where in
he requires of the choosers, most faithful and painful diligence, that they
do cyrcumspectly consider and vewe, not only the countries and places where
they were bred and brought up, their age, their staure, their behavior, the
good making and proportion of their bodies, the quickenes of their eyes and
countenance: but also the trades and sciences wherein they have been most
occupied and used, their strength, swiftnes, nimblenes and actiuitye: by which
likelyhoodes and tokens it might well appear which would be most meet for so
great a work. And in the well choosing of these does consist the chiefest
hope, not only for the strength of the army, but also for acchieuing the
victory.

Secondly he sets forth the trayninge up of the young soldiers well
chosen, An army in latin called Exercitus ab Exercitio.
with dailye use and exercise: whereupon it came to pass y^ an army in latin
was called Exercitus, to the intent it should be ever in labor and practice,
and never forget to what end it was so named.

Wherein he first shows that they must learn and exercise to march in
battle raye, to run, to leap, to swim, to strike hansomely, cunninglye to
use al kind of weapons, to shoot, to cast darts, to cast stones with
slinges, or with hand, to mount on horses, to carrye weight, to fortefye the
Camp, to cast and scour trenches, with other kinds of exercises to long
here at this time to be recyted.

In the second book he deuideth the feats of war into certain kinds,
The.2. book
he describes the parts of an army, which among diverse nations were
diversely named: but the Romans called them Legions, Ab eligendo, Legio ab
eligendo.
which word he says requires their faith and diligence, by whom ye soldiers
are to be allowed or refused. He shows how many cohortes or bands of
soldiers should be in one Legion, how many or how few Legions the Romans
used to lead in one army, he sets forth the names and degrees of the
principal men of ye host, he declares the offices of all the Captains and
governors, ye lieuetenaunt, the Martial, the Centurions, peticaptaines, and
all other rulers and officers of the whole army: he describes the troops of
ye horsemen, and as well the names, as the offices of the Captains of every
band. Many other things also he touches concerning the Standerds,
banners, ensigns and flagges, yea and the offices of the Trumpetters, by whose
sound it is known when ye soldiers should set forward to any work, when
they should fight or stay, when they should follow the chase, or when they
should retire. Thus with many other notable things to be known, and partlye
with a vehement exhortation to the diligent exercise of ye feats of war, and
partly with a brief rehearsal of certain tools and engines, used to be carried
with the army, he concludes the second book.

In the third he teaches how an army well appointed and enstructed, The 3.
book
as is aforesaid, may now be brought to the field and join with the
adversaries. But first he sheeweth how the health of the host should be
preserved: what regard should be had that grain forage and victualles should
be provided for and kept: how the chief Captains should keep the
soldiers in quiet from sedition and uproar: how warelye and cyrcumspectlye
the army should be led, when at any time it remoueth: how to pass ryuers,
and other dangerous places. How great consideration ought to be whether they
should fight in skirmishe, or set battle? ye chief Captains great
carfulness before they join battle, in tryinge the courage of his
soldiers, in chosinge ameete place for to fight in, in settinge them in
such order and array that they be not easelye overcome. Which things for that
they cannot be comprehended in few words, and the Author discourses of them
at large in many Chapters, I refer the Readers to the self same Author, who
does so perfectlye set forth such notable devises and pollicyes, such
skilfulnes and knowledge, such providence and warenes, as ought to be in such a
man, to whom the worthy honors of so great power and authority are
ascribed, that unto his fidelitye, virtue, and manhood (that I may here use
the very words of Vegetius) the defense of Cittyes, the lives of the
soldiers, the renown of the common wealth, may safely be committed. After
these, he declares certain general rules of war, and so ends his third
book.

In the fourth book he treats of the besieginge and defendinge of Cittyes:
The 4. book
wherein he first speaks of the buildinge and fortefyinge of the same: and
what foresight should be if a Cittye be besieged, that it suffer not famyne:
what policy may be used, if water, salt, strings, or cords and such like
should fail in the Cittye. He reherseth also a number of engines and much
ordinance used in those days in the besieginge of Cittyes: the description
whereof who so list to know more at large, let him read the tenth and eleventh
book of Robertus Valturius. Also he gives certain precepts and rules of
wars upon the sea: in which he shows what kind of ships were most
necessary and commodious for the purpose: and how dilligentlye the same were
made: in what months and seasons of the year timber should be felled: he
names and nombreth the winds: he shows when it is good to sail, and when
not: he speaks of certain signs and tokens, whereby mariners may foreknowe
fair weather or foul, calm or tempest: then describing certain armor and
ordinance for ships, he briefelye teaches how to lie in wait, and also
how to join open battle on the sea: and thus ends he his fourth and last
book of the institutions of war. In all which work briefelye and plainlye
is contained, not only (as I said before) a method or compendious way, but
also a perfect knowledge and art of war: to the which if painful
diligence and experience be joined, Experience joined with knowledge, bri^geth
great things to pass.
what let should be, but that no less worthiness ^ud excellencye appear in
warriors of these our days, then has been found in the most famous
Captains before our time: to the which not experience alone brought them, but
diligente learning and studyinge of the feats of war, written and set forth
both by historical writers and Poets, and by such also as this our present
Author Vegetius is. Innumerable examples might be here recyted, but passing
over all the residue for shortness of time, two of the chiefest may suffice.
Alexander the great.
Alexander the great, who in short space subdued the greatest part of the
world, had always the Poet Homer laid under his beds head, in whom he might
behold the office as well of excellent Princes, as of most worthy Captains.

Julius Caesar, C. Julius Caesar.
how greatly he was geeuen to this kind of study, it does most euidentlye
appear by such notable books as he has written and entitled Commentaryes.
And surely in mine opinion, it seems a far better and shorter way to
attain to the name of a worthy and perfect Captain to join experience unto
knowledge, Better to join experience to knowledge, then to get knowledge by
experience.
then to get knowledge by experience. For man's life being short and subject to
many casualtyes, oftentimees is cut of before it can come to any such
perfection as is required in an excellent man of war: whereas small
experience with diligente readinge and perfect learning of feats of ware,
may frame and make many polliticke Captains in a shorter space. I do not
mean that knowledge without experience, can do any great thing at all: but
being joined both together, doubtless they may be as able to bring to pass
as great and marvelous things in valiant men in these our days, as they have
been in many noble men before our time, as namely in those most worthy and
famous conquerours, whom partly for breuityes sake, partly for honors sake I
mentioned before: whereof Alexander the great (as Iustine and others do
witness) never fought with any enemies, whom he did not vanquish and
overcome: and how Julius Caesar did prevail, his historyes do declare, who
being much inferior in number to his enemies, was so skillful and expert in
the ordering of his battelles, The not^^^^ skilfulnes of Julius Caesar.
that as it were before throughlye assured, he would foretell to his men, even
in this band (naminge and pointinge out the same) shall consist the victory:
which should afterward even so come to pass as you may read in the greatest
and last conflicte between him and Pompeie, besides other places in the third
book of the Romayne cyuill wars.

Presupposinge that I have said sufficientlye for the exhortinge of thee
gentle Reader to the ouerlookinge of this book: as well for the necessary
matter therein contained, as for causes by occasion chauncinge from time to
time, whereby the same matter may need to be practsed: with hope of thy good
pardon for any my faults whatsoever, as thou may seem rather to encourage
then discourage me: I commit thee to Almightye GOD, and to the readinge of
my Author Flauius Vegetius, rudelye, yet profitably hereafter speakinge in
English.

Farewell.
Christopheri Carlili Saphphica.
Art qui quauis patriam tuetur,
In domo diuum locus est paratus:
Id facit Sadler: patet ergo coeli
Porta supremi.
Nonne constanter patriam tuetur?
Qui modos tradit quibus amouentur
Hostium frauds, furiae rebels,
Insidiaeque?
Scire vis turmas equitum locare?
Copias crebras peditum? legantur
Quae dat interpres Vegetj lat^^i
Ore Britanno.
Scire vis quid sit manus, atque turma?
Quid cohors, alae, legio, balista?
Quidque sit quincunx, aries, duelli
Cornua bina?
Scire vis qui sit locus atque tempus?
Machinae martis? celeres biremes?
Classium portus? sonitus tubarum
Palladis arma?
Bellicum quid sit? lituus sonorus?
Tela bellonae? docetid polita
Art Sadlerus: facit, vt regustet
Angla inuentus*
Anglicae pubi dedit haee legenda
Cura Sadleri: monumenta sunto
Digna, quae cedro simul ac cupresso
Perpetuentur.
Thomas Dranta
BElla virosque canit Sadlerus tempora belli,
Castra acies fossas, spicula, tela, duces.
Perbelle facit is, bellum qui rite repandit:
Aurea per bellum pax solet essere dux.
Edocuit bellum, bellum Deus ipse probauit:
Si bellum, belli tunc probatilli librum.
Sic Sadlere tibi multum pax bellaque debent:
Sic Deus and librum, te probat atque tuum.
Thomas Drante
To write of peace is good, to write of war is gaye
and good, for God himself taught David's hands to fraye*
War faughte^ right is good, such war does Sadler tell
the fact he does is right, the work he wrytes is well.
In I. Sadlerum eiusque versionem Gulielmus Iacobus.
DVra quod vt nuper, nunc non sint scripta Veget^,
Dic cuius studio, cuius and ingenio?
Dic mihi quis castris Anglus, quis tantus in armis?
Sic quis ad arma vocet, sic sua crastra locet?
Dic quis tam doctus sic explicat omnia docte,
Sic apt loquitur, sic sua bella parat?
Denique dic quis sit sapienter tempore in isto
Adfert qui patriae commoda tanta suae?
Vnus is emultis, vel dicam, ex omnibus vnus,
Qui facit vt durum hoc non videatur opus:
Qui dedit effigiem belli quasi clarus in armis,
Bella paransisto commodiora modo:
Qui docte scripsit, posuit nec quid nisi recte:
Qui prudens isto tempore bella parat:
Est is Sadlerus qui sic sentitque sapitque:
Hec fiunt studio cuius and ingenio.
In Vegetium quem I.S. Anglice loquentem fecit.
Gulielmi Charci carmen.
CAstra quid and campi possint, virtusque dolusque,
Scripsit Vegetius: nobile Martis opus.
Quas habeant arts terrestria praelia, scripsit,
Et quae Neptuni bella geruntur aquis.
Quas teneant equites classes, peditesque phalanges
Et qui cui turmae fortior ordo siet:
Vt celeres alae possint volitare per agros,
vt possis cuneos hostibus incutere:
Vt formas formae superent, vtque hostibus hosts
Fortius occurrant, agminaque agminibus:
Haec eadem Martis, magna ornamenta, potentis:
Aptum opus and gratum, terra Britanna tibi:
Sadlerus sermon dedit cultuque Britanno.
Vtere, nam rebus maximus vsus inest.
William Bulleyne
THe fruits of fearful war, each wight may plainly know:
It is the rod from God above, to us that dwell below.
A blessing rich it is in deed, where God does win the field:
Or else a triple plague (God wotte) to use the sword or shield.
By war most lands and Cittyes great were won and still do stand:
By war Nauyes and gallyes swift have gained many a land.
Even so great fortes and walled towns by wars overthrown:
Sometime (again) the Nauyes great in storms are ouerblowne.
And captives great in bondage led, which never back returns
And bloudye corpse in street lie dead: the fire consumes and burns.
The buildinges fair, and antiques old: in bed the child is slain:
The Temples huge are cast a down: nothing does else remain,
But hunger plague, and bloody wounds, ye mother her child does ea^e:
Dunge is daintye to hungrye slaves, when they do dye for meat.
Why then fear God, love well your Prince, esteem ye man of war:
For they do guard each common wealth, and chase thine enemy far.
Give peace good God in these our days, for thou do for us fight
Preserve the Church, defend ye Queen, and people day and night.
And Sadler then for his reward d^e praises let him have:
Take in good part his diligence, else nothing does he crave,
The Prince to chief rule,
The Preacher to the word:
The Lawyer to the skroule,
The Soldier to the sword.
The Merchant to the purse,
The thrasher to the flayle,
The sheapehearde to the flock:
The mariner to the sail.
John Higgins.
AS war has won eternal fame, and found a lasting praise,
As war has kingdoms great preserude, and kept the^ from decayse
So sure the Feats of war do pass, which if thou can attain:
Shall cause the win the field, and live, to see thy enmyes slain.
This Sadler by translating of, Vegetius shows so well:
That thou by practice may attain, and therein soon excel.
Four books there are, the first does teach, to muster and to choose;
And after choice what exercise, to practyse learn and use.
The next declares how wyghtye war, divided is in parts,
How legions, wings, and armies stands, and teaches each their arts.
The third of good provision shows, and how the armies knit:
Which way to skirmishe fight and frame, your force with wyles of wit.
The last does teach how Cities may, prepare for their defense:
And tells what engines erst were used to drive the enemies thence,
Likewise what ships on sourginge seas, in time of war do well:
By Sea what wyles and weapons cause, the soldier to excel.
In such a sort are these so pende, by Sadlers painful skill:
Vegetius teaches Englishmen the Feats of war at will,
And learnes himself a language strange, he erst ne wist before,
Thus he by Sadler taught, of war does teach and learneth more.
Sadleri carmen ad praecedentia.
CVius hae lauds nisi Brudenelli?
M^litis clari, atque equitis Britanni?
Cuique, si quid sit, merito putetur
Maius honor?
Quicquid huius sit studi^, laboris:
Huius hortatu patriae tributum:
Vna causa, and fons fuit iste primus,
Solus and author.
Si tamen verum volumus fateri:
Nemo, preterquam Deus ipse solus
Dignus est, sic cui tribuenda laus sit,
Omnis honorque.
The same.
To whom are all these praises due, and more then these, by right?
but to sir Edmonde Brudenell that worthy English knight?
Whatsoever fruit may by this work redounde unto this land,
at his request the same was done, and taken first in hand.
But if the truth we will confess: no man, but God in throne,
is meet, to whom al laud and praise ought to be given, alone.
A COMPENDIOUS treatise of the Institutio^s, of war, writt^n by Flauius
Vegetius, a famous Author, unto Valentinianus Augustus, gathered out of the
Commentaryes of Cato, Celsus, Traianus, Hadrianus, and Frontinus.
The Prologue of the first Book.
THe manner has been of old time to write the studyes of good sciences, and
the same orderlye brought into books, to dedicate unto Princes. Because
neither any thing is well begone, except the chief Prince after God shall
like well thereof: neither does it become any man to know either better
things, or mo things then ye Prince, whose knowledge may be profitable to all
his subjects. Which knowledge that Octauius Augustus and other good Princes
after him, willinglye have had and practiced, it is declared by manifold
examples. By that means through the testimony of rulers, has eloquence
increased, and yet adventure been by no means blamed. Being compelled by
this imitation, when I consider that your clemencye, more then others, may
pardon the bold enterprises of learning: I have not greatly perceived my self
to be so much inferior to the old writers, (although in this work, neither
elegancye of words, nor sharpenes of wit is necessary, but dilligent and
faithful labor) that those things which being scattered and darckelye
written by diverse Historiographers, and such as teach the schole of arms,
hid and unknown, may of me be set forth openly for the commodity of the
Romans. Therefore as touching the choysing and trayning of young soldiers,
I do mean by certain degrees and titles to represente the aunciente manner:
not that these things may seem unknown to you, most puisante Emperor, but
to prove that the first beginners of the Romayne Empire, have heretofore
observed, what thitges you at this time for the safetye of the common wealth do
willingly practice: and to show you how to find out of this little book for
all most waightye and necessary affairs, whatsoever may appear at all times
most requisite.

That the Romans, through the only exercise of arms have overcome all
Nations. The first Chapter.
IN any manner of war, not so much in the great number of men and manhood
without skyll, as in knowledge and practice, does consiste the victory. For why
we see that by no other means the Romans have subdued ye whole world unto
them, but by exercise of arms, the exact knowledge of encamping, and use of
war. How could else the Romans being but a few, have prevailed against
the Frenchemen being so many in nombre? How durst else the said Romans being of
so small stature, have adventured against the Germans being so high and
tall? It is very evident that the Spaniardes not only in multitude, but also
in strength of body, have excelled our men. With the Aphricans in subtlety
and riches, we were never comparable. No man at any time has doubted, but in
sciences and wisdom, the Greeks have far passed us. But always we found
it profitable to those an active and wise soldier, to teach him, if I may so
term it, the law of arms, to confirm his knowledge by daily exercise, to
make him understand by trayning him at home, such things as may befall in
battle abroad: and sharply to take punyshement of the dull and slothful
soldier. For the knowledge of war makes men more bold to fight. No man
fears at any time to do that which he persuades him self he has
thoroughly learned. Surely in battle a small nombre well practiced, sooner
gets the victory, then a rude and unskillful multitude, always in danger
of slaying.

Out of what countries a young soldier should be chosen. Chapter.ij.
THe order of things for our purpose does require, that in the first part we
entreat, out of what provinces or countries young soldiers should be
chosen. For it is most sure and evident, that in all places both cowardes and
hardy men be bredde. But yet, because one nations does excelle an other in
war, and the clymate of the heaven does very much avail, not only to
strengthen the body, but also the mind, for in this place what is of the best
learned men most approved and allowed, I mean not to pretermit. They say that
all nations which be nigh to the Sun, parched and dried with over much
heat, have more wit in deed, but yet less blood within the^. And for that
cause, they dare not manfully and boldly stand to it when they fight, well
knowing how little blood they have, and fear much therefore wounding.
Contrariwyse, the people of the North, whom the Sun burns not so nere,
being more rash and unadvised, yet a great deal better blouded, are most
ready of all, and desirous of war Out of the more te^perate costs then
should soldiers be chosen, which both may have blood enough, and so not
force neither for hurting nor killing: and have wisdom also sufficient,
whereby wisely to keep a moderate mean and advisedly by circumspect council, to
prevail in their fighting.

Whether out of the country, or out of the city, young soldiers may be taken
most conveniently. Chapter.iij.
IT follows that we know, whether out of the country or out of the city, a
young soldier may be chosen more convenient. As concerning which part none,
I think ever doubted, but the common rude sort always was fittest for the
wars: which is brought up abroad, and uses to take pain, that can abide
sun burning, that passes not for the shade, that never knew what bathes
meant, ignorant of delicatenes, simple of mind, content with a little, hardened
in every part to abide and bear labor. Howbeit, sometime necessity so
constrains, that even out of cities they be forced to the war. Such
therefore when they are ones made sworn soldiers, let them learn to toil
and travel, to ru^ne to and fro, to carry burde^s, to abide ye sun and dust.
Let the^ fare hardly and homely, let them sometimes be occupied abroad,
sometimes in their te^tes: then at the length let the^ be taught to use their
armor. And if the army shall soiourne long abroad, they must be kept hard to
their task, and holden far from all allurementes of the city, that by this
means both the stre^gthe of their bodies and minds may increase. Neither is
it to be denied after the city was builded, that the Romans went al^ayes
out of the same unto war. But then were they not weakened with pleasures of
the body and deliciousnes. The sweat which was gotten in running and other
exercise of Campus Martius, the youth washte it away with swimming in the
river Tyber. The warrior and husbandman, were all one, only they differed in
kind of armoure. Which thing is altogether so true, that it is most true,
how that unto Quintius Cincinnatus, as he was at plough, the greatest
authority amongst the Romans in time of war, the office Dictatura, was
offered and given. Out of the country therefore the force of the army seems
chiefly to be supplied. For it comes to pass, I can not tell how, that he
less fears death which has tasted least pleasure and delicious^es in his
life.

Of what age those young soldiers should be, which should be thought
allowable. Chapter.iiij.
Now let us search of what age it is convenient that we chose our
soldiers. Uerely if we will observe old custom, so soon as they grow any
thing toward man's state, about fourtene and sixtene years, every man will
grant, they should appear at the m^ster, for not only more spedely, but also
more perfectly all things are learned which we learn in our young time.
Besides, agilitie and actiuitie, fit for war, as leaning and running, must
be tried and put in ure before the body be infeebled by age: for it is
readiness gotten by former practice that makes a good soldier. The younger
sort must be chosen as says Salust, for no sooner were young men able to
away with war, as they learned usually and painfully in the camp, the
practice of the same. And it is better that a young man exercised should
allege that all his age to fight is not yet come, then that he should truly
lamente that the same were already paste. Let him also have space and time to
learn every poincte thereof. For whether you will make a good horse man, a
good footeman, a good archer, or teach a man at arms all his numbers, places,
and gestures: that he forsake not his standing, that he break not array: to
cast his darte with good aim and strength, conningly to entrenche and drive
his stakes, to welde his terget well, to awarde onerthwarte strokes, warely to
avoid blows, and boldly to stryke his enemy: It seems no small nor light
poinct of war. A soldier in this sort instructed, shall not be afraid but
take pleasure to fight with what so ever enemy in the field.

Of what stature young soldiers should be chosen. Chapter.v.
Marius Consul of Rome, I know, always chose young soldiers of tall
stature, so that he would allow none for horsemen in the wings and front of
his battle, but such as were six foot high, or five and ten inches at
the least. But then was there more plenty of people, and more that followed the
war. For as yet had not civil dissension spent away the flourishing youth
of the city. Therefore if need so r^quire, it is mete to have regard more of
strength then of stature, and that we are not herein deceived, we have Homere
for wytnes, who declares that Tideus was but small of person, but yet of good
courage and stomach.

To know by the countenance and making of the body which soldiers are like
to prove good. Chapter.vj.
HE that will go about to muster men, must be very careful that by the
continuance, by the eyes, by the sure compacting and joining of the lymmes, he
chose them which may be able to perform the part and duty of soldiers.
For not only in men, but also in horses and in dogs, the chiefest power is
signified by many tokens, as the best learned men have declared in their
wrytinges, and as also the Poet Virgill speaking of Bees, thus notes to be
observed.

Of bees two sorts there are, but yet the better sure is he,
With semely coat that seems so of golden hew to be:
The other gross and full of sloth, deserves no praise we see.
Let the young man therefore that shall be a soldier, not look drowsely, let
him be straighte necked, broad brested, let his shoulders be well flesh, let
him have strong fyngers, long arms, a gaunte belly, slender legs, the calfe
and feet not to full of flesh, but knitte fast with hard and strong
synowes. Fynding these tokens in a soldier, you neade not greatly complain
for want of tall stature. For more requisite it is that soldiers be strong
and valiant, then huge and great.

What sciences young soldiers should be skilful in, which should be either
chosen or refused. Chapter.vij.
IT follows diligently to be known what sciences young soldiers should
have learned, that are either to be admitted or utterly refused. I suppose that
fishers, fowlers, Pasterours, linen weauers, and whosoever that deals with
any thing that betokens a womanishe nicenes, should be utterly banished the
camp. Smythes, Carpe^ters, Butchers, Hunters of the heart and wild boares,
may most conveniently be called to war. And herein consists the safety
of the whole common wealth, that we choose our soldiers, not so much for
goodly body as for manly courage of mind. The strength of the realm, and
the name of the Romans lies in the first examining of th the soldiers
that are chosen. And let none think this a small office, and euerywhere to be
committed to every one, which of diverse virtues that Sertorius had, was
thought of the old Romans to be chiefest, and most commendable for youth*
unto whom the defense of countries, and fortune of war is to be committed,
ought to come of a good stock if it may be, and also be well conditioned.
Because honesty makes a mete and able soldier: for whylest they dare not
fly for shame, they thereby get the victory. To what use should we train and
bring up a cowarde, to let him remain in the camp and spend wages upon him?
Never Sped that army well in battle, whereof, he that took the muster, was
any thing negligent in allowyng the soldiers. And for as much as use
teaches, and we find by experience, hereof proceade every where so many
discomfitures and damage by the enemy: whiles to long peace causes us make so
negligent and careless choice of our soldiers, whiles the honest are
suffered to follow the citezins trade, whiles young soldier loath to leave
their masters, dissemble ye matter that they be favored and borne withal,
whiles such fellows are made out as their masters are wearye of, and
therefore wyllingly forgo them. Circumspect men for this cause with as
circumspecte diligence must of this younger sort chose both meet and able
persons.

Wha^ time young soldiers should be registered and bylled. Chapter.viij.
FOr all this, notwithstanding, upon these foresaid tokens, a young soldier
may not by and by be bylled or priest, but we m^st first see by exercising
him what he can do, that we may know certainly whether he be a meet fellow
for so great a purpose. It is necessary that he be ready and strong, we
must understand whether he can perfectlye learn the knowledge and feats of
arms, and whether he has a good soldiers stomach or no. For a great sort
although by sight they seame alloweable, yet when they come to be tried, they
are intolerable. The less worthy therefore must be left, and the worthier
succeed them, and be placed in their room. In euey conflicte the multitude
avails nothing so much as manhood Let the young soldiers therefore after
they are bylled, by continual exercise learn the feats of arms. But a
presumption of long security, has brought these things out of use. Whom
shall a man find that is able to teach that which he him self has not
before learned? out of histories then or other authors, we must learn again
that old lesson. Yea, but they seame to have written the noble acts and
success only of wars, leaving these which we now doubt of, as things
thoroughly and sufficiently known. The Lacedaemonians, Atheniens, and other of
the Greeks, have written many things in their books, which in their to
(...) are called Taktika, that is to say, ordinary matters pertaining to
war. But we must search out the martial policy of the people of Rome,
who, of small bounds have enlarged their dominion, well nighe to the regions of
the Sun, and extended the same nere to the worlds end. This necessity
compelled me to ouerlooke many authors, and in this present work most
faithfully to set forth what things Cato Censorius has written of war:
what Cornelius Celsus, and what Frontinus has brieflye comprehended, and what
Paternus, the most diligent mainteiner of the law of arms, has orderly put
in wrytinge. Al which things are provided for by Augustus, Traianus, and
Adrianus constitutions. I challenge no manner authority to my self, but
gathering of ye forenamed, what things have been dispersed, make of them as it
were abridgeme^tes called Epitomes.

That young soldiers be exercised in marching, running, and leaping.
Chapter.ix.
THe first and principal thing that a soldier must be doing withal, is to
learn how to march well. For there is nothing in iournying or in battle
more to be observed, then that all the soldiers do keep their arraye, which
can not well be done but by walking often apace, and just and even one with
another. For a co^fused and disordred army, stands often in great peril and
danger of the enemy. Therefore in five hours, a soldier must be able to
go.xx. miles in summer. But going a full pace, which is swifter, in as many
hours he must be able to rid.xxiiii. miles. A more spedie pace then this, is
plain running. The space where of cannot be justly limited. The younger sort
must chiefly use to run, that with greater violence they may set upon their
enemies, that with more haste when need is, they may take the more commodious
places, or prevent their enemies if they would do the like: that, being made
out for scowtes, they may more cherefully go forward, more redily return and
more easily overtake their enemies when they fly. To leaping also the
soldier must be used, for iumping of ditches, for passing deep places, which
else might hinder them: that when such kind of difficulties happen, they may
go over without any manner of trouble. Moreover, in the encounter and joining
of battle, when a warrior sets forward running and ^eaping, he da^els his
enemies eyes, and puttes him in marvelous fear, and suddenly strikes him ere
he can be ready to resist, or by any means able to defend him self. And as
touching the exercise of Pompey the great, Saluste in this wise seems to make
mention. With the lightest in leaping, with the swiftest in running, with the
strongest he strove in casting the bar. For he could not otherwise possible
have matched Sertorius, except he had with often and sundry exercises prepared
thus him self and his soldiers for the battle.

What young soldiers should use to swymme. Chapter.x.
IN summer every young soldier with his fellows, should exercise swymming.
For they shall not ever have bridges ready to pass over ryuers withal, and
when an army retireth or has his enemies in chase, it is oftentimes
constrained to swymme. Sudden showers or great snowes, make the waters break
out, and by ignorance herein, soldiers are subject to danger, not only on
behalf of the enemy, but also for drowning and perishing themselves.
Therefore the ancient Romans, which by so many wars and continual
perils, came to be excellent in all war matters, those the field Campus
Mar^^us, hard by the river Tyber, that in the same when they had left
exercising their weapons they might wash of clean (...) the sweat and
duste. And when they were weary with running refreshed them selves with
swymming. And it is very necessary that not alone the footmen be able to
swymme, but also the horses them selves, yea, and the pages which they call
Galeareos, that is to say head piece bearers, least the unskillful miscarie
when necessity shall approach.

How warriers before time caused their soldiers to use for exercise wicker
tergettes, and cudgels at a stake or post. Chapter.xj.
Ancient men as we find in books, trained up young soldiers after this
manner. They did wrythe and make of twigges hurdlewise, round tergettes twice
as heavy as a common terget. And the same old captains moreover, gave the
soldiers insteade of swords, great wodden cowgels as heavy again as their
usual and wonted wasters. And thus both in the morninge and at after noone*
the young soldiers were occupied at an exercise called the stake. And this
use of the stake, is not only necessary for soldiers, but also for masters
of sense. Neither was any ever thought either in the place of exercise, or in
the field, a tried and valiant fellow, that had not been very well exercised
at ye stake. And for every soldier was there a stake driven into the ground,
so fast, that it might not stir: and so deep, that it might be six foot
above the ground Against this stake, as against the enemy, the young soldier
did advance him self with his wicker and his waster, as with a sword and a
buckeler. Sometime he stroke alone as it were at the head or at the face,
sometime he made at the ^yre, sometime below at the legs, sometime he
would give bark, sometime step in, sometime even leap at it, and as
earnestly and artificially would he fight with the same stake, as if his
enemy had been in place before him. In which (...) of exercise, this was
generallye to be observed: that so the young soldier should strive to
venne w^ his ennemie, that he him self in no part lay open to any blow.

That young soldiers should be taught to foyne and thruste, not to cut and
stryke down right. Chapter.xij.
FUrthermore, they did learn to prick, not to cut. For such as used to
strike down blows, the Romans would easily overcome, and besides laughe at
them, when they had done. A down stroke come it never so violently, seldom
kylleth: by reason of armoure and bones, that defend the vital parts.
Contrariwyse, a sricke out two inches deep, dispatcheth a man: for running
inward so, it must needs pearce the lively parts. Besides, when a man
reaches up to strike a down stroke, he lies open, both of his arm and his
side: but castinge a prick, a man is ever warded, and the enemy hurt before
the prick bespied. And certain it is that the Romans used chiefly to fight
after this manner. Devising for this cause a wycker (...) and a wooden waster
twyse again so heavy as was customable, that when the soldier should take in
hand the wonted and lighter weapons in deed, he might unburdened, as it were,
fight both more easily, and also more cherefully.

That young soldiers be taught cunningly to handle weapons. Chapter.xiij.
Moreover, the young soldier must be perfectly enstructed, cunningly to
handle his weapon: which thing is set forth by them that teach the same in
the fields, or other places of exercise, the which use yet in some part is
kept For it is plain that even now, in all manner of battayles, those that
can best use and handle their weapons, do fight a great deal more
conuenientlye then others. Wherein the difference may be perceived between a
well practiced soldier, and him that has had little or no exercise: when as
they that are but meanly this way instructed, far pass and go beyond
their fellows in artificial and cunning fighting. And so carefully did our
ancestors observe this practiced discipline, that they doubly rewarded the
teachers thereof. And as for the soldiers which had but smally profited in
this same practice, in stead of wheat were feign to take barley, and not one
of the^ had ever any wheate^ bread given him, till in the presence of the
lieutenante, the captains and such as were chief, they had showed by sure
proofs that they had fulfilled all things which were to be required in a good
soldier. For there is nothing more sure, more happy, nor more commendable
then such a common wealth, which has plenty of expert and learned
soldiers, It is not glistering and gaie apparel, it is not plenty of gold,
silver, and precious stones, that makes the enemies to stoop or seek for
favor, but the only terror of weapons that subdueth the^. Besides, in other
things, as says Cato, if ought be done amiss, it may afterward be amended:
but a fault committed in battle, is altogether past cure, when present
punishment follows by and by upon the oversight. For either they are
forthwith slain which have cowardly or ignorauntly fought, or else being once
put to flight, they dare not ever after deal and encounter again with those
that overcame them.

That young soldiers should use to cast darts and other shot.
Chapter.xiiij.
BUt I return to the same wherewith I begone. The young soldier which is
exercised with the cudgel at the post, must at y^ same post cast darts, as
it were at a man, but much more heavy must those darts be, then such as
afterward he shall by occasion use in deed. In which exercise, the teacher
of this maisterie, must take diligent heed, that every one whurle his spear
stronglye, that with good level he hitte the post, or else go very nere it.
This exercise makes a man strong in the arms, and very expert also in
whurling and casting.

That young souldious should be diligently taught to shoot Chapter.xv.
Almost the third or fourth part of young soldiers, such as were
thought fittest to make archers, with wooden bows and arowes for the same,
were wont for exercise to shoot also at the stake. For this purpose were there
teachers chosen, and cunning fellows in deed, diligently to take heed that
the soldier held his bow well and cunninglye as he should do, that he
drew home and stronglye, that his left hand were ever stead^e, that he ruled
his right hand well, that he eyed and minded the mark altogether at the
which he would shoot: that whether he were on horseback or on foot, he
endeavored to shoot ever as straight as could be. Which art both had need
to be learned diligently, and also with daily use to be kept continually. And
how necessary and profitable good archers are in battle, Cato in his books of
the knowledge of feats of war plainly declares. And Claudius with archers
well practiced before, overcame that enemy, with whom til then, he was never
able to deal. Uerely Scipio Aphricanus, when he should join battle with the
Numantines, which had sometime subdued the army of ye people of Rome, thought
it was not else possible for him to get the victory, except he placed in every
band a certain of chosen archers.

The young soldiers should be used to cast stones with a slinge, or with the
hand. Chapter.xvj.
IT is convenient that the younger sort be diligently exercised in casting
stones, either with hands, or with slinges. They, which first inhabited the
Isles called Baleares, are reported to have first found out and devised the use
of slinging, and so carefully besides to have exercised the same, that the
mothers would suffer their little boys not to eat any meat, but that which
they had stricken and killed with a slinge. And oftentimes round stones
thrown level out of a slinge or slingestaffe, against warriors fenced with
helmettes, cors^ettes, and coats of plate, are more grievous then any kind of
arrows: when as unto those parts which be whole and safe, they do bring a
deadlye wound: and without anoiance of blood, the enemy is forthwith slain
with the stroke of the stone. Uery well known it is that in all battayles of
the old ancient men, slingers have been allowed: and because to carry a slinge
is no labor at all, every soldier therefore must often use this exercise.
For sometime it falls out, that in stony places a skirmishe may be had: that
some high ground or hille, shall need defending: that with stones and
slinges, the forayne enemies must be driven from the assault of towns and
cities.

Of the exercise of leaden plummettes. Chapter.xvij.
THe exercise also of leaden of plummettes, which they call Martiobarbulos, as
who say weapons of Mars the God of battle, should be taught younger
soldiers. For not long ago, in the Illirian sea, there were of late two
legions to the number of six thousand, who, for that they handled these
weapons manfullye and skilfully, were called Martiobarbuli. By these for a long
space it is certain that all wars were very valiauntly ended. In so much
that till Dioclesian and Maximian were Emperors, it was thought good that
these aforesaid, for their prowes and manhood, deserved worthily to be named
Martiobarbuli, Iouiarii, and Herculiam, as who should say, the champions of
Mars, Jupiter and Hercules. And they by commandment were preferred before
other legions, and their use was to carry five of these kinds of plu^mettes
within their tergettes: which if the soldiers could hansomely and
conveniently cast, they that wre armed with tergettes, seemed in a manner to
do as good service as those they call archers. For they wound the enemies,
and gall their horses, before they can come not only to fight hand to
hand, but also to the stroke and danger of the darte.

How young soldiers should be exercised to vaulte or mount on horses.
Chapter.xviij.
NOt only of the young soldiers, but also of stipendarie soldiers, the
vaulting of horses has always been straightly looked to. Which use verily
has continued to this our age, although they would have it seem now as
though it were not so* Horses of wood in winter were set in a house, in summer
in the open field. Upon these the young sort were compelled to mount, at
the first without armor, until with use and exercise, they could do
indifferently well, afterward in their harneis they were forced to do the
same. And so great regard was there hereof, that they learned, not only on
the right side, but also on the left, both to get of and on: yea, even with
drawn swords, or long poles in their hands. And here was the commodity of
this continual exercise, that these which in peace had plied this practice so
diligently, when never so soden a tumulte was moved in battle, with the
least warning that could be, could mount and horse them selves.

That young soldiers should use to carry weight and burdens. Chapter.xix.
YOu should often force the young soldiers, to take up a three score pound
weight, and to walk with the same a wonted soldiers space. And needeful is
this for them whom need often compels, in many a shrewde journey to carry
victual and armoure. Neither should this be thought a hard matter, if great
need so require: for what can not daily exercise overcome and make at length
very easy? That this forsayde kind of exercise, the soldiers of foretyme
have used, the Poet Virgill witnesses in these words.

Like as the Roman fearce in arms like to his country guise,
Which heavy burden on his back him self fast forward hyse,
And ready on his foe unawares does set in battle wise.
What kind of armor soldiers of old time were wont to use. Chapter.xx.
Now is here fit place to show with what kind of armor and weapons the
young soldiers should be furnished and fenced. But in this point the old
custom is utterly laid aside. For although horsemen in arms did good, as we
have of the Gothians, Alanes and Hunnes for example, yet it is plain that the
footmen were naked and unarmed. For after ye city of Rome was builded, unto
worthy Grecians time, the army of footmen was fenced both with coarselettes
and headpieces. But when the exercise of Ca^pus Martius, by negligence and
slouthfulnes, was given over and discontinued, armor begone to seame heavy, and
was not worn often of soldiers. Therefore first they made a petition to ye
Emperors, that they might wear no more coarselettes, afterward yt they might
lay away their helmettes. And so when they should go to fight against ye
Gothia^s, being naked of their breasts, and having nothing of their heads, they
were oftentimes by ye multitude of archers vanquished and ouerco^. And
notwtstanding so many misfortunes which have happened even to the destructions of
so mighty and great cities. No man has regard as yet to restore again to
the footmen, either their coarselettes or headpieces: whereby it comes to
pass that naked men in the forewarde in danger ever of wounding, have greater
mind of flying then they have of fighting. What can an archer on foot do
without harneis? without head piece? which can not hold his bow and buckeler
both together? What shall the standerd bearers do in battle, aduauncing the
ensign with their left hand, and have nothing to save their heads or their
breasts? Mary a footeman perchance, which seldom does exercise and handle
his armor, will think a brestplate troublesome and heavy. Howebeit, by daily
use he might well enough away withal, which, though it bear heavy things,
yet never complayneth. But they, which will not take pain to carry ancient
armoure for their furniture, shall vnfurnyshed bear the blows away, and
catch their deaths wound. And that which is a greater grief, and more
shameful to be spoken of, either become captive, or betraye their common
wealth by running away. So that eschewing exercise and labor, with ye
greatest shame that can be, they are slain like beasts. Wherefore was an
host of footmen of our ancestors aforetyme called a wall? but because the
legions, besides their tergettes armed with darts or other shot, made a
goodly glistering show also with coarselettes and headpieces: in so much that
the archers were fenced on their left arms with sple^ces or gauntelettes.
Footeme^ that had tergettes besides their coarselettes and head pieces, were
also constrained to harneis their right legs. And thus were they armed which
fought in the forefront of the battle, and were called Principes, as who faye
the first and foremoste to perilles. And they, in the second order, which
were called Hastat^, that is to say spear men: and they in the third order
called Triarii, as who should say of the rear ward, ready in the third
place to fight. But these Triarii were wont to stoop and keep the^ within
the fence of their tergettes, least standing up they might be wounded with
their enemies weapons, and that when need should require, having rested
themselves so well, they might more vehementlye assault and set upon their
enemies. And certain it is that these often have gotten the victory, when the
spearemen before them called Hastati, have been slain, The ancient warriors
had also among their footmen, such as were called light harnessed men, as
Slingers and other with light Armoure, which chiefelye were placed in the out
sides or wings, by whom ever the unset was given* and these were of the
swyftest and best exercised sort, neither were they very many, because in
retyring if necessitye constrained, they were succored and received of those
in the forefronte, so that the whole battle stood still unbroken. There has
a custom continued almost to this our time, that al soldiers used cappes
made of skins, which soldiers they called Pannonicos, devised for this
purpose, y^ the head piece should not seem heavy to any man in fight, which
did bear always somewhat on his head. But the shot which the army on foot
did use, were called Pila, fastened with thin iron to the foreparte of a
triangle of nine inches, or a foot long, which being fast in the Targette
could not be cute away, and being skilfullye and valiantlye directed, could
easelye break in sonder any harness: of the which kind there be very few
weapons now among us. But the forrayne barbarous footmen that have Shieldes
or Tergettes, do chiefelye use these Darts, which they call Bebras: and of
them they have two or three a piece. Moreover we must know, that when the
matter is tried with Darts, the soldiers must set their left feet before,
for so in throwing their darts when they step in with their right leg, the
stroke is much more vehement. But when the matter is come to ye pintch (as they
term it) and fight as it were at the half sword, the^ must their right feet
be foremost, that their sides be from their enemies, least they catch a wound,
and that their right hand be ready to geeue a blow when need is. Therefore
it is manifest, that young soldiers should be furnished and fenced, with all
cunning and pollicye in fighting, and with all manner of armor and weapons.
For needs must he fight more boldlye, that being safe of breast and head,
stands not i^ fear of woundinge.

Of the fortifyinge of Camps. Chap. xxi.
THe soldiers also ought to learn to fortifye their Camps, for there is not
a more safe, nor a more necessary thing in all war. For why, if the army be
well planted, the soldiers so safe enbulwarked, void of all care pass over
days and nights, yea even though their enemies besiege them, they are as
safe as though they had a walled Cittye on their backs. But the knowledge
hereof, is utterly come to nothing: it is long ago, since that when any
would pitch their Camps, they used to entrench them, and set stakes before
them: so that we have known, when the forrayne horsemen as well by day as
night, have come of a sudden many armies, many times have been maruelously
annoyed. But not only the fool hardy without ye Camp suffer these things:
but when as by any chance in the forebattell they begin to retire, they have
not a defense of the Camp, where to save themselves, and so are killed up like
dogs: and so long do they dye, as their enemies please to pursue and chase
them.

In what places the Camp should be pitched. Chap. xxij.
THe Camp should always be placed, especially if the enemies be nighe, in
a place out of danger, whereas may be plentye of wood, forage and water.
And if there they be likelye to lie long, a consideration must be had, for the
holsomnes thereof. They must also take heed that there be no hill nighe,
higher then the Camp, which if their enemies take, they may greatly annoye
them. They must also consider whether the field where they would encampe,
has been wont at any time to be ouerflowed with sudden waters: which by
the like chance might force the host to remove. According to the number of
soldiers, and the carriages, y^ Camp must be fortifyed, least the greater
multitude be crowned into small room, or least the small number be constrained
to stand a loufe one from another, and more scatteringe then is conueniente.

In what form the Camp should stand. Chapter.xxiij.
A Camp must be pitched sometime fouresquare, sometime threesquare, sometime
halferounde, as the qualitye or necessitye of the place shall require. But the
gate which is called Porta Praetoria, that is to say, the gate for the
Captain, must be either Eastwarde, or else in such a place that is full before
the enemy, or if they be iourneyinge, it must stand that way whether the
army means to go. Hard within this gate the first hundreds, (that is to
say) the chief bands or companyes of soldiers do pitche their Pauilions
and place their Standers.

But the gate which is named Decumana, (that is say) the great gate or entrye
into the Camp is behind the Captains gate, out of the which such
soldiers as offend, are led to take their punishment.

With what things a Camp should be fortifyed. Cap.xxiiij.
Diverse ways a Camp may be fortifyed, and especial three ways, for if they
be not driven to a marvelous pinch, they cut turfes out of y^ ground, and with
the^ make a wall as it were a wall three foot high above the ground, so that
where the turfes were dug, even just before it their be a ditche. Then in all
have must their be ^ ditche made nine foot broad and vii. foot deep. But
when enemies of great force are at haude: the Camp must be fenced round
about which a very large ditch, so that it be by the line (as they call it)
twelfe foot broad, and nine foot deep. But after they have set hedges above
the same every way with earth thrown out of the ditche, and cast upon the
hedges it will be reared four foot high, and thus shall it be.xiii. foot
deep, and xii. foot broad, above the which, must be stakes of very tough
wood well entered, which the soldiers are wont to carry. For the which
purpose it is good to have always in readiness mattockes or spades, rakes,
scuttels or baskets and other kind of implementes.

How a camp should be fenced when the enemy is at hand. Chapter.xxv.
IT is an easy thing to fortifye a Camp, when enemies are far of, but if
the enemies do come fast upon them, then all the horsemen and half the
footmen, are set in battle raye, to break the brunte of the ennemy: the
residue behind them, when they have drawn the ditches, do fortifye the camp,
and by a crier is wont to be proclaimed what ye first company has done, what
the second, what the third, what the fourth, until they have finished all the
whole work. Then come ye Captains to vewe and measure the ditche, and such
as have wrought leaselye and slouthfullye are therefore punished. After this
sort then the young soldier must be trained, that when need shall require
he may by and by fortifye the camp without trouble.

How the young soldiers may be trained, that in the battle they keep good
order and their arraye, and space between one and an other. Chap. xxvi.
IT is certain that there is nothing more profitable in fight, then that
soldiers exercise daily themselves to go in battle in good order and
arraye, neither runninge on heaps, nor scatteringe abroad more then is
expedient. For truly when they are thick thronged together, they lose their
space they should fight in, and every one every where lets another: and
when they stand thin that each may be seen how he stands, they show a
way to ye enemy to enter and go through the army.

And thus if the enemy shall cut and part the army, and come to the
backs of them that fight, very fear must needs bring all things out of
order. Therefore the young soldiers must be brought forth always to the
field, and as they are by name billed, they must be called to ye battle: so
that the battle be long right out at the first and single: that it be not
hollow, that it be not crooked, y^ the soldiers stand, of like and convenient
distance one from another: then they must be charged of a sudden to double
the front: so that though they go as fast as even they are accustomed in the
field, yet they may keep their arraye. Thirdlye commandment must be
geeuen, that forthwith they bring themselves into a quadrangle form. That
done, they must turn them into a triangle (wedgewyse as they term it) y^ is
to say, small before, thick and brother afterward. This good orderinge of
soldiers has done very much good, and been profitable in war. They must
also be warned to conueye themselves into a round form, whereby when as
violently the enemy does break into the battle, the soldiers with this
practice may be able to resist them, least all the whole multitude be compelled
to run away, and by that means grievous peril follow therevppon. If the
younger sort can by dailye exercise ones perceive these things, they shall a
great deal more easelye save themselves when they fight.

How much space the soldiers must go and come when they be brought forth to
march: And how often they must be exercised in a month. Chapter..xxvij.
Moreover the custom has been and remains still, and also is in the decrees
of worthy Augustus, and Adrianus Emperors, it is provided in the same, y^
thrice in the month, as well horsemen as footmen, should be brought forth to
march, (for so do they term this kind of exercise.) The footmen armed and
furnished with all manner of weapons, were commanded to go and come y^ space
of.10 miles from ye Camp a marching pace, so that some part of the way they
might run over merilye. The horsemen divided by troops in armor, likewise
went even as long a iourneye, and as such on horseback are wont to do for
exercise: Sometimes they followed, sometimes gave back, and forcinge their
horses, ran them out upon the spur, not only in ye plain fields, but
also in places steep down, and very high both horsemen and footmen were
caused to go up and down, so that hap what hap could to them in their fight,
these practiced soldiers had very well forelearned.

Of the persuasion to warrefare, and of the manhood of the Romans.
Chap..xxviii.
IN consideration of my faithful promise and vow (most puisau^t Emperor, I
have gathered together into this little book, these things which I have chosen
out of all authors, which have written the science and Art of warrefare: that
in mustering and exercising of young soldiers, if any man would be
dilligente, he may easelye make a strong army: but followinge the ancient
manhood that has been in times past. For neither is all martial blood and
stomach quite gone and decayed in men, nor yet lands which brought forth ye
Lacedemonia^s, ye Athenians, Mar^ians, Samnites, Pelignes, yea and the very
Romans themselves, be barren and unfruitful. Have not the people of Epirus,
sometime prevailed very much in arms? Have not the Macedonians and
Thessalians by war, conqueringe first y^ Persians, come as far as Indie?
And it is manifest that the Danes, the people of Media and Thracia, have
always been such stout warriors, y^ Mars himself is feigned to have been
borne among them. It were to long to reckon up the strength of all countries,
when as they all consist in the Empire of the Romans. But great securitye
and long peace has made men partlye delighte in idleness, and partlye in
service at home in the common wealth. By such means therefore it is well
known, that the care of warrelye exercise was at the first negligently
handled, afterward dissembled, last of all brought into oblivion and quite
forgotten. Neither let any man marueyle that this has chanced in the time
late passed: when as after the first war between the Romans and the
Carthagiens, when 24. years were come and gone, peace so weakened the Romans
through idleness and disuse of Armoure, which before had been every where
conquerours, that in the second war of Carthage, they were by no means
comparable to Hanniball. After so many Consulles lost: so many Captains
slain: so many armies cast away: finding a means to learn the use and
exercise of warfare, they came at ye length to be co^querours again. At all
times therefore should young men be chosen and exercised, for cheaper certain it
is to instruct a man's own soldiers in arms, then to hyre strangers for
money.

The second Book of Flauius Vegetius Renatus of the institutions of war.
The Prologue.
Continual conquestes and triumphs, do declare that your Grace does chiefelye
and most skilfullye keep in remembrance the ancient ordinances of the
elders, as touching the knowledge and feats of arms: For the effect of
things is always the most certain proof of any science. But your rest and
quietness (most victorious Emperor) does require the old and ancient things
out of Books, with a deeper judgment then any earthly mind is able to
conceive: when as with new and fresh noble acts, it passes antiquitye it
self. Being therefore commanded to comprehend briefelye in wrytinge these
things, not therein to teach or instruct your majesty, but only to put you
in remembrance thereof: my due obedience and solemn promise has oftentimes
striuen with shamefastnes. For what greater bouldnes ca^ there be, then to the
Lord and Prince of the whole world, the vanquisher of all barbarous and
foreign Nations, to write of the knowledge and use of war: except
peradventure you commanded that to be done, which you your self had
performed. And again, it seemed a very heinous and dangerous thing not to
obey the commandments of so great and mighty an Emperor. Therefore in
obeyinge I am become very boulde, whiles for fear that in denyinge I should
appear more bold. To the which rashenes the long continuance of your
accustomed and exceeding great clemencye has encouraged me. For of late I
offered a little Book of the chusinge and trayninge up of young soldiers,
as one of your own familye, yet ^herein sustained no blame: and therefore
fear I not at your commandment to adventure on a work, when as that which
was voluntarilye done, has past vnreprehended.

Into how many kinds the Art of war may be divided. The first Chapter.
WHat soever belongs to war (as the singular and notable Author among the
Latynes does testifye) consists of armoure and men: Whatsoever partayneth to
war, I say is divided into three parts, Horsemen, Footeme^ and Nauyes. Of
the horsemen one sort be called wings, because that like unto wings they
defend the battle on both sides, which now be called Vexillationes, that is
to say, companyes of men of war all under one Standard, a Velo, because they
do use banners or Ueiles, termed glistering flagges or ensigns. There is
another sort of horsemen which be named, Legionacij, because they be joined to
the Legion: like to the which are devised another kind (and for their harnes
they weere of their legs) called Ocreati.

There be likewise two manner of Nauyes, one which may be called Foystes or
Gallyes, and the other of ships. The horsemen keep the playnes, the Nauyes
the seas and waters, the footmen the hills, Cittyes the champion grounds and
also steep places. Whereby we see that the footmen are most necessary for
the common wealth, doing good service every where. And whereof a greater
number may be maintained with less cost and charge. An host of men is in
lattine Exercitus, of the very thing it self, and of the use of exercise
has therefore so proper a name given unto it, to the intent it should never
forget what it was called. The footmen are divided into two parts, the one
sort Legionaries, the other Aides: the Aides were sent from their part takers
and confederate Nations. The Roman virtue does far exceade all other in the
orderinge of their Legions. A legion has y^ name Ab eligendo, which word of
it self requires their faith and diligence by whom the soldiers are
allowed: For reskewe and aid the lesser number, for legionarye soldiers a
much greater number has ever customablye been appointed.

How the legionarye soldiers and those that are sent for aid do differ.
Cap. ij.
THe Macedonians, the Greeks, the Troyans, did use those battayles which they
called Phalanges, about ye number of.8000. men in a Phalange. The Frenchmen and
Spaniardes, and many barbarous Nations, used in battle such as they called
Gaternas, wherein were 6000. harnessed men: the Romans have Legions, in the
which are.6000 warriors or more. But what difference may seem to be between
the Legions and Aids, I will plainly declare. Those which are sent for aids
come from sondrye places, for diverse and sondrye hyre: neither in trayning, in
knowledge, nor in disposition one like another, far unlike be their fashions,
their use of their Armor clean of another sort. And needs must they be long
of getting the victory, which before they come to fight differ thus after
this sort. Finallye whereas expedition requires, it is very expedient that
all the soldiers at one only warning, should straighte way turn themselves:
then how can they do all a like that, which they are commanded, when they
never kept any company altogether before: and yet these things solemnlye
used, often exercised, almost dailye confirmed, profit not a little. The aids
went always with y^ legionarye soldiers, as light harnessed men in the
forebattayle, rather for an help in fightinge then a principal succor. But a
Legion where is but one peculiar kind of soldiers, having in it complete
harnessed men (that is to say) first and foremost Principes, then Hastati, the
third Triarij or of the rerewarde, the Ensign bearers: then light harnessed
men, as casters of ^artes, Archers, men with Slinges, Crossebowe men: having
also in it m^n at Arms, and such as be annexed unto the Legio^ called
legionarye horsemen, and all these in one register: when as with one mind and
one consent they ^ortifye ye camp, order their army, and join battle
together, being safe and sure on every side, needing no manner of outward
help or aid.

What multitude is so many, that such an army shall not conquer? As we are
plainlye taught by the great prowess of the Romans, which vsinge Legions
always in such sort aforesaid, overcame so many enemies as either
willinglye they would, or all things considered, they possible could.

The cause why Legions have been wasted and deminished. Chap. iij.
THe name of Legions remains yet till this day, but through negligence of
former times, ye strength thereof is abated: for y^ ambition preventing
manhood, has got away his due reward: and soldiers now a days are
promoted by favor, which never were promoted but only by labor. And again
for this cause, y^ when we have paid a certain their wages, and with a pasport
(as ye custom is) dismissed the^, we never substitute other in their roumes.
Besides it ca^ not be chosen, but some must fall sick, become weak and so be
discharged: some geeue over warfare, or dye by one chance or other: y^ except
every year, (yea almost every month) as many again succeed them, and come
in their place: an army be it never so great, must needs consume and wast.
An other cause there is why legions may be lessened: A soldier takes much
pain in a Legion, armoure is heavy and burdenous, rewards come sloulye,
punishementes ryfe and sharp, which things the most part to avoid, if it
might be, seek to be sworn and serve for aid, where both they take less
pains, and are more sone preferde. Noble Cato ye Elder, both valiant in arms,
and who that being Co^sull had oftentimes himself conducted an army, he
thought yet, he might profit ye common wealth a great deal more if he put in
wrytinge what belonged to war: for valiance and noble acts continue but one
age, but what things are written for the profitte of the common wealth, are
remembered throughoute all ages. The like have many other done before, but
especially Frontinus, writing to ye gracious Prince Traianus, for this
endeavor and travail was very much commended. These men's ordinances, these
men's instructions, as much as in me lies, briefelye and faythfullye I intend
to put in wrytinge. For saying that whether an army be well ordered or evil,
the expenses are as great of the one as the other: it shall be profitable not
only for the time present, but also for ever hereafter, if by your maiestyes
good provision, (most noble Emperor) strong and polliticke use of Armor
may be renewed and established, and whatsoever dissimulation for favor has
tofore been practiced, the same may by your means be redressed and amended.

What number of Legions the ancient Romans led with them to the wars.
Chapter..iiij.
We find in all Authors that every Consul, against the greatest number of
enemies, lead never mo the^ two Legions, reckening there with the aids y^
came from their friends and confederates. So well exercised were they, so
stout and valiant, that they thought two Legions sufficient for any war
whatsoever. Wherefore according to the rule of the law of Arms, and trade of
wars, I will declare the old manner of ordering of a Legion: which description
if it shall seem somewhat diffuse or homelye, impute not the same to me, but
to the hardness and difficultye of the matter it self. With a diligent and
attentive mind, they must therefore be read over and over, that they may be
throughlye understood and perfectlye remembered. For needs must that common
wealth be invincible, that has a governor so skillful in chiualrye, as when
he will, can make both strong and valiant Armies.

How a Legion should be ordered. Chapter..v.
AFter much diligence has been used in choosing such of the younger sort as
shall be of good stomach and courage, and also practiced before for the space of
four months or more: then at the commandment and by the authority of the
mighty sovereign Prince, a legion is framed and made. For soldiers being
once bilde, pricked and registered they use to be sworn. And hereof therefore
comes that Ceremonious taking of an oath in war, of the which this is the
form. They swear by God ye father, by Christ the son, and by the holy
Ghost, and by the Majesty of ye Emperor or Prince, which after God, ought
to be beloved and worshipped of all me^ living. For when as the Emperor or
Prince has received the title of royal majesty, unto him (as if God were
presently and corporally with us) our faithful obedience must be performed,
and most vigilante and diligent service declared and showed. For whosoever
lives either out of the wars or in the wars, does then serve God, when as
he faythfullye loves him, whom God has appointed to rule and reign over
him. But to this, do the soldiers swear, that they will do all things
valiantly, which the Emperor or Prince does commau^de: that they will never
forsake ye wars, neither refuse death for the Romayne common wealth.

How many cohortes or bands should be in one Legion, and how many
soldiers should be in one band. Cap. vj.
We must know that in a Legion there ought to be 10. bands. But the first
band passes all the rest, both in number of soldiers, and also in
estimation, and co^monlye they be (as it is requisite) of very good calling
and well brought up in learning: for this band bears the Eagle, which always
is the chiefest standard in the Roman army, and the ensign of all the whole
Legion. These have in reverence and worship their Emperors pictures as present
tokens from God. This first band contains.1105. footmen: heavy armed
horsemen 132. And it is named Cohorsmiliaria, that is to say, a company of a
thousand and mo soldiers. This band is the head of all the Legio^: when
soever they must fight, this band begins the battle, and are first set in
order in the front of the battle. The second band contains.555. footmen,
and 66. horsemen of heavy armor. And this band is called Cohors quigentaria,
y^ is to say, a company of.5. hundred and mo soldiers. The third band
likewise has.555. footmen, and.66. horsemen. But here they use to place their
strong and more expert me^, because this third band is in the mids and
strength of the battle. The fourth band has.555. footmen, and 66 horsemen
The fifth band has as many, but it is requisyte they be valiante and
courageous soldiers: because as the first Cohorte is set in the right wynge,
so the fifth is set in the left winge.

These five bands are set in a raye in the first battle. The sixte band
has.555. footmen.66. horsemen, and the same must be chosen and picked me^:
for why, the sixth band is placed next behind the standarde, and next the
Emperors arms in the second front or battle. The seventh band has.555.
footmen.66 horsemen. The eight band has.555. footmen 66* horsemen: but
courageous men, as it is expedient, because it is the middlemost band in the
second battle. The nynthe has 555. footmen.66. horsemen. The tenthe does
contain also.555. footmen 66 horsemen: valiant and expert warriors, because
in the second battle it defends the left winge. These ten bands make a
full and perfect Legion, contayninge 6100. footmen, and 726. horsemen. There
may not be in a Legion any fewer of harnest men: mo there has been
oftentimes. For when one band would not serve, by commandment have been
taken mo other bands, of a Thousand soldiers in a band.

Names and degrees, of the chief and principal men of the Legion. Chap. vij.
Now that I have set forth the ancient orderinge of a Legion, I will declare
the names and offices of the principal soldiers: to speak plainlye and
properlye, show by what name every soldier was first registered and billed.
The chief Tribune was appointed by the descretion and judgment of the
Emperor, by his solemn Epistle or letter written to that effect. The under
Tribune came up by his service. And he is called Tribunus a tribu: of giving
every one his right: because he has authority over the soldiers, which
Romulus first chose out of ye Tribes (that is to say) out of ye wards,
hundreds, or other such like companyes of the peoples of Rome. Those soldiers
Ordinarij, are called such as have charge in the battle, and lead the first
ranks or rays. They were called Augustales, which were joined to those
ordinarye soldiers by the Emperor Augustus. Fla^iales in like sort, as it
were Secundi Augustales, noble Vespasian added to the Legions. Aquiliferi, are
they which carrye the Eagle. Imaginarij or Imaginiferi, which carrye the
Images or pictures of the Emperors. Optiones ab optando, when those next going
before them were sick or grieved, these as it were their successors and
supplying their places, were wont to take upon them all their whole charge.
Signiferi, are the Standarde bearers now called Draconarii. Tesserarii be they,
which gave the watch word to the soldiers of all the Legion. And this
word Tessera, is the commandment of ye chief Captain, to call the army
either to any work or battle. Campigeni, that is to say, Antefignani, are
therefore so named, because by their endeavor and manhood, ye manner of
exercise does increase in the field. Metatores, are those which go before ye
army, to chose them a place to encampe in. Beneficiarij, so called who^ the
Tribune to benefit prefers and promoteth. Librarii, that keep a book of ye
soldiers accounts. Tubicines, Cornicines, and Buccinatores, which by blowing
a trumpet, brazen horn or Sagbut, cause the soldiers to join battle.
Armaturae duplares, were soldiers, which had double allowance of victuals.
Simplares, which had ordinary allowance.

Mensores, which in the camp measured out by y^ foot to y^ soldiers, places
to pitch their tents in, or appointed every soldier his lodginge in the
Cittyes. Torquati duplares, soldiers with double chains: and Torquati
simplares, soldiers such as wore a single chain al of gold, had it, for
some reward of manhood and virtue. Which who so deserved, besides the praise
and commendation sometimes had double allowance of victuals. There were also
Candidati duplares, such as labored or stood for double allowance of
victuals: and Candidati simplares, such as labored for single allowance.
These be the principal soldiers which have any prerogative or privilege
above the other. The rest are named Munifices, because they are constrained to
look to their charge and office.

The names of them which led the ancient orders of soldiers. Chap. viij.
THe old custom has been, that the chief leader of the Legion, should
promote the Centurion or Captain of the vaunte guarde called Primipilus, whose
office was not only to take charge of the Eagle or chief standard, but also
to have under his leading in y^ first battle four Centuries, that is to
say.400. soldiers. This captain as the chief of all the Legion, did obtain
many profits and commodityes. Also the chief of them which be called Hastati
did lead in the second front, two Centuries, y^ is to say, 200 men, whom we
do now call Ducenarium, that is a Captain of two hundred. But the principal
of the first band, had under his government one Centurie, and an half, that is
to say.150. men, and the orderinge of all things in the Legion whatsoever.
Likewise the second called Hastatus, did lead as many as did the first, that
is to say, 150* men. The first or chief Triarian, did lead an hundred men:
so that these five ordinarye soldiers, governed ten Centuries of the first
cohor^or band, and unto whom the ancient fathers did great houor, and also
appointed to their commodity: for this end chiefly, that the other soldiers
of all the legion with all kind of labor and humble service should endeavor
the^ selves to attain such rewards. There were also centurions or under
captains, which had the charge of a single centurie or just hundred, which
be named Centenarii, there were Decani. That conducted ten soldiers, which
are now called the chief of one company in one pauilion or tent. The second
cohorte has five centurions, likewise the third, the fourth, the fifthe, and
so to the tenth cohort. And so in all the legion were.155. centurio^s.

Of the office of him that is called Praefectus legionis, the lieutenauntes
deputy. Chapter.ix.
Such as sometime had been Consuls, sent the Emperors lieutenantes to war,
unto whom all the whole armies and those which were sent for aid, as well in
peace as in necessary time of wars were always obedient: whose room it is
certain that right excellent famous men, as masters of the soldiers do
now supply, which were wont to have the government, not only of two
legions, but also of a greater nu^bre. But the very chief and peculiar judge
of the legion was Praefectus, having common authority of the best estate or
order, and in the absence of the lieutenaunt, as it were his deputy or
vicegerent, had the greatest power of all. The tribunes or centurions, and all
the other soldiers, were all at his commandment. This same gave the watch
their charge, and when any voyage was to be made gave only commandment. If
a soldier had committed any fault, this deputy forthwith by his authority,
commanded the marshall to take punishment of him. He took charge of all the
soldiers armoure, also of the horses, apparel and vitaile. He might
command severe punishment to be executed, and exercises, not only of the
footmen, but also of the horsemen daily to be practiced. Him self as a
diligent and sober ouerseer, trained up the legion committed to his charge,
always honestly and diligently in all good service and industry, as one not
ignorant that the valiauntnes of the soldiers redounded chiefly to the
comme^dation of the captain.

Of the office of the chief ouerseer of the camp. Chapter.x.
THere was also an ouerseer of the camp, though not of great authority, yet
occupied in no mean or small affairs: whose office was to see to the
encamping of ye army, to all fortification, to ditching and entrenching. The
tents or hales of the soldiers, withal the bag and baggage were ordered
ever as it seemed good to him. The sick soldiers besides of every tente,
with those that had them in cure, all expenses belonginge to the same,
concern his only travel and diligence. Carts or wagons, shot or
artillery, timber, edge tools, wherewith to hew and saw the same, for
opening of ditches, when a bulwark should be purposed, and for more commodious
conueyinge of water, this matter pertayneth properly to him. He did moreover
forsee that there wanted not at any time either straw, or wood, battring
rams, cross bows, field pieces, and other kind of ordinance. This
officer, after long and great experience of warrefare, was chosen as one most
expert, and cunningest well to teach and enstructe others in that, which he
him self had done with commendation.

Of the office of the master of the artificers. Chapter.xj.
Moreover, there are in a legion Carpenters, and such as make preparation, as
Cartwrightes, Smithes, Painters, and other artificers, for building places to
winter in. For ye speedy making of engines, wooden towers, and other things
wherewith ye enemies cities are annoied, and their own better defended. And
either to make new, or to repair the old shaken armoure, weapons, wagons and
other kinden of ordinance. They had also forges or shoppes for tergets, or
b^clers, for coats offense, for bows, in which arrows, darts, helmets, and
al kind of weapons were made. For this was his special charge, that no
necessary thing should at any time be missing in the camp: in so much that
they had also pioners, which after the manner of the Bessians, working under the
ground, and undermining the fou^dacion of the walls, would suddenly issue out
and take their enemies cities. Of all these, the master of ye artificers had
the charge, and was the only ouerseer.

Of the office of the chief tribune or Colonel. Chapter.xij.
A Legion, as it is before said, has.x. cohortes, but the first contained
a.1000. or more soldiers, in ye which were such placed as were sent, for
their great wealth for birth, for their learning, for comlines, for virtue, and
manhood. Over this cohort the tribune had the government, passing all other in
knowledge of arms, in goodly personage, in honest manners and conditions. The
other cohortes as it seemed good to the prince, were ruled by other tribunes or
governors. But so great regard was there had for the exercising of the
soldiers, that not only the said tribunes or governors did command their
own soldiers committed to their charge to exercise them selves, every day
in their own presence: but also they the^ selves being perfect in the
knowledge of arms, did exhort and encourage other the rather by their
example, often to do the like. The tribunes carefulnes by this industrious
traueile was very much commended, when as his soldiers went clean in
apparel, when their armoure was sure and brighte, when they often exercised
them selves by use to become skillful.

Of the centuries, or hundredes of the footmen, and of their ensigns, or
penoncels or banners. Chapter.xiij.
THe first and chief standerd of all the legion is the eagle which he that
carries is called Aquilifer. Also there be carried in every cohort drago^s, and
those that carry them, are called Draconarii. But the ancient men of war,
because they knew that in the fightinge of the b^^^taile it might so fall out
that array in the army might very soon be broken: for remedy thereof, they
divided the cohorts into centuries, or hu^dredes, and to every hundred they
appointed a peculiar ensign, so that it was written with letters in that
ensign or flagge, of which cohort or band, and of which centurie in order of
the same cohorte, every one was. The which the soldiers beholdinge and
readinge, in never so great hurly burly, could not far wander from their
companies of their own tent. Moreover, they commanded the ce^turions, which
now are called Centenarii, being valiant warriors in complet harnis, to
govern every centurie or hundred, the crestes of their helmets being set
overthwart, to thentent they might be more easily known, and to thend there
might be no great disorder, when as an hundred soldiers might follow, not
only their ensign, but also their centurion or captain by the mark or
ensign in his helmet. Again the centuries or hundredes were divided into
companies of ten soldiers, so that over ten soldiers abiding under one
pauilion, one was chief ruler called Decanus (as who say ye chief of ten)
which is named ye head of ye company. And y^ company often was called
Manipulus, for that, yt hand in hand as it were, they faught always just and
jointly together.

Of the trompes of the legionary horsemen, called Turmae. Chapter.xiiij.
LIke as among the footeme^, there was century (that is to say, the nu^bre of a
hundred me^) or Manipulus, which is less* y^ is y^ nu^bre of x. eue^ so is
turma called amongst ye horsemen. One troop does co^teine.32. horsemen. The
captain over these is called Decurio, the leadear of.30. or mo of horsemen.
For an.100. footmen go under one centurio^, and under one ensign: likewise
under one Decurio^.32. horsemen, under one ensign. Moreover, like as ye
centurio^ to be chose^, should be a man of great strength, of tall stature,
cu^ningly and strongly to toss his pike, throw his darte, knowing very
skilfully how to fight with his sword, and how to turn and welde his terget,
having very good knowledge in ha^dling his weapon, vigilant, sober, nimble, and
active, a doer rather then a talker, which can hold in his own soldiers,
learn them feats of war, make them exercise their weapons, see they be
well apparailed, and clean shoode, that every soldiers harnisse be without
ruste, well skoured and bright: So the Decurion to be chosen Captain of a
troop of horsemen, must first of all be a handsome man, a comelye and tall
man, able with praise and admiration of all men to mount on his horse, though
he be harnissed and armed at all points, which can cunningly handle the
staff, and advisedly bestow his arrows, which can enstructe y^ soldiers of
his troop (that is to say) the horsemen committed to his charge, in all manner
of things which appertain to a horseman: which will see that they often
make clean their mayle, furbushe their harnisse, their spears and helmettes.
For the glistering of armoure breeds and strikes, a great fear to the
enemy. Who will take him to be a valiant soldier, which lettes his armoure
ruste and be evil favored by negligence. And it is convenient that not only
the horsemen, but the very horses also them selves be at commandment, and well
broken. The chardge therefore as well of the men, as of the horses, of health no
less then exercise, coucerneth the Decurion or captain of the horsemen.

After what sort the legions should be se^ in order. Chapter.xv.
Now by the example of one legion, we will declare after what manner a whole
army should be set in array, if necessarily they must join battle
spedely. This thing if need shall require, may be applied to mo legions. The
horsemen must be placed in the wings. The fore front of the footmen in the
first cohorte or band, must beginnne the arraye in the right wynge. Hereunto
must be joined the second cohorte. Then the third cohorte in the midst,
and there withal the fourth. The fifth cohorte must stand for the left
wynge, but before and behind the standerdes. Those which fought in the fore
front or first battle, were called Principes: that is to say, chief and
principal soldiers, as those in complete harnisse which had helmettes,
coarselettes, leg har^isse, shieldes, swords and great daggers, and five
leade^ plommettes in their shieldes, which they do cast at their first
joining. Also two kinds of darts: the one greater, with an iron head three
square, of nine inches long, the staff five foot long and a half, which
they named Pilum, at this time called Spiculum. This used the soldiers
oftentimes to cast, for that the same directed with cunning, and throwe^ with
good courage, strikes through both footmen with shieldes, and horsemen with
their complete harnis: the other less, and was a kind of darte with an iron
head, three cornered of five inches long, the staff of three foot and a
half: which they were wont to call Verriculum, but now Verutum. The first
and chiefest soldiers in the first array, called Principes, and the second
called Hastati, were wont to be furnished with this kind of weapons. Behind
these were such as were called Pherentarii, and light armed men, which now
with harnisse and armoure we place for aid. Next were such as bore shieldes,
with leade^ plummettes, swords and darts, as now a days almost all our
soldiers use. Then archers with helmettes, brestplates, and swords, arrows
and bows. Likewise slingers which with slinges, or staffeslinges, did cast
stones. There were also that were called Tragularii, which did shoot arrows
with hand bows, and cross bows. The second battle was likewise armed, and
those which were placed in that band were called Hastati, that is to ^aye,
pikemen or spearemen. But in the second battle the sixth band was set in the
right wynge: to the which the seventh band was joined. The eighte band kept
the middle front of the battle, having the nynthe joined to it. The tenthe
cohorte in the second battle, did always ^epe the left wynge.

After what manner the Triarians, and also the Centuriens should be armed.
Chapter.xvi.
AFter all these battles, the Triarians, or soldiers of the rerewarde were
placed with shieldes, coarselets, helmettes, being harnissed on the legs,
having swords, great daggers, leaden plu^mettes, and two darts, the which
did rest kneelinge upon one knee: that if the first battle were overcome,
these might repair and make up the battle again, and set on the enemies a
fresh and recover the victory. But all the standerd or banner bearers
although they were footement, had on coats of mayle or plate, of the lighter
sort, and helmettes covered with bear skins, to terrify and make aferde
the enemies. The Centurions also had coarselettes, brigantines, shieldes and
helmettes of steel, but with crestes ouerth warte, and covered with silver,
that they might be the better known of their soldiers.

Now that the battle being joined, the complet harnissed men stood as a
wall. Chapter.xvij.
THis thing also must be known and diligently observed, that in open war
the first and second battle should stand sure and immovable. The
soldiers also of the rerewarde, should abide and rest. The light armed
soldiers, and terget men, archers, slyngers, that is to say, such as were
armed with light harnisse should go before the army, and provoke the enemies.
And if they could put the enemies to flighte, they should pursue them, but if
they were ouermatched and ouerlayde with the power and multitude of their
enemies, they must retire to their own company, and stand behind them. But
the complet armed men must receive the brunte of the battle, and stand as
we say, like a brazen wall, and they must not only cast darts, but also
with swords fight nearer hand. And if they put the enemies to flight, these
complete harnissed men must not pursue them, least they should disorder the
band, and break the battelraye, and so the enemies returning and suddenly
coming upon them, so disordered and scattered abroad, might easily overcome
them. But the light armed men, with the slingars, archers and horsemen, must
pursue the enemies in the chase. By this good order and diligent provision, and
circumspection, this legion shall either easily vanquishe their enemies, or else
shall be out of danger if they chance to be overcome: because it is necessarely
required in this company, not, without great cause, either to give back or
fly themselves, or pursue their enemies reculyng.

The names of soldiers, and the orders and degrees should be written in the
shieldes. Chapter.xviij.
BUt, least soldiers sometimes in the hurly burly of a battle, should
depart from their own company: they did painte in diverse ba^des, diverse
signs or marks in the shieldes, which they called Digmata, that is to say,
signs, marks, or tokens: like as they use to do now a days. Moreover, in
the shieldes, the name of every soldier was written with letters, and also of
what band every one was, or of what hundred. Thereby by these it is manifest
that a legion well furnished and ordered is, as it were, a most sure defenced
city, which carried with it every where all things necessary unto battle:
neither feared the sudden coming of the enemies, which also in the middle
of the plain fields could fortify it self quickly with trenche and
bulwark. Which also had within it self all manner of warriors, and
furniture fit for the war. Therefore if any do covet in open battle to
overcome the rube and barbarous people, let him earnestly desire and pray that
according to the will and pleasure of God, and the appointement of the
victorious prince, and the good guiding and ordering of a valiant captain,
the armies may be repaired and made up again with young and fresh
soldiers. And within short space younger men being skilfully picked out and
exercised diligently every day, both in the morning and after noone, with all
manner of martial affairs and feats of war, shall sone be equal to those
old soldiers which have subdued the whole world. Neither let your majesty
be moved O Caesar, that the old custom which in times paste did flourishe and
was best liked, is now altered and changed. But the continuance of this good
provision and happy success consists in you, that is for the safety of the
common wealth, both to inuente new things, and to restore the old. Every
work seems hard before a man assaye: but if expert and politic men be
appointed to pick out and choose soldiers, an army meet for the wars,
may quickly be gathered, and diligently instructed: for any thing may be
^^ought to pass by diligence and policy, if sufficient and competent
expenses be allowed.

Besides the strength of the body, the cunning or knowledge of ciphers and
countyng, must be regarded in young soldiers. Chapter.xix.
BUt for as much, as in armies there be many schools and exercises of
cheualrie, which do require cunning and expert soldiers, it is very
expedient that they which do admit and allow the young soldiers, should
search out diligently, and know in every one the bigness of the stature, the
strength of the body, and the promptnes of his mind. But in certain the
cunning of ciphers and augurim, and exercise of reckening and casting account
is required. For the account of all the whole legion, whether it be of the
diligent service, or of the numbers of soldiers, or else of money, is daily
registered in the acts or chronicles, with greater diligence almost then the
trade of victualling, or civil government, is noted in the register books of
the city. They note also the continual watches in time of peace. Also the
warding on the day time, and the charges or offices in carrying from place to
place: amongst all the centuries and companies, what the soldiers do by
course: that none be charged or burdened more then is due and right, or if any
have liberty granted and are exempted. The names of the^ which ordered their
courses, are noted in the books. When any man has received a pasporte, and
for how many days it is noted in the abbridgementes. For at that time a
pasporte was granted very hardely, except it were for most just and probable
causes. Neither the soldiers which were lately begone and entered, were
assigned to any certain service, nor any private charge committed unto them.
For why, it was not thought meet and convenient that any soldier of the
prince or chief captain, which is found meat, drink and clothing, of the
common provision, should attend upon private commodities. Notw^^hsta^ding,
there were soldiers appointed to wait on the chief Judges and tribune, and
other that were in authority, which were called Accensi, that is to say,
soldiers appointed to be about great officers. For when the legi^n was fully
made up and perfect, these were added which now we do call
Supernumerarios, above the just number. And yet the very ordinary soldiers,
did carry ferdels or bu^dels into the camp, that is to say, wood, hay,
water, and straw. For of this they were called Munifices, because they did
those commendable things which they were charged withal.

How soldiers ought to put aside the half part of any gift in money, or
other things given them, in the keeping of such as are standerd bearers.
Chapter.xx.
THis thing in times paste was excellently well ordained and appointed of the
ancient men, that the one half of such things as were given the soldiers,
should be set aparte with the standerdes, and there should be kept for the use
of these soldiers, least through excess and riot, or the getting of vain
things, it might be wasted of their own companions. For the most part of
men, and namely the poorer sort, do spend and lay forth willingly so much
as they have, or can come by. But this sequestration or putting aside of the
money, first of all is proved profitable and commodious, even for their
fellow soldiers. For seeing that they are sustained and found meat, drink,
and clothing of the common expenses, their goods which they have gotten in
war are increased, according to the equal part or one half of those
things which were given them. Furthermore, the soldier which knows his
money to be kept with the standerdes, does never mind to forsake the
standerdes, but rather to stick to them. He fights more stoutly and
valiauntly for them in the battle, as all men are commonly wont to do. That
is to take care for those things wherein he knows their whole wealth and
substance does consiste. Finally, there were set abroad te^ne bags in every
band, in the which these things were put. There was also joined the.xi.
bag, into the which the whole legion did put a certain portion to be
bestowed on the burials: that if any of the companies died, ^uner all charges
should be taken out of that eleventh bag. This account was kept in a basket
or cophin by standerd bearers (as the report is now) And therefore, such were
standerd bearers, as were not only faithful, but also learned and skillful,
which could both safely keep things which were committed to their custody,
and also give just account of that, which they had in keaping, to every man.

Promotions and dignities in the legion, are so disposed and ordered, that none
is aduau^ced thereto before he have passed through the.x. bands or companies
of the legion. Chapter.xxj.
I Think verelye that among the Romans, the legions were appointed and
ordered, not only by the policy of man, but also by the inspiration of God.
In the which, ten bands are so set in order and joined together, that of
all those is made as it were one body and one society. For the soldiers are
advanced, and proceade through diverse bands, and diverse companies as it were
round about, one after an other, so that from the first band going forward
in order by little and little he came to the tenth band, and again from
thence he came back again through the rest to the first band: having
better preferrement, and his wages still augmented. Therefore the Centurion or
chief captain of the forewarde, after that he ruled and governed all the
bands round about in course, by sundry exercises and feats of arms: in the
first band he obtained that reward, whereof redounded innumerable commodities
to him out of ye whole army. Like as Primicerius, or he that has the chief
authority in the principal office of the overseers or other rulers, does come
to some honest and gainefull preferrement in warfare: even so the horsemen of
every band, do courteously use their own company with good fellow ship:
because the horsemen and footmen do naturally vary and disagree one with an
other. Therefore by this joining, and as it were linking together of the army,
good agreement was kept and continued throughout all the bands, both of
horsemen and footmen.

What difference is between trumpetters, blow^rs of horns, or shawmes and
such like. Chapter.xxij.
Moreover, an army has trumpettes, cornettes, and shawmes. The trompetters
do call the soldiers to battle: and again do call them back blowing the
retraite. The cornettes were an ornament to set forth the whole army, both
in the marching forewarde toward to the battle, and also in the retiring from
the fight. As often as these do blow, not only soldiers, but also
standerdes, are ready at the ^ounding of them to remove. Therefore, as often as
the soldiers march forward alone to any business or skirmishes, the
trumpetters do blow, and the soldiers only do come together at ye sound of
the tru^pets. As often as the standerdes must be removed, the blowers of
cornettes do sound. But when they do fight, both y^ trumpettes and the
cornettes do sound together. Also Classicu^, is called that noyce which the
trumpetters do make with the sou^de of a cornet. This is a notable sign of
great power and authority royal, because this is sou^ded when the prince,
chieftayne, or general captain is present, or else when a soldier for some
heinous offense is put to death. For this must needs be done by the statutes
and laws of the general: but if the soldiers go forth to keep the watches,
to carry things from place to place, or to do any work, or to make a rode,
at the sound of the trumpettes they do it, and by the sound of the same do
retire to the ca^pe again. But when the standerdes do march, or in marching
when they should stay, the blowers of the cornettes sound to both these. The
which thing in deed for this cause is observed and kept in all manner of
exercises, skirmishes, rodes, and marchinge forward of the army, that in the
fight the soldiers might more easily obey: if the captains should
command them, either to fight or to stay, to pursue, or to retire. For this
proof is plain that such things must be practiced at vacant time and leisure,
which of necessite must be achieved and done in the battle.

Of the exercise of soldiers. Chapter.xxiij.
THe appointing and administration of an army, being orderlye descrided, let
us return to exercise again: whereof (as it is said already) Exercitus, that
is an host has derived the name. The young and new soldiers were
exercised with all kind of weapons and feats of chiualry, both in the morning
and after noone. But the old beaten and expert soldiers, once a day were
exercised in arms. For neither long age, nor number of years, does teach
the feats of arms, but the continual use and study of exercise: and a
soldier not exercised and trainde up in feats of war, although he has
been never so long in wages, yet he is always but a young begynner, and
altogether ignorant in handling his weapon, which on the holy days is set
abroad for to behoulde in the exercise. Therefore not only they, which were
under the chief masters, did learn by daily exercise the handlyng of
armoure and weapons, and the swiftenes and nimblenes of the body, but also all
the soldiers a like did exercise the same. For swiftenes and agilitie of the
body, and also the cunning both to stryke the enemy and defend him self,
is chieflye gotten by exercise and practice, especially if they fight near at
hand with swords. But this is more weighty and needful that they learn in
their playing exercise to keape their orders, and that in so great sturres and
thronges, being used to the like in these exercises, wherein they are first
trained and entered, they do wait upon their own banners and ensigns, and
that among the well trained and expert soldiers, there be no error or
disordre committed, although in the common sort there may be very great
confusion. It is also very good that the young soldiers be exercised with
some post or stake, where they may learn to stryke at the sides, the legs,
and heads, either with the thruste, or with right down strokes. Let them also
accustom to leap and strike together: to vawte against their shield, as if
they were dauncynge, and skypppe down again: sometime to run forward
skipping and leaping, and fetching of gamboldes, sometime to step away
quickelye, and leap back again. Let them exercise also to throw darts a
far of at the posts or stakes, that they both may be more cunninge in
castinge straighte, and more nimble and quick with the right hand. But the
archers and slyngers, did set up some broom for a mark, or bundels of
shrubbes, or straw, that standing six hundred foot from the mark,
oftentimes they might hitte it with their arrows, or with their stoones
leuelled out of a slynge staff. Therefore, more boldly they did that in the
battle which before they had exercised in sport in the field. They must
also at all times accustom them selves, that they swing the slynge, but once
about the head only, when a stone is cast out of it. And all the soldiers
did use with one hand to cast stones of a pound weighte, which exercise is
thought more ready, because it needs not a slinge. They were also compelled
always and with continual exercise, to cast darts or leaden plummettes: in
so much that for the horsemen in winter season, large galeries were covered
with tyles or shingles, which are cliftes of wood: or if they did fail, with
readde, flagges or stubble, or else straw: and also certain large places made
for the footmen, and covered in like manner: in the which in the time of
storms, wyndes, or foul weather, the army was enstructed and exercised with
armoure and weapons under covert. But the other days in winter, if snow and
rain did cease, they were compelled to exercise them abroad in the field:
least if this custom should be left of, the minds and also the bodies of
the soldiers might be weakened. At is good also that they use often to cut
down wood, to carye burdens, to leap over ditches, to swymme in the Sea, or
Ryuers, to walk a good round pace, or to run yea, although they be laden
with the weight of their armoure and other burdens: that daily labor in time
of peace* might not seem hard, or paynefull in time of war. Therefore,
like as the whole legion is exercised, even so the aids ought to be
exercised daily. For like as a well tryaned and exercised soldier desires
the battle, even so the vnexperte and ignorant, does fear the same. Last
of all we must know that in fight, use and experience, does avail more
then force. For if the teaching to handle weapons do cease, and cunnyng in
feats of arms be not regarded, then a country clown is as good as the best
soldier.

Examples of exhortations, and the exercise in warlike affairs, taken of other
arts and sciences. Chapter.xxiiij.
THe wrastler, the hunter, the carter, commonly for a small reward, yea, for
favor of the common people, use to keep and increase their cunning and
knowledge with daily exercise. Much more it behooves a soldier, by whose
manhood and valiauntnes, the common wealth is defended and preserved, perfectly
to know, and by continual exercises to retain and keep the cunning in
martial affairs and feats of war: to whom often chances not only a
glorious victory, but also proies of great price: and whom, also both the
law of arms and the good judgment of the general, will advance to wealth
and honor. The cunning stage plaiers do not leave of their exercises, loking
only for praise and commendation of the common people: a soldier then chosen
and admitted by a solemn oath, whether he be a young soldier or an old,
ought not to cease, discontinewe or be slack in the exercise of chivalry,
who must fight both for his own saffetie, and also for the liberty and
safegarde of his country: especially saying there is an old and wise saying,
that all manner of sciences do^ consiste in continual study and exercise.

A rehersall of Iron tools and other engines of the legion. Chapter.xxv.
AN army also commonly vanquisheth and conquereth the enemies not only through
the multitude of soldiers, but also through diverse kinds of Iron tools, and
other engines. First of all, it is furnished with shot, which no coat
armooure nor tergettes are able to abide. For in every century or hundred, they
use to have a field piece: the which a mule was appointed to draw. And the
companies of one pauilio^, that is to say.xi. men, were assigned to address,
and set forth the same. For the greater these pieces be, the further and more
strongly they shoot the pellets. And they not only defend the Camp, but
also in the field they are planted behind the battle of the complete armed
men. The brunt and violence whereof, neither y^ horsemen with coats of fence,
neither footmen with their shieldes, are able to withstand. And there are wont
to be in one Legion lv. field pieces: also ten greater pieces called Onagri,
that is to say, in every cohort one, and they are carried in tilted carts
with two Oxen, that if by chance the enemies came to assault the rampyre and
bulwark, the camp might be defended with arrows and pellets. The Legion
also does carrye with it, boats made hollow of one piece of timber with very
long cords, and sometimes also with iron chains: and forasmuch as they are
joined together (as they say) all of one piece of timber and bordes joined
together, and laid upon them: by the help of these, both the footmen and
horsemen safelye pass over ryuers, which otherwise without bridges they could
not pass over. It has also iron clampes which they call Lupos, and iron
hooks fastened to great long poles. Likewise it has for dispatching the
work about the ditches and trenches, mattockes, spades, shou^ls, rakes,
maundes, baskets, chipaxes, sawes, with the which stakes and other stuff are
squared and sawen a sunder. It has also artificers with all kind of iron
tools, which for the assault of the Cittyes of the enemies may make engines,
which they call Testudines, and Musculos, that is to say, engines of war to
beat down walls, whereby they are defended which do approach the walls of a
Cittyes besieged. And Arietes, which were pieces of ordinance, made like a
rams head to beat down y^ walls. And Vineas, which are an ordinance of
war made of timber and hurdles, under the which men went surely to the walls
of a town besieged. Also battle rams and towers mouable. But least in
rehersing every thing more be said then need: a legion ought every where to
carye with it all manner of things, which are thought necessary in any kind
of war: that in what place soever it shall pitch the Camp, it may make an
armed Cittye.

The third book of Flauius Vegetius Renatus of the feats of war.
The Prologue.
THe ancient Chronicles do testifye that the Athenians, the Lacedaemonians, and
ye Macedonians, have been chief Lords and mighty rulers. But the Athenians
have not only taken diligent travail in feats of war, but have also in
diverse sciences famouseiye flourished. As for the Lacedemonia^s they had their
chiefest regard, and applied themselves most to war. For they first of al
other, gathering the experiments of fight by the success thereof, are affyrmed
to have written of war: in such sort y^ they brought that which was thought
to consist in ma^hoode and good fortune, into a form of knowledge and cunning:
and commanded the masters of Arms (which they call Tak^ikous) to teach their
youth the use and diuersitye of fightinge. Men worthy of praise and much to be
m^rueled at, which would be cunninge in that science, without the which, other
sciences are altogether nothing. The Romans following their ordinances both
have kept in use, and also set forth in writing, the rules of martial
pollicye: y^ which being dispersed abroad in diverse Authors and books, you
have commanded me most victorious Emperor, as my mean knowledge in learning
shall be able briefelye to abridge: least the multitude of those rules should
bring tediousnes, or the small points be deuoyde of due and full credence. But
how greatly the knowledge of the Lacedaemonians have prevailed in battle (to
let the other pass) it is declared by the example of Xantippus: which took
Attilius Regulus, and gave the overthrow to the army of ye Romans, which
before had been conquerours against the Carthaginians. All which he did not
by prowess and manhood, but by the help of pollicye, and that triumphinglye,
and at one onset to the dispatchinge of that whole battle, and bringinge it
to an end. Hanniball when he prepared to come into Italye, sought for some
Lacedemonian to lead and guide ye Army, by whose counsels (although inferior
in number and strength) he utterly destroyed so many Consulles, so mighty
and great Legions. He therefore that desires peace, let him prepare for war:
he ye coueteth the victory, let him diligently train and enstructe his
soldiers: he that wysheth for prosperous success, let him fight with art and
pollicye, not at all adventure and by chance. No man dare provoke or offend
him, whom he does perceive to be the better or superior, if the matter come
to blows.

What manner or of what number an Army should be of. The first Chapter.
IN the first Book I have showed the musteringe and exercise of young
soldiers: in y^ second was taught the orderinge of a Legion, and the
knowledge and science of warfare. But this third book does sound the
Trompettes and blows out the Alarm. For therefore are those things written
before, that these wherein the cunninge of conflictes and the chiefest point
of the victory does consist, might the sooner, by observing some order in
teachinge, be understood: and thereby profit the more. An host or army is
called a multitude, as well of Legions as of aids, and also of horsemen,
gathered together to make war.

The manner whereof is, to be known of the masters of arms. For whereas we
read examples of Xerxes, Darius, Mithridates, and other kings, which have had
in their armies infinite nombers of people: it does evidently appear that over
great armies, have oftener been destroyed through the greatness of their own
number, then through the manhood of their enemies. For the greater multitude
is subject to many chances: in iourneyes and vyages, it is always slower by
reason of the vastnes thereof. And when it traueyleth a length, it chances
oftentimes to be invaded, and to suffer loss, though the enemies be but few.

And in passinge of roughe places or ryuers, it is oftentimes deceived by the
lettes and stays of the carryages. Moreover for the great number of cattle and
horses, forage is gathered and gotten not without great labor.

Also the trouble and danger in prouidinge grain, and the scarcitye thereof,
which in any manner of vyages is to be avoided, does eftsoon encumber the
greater armies. For with how great study and diligence soever victualles be
prepared, yet the more that they be employed and distributed unto, the sooner
they do fail. The very water also sometimes does scantly suffice a great
multitude. If so be that y^ army by chance should be put to flighte, it must
needs be that of a great number, a great meanye must be slain: and that they
which have escaped being once thoroughly afraid, will afterward fear to fight
again. But the ancient me^ of war which by experience had learned remedies
against incumberau^ces, would not have their armies so huge in number, as well
trained up in the feats of war. Therefore in smaller battayles, they
thought one Legion with the aids joined unto it, that is to say, ten
Thousand footmen and two Thousand horsemen, able to suffice: which army the
Pretors being as meaner Captains, did use to lead forth when any vyage was
in hand. If the power of then enemies were great, then the might of the
Consulles (as who say a greater authority) was sent with xx. Thousand
footmen, and four Thousand horsemen. If that an infinite number of cruel
people had rebelled: then in so great and dangerous time of need, two
Captains, namely both the Consulles were sent with two armies, with such
commandment, that they should foresee that the common wealth should take no
damage nor detriment. Finally when as y^ Romans almost al their time fought
in diverse realms against diverse and sondrye enemies, their soldiers were
for this cause the more sufficient, because they judged it not so profitable
to have great armies, as well instructed and trained in the knowledge of feats
of arms: Yet provided always that there should not be in the camp a greater
number of the confederate helps, then of Citizens of Rome.

After what manner the health of an army^ should be maintained. Chapter.ij.
Now I will declare (which thing ought chiefelye to be foreseen) how the
health of the armies may be preserved: that is to say, by reasonable places,
waters, time, medecin, and exercise. For the places that the soldiers do not
tarry long in a pestilent and unwholesome country, nigh unto marisses or fennes,
apt to breed sickness: nor in fields wanting water, nor hillles without
wood: nor in ye Summer without tents and pauilions: least that goinge late
from their place, they bring sickness on them through the hea^e of the Sun,
and wearines of their iourneye: but rather in Summer season y^ they come to the
places whereunto they mean to travail, before it be day: that in cruel and
could Winter they travail not by night through frost and snow, or sustain
the scarcitye or want of wood: or little store of apparel. For that soldier
can neither be healthful nor fit for any voyage, which is constrained to
(...) for could. Neither let the army use noisome or (...) waters: for the
drink that is made of naughtye water is like to poison, and breadeth the
pestilence in those that drink it. Now as touching that any company of
soldiers being sick by any such chance, may be refreshed with convenient
meats, and healed with the help and cunning of y^ Physicians: the dyligence
of the rulers and Tribunes, yea and of the lieuetenaunte himself which
executes the greater power, shall be required hereunto. For they are in very
ill case upon whom the necessity both of war and sickness does lie. But the
expert and cunninge men in feats of war have thought, that dailye
exercises of arms could more avail to ye health of soldiers, then
Phisitio^s could. Therefore they would have the footmen in reign and snow,
continually to be exercised for health under covert, at other times in the
plain field* Likewise they commanded that the horsemen should daily exercise
both themselves and their horses, not only in the plain: but also in most
difficult passages as in steep down places, and in the gaping of ditches.
That nothing might happen unto them in the necessitye of fight, which they
knew not before. Whereof it is to be understand with how great study and
diligence, the army should at all times be learned the knowledge of arms:
when as the use of labor both may get them health in their tents, and
victory in the battle. In the time of Harvest and Summer, if a multitude of
soldiers to tarry long in a place, there must needs arise most hurtful
sickness, both of the infection of the water, and smell of the very filthe with
corrupt breathinge and naughtye air: which none other way can be keep from
them, but with often removing of the Camp.

With how great care and regard, forage or grain ought to be provided and
kept. Chap. iij.
ORder does require that we should now speak of the provision of forage and
grain. For scarcitye does more consume an army, then fighting: and hunger is
more cruel then ye sword. Moreover other casualtyes be helped in time, but the
providing of forage and victual has no help or remedy, unless they be
laid up before hand. In any manner of enterprise this is one and the
chiefest counsel y^ thine army may have sufficient to live with: that lack
of necessary things may weaken the enemies. Therefore before war be
begone there ought to be a wise and prudent deuyse, for money and other
charges, that forage, grain, and other victuals (which the old custom did
require of forrayners) might be gathered in time: and greater store thereof then
is sufficient always laid up in such places as are strongly fenced, and most
convenient to serve the turn. If so be that the tributes or paymentes do
fail, all things must be compassed and gotten with money paid before hand.
For possession of riches is not without care, except it be kept with force of
arms. But many times there is twyse as much need, and a s^ege oftentimes is
longer then they thin^ke it will be: when as the enemies themselves being
almost famished, do not give over to besiege them whom they hope may be
overcome with famyne. Furthermore whatsoever cattle, grai^e, or wine, the
enemy that causes war ca^ preuente and take to their own provision of
victual: (the owners thereof not only being warned by public
commandment, but also constrained by chosen sear^hers) the fame must be
brought to convenient houldes, and streng thened with garrisons of armed men:
or to safe and surely defenced Cittyes: and the foreign people must be
called earnestlye upon, to keep themselves and all that they ^^ue within
their walls before the enemies (...) enter in. For the repayring of the walls
and all manner of ordinance, must be looked too before. For if the enemies do
once prevent them being otherwise occupied, every thing is disordered
through fear: and such things as are to be demanded of other Cittyes, are
always denied after that the passages be once stopped. But to keep those
things trustelye that may be saved, and to destribute them moderatlye, is as
good as if there were plenty, namely if from the beginning they be well looked
to. But it is to late to spare when nothing is remayninge. In hard and
dangerous voyages the ancient warriors did use to bestow the victuals,
rather according to the number of the soldiers, then to the worthynes of
them. So that after the necessitye was past, then recompense was made to those
that were worthy, of the common charge and cost. In the winter, the scarcenes
of wood and forage, in Summer the lack of water is to be avoided. But the
want of grain, wine and vyneger, and also of falte, at all times is to be
shunned: so that such soldiers as can do least service in the field, should
defend the Cittyes and houldes with armoure, arrows, ^^ingstaues, slinges, and
also stones, artillerye of all sorts. And chief^lye we must take heed that
the vncyrcumspecte simple forrayne people confederate with us, be not deceived
by the craft and periurye of the enemies.

For oftentimes deceitful couenaunts and feigned peace, have done more harm to
such as are light of credit, then the force of arms. By reason whereof, the
enemies if they be altogether do suffer hunger, and if they be dispersed they
are easelye onecome by such as every foot will be skirmishing with them.

After what manner they ought to foresee, least the soldiers do make any
stir or sedition. Chap..iiij.
AN army gathered out of sondrye places sometime does stir up sedition and
uproar, and when they are not willinge to fight, they feign themselves to be
angrye: to the intent they should not be led to battle. Which they
chiefelye do, that lived at home idlye and deliciouslye. For they, which would
shrincke from fighting, ru^ne headlong into such desperatnes, because they are
grieved with the sharpenes of y^ labor, wherewith they are not acquainted, which
notwithstanding in the voyage they must needs sustain, and moreover because
they are afraid to enter into battle. To the which wound men have used to
layemanye and diverse medecines: that they may be holden, whiles they be yet a
sunder in their places, to all manner of knowledge and exercise with most street
sharpenes of the Tribunes, lieuetenauntes, and also the chief and principal
of the army: that they observe nothing else, but their solemn vow and
promise, and that with descretion: that they have no ^eysure to set their
minds on pasportes: let them use co^tinuallye to attend to their name, and to
their ensigns: let them practice dailye the runninge of the field (as they
term it) and the dilligent beholding of the handlinge of armoure and weapons:
They must be held very often to these exercises, and that most part of the
day, even till they sweat again, to shootinge and to throwinge stones,
either with a stinge or with the hand, to wear armor that they may weilde
themselves in it, to pitching the bar, and with wasters as though they
should fight with swords, now with the point, now with the edge to strike one
at another.

Also they must with like diligence be trained in running and leaping, that
they may skippe over ditches, if the sea or a river be nigh to their tents. In
Summer time all the soldiers should be constrained to swim: moreover to
cut down wood, to journey through bushye and shrubbye places, to square
timber, to scour the trenche, to take and keep some place, and to endeavor
themselves with shieldes, violentlye meeting one another, that they be not
beaten from it by their own companyes. In such wise the soldiers of the
Romans being exercised and trained at home, whether they be of the Legions
or of y^ aids, or of the horsemen, when they shall come from diverse places to
take a voyage, they must needs through an ambitious desire to try their
manhood, rather wyshe for war, then for peace. No man does take any thought
for seditious styrring, which has any confidence in his cunninge and
strength. But the Captain ought to be cyrcumspecte, if there shall be any
troublesome or seditious soldiers among all the Legions, or aids, or
troops of horsemen, that he may know them by the Tribunes, deputyes and
principal men, not for the ill will of the enformers, but for the truth of the
matter: and the same to be separated from the Camp by some witty devise, to do
and accomplish some thing, which even unto themselves may seem such, as in
a manner they would wish for: or else let them* fortifye and keep some holds
and Cittyes, * with such a preetye subtiltye, that whereas in deed they be
rejected and dispysed, they may seem to be chosen of purpose.

For a multitude does never burst out to disobedient stubbernes with like
agreement: but they are styrred up by a few, which hope they may with a number
offend freely without punishment, for their vices and wickedness. If so be that
extreme necessitye shall require a remedy to be had therein, the best way is
after the manner of our forefathers to punish only the Authors and beginners
of such faults, that fear may come to all, punishment to a few.
Notwithstanding those Captains are more worthy of praise, whose armies labor
and use has instructed to sobernes and humilitye, then they whose soldiers
the fear of punishmente does constrayne to obedience.

How many kinds there be of ensigns of war. Chapter.v.
Many things ought to be well learned and marked of them that fight: for
why, negligence ought not to be pardoned, where as they fight for life and
death. But amongst other things nothing is more profitable to the victory,
then to obey the warninges of the ensigns. For when as in the hurlye burlye
of battayles, a great number cannot be ruled with one voice only, and when as
of very necessitye many things forthwith must be commanded and done: the
ancient use and experience of all nations has invented, how the whole army
by the ensigns should know and follow that, which the only Captain judged
to be profitable and expedient. There are therefore as it is manifest, three
kinds of ensigns, one sort having voice which are called Vocalia, another
partlye having voice, and partlye not, which they call Semi^ocalia, the third
without voice, and they are called Muta: of ye which they that have voice, and
they that partlye have voice, are perceived and known by the ear: but the
dumme without voice, are referred to the eyes. Vocalia, are said to be they,
which are pronounced with the voice of a man, so that in the watche^ or in the
battle it is accounted for a toke^: as for example: victory, reward,
virtue, God be with us. The triumph of the Emperor and such other,
whatsoever they will geeue which have the greatest authority and power in the
army. Yet we must know that these words must every day be altered: least
by use the enemies may know our token or watcheworde: and searchers or spies
may be amongst our men without danger and punishment. Simi^ocalia be called
which are given by the trumpette, or the horns, or the shawme. The trumpet
which is straight is called Buccina, which is bowed toward it self with a
brassen cyrcle. The horn of the wild bulls being bound with silver is best
heard, when it is moderated with art, and the breath of him that blows it.
For by these with most certain and undoubted soundes, the army does know
whether they ought to stay or go forward, or certainlye to retire: whether
they should follow the chase any long way, or sound the retraite. Muta
signa, be the Eagles, Dragons, banners, read peno^celles, read scarfes,
feathers, crestes of helmets. For whether soever the leader shall command
these to be carried, thither of necessitye must all the soldiers go, following
and waytinge upon their own ensign. There be also dumme signs, which the
Captain of the war does command to be observed: in the horses, in
garments, and also in the very armoure: to the intent the ennemy may be
known from their own company. Moreover he signifies some thing with his
hand, or (after the cruel manner of rude and strange people) with a whippe,
or else with moving or styrring his apparel which he has on. All which things
all the soldiers should acknowledge both to follow and understand in their
places, in iourneys, in all manner exercise of the camp. For continual use of
that thing is necessary in time of peace, which in the confusion and trouble
of y^ battle should be kept. Also there is a dumme and common ^igne, as often
as in the goinge of a multitude, the dust styrred up, ryseth like clouds,
and does bewraye the coming of the enemy. Likewise if armies be divided,
the flame of fire in the night, and in the day time the smoke, does signify
unto their fellows that, which by no other means can be showed. Sometimes
they do hang out beams in the Turrettes of Cittyes, which other whiles being
raised up, and other whiles letten down, do declare what things be done.

How great subtiltye ought to be used when an army is removed the enemies
being nighe. Chapter.vj.
THey which with great diligence have learned the feats of war, do affirm:
that mo perilles are wont^ to happen in iourneyes, then in y^ very battle it
self. For in ioyninge together of the battle, all the soldiers be armed
and see the enemy in the face, and comes with courage to fight against him.
But in the journey a soldier is less armed and less headfull, and he is
suddenly troubled with the force and deceit of the priuye invasion of the
enemy. Therefore the Captain ought with all diligence, and with all care to
foresee least in going he suffer invasion of his enemy: and that, although
not easelye, yet without damage or loss, he resist and repel the same. First
of all he ought to have perfectlye set forth the passages of all the cou^tryes
in the which the war is: so that he may learn the distances of places, not
only by the length thereof, but also the fashion or qualityes of the ways:
that he consider the shortness of ways, the turninges, the mountains, the
ryuers being faithfullye described unto him. In so much that the wittyer
Captains are affyrmed to have had the iourneying descriptions of cou^tryes, in
which they must needs have to do, not only dyligentlye noted, but also
painted before their eyes: that they might point out the way to them that
should go, not only with the aduisement of the mind, but also with the sight
of the eyes. Furthermore he should dyligentlye inquire every thing
seuerallye of the wyser men, and such as be of reputation and skillful of the
places, and so gather the truth of a meanye. Moreover when there is danger in
chosing the ways, he should take meet guides and cunninge, and deliver the
same to the safe keepinge of others, with a sure promise either of punishment
or of reward, if they serve truly. For those guides shall be profitable when
they shall understand that in no wise they can escape or run away, and that
for their faythfulnes and truth rewards be prepared, and for their untruth and
false dealinge punishments are ready. Also it must be foreseen y^ wise and
expert men be sought, least the error of two or three may purchase danger
to the whole multitude.

Sometime ignorance and bold rudenes does promise many things, and believes
that he knows y^ which he does not know. But the chiefest point of this
warenes and heed taking is: that it be kept close unto what places and by
what ways the army should pass forth. For it is thought y^ in all vyages the
thing which must be done, should be not known. For this cause the old men
of war have had in their Legions the badge or sign of Minotaurus, that as he
was said to be hid in the innermost and most secret place of ye maze or
intricate place called Labyrinthus: even so the intent of the Captain should
be kept secret and hid. That iourneye is taken in hand without fear, which
the enemy does not so much as once suspect: but because spies sent out on the
other part, do either see or suspecte which way the army goes, and many
times there wants not runnagates and traitors: it must be declared how
these being at hand, may be prevented and resisted. The Captain ready to
march forth with his army, must send most trustye and fine witted men with
the best tried horses: which may search the places through which they must
take their iorneye, before and behind, on the right hand and left hand,
least the enemies go about to set an ambushmente, and lie in wait to deceive
them. But y^ searchers or spies do work more safelye by night then by day.
For he, after a certain manner is a traitor to himself, whose spy or
scoutewatch may be taken of his enemies. Therefore let the horsemen go first:
after them the footmen, carriages, Archers, pages, and in the midst the
wagons must be placed: so that part of the light armed footmen, and light
harnessed horsemen do follow. For seldom as they do march on, they are
invaded before, but more often behind. Also on the sides ye carriages ought to
be guarded with a good company of soldiers. For they that lie in wait,
oftentimes with a contrary course rushe into some other place of the army,
then where they are suspected. This also is specially to be observed, that y^
part, to the which the enemy is lykest to come, may be fortifyed with the
most choice horsemen, with light armed men, and also with archers on foot set
purposely to withstand them. If so be that the enemies do assail on every
side, then every side must be defended. But least sudden trouble should
excedingly hurt them, the soldiers are to be warned aforehande, that they be
ready with mind and courage, and that they have their weapons in their hands.
For sudden chances which amase men most when they are put to their pintche,
are nothing fearful, if they be provided for aforehande. The old men of
war did most dilligentlye take heed least the soldiers in their fight
should be troubled by the pages sometime being hurt, sometimes being in fear,
and least archers through their cry should be made afraid: least that
either being scattered far a sunder, or gathered togethered on heaps, they
might let their own party more then profit them, and by reason thereof
further the enemies. And therefore even as the soldiers march forth, so
they also lead the carryages well appointed under certain ensigns. Finallye
they did choice of the very pages (which they call headpeece bearers) such as
were fit and cunninge by experience: whom they make as it were Captains, over
two hundred fletchers and other young fellows, and not above. Unto these they
gave banners or flagges, y^ they might know to which ensigns they ought to
gather their carryages together. But the fightinge men are divided from the
carriages a preatye space, least being thrust thick together while the army
is in marchinge forward, they may be hurt in fight. As the places do differ,
so the manner of defense should be altered. For in ye open fields horsemen use
to assault the army, rather then footeme^. But in places full of woods,
hills, or fennes, footeme^ are more to be dread. This also must be avoided,
least y^ while one sort make to much have another sort through negligence going
to slowlye, ye army be broken a sunder in the midst or else peradventure be
made thin. For ye enemies always make their invasion there, where the army
is slender.

Therefore the most expert Captains of the field, the deputyes or the Tribunes
must be set before, which may stay them that go to fast, and constrayne
them to make have that go to slowlye: for they that go a great way before, if
a sudden inuasio^ come, do not so much covet to retire, as to fly. But they
that be last, being left behind of their own company, what with the violence
of the enemies and their own dispayring, are straight way overcome. We must
also know, that the enemies do priuilye lay ambushmentes in such places as
they perceive meet for them: or else do assail them with open battle. But
least any priuye places may do hurt, that the diligence of the Captain
provides for, whose duty it is to search every thing before hand. Also the
ambushe being perceived, if it be compassed about pollitikelye, it does
suffer more peril and danger, then it went about to do. But if an open power
be prepared in the mountains, the higher places must be taken up with aids
sent before: to the intent that when ye enemies shall come, he may be on the
lower ground, and then he dare not adventure to withstand, when he sees
armed men as well before him, as above his head. If so be that the ways be
narrow, and not safe enoughe, yet it is better that soldiers go before, with
hatchets and axes, and with labor to make the ways open and plain, then in
never so good a way to suffer peril and danger. Moreover we ought to know
the usual trade of our enemies, whether by night, or in the dawning of the
day, or in the time of repaste, their custom is to assail their wearyed
enemies: and to e^chewe that, which after their accustomed trade we think
they will do. Furthermore it behooves us to know, whether they can do more
with footmen, or horsemen: whether with slingers, pykemen, or archers: whether
they excel us in number of men, or munition and fence of armor and weapons:
and then we ought to order that thing well, y^ we know profitable to our
selves, and contrary to them. We ought also to consider and deliberate, whether
it be better to begin our journey by day or by night: what and how great
distaunces be of the places to y^ which we covet to make have: least in Summer
y^ scarcity of water hinder us in iorneying: in winter dangerous fennes and
such as men cannot pass, or great waters: and by such means y^ iourneye being
let, our host may be compassed ^rentrapped before it can come to the place
appointed. As it is our commoditye at all times to avoid these things: so if
y^ ignorance or negligence of ye enemies shall give us occasion, it ought not
to be let pass: but we ought insta^tly to allure the traitors and spies, to
the intent that we may know what our enemy both presently and afterward
does purpose to do: and with horsemen in readiness, or light armed footeme^,
prepared for the purpose to beguile them, and so to cast them into a sudden
fear, as they be ranginge abroad seekinge for forage and victuals.

After what manner great ryuers may be passed over. Chap..vij.
IN the passinge over of ryuers ^hey that are not very cyrcumspecte, are
oftentimes excedinglye molested. For if any water be rough and boisterous, or
the channel very broad, it many times drowneth the carriages and the boys
and now and then slothful and lyther soldiers. Therefore after the foorde
be serched, two troops of good horsemen upon chosen horses are appointed,
being separate a sunder a reasonable space, that the footeme^ and carryages
may pass over through the midst: for the former troop does break the
violence of the waters, and the latter does gather and put over such as be
caughte and were under the water. But when the floude is deeper, so y^ neither
footema^ nor yet horseman can pass it: if it do run through plain places,
it is best to divide ye river into many parts with ditches, and thus being
parted, ye passage over will be easy. But ryuers are made easy to pass over
with boats, or with spearestaues rammed fast into the earth* and plantchers
laid over them, or else with much labor to gather together as many emptye
vessels as can be, and to lay boards over the^ But the expert horsemen use to
make bundells of dry reeds or flagges, upon the which they do put their
armoure and weapons, least they should synke. They ^^em selves, and their
horses did swymme after their bundels and so pass the river. But experience
has found out this to be a more commodious way, that the host do carry
with it in carts certain boats, which they call Monoxilos, that is to say
boats somewhat broad, made hollow, all of one beam, very light according to
ye kind and fines of the wood, having boardes likewise and Iron nails in a
readiness for that purpose. And thus a bridge being made without delay, and
bound strongly with roopes (which for the same purpose must be prepared,
wylbe as strong for the time as if it were a bridge of stone. But the enemies
are now already upon the banks, and their use is to lie in wait, and to
come upon them that pass over of a sudden. Against the which extremity or
need, companies well armed, are set in the bank on eitheir side, least they
being divided by the channel that runs between them, should be oppressed of
the enemies. But the surest way is, to fasten stakes before on both sides,
that if any assault be made they may sustain it without harm. If so be
that the bridge be necessary, not only for passinge over, but also for
coming back again, and provision of victualles: then at either end it
should have soldiers to defend it, and broad ditches should be cut out of
it with a rampire made by it, and the soldiers should keep and defend the
bridge as long as they shall have any necessary affairs in those places.

After what manner a camp should be placed. Chapter.viij.
THus having described the manner how an army should be ordered in the journey,
it seems good next to come unto the orderinge of the tents, wherein we
must remain. For in time of war, a fortified or walled city is not always
ready in the way to abide at, and it is an unwise poincte and very dangerous,
that they should stay or abide every where without any munition or forte:
when as the soldiers being busied to take their meat, or scattered abroad
to do any thing pertaining to their charge: it is an easy matter to find
out wyles to entrappe them or ever they be aware. Finally, the darkness of
night, the necessity of sleep, the scatteringe of the horses when they
feed, do minister occasion to sudden invasions. In pitching a camp, it is
not enough to chose a good place: except it be such one that an other better
then it can not be found, least we, forsakyng the better place, and our
enemies taking it to their use, we may chance to smarte for it. We must
also take heed in Summer, least either corrupt water be nyghe the army, or
wholesome water be far of: In Winter least we lack store of forage, or
plenty of wood now and then: least the field wherein we must abide now
and then be ouerflowed with sudden storms, least it be pitched in steep
down and roughe places, and such as if the enemies should besiege us, we
might hardely get forth: least it be within the reach of our ennemies
arrows, when they cast them from high places over our heads. The which
things being foreseen warely and dilygently as they ought to be, thou shall
make the camp, either four square, or round, or three cornered, or else
longewayes, according to the necessity of the place. For the fashion or form
is not prejudicial to any commodity. Nevertheless, those camps are thought
fairest, which are longer by the third part, then they are broad. But they
that vewe and suruay the field, ought so to measure every foot thereof, that
the army may be compacted according to the number of the same. For if the
camp be narrow, they in the forefronte hemme it in to straightly. And if it
be to broad, they scatter farther then they should do. There be three ways
whereby they say a camp may be fortified. The first they say, is some what
slight, serving them one night only while they are in their journey, that is
to dig up turues and to lay them in order round about the camp upon
heaps, and above them in good order to make a pale. I mean to set stakes
there, or briers and brembles. A turfe it cut of earth, that contains both
the grass, the roots and the earth also, and is cut out of the ground with an
Iron spade or such like, it is made half a foot deep, a foot broad, a
foot and a half long. If it be so that the ground be so sandy that after the
fashion of a brick, a turfe can not be cut up, then every man must set to his
helping hand to the making of a ditche, which must be five foot broad and
three foot deep, in the inner side whereof a ra^pire must be raised: so that
the army may take their rest without fear. But if the camp remain in one
place, then whether it be summer, or winter, if so be ye enemy be at hand, it
must with greater care and labor be fortified: for every hundred have their
stations appointed out by the captains and generals of the field, which they
take and keep the^ unto: and laying of their shield and fardels about their
own ensigns, ^hey girde their swords unto them, and cast a trenche about
the army of.ix. foot, or.xi. or.xiii. foot broad, or else if they fear a
greater power of enemies.xvii. foot broad, (for it is a custom always to
observe an odd number) then they raise up a rampire and hedge it about, or else
drive stakes into it, and bows of trees, least y^ earth should slide a way:
upon the which ra^pire they make battilmentes and fortresses, even as they do
upon a stone wall. The captains do measure out this work with poles or
perchies.x. foot long, least any man should dig less then he ought, or else
through his fellows negligence should dig out of square. The tribunes also
ouerse this work, neither do they depart if they be good and dilligent in
their office, before that al be finished. Now least there should be any sudden
inuasio^ on the^ that labor, all the horsemen and part of y^ footeme^ which
does not work by reason of prerogative of dignity, do stand armed in readiness
before the trenche, that they may withstand the enemies inuading the^.
Therefore, within y^ camp y^ sta^derds are first set in their places: because
there is nothing more to be had in reverence of ye soldiers, the^ y^ majesty
of y^ same. The pauilion called Praetoriu^, is prepared for y^ chief captain
and his company. Other tents are pitched for the tribunes, unto whom water,
wood, forage, are ministered by certain companies assigned to those charges.
Then according to their degree, are places appointed in the camp for the
legions, aides, horsemen, and footmen, wherein they may pitche their
pauilio^s: and there be chosen of every hundred four horsemen and four
footmen, which do keape the watches by night. And for as much as it seemed
impossible, or a very hard thing, in the watch tower for every one to
continewe watching all the whole night: therefore the watches are divided by
an hour glass into four parts, that it should be need for noone to
watch more then three hours in the night. The watches are begone by a
trompetter, and after the hours be ended, they are called away again by a
blower of a horn. But for all this, the tribunes do choose and pyke out fit
and tried men, which may go about the watches, and show if any fault
may appear, whom they call Circuitores, that is to say searchers of the
watch. Now are these made a certain degree in the wars, and are called
Circitores, that is to say, officers going about to see good rule in the
night. Yet we must know that the horsemen ought to watch without the
trenche and bulwark. But every day time, after the camp be pitchte, they
do use to take order for warding and posthorses, some in the morninge, some
after noone, for weareing of the men and horses. Among the chief and special
points, it behooves the captain, whether he remain in the camp or in a
city, to provide that feeding for the cattle, conueying of grain and other
kinds, the carriage of water, wood, and forage be made assured and without
danger, from the invasion of their ennemies. Which thing otherwise can not
come to pass, except in meet and convenient places, by which the provision
of our victualles must pass, there be set and disposed places of refuge
and succoure: whether they be cities or defenced castles. If so be that any
oulde munition be not found, there must hastelye be made sure fortresses
compassed about with great ditches. For the word fortresses, is so named being
deryued of this word forte: as who say, a little forte or castle, within the
which a certain number of horsemen and footmen continuing, having charge to
watch and attend for the same, do conducte and make safe the way, for the
conueyaunce of victualles. For the enemy dare scarcely adventure to come to
those places, in which he knows his adversaries to abide both before and
behind.

What manner, and how great things should be considered, to understand
whether we ought to fight with skirmishing, and lying in wait, or with open
battle. Chap. ix.
Whosoever will vouchesafe to read these bridgeme^ts briefly gathered out of
the most expert and tried authors, he coueteth quickly to hear the law, or
manner of a field foughten, and the precepts of rules of fighting. But an open
or a set battle, is soon determined by the trial of two or three hours
space: after that all hope of the side which is overcome, does once begin to
fall and decay. Therefore al things should be thought on and assaied before,
that it come to the vttermoste and last breaking of. For good captains do
not assaye the field with open battle, where ensues common danger to al,
but always closely and privily, that by that means they might destroy, or at
the least terrify their enemies, their own soldiers being yet fresh and
lusty. Concerning which part, I will declare such things as are very
necessary, which I have gathered out of old writers. The chief art and
commodity of the captain, is oftentimes to debate and entreat of his own
power, and also if his enemies power, taking unto him throughout all his army
expert and cunninge men of war, and also wise and discrete men, that (all
flattery set a part) which is very hurtefull, he may know whether he or
his enemies have the greater number of fighting men: whether his men or ye
enemies be better armed, and furnished with artillery, which are most
exercised, and which in greatest dangers are more valiant. He must also
enquire whether part have better horsemen, and whether better footeme^. He must
also know that the strength of the army does chiefly consiste in the
footmen: and among the horsemen he must see which were best with the
lance, and which with the bow, who have the best armoure, the best horses:
last of al, whether the places in which they must fight, be more commodious
for the enemies then for them selves. For if we delight in an host of horsemen,
we must desire the plain fields: if in an host of footmen, we must chose
such places, as be narrow and straight, environed and stopped with ditches,
marisses, and fennes: or with trees, and sometime hilly places: for the which
army, store of victual must be had, rather to much then to little. For
hunger (as men say) does pinche inwardly, and oftentimes does over comme
without di^te of swoorde. But chiefly he must consulte and deliberate, whether
it be more profitable to prolong the urgent necessity of battle, or to
fight it out of hand. For sometime the adversary does hope that the voyage
may soon be ended: and if it may be delayed and longer, either the army is
famished for lack of victuals, or is called away to their own, through the
love and desire that they have thereof: or else having done nothing worthy of
praise, is compelled to depart through despair Then many discouraged with
pains and wearines do forsake him: some betraye him, and some yield them
selves to their enemies. For in adversity faithfulness is rare, and he that
came welthie, now begins to be bare and neady. It is profitable also to
know what manner of man the adversary is, what his companions are and leaders,
whether they be rash and hasty, or ware and circumspect, whether they be
hardy or fearful: cunning in the feats of war, or such as are wo^te to
fight at all adventure: what valiant people have fought with them, what
cowardly and fearful: of what trustines our aids be, and of what force: what
courage his army is of, and what also our host has: and which part does
more hope for the victory, for by such cogitations manhood is either
increased or diminished. By the encouraging of the captain, even those which
despair are much boldened, and if he be not fearful, they wax courageous,
if he has done any valiant act, either by laying wait, or by other occasion
offered: if things go not well, but fall out vnluckelye with their enemies:
if he can vanquishe any of his enemies, either such as be weaker, or not so
well armed. But you must take diligent head that you bring not forth the army
to fight at any time, if it be doubtful or fearful. It is very necessary to
know whether you have new soldiers or old. Whether they have been some
little time in wars, or have continued a good while in peace and quietness:
for they are to be esteamed as young soldiers which have not fought a long
season. But when the legions, aides or horsemen do come from sundry places to
us, a noble and worthy captain ought to exercise every company severally in
all kind of weapons and artillery by the tribunes or marishals thereto
appointed, whose diligence he has tried before: and after ward shall
exercise them gathered together into one place, as though they should fight in
open battle. He him self shall often try and prove what cunning they have,
what force, how they agree together, whether they can be ready at the sound
or blowing of the trumpettes, at the showing of the ensigns, yea, and at every
beck and commandment. If they do amiss in any poinct, they must be
exercised and enstructed, until they be cunning and expert. Although they may
be fully enstructed in runninge in the ^ielde, and other exercise: in
shootinge, in throwyng darts, in settinge the army in order: yet they must
not rashely be brought to the open or set battle upon every light
occasion, but they must first be entered and acquainted with little
encounters. Therefore the paynefull, discrete and wise Captain, doothe judge
of his own, and also of his adversaries power, even as he and his council
should judge of a civil matter between party and party. If he be found
more able and better furnished in many things, let him not differ the
convenient and fit occasion of fighting. But if he perceive his enemy to be
the better, let him avoid the open and set battle. For a fewer in number,
and weaker in strength, oftentimes under good captains have obtained the
victory by sudden invasions, and lying privily in wait.

What must be done if any captain have an army out of use of fighting, or an
army of young soldiers. Chapter.x.
ALl arts and sciences, and all our daily works do proceed and increase by
continual use and exercise, which if it be true in small things, how much
more ought it to be observed in the greatest affairs. And who does doubt
that the knowledge and skyll of war, is more mighty then all other things:
by the which liberty is maintained, and the dignity of a prince enlarged,
and the Empire maintained and preserved. The Lacedaemonians, in times past (all
other kinds of learning set a side) did judge this only to be observed, and
after that the Romans likewise. And even at this time, the barbarous and
strange nations, do also think that this only ought to be observed and
kept. And they have such confidence herein, that they think all other
things do consiste in this: or that they may obtain all things through
this. This unto them that must fight, is very necessary, by which they may
save their life, and obtain the victory. Therefore a captain unto whom the
worthy honors of so great power and authority are given: to whose
faithfulness and prowes, the goods of the possessours, the defense of cities,
the safety of the soldiers, the honor of the common wealth is committed:
ought to be careful, not only for the whole army, but also for every
particular company of the same. For whatsoever does happen in the war
otherwise then well, the fault is his, but the injury and hurt is common.
Therefore if he guide an army of young soldiers, or such as have been long
out of use in chiualry, he ought diligently to try and search the strength,
courage and experience of every band of the legion, and also of every company
of the horsemen. Let him also know (if it be possible) by name, who is
captain under him, who is tribune, which be his household servants, which
be common soldiers in every hand, and how much he can do in the war:
and let him get great authority by sharpenes and severity: let him punish
all the soldiers faults by the laws, let him not be thought to wink at
any that offends, let him understand and know the proof and trial of all
in sundry places upon diverse occasions. These things (as it behooves) being
thus ordered and looked to, when the enemies do wander abroad careless,
dispersed here and there for booties, then let him send expert and tried
horsemen, or else footmen with the young and meaner soldiers, to the intent
that if, by occasion the enemies be foiled, they might be made more cunning,
and the other more bold and hardy. Let him place certain companies very
privily to come suddenly on the enemies at the passing over of Rivers, at the
stiepe or fall of mountains, at the narrow straightes of woods, at the
dangerous passages of fennes and other ways. And let him order his own
journey so, that being ready and well furnyshed, he may set upon them, either
when they are eating or sleaping, or being idle, careless, unarmed, vnshodde,
their horses being scattered abroad, suspecting nothing: because in such
skirmishes his soldiers may be boldened and encouraged. For they which
before of a long time or never in their life have seen men wounded or ^layne:
at the first sight are so afraid, that they quake and tremble: and being
amassed throught fear, have more mind of flying the^ of fighting. Furthermore,
if the enemies do range abroad to make invasions, let him set upon them after
they be weary with their long viage: and let him invade the hindermoste, even
at unawares. Let him also suddenly prevent with chosen me^, such as either for
forage, or for a booty do tarry a great way from their company. For these
things must be tried first, which if they have ill success, it does small
harm: if they prosper well, it does much avail. It is the point of a good
captain to minister and breed causes of discord amongst th ennemies. For no
nation though it be very little, can quickly be destroyed of the enemies,
except it be consumed with private dissensions and hatred within it self. For
civil discord and hatred is to hasty and rash in seeking the destruction of
the enemies, and to careless and vnheedy of foreseing of their own defense and
safety. And in this enterprise, this one thing must be foretold, that no
man should despair of the perfourminge of those things which have been done
before. But some man may say that no man in many years space does enuironne
an army which is pitched, in a place compassed about with a ditche, a rampire
or trenche. I aunsweare him thus, that if this heed were taken the sudden
invasion of enemies, neither by night nor day, could do any hurt at al. The
Persians following the example of the Romans, do pitche their camps with
diches drawn about: and for as much as all places in a manner be sandy, they
fill sackes, which they carried empty with earth very dustie and dry (which in
those places is dug) and with an heap of them they do make a rampire. All the barbarous people having their carts joined together in a round compass,
after the manner of a rampire, do pass over the nights quietly, and out of
danger of them that do invade them. And do we fear that we can not learn
those things which others have learned of us? These things must be learned
by experience, and also by reading of such things as before time were
observed: but being left of for a great while, no man has sought them out,
because that as long as peace flourished, the necessity of war was far out
of mind. But least it may seem impossible to renew and restore the knowledge
of marshall affairs, being long intermitted and decayed for lack of exercise,
examples may sufficiently teach us in this point. The knowledge of warfare
has oftentimes been forgotten with them of old, but (...) has been sought
out again in books, and confirmed by the skill and authority of good
captains. Scipio Aphricanus, did take the armies which were in Spain, being
oftentimes overcome under diverse general captains: and observing the order
and precepts of warfare, he so diligently exercised the^ in casting of
ditches, and making tre^ches, that he would say commonly that diggers must
be defiled with mire, which would be washed with the blood of their enemies.
And at the length with those he so fired the Numaintines, that their city was
taken, and never one escaped. Metellus received an army in Aph^ike, which was
subdued under Albinus their general captain: which he did so repair with
old precepts and policy of the ancient warriors, that afterward they
overcame them, of whom they had been subdued before. The Germans also in
France, destroyed the legions which Cepio, Manilius and Sillanus led: the
remnaunt whereof, when Caius Marius had received, he so enstructed them with
knowledge and skill of fighting, that he destroyed in open battle an
innumerable multitude, not only of Zelanders, but also of Germans, and
Hungarians For it is easier to enstructe soldiers of new unto prowess, then
to call again them that be thoroughly afraid.

What things should be done the same day, that the open or set battle
should be joined. Chapter.xj.
THe more easy feats of war being declared before, the order of the trade
and knowledge of warfare, does move me now to come to the doubtful day of
the open fight, and mortal day unto nations and people. For the whole
victory consists in the success of open battle. Then at this time so
much more ought the captains to be diligent and careful, in as much as
greater renown is hoped for of them that be diligent, and the greater danger
does follow them that be slouthefull and vnexperte: in which the use of
skilfulnes, the knowledge and policy of fighting, incontinent does try and
rule all the matter.

In old time they were wont to bring forth the soldiers to fight, refreshed
before with a small portion of meat: to the intent that their meat received
might make them the quicker: and that in the longer bickeringe they might not
be wearied with hunger. Great care also must be had, if the enemies be present,
whether you bring forth the soldiers to the battle out of the camp, or out
of a city, least whiles the army goes forth through the straighte passage
of the gates by small numbres, it be discomfited of the enemies gathered
together in a readiness. Therefore this must be provided, that all the
soldiers do issue forth of the gates, and the army be set in array before
the enemy come. If ^o be that the enemies being ready come to them abiding
still in the city: let their issuing forth, either be differred, or at the
least dissembled: that when the adversaries shall begin to advance and
boaste them selves against those whom they think will not come forth of their
city: when as they shall retire, and purpose to get some booty, and so
shall break their araie, then they being astonished, let the most choice and
piked men rushe out, and forthwith set upon them at unawares. But this must be
observed that the soldiers be not wearied with any long journey: least you
compel the horses being weary after their running to the open battle. He
that shall fight, must needs be much weakened with the travail and pain of
the journey. What shall he do that commes blowyng and panting to the battle?
This thing the oulde men of war have always shunned, and in the time late
passed, when as the Romayne captains, through ignorance, have not been ware
of, (so that I will say no more) they have utterly cast away their army. For
the state or condition is unlike, for him that is weary, to fight with him
that is well refreshed: he that sweateth with him that is fresh: he that
runs with him that stood still.

We must diligently search out* what minds the soldiers be of, when they
should fight. Chapter.xij.
THe very same day that the soldiers shall fight, it is meet to search
diligently what they think. For fearefulnes or confidence is perceived by the
countenance, talk, going, and moving: neither ought you to be very bold,
although the young soldiers do covet to fight. For battle is pleasant to
such as have not tried it, and you may be assured that the battle must be
prolonged if the expert warriors be afraid to encounter with their ennemies.
Yet with the aduertisementes and exhortations of the captain, manhood and
courage increases in all the army, specially if they can perceive such order
and means invented for the battle that shall be foughten, that they may be
in hope easily to attain the victory. After this, the cowardnes and ignorance
of the enemies must be declared. And also, if they have been overcome of us
before time. Such things also must be declared, by the which the minds of
the soldiers through hatred of the adversaries, may be stirred to anger and
indignation. For this is given naturally almost to all men to be afraid, when
as they come to ye joining of battle. But without doubt they are more
fearful, whose minds the very sight of the enemies does amase and trouble.
But that fear is mitigated by this remedy, if before you shall fight, you do
often set your army in array in safe places: from whence they may use both to
vewe the ennemies and to know them. Sometime they may venture some thing of
good occasion, and so either chase or ^lea the enemies: that they may know
the manners and fashions of the enemies, their armoure and their horsemen. For
the things which are practiced by experience, are less fearful.

How a meet place should be chosen to fight in. Chapter.xiij.
IT behooves a good captain to know, that the very place wherein they must
fight, does contain a great part of the victory. Take pains therefore, that
when you shall join battle, first you have the advantage of the place:
which the higher it shall be when as it is taken, it is thought to be the more
commodious. For the darts and other weapons are cast down with greater force
against them that be under: and the higher part does drive them back that
withstand, with greater violence. He that forces him self against the rising
or bending of an hill, he does take on hand a double conflicte, both to strive
with the place and with the enemy. But here must be discretion had, and a
difference made if you hope for the victory through your footmen, against the
horsemen of your enemies, you must choose rough places, uneven, and full of
hills. But if you seek the victory against the footmen of your enemies
through your horsemen, you must choose such places as be in deed some
what higher, but plain and open, encumbred neither with woods, nor with
^ennes.

How an army ought to be set in order, that in the battle it may be
invincible, or not easily overcome. Chapter.xiiij.
HE that goes about to set his battle in good order, he ought to forsee three
things: the Sun, the duste, and the wind. For the sun before their faces,
does blemishe or basell their sight, a contrary wind does turn away your
darts and beatheth them down, and furthereth those of the enemies. The duste
gathered before the face fills the eyes and closes them up. The unskillful
captains use to avoid these incommodities even in that very moment when they
set the battle in araie: but a wise and circumspecte captain ought to take
heed betime, and forsee things to come* least a little while after the day
coming, the course of the sun being changed, it may be hurteful: and
least a contrary wind does rise, even in the time of the battle. Therefore
let the ranks be so set in araie that these may be behind us: and (if it may
be possible) that they may be full in the face of our enemies. Acies is called
an army set in order and in good array, and the forefronte of it is placed
directly against the enemies. This forefronte in open or set battle, if it
be wisely set in order, does help and profit very much. If they be ordered
unskillfully, if they were never so good warriors, yet with ill setting in
array, they are soon vanquished and overthrown. The rule of setting in array,
is that in the first rank be placed the expert and oulde beaten
soldiers, whom in old time they called Principes, that is the most expert
and valiant soldiers. In the second rank must be appointed archers,
being armed with curets or breastplates, and the best soldiers with darts
or else spears, who of old were called Hasti, that is pikemen. Every armed man
was accustomed to take straight forth three foot space between one and
other. That is to say, in the space of a mile, a thousand six hundredth three
score and six, are placed and set in length, that neither the battle may
appear thynne between the soldiers, and that there may be room enough to
handle their weapons. They would have between one rank and other, a space
behind their backs, six foot in bredthe, that they that fight, might have
room to come forewarde and go backewarde. For the darts in leaping and
running, are cast with a greater violence. In those two ranks are placed
such as are of riper age, hardy through use and experience, and also armed
with more heavy and weighty harness. For these as a wall within them selves
can not be compelled, either to retire, or to pursue their enemies: least they
should disorder their rays: but are ready to receive the enemies marchinge
forward, and by standing stoutly to it and fighting valiauntly, either to
drive them back, or put them to flyghte. The third order or raye, is placed
of the lyghtest armied men, of archers, being young men, of good casters of
darts, which in oulde time were called Ferentarii, that is, men armed in
light harnisse, ready to come quickelye to succors.

The fourth order must be set with the most ready soldiers, which are
armed with shieldes, with young archers and such as fight with darts and
leaden plu^mettes (which they name Martiabarbulos, all which were called light
harnissed men. Therefore we must know for as much as the two first orders
do stand still: the third order and the fourth with their darts and
arrows, must always go forth to provoke the enemies. If so be that they can
put the^ to flight, then they with the horsemen do pursue. But if they be
driven back by the enemies, they return to (...) first and second ordres
again, and amongst them every one takes his own place. But the first and
second battle, as soon as they come to fight with dinte of swoordes, and
short darts, that is (as they say commonly) to hand strokes they endure and
hear of, the brunte of all the battle. In the fifthe raye or battle,
sometime were planted field pieces, and shooters in crossebowes, slingers both
with the slyngestaffe, and with the hand. They be called Fundibulatores,
which cast stones with staffeslinges. The slinge staff is a staff four
foot long: to the which through the mids is bound a slinge of leather: and
being forced with both hands, does cast level the stones in manner of a
great gunne. Funditores, be such as cast stones with slings made of flax,
threede, or great hears, for these they do call the better, they do throw
stones, fetching their arm round about their head. They that had no shieldes,
did fight in this order, whether it were with stones cast with hand, or with
darts: whom they did name Accensos, as who say, as yet younger men and not
expert, but afterward added and put to the legion. The sixte order, was
vpholden and stayed with the most valiant and courageous warriors, and such
as had shieldes and were fenced with all kind of armor and weapons: whom
the ancient men did name Triarios, that is to say soldiers which be set
always in the rerewarde, which were the strongest men. These are always
placed after the last ranks: that being rested and fresh, they might more
sharply assail their ennemies. For if any thing had happened otherwise the^
well unto the first orders, al ye hope of recovery did hang and depend of
their force and strength.

The manner of measuring by the foot, how much space in the battle should be
between every man in length, or in breadeth, and how much betwixt every
rank. Chap. xv.
BUt after that I have set forth in what manner the army ought to to be set
in arraye, now I will declare ye footinge and measuringe of the same. In one
miles space one battle does contain 1666. footmen: because that every
soldier does occupye three foot space. If that you would ordeine six
battelles in a mile space, there must needs be 9996. footmen. But if you
would pitche the same number in three ranckes, you must take.2000. paces. But
it is bettter to make mo battelles, then to disperse them farther a sonder. But
I said before that there ought to appear between every rank behind their
backs six foot in breadth. And the fighters as they stand to take every one
a foot. And therefore if you would set in array vi. ranckes or battelles: 42.
foot in breadth, and a mile in length will contain an army of ten
Thousand men. But if you would set the same in array divide into three
battelles.21. foot in breadth, and two miles in length, will contain the
army of ten Thousand me^. After the same reason, whether there be xx.
thousand or.30 thousand footeme^, according to ye measuring by the foot,
they may be set in array very easelye. Neither is the Captain deceived when
he knows how many armed men every place can contain. Finallye if the
place be somewhat straight, or if the number be sufficient, then it is best to
set them in nine battles or more. For it is better that they fight thick
together, then severed further, and a great distaunce one from another. For if
ye battle be made to slender and thin, the enemies do easelye break
through, and disturb the array by violent invasion, and no help afterward can
be had. But what bands ought to be set in the right wi^g, what in the left,
and what in the midst, it is (...) a custom and manner, either according to
their dignityes and degrees, or else for the order and form of the enemies it
is altered.

Of settinge the horsemen in order Chap. xvi.
AFter y^ the footmen be set in battle raye, the horsemen are set in y^
wings, so yt all they y^ be in complete harness, and such as have lances be
joined to the footeme^. But archers and such as are not well armed, let them
roue abroad, and keep a loufe from those which are better armed, and more
valiant soldiers. For the sides be defended with horsemen, and the wings of
the enemies must be separate, scattered and disturbed by the quick and light
horsemen. The Captain ought to know against what troops of the enemies, or
against what ranckes of his enemies, he must place his troop of horsemen.
For I know not by what hid or secret way, yea rather by some heavenly
means, some do fight against some better then others: and they that had
overcome stronger men, oftentimes are overcome of yt weaker. If so be that the
horsemen be not equal, ye swiftest footmen, after the manner of the old
warriors with light Tergettes, exercised to the same purpose should be joined
with them, whom they did name Expeditos velites: that is to say light and
nimble for skirmishes. Which being done, though there were never so stout
horsemen of the enemies, yet ca^ they not be able to match an army so
mingled and tempered. The old Captains invented this remedy that they used
to exercise certain young men that ran notably, and did always place of
them between every two horsemen a footeman, with light sheldes, swords and
darts.

Of aids or rescues which are placed behind the battle. Chap. xvii.
BUt the best way is and does most avail to the obtaining of the victory,
that the Captain have in a readiness behind the battle, the most pyked and
choice soldiers of the footmen, horsemen, with the deputyes, rulers and
Tribunes attending only to that purpose. Some about the wings, some in the
midst, that if the enemies in any place do violently assault them, and
strive to burste in by force, the may step forth suddenly and fulfill the
places, least the battle raye might be disturbed and broken: and so by showing
their manlines and courage, they might abate ye stoutenes of the enemies. The
Lacedaemonians first inverted this way: whom the men of Carthage have followed:
afterward the Romans in all places have observed the same. There is no
better order or placinge of a battle then this. For the forefronte which is
placed directlye against the enemies, oughtt only to do this, if it be
possible, either to drive back the enemy, or else to discomfite him. If it be
set like a wedge small before and broad behind, or spreading open like a
pair of sheares, you must needs have behind the battle soldiers, more
then ordinarye: of which you would make your battle wedgewyse, or open like
the sheares: if it should be led in and out like a saw, it shall be made
likewise of the superfluous soldiers. For if you begin to put out any
soldier set in array, out of his place, you shall disturb and bring all out
of order. If any troop of the enemies depart from their company, and
begin earnestlye to invade either your winge or any other part, unless you
have soldiers more then ordinarye, whom you may set against those troops:
whether you take horsemen from the battle or else footmen: whiles you wou
would defend one part, you shall endaunger the other by dispoyling of it so.
If you have not a sufficient multitude or plentye enoughe of fightinge men, it
is better to have the battle less pitched, so that you place very many to
serve for aid and succor: for you must have many choice men about the middle
part of the battle, pyked out of the well armed footmen, of which you may
make your battle wedgewyse, and so shortly break into the army of your
enemies. And it is very good to enuirone the wings of your enemies battle
with the horsemen about your wings, appointed and kept for this purpose,
which are furnished with lance and armor, and the light armed footmen.

In which place the first and chief Captain ought to stand, in which the
second, and in which the third, Chap. xviij.
THe Captain which bears the chiefest rule and auctoritye, uses to stand
between the horsemen and footmen on the right side. For this is the place in
which all the battle is ruled, from whence is the streighte and free passage
to the skirmish. And therefore does he stand between both those companies, that
he may both guide with wisdom and counsel, and also exhort with his
auctoritye and estimation, as well the horsemen as footmen to fight. He with
ye horsemen which are above the ordinarye number, and the light footmen
mingled with them, must compass the left winge of the enemies which stands
against the same, and always assault and press on them beehinde their backs.
The second Captain is set in the middle battle of the footmen, which may
stay and strengthen ye same. This Captain must have with him the most valiant
and well armed footmen, of them that be overplus. Of the which either he
himsellfe may make his battle wedgewyse, and burst the forefront of the
enemies: or else if the enemies shall make theirs wedgewyse, he may make his
battle open like the sheares, that he may meet and encounter with the
enemies wedge. In the left side of y^ army ye third Captain ought to be
very valiant in arms, wise and cyrcumspect: because the left side is more in
danger, and as it were stands in the battle maimed and weak. Therefore he
must have about him good horsemen, which are above the ordinary number, and
the most nimble footeme^, by the which he may always enlarge the left winge,
least it should be compassed about of the enemies. But the shoute or cry
(which they do call Barrithum) must not be raised up before that both the
battelles be joined. For it is the point of such as be unskillful, and cowards
to cry aloude a great way of, when as the enemies are made more afraid, if
with the dint of weapons come together the hedious shoute and cry.

But you must always cast and study to set your battle in arraye before
your enemies: because you may at your own will and pleasure do that, which
you think to be fit and profitable unto your self, when no man does let or
withstand: by this means also you shall more encourage and boulde^ your
soldiers, and discourage your enemies.

For they are most courageous, which dare provoke and challenge their
enemies. And the enemies do begin to fear, when they see the battle set
in order and arraye: and this commonly also comes hereof, that you being
now set in order and well prepared, may preuente and assault your enemies,
ordering themselves and tremblinge for fear. For it is one part of the
victory to disturb the enemy before you fight.

With what means the vallantnes and deceytes of the enemies in the battle,
may be withstand and prevented. Chap. xix.
Besides the priuye onsettes and sudden invasions upon occasion, which ye
Captain of an army does never omit: sometime it is good to set upon the
enemies, when they are wearyed with long iourneyes, dispersed through passing
over of ryuers, let with fennes or marisses, trauailinge in the tops of
mountains, scattered in the plain fields, and sleaping quietlye in their
abiding places. For when the enemy is hindered or troubled with other business,
he may be slain before that he can prepare himself. If so be that y^
adversaries be ware and cyrcumspect, and that there is no oportunitye of lying
in wait: then with like choice and advantage, we must fight hand to hand
with our enemies, which know and see all as well as we. For this cause the
skill and knowledge of war does no less help them that be enstructed, in
this open fight, then in the priuye deceiptes and lyinge in wait. But above
all things you must take heed, least upon the left winge (which more
commonly does chance) or else on the right (which happens very seldom)
your soldiers be compassed about of the multitude of the enemies, of
troops of horsemen, rouing abroad whom they call Grumos. Which thing if it
shall chance, one help and remedy is: that you turn your winge (as it were
the insyde outward) and make it round, because that they being turned, may
defend the backs of their fellows. But in that corner where most peril and
danger is, must be placed the most valiance men: for there the greater
violence and brunte is wont to be. Likewise against the array of the enemies
coming wedgewyse, you may resist with certain and ordinarye means. Cuneus,
is called a company of footmen, which joined with the forebattell goes in
like order small before and broad behind, and so does invade and break the
arayes of the adversaries: for so much as y^ darts be cast of a great many
into one place. The which thing the soldiers do name Caput Porcinum, the
swynes head: against the which that order and raye is appointed, which is
called Forfex, opening like a pair of sheares. For this battle is made of well
chosen soldiers, set thick together, in form and likeness of the letter V:
and does receive the wedge or sharp battle of the enemies: and encloseth it
on both sides, which being done, it cannot pearce through the forebattel. Also
Serra, is called a company which being appointed of the stout and valiant
soldiers fights in battle, sometime marchinge forward, sometime
recoylinge as a saw goes when it is drawn, and is placed before the
forefront directly against their enemies, that the forebattell disordered, may
be brought into array again. But Globus is called a company of men of war,
which being separate from their own battle, does invade the enemies with an
uncertain and sudden coming upon them: against the which is sent another
globe or troop of horsemen, of a greater number of people and more valian^e.
You must also mark well that a little before the time, wherein the battle is
joined, in no wise you do alter your rays, or remove any companyes from their
own places unto others. For straight ways does rise discord and confusion of
all things, and the enemy does sooner set upon them being unprepared and
altogether disordered.

How many kinds of ways an open or set battle is joined, and how also that
army which is less in number and strength, may obtain the victory. Chap.
xx.
THere be seven kinds of open fighting, when the banners displayed in defiance
on both parts, do join together in fight. One kind of fight is with a long
forefront, and a four cornered army: as now a days always almost they use
to fight: but this kind of fight, they that be skillful and expert in arms,
do not judge to be best: because that when the battle is stretched forth in
length, an even plain ground is not always in the way nighe hand and
ready, and if sometime there be any emptye or hollow place, or bowing or
crouking in the middle part, in that part oftentimes the foreranke is broken.
Moreover if the enemy do pass you in multitude, he does compass either the
right or the left winge on the sides: in the which there is great danger,
except you have above your ordinarye number, which may stay and put back the
enemy. He only ought to join battle after this sort, which has both mo in
number, and more valiant fighting men: that he may compass his enemy of
both the wings, and enclose him as it were within his own army. The second
kind of fight is common, which is better then any other. In which if you
will appointe a few stout and courageous men in a place conueniente, although
you be troubled with multitude and manhood of your enemies: yet may you
easelye win the victory. The manner of this fight is that when the battelles
set in array do join together, then shall you separate the left winge a good
way of, from the right winge of your aduersarye, that no darts or arrows
may come as far as it.

But you shall join your right wing to his left winge: and there first begin
you the battle: so that you do assault and compass about the left side of
it, to ye which you shall join your self, with the best footmen and most
tried horsemen: and that you may come to the backs of the enemies, by
thrusting them out of place an ouerrunning them. If so be that you once begin
to make your enemies to recoile: and give back from thence: if your own men
do come on wtall, you shall obtain most certain victory: and that part of
your army which you removed from your enemy, shall remain in safety. But in
this kind of fighting the battle is ordered after the similitude of ye letter
A. or else the Carpenters squyre. If so be yt the adversary do the same before
you: you shall gather together unto your left winge, ye extraordinarye
soldiers, as well horsemen as footmen: which before I said must be set
behind the battle: and so shall you withstand your aduersarye with great
force and strength, that you be not driven back with craft and pollicye. The
third kind of fight is like unto the second, but in this point it is the
worser: because you begin with your left winge, to fight with your enemies
right winge. For the invasion is very weak, and they that fight in the left
winge with much difficultye do assault their enemies openly. The which I will
more plainelye declare. If you shall at any time have your left winge a good
deal the stronger, then join together the most valiant horsemen and footmen:
and in ye conflicte bend ye same first to the right winge of the enemies, and
as much as is possible, make have to drive back and compass the right side of
your aduersarye. But separate the other part of your army in which you know
that you have the worst fighting men, a good way of from his left wing, that
it may not be invaded with swords, or that the darts come unto it. In this
kind of fight you must take heed least your cross battle be beaten through
with the wedge or sharp battle of your enemies. But by this way in one case ye
shall fight profitablye, if your adversaries right winge be weaker, and your
left winge a great deal the stronger. The fourth kind of fight is such: when
as you have set your battle in arraye, four or five hundred pases before they
come to the enemy, suddenly when he looks for no such thing, you must
couragiouslye set forward both your wings: that you may on both his wings
put the enemy to flight, and so sooner attain ye victory. But this kind of
fight although it do quickly overcome, if it shall set forth very expert and
valiant soldiers, yet it is full of danger, because he that fights in
such wise is constrained to leave his middle battle naked, and to divide his
army into two parts. And if the enemy be not overcome at the first brunte,
he has afterward occasion, whereby he may both set upon the wings divided,
and the middle battle also left without aid and succor. The fifte kind of
fight is like to the fourth. But it has this one thing more, for because it
does set light armed men and archers before the first battle: that they may
resist the invasion of enemies, and let them for breaking in: for so does he
set upon the left winge of the enemy with his right wing, and with his own
left wing the right wing of the enemy. If so be that he can put the
enemies to flight, he does straight way win the field: if not, the middle
battle is in no ieopardie, because it is defended of the light armed men and
archers. The sixth kind of fight is the best of all, and in a manner like the
second: which they do use that despair or mistrust of the number of their own
soldiers, and also of their manhood. And if they do set them well in array
and good order, although it be with a small number, they do always get the
victory. For when as the battle set in array does approach and come to
thennemyes, join you your right winge unto the left winge of thennemyes, and
with the most tried horsemen and swiftest footmen, there begin to fight. But
remove and take away the other side of the army, a great way from the right
side of your enemy, and stretch it out a length as it were a spitte or a
darte. For if you shall begin to beat the left part of his army, both of
the sides and behind, without doubt you shall put them to flighte. But
thaduersarye cannot succor his y^ be in danger, neither with his right winge,
nor with his middle battle: because your battle is stretched forth and reaches
it self al in length, after the fashion and similitude of the letter.I. and
goes a great way of from the^nemyes: with the which kind many times they bicker
in their vyages. The.7. kind of fight is, which through y^ help and benefit
of the place, does help him y^ does fight. In this kind also you may wtstand
and match with your adversary, both with a small number, and also with less
valiant soldiers, if you have on one side an hill, or ye sea, or a river, or
a lake, or a Cittye, or fennes, or rocks and stiepe down places: by y^ which
the enemies cannot come unto, and set y^ residue of your army in straight
battle raye. But in yt winge which has no defense, you must set al your
horsemen and Gu^ners. Then with more safetye you shall encounter with the enemy,
after your own will and pleasure: because of one part ye nature of the place
does defend you, of y^ other part almost a double strength of horsemen is set.
Notwithstanding this thing ought to be observed, which is most necessary: yt
whether you would fight, you right winge with his left wing, there set the
valiant men: or whether your left with his right wing, there place ye stoutest
men: or whether you would make a wedge or sharp battle in the midst, by the
which you might break ye battle rays of your enemies: in the same wedge you
must ordain and set the most expert and cunning soldiers. For the victory
is wont to be achieved by a few. The matter does altogether rest in this, that
by a wise and discreet Captain, chosen men be set in those places, which by
skill are thought most fit and commmodious.

That a way should be given to the enemies to depart, that they may more
easelye be destroyed in flyinge away. Chap. xxi.
Many men being ignorante of the feats of war, do think they may have a
greater victory if they can compass the adversaries either with straitnes of
places, or with multitude of armed me^: y^ they can find no way to depart or
fly away. But they which are so enclosed be more encouraged and boldned
through desperatio^: and when there is no hope at al, fear does co^straine them
to fight. He does covet willingly to die with company, which knows most
certainly y^ he must needs dye. Therefore is the saying of Scipio commended,
which said, y^ the way whereby the ennemies might fly should not be fortifyed.
For if a passage to depart awaybe once opened, as soon as y^ minds of al do
agree to ru^ne away: they are slain and murdered like beasts, neither is there
any danger to them y^ pursue, when as they y^ be overcome have turned their
weapons into flighte, with the which they might have been defended. After this
sort y^ greater y^ an army is, so much more easy a great number is
overthrown, for there is no number to be required, where the heart of ye
soldiers once sore afraied and discouraged, does not so much covet to shun y^
weapons of the enemies, as their faces. But being enclosed, though few in
number, and weak in power: yet in this same point they be equal to their
enemies, for as much as being in despair, they know that they hopinge for no
escape, must needs fight. For this only hope have they yt be desperate, to
look for no safetye or life at all.

After what manner ye may depart from the enemy, if you do not like of your
purposed battle. Chap. xxii.
AL things being orderlye declared and made plain, which the trade of war
has by experience and knowledge observed: one thing remains to declare,
after what manner we may retire from the ennemies. For they y^ be expert in the
knowledge of war and in examples, do testifye, y^ no where any greater
danger does appear. For he y^ before the ioyninge together does recoyle, does
both take away good hope from his own army, and does encourage and bolden
the enemies. But forasmuch as this thing does of necessity happen oftentimes,
we must declare by what means the same may be done safely. First of all that
your own men do not know that therefore you depart, because you shun to
join battle: but y^ they may be brought in believe that they be called back by
some pollicye, for this intent y^ the ennemies may be allured unto a more
convenient place, y^ may be the more easelye vanquished: or else if the enemies
should pursue after them, priuye waytes might be laid the better. For it must
needs be that they will be ready to fly, which perceive their own Captain to
despair. This also is to be avoided, that the enemies in no wise perceive of
your departure away, and so forthwith run hastelye upon you. Therefore many
have set their horsemen before their footmen: to the end that they running to
and fro, should not suffer the enemies to see when the footmen departed.
Also they withdrewe every rank or batteile particularly, beginning at the
first and called them backewarde. The other remayninge still in their order and
place: which afterward by little and little re^oylinge, they joined unto them
which they had withdrawn. First after the ways were searched, some did retire
with the army by night: to the intent that when the day came, the ennemy^es
could not overtake them that went before. Moreo^er the light harnessed men
were sent before to the hills, by the which the army might sodainlye be
called again without danger: and if the enemies would follow on, they
were discomfited of the light harnessed men, which got the place before them,
with ye horsemen also joined to them. For nothing is thought more dangerous,
then if they which lie in the ambushe should meet them that pursue them,
unadvisedly or before they have prepared themselves. This is the time wherein
ambushmentes or trappes conuenientlye are laid, because there is greater
boldness and less care against them that are in flying. For of necessity, of
greater securitye and less carefulnes ensues greater peril and danger.
Ennemies are wont to come sodainlye upon such as are unprepared, or taking
their meat, wearye in their iourneye, feedinge their horses, and suspectinge
no such thing at all. Which thing both we our selves must avoyde, and in such
manner of occasions we must annoye our enemy. For neither manhood, nor yet
the number of men can help such as be oppressed by such a chance: for as
much as he that in battle is overcome in open fight, although policy and
cunning does there avail very much, yet he may accuse or allege ill fortune
for his defense: but he that has fallen into ye sudden coming on of the
enemies, and their ambushes laid for them: can allege nothing to excuse his
falte: because he might have avoided it, and known before by scoutes and
spies meet for the purpose. Whenever any army or company does retire, this
subtiltye is commonly used. A few horsemen do follow after with a straight
journey: a strong power is secretly sent by other places or ways: as soon as
the horsemen come to the enemies, they try and assay lightly what they can do
and so depart The enemy thinks straight y^ whatsoever lying in wait had
been, that is gone and past, and so waxes careless and negligent^ then that
power which was appointed by a secret way, coming on them suddenly, does
oppress them at unawares. Many when they depart away from the enemy, if
they go through any woods, do prevent and take rocks or straight places:
least their enemies should there lie in wait for them. And again they
stop the way behind them with trees cut down, which they call Compedes,
that is to say fetters or gyues, to the entente they may let their enemies
in pursuing them: and in such ways there is occasion for both the parties, as
well the one as the other to lie in wait. For he that goes before, does leave
ambushmentes as it were behind him in valleys meet for the purpose, or
mountains full of woods, into the which when the enemies shall fall, he
returns quickly and helps his own company. But he that follows by
back ways, does send light harnessed men a good way before: and gettinge
before, does keep his enemy from passing over, to the end that he may
encclose him being deceived both behind and before. And as well he that goes
before may return back, as also he that follows (though it be far of)
may sodainlye come upon them that are a sleep in the night, by some deceipte
or pollicye. In the passinge over of ryuers, he that goes before, does assaye
to oppress that part which is sent before to pass over, whiles the residue
are scattered in the river. But he^ that follows in have, does trouble those
yt could not pass over before.

Of Camelles and men of arms upon barded horses. Chap. xxiii.
SOme Nations have used in times paste, to bring forth Camelles in the
forebattell: as the people called Vrciliani, in Affricke and they that be
called Macetes, at this day do bring forth the same. But this kind of
beasts: being apt for sandye and dry places, and to abide thirst, is reported
to go y^ straight ways without wa^dring, yea though they be troubled with dust
through the wind. But sauinge for the strangeness, if it be put away from
the things that it has been accustomed with, it is of no force in the war.
The barded horsemen for the munitio^ of armor which they bear, are in deed
safe from wounds. But for the hinderance and waightines of armor, it is an
easy thing to take them: and many times they be in danger to gi^^es and
shares: they be better against footmen scattered abroad then against horsemen
in fight: nevertheless being set either before the Legions, or else joined with
the Legionaryes, what time as they join together in fight, that is to say,
hand to hand: oftentimes they break and invade the forebattell of the
enemies.

After what manner we may withstand Chariottes armed with hooks, and also
Elephantes in the battle. Chap. xxiiii.
King Antiochus and king Mithridates, had Chariottes in the war armed with
hooks. Which as at the first brought great fear in the battle, so
afterward they were laughed to scorn: for the armed Chariottes does hardlye
find a plain and even field at all times: and with a small let it is holden
back, and one horse being vexed or wounded, it is disappointed. But these
things have perished and decayed, chiefly through the pollicye of the Romayne
soldiers. After they came to fight, the Romans suddenly through out the
fields did cast caltroppes: on ye which when as ye Chariottes fell in their
running, they were destroyed: this same Tribulus or caltroppe is, an instrument
of defense fastened together with.iiii. iron pin^es: ye which whatsoever way you
will cast it, does stand with three corners or pricks, and with the fourth,
standing up right is very dangerous. The Elephantes by reason of ye greatness
of their bodies, the fearefulnes of their cry or braying, the strangenes of
their form and shape, do trouble both men and horses in the battayles. King
Pyrrhus brought these first against the Romans in Lucania. Afterward
Hanniball in Affricke, king Antiochus in the East part, Iugurtha in Numidia,
had many of them, against the which they invented sondrye kinds of armor and
weapons to withstand them. For a certain Centurion in Lucania, with a sword cut
away from one of them ye hand or long snoute (which they call Promnistide^) and
two barded horses were joined to the Chariottes; upon whom such as were called
Clibanarij sitting, did direct against the Elephantes long spears called
Sarissas, that is to say, the longest poles they could get: for being fenced
with iron armor, neither were they hurt of the Archers (which the beasts did
carrye) and they shunned the violence of the Elephantes through the swiftnes
of the horses. Some other have sent out against the Elephants, soldiers in
complet armor: so that in their arms and helmettes or shoulders, were set
great sharp pricks of iron, least the Elephant with his hand or long
snoute, may lay hold of the man that came to fight against him. Yet the
old men of war chiefelye appointed light harnessed men called Velites
against the Elephantes. Velites, were young men with light armoure, of a
lustye and liuelye body, which shot and cast darts very well on
horseback. These when they ran besides the Elephantes, with broad spears
and greater Darts, then they were wont, killed the beasts: but when hardines
and boldness grew, afterward many soldiers together cast al at once their
darts, that is to say, their shot against the Elephantes and so wounded
them. Yet this also they used to do, y^ slingers with slingstaues and round
stones leuelled out of their slinges, did overthrow, and kill the men of Inde
which ruled the Elephantes with y^ towers also: and there was no safer way to
destroy them invented then this. Moreover the soldiers made room for the
coming of the beasts, where they might break into the battle: which when
as they came so far as the midst of the host, the troops of armed men
compassed them about on every side, and took both the beast and their rulers
not hurt nor wounded. It is very good also to set certain field pieces
behind the forebattel of a greater bigness, then the residue laid upon carts
with two horses or Mules, for such do shoot level their pellets farther and
with greater violence: and when the Elephantes come within y^ reach of the
darte, the beasts are stricken through with the shot of the Gunners.
Notwithstanding the iron is thrust brother and more surely into them, because
in great bodies are made greater wounds. We have rehearsed many examples and
engines against the Elephantes, to the intent that if at any time necessitye
shall require, it may be known what defense may be had against so huge and
terrible beasts.

What ought to be done if either part, or the whole army does fly. Chap. xxv.
VUe must know, if one part of the army has overcome, and another does
fly, we should not yet despair: when as in such an extremity ye constancy of
the Captain may get the whole victory to himself. This thing has happened
in very many wars: and such have been accounted to have the vpperhande, as
have not dispayred.

For in such like case, he is thought to be more valiant, who^ aduersitye does
not discourage. Therefore let him first take the spoils of the enemies
slain, and as they do term it, let him gather the field, let him first
rejoice and triumph with a shoute and the trumpettes. By this boldness and
confidence he shall make the enemies afraid: so shall he increase the courage
of his own men, and go away as though he were a conqueroure. If so be that by
any chance all the army be discomfited in the battle with great loss of
men, yet many have had good luck in recovering and rescuing that which was
lost, and therefore such remedy in the like distress must be sought.
Therefore a wise and cyrcumspect Captain, ought in open or set battle, to
fight so advisedly and warely, that if any thing should happen otherwise then
well, through mutability of wars, and man's frail condition, he might deliver
him and his overcome soldiers without great loss or displeasure. For if
hills be nighe, if any defense be behind their backs: if, although the
other go away, all the most valiant stand stoutely to it, they shall save
themselves and their own company. Oftentimes and army now discomfited, if it
can recover strength again, does slay them y^ pursue, dispersed and scattered
abroad out of order. For they which rejoice and advance themselves, are never
in more danger, then when from sudden fiercenes and boldness they are changed
into sudden fear. But what success soever follow, they must be gathered
together that remain alive, and must be encouraged with meet exhortations,
and cherished and comforted by repayring of their armor. Then must there be
new choice had of fresh soldiers, and new aids must be sought for: and
then a fresh assault and invasion must be made upon the conquerours if
occasion serve, by some priuye lying in wait: for this is very good and
profitable: and so boldness may be recovered again. Neither ca^ opportunity
want at such times: because men's minds are commonly puffed up with pride,
through good luck and prosperous success, and then are less cyrcumspect and
fearful. If any man think this to be ye greatest misfortune yt can be, let
him (...) and remember, that they commonly, which get the victory, have the
worse always in the beginning of the battle.

General rules of wars. Chap. xxvi.
IN all manner of battelles, the state or condition of the settinge forth is
such, that whatsoever is profitable to you, is hurtful unto the aduersarye:
that which does help him, is always hurtful unto you. Therefore we never
ought to do or dissemble any thing after his will and pleasure: but to do
that only which we judge to be profitable unto our selves: for you do against
your self, if you follow y^ which he has done for him self. Again,
whatsoever you have attempted for your self, it will be hurtful to him if he
mind to imitate it. In time of war, he that in posting or conueyinge of his
carriages is dilligent: and takes great pains in exercisinge his soldiers:
shall incur less peril and danger. A soldier must never be brought
forth into the battle, before you try and prove what he can do. It is better
to subdue the enemy through scarcitye and lack of necessary things, by
sudden invasions, by terror and fear, then with open battle: In which
fortune co^monlye bears more swaye, then manhood and prowess.

No cou^selles are better then those, which the (...) knows not before you
accomplish them.

Occasion and oportunitye is commonly more profitable in war, then valiantnes.

It is very good to entice and receive such as fly from their Captains, if
they do it faythfullye and dissemble not: because such as forsake their own
Captains, and go to the contrary parts, do discourage the aduersarye more
then they that be slain.

It is better to keep some in readiness behind y^ forebattelles for succors,
then to have ye soldiers scattered abroad.

He is hardly overcome, which ca^ truly judge of his own power, and also of
his enemies power.

Manhood does more avail then multitude of men.

The opportunitye of place does oftentimes profit more the^ manhood.

Nature brings forth few valiaunte men, but diligence does make many by
good enstruction and discipline.

An army with labor does profit and proceed, with idleness it does decay.

Never bring forth a soldier into the f^elde, except thou perceive that he
hoopeth for the victory.

Sudden things do make enemies afraid, things common and stale are nothing
set by.

He y^ rashlye pursues the enemies when his own men are out of array, will
soon give to the enemy y^ victory which he had gotten.

He that does not prepare grain and other necessaryes, is overcome without any
dent of sword.

He that has more store of me^ and also more valiant, let him fight with the
forefront four square: which is the first way of setting an army in array
before described.

He that thi^keth himself unequally matched with his enemy, let him with his
right winge drive back the left wing of the enemy: which is the second
way.

He that knows himself to have his left winge, the strongest and best
furnished: let him set upon the right winge of the enemy: which is the
third way.

He yt has the most expert and cunning soldiers, must set on both the wings
of his enemies battle together: which is the fourth way.

He that is Captain of the light armed men, let him invade both y^ wings of
the enemy, placing ye light harnessed me^ which are quick and ready, before
the forefront: which is the fifth way.

He that has not sure trust, neither in y^ number of his me^, nor in their
manhood: if he purpose to fight, let him drive back the left wing of the
enemies, with them of his right wing: the residue of his men being stretched
in length after the form of a spit or broche: which is the ^i. way.

He y^ knows himself to have the fewer and weaker men after the seventh
way, ought to have of one side, either a mount, or a Cittye, or the Sea, or a
river, or else some other succor or safegarde.

He y^ has most confidence in his horsemen, let him seek y^ higher places,
and do his chief feats of arms by ye horsemen.

He that has most trust in his foot armies: let him get ye higher places for
the footmen, and accomplish his enterprise chiefelye by them. When a spy of
the enemies does go to and fro in y^ camp very privily, let every man be
comma^ided in the day time to resort to his pauilion, and straight way^ the
spies is apprehended.

When you shall know that your counsel and purpose is bewrayed to the
enemies: then you must change your intent and purpose herein.

That which chiefly ought to be brought to pass, entreat and deliberate with
many: but that which you do intend to do herein, communicate with very few
and those most trustye and faithful, or rather deliberate and consult of them
with your own self and no mo.

Punishment and fear do amend soldiers abiding in one certain place: in a
vyage oriourneye, hope and rewards do make them better.

Good Captains do never fight in open or set battle, but upon good occasion,
or very great necessitye.

It is a good devise rather to oppress the enemy with hunger and famine,
then with the sword.

As touching an army of horsemen, there be many rules and precepts: but
seeing that this part of warrefare has profited and proceeded through use and
exercise, through the kind of armor, and ye worthiness of horses: I suppose
that nothing is to be gathered out of books, when as this present instruction
may be sufficient.

Let not the enemies know after what manner you intend to fight, least they
go about to prevent and withstand ye same by one help or other.

I have orderly declared things, O valiant and mighty Emperor, which being
approved, diverse and sundry times, through faithful and diligent experience,
the most worthy authors have set forth and published: that unto the cunning
of shooting, which in your grace the Persian does praise and maruayle at: unto
the knowledge and comelines of riding of horses, which the people of Hungarre
and Scithia, called Hunni, and Alani, would gladly imitate if they could: and
to the swiftenes of running, wherein the Saracine, and man of Inde, can not
match with you: to the exercising of handling the weapons, and using al kind
of artillery, wherein the captains and masters of the field are glad, that
they knew some good examples to follow: (unto all these things I say) a
rule or trade how to fight in battle, yea, rather policy how to get
the victory, must be annexed: that as much as you can through puissance and
marvelous good orderinge of your common wealth, you may show the office and
perform the duty, both of an Emperor and a soldier.

The fourth book of Flauius Vegetiu^ Renatus of the feats of war.
The Prologue.
BUilding of cities, was the thing that in the beginning did separate and
divide the homelye and rude life of men, from the society and company of
dumme creatures and wild beasts. The which cities upon their common utility
and profit have the name of public weals. Therefore most mighty nations and
princes of famous memory have thought there could be no greater renown, then
either to build new cities or else amplifying those which have been builded
by others, to call them after their own name. Wherein your majesty does
obtain the chiefest praise of al other. For whereas other princes have builded
one city a piece, or few more: Your grace with continual labor has erected
such a number, that they may seem to be builded, not so much by man's hand,
as by the will and working of God. So you excel all other Emperors in
happiness of estate, in temperance, in chastnes of life, in examples to be
followed, and in the great love that you bear toward learning. We see with
o^r eyes the goodness of your government, and also of your good mind. The
which things, both they which have gone before us, did wyshe to enjoy, and
they whicht are yet to come, desire to continue for ever. By reason whereof we
do rejoice that so great a jewel is given to all the world, as either the
mind of man could desire, or the bountiefulnes of God could give. And as for
the building up and repairing of walls how it has gone forewarde, through
the good orders devised by your grace, the city of Rome can show. Which by
defending the tower Capitolium, has saved the citizens lives, that afterward
it might with greater glory obtain the dominion of all the world. Therefore
for the accomplishing of this work, taken in hand at the commaundemen of your
majesty, I will bring into order the devises of sundry writers, by the which
both our own cities may be defended, and the cities of our enemies
overthrown: neither shall it forthinke me of my labor, because these things
in time to come may be profitable to all men.

That cities ought to be fenced either with handvvorke, or nature, or both.
The first Chapter.
CIties and castles are fenced, either by nature, or with hand, or else with
both, which is rekened the stronger. By nature: as with the heighte or
craggines of the place with the sea, with fennes, or with rivers. By hand, as
with ditches and walls. In that benefit and help of nature, the most
safety consists in ye wittines and counsel of the chooser: in the plain
ground, full necessary is the diligent travel of the builder. And we see some
very ancient cities so builded in plain and open fields, that although the
help of situation did fail, yet with cunning and workmanship they were made
invincible.

That wales should ^ot be made straight but with many coignes. Chapter.ij.
MEn in times past drew not y^ circuit of their walls straight lest they
might be apt to receive the strokes of the battering ram. But laying the
foundation they enclosed their cities with many wyndinges and turnings in and
out, and in the very corners did build many towers. For this cause, that if
the enemy would set ladders or other engines unto a wall builded after such
order, he might be beaten down, not only before but also on the sides, and
in a manner behind, as enclosed in a lane or bought.

After what sort earth may be heaped up and joined to a wall, so that it shall
never be beaten down. Cap. iij.
A Wall which can never be thrown down is made after this manner. Make two
walls on the town side of y^ ditche a good way distant a sunder, then cast
between them that earth which you throw out of the ditche, and beat it
down hard with beetels and weig^tie instruments: so that, that which is
first and next to ^he vtmoste stonewall, be somewhat lower then the stonewall
it self, and the second a good deal lower then the first: that from the
city men may go up easily to the battlementes, as in the rising of an hill, or
after the manner of steiars. A wall thus strengthened with earth, can never be
beaten down with any ram, and though the stones should chance to be thrown
down, yet the great heap of earth that is rammed between the walls, does
withstand them, that give thassaulte, as well as any wall.

Of portcluses, and how gates may be safe from burning. Chapter.iiij.
Moreover, we must take heed least the gates be burned with fire, for the
which cause they should be covered with leather and iron. But that is more
profitable which in the old time has been invented, that before the gate
there should be a fortress, in the entering whereof is a perculles, hanging with
rings of Iron and ropes: that if the enemies should enter in, the same being
let down, they might be enclosed and destroyed. And the wall above the gate,
must so be made with holes that we may power down water and quench the fire
underneath.

Of making ditches. Chapter.v.
BUt the ditches before the cities must be made very deep, and very broad:
that they may not easily be made even, and filled of the besiegers. And that
the water running over, may stop the undermining of the ennemie. For two
manner of ways is undermining let, either with the depenes of the ditche,
or ouerflowyng.

How to keep them which stand on the wall harmeles from the arrows of the
enemies. Chapter.vj.
IT is to be feared sometime, least that many archers dryuing the defenders
down, may suddenly take the wall. Therefore it shall be good to have in the
city complette harnis and store of shieldes. Moreover, mantils, clokes, and
heareclothes, may be hanged before them, and so receive the shot of
arrows: for the heads of the arrows cannot easelye pearse through that
which yeldeth and waueth to and fro. There is also a remedy found: to make
hurdles of wood, called Metellae, and to fille them with stones, and to set
them between two battlementes so cunningly, that if the ennemies should clyme
up by ladders and touch any part of them, the stones may turn upon their
heads.

By what means it ought to be forseene that they that are besieged be not
famished. Chapter.vij.
THere be many kinds of defending and assaultinge of cities, which we will
speak of in places convenient. Now we must know that there be two kinds
of besieging. One when the enemy appointing his men in dew places, does with
continual assaults assail the besieged. The other, when as he keeps them
from water, or trusts that they will yield through famishement, having
stopped all victualles from coming to them. For by this devise he him self
being quiet and safe, does weary his enemies. Against which chances, the
towns men upon small suspicion of their enemies, ought most diligently to
place within the walls all kind of food, whereby man may live: to the intent
that they them selves may have abundance, and their enemies through need
compelled to raise their siege. And not only porcke or bakon, but also al
kind of flesh, yt may be preserved close, ought to be laid up, that through
the help of flesh grain may suffice. And pulleyn likewise in a city may be
kept without charge. And for such as be sick very necessary. Especially
foder must be gotten in for horses: and such as can not be brought in must be
burnt. Likewise of wine vinegar and al other kind of grain, or fruit great
store must be laid up, and nothing that may be profitable to the^, ought to be
left for the enemies. Gardens also, both for the profit and pleasure of them,
ought not to be neglected, in the grasseplotes and yardes of houses. But it
does little profit to have gathered much together, except from the beginning,
the delivery or distributio^ be moderated by such convenient overseers, as
have charge thereof with a good and profitable measuring of the same. For they
be never in danger of famine, which used in time of plenty to keep sobriety
and moderation in spending. Also the youth and weome^, which are unfit for
war, many times are thruste forth foor want of vitailes, least scarcity
vppresse the soldiers, by whom the cities often have been defended and kept.

What kind of things must be prepared for the defense of walls. Chapter.viij.
IT is convenient that there be prepared, to set the engines of the enemies or
fire, such things as are apt to burn, rosyn, brymstone, clear pitche
without dregs, oil, called Incendiarium, that is to say, ready to set any
thing on fire. Iron of both tempers to make armor and weapons, and coals
ought to be saved in store houses, wood also for spear staves, and arrows,
must be laid up in store. Round stones out of rivers which for their roundnes
are somewhat heavy, and meet for the casters, must be gathered most
diligently: with the which the walls and towers should be filled. The least
stones of all are to throw with slinges, or slingestaues, or else with the
hand, the greater stones are shot with the gunnes. But the greatest of all,
by reason of their weight and rolling fashion must be laid in fortresses,
that they being thrown down headlong upon a soden, may not only ouerwhelme
ye enemies underneath, but also may break their engines. Also mighty great
wheels must be framed of green wood, or rowlers cut of very strong trees,
which they call Taleae, must be made smoothe, that they may roll, which
sliding down do overthrow the soldiers with the sudden vehemency, and
make the horses sore afraid. There must be also in readiness beams and
trasinges or boordes. And nails and pinnes of iron of diverse quantities. For
such engines of the enemies must be hindered by other like, specially when as
the walls or fortresses upon a soden shall have need to be made higher, least
the moveable towers of the enemies should rise above them and so take the city.

What ought to be done if store of stringes or cords do fail. Chapter.ix.
IT is also expedient to gather very diligently good store of stringes or
sinews, for as much as y^ ordinance which is called Onager and Balista, and
other like, except they be bent and drawn with cords or sinews avail
nothing. Notwithstanding, the big hears of the tails or manes of horses,
are thought good for the lesser artillery. But it is a thing most certain,
and has been tried in the Romans need that weomens hears in such kind of
ordinance are no less profitable. For in the long siege of Capitolium (the
chief castle of the city of Rome) their artillery being marred with the
continual and wearisome fight of the enemies, and cords or stringes failing
them, the matrones of Rome cut their hear from their head and brought it to
their husbands as they were fighting, and so repairing their engines, they
drove back the force of their enemies. For those honest and chaste^weomen,
rather chose with heads for a time disfigured to live at liberty with their
husbands, then with all the^ trimming to be subject to their enemies. It is
also good to get together horns and raw hides, for the covering of complet
armoure, and other engines and munitio^s.

What should be done that the besieged lack not water. Chapter.x.
IT is a great profit and commodity for a city, to have within the walls
wells, and springes, ever continuing, and enduring. If so be that the nature
of the place do not serve, the^ must you dig pittes of what depenes soever
you think good, and draw up the water with ropes. But some time the places
which are fenced with mountains and rocks, are more dry then other. In such
a case you may build a forte at the foot of the hill, and so shall you by
digging find water. And from of the forte defend it with darts, or other
shot appointed for the purpose, that there may be free going and coming,
for the fetching of water. If it be so that the water be without the cast of
the darte, and yet in the side of an hill under the city: it is mete that a
little forte (which they call a blockehouse) be builded between the city and
the spring: and there to be placed ordinance and archers, that the water may
be defended from the enemies. Moreover, in all the public and common
buyldinges of the city, and in many private buildinges there should be
cesternes most diligently ordained, that they may be receites for rain water
which falls from the houses. For thirste does seldom overcome them which in
a siege have used water only for their drink, though it were never so little.

If ^ault should fail in the city, what ought to be done. Chapter.xj.
IF the city stand by the sea, and salt be wantinge, take water out of the
sea, and pour it into broad vessels, and by the heat of the sun it will
turn to salt. If so be that the enemy do stop thee from the water (for
that often times does chance) then take the sand, which the sea casts up,
and wash the same with fresh water, and that water being dried, will turn
likewise into salt.

What should be done when the enemy does first assault the walls.
Chapter.xij.
VUhat time as the assault is given to a Castle or Cittye, great is the
danger on both parts, but greater is the bloudshedde of them that give the
assault. For they that covet to enter the walls, with rerrible preparation
show forth al their army, and with noise of men and trumpettes fray the
town, hoping thereby to make it yield. Then the towns men being astonyed at
the first brunte (for fear dismayeth the unexercised) if they know not the
experience of such dangers quickelye loose their Cittye, if the enemy set
ladders to the wall. If it be so that at the first meeting the enemy be put
back by bold and warreli^e men, straight way the towns men wax boulde, and
then they fight not with fear, but with courage and cunning.

A rehearsal of engines with which the walls are assaulted. Chap. xiij.
THe engines that are set to walls are in latin called Testudines, Arietes,
Falces, Vineae, Plutei, Musculi, Turres. In English, Snayles, Rams, Hooks,
Uines, deskes, Myse, Turrettes. Of which particulerlye after what manner they
may be made, by what manner cunninge also they may fight or be driven back, I
will hereafter declare.

Of the battering Ram, the hook and the snayle Chap. xiiii.
THe engine called Testudo, that is to say, the snaile is joined together of
timber and boards, which to keep away fire is covered wit^ lether or
hear^clothes, or any patched clothe. This engine has within it a beam which
is headed with a crooked iron called Falx, that is to say an hook, to the end
that it may draw stones out of the walls, or else the head of the self same
beam is covered all with iron, and is named Aries, that is a Ram: either
because it has a very hard forehead to cast down the walls, or else because
after ye manner of Rams it goes backewarde, to the intent it may strike
with a more vehemente force. But Testudo, has taken that name of the form and
similitude of the very snayle in deed: because like as the snayle sometimes
pluckes back her head, sometimes puttes it forth: even ^o this engine,
sometime draws the beam back, sometime thrusts it out, that it may
strike with greater power.

Of sheddes, deskes and countermur^. Chap. xv.
THe engine named Vinea, that is a vine, is compacte of light wood and it is
viii. foot high, seven foot^ broad, and xvi. foot long. The coueringe of
it is double with boardes and hurdles. The sides also are hedged with rods,
least they should be pearsed with violence of stoones and darts. The out side
is covered with raw and new hydes, or else with tyltclothes, that it be not set
on fire. A number of these are joined together in a row: under the which the
besiegers being safe, do pearse the foundations of the walls to throw them
down. Plutei are called, which after the similitude of a compassed vaute or
arche, are compacted of rods, and covered above with heareclothes or lether,
and are moved as it were a cart, unto what part soever you will, with three
little wheels, of the which one is set in the midst and two in the head or
forepart. These do the besiegers bring to the walls: and standing under them
with arrows, or slinges, or darts, drive away the defenders from the walls,
that they may better s^ale the walls with ladders. But that that is called
Agger, or countermure, is raised up of earth and wood against the wall, from
the which the darts are thrown.

Of engines called Musculi. Chapter.xvj.
MVsculi be lesser engines, with the which the men of war being covered, if
mire or the ditche of the Cittye do hinder them, do not only fill the same,
but also make it hard with stoones, wood, and earth brought thereunto. To
the end that the moveable towers may be joined to the walls without any let
or hinderaunce. They be called Musculi, of beasts of the Sea like unto myse.
For like as they, although they be lesser, yet the aid and help ye Whales, in
going before them for dashinge against rocks: even so these lesser and shorter
enginnes appointed to serve the great mouable towers with wheels, do prepare
the way for their coming, and fortifye the passage before them.

Of towers mou^ble. Chap. xvij.
TOwers are a kind of engines joined together of beams and boardes, after the
similitude of buildinges. And to keep so great a work from fyringe by the
enemies: it is most dillige^tly fenced on all parts with raw hydes or tylt
clothes: for the heighte of it is proportionable to the breadth, for sometime
they be xxx. foot broad by the square, sometime xl. or l. But the tallenes or
height must be such, that they may pass in height, not only the walls, but
also the towers of stone. These towers must have many wheels cunninglye made,
by the easy rolling of the which so great a frame may be moved. And it is
present danger to the Cittye, if the tower come once to the walls. For it
has with it a number of ladders and diverse ways may set men into the town.
For in the lower part it has the Ram, with the violence of which it beats
down the walls About the middle it has a bridge made of two beams and
hedged with rods which may quicklye be brought forth, and set between the tower
and the wall, and the men of war going by ye same out of the engine pass
over into the Cittye and take the walls In the higher parts of the same
tower, be placed pykemen and Archers, which from an high may overthrow the
defenders of the Cittye, with pykes arrows and stones Which being done, the
Cittye is taken without delay. for what help does remain, when as they which
did trust to the height of their walls, sodainlye behold above them a wall of
their enemies higher then theirs.

How the mouable tower may be set on fire. Chap. xviii.
THis evident and apparent danger many ways may be resisted. First if your
soldiers be strong and bold, a number may issue forth together. And dryuinge
away the enemies, pull of the lether and set fire on the tower. If so be yt
they dare not issue forth, let them dischardge the greater artillerye, and such
as they call Malleoli and Phalaricae, with fire shot, that rentinge the hides
or tyltclothes a sonder the flame may be hid inwardlye. Malleoli be as it
were, arrows which burn all where they light.

But Phalarica after the manner of a Iauelin has a strong head of iron, and
between the hollownes or pype thereof and the staff, it is wrapped round
about with brimstone, rosen, pitche and towe soked in oil apt to burn, the
which being discharged level with the violence of your artillerye, breaks
the coueringe, and s^ickinge in the wood oftentimes burns the whole turret.
Also you may let down men with roopes when your enemies be a s^eape, and
with lanternes privily hid, burn theit engines, and then pull them up
again.

How you may make your walls higher. Chap. xix.
THat part of the wall to ye which the engine comes, may be made higher
either with mortar and stones, or with claye or brick, or with bards and
planckes, and so shall not the defenders ^e oppressed with the heighte of the
turret. And the turret being to low shall serve to no use. But they that
besiege towns, use oftentimes this pollicye. First they build such a tower as
may seem lower then the walls of the City: afterward they make another little
tower within of bourdes and plankes, and when the tower is joined to the walls
sodainlye they put forth that little turret with roopes and pullyes, out of
the which the armed men going forth, because it is higher then the walls
straight way take the Cittye.

By what mean the earth may be dug, that the engine can do no harm. Chap.
xx.
SOmetime they do set long beams headed with iron against the coming of the
engine, and so keep of the same from the wall. But when as the Cittye of
Rhodes was besieged by enemies, and they had made a tower with wheels above
the heighte of all the walls and towers, this remedy was invented by the
wit of a certain crafts man: in the night he undermined the wall, and that
place to the which the day after the tower should be removed, he made hollow
within casting, out the earth, none of the enemies perceiving it: so that when
that great frame was driven and forced forward with the wheels, and came to
the place which underneath was made hollow before, straight way it soncke,
the ground yeldinge to so great a weight, so that it could not come near y^
walls nor be moved any further, and by this mean the Cittye was delivered
and the engine left behind.

Of ladders and the frame of timber with ropes, of the bridge, and of the
sweape. Chap. xxj.
When the tower comes to the wall by all means possible they drive the
enemy from the wall, with stones, darts, arrows, pellettes and such like.
This being done, and ladders set to the wall, they take the Cittye. But they
which do scale the walls with ladders, many times sustain peril and danger
after the example of Capaneus: by whom this manner of assault with ladders is
said to be first invented, who was slain with so great violence by the
Thebanes, that he was thought to be destroyed with thunder. And therefore the
besiegers do enter the walls of the ennemies with these engines called
Sambuca, Exostra and Tolleno, that is to say, a frame of timber and roopes, a
bridge, and a sweape. Sambuca is called after the similitude of an harp: for
like as in a harp there be stringes, so in the beam which is next the
towers, be roopes which do loase and set at lybertye the bridge with pullyes,
from ye upper part, that it may go upon the wall: and straight way the men of
war issue out of the tower, on^ goinge over upon it, do invade the walls of
the Cittye. Exostra is that bridge which we spoke of before, which suddenly is
stretched forth of the tower unto the wall. Tolleno is this, when a beam is
set fast and deep upon the earth, upon the which in the highest top,
another beam is joined ouerthwarte, longer by the one half in measure so
equallye, that when you pull down the one end, the other ryseth up. In the
one end of this with hurdles and boardes, is made room for a few men to stand
in. Then pulling the one end down with roopes, ye lift up the other end,
and so set your men upon the walls.

Of the lesser kind of Ordinance called Balista. Of the greater named Onager,
of that which is called Scorpio, of Crossebowes called Arcubalistae, of
slingstaues and slinges, by the which the wall is defended* Chap. xxij.
AGainst these inco^modityes such kinds of ordinance defend them that be
besieged, Balistae, a lesser kind of ordinance, Onagr^ a greater, also that
which is called Scorpio, Arcubalistae, Crossebowes, Fustibali, slingstaues,
archers and slinges. Balista is a kind of Ordinance bente with roapes or
cords, the which the longer and greater that it is, so much the further it
casts y^ shot, and this kind of ordinance if it be cunninglye framed, and
afterward discharged by skillful men that know the reech and compass of it,
does pearce through whatsoever it stryketh. That which is named Onager,
serves to shoot stoones withal: and because the roopes of it are great,
therefore the stones are mighty that it casts. For the greater and larger
the engine is, so much the greater stones it hurleth in manner of thunder. There
is no kind of ordinance more violent then these two sorts. Scorpiones were
called in the old time such as now we term Manubalistae, so named because
that with small arrows they kill me^. I think it superfluous to declare
Fustibalistas, Arcubalistas and Fundas, which experience at this present
knows well enoughe. The ordinance that I named Onager, if it shoot mighty
stoones, does not only overthrow horsemen and footmen, but also breaks the
engines of the enemies in sonder.

Against the engine named a Ram, be flockebeddes or matresses very good, also
roopes and great pillars. Chapter.xxiij.
AGainst the battring Rams or hooks, there be many helps and remedies, for
some with cords let down their tiltclothes and other patched gear, and
mattresses, and so let them hang in such places as ye ram does beat, that
the violence and force of the engine may be broken with the softnes of these,
and not throw down the wall. Some others with a number of men, do from the
wall catch the Ram with roopes, and drawing it a side overthrow it: Many
use to tie unto roopes a piece of iron much like unto a pair of sheeres full
of teethe, which they call Lupum, and so either they do overthrow the Ram
caughte with the same, or else lift it up, that it has no force to stryke.
Sometime they throw down huge stones of marble, or other of like hardness from
ye walls, and all to break the Rams.

If the force of ye Ram shall be so great, that it shall beat through the
wall and cast it down (as oftentimes it chau^ceth,) then is there none other
help but to pull down your houses, and make another wall within, and so
between two walls to slay your enemies, if they break in.

Of undermining and throwing down walls that way. Chap..xxiiij
There is another kind of assault, that is under y^ earth and priuye, which is
called vndermininge. The manner of it is this, a number of pyoners dig in the
earth as myners do, and making a trench^, by that means seek to destroy the
Cittye. The which by two ways they bring to pass. For either they do enter
the Cittye, and by night when the towns men are not ware of it, do issue out
of their trenche, and vnlockinge the gates let in their own army, and slay
the enemies in their houses at unawares: or else when they come to the
fou^dations of the wall, they dig under a great part of it, and with dry
timber underset it, that for a while it may not fall, afterward they lay
many fagottes and such like dry fuel about it, and having placed their
soldiers in array, they set fire to it, so that the pillars of wood and
boardes being burnte, and the wall there with falling suddenly, they have a way
laid open for them to burst in at.

What the towns men oughe to do, if the enemies brust into the Cittye. Chap.
xxv.
IT is manifest by infinite examples, that they which have entered their
enemies Cittye oftentimes have been so slain, that not one has escaped.
Which thing without doubt does come to pass, if the towns men do keep
their walls and towers, or take first the highest places.

For then such as be of age, both men and women, do ouerwhelme with stones and
other kinds of weapons, such as do break in: the which to avoid, wise
Captains set open the gates of the Cittye: to the intent that having leave to
depart, they may not resist. For desperation in such a case, is a necessary
enforcement to manhood.

The towns men have only this help, whether the enemies enter by day or by
night, to hold and keep their walls and towers, and to clyme up to the
highest places, and so to overthrow their enemies on every side, in all the
streets of the Cittye,

What heed ought to be taken, Jest the enemies priuilye take the wall.
Chap. xxvj.
Many times y^ besiegers do invent some guile or craft, and by a counterfette
desperation depart a good way of. But when as, after fear is past, the
vnheedefull and careless towns men have taken rest, watch of the walls being
given over, the enemies come priuilye with ladders, taking occasion of the
darckenes of the night, and so clyme the walls. For which cause a greater and
more dilligente heed must be had, when as the enemy is gone away: and in
the very walls and towers, ought small cabines to be made, in which the
watch men in winter season may be defended from showers and cold, and in
Summer from the heat of the Sun. This thing also experience has found
that in the towers is good to keep fierce dogs and quick of smellinge,
which can perceive the coming of the enemy by the sent, and give warning
thereof by barkinge.

Also geese by like skill of nature declare by their cryings, the ^odaine
invasions of the enemies by night. For the French men enteringe into the
chief Tower or Palace of Rome (called Capitolium) had for ever blotted out
the name of the Romans, had not Manlius wtstode them being raised up with
the cryinge of geese. And by the means of one goose they were saved, which
afterward subdued the whole world.

How the town^s men may be deceived. Chap. xxvii.
Above all things it is counted the greatest matter, not only in sieges, but
even in all kinds of war, to spy out and know dilligentlye the custom and
use of the enemy. For you cannot conuenientlye by layinge wait for them
deceive them, except you know at what hours they cease from their labor,
and at what time they be less cyrcumspecte, whether at none or toward even
or in the night, or at such times as they eat their meat, when as y^
soldiers of both sides are dispersed to take their rest, and to refreshe
their bodies. Which thing when the besiegers perceive, subtillye they
withdraw themselves from battle, that they may give free liberty to the
enemy to be very negligent. Which negligence what time as it shall be
greatest, for that they fear nothing, then the besiegers shall suddenly
bring their engines and ladders to the walls, and take the Cittye. Therefore
in the walls the towns men ought to have stones and ordinance in a readiness,
to the end that as soon as the deceipte is known, they may resist and have at
hand such things as they may roll, and cast upon the heads of their
enemies.

What the besiegers ought to do that they be not entrapped of the towns men.
Chap. xxviii.
IF the besiegers likewise be negligente, they are as sone caught by deceit as
the other, for whether they be occupied at meat, or sleep, or else scattered a
sonder through idleness or any other necessitye: then the towns men sode^lye
rushe forth, they slay them ere they be aware, set on fire their enginnes,
rams, and the very countermurs, and overthrow all the works that were made
against them. For this cause the besiegers do make a trench, a stones cast of,
and so furnishe the same, not only with a pale and stakes, but also with
turrettes and fortresses, that they may easelye withstand them that issue
forth of the Cittye, which work they call Loriculam, and oftentimes when a
siege is described in any historye, ye shall read that this or that town
was compassed round about with this paleworke called Loricula.

With what kind of ordinance Cittyes may be defended. Chap. xxix.
AL kind of shot, either pellets of lead, or Iauelines, short darts, or
longer darts, the higher that they come down, so much more violentlye they
fall upon those that be under them. Arrows, also shot with bows and stones
thrown with hands, slinges or slingstaues, from how much the higher place they
be cast, so much the deeper do they pearse. But Bal^stae and Onagri, two kinds
of ordinance if they be warelye discharged by such as be skilful and cunning,
they do cut in sonder every thing they meet with, and against this kind of
ordinance can nothing be a sufficient defense* For whatsoever it strikes in
manner of thu^der it undoes it and goes through it.

How ye may know what heyght your ladders and other enginnes ought to be of.
Chap..xxx.
LAdders and other enginnes do very much avail for the taking of town
walls, if they be made of such heighte that they over reach the town.

The heyghte of the town ye may take two manner of ways, for either may you
tie a slender line to the one end of an arrowe, and so shootinge it, when it
shall come to the top of the wall, by the length of the line you may know
the heighte of the wall, or else when the son either setting or rysinge does
cast a shadow from the towers and walls to the earth, then measure the
length of that shadow, thine enemies not knowinge thereof. And afterward
stick up a poole ten foot hye above the ground, and measure likewise the
shadow thereof, the which being done, ye may easelye know the heyghte of the
wall or town, by proportion of the poole, saying that a body of this heighte
casts a shadow of this or that length.

And thus have I set forth for the common commoditye and profitte (as I
suppose) of those things, which ancient writers of chiualrye have left
behind them, and the latter age by experience has necessarilye found out
touching the assault and defendinge of Cittyes. Marye this one thing I cannot
to much warn you of, that you provide dilligentlye that there be neither
scarcitye of meat nor drink in your Cittye besieged, for that cannot by any
means be remedyed. Therefore the longer time that you suppose y^ siege will
endure, so much the more victualles must you lay up in your town.

And thus much the manner of war on land, being declared sufficientlye, with
the means of defendinge and assaulting of Towns: I will consequently treat
of war held on the Sea, and of ships and Gallyes, and first of y^
Liburnian Gallyes.

Precepts to be observed in making war upon the Sea. Chapter. xxxj.
THe manner of making war upon the land, sufficientlye declared at your
maiestyes commandment (most mighty and worthy Emperor) the portion yet
not spoken of, as I trow, is of war upon the Sea. Of the feats and
cunninge whereof the less therefore remains to be spoken, for that the Sea
being quieted now this good while, we keep war with other strange Nations
upon the land. Notwithstanding that the people of Rome for the worship and
commoditye of their great renown: and not for any necessitye growing by
sudden commotion, but least at any time it might suffer danger, always had
an army in readiness. For no man dare give occasion of war, or do, or offer
any wrong to that kingdom or people, whom he knows well provided, and
ready to withstand and to revenge the same. Therefore at Misenu^ and Rauenna
Cittyes of Italye, at each there abode a Legion of Romans with y^ Nauies:
that they should not leave the Cittye undefended: and when as occasion served,
without delay or fetching much compass, they might pass to al parts of the
world. For the Misenates had lyinge hard upon them France, Spain, the
Moors, Affricke, Egipte, Sardine, and Cycil. The Rauennates used to pass with
a streighte course into Epyrus, Macedonia, Achaia, Propontis, Pontis, East
Asia, Creta and Cyprus: and to these with most speed, because in warrelye
affairs speedi^es and swiftnes does more avail then manhood.

The names of the Judges which governed the Nauye. Chap..xxxii.
THe chief Captain of the Nauye of the Misenates, did govern the ships or
Gallyes which lay in Ca^pania, on the weste side of Italye: but the Captain
of the Nauye of the Rauennates, did keep them that rested in the Sea called
lonium on the East side of Italye: under the which there were appointed.10.
Tribunes, in every band one. But every Gallye had such a one as was called
Naua^chus, that is, the master or governor of the ship whom they called
also Nauicularium, a Pilote or co^ducter of ships. Which besides other duties
of Mariners, did carefullye and dilligentlye every day, help the governors
and rowers, and further also with all possible industry, all manner of exercises
of the soldiers.

Why the Lyburnian Gallyes were so called. Chap. xxxiii.
Diverse countries at diverse and sundry times have been able to do much upon
the Sea, and therefore have had diverse and sondrye kinds of ships. But what
time as Augustus fought the battle at Actium, whereas Antonye by the aid of
the people of Liburnia, was chiefly overcome, it appeared by the experiment of
so great a conflicte, that the Liburnian ships were more fit for the wars
then others. And according to the fashion of them, did the Romayne Emperors
afterward build their Nauye, borrowing of them both their name and their
likeness. For Liburnia is a part of the country called Dalmatia, lying nighe
to the Cittye called ^adera: after whose example now the ships of war are
builded, and be named Liburnae.

With what diligence the Gallyes or ships called Liburnae are made. Chap.
xxxiiii.
LIke as in buildinge of houses men seek dilligentlye for good mortar and
stones, eue^ so ought good stuff be sought for the framinge and making of
ships, and so much rather because the danger is greater if a ship be
faltye, then an house. Therefore if you will build a Liburnian vessel, chose
chiefly to make it of Cyprysse and Pyne tree, Larche and Fur, then any other
timber. And for your nails, it is more profitable to have them of brass then
yro^, although the cost be greater. For iron nails will sone be rustye with
water, and so consume: but brazen nails for all the water, do keep their
natural substance still.

What heed must be taken in cuttinge down of Timber. Chap. xxxv.
THe Timber whereof Gallyes must be made, ought to be cut down between the
xv. and the xxiii. day of the Moon. And this must especially be observed.
For none other but only that which is cut in these eyghte days, will be
free from worms and rottinge. That which is upon any other day hewed down,
within a years space, will be worm eaten and turn to dust. And this do all
Carpenters know to be true, by their skill and dailye experience.

In what months Timber should be cut down. Chap. xxxvi.
IT is good cuttinge of Timber in Iulye and August, and so till the first of
Ianuarye, for then be trees most without sap, and therefore the timber both
drier and stronger. But you must beware that straight upon the cutting down
your Timber, you square it not, nor make your ship of it, as soon as you have
squared it. For timber asks a double dryinge time, one before it be sawen,
and another after, and so shall it be thorowlye dry, and fit for your use:
whereas if you put green Timber or boarde into a ship, within a while after
when it waxes dry, it will shrincke and make wide riftes, which is most
perilous for those that are in the ship.

Of the bigness and fashion of Gallyes called Liburnae. Chap. xxxvij.
AS touching the quantity or greatness of the Gallyes named Liburnae, the least
of all have every one, one row or bench of Oars: they that be somewhat greater
have two, they that be of a convenient bigness have three or four, or else
sometime five. Neither let this thing seem strange to any man, saying that
in the battle at Actium, there were much greater Gallyes then I have spoken
of, so that some had six ranckes of Oars and above. But small boats yt serve
for scoutes, and go always with the greater Gallyes, have almost twenty rowers
in each side: the old Brytaines termed these kinds of boats Pictas.

Their use is suddenly to steal upon the enemies ships, and to meet with
their provision by the way, and to spy out their counsel, and to give
warninge of their coming. And if you will not have them discryed by their
whitenes, you may color their sails and tacklinge with a light blewe,
because that is like the Sea color: and with the same likewise stain your
pitche wherewith you dress your ships, and let your soldiers and Mariners
apparel, be likewise colored with the same, that neither in the night nor
day time, they may well be espied in their scouting.

The names and number of the winds. Chap. xxxviij.
VUhosoeuer caryeth an army with his Nauye, ought to foreknow the signs of
storms and whirlewindes. For Gallyes have more often been taken away with
tempests and surges, then with the force of enemies. In the which behalf the
whole cunning and knowledge of natural Philosophye is to be used. By the which
we learn y^ nature of wyndes and tempests, by a certain divine kind or
mean. And in a roughe and raginge sea, even as heed taking does defend and
save them that be ware and cyrcu^specte: so negligence does cast them a way
that lie rechles and careless. Therefore he that will be skillful in saylinge,
ought first to consider the number, and also the names of wyndes. Old
warriors persuaded themselves that according to the situation of the four
coasts of Heaven, that only four principal winds did vsuallye blow from
every part thereof, but a latter time found out twelve winds by experience.
We have set forth the names of the same, to put all manner of doubt clean
away: so that the principal winds being declared, we may show those
also, which are joined to the same, both on the right side and on the left.

Therefore from the place where the son stays in the Spring time, that is
to say, from the chief and middle point of the East, comes the plain
Eastwinde. Unto this is keeps the middle point of the South, unto this is
joined on the right side the South southeast wind: on the left side the South
southwest wind. The plain west wind keeps the middle point of the West.
Unto this on the right side is joined the West Northwest wind, on the left
side y^ West Southwest wind. The plain Northwynd does keep the middle point
of ye North* unto which is joined on the right side the North northeast wind,
and on the left side y^ North-northwest wind. Of these oftentimes blows one
at once, sometime two at once, but in great Tempests, yea three are wont to
blow together. The Seas which of their own nature are still and quiet,
through the vehemencye of these winds, wax roughe with raginge and
troublesome waves. As these winds blow according to the nature of times or
places: so tempests are turned into calm weather, contraryewyse calm weather
into tempests. And ^ luckye wind bringes a nauye to the most desired haven:
the contrary wind compelles a man to lie a loofe, go back again* or else to
sustain peril. And that man therefore dot^ seldom suffer shipwreck, which
has diligently considere^ the nature and reason of the winds.

In what months men may sail more safelye then others. Chap. xxxix.
Now it follows to speak of months and daye^, for neither does the
violence or raginge of the sea suffer men to sail all the year long: but some
months are most convenient to sail in, some be uncertain and doubtful, and
other not to be used at all. During the course of y^ clear and lightsome time
of Summer, that is to say, after the rysinge of the Pleiades, in latin
Vergilie, in english the seven stars: from the xxvii. day of May: unto the
rising of the star called Arcturus, otherwise in Greek Bo^tes: that is to
say, unto the xiiii, day of September saylinge is thought good and safe,
because through ye benefit of Summer, the rage of the wind is assuaged* After
this time unto the vi. day of November, sailing is more uncertain and more
dangerous: because after the xiii. day of September Arcturus does rise, the
most vehemente star of all other. The xxiiii. day of September comes in the
raginge time of the Equinoctial. About the seventh day of October do arise
certain stars called Haed^^pluu^ales, betokening rain. The xi* of October
does rise the star called Taurus. But from the month of November the going
down of the seven stars which is in winter, does trouble the ships with
many tempests. Therefore from the xi day of November unto the x. day of
March, the Seas are shut up. For why the very short days, the long
nights* the thicknes of clouds, the darckenes of the air, the double raginge
of the winds, showers, and snowes: does much trouble and drive away, not
only Nauyes from the Sea, but also goers, by the way, or travelers from a
journey on the land. But after the birth day of sailing (as I may term it) or
first settinge forth of ships to the Sea, which is kept solemn with yearly
games and common shoes, or specta^les of many Nations. The seas are dangerous
to prove unto the xv. day of May, by reason of many stars raygninge, and
also of the time it self: not that the travail of marchantes should cease,
but because there is more heed to be taken, when an army does fail with
Gallyes, then when the foolish and greedy hardines for private merchandise does
make have thereunto.

After what manner the signs and tokens of tempests may be observed. Chap. xl.
Moreover the rising and going down of certain stars does stir up and
cause most vehement tempests: in y^ which although certain days be marked by
y^ testimony of authors, yet for as much as they be sometimes altered by diverse
chau^ces, we must confess and acknowledge that man's nature cannot know
perfectlye the condition or state of heaven. The rising of te^pestes yearly is
of three sorts. For by experience we find y^ ^^pestes do happen either about ^ne
certain day of the year prefixed, or before it, or after, whereupon the
te^pestuous seaso^s that go before y^ day appointed or midst of winter, we
call by y^ name of a Greek word Procheimasin, those y^ rise just at ye
ordinary day we name Epicheimasin: those y^ follow the same we term
Metach^imasin. But to rehearse every thing by name, it seems both unmeet
for this place and to long. Seeing y^ many writers have declared dilligently y^
course and order, not only of months, but also of days in this case. Also
the motions of planettes many times trouble the clerenes of the air, when as
at certain days appointed by God the creator of the world, they draw near or
depart from some of the xii. signs. Likewise the days wherein the Moon
changes are commonly full of tempests and fearful to such as use the sea.

Of s^gnes and tokens whereby to know the clearenes and troublesomenes of the
air. Chap. xlj.
BY many tokens may men foreknow both storms after a calm, and fair weather
after tempests, and this does y^ cyrcle of the moon declare as in a glass. A
ruddie color betokens winds, a bluish or sky color, rain. A color
mixed of both, foretells storms and ragi^g weather. A pleasant and brighte
cyrcle does promise clear weather to ships, especially if the fourth day
after y^ change, her horns be not blunt and read, nor yet darkened with much
moisture. Furthermore in ye Son ye must mark whether at his rising or
setti^g, his beams be chereful and of one color: or by reason of a cloud
over against it, they be of diverse colors, and whether they be bright and
glisteringe, or red like fire, which is a sign of wind yt will shortly
follow: or pale and speckled which betoketh rain sone after. Likewise by the
air and sea, and the greatness and fashion of the clouds, may maryners know
the chau^ges of weather if they give their mind to it And some tokens may they
learn of birds, and some of fishes, as Virgill in his Georgikes does very
wisely declare, and Varro in his books of sailing does dillige^tly set forth
the same. And these things do Pilats and masters of ships profess
themselves to know, so far forth as unlearned experience without any profound
learning has enstructed them.

Of ebbing and flowing of the Sea* Chap. xlii.
THe Element of the Sea is ye third part of the world: which besides the
blowinge of the winds does also move by it self. For at certain hours as
well in the day time as in the night, it runs to and fro by ebbing and
flowing. And sometime like a running brook, flows to y^ landwarde, sometime
back into the deep again. This doublenes of the moving of the Sea, does
help the course of ships if it be with them, and hinder them if it be
contrary. Which thing must be eschewed with great heedefulnes of him that
intends to fight. For the violence of the tide cannot be overcome by any
help of Oars, when as y^ wind it self does give place thereto. And because
that in diverse conntryes through the state of the moon increasing or
diminishing: at certain hours the tides do alter, Therefore he that goes
about to make war on the Sea, ought to know before he join battle, the
usage of the Sea in that place.

Of the knowledge of places, and of the rowers. Chapter.xliij.
THe diligence and cunning of the Mariners and governors, is to know the
places and havens where they sail, that they may esche we shallowe places and
such as be dangerous, by reason of rocks appearinge or hid. For the deeper
that the sea is, so much the more safe and quiet it is. In mariners is
required diligence, in ye Master skilfulnes: in the rowers strength and
manhood. Because that a Sea battle is joined when the water is calm: and
Gallyes when they strike their enemies ships with their stemmes and
forepartes, are driven with Oars and not with wind. And also when they shun
the brunt of others, they use the help of Oars, and not wind thereto
Therefore look what part has strongest rowers and cunningest Captain and
master, that same carries the victory.

Of weapons and ordinance of ships. Chap. xliiii
A Land battle requires many kinds of armor and weapons, but that which is
fought on the Sea, needs many mo kinds, both of armor and weapons, and
also enginnes and ordinance, even as they should ^ight on the walls and
towers of a City. For what is more cruel the^ the fight upon the Sea? whereas
men be killed* not only with water, but with fire. Therefore there must be a
special regard had of harness and other coueringes, that the soldiers he
fe^ced with complete armor, coats of plate, helmets and leg harness. For
no man can complain of the weight or burden of his armor, which fights
standing in the ships: ye may make your shieldes both stronger and larger,
to bear of the strokes of stoones, hooks, and clampers, and other kind of
weapons used in ships. Darts and stones are cast between both parties,
with arrows, pellettes, slinges, slingstaues, leaden plummettes, greater
ordinance, lesser ordinance, iron bows or Crossebowes: and (which is a more
gre^ous thing) they that presume and think themselves sur^ by reason of their
manhood, after their Gallyes be joined (...), do pass over into y^ ships of
their enemies on bridges laid over between.

In the greater gallyes they do make up fortresses and towers, that as upon
a wall, so they may from above more easelye wound and slay their enemies.
Also they use to wrappe arrows in towe, pitche and bri^^stone, and so kindling
them* to shoot and strike them into the sides of their enemies ships, and
so suddenly to set them on fire by reason of the pitche and rosen, wherewith
the sides of the ships are already anointed. One sort are slain with the
^word, and stones or pellettes, another sort are compelled to burn in the
water, and among so many kinds of deaths (which is the must cruel of al)
their bodies vuburyed, must be devoured and confumed of fishes.

How wyles may be wrought on the Sea. Chap. xlv.
AS the use is in a field battle, so likewys^ on (...) water, you may
priuilye steal upon your enemies at unawares, or in ^^eekes and str^ightes
convenient, you may hyde a number of Gallyes ready to come forth when need
shall require, that your enemies being unprovided, may the sooner be overcome
specially if they be wearye with long rowing, or if the wind or tide be
contrary to them* or if they sleep suspecting none ill, or if the rode or
corner which they keep have no way to issue out. If opportunitye to fight do
come as you would wish, then must your men fall to it cherefullye having
these helps, and so join your battle as may be most for your advantage. If
so be that the foresight of the enemy be such, that they will not be
beguiled, but encounter in open fight, then your Gallyes must be placed in
array not straighte as soldiers be in a field battle, but bowinge in, after
the similitude of ye half moon, so that the two ends come out, and the
middle be hollow, that if the enemy shall assaye to burst throug be* he may
be caught and compassed in, by reason of the very order and array. But in the
wings must ye place the chiefest strength both of your Gallyes and of your
soldiers.

What should be done when open battle is joined on the Sea. Chap. xlvj.
Moreover it is profitable that your nauye be always in the deep sea and at
liberty, but your enemies always driven to the shoore. For they do loose all
force and strength in fighting, which are thrust to land. In this sea ^ight,
three sorts of weapons help much, named in latin. As^eres, Falces,
Bipennes. Asser is when a scle^der and a long beam much like the sail yeard,
does hang on the mast, and has both y^ ends headed with iron. This serves
in steed of the battle Ram, and being driu^^ mightily and with great
force, it throws done and kills both Mariners and soldiers, and
oftentimes beats through the ships sides. Falx is a very sharp iron,
crooked like a hook, which being put upon great long pooles, does suddenly
cut the enemies tackeling a sonder, and the roopes that bear up the sail
yard: and so the sail clothes falling down together, does make the ship
more ^lowe and unprofitable. Bipennis is a double edged axe, on both sides
very broad and sharp, with the which the most skillful Mariners when as the
battle is hottest, they go down into a small boat, and priuilye cut a
sonder the roopes wherewith the rudders of the enemies ships are tied Which
thing being done, the ship is straight way taken as unarmed. For what help
is left when the rudder is lost. As touching the ships of pastyme which are
used in the ye river of Danubius, in daily watchinges, I purpose to speak
nothing at all, because that in them by often use, has been found more
cunninge, then our ancestors have left to us in writing, and my purpose was
only to gather such things together, as I find written in Books.

FINIS.
This engine serves for the xiiij. Chapter of the fourth Book. Folio. 55.


This engine surueth for the xv. Chapter of the fourth Book. Folio. 55.


This engine serves for the xvi. Chapter of the fourth Book* Folio. 56.


This serves for the xviij. Chapter of the fourth book. Folio 56.


This engine with the two next following serves for the xxi. Chapter of the
fourth Book. Folio. 57.


For the* xxi. Chapter of the fourth Book.


For the xxi. Chapter of the fourth Book.


A table declaringe what every Book contains in every Chapter.
The first Book.
THat ye Romans through ye only exercise of arms, have overcome all Nations.
Chapter. 1. Out of what cou^tryes a young soldier should be chosen. Chapter.
2. Whether out of the country or out of the Cittye young soldiers may be
taken most conveniently. Chap 3. Of what age the young soldier should be,
which should be thought allowable. Chap. 4. Of what stature young soldiers
should be chosen Chap 5. To know by the countenance and making of the body
which soldiers are like to prove good. Chap. 6. What sciences young
soldiers should be skilful in, which should be either chosen or refused.
Chap. 7. What time young soldiers should be regestred or billed. Chap. 8.
That young soldiers be exercised in marchinge, running and leaping. Chap. 9.
That young soldiers should use to swim Chap. 10 How warriors aforetime
caused their soldiers to use wicker tergets, and cudgels, at a stake or post.
Chap. 11. That soldiers should be taught to foyne and thrust, not to cut,
and strike down right. 12. That young soldiers be taught cunningelye to
handle weapons. Chap. 13. That young soldiers should use to cast darts and
other shot. Chap. 14. That young soldiers should be diligently taught to
shoot Chap. 15. That young soldiers should be used to cast stoones with a
slinge, or with the hand. Chap 16. Of the exercise of leaden plummettes. Chap.
17. That young soldiers should be exercised to vault or mount on horses.
Chapter. 18. That young soldiers should use to carry weight and burdens.
Chap. 19. What kind of armor soldiers of old time were wont to use. Chap.
20. Of fortifying of camps Chap. 21. In what place a camp should be pitched
Cap. 22. In what form the camp should stand Cap. 23. With what things a
camp should be fortifyed Cap. 24. How a camp should be fenced when the
enemy is at hand. 25. How the young soldiers may be trained that in the
battle they keep good order, their array, and space between one and an other.
Chap. 26. How much space y^ soldiers must go and come when they be broughe
forth to march: and how ^ften they must be exercised in a month. chap. 27. Of
the perswation to warrefare, and of the manhood of y^ Romans. chap. 28.
The second Book.
INto how many kinds the Art of war may be divided Chapter. 1. How the
Legionary soldiers, and those that are sent for aid, do differ chap. 2. The
cause why Legions have been wasted and deminished. 3 What number of Legions
the aunciente Romans led with them to the wars. chap. 4. How a legion
should be ordered. chap. 5. How many cohortes or bands should be in one
legion, and how many soldiers should be in one band. chap 6. Names and
degrees of the principal men of the Legion. ca. 7. The names of them which
led y^ ancient orders of soldiers. chap. 8. Of the office of him that is
called Praefectus legionis, the Lieuetenantes deputye. chap. 9. Of the office
of the chief ouerseer of the camp cap. 10. Of the office of the master of
the artificers. cap. 11. Of the office of the chief Tribune or colonel. cap.
12. Of the Centuries or hundredes of the footmen, and of their ensigns,
penoncels or banners. chap. 13. Of the troops of the legionarye horsemen
called Turmae. chap. 14. After what sort the legions should be set in order
chap. 15. After what manner the Triarians and also the Centurions should be
armed chap. 16. How that the battle being joined, the complete harnessed men
stood as a wall. chap 17. The names of soldiers, and other orders and
degrees, should be written in the shieldes. chap 18. Besides the strength of
the body, y^ cunninge or knowledge of ciphers and counting must be regarded in
soldiers chap. 19. How soldiers ought to put aside the half part of any
gift in money, or other thing given them, into the keeping of such as are
standerde bearers. chap. 20. Promotions and dignityes in the legion are so
disposed and ordered, that none is advanced thereto, before he have passed
through the 10. bands or companyes of the legio^ chapter. 21. What difference
is between trumpetters, blowers of horns or shawmes and such like. chap. 22.
Of the exercise of soldiers. chap. 23. Examples of exhortations and the
exercise in warlike affairs, taken out of other arts and sciences chap. 24.
A rehersall of iron tools and other engines of the legion. chap 25.
The thride Book.
VUhat manner, or of what number an army should be of chap. 1. After what manner
the health of an ^rmre should be mayntayned* chap 2. With how great care and
regard, forage and grain ought to be provided for and kept. cap 3. After what
manner we ought to foresee least the soldiers do make any stir or sedition.
chap 4. How many kinds there be of engines of war. Cap. 5. How great
subtiltye ought to be used when an army is removed, the enemies being nighe.
Chap. 6. After what manner great ryuers may be passed over. Cap. 7. After what
manner a Camp should be placed. Chap 8. What manner, and how great things
should be considered, to understand whether we ought to fight with
skirmishinge or with open battle Chap. 9. What must be done if a Captain have
an army out of use of fighting, or an army of young soldiers Chap. 10 What
things should be done the same day that the open or set battle should be
joined Chap. 11. We must diligently search out what mind the soldiers be
of, when they should fight. Chap. 12. How a meet place should be chosen to
fight in. Cap. 13. How an army may be set in order, that in the battle, it may
be invincible, or not easelye overcome. Cap. 14. The manner of measuring by the
foot, how much space in the battle should be between every man in length,
or in breadth, and how much betwixt every rank. Chap. 15. How to set the
horsemen in order. Cap. 16. Of ^ydes or rescues which are placed after the
battle Chap. 17. In which place the first and chief Captain ought to stand,
in which the second, and in which the third. Cap. 18. With what means the
valiantnes and deceytes of the enemies in the battle may be withstand and
prevented. Chap. 19. How many kinds or ways an open or set battle is joined,
and how also that army which is less in number and strength, may obtain the
victory. Chap. 20. That a way should be given to the enemies to depart, that
they may more easelye be destroyed in flyinge away. Chap. 21. After what
manner you may depart from ye enemy if you do not like of your purposed
battle. Chap. 22. Of Camels and men of arms upon barbed horses. Cap 23 After
what manner we may withstand Chariottes arme^ with hooks, and also Elephantes
in the battle. Cap. 24* What ought to be done if either part or the whole
army do fly. Chap. 25. General rules of wars. Chap. 26.
The fourth Book.
THat Cittyes ought to be fenced either with handyworke or nature, or both.
Chap. 1. That walls should not be made streighte, but with many coignes. Chap
2. After what sort earth may be heaped up and joined to a wall, so that it
shall never be beaten down. Cap 3* Of Portcluses, and how gates may be safe
from burninge. Chap. 4. Of making ditches. Cap. 5. How to keep them, which
stand on the wall, harmless from the arrows of the enemies Cap. 6. By what
means it ought to be foreseen, that they that are besieged, be not famished
Chap. 7. What kind of things must be prepared for the defense of walls.
Chap* 8. What ought to be done if store of stringes or cords do fail Chap. 9.
What should be done that the besieged lack not water. Chap. 10. If salt
should fail in the Cittye, what ought to be done. 11. What should be done
when the enemy does first assault the walls Cap. 12. A rehersall of engines
with which the walls are assaulted Chap. 13. Of the battering Ram, the
book, and the snayle. Cap. 14. Of Sheddes deskes or peintesses and
countermure. 15. Of engines called Musculi. Chap. 16. Of towers mouable. Cap.
17. How the mouable tower may be set on fire Cap. 18. How you may make your
walls higher. Cap 19. By what means the earth may be dug that the engine
can do no harm. Cap. 20. Of ladders and the frame of timber with roopes, of the
bridge, and of the sweape. Cap. 21 Of the lesser kind or ordinance called
Balista: of the greater called Onager: of that which is called Scorpio, of
crossebowes called Arcubalistae: of slingstaues and slinges, by the which the
walls are defended. Cap. 22. Against ye engine named a Ram be flockebeddes
or mattresses very good, also ropes and great pillars. Cap. 23. Of undermining
and throwing down walls that way. 24. What the towns men ought to do, if
the enemies brust into the Cittye. Cap. 25. What heed ought to be taken
least the enemies priuilye take the wall. Cap. 26. How the towns men may be
deceived. Cap. 27. What the besiegers o^ght to do, that they be not entrapped
of the towns men Cap. 28. With what kind of ordinance Cittyes may be
defended. Cap. 29. How you may know what height your ladders and other
engines ought to be of Cap. 30. Precepts to be observed in making war upon
y^ sea. 31. The names of the Judges which governed y^ Nauyes ca. 32 Why the
Lyburnian Gallyes were so called. cap. 33. With what diligence the gallyes or
ships called Libu^nae are made. cap. 34. What heed must be taken in cutting
down of timber. ca. 35* In what months timber should be cut down cap. 36.
Of y^ bigness and fashion of Gallyes called Liburnae. cap. 37. The names and
number of the winds chap. 38. In what months me^ may sail safely, more the^
others. 39 After what manner the signs and tokens of tempests may be observed
chap. 40. Of signs and tokens whereby to know y^ clearenes and troublesomenes
of the air chap. 41. Of ebbinge and flowing of the sea chap. 42. Of the
knowledge of places, and of the rowers. chap. 43. Of weapons and ordinance of
ships. chap. 44. How wyles may be wrought on the sea. chap. 45. What should
be done when open battle is joined on y^ sea. chap. 46.
Then end of the contents.
Faults escaped in the printinge, whereof the first number signifies the
leaf, the letter a. the first side, and b. the second side.
In the Epistle dedicatorye, b. for translation thereof, read^ translating
thereof.

Folio 3. a. continuance, read countenance.

Folio. 3. read soldiers for soldier.

Folio. 8. Grecians, read Gratians.

Folio. 9. b. army, read Camp.

Folio. 10. a. standers, read standerds.

Folio. 10. a. especial, read especially.

Folio. 13. a. Legionacij, read Legionari^.

Folio. 13. b. Gaternas, read Cateruas.

Folio. 14. a. possible, read possibly.

Folio. 15 b. harvest, read harnesde.

Folio. 20. a. footement, read footmen.

Folio. 24. readde, say reed.

In y^ third book the Prologue, Men worthy, read O men worthy.

Fol. 34 a. it, read is.

Fol. 40. a. Hasti, read Hastati.

Fol. 41. a. ranks, read orders.

Fol. 48 a. Promuscide, read Promuscide^.

Fol. 53. b. vppresse, read oppress.

Fol. 56. b. bardes, read boardes.

Folio. 63. a. there lacks before the beginning of this leaf, all these
words followinge: joined on the right side, the East Northeast wind: on the
left side, y^ East, Southeast wind. The plain southwinde.

Folio* 64. a. Pilats, rea^e Pilots.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London in Fleete-streete near unto Saint Dunstones Church, by
Thomas Marshe.


