THE BEAM OF BRIGHTNESS.

Or The three fair Sisters of Christendom.

Containing: A Disputation between the three famous Cities in Europe.

Viz. Venice, Paris and London, with their differences.

Composed by William Venner, Gentleman.

AT LONDON Printed for John Wright, and are to be sold at his shop in Newgate
Market, near Christ-church. 1611.

To the right Worshipful Sir John Watts, Knight, one of the prudent
foreseeing Aldermen of this honorable and famous City of London.
IN the time of your honorable government in this City, it was my chance right
worshipful to rhyme before you, and being more worthily esteemed, then my
deserts could merit, I did think it a point of my duty, to dedicate this
worthless work, only to show a kind of thankfulness, assuring my self that
since I received grace for extempore, this poor Invention shall escape free
from disgrace, having so worthy a Patron to defend it, Thus commending a ring
posie rather then an Epistle I end, wishing your Worships endless felicity.

Your worships at all duty William Venner.

To the courteous, not captious Reader, health.
I Make no doubt, but there are many of my countrymen which have seen the
beauty and riches both of Paris and Venice, who may happily blame me for my
brief description. But gentle reader I answer it thus, I could Willingly have
given them a larger praise, had their merit been equal with Londons: And
this moreover I desire those which shall mislike my Labor to mend it, and none
shall be more willing and ready to applaude them then my self. I have begun
the foundation, if any please to build upon it, I shall thank him for
beautyfiing my rough building, But hoping they will judge of me, as I would do
of them in this case, I leave it to their mildest and most favorable censure.

Your friend, VV. V.

The three fair Sisters of Christendom, containing a Disputation of the three
famous Cities in Europe, and their differences: viz. Paris in France, Venice
and London.
Paris to London.
PRoud English Sister fall upon thy knee,
and ask forgiveness of my angry gate:
Thy shining beauty has dishonored me,
thy fained love deserves my mortal hate.
Know I am Paris that does check thee so,
Whose fame and beauty through the world does go.
London to Paris.
Fair famous sister, it is no swelling pride,
that makes me termed the beauty of the earth:
What all men give, thy envy cannot hide,
although thou seek'st for to advance thy birth,
Thus much I Will speak without reproach to thee,
Thou know when thou wast servant unto me.
Venice to London.
Peace prating girl, call her not thy inferior,
she has that in her, thou can not obtain:
Both I and she, will now be thy superior,
to call thee Sister now we both disdain.
I am ingirt with Seas, she with the land,
And what can thou have more at thy command?
London to Venice.
Venetia's virgin mask thy blushing face,
thy walls salt water are, salter's thy sin:
Thy common Curtizans shows thy deep disgrace
though by their lust thou do much profit winn.
Thou harbourest murder, rape, and jealousy,
My maiden-streetes do scorn their company.
Both to London.
Do thou accuse us of so small abuses,
we can condemn thy streets of twenty more:
First thy Stage Players serving for no uses,
but to enrich themselves to make thee poor.
Next cousning wits that on poor guls are whetting
And all thy shops polluted are with cheating.
London to both.
Blush both with shame, for this you have reported,
since I am governed with the sword of right:
True Justice in my maiden Town is seated,
whose honor makes my beauty shine more bright:
My wedded Lord does sit in Justice chair,
For to advance me, thrice honored Lord Mayor.
And for those players that do so offend you,
they can lay open all your secret vices:
And for your virtues they likewise will commend you,
you speak but what foul envy you intises:
Within my maiden walls I scorn to hear them.
Yet all the world for action comes not near them.
But to come to, a near particular,
chant out your worthes wherewith you are endued:
When you have done with terms familiar,
I Will show you what within me may be viewed.
She that her fame with truth does most make glister
Shall be esteemed for the worthiest Sister.
Both to London.
We are content, thy motion's reasonable,
beshrew the heart of them that would deny it:
And let it be recorded in a table,
that all may read our praises that pass by it.
Paris.
Pray sister peace (if I be not mistaken,)
Her pride and state shall by my worth be shaken.
Venice.
Paris begin, and London listen to it,
her fair description will force thee look pale:
If not, then London know, Venice will do it,
yet will we both vouchsafe to hear thy tale.
Chearly sweet London, do not look so thin,
Me think thou faint'st before our tale begin.
London to both.
Stretch out your fame unto the largest bower,
I Will sit and hear your praise with patience:
Know worthy sisters, that it is my order,
to grace a strangers words with audience,
Report the truth, and then my grief is cured,
I Will speak no falsehood, be ye both assured.
Paris description of her self.
My name is Paris, London view my face,
know I am Grandmother to mighty France,
And am well situated in a place,
where gods and goddesses may seem to dance.
In me there flows fair fountains and sweet springs,
I am the seat of the first Christian Kings.
My riches passes all my skill to tell,
yet thus much to report I may be bold:
What other Cities have, I have to sell,
from meanest metal, to the purest gold*
Orrenges, Limmons, White and Clarret wine,
London, thou borrowest from my tree and Vine.
I want for nothing that the earth can yield,
my government is civil, rich, and fair,
I stand on dry ground in a pleasant field,
the heavens breath in me, their wholesome air.
Except sweet Venice, none in Europs horrizon,
Compares with Paris, Paris without comparison.
For my religion, it is the Roman faith,
in me the holy Monks and Friars sing:
The holy Vicar, much good of me says,
whose love I do esteem above my King.
Rich in religion, rich in wealth and all,
Last; whiles the world stands, Paris cannot fall.
Venice to London.
How likes fair London of the French maids words
I am assured I shall not need to speak:
I see thy heart is cut as twere with swords,
and thou for Lady Paris art too weak.
Therefore I count my speeches should be vain,
Unless thy pride should stir me up again.
London to both.
Pardon me both, I was almost a sleep,
to hear the singing of the holy Friars,
Me thought their bells such rattling did keep,
within my ears: yet grant me my desires.
Fair Venice speak your worth, Paris defend it,
And when you both have done, I Will help to mend it.
Venice description of her self to London.
I know that I thy patience shall disturb,
but yet poor London, thou of force must hear me,
Know I am Venice, mistress of the Orb,
no human force on the earth, ther'is can fear me.
My walls are mighty galleis on the maine,
I fear not Room, nor stand in awe of Spain.
No rattling Cart or Wagon runs in me,
but gentle Gundels swimming ore the stream.
I am admired for my courtesy,
great Dukes do quail, if I of anger dream.
I Will beg for no Kings love, deride all hate,
I Am more then Venice, the Venetian state.
In rich attire all my men go clad,
my women masked from the scorching sun,
To trade with me all forreners are glad,
I gain by all, and all by me have won.
Each Curtizan that does in me remain,
Does tribute pay out of the gould they gain.
Thus do I dwell securely in the sea,
what I can wish is brought me by the maine:
And though salt water comes in every where,
yet all my wells sweet water do contain,
Of all the world my state is holden wise,
All call me the fair flower of merchandise.
For my religion Paris, it is like to thine,
I love the Pope and seem not to gainsay him:
But if he once command the least of mine,
I Will smile at his command, and not obey him.
Thus do I live a famous Virgin free,
Commanding all, yet none commands me.
Paris to London.
I wounded thee but this fair Queen has slain thee
her royal praise has struck thee to the heart:
And London know we ever will disdain thee,
if thou from us in this dumb show depart.
Therefore lets here what you can briefly say,
Although you bear your share of shame away.
London to both.
I must confess you are exceeding fair,
and both your largeness far surpasses mine:
Paris is rich, Venice is full of ware,
and both well stored with fruit and choicest wine:
Since this and more my eye in you does see,
give leave, I Will show you what there is in me.
Both to London.
Speak free thy mind for we are both content,
and will acknowledge thou art wondrous kind.
Since that thy Judgment is so friendly spent,
upon our worthes, our favor thou shall find.
We long to hear thy worth what it may be,
If thou can equal ours we will all agree.
Londons Description.
First Lady Paris I adresse to you,
you stand on Champion ground and so do I,
No stately shipping comes unto your view:
thanks be to heaven my dwellings not so dry,
Paris wants seas, Venice wants hills of chalk,
London wants neither water, nor sweet walk.
At both your riches London does not grudge,
if thou desire some of my wealth to see,
Walk but directly over my fair bridge,
to my exchange and then you will honor me,
From thence to Paul's, and more wealth shall be spied,
But wink not with your left eye in Cheapside.
My honorable Lord does govern me,
with his wise brethren and a worthy shrieue:
Where equity and Justice you shall see,
in larger measure then you can believe,
As wide as is the world my fame does ring,
I am a seat for Prince for Queen and King
I am arts Mistress and the tradsmans nurse,
I am the high way to Pernassus mount:
How many strangers come with laden purse,
to buy the water of my Nimphy fount.
For trades I am a plain community,
For art a tenfould University,
Both to London.
Peace speak no more, our anger is abated,
No more we will strive for soueraignity:
Thy worth of us is now beloud, not hated,
give us thy hand we will swear true amity.
Venice is fair, Paris is large and wide,
London is rich it cannot be denied.
London to both.
You interrupt me ere my tale is done,
four Terms are holden in me every year:
My countrymen unto me ride and run,
and do inritch me, yet I am not dear,
Yet this is nothing to that I now shall tell,
By which you both shall say I do excel.
My masters can command their servants so,
they must fulfill it without all reply:
If they command, their men with speed to go,
with willing mind all sloth they do defy.
Yet give me leave I must speak one thing more,
More worth then all, that I have spoke before.
For my Religion it is profound,
in Jesus Christ I build my cheifest hope:
Gods word, the sacred scripture is my ground,
and not the devilish doctrine of the Pope.
You both are blinded with his false illusion,
which not foreseen will work your own confusion.
Both to London.
Sweet sister peace for you have shamed us both,
and pricked our consciences with endless grief:
We must give thee the best, though we are loath,
yet have thou got it and thou must be chief
Think kindly of us, worthiest of the three,
And let our Traffic with thee still be free.
London to both
Think you of me, as I will do of you,
no pride nor envy dwells in my heart:
You gave me that which is mine own by due,
yet still with me you shall have sisters part:
Use me for traffic and transporting still,
My heart is free to think the least of ill.
Now farewell Sisters England calls me hence,
and I must go, good haps betide you both,
Yet thus much understand without offense,
to change my wealth with both I would be loath.
Yet will I yield the best on this condition,
That you cast off your grounded superstition.
Paris to both.
Farewell sweet London thou have conquered me,
I now must take my leave and fly for France:
My study shall be to speak well of thee,
thy words have struck poor Paris in a trance,
Fair sister Venice thrice farewell to thee,
But to brave London I must servant be,
London to Paris.
Nay say not so, no servant you shall be,
Dublin and Edenborough my fair handmaids are,
Fair Hollands Girls their duties show to me,
it is I delivered them from hand of war,
Paris, in love, fair London takes thy hand,
To thee united in a true-loues band.
The Beam of Brightness. Paris adieu.
Much honored Maid, eternized be thy fame,
may Paris live to do thee service still:
Heavens plague on them, that seek to work thy shame,
or have intent to wroke thee any ill.
The wind is Nore, and I will post to France,
Where Londons name, I Paris will advance.
Venice to London.
Paris is gone to France, but wretched I,
will have unto the Adriattick sea:
My streets shall salt tears weep, and nere be dry,
since that I am constrained to obey.
Yet lovely London, this report of me,
I am the second, worthiest next to thee.
London to Venice.
Be sure me Venice, but I will report,
thy fame and credit may coequall mine:
Yet one thing there is wanting in thy Court,
which I contain, that is Gods word divine.
Yet truly Venice, this I Will say to thee,
I love thee, and thou shall have peace with me.
Venice farewell.
More lovely then my love can set thee forth,
more famous far, then fame has skill to call thee:
My might is much, but little to thy worth,
and thus I wish all endless joys befall thee.
London command me, where thou will and when,
God prosper thee, thus Venice says Amen.
Londons Conclusion.
They both are gone, and left me hear alone,
I wish them well, though first they envied me,
I ever shall enjoy my native home.
to let my countrymen my beauty see.
Venice commands the Seas, Paris the land,
London, both sea and land, at her command.
Great God preserve my royal Emperor,
the Queen, the Prince, the Council, and my Lord,
His worthy brethren, and each venturour,
that can for them and me their love afford.
Plant Preachers in me, to beat vices down,
Last with thy hand defend my maiden town.
Amen.
FINIS.

