The Newlanders CVRE.

As Well of those Violent sicknesses which distemper most Minds in these latter
Days: As also by a Cheap and Newfound Diet, to preserve the Body sound and
free from all Diseases, until the last date of Life, through extremity of Age.

Wherein are inserted general and special Remedies against the Scuruy.
Coughes. Feauers. Gout. Collicke. Sea-sicknesses,
And other grievous Infirmities.

Published for the Weal of Great Britain, By Sir William Vaughan, Knight.

Vbi Lux sicca, ibi Intellectus multus.

Imprinted at London by N. O. for F. Constable, and are to be sold at his Shop
in Paul's Church at the sign of the Craine, 1630.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY Loving Brother, JOHN Earl of Carbery, Baron of
Molingar.
SIR: Here you may behold, as in a Looking-glass, many Sickely Faces, not of
Heathen men, but of pretended Christians, with Heathenish Conditions. A Glass
of Steel, far truer then that Mathematical one, whereby some have proiected
to discover with more then Humane Spectacles Another World in the Moon; of
Seas, Lands, and Woods, like Ours, before it was lately dis-robed of this
latter Ornament by the greediness of a few Iron Ma^^ers. Here you may see what
a number of Diseases have taken Root within us. Yea more, then ever were
practiced before Noah's Flood.

The maine Cause of their Destruction proceeded from their Carnal matches, The
Sons of GOD, with the Daughters of Reprobates, where we transgress not only
in that. but in many other ^^a^ contrary to our Christian duties, who have bin
now enlightened for the space of these four score years. Here likewise you may
find preservatives and Cures both to prevent the imminent plagues, (which we
have worthily deserved,) as to heal the most disordred, both Bodily and
Spiritually, (if they be not past Grace;) yea, and to dispossess them of
Devils, without profane Holy Water, or Popish Exorcismes. But before these, as
a Frontispice upon a Gate, I have fixed the four first Verses of purpose, that
once a day at least, you may repeat^ them over. And for the rest, if you read
them once a Week, I doubt not, but you shall receive thereby some spiritual
Comfort among other Helps to Devotion, which are not wanting in your House.
Howsoever, I am assured your Cogitations shall be somewhat rouzed up to look
about you, and to make some doubt, that you have not many years yet vnexpired
of your Pilgrimage here on Earth. For our worst part must rot, before it rise
up to Immortality.

The thought of Death, I confess, is terrible, and has perplexed many,
specially, Great persons, insomuch that Queen Elizabeth of famous Memory,
albeit in all other matters an incomparable religious Princess, and adorned
with masculine Virtues, yet She could not endure to hear of Old Age, nor
Death. For when a Learned Bishop of our acquaintance had in a zealous Sermon
admonished her to think on her last End, by reason of her great Age, which few
Princes had attained unto, and of the Climactericall year of her Life, which
happened at that time, She took it so impatiently that the Bishop for his good
intentions, was not only distasted by her, but put for a time to some trouble.
Yet God, who never forsakes them, that quit themselves like Men in his Service,
did ever sithence, until his Decease power down many Worldly Blessings upon
him, so that I think few Bishops of this Kingdom left behind them to their
Wives and Children such fair Estates, as be left unto his Wife and Children.
The which questionless were conferred upon him, to let the Cowards and
Claw-backes of the times understand, what a sweet smelling Sacrifice in his
sacred Presence is Magnanimity grounded on Faith and piety; as well appears by
those Martyrs in Queen Mary's days, for whose glorious sakes the Eternal
Majesty at the intercession of those Martyrs General, his dearly beloved
Son, did by shortning of those Marian days restore that Reformed Religion to
this Kingdom, which has chased hence those False Prophets, who set to sale
the Bodies and Souls of Men, together with the Rabblement of Idolaters,
Abbey-Lubbers, Fayries, and Hob-Goblins; and doubtless will continue the same
until the Worlds end: Notwithstanding these our Present and last Conflicts
with the Spiritual Dragon, and with those Spirits, which issued out of his
mouth; wherein we have much a do to escape their Ambuscadoes, Quirkes, and
socret Stratagems practiced by our Schoolmen, which are far more dangerous
then their open Violences, being such, as it is Written, Able to deceive the
very Elect, if it were possible. But to return where I have digressed, the
Remembrance of Death will prepare us for the other World What can be b^tter for
us, then to be loosed from the lumpish clog of Flesh and Blood, which must not
inherit Heaven, before it be purified, as the Holiest and best Patriarchs
were, and to live with Christ in perpetual Joys.

Seeing that Death brings with it so great Happiness, I hope you will not be
offended with me, it by Calculating our Ancestors Years, for these three last
D^s^^n^s, I seem to put you in Mind, that you ought not to expect much longer
time, then they enjoyed. Our great Grand father, Hugh Vaughan, Gentleman Usher
to King Henry the 7th who is Famous in our English Chronicles, for the Iustes
in Richmond, before the said King, against Sir James Parker, about our
Ancestors Arms and Scutcheons: Where the said Sir James lost his life, in the
first Encounter. Our said Great Grandfather, dyed before he was fifty years
old. Our Grandfather, who built our House, nay yours by Birth right, (called
The Golden Grove,) dyed about the fiftieth sixth year of his Age. Our Father
likewise about those years, paid Nature her Debt. Why then should we expect
for a greater Lot? We want not above three or four years of theirs. But
suppose we should arrive to seauenty, or eighty, or by the help of this Diet,
which I here discover, to the long Age of the Swethens, it would but augment
our sins and sorrows. Therefore let us live mindful of that, which cannot be
avoided.

For which purpose a Pagan King used every morning to have a Dead man's Skull
brought to remember him, that he was a mortal Creature. So in like manuer we
see in our days many Persons wearing Rings with a Deaths Head engraven in the
seal: Others with a Posie on the inside, including the Remembrance of Death.
Memento mori. But because this Subject breeds sadness, I have added some more
plausible passages to profit the Body, as well as the Mind.

Now having discharged the part of a Brother, in this necessary point, whereto
all Adams Posterity are subject, Sooner or Later: I will now show wherefore I
entitled this Diminutiue rapture, The Newlanders Cure, more for others
satisfaction, who know me not, and yet may by our Free Charter of Election, and
the illumination of Gods working Spirit meet with some passage in this Cure,
to confirm them sure in their Christian Calling, and perhaps move some to
lend their helping hands to the Building up of our New Church, in that remote
Country, then for any desire I have to reiterate a matter of Tauetology, like
the Cuckoes Song, unto you, who from the beginning have bin acquainted with my
Actions in this kind. About thirteen years past, being interessed by Patent
in the South part of New found Land, from our late King of happy memory: I
transported thither certain Colomes of Men and Women at my own Charge: After
which, finding the Burden too heavy for my weak Shoulders, ^ assigned the
Northerly proportion of my Grant, unto the Right Honorable the Lord Vicount
Faulkland, late Deputy of Ireland, a Noble Gentleman, of singular Wisdom,
Virtue, and Experience: And upon your motion to my Lord Baltimore, who to his
immortal praise, has lived there these two last years, with his Lady and
Children.

And for my self, during such time as I rem^y^e in this Kingdom, for the
settling of my private Fortunes, which for ought I see, I must chiefly rely
upon to supply me there, until the Plantation be better strengthened, and
fearing the displeasure of the Almighty, who threatens those, which
causelessely look back at his Plow: I sent forth, (like Noah's Dove) my late
Works, called The Golden Fleece, and my Cambrensium Caroleia, to stir up our
Ilanders Minds to assist and support for a time our Newfound I Will, which
rightly may bestiled Great Britains Sister, or Britanniol, in regard that for
these fourscore years and upwards, She has furnished us with Fish and
Train, which by Exchange return us sundry kinds of Commodities.

In like manner to let the World understand, that my Zeal to Newfound Land is
not frozen. I took her for my Gossipto this Pigmey infant, which now is named
the New-Landers Cure. But why should I among so many thousands of Greater Power
aspire to such an Atlanticke Weight, which is able to crush into the Earth
another Sutton? It is the Lord of Heaven and Earth, whose Powerful Presence
Ouer-lookes all the four Quarters of the Earth, who preferres sometimes the
most simple to His Works of Honor, before the Grand Epicures of the World, As
the Lillies of the Fields, before the Royalties of Saiomon, even our Mighty
GOD, who is so wonderful in all his Deeds, made ch^yse of me for his unworthy
Instrument to do some good in this Heroical Enterprise.

For this cause, and also to edify my Country with those Books, which from
time to time, even from my Youth up I Published, has He bestowed a double
Talent upon me. For these Ends it pleased His Sacred Majesty to reserve my
Service for the Public Good, by preserving my Life most Miraculously above
the ordinary sort of men from Fire and Water, and twice from his Pestilentiall
Arrows.

Upon a Christmas Day 1602. In France at a Passage of two Leagues broad
betwixt Tremblado and Marena falling over board a Ship, in a most terrible
Tempest, I floated amidst the Waves of the raging Sea, being ignorant of
Swimming, about a quarter of an hour: Only with an Oar in my hand, which
casually fell unto me, by what means to this present, I cannot tell. And which
is most strange to Humane sense, the Storm calmed suddenly, during my abode
in this perplexity, until the Bark, from which I fell, found leisure to turn
about, and take me up being ouer-wearied, and at the very point to throw away
the Oar, and perish. As Soon as I was taken up, the Storm began again so
suriously, that the Mast brake within a foot of the But, and with the f^ll had
like to ouer-turne us all.

In January 1608. I was stricken with a sulphurous dampe, my House was battred
about my ears with Lightning and Thunder, the Artilleries of Gods Glory, in
that fearful manner, as your Self beheld the next day, after the ruins of
the Catastrophe, not without great astonishment and admiration, how
miraculously I escaped.

In August 1603. in the hottest time of the Sickness, in my return from
beyond the Seas, I was not afraid to stay a while in London.

And during the last and greatest Pestilence, 1625. I frequented the City from
the beginning, to the latter end, as our famous Countryman Sir Thomas Button,
and our virtuous Cosen his Lady, in whole House I continded the most part of
that Summer can bear me Witness, when you and others of my Friends wondered at
my Boldness. By which Extraordinary deliverances I gather, that his Omnipotent
Majesty has ordained me, as a Fire brand so often taken out of the Flames, for
some glorious service of His, either to do some good unto my Follow Christians
by my Public Writings, or else to advance this hopeful Plantation by my
personal pains and industry. And if I fail in my Presages for this last, I
am fully persuaded, that I shall no tlight upon a worse Fortune then chanced
unto a Gentlewoman of Italy, who having her destiny told her by an Astrologer,
(as that Sex like Eve is ouer-credulous,) that she should be married to a
Prince, she refused many good Matches, in hope of her Princely preferment,
until after many years expectation in vain, fearing, as the Proverb is, To
lead Apesin Hell, she consented at last to marry with the Principal of an
University, who in that place had the Title of Prince. If I miss in my actual
performance for Newfound Land, it lies not in the power of Flesh and Blood, to
take away my Zealous intentions, nor can my Foes (if any such at all have)
deny, but that ^ueaner men then I, have had the Luck to be married to the
Muses: As also the mightiest Lords of the earth have thought themselves graced
to be entertained their Servants and Woers. The truth is, I am addicted both to
the Muses, and Newfound Land. And I could wish, that I had that Command over
some Misers Purses, or of theirs, who may dye without Issue, and leave their
Fortunes to thanklesse Worldlings, for the benefit of Newfound Land, as Mark
Anthony had at Athens. For when the Citizens had cologuingly presented him with
the Image of their Goddess Minerua, because he wanted a Wife: He answered,
that he kindly accepted of their Offer; and therefore he must needs have 1000.
Talents of them, as a Dowry fit for so great a Princess. The charge certainly
is great now at the first, yet if there were but twenty such Persons but of my
poor means and resolution, I would not doubt, but before seven years, our
Newfound Land should not only double those sails of Ships, which Trade
thither at the present, but likewise the yearly Gains, which our Merchants
do reap from that Country, for these many years together, computed to be
above 200000. pounds a year. Indeed there be some Hopes that the London and
Bristow Merchants will now after these late storms settle there some
Iron-workes, Glasse-houses, and for the making of Salt.

And likewise that my Lord of Faulk and, and our Noble Brother in Law, Sir
Henry Salubury Baronet, with some Gentlemen of North Wales, will the next
Spring proceed to do somewhat in that Country, which with open arms awaites
for their coming. And also there be others out of England, to whom I have
freely as I have received, assigned Grants, which have faithfully promised to
Plant in their several Divisions. The which, if they perform, my costly Cares
for Sacrifice would be the less.

But because my Experience teaches me, that we oftne^ meet with backe-sliding
and inconstant men, like Worldly Demas, then with bountiful Conuerts, like
that Terentiam Demea, I cannot build my Foundation on such slippery mould, but
must resolve with my own poor Estate, to continue what I have long since
fruitlessely begun.

After this sort those renowned Monsieurs, De Monts, and Poutrincourt were
deluded above two years, by some Courtiers at Paris, and therefore they
concluded atlast, no more to trust any but themselves, for the Erecting of
their Plantation in Canada, two hundred Leagues beyond our New found Land. Hap
what hap may, I have broake the Ice, I have past the Rubicon.

In the mean time, let me entreat you to conceive charitably of our New-Land
Plantation, which by one hard Winter, among many more tolerable, is like to
suffer; and to regard this Little God-child of hers. And it you, or any other
of our Friends, when wild or i^ regular Passions break out beyond the bounds
of Reason, shall meet with some Le^^tiue, by meditating on the towardly
disposition thereof, as the discased Israelites found ease with beholding the
Brazen Serpent: Do but say, Welfare the New-landers Cure, and that is as much
as I expect for my pains. The Lord enrich you with Heavenly happiness, as he
has bountifully dealt with you in this World. And if hereafter it fortune,
according to Your Hopes, that you shall live in Court, as heretofore you have,
to your singular Praise, and your Friends Comfort, for many yearestogither: Let
not transitory Pomp, nor vain glory, seduce Your Noblest Part to forget the
poor New-Landers Cure; nor Him, whom you are tied in Nature to Respect and
Chee^^s^, who reciprocally shall cuer, during Life, continue in all Christian
Offices

Your Lordships Brother at Command. William Vaughan.

Authoris Praecautio ad Lectorem Morbis Vulgaribus laborantem.
Siquid habent Aloes, vel fellis Opuscula nostra,
Me Medicum vatem Publica Cura sacit.
Depercunt quer^us, silices, et Marmore structa:
Dona sed Ingenu posthuma Fama canet.
Curti^eis rodenda sinam Monumenta laborum?
Musarum s^elus est Dona perire pati.
Non ^ic Romulidum sannas nec curo lituras;
Vos flocci facio, Gens odiosa Deo.
Gorgonicas nec pendo minas, nam munior extra
Aegide squamosa, Numinis intus Open.
Sanum Consilium tantum iaculatur odoris,
Vt Vincat violas, Lilia, Thura, Rosas:
Hoc sine, sunt Arabum catapotia vana, necipsa
Porrigit Aegroto pharmacopola tibi.
Imbibe Cord, Nouae Terrae quod Musa prop^nat,
Corpus erit sanum, Men's quoque, sana, Vale.
THE Newlanders Cure.
The first SECTION.
The Preparatiue of the Bodies Cure showing how the Minds Affections and the
Bodies do follow one another Dispositions.

WHen I had resolved on the Cure of the Minds infirmitus, it seemed unto me
that the same could not be complete, except the Body were also made
harmoniously correspondent to harbor that Heavenly Light with his precious
Gifts, which our Savior promised before his Ascension to send unto us.
Therefore, that both of them, like even yoake-fellowes, might walk safely in
this vale of Misery, I have here inserted a Newfound Cure for the Bodies
health; Ut sit men's sana in corpore sano. But before the discovery of this
divine Medicine, in comparison whereof the Elixir so much commended by our
Paracelsians, is but vanity of Vannies, (for our Physic conduces to the
health of the Mind, as of the Body) I wi^, as a Preparatiue, minister and
show, how the Qualities of the Mind do follow the disposition of the Body.

It is most certain, when the Body is free from supersiuous Excrements, and
noisome Huinours, that then the Functions and Operations of the Mind appear
more lively, fresh, and most capable to receive in Wisdom and Knowledge, which
caused a certain Philosopher to purge himself with Hellebore, before he
adventured to write of deep Mysteries. Even so when the Mind is troubled, the
Face bew^ayes it, although a man would feign conceal it with all his cunning.
Yea, sometimes the very Eyes will manifest the joy that one conceaues in his
heart. Nor is the Mind moved only with those motions and instruments of the
Body, but likewise feels great Alterations by such nourishments and
ing^edients as we take into our Bodies. The which we see verified in our
debauched Gallants, and common Drunkards, who seldom enter into quarrels in
cold blood, but amongst their Pots of Wine and strong liquor, they pass
Polyphemus and all his Cyclops. Others have drunk away sorrow and care. The
like mutation Saffron works, for if a man commonly use it in sance with his
meat, it makes his heart light and iocound. And being taken in Mus^adine, or
some heady wine, it works so violently, that the Taker becomes rauing mad
with excessive Mirth.

The often use of Hares flesh causes men to be f^arefull. As on the other
side, Beef (...) English courageous and vndaun^^^ in perils. And surely, I
believe one of the chiefest causes of the Savages inhumane cruelty proceeds
through their (...) of W^lues and Bcares flesh. In my time I know a^ Oxford a
Poet, who after good (...) of S^^ke would write his best Verses, according to
that old, saying:

When I have drunk sweet Wine,
My Tongue speaks Lat^^e sine.
It is reported, that Thomas Nash a scurrilous Pamph^eter in Q. Elizabeth's
days, used to drink Aqua vitae with Gunpowder to inspire his malicious
spirit with ^ayling matter to shame Doctor Haruey, and other Adversaries of
his: Which infleming Po^ion wrought so eagerly upon his Brame, that he would
often beat himself about the noddle, and scratch the Walls round about him,
until he met with some extrauagant furious Terms, which as he imagined would
blurre and lay sufficient aspersions upon them. The like fiery prouocations the
Turks have accustomed to take, when they went about some desperate service;
whereby they forced a new Bellona out of their mischienous hands.

Other some, like our fighting Cocks, have used Garlike for that bloody
purpose. Thus the Body is oftentimes turned Nolens volens, to serve and obey
the mind, as the Mind likewise to follow the inclination of the Body. For what
other fruit can a Body stuffed with corrupt humors, Choler, and Gall produce,
but beastlike Passions? Whereas on the contrary, the Abstemious and Continent
by their sparing Diet do restrain in time such ouerflowings, and thereby
prepare themselves to be the purer vessels to contain the Water of Life
distilled from the Heavenly Comforter.

Even as a thick Cloud obscures the Sun beams from our sight: So the
vicious qualities of the Body darken the Mind, which is the great Eye or Light
of the Body. And this is the cause, that when the one is grieved the other is
grieved, and when the one is merry, the other is so too. Therefore it is a
thing to be wished, that they were kept both in an equal proportion and
symmetry with convenient nourishments, recreations, exercise, and above all
with spiritual food: Yea and other whiles, if need require, the Mistress must
correct her rebellions Servant, that the Image of our great Creator be not
quite defaced.

But to return to the Subject we have in hand, the Body of Man is the most
temperate of all other mortal Creatures, and therefore it may be rightly
termed the Golden Rule, measure, and square, whereby the Excess of all other
things may be observed, and their different Faculties discerned. And for this
cause in respect of our humane Bodies, the fours Elements are noted to be Hot,
Cold, Moist, and Dry: Here hence we gather, that the Flesh of Foul is hot and
dry, and that the Food of Fish is cold and moist, fit to engender phlegm.
Betwixt these as the Mean, are Earthly Creatures placed, and among these Man's
Body has the pre-eminence, as the best tempered under the Cope of Heaven. The
which also varies according to the Climate.

Sunt Homines alij, variant vt Climata munds. For our Northern Nations are of
a Colder constitution then theirs, that live within the Tropickes, or near
unto them. And therefore the Ancient Philosophers would not allow a temperate
Body but with in a temperate Country. Neither is this temper so constant in our
temperate countries, but the inequaltity of the Soil, and S^ituation,
controules this temper: For we have Spring and Summer weather in places at the
same instant, within a mile or two distant.

As for Example, in Dales and at the foot of Hills we fee^e it warm; whereas
we cannot endure long to stay on the Neighboring Mountains by reason of
Snow, or furious Winds, which likewise other-throw, or hinder the growth of
Plants and Corn six or seven weeks later, then such as we find in the
bottom or lowest descent. The same alteration I have seen in the Alps and
Pyrenae^n Mountains, where I could be hold ripe Grapes and a fourishing
Harvest in the Valleys; and Travailing but a League higher up toward the top
of the Mountains, I might see nothing but horrid Rocks, Hayle, Snow, and
Winds in that impetuous manner, that there a man would take September to be
January. Moreover, this change crosses our Temper i^ respect of Age; for Youth
is more hot and moist then more settled years. And that Diet, which might be
properly accommodated to old men, perhaps would weaken or statue the younger
sort. How then shall we be able to find out this Golden mean and Temper in
man's Body, when we are subject to so many mutations? Do not we perceive the
very Beasts and unreasonable creatures to go beyond us in some of our noblest
Organs? Do they not excel us in the five senses, viz. The Boar in hearing;
the Ounce in seeing; the Ape in tasting; the Vultur in smelling; and the Spider
in touching, as these ancient Verses imply?

Nos Aper auditu, Lynx visu, Simia gustu,
Un tur ^doratu, p^aecellit Aranea tactu.
This cannot be denied in those Creatures; but because I am an ill Huntes-man,
I will continue my conversation with men; amongst which there is much diversity
for their several parts. Here stands a man with a most temperate Brain; there
another with a sound Liver; some are long breathed; some excel in the Temper
of their Hearts; and in many of these we might behold Actions, which tend unto
Unity, as to their Center.

But in general, of late years we degenerate from that, which by our
Baptism we vowed to be; as in like manner we have cracked our Brains,
shortened our breathing faculties, corrupted our Liver, inframed our Blood, and
all with excess of varieties of meats and drinks. We p^ate of the Holy
Ghost, of the Temple of God; but let every man examine his own conscience,
whether it be possible that such a sanctified Guest could remain in such an
impure Body, which has received into it so great store of Victuals, and the
choysest, which the Air, Earth, and Sea could yield, and of the strongest
Wines even unto vomiting.

If after this inquisition we find that the Spirit of God requires an
undefiled and purer seat to lodge in, then let us sweep clean, and do our
best to purify and prepare our Bodies to be tolerably meet to entertayne this
sacred Messenger; for if he knockes at the door of our hearts, and we slight
his Call, it is to be feared he will return no more to such a nasty Room,
where the Master of the house neglects his dearest Landlord. To reduce the
World unto a better Temper, the Body as well as the Mind, I had recourse to
many Cures. I read Marsilius Ficinus his Work concerning a Heavenly Body here
on Earth, but there meeting with nothing but distractions, at the last I
lighted on two Treatises, the one Published by Lodouico Cornario an Italian;
and the other by Lessius of Bruxels a learned Jesuit, out of whose Precepts I
collected this admirable Diet, which whosoever has the power to practice, he
shall quickly apprehend the difference betwixt a Table furnished with variety
of meats, whose nature in digestion are contrary the one to the other, and
betwixt that simple Cheer, which conrented our Savior here on Earth with his
Disciples. By the former spring all our sicknesses. By this latter of Sobriety
we stint Concupiscence and after one quarter of a year our Bodies being
accustomed to a set measure of meat and drink, we shall confess, that saying
of the Heathenish Philosopher, to iumpe aright with a reformed Christian: Turpe
est homini non nosse mensuram ventres sui. It is a shameful thing for an
understanding man not to know the measure of his own Belly.

To wind up this my Preparatiue in a word, when I had compared Lessius his
observations with Daniels and his three Companions Diet, and how by reason of
their slender fare being but Pulse, they were in better state then those that
fed on dainties, I concluded this new found diet to be acceptable to Gods
spirit, and if it awaites on Faith, it will serve for a Christians Purification
before Glorification.

The second SECTION.
The Description of a New found and cheap Diet, to preserve the Body and Mind
from all s^cknesses and Passions, and how a man shall find out the true
Proportion what will content a reasonable Creature.

BY the former Discourse it is apparent, that the Well-being and Health of Man's
Body consists in observing the Golden Mean, which is Temperance in our Diet,
that is, cating and drinking no more, then the Stomach can well digest, and
that thereby the functions of the Mind be not hindered nor made obscure by
the excessive Quantity. For this reason, and because Study and Contemp^ation
do mightily hinder Concoction, they that are this way busied, must eat and
drinkelesse, then those that be idle, or do trauailc abroad.

But now to find out this Measure, I confess it a great difficulty by reason
of the dinersities of men's Constitutions, Years, and Strength: For that
Measure, which agrees with an o'de man, cannot square well with a young man,
nor that of the strong man with the weak.

The Chollericke must have his proportion differing from the Flegmaticke. These
have every one a stomach repugnant to one another nature: How then shall we
compose an exact Measure to reconcile these repugnances? Necessity requires us
to lookeafter this Sovereign good, for the health of the Body and Soul; but
Concupiscence and our longing wills can hardly consent to be limited. Yet
notwithstanding, natural reason bids us to proserue Nature, although we smart
a little to enjoy the more content.

Let us then search out what proportion of meat and drink will serve a
reasonable Creature; the which the easier to find, we must observe these Rules.
First, if one takes into his body ordinarily so much meat and drink, that
after the meal he feels himself more heavy, sleepy, and less capable to
conceive matters of Divine knowledge, Sermons, or any kind of Study, then he
was before his meal, let him rest assuredly, that he has exceeded the
Measure we look for. For it is not fit to feed and please the vegetative and
sensual part so much, that thereby the noblest part be offended, which is the
Animal and reasonable Faculty.

We must consider, that out of the abundance of meats, which we receive
into our Bodies, there will arise Vapouis from the Stomach up to the Head,
which will darken the Understanding; and also store of Humors and Blood
engendered in the Liver, M^lt, and Veins, which will inflame upwards, and help
with the former Vapors to ouercloud the clear Rays of Reason and Wisdom,
which they would never do, if a man had not exceeded the lawful measure. O how
much are they deceived, who feeling themselves feeble in the morning, run
speedily to Breake-fast, as though Nature languished for want of meat, when as
in very deed their weakness proceeds from the abundance of Humors
congested and gathered together, which by their overmuch moisture have stuffed
the Musckles and the sinews, and stopped the passages of the spirits, so that
the Scuruy and other Diseases creep in by reason of those Obstructions and
Oppilations. The like abuse some commit in their mornings draughts, which
indeed is the chief cause of the Dropsies, Gouts, Coughes, and other moist
sicknesses.

Secondly, a man must not suddenly think to meet with this Measure, but by
little and little by degrees he must leave of his former course of Diet, and
all by leisure proceed by diminishing his wounted fare, until he arriues to
that Quantity, that after his meal he feels none of the above named
impediments to grieve his Head, or to hinder the Functions of his Mind.

Thirdly, although a certain set quantity cannot rightly be prescribed by
reason of the different natures of meats, and of the ages of men, yet
notwithstanding it is lately tried by experience, that for old Persons, or for
such as approach near unto it, or for some that fear some incurable
sickness, twelve, thirteen, or fourteen Ounces of meat will serve a man
for a day, accounting Bread, Flesh, Eggs, or any such solid meat, and so many
Ounces or somewhat more of drink. This measure I prescribe only to aged
persons, the sickely, to Clergy men, to Judges, Scholars, or to such as are
wholly addicted to their Books, to Maids, and such sedentary or idle people,
who use not bodily exercise. Loao^i ^ Cornarie, Father Lessius and many others
by late experience found this quantity to be sufficient.

Fourthly, as for the Quality of the meats, there is no great heed to be taken
so that they exceed not in the quantity, if the meat distaste not the
Appetite, and that the due measure be observed. Among all the sorts of meats
which we eat, those are commended, which are of least putrefaction. For we
see, that Fish and Flesh will taint sooner then Pulse or Corn. And therefore
Rice, Bread, or such as are made of them will agree best with Nature, for by
experience it is sound, that the chief cause of the small Pockes, etc. comes
of the eating of flesh too soon.

They which have practiced this Diet, do highly commend Panades, or Gruell,
which the Italians call Panat^llam, or Pulticulam, which is compounded of Bread
and Water, or Brewis, or the like diuersified with Butter, Oil, Eggs, Wine,
Currents, Cynamon, Sugar, Honey, Pepper, Saffron, Cinger, etc. because this
kind of meat is most easily to be concocted, being ready to breed good blood,
and very like to the Chyle, or that substantial myce, which the Stomach
works out of the Conco^tion of our meat.

The fifth Rule, for as much as all the difficulty for the observing of this
measure proceeds of sensual appetite, and that this sensual appetite springs
of the apprehension of Imagination, whereby varieties of meats are conceived
to be very pleasing to the senses, we must do our endeavor to correct this
depraved Imagination. For the correcting whereof, two things among others are
chiefly to be regarded First, that we withdraw our selves from the sight of
such prouoaking and enticing dainties, as we read Epaminonda that valiant
Theban did, who being invited to a friends house, and seeing the Table too
fully replenished with delicacies, departed suddenly away. And afterward
being demanded wherefore he went so rudely and hastily from thence; answered,
because he thought his friend had prepared all that abundant cheer, as a
Sacrifice for the Gods; and not for necessary food to mortal Men. Secondly,
when we are forced for manners sake to stay and behold such vain Varieties,
that we imagine them not to be in very deed so delightful, fair, and
wholesome, as in outward show they seem to be, but that they are deceitful
baits to catch and e^snare his fantasy to feed on them for his destruction;
and that when they pass through the Body, they are most loathsome Excrements,
leaving poisoned relickes behind them to be converted into hurtful humors.
Every thing when it is resolved into the first Principles and Elements will
appear in the true shape, which is no other but Corruption. And the more
sweet it is, when it so resolved, it becomes the more sordide and st^nking, as
may be noted by Suckets and such sugared Condited ware, whereas the Dung of
Laborers is nothing so displeasing, for that they feed on simple food, which
Nature best approoues. To verify this, let us enquire whose Dung is most
stinking, the Dogs or the De^^es.

This Diet composed of Bread is pure, simple, not subject to Corruption, as
other nourishments be. And therefore I may well auerre, that it resembles that
choice food of Manna, which God bestowed on the Israelites in the Wilderness;
the which as the Spanish Author in his Trial of Wits was of opinion, that for
many Generations after it did reduce their Bodies to a more Temperate
Constitution then my other Nations, in so much that their Seed did multiply,
and their Minds were more purified, and prepared capable of Gods miraculous
blessings, to inherit the land of Canaan, which their Fathers, whose longing
thoughts were altogether set on the Onions, Garlike, and fleshpots of Egypt.
wherewith from their Infancy they had accustomed to feed on, were debarred off
for their hardened hearts.

I prescribe not this Diet, though solid and substantial, to Laborers and
Hindes, for their stomachs are like Ostridges, which can digest Iron, and by
their Violent motion can better away with Bull-Beefe, Ram Mutton, Beans and
Bacon, then with the daintiest meat in the World: As I hard that a Clownish
Boore told my Uncle Sir John Perrot, who on a time coming to visit him being
his Tenant and sick, advised him to eat some der meat, as Chicken or sucking
Rabbet; he answered him: Alas Master, what shall I do with such kind of
Meat, when I cannot eat the Bacon, which is as yellow as the Golden Noble? I
limit no such persons, no more then Galen did, when he Dedicated his Work for
the preservation of Health De sanitate tuenda, not unto the strong Complexioned
and the Barbarous, as the Germans, who were so accounted in those days; but
unto the civil and nice-b^ed Italians.

I present the discovery of this Secret, and the Practice of it, to them, that
make a conscience of their Calling, not to wallow like swinish Epicures in
sensual beastly pleasures, but as men resolved to live soberly, like
Christians, who must acknowledge, that the Holy Ghost cannot long reside in fat
foggy Bodies, that make a God of their Bellies, and who for that cause do
still pamper themselves with delicacies, and continue more hours at their
gluttonous meals, swilling of sugared Sack, and many cups of strong drink,
then they do at their Prayers, or in the service of God.

St. Paul, as likewise the first Christians, did often use to mortify their
Bodies for fear of Temptations: I tame my Body (says he) to bring it into
subjection, least while I Preach to others, my self become a Cast ^way.

But we are so fa^ie from such mortifications, that we cannot spare one mea^e
in the Week, though it were to fa^^^ a Neighbors life, or to convert the
expense of that mea^e to defend the Publ^cke State from ruin, or from
Antichristian Tyra^^y. And yet we must pass for reformed Christians. None must
say, Black is our Eye, or that we have the least skarre abo^t us. O that men
would look within them; and see whether that place be fit to receive the holy
Comforter. If then they find that my words be true, and that their Gurmandize
and Intempetance ^a^e obscured their Judgments, whereby they were not able by
reason of stupidity and dullness to fall to the Practice of a Sober Living, let
them out of hand begin to make some experience of this Diet, if not
continually, yet on those Fasting days, which our Church has ordained of
Christian Policy, to purify a loathsome Carkases, and not as meritorious for
satisfaction of Gods Justice.

Thus the Israelites of old time were advised to fast, and commanded to
Purify their Bodies in another manner. The which the very Turks and Jews do
put in Practice at this day. And wherefore stands this Purification? but to
prepare ^oome for the spiritual Bridegroom? yea, and perhaps, this Abst^^ence
may ser^e for some qualification of his Justice, although not for any
satisfaction, Yet help to cover a Mult^^ude of sins: As Saint Peter and
Saint James wrote, specia^ly, if the estimate of what is spared, be conferred on
pious uses.

The third SECTION.
The Commod^^ies, which this Newfound Diet brings to the Body.

IT remains now, that I propose, what Commodities this set Diet produces:
First, it preserues a man free from all sicknesses, for it keeps back all the
Humors and watrish spirits, which arise from the Stomach to the Head. It
cures the Go^t, the Dropsy, the Astmaticke Passions, the Cough, and Catarrhes,
it hinders Crudities and raw f^^gmaticke humors, which indeed are the
ingendring causes of all diseases. It bridles and keeps all the Humors in such
an equal temper, that none shall offend either in Quantity, or in Quality: for
indeed all our sicknesses proceed from Repletion, saving some few which
proceed of Famine, in taking more sustenance then Nature requires, or the
Stomach can well digest. For manifestation whereof, we see, that all Diseases
are cured by Euacuations. Blood letting is used to ^ase Nature. And so are
Purgatious taken to free the Body of that insupportable load of filthy matter,
which by Gluttony was engendered. Nor will one Purge sustice. But before an
ordinary sickness be removed, the Apothecary must minister many Nauseatiue
and bitter Potions able to weary the strongest Nature. For at the first, the
first Region, as Physicians call it, must be purged; that is, the Guts and
entrails. Secondly, the Liver. And lastly, the Veins must be emptied of
their watrish Humors and excrements.

And it is holden for certain, that in every two years there is such store of
ill humors and excrements engendered in the Body, that a Vessel of one hundred
Ounces will scarce contain them.

These humors being let alone, will corrupt in process of time, and will cause
a man to fall into some deadly sickness. And commonly, most people, which dye
in their Beds, before they arrive to extremity of old age, do perish by these
ouer-abounding Humors, which they heaped within them through their excessive
Feasts and Belly-cheere.

The second Commodity, that comes by this orderly Diet is, that it does not
only defend a man from those superfluous Humors within the Body, but likewise
it fortifieth him against outward Causes; for he which has his Body pure with
temperate humors, shall easier endure the ini^ries and discommodities of cold
or hot weather and of ^oylesome labor, then he that lives licentiously. Yea,
and if he be wounded in his body, he will speedily recover.

The reason is, because very little flux of any offending humor can fall into
the wounded part, which in other bodies is wont to inflame; yea, and sometime
it will cause a griping Convulsion, or a violent Fea^er. An which our temperate
habit of bodily Mould shall never once be affected with; for there is as much
difference betwixt them, as the^e is betwixt a perfe^t Ch^^ensian Procellane,
and our roughest earthen Vessels.

Lastly, it preserues a man from the Plogue, for there is nothing here to
spa^^, no matter to work upon, which was verified insober Socrates, who
notwithstanding that the Plag^e had oftentimes wasted Athens, yet he was never
sick either of that, or any other disease.

The third Commodity is, that it causes not only Health, dut also Long Life,
in so much that when he dies, he feels no such pangs and torments, as other
men use to have, for he falls, like an Apple fully ripe, even by mere
resolution, mildly, and gently away. The bond of a Temperate man's Body and
Soul is dissolved only, when the Radical moisture is spent; like unto a
Lamp, which is extinguished when the Oy^e is quite consumed. For even as a
Lamp may be put out three manner of ways:

First, by outward violence, as by v^hement wind.

Secondly, by pouring too much water upon it, wherewith the pure Liquor of the
Oil is oppressed.

Thirdly, by the vt^er consumption of the Oil: So Man's Life, which is compared
to a burning Lamp, may be extinguished three ways.

First, by the Sword, Drowning, or such like violent death.

Secondly, by the superfluity or depraved quality of the Humors, wherewith the
natural moisture is corrupted. Thirdly, when this moisture is spent by the
length of time. If a man dies by reason of either of the two former ways,
there must ensue a great commotion in Nature, and therefore he feels
extraordinary grie^ances, when the bond of Nature is thus ^^o^ently before the
day and ripe time compelled to be dissolved. But by the third manner of
dissolution a man feels no pain at all, because the Temperature is all by
leisure dissolved from within him, and because the gentle moisture, which
feeds the Body, becomes wasted together with the natural heat at the same
instant, when the Soul departes. And thus shall our Dyeted persons dye, except
they bee^ forced by some outward Accident.

The fourth Commodity is, that it makes the Body Active, Light, Lively, and
ready to all motions and exercise: For heaviness, laziness, and the
oppression of Nature proceed from the abundance of Humors which destroy the
passages of the Spirits, and besiedging the ^ovnts, they over moisture them at
last. Therefore when this abundance of Humors is diminished or taken away by a
Regular Diet, the very cause of dullness and heaviness is also taken away, and
then the pores and passages of the Spirits are made broad and more open.

The fourth SECTION.
The Commodities which our Diet brings to to the senses and Mind, and how it
may help to build there a more convenient Temple for the Holy Ghost.

AS the Body feels several benefits by this admirable Diet, so the Mind
partakes of no less commodities: First, it brings Health and Vigor to the
outward senses, for the sense of Seeing becomes darkened in aged Persons, by
reason that the Optic nerves are ouer-charged with superfiuous humors or
vapors, whereby the animal spirit, which serves for the use of the Sight,
either is obseured, or else is not able to minister as much matter, as is
sufficient to make the Sight perfect.

This impediment is removed, or at least much diminished by Sobriety, and
Abstinence from those things which fill the Head with fumes, of which kind are
all fat things, and Bu^ter excessiuely taken, raw Onions, Garlike, strong Wine,
omuddy Beer or A^e. Or if at the worst their sights be somewhat dim or
reddish, the Oyn^ment of Tu^^^ with a i. t. e. Aloes wi^^auayle them. Or if the
fear a greater grief, the Juice of Stonecrop will (...) the pin and the Web.

The sense of Hearing is hindered by the defluxion of raw Humors from the
B^aine, into the Organ of Hearing, or into the sinews which serves it. By
which means a man becomes thick of Hearing, or deaf on that side where the
Defluxion happens. A temperate Diet will prevent this Defluxion, and with a few
local medicines, unless the deafness be inueterate, it will quite expel it.

As for the Sense of Tasting, it is certain, that the Taste of a Temperate man
is far more quick, sharp, and pleasing, then it is in the Glutton, and
Drunkard, who by reason of Chollericke or brackish Humors, whether they be
ingend^ed in the Head, or in the stomach, takes all Meats otherwise then they
are in deed.

Another Commodity, which a Temperate Diet brings to the Soul, is that it
m^tigateth Affectors or P^ssions, chu^fl^ melancholy and Anger. We see by
experience, that they in whom Cho^^r and Melanchoily bea^e Dominion, if they
be not in convenient time p^^ged of those Humors, they fall into strange and
violent sicknesses, as Lunacy and Fre^zy, especially if they be suffered to
get footing in the Brain and there to ens^ame. If it be sharp, and falls
into the tunicles of the Stomach, it causes a man to become very Ra^enous: If
there be abundance of blood, it makes a man Leacherous, chiefy, if there be
some windy matter crept into it.

The Reason is, because the Affections of the Mind do follow the apprehension
of the Fantasy; and the apprehension of the Fantasy is conformable to the
disposition of the Body, and to the Humors which bea^e rule in the Body. Hence
it is, that the Chollericke do dream of Fires, Flames, Wars, and
Slaughters. The Melancholic dream of Darkness, burialls, Sepulchers, Sprights,
of deep pits, fearful flights, and of the like troublesome things. The
Flegmatick^ dream of Rame, Ri^ers, Lakes, Shipwreck, drowning, etc The
Sa^guine dream of Banquets, Love, Joys, etc. All these with their Causes are
avoided by a sober Diet; for instead of bad there are engendered nothing but
true and good Blood, Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy, so that their inward
conditions are well composed, gentle, Mild, Demure, and quiet, never ministering
any cause of Debate, but with Sobriety and Patience taking all things in good
part.

The third Commodity, which a sober Dye^ brings with it, is the safety of
memory. which is wont to be impaired and hu^t by reason of cold Humors, which
have seized on the Brain, and is very ominous to the intemperate or aged
person. This inconvenience is speedily cured by an orderly Diet, with
abstayning from ho^ liq^^urs and fuming drinks, unless it be in sin^^l
quantity. For although Wine and strong drink be hot, yet it causes cold
sicknesses being often taken, as Coughes, Distillations, the Pose, the
Apoplexy, or Palsy.

The fourth Commodity is, the lively Vigor of the Mind, in Reasoning,
Judging, in Invention, and in an apter Disposition to conceive or receive
Divine Mysteries. Here hence it comes to pass, that they, which observe a
sparing Diet are watchful, circumspect, provident, and sound of Judgment:
Whatsoever spiritual or mental exercise they take in hand, they commonly
excel in that kind of knowledge, which they undertake. The reason is, because
their thoughts are abstracted and severed from this base earthly mould to
Heavenly Contemplation, and to those high Angelical raptures, of which f^esh
and blood can hardly enter into the Consideration.

I believe very few in these days may be said to be thus Divinely disposed,
for I will stand unto it, that except they have some power of Abstinence
together with that unspotted Faith, which the Protestant Church holds, they
shall never pass for men truly Religious, nor shine with that bright Light of
Understanding to cont^mne the Vanities of this seducing World, nor receive that
solace in their spirits to conceive themselves as it were in Paradise familiar
with God. For doubtless they that are thus Regularly dyeted, if they have but
a grain of Faith, as it is Written, they may work wonders, and perhaps
perform mi^acles. They shall see strange Visions, and be rapt up, as St. Paul
was, into the Heau^ns for some small time to receive spiritual consolations,
the which if these Revelations and Consolations conc^rne only themselves, they
must not blabbe them abroad, unless their publication be more for the glory of
God, then for their own Hypocritical praise.

For it pleases God oftentimes to send or infuse messages to confirm his
servants in their constant courses. As I remember in the Book of Martyrs a
Holy man being in Queen Mary's days to be brought to the Stake for the
Faiths sake, the night before complained to one Austin his Friend, that since
his Imprisonment he had no secret enco^ragement of the Holy Ghost to continue
steadfast; but on the contrary he found himself very heavy, and somewhat loath
to dye. But the next day as he was lead toward the Stake to be burned, he
met the said Austin by the way, to whom this Good man cried out with great joy,
laying his hand on his heart: O Austin, Austin, he is come, he is come;
meaning, the Holy Ghost, of whose absence he had bewailed the night before.

I deny not, but there may be many Saints here in our days, but surely they
take not the right course to make their Election sure, if they mortify not
their Bodies sometimes, when rebellious Passions are like to break out into
combustion, or else that they be endowed with this powerful virtue of
Abstinence, as I do here prescribe. Nor are they to be counted perfect
Divines, which can only discourse of Divinity, Preach eloquent Sermons, or
dispute of profound Mysteries; but He is the true Messenger of God, who lives
according to our Sa^iours life, and his Apostles, or at the least does his
endeavor to imitate them, as near as he can.

And in what outward service can a man draw nearer unto them, then in Sobriety,
and Abstinence? For, as Faith is the inward ground of the Spiritual building
of GODS Church: So Abstinence, I hold to be after a sort, the secondary and
outward foundation of this great structure, as well because it remooues those
lets, which might prejudice our understanding, as also because by it we meet
with many singular good helps to prepare the Faculties of the Mind to be
more clear and ready to embrace that course of Life, which best pleases our
Creaetor.

Therefore, as Lessius writes, Seeing that our proceeding or Progress in
Spiritual maetters do depend upon the use of Understanding, or that
intellect, which is infused in the Soul, and upon Faith, which resides in
this Understanding, we cannot love that which is good or prosite in that Love;
nor hate that which is evil, or grow in hatred of that evil, except it be
first propounded and discussed in the Understanding, to stir up and move our
Affections for that Virtuous purpose.

Where hence it comes to pass, that they who have lodged Divine matters in
their Understanding, as the Apostles did, and such as followed their steps,
they shall easily cont^mne all Earthly Goods, and climb up to the high degree
of Sanctity and Holiness, and for that cause at the last they shall obtain
for their reward a glorious Crown in Heaven. For the Will of man does easily
conform it self to the Judgment of the Understanding, when a matter is not
there rashly, and suddenly propounded, but with deliberation deeply, and with
length of time discussed and debated. Whereby it appears that those things,
which do hinder, darken, or make difficult the Functions of the Mind, for the
most part are the Causes, why in knowledge, or in the O^^ices of P^ety, or in
Ho^inesse of life we arrive not to the wished and illustrious d^g^ee of
Perfection.

By the Premises it is apparent, that Temperance, or Sobriety is of great
e^^^cacy and power both to ex^^nguish those impediments, which e^lipseour
judgments from meditating on the bright beams of Understanding, and the true
course of our Salvation, and therefore it may not unfitly be called The
secondary Foundation of wisdom and of our spiritual progress. For what be
the lets that make us so unapt to spiritual knowledge; are they not the
superfluous limidities of the Brain, the obstructions of the Brains pores and
passages, the abundance of Blood, the heat of the Spirits, which spring from
Blood and Choler, or the Humors of Melancholy, which assault the Head and
Brain? All which may be prevented by a well ordered Diet.

The fifth Commodity, which this Diet brings with it against the inw^rd motions
is, that it asswageth or rooteth out the flames of lustful desires, which
annoy both Body and Soul. And surely next to the Grace of God, nothing auailes
more; for a Sober Diet takes away first the Matter, which is the abundance of
Windy sperme. Secondly, the impulsive Cause, which is the needless store of
the animal Spirits, whereby that Sperme is expelled. And thirdly, the
provoking Cause, which is the imagination of venereous doings. This Imagination
stirs up chiefly the Passion of Concupiscence, which presently mooues the
Spirits to expulsion, and these spirits being so moved to expulsion do
vehemently urge, yea, and do perform the Deed, unless the Will chance to
restrain the same.

All these abominations are chased away, or at the least corrected by a
Temperate Diet. The which whosoever practizeth, shall find himself free from
such perturbations, so that our Papists need not afflict their Bodies, as many
of them do, with languishing Fasts, Bodily labors, Whip-cords, Wyres of
Steel, going barefoote, or with lying on the cold ground, so benumming, or
making Brawne of their Carcasses, that might by this manner of Diet be
sustained with vigorous and lively heat to sympathize and correspond with the
Functions of the Mind; where, as in a Glass, the whole Man, though outwardly
made but of Dust and Ashes, may behold from within him, the very Image of the
incomprehensible God, both in Unity and Trinity, except his judgment be
eclipsed with ^rronious motions.

The fifth SECTION.
Examples of such, as by Abstinence and a sparing Diet have prolonged their
Lives to very old Age.

THere was a Sect among the Jews, called the Essen^, who when as they could
not in their consciences brook to live in Jerusalem, betwixt the Pharisees and
the Saducees, by reason of the Hypocrisy, and Dissimulation of the one; and
the lycentious living of the other, retired themselves to a Desert near the
Lake of Asphaltes, not far from Ievicho, and there gave themselves to a
Temperate Diet, with extraordinary Fastes, whereby most of them lived above
100. years.

Paulus Theb^us, about the age of 15. years o^d, during the Persecution under
Decius the Roman Emperor, being discontented for the loss of his Father,
and liketo be betrayed for a Christian by a cou^tous Hypocrite, that was
married to his Sister, because he might enjoy his Patrimony, fled into a
solitary place, and there hid himself in a Cave, at the foot of a Rock,
near to which place grew a great Palm Tree, upon whose fruit he daily fed.
They write, that for the space of 60. years a Raven every day at nine a
Clock, brought him half a loaf of bread, and that his apparel was made of
the leaves of the Palm tree.

St. H^erome reports, that from the time which he entered into this retired
place, which was about the year 260. until the end of his life, he never
departed thence, having continued there 110. years.

St. Anthony. who instituted an Hermita life in Egypt, borne of Noble and
Religious Parents, and being about 20. years old, sold his estate, and
bestowed part upon his Sister, and distributed the resdue to the Poor. And
retiring himself from the World, he built himself a Cortage in a place remote
from Company, where he lived a most austere and strict life. He dyed about the
year 345. having lived 105. years. His diet was only bread and water, saving
that he added broth or Pottage to his sustenance, when he was exceeding old,
as Athanasius witnesses. He was so famous in his latter days for his Holy
and Devout life, that Emperors, Kings, and Princes sent unto him for his
Counsel, and recommended themselves to his Prayers.

Cariton an Iconian by birth, having endured much troubles under Aurelian for
the Christian Faith, in the end being enlarged out of Prison during the Reign
of the Emperor Tacitus, which succeeded him, and going to see Jerusalem, they
write that he was taken Prisoner by a Company of Thieves, who bound his hands,
and put an Iron chain about his neck, and so led him into a Desert place,
near unto the dead Sea, or Sodomes Lake. Afterward, these Thieves going
forth for more boo^ies, a Viper came into their Cave, and drank of the
Vessel, where the Thieves kept their Wine: the which she poisoned, so that
when the Thieves d^anke thereof, they all dyed instantly. And they say, that
Caritons bonds at the very same time were miraculously broken or loosned, inso
much that he remained Master of their wealth, whereof he communicated the most
part to the persecuted Christians, that were fied into those Deserts, and with
the rest he built a Religious house, where he lived for the most part upon
Bread, Roots, and Water. He ended his days under Constantine the second, and
Constantius his brother, being above 100. years old.

James the Hermit a Persian by Nation, lived by a very sparing Diet, above 104
years, as Theodoret writes.

St. Macarius one of the Fathers, which assisted at the Counsel of Nice, lived
92. years.

St. Epiphanius whose learned works we have, lived 115. years.

Arcenius Schoolmasters to Arcadius the Emperor, lived 120. years, with
admirable abstinence.

Simeon Stilites lived 109. years, with incredible parsimony, Sobriety, and
Temperance.

St. Romuald and Italian, lived 120. years, with a very straight Diet, whereof
he spent one hundred years in a Religious house.

Johannes de Temporibus lived 300. years, even from Charlemaines time, under
whom he served as a Soldier, until our Western Christians set out for the
Conquest of the Holy Land.

Vdalricus Bishop of Padua, a man of wonderful Abstinence lived one hundred
and five years.

Venerable Bede, a Saxo^ borne, whose Writings we read, lived 92. years in a
Monastery, ever since he was seven years of age.

But to descend to our own times, I will conclude with one excellent example
of Lodou^co Cornario a Venetian Gentleman, whose Treatise with Lessius his
Annotations ministered unto me my chief Light for the discovery of this
Newfound Diet, lived above 100. years. In his youth he spent his time very
lycentiously, insomuch that when he was ^5. years of age, he fell to be
wonderfully crazed, and diseased with a pain in his Stomach, and oftentimes
in his side, and also infested with the Gout, and wi^h a spice of a Fever. In
this manner he languished until he came to forty years. And then the
Physicians gave him over for a dead man, yet with some hope, that whereas their
Physic could not restore him to his health, yet perhaps he might prolong his
life, if he could betake himself to a set sp^ring Diet, the which I have
prescribed here. Coruario seeing no other help, and being loath to dye in the
midst of his age, and flourishing time, by little and little fe^^ unto it, and
within half a year was delivered of the most part of his griefs. But before
the year went about, he was quite rid of all sicknesses. And so continued all
his life after, with singular great contentment in his Mind and Body. When he
was 83. he made a pleasant Comedy, which is a work of iouiall youth, Partus
Iuventutis: For, as he writes, he found himself of such an excellent Temper
in Body and Mind, that he would not exchange his Age at those years with any
Young man whatsoever, that did not observe his Diet; and he hoped to live as
long as the other. He could at those years get up a Horseback as light and
as nimble, as when he was but 24. He was always merry, never once angry nor
sad, but of that admirable temper, that all the H^mours of his Body were in an
equal proportion, as it were Harmoniously compacted, in so much that during the
time that he used this Diet, he never after sic^^ened.

His sleep was moderate, his Dreams sweet and pleasing; and his Hearing and
senses sound, his understanding so pure and lightsome, that at 95. years o^d
he wrote a Book to the Clergy in commendation of Sobriety, and this Diet.

Among Princes, that by temperate Diet prolonged their lives; I will instant
only on two, the Emperor Augustus, and Queen Elizabeth of England, whereof
the former lived near eighty years, and was so abstemious, that he never
drank but thrice at one meal. And the other did seldom eat but one sort of
meat, rose ever with an appetite, and lived about 70. years.

Now let me question our Paracelsians, who believe such strange Miracles of
their El^x^r and Potable Gold, whether Arnoldus de Villa Noua, Raymundus
Lullius, Friar Bacon, Ripley, or any other, whom they flatter themselves to
have had the knowledge of the Philosophers Stone, whether, I say, any of these
did live longer, or in better health, in Body and Mind, then Cornario, or some
of these did? If they can prove, that their great Masters have lived as long
as Ours, then let me put them further in mind, that Paracelsus himself their
principal Patron dyed at forty eight: whereas Galen, who a^firmes that ever
since he attained to twenty eight years, he observed a Temperate Diet, which
profited him so much, that thereby he escaped free from all violent
sicknesses, all his Life time after, and lived until he was above an hundred
years old, as Hippocrates and Herodicus before him, only by reason of a sober
Diet without Physic, prolonged their lives to one hundred years.

The sixth SECTION.
The Effects and Fruits of this admirable Diet.

THe Effect of this Newfound Diet, is singular great, and the Fruits
inestimable: For thereby Old Age, which is held to be an incurable sickness;
and a tedious misery, becomes fresh, green, lively, sprightfull, and
flourishing. Now, after long Experience which a man has learned in the World,
he is able to judge by comparing his present estate with the Vanities of his
fore-passed manner of living, of the Causes, why GOD, sent him into the World,
and by what means he may thence forwards recover and redeem the idle time
which he has spent, to the glory of God, and the safeguard of his Soul,
which but for the great mercy of his Savior, he has foolishly forfeited.
Then, he cannot but contemn earthly thoughts, and with a brave resolution
scorn to fix his Mind on things, which like a Dream will pass away
suddenly, remembering that saying in the Gospel: O Fool, this night will I
take away thy Soul, and then whose shall those goods be which thou have
prepared, and heaped together? Then, he will acutely see, that there is no
cause for him to join Fie^d to Field, Farm to Farm, or Lordship to Lordship.
For if he observe this Diet, he needs not be at such former charge for
Gut-worke, or to please his sensual Pa^a^e, as he has been at to the hazard
of his Health, and more of his Soul. He will find that a very final reuenew
will s^^^ice him, and that now he shall be the better able to distribute the
ouer-p^us to his Christian Neighbors, or bestow the same on some monuments for
the honor of his Redeemer, who gave him the grace and power to leave off his
former superfluities and noisome Varieties: Then, he shall perceive that ten
years redeemed and conferred in this order of life, will better him more then
20. years in such irregular vame courses, as he before had fruitlessely
consumed. Then, seeing himself at more ease and contentment in spirit, with a
well composed nature without rashness, or inperate Passions, he may
accommodate his Mind to Prayers, to the service of God, and to do works of
Charity. For no extrauagant business can fall out to interpose betwixt him and
Heavenly cogitations, as he used to have when he dealt about matters of
worldly profit. But perhaps some will say, who will pine himself, and loose so
many dainty morcels, to enjoy a few years longer then our Forefathers?

Heu non est tanto dig^a dolor salus. To these I answer, that the addition of
a few years more to a man that begins to leave off sin, and to be borne a
new man Regenerated unto God through Christ, ought to be dearer then all the
delicate cheer of the World, which cannot come to pass, while the Body is
heavy, and pressed down with a load of fat, and gross Humors. For of all the
meat, which a man eats, let him consider how little of it turns to
nourishment or Chyle within the Body, and how much goes to excrements, to
superfluous Blood, and to those humors, which one day, and in process of time
will cause some grievous sickness, if not mortal, and he will judge my
Counsel for Sobriety to be from God, and sent from Heaven in these latter
days, to assist him in his Christian Progress to Salvation.

At first is all the difficulty and hardest labor, by reason of the contrary
custom, and for that the Stomach is stretched out at large, and as the French
man says, as Hollow as Saint Benets Boot. But this difficulty is quickly
taken away, if every day by leas^re he withdraw and diminish somewhat of his
usual Diet, until such time, as he comes to the stinted measure. And after
that the Stomach is once contracted and made narrower; then there is no more
difficulty nor trouble, but that he may easily continue his Sober Dies,
because that small Quantity does answer and well agree with Nature, and the
capacity of the Stomach, only the danger is, that after the Diet is
accustomed, it must be continued still, for Alteration is somewhat dangerous.

The like examp ewe see in them, who in Lent do at the first find it grievous
to abstain from their Breake-fast or Supper, but after a few days they make
nothing of it; no more then those do, who are commanded by their Physicians
to refrain from some kind of accustomed meat, which gives ill nourishment to
some dangerous disease, although it be very pleasing to their Appetite. In
like manner do not we often see, that some of our Land soldiers having been
long at Sea, and there limited in time of scarcity to a set quantity of
slender Victuals do fall into Fluxes and languishing sickenesses, if
suddenly at their first Landing, they break that limited and set measure? And
how comes that to pass? But because the Stomach has been kept for many
days more straightned, narrower, and more contracted, whereby their sudden
falling into a larger Diet without regard had to that violent oppression of
nature, which ought not to be so altered, but by degrees, is the chief cause
of their Fluxe^.

Therefore men of experience will take heed at their Landing of this excess,
and reduce their Stomachs by little and little to receive in such meat, and
that in small quan^ity at the first, as shall not offend them after wards. They
will content themselves with Broathes and weak meats for the first three or
four days, or if they fear such Fluxes, as they have reason for it, they
will take the juice of ground Iuy, or the Broth of Rice, or the Syrup of
Poppy, four or five mornings after their Landing; yea, and perhaps they will
Physic themselves with Rheubarbe, as well to purge themselves of that taint,
which they got a Shipboard, as to strengthen their Stomachs: Or else they
will swallow two or three days together, (but not without a Preparatiue or
Glister, before hand,) those which the Arabiaens call the Blessed Pi's of
Aloes, which are compounded of Aloes, Mirrh, and Saffron, the which likewise
being infused in some Liquor, to be taken in times of Pestience, or
Calentures, are found miraculous. Or if they fear the Scuruy, a Disease sprung
from Oppilations in the Stomach, and now a days too common, dee seize on
them, they will not negle^t in time to take the juice of Lemons, Turnips, or
else the Sa^t of Scuruy-grasse, or the juice it self in some pleasing Liquour.

But to return, where I have digressed* admit, that this Diet were somewhat
grievous at the first, let them consider. how they are forced other-whiles to
endure a more grievous Penance at their Physicians hands, when they must take
most loathsome Medicines, whereat Nature trembles to think of, as our finest
Gentle-women for the Greene-sicknesse are constrained to take Powder of Steel,
etc. whereas the troublesomnesse of our Diet is recompeneed with wonderful
great commodities and singular fruit. For a Temperate Diet makes the Body
Light, Pure, Healthful, preserues it from diseases and stinking corruption. It
prolongeth life until extreme old Age. It makes one sleep quietly, and
pleasantly. It makes our meat taste the more sauouring and acceptable. It
brings soundness to the Senses, quickness to the Memory, clear judgment to
the Wit, it asswageth the rage of unruly Passions, beats down and breaks the
fury of unlawful Lust, and drives away anger and sorrow.

To conclude, it conioynes, cements, and as it were glues and scrues together
the Soul and Body with such an harmonicall admired temper, that with a quiet
Conscience, Apostolical patience, and with a Magnanimous sparkling spirit,
partaking equally of Mirth and Gravity, he shall soon perceive himself
metamorphozed and changed of a sensual Creature to be a man of Reason; of a
dark besotted apprehension, now suddenly become one of the hopeful Children
of God, illuminated with Understanding to ponder, judge, and discuss of
Caelestiall matters, touching the Mysteries of our Salvation, of Faith, Grace,
the Resurrection, Beatitude, and the difference betwixt Humane and Divine
policy, betwixt Saint Michael the Archa^gell, and the Spiritual Dragon;
betwixt the Heavenly Jerusalem, and the most reformed Commonwealth among
mortal men. And lastly, he shall be able to apprehend, how Sin and the
Prince of the Air, are linked in one, to confirm Men's hardened hearts in their
own accursed Courses.

The seventh SECTION.
How necessary the Bodies Purification by a Temperate Diet is for the Souls
health.

The sudden Cure of the Cough, the Tisicke, and other Diseases by some
Medicines intermixed with this Diet.

PVrification must go before Glorification. For before a man can assume a
Glorified immortal Body in Heaven, it is necessary the whole man be purified
here on Earth, the Soul by Faith, and the Body by Abstinence. After this life
we must not rely on Apocriphall dreams of a third place, by Capriccious
Schoolmen called Purgatory, like to the Poets Eliz^an Fields. But at our
departure out of this World we must repeat the same Words, which our Savior
spoke at the giving up the Ghost, Consummatum est, it is finished. We have
fought in this World a good fight, we have abstayned from Carnal and worldly
Temptations. Otherwise, we go out, but as half Christians, and being
lukewarm, Christ will not know us, if we stand on bare Faith, without the
fruits of Faith, which must not only spring in us toward our own Bodies,
but by example and good works toward our fellows, the members of Christ. O
how much do the Capuchins and Carth^sians go beyond us in Abstinence, and in
contemning the World! And if they had the Faith, which we profess, and did not
too much macerate and deface the handyworke of GOD, upon a meritorious Baalish
hope, surely, they might be said to see with two eyes, and we but with one
eye, and being better purified then we, they were assured of that
Glorification, which we expect.

I doubt no^ but some here will tax me, that I savor a little of
Pharisaicall Popish leaven, because I insist on the Bodies Purification, as if
I derogated from Faith, which only justifies, and that all meats are
tolerable, let a man eat and drink never so much, as long as they are
sanctified with our ordinary Graces of thanksgiving, though said by roat or
cooled zeal.

And that we cannot transgress in what enters into the Body, seeing that all
things were purified and made clear by Christ, according to St. Peter's Vision
about Cornelius,

These Libertines would feign cover their Epicurean excess with Sophistical
daubings, but they heed not my aim, who with St. Paul profess, that all
things are clean to the clean. It is the Quantity, and not the Quality of the
Meats, or Drinks, which I reprove. If I should tell them further, that the
cause why Moses forbad the Israclites the eating of Swines flesh was, for that
he foresaw, that the same in those hot Countries would breed It^h and
Scabs, and that it did become the Hely Nation, to keep their Vessels better
purified, then to appear in the House of GOD so polluted; surely I believe,
they would take me for ^ Jew, as well as a Romanist. Why were Lepers, and those
that had running Issues debarred from the Temple, insomuch that their King so
diseased, was repulsed to enter? Was it not because God loved a purified clean
Body, ^ather then a mangy person? Specially, if through his own disordered
manner of living, or the Divine Vengeance he became so defiled? In respect
whereof, it is convenient that we do our best endeauours to purify that
place, which is destinated for the Holy Ghost, by abstayning from alluring
meats of diverse natures at the same Mea^e. Go to the Physician before thou be
sick, (says the Wise man.) Before Gluttony and Drunkenness hale us into the
Prison of sicknesses, let us take heed of their causes, and not find fault
with Friends, who without Fee or rewards have opened them the way to
Purification, and a sober living. Because Lessius and Cornario being Papists
late^y renewed and brought to Light this admirable Diet, shall we disdain
their wholesome Counsel?

This uncharitableness leads to Error what we find among Papists
Praiseworthy, and not repugnant to Faith, we ought to embrace and cheerish. By
that reason we should have no Discipline, no Canon Law, nor any civil Order
for the government of the Church against Ref^a^^aries and gyddy headed
Heretics, if we condemn all that we borrow from them. For our Religion it
self, though afterward eclipsed, was propagated and sent into this Island from
the Bishop of Rome. Because their Mine yeeldes not the finest Oar, shall we
not refine the Oar, and purify the Gold, that comes from them? yea, though it
came exsterquilinio out of their Dunghill, with many dregs and filth, we must
not reject and altogether debase what we received from them, as long as it
tends to our profit or edification. We ought to commend them for their laudable
Fasts, their Almes-giuing, and their continent lives; I mean some few of them,
which were indeed most continent, and not minister occasion of scandal in our
Christian calling, to make them the more obstinate, and obdurate. St. Paul
could have wished never to eat meat, whilst he lived, if he thought, that
that kind of meat offended his Brother; where as some of us on the contrary,
would e^te Flesh on Good Friday, even to dispite them. By this indiscreete and
uncharitable carriage toward them, in things indifferent, many Souls have
fallen away from our Church, and left those skars, which will continue (I
fear) to the worlds end. So tractable in this indifferent course was Peter
Mo^lins that Religious Minister of France, when he heard how some of our
English Preachers chose rather to be silenced, then to wear the Surplice: O I
would to God, says he, that I were bound to go in a Fools coat through Paris
all the days of my life, so that I were Licensed to Preach the Gospel there.
And so an English Co^ntesse heretofore, was content to ride through Couentry
stark naked at Noone day, so that she might gain freedom for that Town,
which for their common and future good, she afterward most zealously
performed. Now to advance forwards, and thereupon to conclude our work of
Purification, to be brought to pass by abstinence, and our newfound Diet, it
is looked for, that I should first cu^e some of those infirmities, which are
already grown through Repletion, and disorders. Among which, I behold the
Lunges, which wax old sooner then the rest of the members, as Aristotle
affirmed. And the reason is, because they are subject to all kind of
excrements. For they receive catarrhes, coughs, and other fi^thy matter from
the Brain, besides excrementicious blood, which is engendered there, and turns
to purulent matter, which render them foul and filthy, as our late A^atomists
have found, as^ve ^as that, which comes from the head, and what ber is made so
impure, must needs grow soonest old.

For which cause those Persons, whose breath does stink by reason of the
impurities of the Lunges, shall wax old sooner then others. As on the
contrary, those whose breath smells well, or does not stink whilst they are
Fasting, may live much longer. For the abating or correcting of this viscous,
clammy, and mattry stuff, which is there engendered, or fallen from the Brain,
nothing anayles more then this our Diet, after that the same has been
practiced and used two or three Months, such impurities will cease of their
own accord.

But for fear the Diseased party may in the mean time suffocate and perish,
like the Horse, that starued, while the Grass grew; let him that is troubled
with a violent Cough, which is accounted but a Symptom, mingle some Manna well
sifted, and a little Saffron with his Panade, Broth, or Gr^ell, and that being
used for five, or six days together, will by gentle Purges by little and
little consume away the cause; yea, and will supply the place of an
Expecterall, as well as any of those Medicaments which they call Becchica, or
else they may use three or four drops of the Syrup of Tobacco in two
spoonefuls of Hysop water, or in default thereof, a piece of Tobacco it self
rolled and chewed in the Mouth, before meat, for four or five days together,
will perform the C^re, or in case of necessity, let him drink but once an
O^nce of the Juice of the Blew-Flower-de Luce root called Ir^s, newly gathered,
beaten, and strayned, with sug^ed Water, and some Saffron; and though the Party
were at the very point ready to be choked with these s^^my and gross
h^mours, and could not rest, but sit up wheezing, and without sleep; yet
within two or three hours, (as it were by Miracle) he shall avoid by Vomit,
and Stools, the causes of his deadly distemper. Or else let him take twenty,
or twenty five grains of Pantomagogon in Pills, with the Powder of Lycoras,
once every second day for a week, and these will gently purge a^l the Humors.

And these Pi^s I hold to be singular good to prevent many other diseases, and
not so loathsome as most Medicines be.

Next, the Brain presents it self to my View, the indisposition whereof may
be discovered by the Heat, or Coldness. If it be over hot, it causes
distillations into the Lunges, Lunacies, etc.

For the Cure whereof, some Lettice may be boiled with our Diet, or the green
leaves of Poppy, and in defaulte thereof their seeds, or their Syrupes. In
that case Diacodion, which is composed of white Poppy, with sugared Water alone,
or mixed with our Diet is of admirable operation both to cool, and to procure
sleep. To which as a Cau^at, I wish such distempered persons to beware, how
they keep their Heads too warm with Night-Caps; for thereby I have observed
that many have unadvisedly miscarried. For the cold distemper of the Brain,
accompaned with Moisture: the smoke of Tobacco with a drop or two of the Oil
of Anny-seed is expedient, if the Party be not too narrow breasted, or else
troubled with the fits of Asthma.

But oftentimes the Brain may suffer by reason of outward Causes, as Frost, or
Cold winds in the same manner, as the Lunges are, for both alike are impaired
by Cold, that they might the sooner become weakened and old, and that by reason
of respiration. For both these Members do breath and respire, the Brain for
the perception of smells, and the Lunges more abundantly, for the recreation
of the heart. Therefore both these Members do secretly through their Pores and
passages draw in the Air, and do receive their impressions, which happen not
to any of the other Members. For this discommodity, whereto our Northern
Nations are much subject, thet have lately armed themselves with Hoodes against
Rain, Snow, and Tempests; and if before their iournies they annoint the soles
of their feet with that excellent Oil of Euphorbium, or of Pepper, and stop
their ^ares with Cotton or bumbase dipped in Oil of An^^seed, or with Cyuet:
They need not fear distempers through Cold, as long a so as Englands Golden
Fleece is able to furnish them with Outward Defenses. But we have cause to
doubt a greater inconu^nience then, a momentary cold, which commonly with the
weather for sake the hold; for if it prove an extreme Frost, or blustering
Winds, specially after ^ainy Weather, which occasion the cuils aforenamed,
that treacherous guest, the Sc^ruy, the storehouse of al diseases, Farrago
omnium morborum, (which some have mistaken for a spice of the Catholic
Disease:) may get possession within the Body.

And this happens both by the Suns absence, and for that the skin, and all
the outward Pores are stopped, thickened, and congealed with Cold, so that there
is no place left for the venting of Euaporations, and Exhalations out of the
Body. And therefore they are driven back coagulated, where those Vapors are
forced for want of vent to assault the inward parts, and at length they
domineere, and cause Oppilations and stoppages, so that the lively Spirits
cannot perform their Offices. Here hence it falls out, that some of these
tainted exhalations are carried upwards to the Eyes, Ears, Nose, and to the
Teeth, and Gummes; and other-whiles to the Breast, or else they descend down
to the Legs.

A spoonefull of the Juice of Lemons at a time, or the luyce of Scuruy-graf^e,
or the salt of it, as I showed in the former Section, mixed with our Panade,
will remove this Suruy-baggage. And for the putrified Gummes, a drop or two of
the Oil of Vitrioll, or some Vnguentum Aegyptiacum applied unto them, will
speedily cure them.

I need not correct the Stomach, but with the own simple Diet, yet if at
first by reason of the sudden alteration, which I have notwithstanding here
expressly forbidden, and on the contrary advised them to proceed by degrees
from twenty ounces, to fourteen, or twelve, and by so many, or a little more
of drink, to be diminished within a month: Then if the Stomach should
become somewhat fainting, a cup of Wine and Sugar added to the Diet, or in
extremity Cinnamon water, Anniseed, Worme-wood water, or Manus Christi, or
Ginger-bread, will quickly restore the cowardly Stomach. But if the Midriffe
rise, or any wind, which our Diet will speedily chase away, Vinegar
Scilliticke, or Sea Onion will keep it down. Afterward, if they chance to
break this Diet, if it be but for a meal or two, I wish them to fast the next
meal after, although it were more commendable Esu^ire inter epulas, to rise up
with an Appetite.

For the Stone, if Walter Caries Quintessence of Goats Blood, which in his
Farewell to Physic, he calls the Hammer for the Stone, may not be gotten, let
the Party take Goats Blood, and use it after the Arabian manner: That is,
dried in the O^en, and drunk in some Liquour. More Medicines I could lay
down, for this and other sicknesses, but that I doubt our Practitioners of
Physic would indite me for intiusion into their Profession; albeit I think
they will be more offended with me for the Publishing of this Dietary Cure,
then for any other Quarrel. For I make no question, but the same will both
prevent and heal more Diseases, then all their Recipes grounded but upon
coniecturall Prognostickes for the most part, like unto our Almanackes.

Me thinks, if it were nothing else but for the avoiding of Physicians Fees,
and Ap^th^caries Bills, that were a motive sufficient to enduce us to live
soberly. Whereto might be added the shortning of our days, which their
Drugges do cause, besides the poisoned relics, which they leave behind them
in the Body. For we must understand, that all Purgations, specially Electuaries
soluble, have some venomous quality in them, and likewise that the good humors
as well as the bad are exhausted by them, to the future decay of health, and the
treacherous wasting of the Oil of Life. The like fatal inconvenience comes by
Blood letting.

The eight SECTION.
Special Remedies against Sea sicknesses, the Scuruy, and against the
annoyances of snow, Frosts, and cold Winds. Wherein the cause of my Lord
Baltimores Disasters in Newfound Land this last Winter is debated.

THe Disasters which happened to my Lord Baltimore and his Colony the last Winter
at Feriland, in our New-land Plantation, by reason of the Scuruy, have moved
me to inserte some more specifique Remedies against that Disease, which not
only in those Climates bears dominion, but likewise here in England,
although hooded with other Titles, yet commonly sprung of the same causes.

For sometimes the Scuruy is engendered of outward Causes, and sometimes from
within the Body, or from both. And therefore they that dwell near the Seaside,
where the North-east Winds rage, are most subject to this infirmity. Before
the said Lord ever began his Plantation, he cannot deny, but I advised him to
erect his Habitation in the bottom of the Bay at Aquafort, two leagues distant
from that Place, which for ought I hear, is not much to be discommended, and
more into the Land, where my people had wintred two years before, and found no
such inconvenience. Nay, his Lordship himself suspected the place; sor^^ his
Letters he complained that unless he might be beholding to me for the
assignment of both those places out of my Grant, he was in a manner disheartened
to plant on that Coast, by reason of the Easterly Winds, which with the
Mountains of Ice floating from Estotiland, and other Northern Countries
toward Newfound land, rendered that Easterly shore exceeding cold. Yet
notwithstanding, his Lordship being persuaded by some, which had more
experience in the gainefull Trade of Fishing, then in the Situation of a
commodious Seat for the Wintring of his new Inhabitants, bestowed all his
charge of building at Fertland, the coldest harbor of the Land, where those
furious Winds and Icy Mountains do play, and beat the greatest part of the
Year. Whereas, if he had built either at Aquafort, or in the Westerly part in
the Bay of Placentia, which has above 50. miles ouer-land, betwixt it and that
Eastern shore, his enterprise had suceeeded most luckily: And so this of
Fertland, might have served well for his profit in the Fishing, and also for a
pleasant Summer dwelling.

Sir Francis Tanfield, under the right honorable the Lord Vicount Faulkland,
continued two years, but three leagues more Southward at Renooz, and did well
enough, in which place likewise my Colony remained one Winter without any such
mortal accidents. But all Winters, I confess, are not alike in that Country,
no more then they are here with us in Europe. Yea and here too in the same
parallel, the season differs. Who will imagine, that we in Wales have less
Snow and Frosts then London and Essex? And yet by experience we find it so,
whereof the very cause proceeds from the Eastern winds, whose rigorous force
before they arrive over land into our Western parts, cannot but be much broken
and abated.

Besides these Winds, snows, and Fr^sts, the Scuruy is engendered by earing of
those meats which are of corrupted juice, raw, cold, salted, or of ill
nourishment, which breed gross blood and melancholy. Among which I reckon
Bacon, Fish, Beans, Pease, etc. And among Drinks, I rank all strong liquors
whatsoever, specially, if they be taken in Frosty weather, when the Stomach
over abounds with heat, and consequently at that time most subject to
infiamations, which, when the Th^^^ comes, will certainly break out into some
dangerous disease.

Do but observe how the Sap of Plants and Herbs in Frosty seasons descends
down to the Root, as to the last refuge and help in Nature? The which Plants
if we should refresh with Chalk or Lime, well may they flourish for a little
while, but their Fruit and themselves are of no continuance. The like I may
say of such, as by strong liquors do conceive, that they fortisie and comfort
their stomachs in cold weather, when as indeed they get but a sparkling heat
like a blast, that will quickly extinguish: From hence arise the Scuruy,
Catarrhes, Rhumes, Coughs, Fevers, etc.

But leaving these Causes, I will proceed to the Cure of this fatal sickness,
which now a days proves a stumbling stone to the wisest Physicians, by reason
of the manifold symptoms and infirmities which accompany it, able to deceive
Aesculapius himself.

First, let the party, that fears or suspects himself tainted, change or air
his apparel, putting on clean shifts and linen.

Secondly, let him sleep in boorded Rooms, and if he be able, to have his
Chamber Wainscotted, or well dried of those dampish savors, which stone or
earthen walls are wont to euaporate and breath out.

Thirdly, let him beat and burn one Acre of Land round about his dwelling.

Fourthly, let him eat those meats, which are tender, light of digestio^, that
will not be soon corrupted, chiefly fresh meats with dited sauce, but
moderately, and without excess.

Fifthly, let him often use the expressions of Currants, Prunes, or Reasins, or
Diaprunis, or some of these in broth made with Manna, Cassia, Tama^ind, or
Seen. For these will loosen the Belly by their moisture and slippery faculty,
whose whayish humors the Melt or Spleen is accustomed to steal away, and so
by making it self great and big to impouerish and infeeble the rest of the
Members.

Sixthly, for an exquisite Purgation after a Glister, or Preparatiue first used,
which might be of Oximel. with some of the aforenamed Expressions, let him take
of the root of Rheubarbe, or Mechoacan three dragmes, Hermodactilis two
dragms, Turbith three dragmes, an ounce of Diagredium, two scruples of Cinnamon
and Ginger, three pound of Sugar. Of this Purgation, let the party take one
ounce, or six dragmes at a time.

Seauenthly, after these Purgations, which must be taken every day, or every
second day, while it lasts, let him use bathes made of Brimstone or Branne
once a week to attenuate the skin, whereby the Vapors of the Body may the
easier exhale out. But for twelve hours after bathing he must not stir out
of doors. Whosoever will use these Observations, not neglecting those, which I
have generally delivered in the former Sections, as Antiscorbutica, to prevent
the Seuruy, he may rest assuredly not to become infe^ted with the Disease, and
if he be tainted, he shall speedily recover.

And now for the poorer sort, who perhaps are not able to provide themselves of
the premises, they may either purge themselves with those Pills called
Pantomagogon in the precedent Section described, or take three grains of
Stibium in a cup of Beer steeped and beaten to powder, every second day for a
week together. And to prevent the Scuruy, we have tried in Newfound land,
that the tops and leaves of Turnips, or Radish being boiled, is a sovereign
help. And also that Neetleseede, and Honey, with a little Wormwood is expedient.

To conclude, Goose-dung being mixed with Meal and Butter, will serve for a
Pultes to the tumors or outward griefs, caused through this sickness to
abate the inflammations, and the spots, and ulcers; yea, and if their stomachs
could away with the loathsome taste with a few cloves in drink, it will cure
the Scuruy suddenly, as they in Zealand have often tried.

A Pomander to be used at Sea, against the noisome sent of the Ship.
This Pomander will much avail against such offensive smells: Musk three
grains, Saffron one scruple, so much of Cloves and Nutmegs, half a dragme of
Masticke, of Laudannu on ounce, let these with two dragmes of white wax be
rolled and stirred together in a hot mortar. As for the poor, they may use
the rind of Oranges, Lemons, or the root of Angelica.

Agaiast violent vomiting at Sea.
Let him drink Worme-word wine, or the salt of Worme-wood in Beer or wine. A
bag of dried Mintes laid to the stomach is singular good in that case.
Likewise, this medicine taken and eaten in the morning, will strengthen the
stomach: One cloue or two of Garlic, two or three Almonds, two or three
Cloves, and a little Ginger, let these be moistened with half a spoonefull of
Vinegar. After meals Coriander Comfits, or Quince ma^melate is commodious. For
the first three days, let him feed sparingly, and use Capers or Olives, with
his meat.

Remedies to preserve the Members from the discommodities of the Frost, Iee,
Snow, and cold Winds.
Let not the party presently enter into a warm room, or two near the fire,
but by little and little let him approach or remain in a temperate Room. Let
the frozen and congealed members be anointed over with the Oil of Chamomell,
if the strong smell offend him not, or with Oil of Lillies, or else with
sallet Oil and salt somewhat warm. And about half an hour after that he
be put a Bed, let him drink a cup of Wine or Beer well mulled or heated with
pepper rudely brayed and put in a piece of cloth for fear of offending the
throat. Let him hold in his mouth some hot spice, as Cinnamon, Ginger, A^oes,
Cloves, or Pepper.

Garlic boiled in milk, or Beer, will suffice in this extremity for the
poorer sort. In brief, if there be any doubt, that some member is almost
stupefied with Cold, specially with the Frost, let that member be held in cold
water for a while, that it may soften and so by degrees return to the temper.

The poor may in default of a better Ointment, before and after their return
homewards, annoint their hands and feet with bruised Garlike, tempred with
Oil or Butter, if they cannot have some of the Oils above named in the former
Section.

To preserve the Eyes from Snow, which sometimes as the more excellent, annoyes
the less: A piece of blacke-stuffe or cloth ho^den in the hands, and often
looked on, will perform the same, and defend the sight from injury. Above all,
let not the Party go abroad fasting.

The ninth SECTION.
Remedies against other Sicknesses incident at Sea, or Land. Against the heat
of the Stomach, and to prevent the Calenture, and other Fevers.

SYrupus acetosus simplex in this case, is highly commended by Ranzouius, as
also to prevent Fevers, which kind of Syrup is made of Water-sugar, and
Vinegar, as Oximell is made with honey. He that uses the same shall hardly be
infected with any kind of Fever, nor be troubled with the Asthmaticke
passion, or Tysicke.

In the beginning of a Fever, the Syrup, or Looch of Poppy, is convenient both
to cool the Body, and to procure sleep. And so is a Glister or Suppositary,
in the beginning of any sickness.

A Friend of mine who had been sundry Voyages in the Indies, and within the
Tropickes assured me, that when most of his People had been often sick at Sea
of Calentures and burning Fevers, he ever escaped. And the means which he
disclosed unto me were these: He used every day to sip a spoonefull of the
juice of Lemons, and in default thereof, he accustomed to drink often a
beuerage of Vinegar and Water. And lastly, every day he bathed and washed his
fundament with cold water, which is the chiefest way, that the Turks,
Arabians, and Moors do purify themselves before their Saba^thes, and during
the time of their Fasts. Above all, our Diet, or that which our Mariners call
Lob-lolly, will serve them for nourishment at Sea.

A Powder to be used either on Land, or Sea, to defend a man against sickness.
Take of dried Rose leaves three drams, of Lignum Aloes half a dragm, of
Licoras, Nutmegs, and Saffron, of each a scruple, of Musk four or five
grains. Make all these into fine powder, and then quilt it in a piece of
Taffata, or Sarcenet, and wear it on the left side of the Breast.

An Electuary against melancholy Pass^ons, (...) and to make the heart iouiall
and merri^r.
Take of the conserues of Roses two Ounces, of the conserues of Buglosse, and
Marigold, of each one ounce, of Cinnamon one dragme well powdered. Form these
into an Electuary with two ounces of the Syrup of Poppy, and at your going to
Bed take the quantity of a Nutn^^g.

A description of certain Pills to procure sleep and to open obstructions.
Take of the powder of Alkekenge with out Opium two d^agmes, of Opium on diagme
and a half we^l beaten, with one ounce of Sugar Candy. The which with syrup
of Lic^ras must be made in a Mass, and then divided into Pills and swallow
them. They will serve for two or three times.

A drink to ripen and ure the Cough.
Take of the syrup of Enulacampana and Licoras of each two ounces, of Hysop
water a quarter of a pint. Boil these in a quart of Ale or Beer, with some
red sugar candy to a pint, and drink thereof two or three spoonefulls at a
time, lying on your back, and letting it distill down your throat, by little
and little.

To prevent the Palsy.
Nothing is better then to eat some Diatrion P^perior, or to swallow down in
the morning four or five grains of pepper.

The Cure of the Wind in the Stomach, and the Collicke.
Commonly this Infirmity happens for want of stirring and exercise, or by
eating of Fish, Fruit, or the like windy food in greater abundance then
Nature is able to bear without Belching, Rumbling, or the like commotion in
the Stomach; which sometimes descending lower down into the Guts, before the
former meat be fully digested, begets more strength of wind, so that betwixt
the old excrements and the new, this grievous pain called the Coll^cke, is
engendered.

For the Cure whereof, if the Wind proceeds from heat by drinking of Sack,
or strong Liquor, or in the Summer, first let him abstain from those causes,
and take a Glister made of Sugar, Milk, and some cooling Herbs, or of Broth
where in Raisons, Prunes, or Currants have been sodden, or where Diaprunis is
dissolved, with some Anniseeds. And for a Topicke Medicine, to fortify and
ease the place affected for the present, let the Party apply a dried Rose-cake
somewhat warm, and besprinkled with a few drops of Vinegar to the Belly. The
poorer sort may clap warm trenchers or napkins. But if the Collicke be
engendered of the Cold, as in Winter, or by feeding on moist and raw
sustenance; I wish the poor to content themselves with Garlic boiled, or
raw. And for the Richer sort, I prescribe this singular Receipt, Take Venice
Treacle or M^thridate with a few beaten Cloves, dissolved and mulled in a cup
of Wine. Or in default thereof, a spoonefull or two of Worme-wood, Cinnamon, or
Anniseede Water, or some liquour wherein Pepper has been soaked. Diatrien
P^perion also eaten is exceeding good, fasting, or at going to bed.

And for a local Remedy, let him put dried Cammomill betwixt two linen
clothes to the Belly. Or for want thereof the Oy^e, or Paracelsus his
stipticke plaster, the place being first anointed with that kind of Oil, or
with that of Roses.

Against the evil disposition of the Body, as the Dropsy, the
Greenesicknesse, and the like.
Take of Allom, Brimstone, and of the fi^ings of iron, or steel of each a
handful. Inf^se them bruised in three quarts of white wine Vinegar three days,
and let the Party add thereof a spoonefull at a time to every draught of
drink. Likewise a Posset made of Allome, will correct this ill disposition of
the Body.

R^medies for the straightness of the Breast, and the rising of the Lights.
Some do highly commend Quick Sulphur beaten to powder, and well mixed with
Sugar Caudy, to be taken either alone or with Wine. Others at the time of the
fit, do advise to give him Vinegar Scillitick with Ammoniacke dissolved.
Fracastorius extolies Lungwort, either of the Oak or Juniper; li^ewise the
smoke of Sandaraca, o^ O^piment in the manner as I have showed in my Book of
Directions for Health. But in truth the Foxes Lights soaked for three days in
Vinegar, and afterward dried in an Oven, being taken to the quantity of a
Nutmeg, either alone, or with some Liquor, is the best Remedy, as well for this
infirmity, as for the Cough proceeding of the difficulty of breathing, for it
is known, that of all Creatures the Fox has the longest breath, and
strongest Wind. In default of the substance, the common Receite called Looch
de Pul^^one Vulpis is expedient.

Remedies for the Gout, whether it proceed from Hot or Cold Causes.
First let him betake himself, if he can, to our Diet.

Secondly, let him beware of all strong Drinks and Wine.

Thirdly, let him purge himself with the Potion of Hermod^c^^l^s, M^choacan,
etc. which I have before described against the Scuruy: Or else let him use
Pillu^ae Cochiae which draws awayes the causes from the Head. And these
Purgations he shall use once a month. And if there be cause, let him bleed
sometimes.

Fourthly, let him exercise.

Fifthly, let him annoint for a local Lenitiue the place affected with Oil of
Frogs, or of Mirrh, either alone, or with a little Saffron, and if the pain
be violen^, with some Opium.

But indeed to mollify and assuage the grief, for the richer sort, I advise
them never to be without this precious Cataplasme. Take of dried Rose leaves
one Ounce, of Masticke half an Ounce, of Saffron one dragme, of Campher
sixteen grains, and of Barley meal two ounces. Power thereon as much white
wine, as will make them boil, which must be gently, a^l by leisure. and often
stirred.

The tenth SECTION.
Remedies against the odious and unhealthful vice of Drunkenesse.

The Authors admonitory Conclusion, to live soberly and temperately.

FOr the shutting up of these particular Cures, I will insert this Corollary,
which I wish all them that have a care of their healths, daily to reuolue in
their minds, being drawn out of Hippocrates his golden Aphorisms: That
whatsoever Nourishment enters into an impure Body, will make it the more impure.

But there is one Sickness more, which rightly may be styled the Northerre
Catholic, crept among us within these forty years, the sin of
Drunkenness, brought hither out of Germany, and the Low Countries, which
bears such sway, that few merit the name of Gallants, or sociable Creatures,
vn^esse they can Carouse more Cups, then the large Body of a Camel is able to
brook, without great alteration in Nature.

For the suppressing of this odious sickness, we have laudable Acts of
Parliament, but for want of due execution of the Laws it increases to the
great displeasure of Almighty God, the scandal of our Religion, and the
grievous disturbance of their Bodies, which we see drooping away daily, before
the date of life conditionaly granted unto us by our Creator. What shall we do
in this desperate case? Our Statutes fail to remedy this evil: Our Preachers
with their thundering Woes miss to reform it: The careful Cure is neglected;
for most men now a days do more intend their private ends, then the public
good. Only this provident Counse^l is left, which I submit in most humble
manner to the higher Powers, that some more Additions be enacted, that in such
places as lie remote from the meridian of the Fountain of Justice, all blind
Alehouses be suddenly put down, that none be Licensed, except they were
worth twenty pounds at the least in Goods, able to keep Bedding, with
sufficient man's meat, and Horse-meate, that all such as frequent these
infamous Houses, especially within seven miles of their dwelling places, or
upon the Lords Day, may be bound to their good behavior, and that during the
time of their Bonds, they to be debarred of bearing Witness between party and
party, seeing that it is likely common Drunkards care not what they swear.

Secondly, that they shall not vex their Neighbors with Law-suites, until
they be released and become new men: Or else, that they shall stand as persons
Outlawed* or Excommunicated out of true Christians Society.

Thirdly, that those Officers, in whose division these offenses shall be
committed, shall without delay see the Penaltties ordained by Law inflicted,
and tha^ the negligent as accessory be seuerely-punished.

Fourthly, and because Servants in most of our Gentries Houses are also
infected with this Pestilent abomination, it were fit, that they build new
Cellars near their Parlours, where their Masters Eye might curb them, if
they meet not with sober Butlers to restrain them.

In these latter times people are become so besotted with this abominable
Vice, that no Admonition can prevail to withdraw them from it: Whereas in
times past the very sight of a Drunkard was as rare as a Goblins; Yea, and if
it chanced that any one were but seen reeling in the Streets, the very Boys
would whoote, and laugh him to scorn, until such time as the Magistrate or
the Governor came, and brought him to the Stocks, or committed him to prison.

But now it is grown so common, that they account it a glorious Act, and the
Music must play while the health goes round.

It is recorded, that the godly Mouica the mother of St. Augustine, being but
once vpbrayded by a Servant in the house, that she loved the Wine bottle, she
took it for such a disgrace, that never after she drank one drop of Wine
more, as long as she lived.

Platerus makes mention in his practice of Physic, that he knew a Nobleman
who being diseased of the Gout, and informed by his Physician that his
drinking of Wine and strong Liquor had caused his infirmity, he made a vow
never to drink any such Liquor more, which he religiously kept, and in the
stead thereof drank nothing but small Cider, or Veriuice. Whereby he was quite
cured of the Gout, without any other Medicine.

The like I have heard of an Hydropicke person, who having experimented, that
drink produced and augmented his Disease, he resolved never to drink more,
but contenting himself with Broathes, and the like moist suppings, he was
never after-wards troubled with the Dropsy.

To draw our Newlanders Cure now to a Period, let me entreat all them, which
have any feeling of Sobriety, and of the necessity, wherein our Christian
Common wealth stands at this present time, to lay aside their captious
Criticismes, and carping censures, together with their needless Feasts, and in
good earnest to embrace my Counsel in some measure, if they cannot as yet
apply their wills to the stint, which is here prescribed. I know the
impediment proceeds of Custom, and this Custom can hardly be altered,
(except the Spirit of God will cooperate,) without some offense to
concupiscence. Such is the lamentable obstinacy of many hare-brain'd worldlings
now a days, that Parents cannot without great difficulty withdraw their own
Bowels from following their boon Companions, and roaring Gallants, whose
conversation but for a few days they have frequented. How much harder then is
it to diswade men from those prouocations, which from their Childe-hood they
have continued? The most part presuming on their Constitutions and present
strength, suppose, that all the Meat, which they ordinarily feed upon, and
the Carouses which they swallow, cannot much impair them. Nay, they will
constantly avouch, that it is a sign of Health to drink Healths, or to eat
soundly, whereas they be but baytes of Pleasure, so that Greediness knows
not, where Necessity should ^e ended, or Nature limited, as Saint Augustine
against Julian, Lib. 4. Cap. 14. Existimantes nos adhuc agere negotium
valetudinis, cum agamus potius voluptatis. It a nescit cupiditas, vbi finiatur
Necessitas. But men of understanding will consider, that most of the Bodies
sicknesses and unruly Passions do arise from the wanton Palate, and that
whatsoever enters into the Body, which the Stomach cannot perfectly concoct,
must needs exceed the true Quantity, which Nature allows, and so turn to
noisome Humors at the last, in despite of Nature.

Ye that be Parents, shall here learn to weane your Infants with a better
Diet, then with Flesh and Fish; which will rotte and corrupt their tender
bodies.

Ye, that be Rich, accept of this Treasure, Divine Sobriety, which will infuse
into your hearts, modest contentment.

Ye, that be Poor, shall here learn Frugality, at a cheepe rate.

Ye, that be Young, shall be taught Continency.

Ye, that are Elder, and therefore should be wiser, shall meet here with
health and long life.

Here, ye shall find all your Senses refined, as well the Inward as the
Outward. Here, from temperate heat issue temperate Effects. The Blood spreads
gently through the Veins; the Spirits through the Arteries: And the Soul by
Virtue of this Heavenly Gift, being as it were discharged of her Massy load,
and loathsome Lump, has now some experience of her Liberty, and that by this
Purification she is not far from Glorifications.

In a word, Dear Countrymen, condemn not this Cure before you Read, or make
some trial of the Substance. The time requires it. For the Misery of Iniquity
is permitted to act the last Tragedy of Spiritual Wickedness in Heavenly
matters.

But ye who are enabled to live temperately, need not fear as long as ye
continue steadfast in Faith: Your Old men shall dream Heavenly Dreams, your
Young men shall see Visions, your Sons and Daughters shall Prophecy, your
Servants and Maids shall be inspired with the Holy Ghost, according to the
Prophecy of I^^l.

Authoris Epilogus de Repletionis and Ebrietatis incommodis.
ECce Nouae Terrae Fructus, mensura Diata,
Lux re^ouata, salus, spes, et medicina doloru^.
Pone modum ventri Deus imperat, acc^pe sanum
Consilium, compesce gulam, suspe^de fur^res.
Heu quantes qualesque facit Repletio morbos!
Ex hoc Font fl^unt animi deliria Motus:
Corporis hinc omnes a^gores, Asthmata, Tusses,
Multiplices Febres, Hydrops, nodos^ Po^agra,
Et quot quot memorare horret men's sana (meatus
So ferte obstruerent mixti cum Bile vapores,)
Ni stella^ numerare velis, lateremque lauare:
Curridere solent Nebulonum turba profa^a,
Scurril^busque socis Sanctorum corda gra^are?
Dum ceuet Damocles, v^as saeuire Cyclopas.
Post cyathos in Membra Det, potosque Thrasones
Consilij latebras Parasitis pandere nou^;
Cur jurat Mars iuris inops? Cur iurgia, Lites,
Et pugnas Lapithae de lana saepe caprina
I^miscent saturi? phantasma volubile Bacc^^
Creed malos Gentos in tanta pericula far:
Aerei ludunt sic inter vina Dapesque,
Graeculus vt Rhetor, sit Gracculus ille Poeta;
Gloria sola Deodetur, qui Flamine sancto
Auoc^t a vitijs, Christo ^^dia^te, Britannos.
THE Newlanders Cure.
THE Second PART.
Muse on the Matter,

More then the Meeter.

The first SICTION.
The Preparatius to the Cure of the Minds Infirmities; wherein the Author by
the discovery of his own Imperfections in his Worldly Race and Course of life,
admo^isheth all others his Fellow Christians to Repent and Confes^e their
sins in time.

Morstua, Mors Christi, Fraus mundi, gloria Coeli; Et Dolor Inferni sunt
meditanda tibi.

Think on your Own, and Christ his Death,
The Judgment Day, and Hell beneath:
Think also on bright Heavens Joys,
For Worldly Hopes are Dreams and Toys.
What are our Pomp, Wealth, Beauty, Fame?
But Braine-sicke snares, and Wares too blame?
What Age like our so cracked with I^rres?
Yet crakes of Love, provoking Wars?
Proud Nabal, stoop; prevent thy woes,
Make peace, and Friends take not for Foes.
Just David did thy Flocks no ha^me,
Nay, they were shielded by his Arm.
If to his God thou tell thy Sins,
He Will save thee from the Philistines;
But if his David's thou abuse,
Repentancelate will not excuse,
If Misers Guilt thou justify,
Or Humane Pomp do glorify;
Or Hypocrues thou magnify;
Or thine own worth not vilify;
This CVRE will prove a stumbling block,
And to such Fools a laughing stock.
The same, yet I am confident,
Shall not displease the Penitent:
Nor any Soul of Saints Communion,
That does partake of Christian Union.
Those watchful Spirits long to see,
A true Physi^ian without Fee.
In brief, let me be said to Doat,
If I show not an Antidote,
Against the World, the Flesh, and Diue^^,
Or at the least against some Evil.
And sure, unless they mean to fall.
My Patients will admit of all
This Cure, which Newland for the Old,
And Sickly offers to unfold.
But first, their Faults they must Confess,
Or else they dye Remediless.
They must likewise abandon strife,
And Vow to God a better life;
Then out of hand begin to day,
Dear Penitents; time flies away:
Begin, and I a Sinner too
Will prompt what you shall fail to do.
We here before thy Majesty,
Dread Lord, present Iniquity,
Laid bare without Hypocrisy,
The which from Adams Leaprosie
Of sin de^iu'd, we all inherit,
And for the same Hells flames do merit.
O give us Grace Vice to displace,
To cleanse our selves, while we have space:
If we Repent, thou heal'st our Sins,
And we shall shine like Cherubins.
But what am I, whom for thy Glory,
Thy Spirit mooues to pen this Story?
This little one, like Zoar, where
Thy Servants may behold with fear
Gomorraes flame, old Babels shame;
And those new sins, which us defame?
This Charge became a Levites zeal,
To ring it out with louder peale:
How can thy Gifts in me reside,
That am not clean, nor purified?
In April days with hare-brain'd fury
Led, topsie turuy I did hurry
For Worldlings praise, and thanks to curry,
Whereby thy Motions I did hury.
What then I wrought was to gain Fame,
A blazing blast, to raise my Name.
But now I see that I went wrong,
For Honors all to thee belong.
And whosoever goes about
To lay thy Goods for his own out,
Usurpes, and steals part of thy Glory,
Which made bright Angels dark and sorry.
My Summers growth I spent in folly,
And gave my self to Passions wholly:
To scrape and gape for Golden Days,
Neglecting what the Gospel says:
O Fool, this Night I Will snatch thy Soul,
Who shall thy Fortunes then control?
My loyes were Toys, my Cares bred Tares;
Thus caught with Snares, I sought false Wares.
Thus Dregs to God, to Mammon Wine,
In my best Race I did assign.
How then shall I in Autumn now
Reap Profit, when I faild to Sow?
When Libra for my late repair,
Begins to dye my Amber Hair:
Shall I with Saints a gleaning go,
Who, like a Foe, did Time forgo?
O Gracious God, that give hire,
And with new fire do men inspire.
My Euenings work thou well do like,
For thy Sun always shines alike,
On Publicans, whose hearts rely
Upon Christ's merits, those which fly
From thee displeased to thee appeas^d,
In hope of Debts to be releas^d.
O what brave sparklings of thy Lou^,
Appear in such, who Sins reprove?
I feel some heat by this Remonstrance,
To rouse my heart with quick Repentance.
Let Pick-thankes with Ambition swell,
Till thou blow'st them from Earth to Hell:
We on no Creatures dare rely,
But here before thee humbled lie.
Whether thou scourge, or us will purge,
We will not cease thy Grace to urge:
Yea, though thou hale us in a rope,
Like Sampson bound, yet we will hope.
With Dalilaes we dallied long;
But now we sing another Song.
When our Confessions move to pity,
We then shall frame a sweeter Ditty.
Lord, after shrift renew thy fires,
Devotions flames, in our desires.
The second SECTION.
The Description, Confession, and Effects of our Common sicknesses, which by
the temptations of the Wolrd, the Flesh, and the Devil, distemper most Minds
in this latter age, where^n the weakness of our Common Writers is taxed.

WE brag of Faith, here Satan lurkes,
For in Good works we live, like Turks.
Pure Saints, or Angels we would seem,
Yet Golden ones we more esteem.
We feed like Kings, are served in State,
And make us Gods of silver Plate.
We chop and change, in Pride we ruffle,
And more for Goods, then Good do scuffle.
We plod on Protects, more then Zeal,
On private ends, then Commonweal.
Plain dealing men we flou^e, like Fiends:
And Sycophants we trust, as Friends.
We count it lawful to deceive,
Where Gifts unpunished we receive.
We fee the Lawyers, full of Gall,
While starued Souls for Vengeance call.
How many Thousands pine at Home,
Though Newfound Land yields Elbow room?
But sink or swim, say greedy Elues;
None helps to Plant; all for themselves.
They Rob too soon those Infants milk,
Which might bring Gold, Salt, Iron, Silk.
But why should I for Newland speak,
Whilst that the Old does languish weak?
And like to starve in midst of store,
Which has enough, yet couets more?
So have I seen Hydropickes pale
Swell big, and dye, with bibbing Ale.
Our Minds more Weak in Resolution,
Compared to the Ancient Nation.
Search further, Muse, but with Compassion,
And see, how comes this Alteration?
The Times precedent had their faults;
We have their Old and New assaults.
Their Traditions, Superstitions,
Times Reuolutions, Constellations:
Fiends slye Stratagems, and Temptations,
Devils incarnates Combinations.
All these with our New Prouocations
Work; and we feel their Operations.
Most Men are bad in every Trade,
Even from the Scepter to the Spade.
The Greatest still prey on the Less,
And spend those preyes in foul Excess,
Witness our joining Farm to Farm,
Perverting Wealth to Neighbors harm.
Witness our Drinkings, wasting Health,
Our giddy Smoakes, and deeds by stealth,
What misshapen Apish Fashions,
Are derived from foolish Passions?
Our Purles, rare Pearls, and rich Array,
An Armies Charge might well def^ay.
Our Thoughts are in Prides Altitude;
Old Sacke-cloaths wear is Clownish rude.
Contritions Haire-cloath we contemn,
Nuns Tyres and H^rmits we condemn.
In stead of these, each Groom exceedes,
In Satan's Velvet, gorgeous Weeds.
In stead of these, now Virgins shine
In Church unmasked, with Feathers sine.
^st not a shame, that flaunting G^llians
Dare there to tempt against Tertullians
Advise? who barred the Affricke Maid
Gods Honse to enter so arrayed?
Christ's Seamelesse Coat would hardly pass
Without a Frump. A two-legg'd Ass,
They would nicke-name a Minister,
If the Frize Cass^^ke he prefer,
Preaching against rich s^^ken Stuff,
The Beauer Ha^, and swagg^ing Ruff.
Na^, English Cloth we s^arce a low,
Unless thick Laces we bestow:
Unless it be, like that in Gra^^e,
O^ ^ab^ls Beast, or Whoo^ish Train.
Like VVeather-cockes, our Appetite
In many Changes takes delight:
For which Men tax the Female kind:
When both are Moone-sicke, worse then wind.
The Rainbow, Peacocke, or what hew
Cameleons shift, so it be new,
Or thought Outlandish, that we like;
And presently the same dislike.
Our Eyes are Witches to our Wits,
But why loves Reason Fancies fits?
Our Foes unseen, us idle find,
And by their wheeling lead the Mind.
The Mould of Reason thus made pliant
By Fiends rampant and luxuriant,
The Brain must needs grow wild with weeds
Whence fall bad seeds, to choke good deeds.
Such spite have they inueterate,
To make Mankind turn Reprobate,
That they omit no tricks of State,
To lead them to a shamef^ll Fate,
Like to their own depraved quite;
From which, but Christ, none can acquit.
Sometimes they play the Lions part,
But commonly use Foxe-like Art.
Now they ^ike Apes, or Puppets dance;
A^on in Horses shape they praunce.
Go on, Proud Steedes, men are not well,
But hurried in a foure-whee'd Shell.
With whimseyes doubts ye tempt the Holy,
But Worldly Souls, with costly Folly.
Those means, which God gave for his Glory,
To help the Poor, in Pride ye bury.
O Stings! O storms of Ghostly Foes,
Which now Great Britain undergoes!
When Christ should reap his Harvest pure,
His Angels find us all impure.
We see the Gospels radiant Light,
Yet darkling hunt like Birds of Night.
We ever please the out-ward sense,
But leave the Inside without fence.
Our Petty-fogging liberty,
Helps to advance impiety.
But Athens now, and Courts of Law,
Had need themselves be kept in awe,
By St^ickes more grave, to beat down Vice
Or Thunders sons to satirize.
The truth is, without Discipline,
Our Bees turn Drones, and will decline
From Charity, and virtuous Thrift,
To idleness, and basest shift.
Fond Company we more affect,
Then sober Friends, or Gods Elect.
The Baffoones ^irry meery Buffe,
Sta^e Scoggins ^ests, wi^s Scullions stuff,
Base Mim^cke skoff^s, broad scu^^i^e tau^ts,
With Baggadochian thundering Vaunts,
Stupendous Lies of Balladry;
All which with Tales of Rybaldry,
False coined News, and old Wives fables
We Grace, cu'n at our open Tables.
We glut our guts with luscious cheer,
And seldom Fast scarce once a Year.
Nor then know we to Mortify,
Or the proud Flesh to vilisie.
We often Read of Vanity,
But seldom Books of Piety.
Such glistring Baits do hook vsin,
And make us doat on shining Sin.
Our Stage Plays, Maskes, and Mummeries,
What are they else but Fopperies?
And Lullabies to rock a sleep
Souls, that should wake, or rather weep?
What noble Flames do some enjoy?
And yet their Talents mis-imp^oy?
The very Best of their Inventions,
They give for Baudes, to Lords intentions.
Of Heaven these Promethean Rakers,
Vnworthymen would make partakers.
Wisdom is painted a pure Maid;
The Sisters Nine are Virgins stayed.
If of their Court our Scholars be,
Why doethey stayne their chaste degree?
Begetting mungrell monstrous Notions?
And giving way to wanton Motions?
The Graces three have no lewd Trick:
Why then do learned Spirits kick,
Like Pampred Iades, more then befits
The Sons of Art? corrupting Wits
With glozing Books of Ch^ualry?
Or Legends false of Popery?
If from Above, their Dowries came,
Why do our Chams uncover shame?
Why do they claw Times Fooleries?
Why do they wink at Knauer^es?
Why dare they not the Greatest make
To startle? and at Vice to quake?
It Is true; they Greatness fear and loss,
But who so fears, reiects the Cross:
That Cross, which Christians underwent
Of the best stamp, and element.
Huisht, Cowards then: Your Taients hide,
Until Christ's Audit still vntri'de.
Some for Despite do Libels thunder:
Others for Glory, nine days wonder.
But most do fawn, like Strumpets bold,
And prostitute in hope of Gold.
On Honors bought they wag their Tails,
To Mammon they strike down their Sails.
Frail Beauty some with Heathenish Rimes
Court, wasting so their precious Times.
A Goddess, Star, an Angels mate,
Of Dust and Ashes they Create.
The wonder of Celestial Creatures,
The Paragon of Earthly features:
The good^iest Nymph, which Nature made,
At whose fair sight all Beauties fade.
Both Sun and Moon eclipsed stand,
Till they her Pleasure understand.
No marvel then, that I her Slave,
At her east Frown amazed rave.
With such besainting, and for Gold,
Our simpring she is are bought and sold.
But O what Antickes do I see?
With Music loud about a Tree?
Tripping it on the Saboath Day,
And kissing often their Marians gay?
Thus our best days we fool away.
Some Pill and Poll, alive some flay.
Some roar, and some, like Asses, bray.
Some skoffe and lie, some laugh and play
At Cards and Dice whole winter Nights,
In Summer days with Dogs and Kites.
Here stands one curling (Pockey-full)
His Perrowicke; another Gull
Out-vies his fellow Gull in Oaths;
And Complements, whom he most loathes*
Of Pedigrees that Scoundrell vauntes,
Cal^ing true worth with floutes and tauntes
An vpstars Dwarf, whilst he most mad,
Prates, how for Sires he Giants had.
This Noddy fears proud Hamans Nods,
As Fools do sprights, or Schoole-boyes Rods.
But who lewd Courtiers so observes,
Loud Carters lashes Beast deserves.
Another studies how to train,
More Clients in for cursed Gain.
Physicians now, and Lawyers ^oyne,
To spin long Cures, and Suites for Coin
In elder days what by our Toil
Was gained, became the Clergies spoil.
But now the Lawyers keep a Coin,
And reap upon their Neighbors soil.
As those did quail, so these may fail,
Or be restrained, without Bail;
When Charity shall more prevail,
Their double-tongues some will bewail.
They worship Gold in general:
Yet some fear God, I tax not all.
But these Good-men how to discern,
When needful Suites do us concern;
We must at Noone have Candlelight,
Or Prophets gift, to save our Right.
Most Students do Tradesmen resemble;
Since Both for Custom can dissemble.
In hugger-mugger many Bribe,
Ds if they were of Magus Tribe.
If such be not in Brittane found,
Let Simonists of Foreign ground,
Redeem their Schools, and Cloyster-cowles,
From Chaffring, and the sale of Souls.
Nay, let our Foes fear gaping Hell,
If Seats of Justice they dare sell:
Or if to those they Men prefer,
Who formerly were known to Err.
In what a fearful Case are those,
Who Worldly Fortunes so dispose,
As if our God were fast a sleep?
And did not see what rule they keep?
Me thinks, I see our Fluttring Foes,
Watching their time to breath in woes,
Under pretense of seeming Good,
Like him, that bears under one Hood
A double face, with fained Grace.
They blow a pace, till they get place
Within the Spirits and the Blood:
Where they work Gall of humors good.
This poysn'd Gall, the Souls black laundies,
Pricks so, that Man on Cocke-horse bandies
Against his God, and Natures Law,
That Grafts this Rule with filial aw:
Who lets not sin, if so he can,
Consents to it a wicked man.
Some yearly raise a greater Rent,
By Interest for Money lent,
Then Maltaes lew of Foes did take;
For to the Bones these Men do rake.
I blame not lawful Permutation,
(But with a sober limitation,)
Vtopian-like, to bar Commerce;
But common scandals I rehearse
To them, who sell their Goods too dear,
Or them, that sheare Christ's sheep too near.
More Laymens griefs I could reveal,
Which shame from Muttring bids conceal.
Yet wants there not some Nightingall,
Like sweet Saint Paul, to touch them All.
Those Practices now pass for Good,
Which Noah saw before the Flood.
Some Build, some Buy, some cheat, and borrow.
Whilst the next Morrow steals on sorrow.
The third SECTION.
That the most part of our pretended Christians are infectea with some of the
afore-sayd infirmities, and that all carnal pleasure shall end in pain.

THese Mad Conceits bewitch us all,
Yet Lu^atickes who dare us call?
These I doll lusts we hug in Spirit,
Yet do we boast of Zeal and merit.
Like bawling Curres, we bark at Vice,
We Rail on Br^bes and Avarice:
We Blame the Whore, and idle Drone,
But who throws guiltless the first stone?
Many find fault with swinish Drunkards,
Themselves rebellic^s under Placards.
The Blind-m^n calls his Brother, Blinkard.
The Pockey (...) his fellow, stinkard.
Thus others B^ots we quickly score,
When we deserve correction more.
When Judgment Consc^^^ce shall control,
The purest souls will prove but foul.
Here lur^es a Toad, a S^rpent there,
Sharp stings and poison every where.
The Preacher wrote; all is but Uaine:
But I dare Write, all ends in pain.
What cares have we, what toil, what pain;
These seeming pleasures to obtain?
And once obtained, what is then our Mind?
But Neighing new and more to find?
No Earthly thing brings much content,
But afterward breeds discontent,
Which A^ams Apple we may call,
Both bitter sweet, and Honey'd Gall.
Joy surf^its some; some pine with Pain;
Yet the partake in Sin and Rain.
Death spares nor Rich, Poor, Poole, nor Wise;
For All must fall before they Rise;
The Crown, which Royal brows adornes,
Within is Nettles, Pricks, and Thorns:
Fears Discontents, want of Treasure,
Jealous of Neighbors, Leagues unsure.
Nor live our Grandes without trouble,
Their Pomp to double, though a bubble.
The Midling and the Lowest sort,
Grieve to maintain the Lawyers Port.
Thus Christians as a Tennis Ball,
Tossed by themselves, are prone to fall.
Yet None begin to look for ease,
But think of Iarres instead of Peace.
The fourth SECTION.
The Description of the Catholic Scuruy, engendered by the Mystery of
Iniquity, the Glorious manifestation whereof had been restrained and sealed up
by the Angel, until 1000. years were expired, for the hardness of our
Forefathers hearts.

NOt only these do us disease,
But only Ills disturb our ease.
It Is found, that most Diseases tend,
And to the Scuruy power lend,
To torture Slugs, who nastily
Were Clothed, or fed too greedily.
Great F^ends likewise, and Men Soule-sicke,
Hell's Scuruy make a Catholic,
With Murders, Lies, Hypocrisies,
Idolatries, and Blasphemies.
As does the former Scuruy beat,
For want of Sun and Motions heat,
Upon the Spleen, the Breath, and Skin:
So does that old and Scuruy sin
With Purple spots go on to stayne
Both Soul and Body, all for Gain.
Men's want of Faith, and Scriptures Light,
Enwrappes them in blind Aegypts night.
Fond quirkes and quillers, Schools inventions,
Do hinder them to use preuentions.
But how comes this gross Sin to pass
In those, who say Christ's Blood does wash,
And hea^^al Plagues, and cancred Lust,
By virtue of his Merits just?
When Men distrust the safest way,
They cannot ch^se but go astray.
When Fabells Tower, and Asaes Hopes;
When (...) G^d, and Ba^lish Popes;
When Man's pos^^ons, ^rring Brain,
They trust, as if Christ died in vain;
When they refuse Gods tendered Motions,
And will carouse false Prophets Potions;
Their ^oules so giutted salla reeling,
Like drun^en Tosse-pots without feeling.
Then Judgment, Wid, and Memory
Deprived of Faiths strong Armo^y,
In black Despair conclude their ways,
And never after see good days.
Or they Presume (a Plague as bad)
With too much Learning running mad.
These two Extremes, like scorching Sun,
And hideous darkness, we must shun.
The middle Course with Modesty,
Yeeldes some content to Majesty.
To which add Faith: then Grace will cover
Our brittle Knowledge, and discover
What vengeance more hangs on the Scuruy,
Which Christendom turns topsie turuy
With blood, Fraud, Dreams, Ambition, fears,
Regardlesse of poor Christians tears:
Till He, that Rocks with Thunder tears,
He, that controules the Wandering Spheres,
Do by his Light expelling Night
Remove the Beam, that dimmes our sight;
And tame the Force of this great Fury,
Which wilfully true Faith would bury.
The Diuell^s loose from B^bilon,
And wa^ches whom to work upon.
Old Heresies he brings in:
So fair without, and foul within,
Some Stars begin to loose their Light,
Which on the Saints shined lately bright;
And it is most true, some States will rue,
If the last Earthquake do ensue.
Proud Gog, and Magogs Horn with eyes,
Have pitched their Tents to Tyrannize,
And Giant like do threaten those,
Who Lies and false-hood shall oppose:
Those, who serve GOD in Unity,
And in the Persons Trinity,
They persecute with Fire and Sword,
And vow to raze his Written Word,
(Which now has flourisht many years,
In spite of Balaam, and his Peers.)
And make us bow to Romes Mark'^ Rabble,
Their Mazzims God, and Masses Babble.
A thousand Years by Treachery,
And iuggling Tricks, this Mystery
Shut up and sealed, gul'd faithless slaves,
But now against Gods Church it ^aues,
That Church, which then for few assigned,
To Deserts fled for fear confined,
And acts the last red Dragons part,
With open Force and cunning Art,
Let us (say they) with all our Might,
Their consciences at length affright,
If our false Fire and wonders fail,
Our three Frog-spirits shall prevail,
Whom Ca^phas cursed with Book and Bell,
We Will sacrifice their Blood to Hell;
But before this Desolation,
We must b^nd the strongest Nation.
You hear the Plot, now to prevent
These latter Plagues; watch and Repent:
For if they bind the Valiant Men,
What will become of weaklings then?
When God remoues his Candlestick,
Hells darkness more will make us sick.
The fifth SECTION.
The emminent Dangers of this great and Mystical Disease over Great Britain,
by a Reflection of those T^ibulations, which our Fellow Members have lately
endured beyond the Seas, and may hereafter light upon us, if we prevent them
not by speedy Repentance.

BEhold the sad and riuel'd Face
Of Rochell, once the strongest Place
Of Christendom, now made a slave?
And forced for Light to c^ye and crave.
Behold the Land of Casimire,
On Khines fair Banks, whom France did hire,
To save her Church New-Built from fire;
Now poor, disrobed of her Attire.
In like manner, see, how many
Bright Uirgins Lamps in Germany,
Extinguished lie, whose glorious Rays
Like Carbuncles, made Nights seem Days.
Our Fellow Members reap this Curse;
And we deserve the same, or worse.
Their Fatal loss concerns us near,
And ought to strike a tremb^ing fear.
For if Our Savior gives us over,
The Cut is short from France to D^uer.
God may permit the Spanish Nation,
By Land and Sea to work vexation.
Or those, that are now Friends, to langle,
Or out of Trading us to wrangle.
Or let o de Satan's Sorcery
Pre^aile, to bring in Popery.
which if He do, how stand our Lives,
Our Church, our Children, States, and Wives?
In stead of Milk our Younglings luck
Would be, empoys'ned whay to suck.
All then must to the Shaven Crown,
With the Beasts mark, fall prostrate down.
None Just, but who to Babell tun:
No Maid made Saint, but a fair Nun.
And she for Penance must submit,
To her Confessors venial fit.
But first Mortmaines must be repealed,
And Praemunires quite expelled.
If this great Earthquake shall prevail,
And the Old Dragon with his Tail
Draw twinkling Stars from Heaven down,
And form them Fire-drakes of his own,
O^r Watchmen then should hear Brauadoes,
And turn or burn, or feel S^rapadoes.
Our sins deserve this dark Eclipse,
To kiss the Pax with Who^^ ^^^lips.
We felt of War the discontents,
The Pestilence sacked our chief Tents:
A Famine new creepes in through Rain,
From which, Lord, keep our Souls again.
What dangers more may us oppose,
I have no warrant to disclose.
I dare not to me arrogate,
Of Prophecy the certain Fate.
But I could wish, that Harmony
Supplied the place of Simony:
That Justice, Love, and Godly zeal,
Did reign in Church and Commonweal
And for those Perils, which I fear,
Let every Kna^^ his burden bear.
And justly too, if they allow
For current Good, the ill they know.
They who feel not these Offenses,
Nor look help, have lost their senses.
But let them get Souls spectacles,
And they shall see Gods Miracles:
How with a strong and mighty hand,
He still protected this our Land,
Against Romes subjects every where,
While we in Faith courageous were.
The fifth SECTION.
The imminent Dangers of this great and Mystical Disease, over Great
Britain, by a Reflection of those Tribulations, which our Fellow Members have
lately endurea beyond the Seas, and may hereafter light upon us, if we prevent
them not by speedy Repentance.

Within my time I can record,
How God kept us from fire and Sword,
From Treasons hatched in Satan's Den,
Beyond belief of Mortal men.
In Infants Years I well remember,
He saved our Churches Royal Member,
Elizabeth, from Parries Blow,
Which though a Child I then did know,
For that my Father stood engaged,
For him to Hare, whereat enraged,
Because my Father for his Debt,
Three thousand pounds, was su'd, he set
Upon H^gh Hare within his Study,
Gave diverse stabs, and left him bloody.
Then, in despair he went beyond Sea,
Was reconciled to the Romish Sea:
And there by Comoes Cardinal,
Put on to play the Canniball.
For coming home, he hunted further,
Scorning Hares the Lion to Murder.
But God did keep our Lion Queen,
Whom Parry meant to ^ill unseen.
About that time, the Pote did muster,
And out of Ireland thought to thrust her,
By Peter's Keys, and Paul his sword,
With Desmonds help, a powerful Lord.
But God looked down, and saw their spleen,
He fought for us, and for our Queen.
Then, Fourteen ^raytors thought to throw
Down Englands Star; for they did sow
Their seeds of foul Conspiracy,
To yoke us to the Papacy.
But God himself with hand unseen,
Confounded them, and saved our Queen.
In Eighty Eight, his Elements
Scattred Spaines Fleet, and Regiments;
So that for their Atla^tides,
They sought the Pole at the Orcedes.
Thus God preserved a Maide^ Queen,
From Nembrod^ spite, and Giants teene.
When Forces failed, Bulls went about,
And cunning Jesuits they sent out.
They Lopez hired with Po^s^ncaski^l,
Both Her, and some great Peers to kill.
But God protected, though unseen,
Our Faiths Defendresse, Englands Queen
After these storms, the Traitor Squire,
By Friars Counsel did Conspire:
But ^e, Tyrone, and all our Foes
Had ouer-throwes with Tragic Wees.
For on themselves God turned their spleen,
And still defended Englands Queen.
Again, the ^paniaras sought Seaports,
In Ire^ana, where they won some Forts,
And marching on, they thought to boast,
But God by Mountioy foiled their Host,
And gave their Dous unto our Queen,
O^ whom they meant to wreake their teene*
O Peerless Queen, beloved of God!
Who for thy Zeal were made his Rod,
To chastize Gogs, and Tyrants bold!
Which more then him, did worship Gold!
Thou did Spaines Fleetes, and Carracks shal^e,
Thou made the Groine, and Lisbane qual^e,
And make us tell unfeigned tales,
How God for Thee subdued Cales*
How He for Thee did scourge New Spain,
Brazil, the Islands, and the Maine.
God gave the Flemings liberty
By thee, and all Prosperty.
By thee, great Burb^n got his Right,
I^ (...) and in the Leagues despice.
By thee were ships and Trades sustained,
By Thee at home was Peace maintained.
By thee, God wrought for his great Glory,
This to be writ, in after Story:
A Queen debarred of Bodies Breed,
Of spirit left true Christian seed.
Scarce to her Orb our Virgins Star^e
Was gone, but by a Ciu^^l VVa^re
Some Papists thought to work a side,
And our ^oyn'd Kingdoms to divide:
But Watson and his Accomplices,
Paid dear for these Confedracies.
Here is not all, which I have known,
Done by our God for Britains Crown.
What Poets pen, or Wit of Man,
Is able to express, or scan
The means, how in November we,
On the Fifth day, escaped free?
When many Papists d^d consent,
To blowat once our Parliament,
With Powder up into the Air,
In hope to make our Church despair?
They swore upon the Sacrament,
To keep full close their Blows intent.
The Jesuit Garnet under hand,
And others of his Learned band
Allowed it for a pious deed,
A Christian King and his Male seed,
To murder, with his Royal Mate,
And all our Peers by sudden Fate.
O Piercy, Catesby, what meant ye,
With other Britains to agree,
To pierce Christ through his servants sides,
In hope of Pardon from blind Guides?
Guy Faukes by all the damned Crew,
Was set to play the boute-feu.
He had his Match and all things ready,
(Alas that Christians were so heady)
To blow them up out of the Mine,
Fierce Nero like and Catiline.
Thus to the end their Treason brought;
God counter wrought, what they had wrought,
Inspired the King to search the matter,
Suspected by a mysticke Le^ter;
A Letter sent to brave Mounteagle,
Whom Treassams Art could not inue^gi^:
So all came out, we saved from Fire,
And they received their Treasons hire.
Just as they thought our Church to batter,
Gods justice did their own limbs scatter.
Our Papists also should remember,
What on the fifth of their November,
At the Blacke-Friers fell on them,
Which our Religion did contemn.
Their Priest, and those, who then him heard,
As sometime were the Swinish Heard,
Within the Gospel mentioned,
By Miracle lay Ruined.
Thus may both Churches understand,
The several working of Gods hand
On that Fifth Day; a stumbling bar
To them, but unto us a Star.
To these my ripe Remembrances,
I add our strange Deliverances,
From Pestilentiall Arrows shot
By God himself, well-nigh forgot
Of those, who were by his Alarm,
Like Hezekias, sau^d from ha^me.
So careless in Prosperity
Are men, when once Adversity
Is past, that they scarce think on VVoes,
Unless some chance to interpose
Betwixt them and their vanities,
Or that they loose Commodities
Thereby, although but Temporal.
For orders sake they outward call
On their Redeemer for a while:
But in their sleeves they laugh and smile
At their true zeal, who them accuse
Of blo^s, which they could never excuse.
Such Counterfeites are now a days,
Ungrateful, base in all their ways,
That to speak truth works enmity,
And to Cologue breeds amity.
How many Sick have cured been?
How many Coarses have I seen
On Beeres and carts both Day and Night?
Whom hours before in Iouiall plight
I knew, not dreaming once, that Death
Could stop so soon their vita^l breath:
Yet suddenly, behold a Wonder
Done by our Lord the God of Thunder.
For six Months space the Plague continued,
And after that all Trades Renewed.
I saw all Frollicke, Flourishing,
As if I saw none perishing.
Our Courts of Law again frequented,
Which Redding had one Term prevented.
For this, O ^rittain^s greatest City,
Sing to thy God a thankful Ditty.
Admire Christ's Mercy, fear thy Judge,
Love thy poore-Neighbours without grudge*
Trust not to Faith without this chain;
Least Faith prove vain, and end in Pain.
By these rare wonders I conceive,
That unto Men God will not leave,
Us long a Byword, nor a Prey,
If his Sons Precepts we obey.
For Carnal faults, or f^aielties trips,
Himself will scou^ge us for our slips.
But for that great backe-sliding deed,
The Souls relapse, let us take heed.
But how shall we prevent this, Lord,
If thou take hence thy sacred Word,
Restored in those Martyrs twain,
By Sodomites and Gypsies slain?
It is not long, since they revived,
And by thy Spirit us relieved,
At their first coming, as with thunder,
Our Worldlings were amazed with wounder.
The News did gall, and them appall,
They feared the fall of Babels Wall.
But now they vaunt, and us do taunt,
They shuffle Cards, as if at Saunt
They played, and won all with the Rhine,
And what thou gave the Palatine.
We must acknowledge, most just God,
That we deserve a sharper Rod,
Then these our Neighbors now oppressed,
For that thy Gifts we have suppressed
As Well as they; in stead of which
Our Ca^^e and Care is to be Rich.
By odious means we buy Promotion,
And scandalls raise for pure Devotion.
As Well as they in drinking health
Away, our youth have spent thy Wealth.
In sensual beds we wantoniz'd,
To Pomp, as God, we sacrifiz'd,
In Body we, and in the Soul,
All over are corrupted ^oule:
Nor can sweet Odours, or perfumes
Abate the stink of our black fumes.
Our swarms of Lawyers and Law-suites,
Hindering true Love, and Christian fruits:
Our Drunken meetings, and often Potting,
Our costly Fare, the Body rotting,
Our daily changes of gay Rayments,
Have meri^ed the Devils payments,
Vnless^ in Mercy Thou mind Sinners,
And will re^ine us for beginners.
Once more, Good Lord, regenerate
And purify our Bodies Mate,
Thy Image la^e, whose threefold Parts
In Ill more knowing, then Good Arts,
Are quite deprived of Heavenly Bliss,
If thou examine what is a miss.
Some Sins we know, and would redress,
But that strong F^ends do us oppress,
Both Openly and Secretly,
Which them to name would seem a lie,
Or slander: Yet thy Servants know them,
And if they might, would not allow them:
O let not Achan's sing^e fault,
(like that which David did assault)
B^ing down ^y Plagues without instruction.
Though All deserve the same destruction.
The seventh SICTION.
General and specifique Remedies not only against the Catholic Scuruy, but
likewise against all other spiritual Diseases, if they be pat ^^ practice.

MOst men are sick; yet few begin,
To Cure themselves of deadly sin.
The Body so by Agues kind,
Did never shake, as does the Mind;
The doubtful Mi^de, her doom foretold.
Yet Custom makes us ouerbold.
We long for Pelf, and strive for Wealth,
Few seek Rest: fewer their Souls Health.
This Custom comes from Elders grave,
Who scrape for Earth half in the Grave.
The Younger noting their base Actions,
Whom they think Saints, fall to Exactions.
O that men would consider this,
And leaving trash, would look for Bliss.
No Hearts like our so ha^dned were,
In sickness rife Cur^s to forbear.
What Cures have we? both Night and Day,
For Cordial comfort we must Pray
To God alone with Humble spirit,
And not depend on Humane Merit.
That Freedom, which through Christ we have,
The Father seals, if it we crave
For his Dear sake, who suffered woes,
And sham^full Death, to save his Foes.
We must derive our only Cure
From Christ alone, of sins impure.
We must Renounce all other hopes,
Devised for Game, by wicked Popes.
We must not shelter Christ his seed,
With Jonas Gourd, nor Aegypts Reed.
The Soul, on Creatures which relies,
Is like a who^^ish Wife* that lies
With Kna^es, and leaves his lawful Bed,
Whom God appointed for her Head.
We must be Infants m^de and meek,
Harmless as D^ues, when Christ we seek;
Yet wise as Serpents, to beware
Of Gordian Knots, and Brokage ware.
We must not wrest the Sacrament,
Nor carpe at things indifferent.
Christ crucifide we must behold,
As the Brass Serpent Those of Old.
They for a sign did see it stand,
But we the meaning understand.
The Cross, Bread, Wine, and what with sense
We apprehend, Time wears from hence.
What Faith conceiues, inflames the Spirit;
And this brave Flame the Saints inherit:
I^ quickneth so, that Christ his Nature,
Inspires and heales the Soule-sicke Creature.
As Bread and Wine the Body feed,
So must the Mind his Passion heed:
Thus Eat and Drink thou Iustifi'd,
His Flesh and Blood, though Glorified.
And Mystery and Figure take it,
As Christ the Rock and Bread fore-spake it.
We must conf^sse our selves accursed,
Of Christian souls the very worst.
We must the same to others do,
As our selves would be done unto.
We must leave off Hypocrisy,
Our foolish Carke, and Policy.
We must care more to d^cke the Minds,
Then the frail Body p^f^ with Wind.
We must not mount above our Calling,
But rest content for fear of falling.
We must our Patience so enure,
That^ aues grown great we may endure,
Who through the Window made their way,
Since eu'rv 'Dogge must have his Day.
We must not swell, when we have store;
Nor yet Repine, though some heap more.
Time ends this strife: The houre-glasse passes.
What need Men then to moyle like Asses?
We must abhor the Reeling sin
Of Soule-sicke healths, which Sots brought in.
To this I add that Indian borne,
Blood-^ainting Fume, drinks shoe in horn;
Of which I blame the quantity,
But not the Physickes quality.
We must not live too sparingly,
Nor spend Gods goods superfiuously.
We must not grudge the Prore to seed,
For Alms are Bal^^es in time of need.
More Hiues for Bees, for Gods Elect,
On o^he^ Coasts let us erect.
Our wearied Lands, our swarms require it:
The Lord commands, the Saints desire it.
We must by Deed; show good example;
And at their entry Passions trample.
We must not brawl^ for every fault:
The Just themselves do sometimes halt.
We must forgive our Foes as well
As God does us, who me^ne Hell.
We must not play more, then the Turk,
Who flips no Day, without some work.
The Mind on Labor fixed sure,
Stops wandering thoughts from Satan's lure.
The Gentle Spark might ^^sse the Pike,
Shoot, Rid^, Graft, Study, or the like
The Female sex finds carke at home,
Sings Psalms, or shows rare skill on Loom^.
The Soldier hears the Drummers sound,
Stands Sentinel, or walks the Round.
He trains, he fights, and spends his blood,
Like Maccabeus, for our Good.
Good Scholars have enough to do,
If tempting Lucr^ they forgo;
Besides the Muses spacious Grove,
The Bodies motion they approve.
On Citizens I need not call,
Nor Countrymen, who swear for all.
We must proud Pomp and Fraud eschew,
And think thereon what will ensue,
As God is just, a fearful end,
Which from Wraths U ioll will descend.
For when we perke, like Cardinals,
And grind the Poor, like Canniballs,
Scorning Christ's Members, racking rents,
And raking Gifts through discontenrs:
Our Angel Guardians fiye away,
And Satan hunts his Beasts of Prey.
If these few Rules we bear in Mind,
The Cure is sure; our Pardon signed.
Then Grace supplies frail Natures want;
Then Love will come, sin to supplant.
Both which who finds, he needs not fear,
Though all the World in Flames appear.
The eighth SECTION.
An Admonition to the Saints, to cont^^ue watchful and constant, and not to
fear this last and great Persecution threatened by the Spiritual Dragon, and
his Angels, although he come prepared with all his stratagems, Ambusher, and
with Multitudes of Men, like the sands of the Sea in Number.

Well may Esdraes Eagle muster;
And bold Chaucers Griffon bluster;
The Pelican, do what they can,
Will make them both Frer, Curse, and Ban.
Let Romish Ne^^rods roar again,
Their Thundering shots will fall in Vain.
Then Woe to them, that flourish now,
And who look back at Christ his Plow.
When their great Ma^sters Vatican,
Nor Basans Bulls protest them can.
When his strong guarded Angelo,
Shall not deliver from this Woe
Them, who with Christians blood do feast.
When the false Prophet, scarlet Beast,
The mounted Whore of Babylon,
The Man of sin, perditions Son,
The Mouth that speaks presumptuous things,
The Mystery with Eagles wings,
The Gog and Magog of the House,
The old red Dragons Rendeuous:
That Deceiuer, who in Gods Church,
Sits as a God, and by the lurch
Lives, and to sale puts Merchandise,
Men's souls and bodies, with false lies.
All figures of false Antichrist,
That dares usurp far more, then Christ
To his Apostles ever left:
For he quits Men of life bereft
From Purging Flumes ten thousands years,
And more he spares Romes roaming Peers.
When that this Monsters triple Head
Soul and Body in scalding Lead
Shall boil in Pits, and Lakes that swim
With Pitch and Brimstone to the brimme:
Then will his Followers all too late,
With Dives wayle their woeful Fate.
Then they will wish with Yel^es and howles,
That they had lived obscure, like Owls.
Then they will see the diffrent manner,
Of Jacobs fight, against Esaus Banner.
Then they will know Saint Michaels Arms,
Wherewith he sa^es Gods Church from harms.
For though the watchmen smote the Spouse,
As she sought Christ, yet still she grows,
Until her Seed, as heretofore,
In spirit plays the arrant Whore.
Let croaking Frogs, and chattring Pyes,
Let Daniel's Horn with Mysticke eyes:
Let curious Schoolmen, errors spawne,
Grace and Faith, for Freewill pawn:
Let such, as broach those Frantic Tales,
Whom Old Saint David chased from Wales,
Pelagian wise, depart from hence;
In spite of all we have defense.
On Physic known our Cures rely,
Let Mountebankes Elixirs try:
Men, who were called, but never Culled,
Thieves of the House, by cro^chets galled.
We fear strong flames; shr^bs safer lie
From Lightnings blast, then Cedars high.
The low-built Cot^age of a Clown,
Stands surer then the Triple Crown.
Aspiring doubts the Church our Mother,
As Fancies Braine-wormes, bids us smother
When Seraphins were feign to Veil,
How could Arminius sight but fail?
Let sober Learnings Oracles
S^te for our eyes plain Spectacles.
With these I see Free Will almost
Through Faith regained, which Adam lost.
The Glorious light restored our sight,
What sin had darkened, Grace sets right;
And gives us power, more or less,
Yet Means enough, to sue for Peace.
The Heart, which once Faith putrifies,
Never quite dies, nor purisies,
Nor is a Christian judged lost,
Before he slights the Holy Ghost;
Before his Talent he impaires;
Or that, like Judas, he dispaires.
God knows already, who are his;
Yet to make sure our Part it is;
For otherwise we should deface
Elections Charter, sealed of Grace.
The sum is this: Christ died for All.
His Word calls All; some hear his Call;
And by their deeds do manifest,
They enter shall into his Rest.
Some few discreetly seek to shun
A hardened Heart, ere day be done.
Mercy for Some there is in store.
We hope the best: And who knows more
The Tith^ of hours reserved to Pray,
The rest not wasted, may repay.
The stony heart in Time relents;
Much more our God, if Man repents,
And daily begges for Heavenly bread,
His Justice slackes; and we are fed.
But here is the worst, though Prayers draw,
There lies a Pad within the Straw.
The Angel Good bids, Fast and Pray,
The Angel Bad bids, Feast and Prey.
Thus Rhyme is marred, true Prayer bard,
A turned to E, the Cure made hard.
The Conclusion of the Cure, not unworthy the Consideration.
When Strife for L^ut, and (...) take for (...):
When praise for (...), and (...) we lock for Catch^ng:
And when from ^^^^s we s^^ll to Feasts and bibbing,
Then [Abbaes Streame] stays in the (...) ^bbing.
Our Advocate craves it to flow again,
The Father yeeldes, and ^o to eu^ry Vein
Their Stream flows fair, until our changling F^oles
Have sought to other Streams from muddy Pooles;
The Trinity then loathing Brains so sick,
Their Motion stop; and Men dye Lunoticke.
From which Re^apse, Distrust, and Heresy,
GOD keep us all as from Apostasy.
[Abbaes Streams.]

Abba Father the Voice of the Spirit in the hearts of Gods Adopted and
Regenerated children, acknowledging their Election from the Father, out of the
corrupted Lump of Mankind, and out of the unrefined Oar or vnpurified Mettle
of pretended Christianity, of mere Grace without any Deserts of theirs at all;
and consequently their Justification by the Son, through Faith, and the
spiritual apprehension of his only merits: Their sanctification by the Holy
Ghost, who proceeding from both their Wills, is content to breath Regeneration,
and New life, into our barren wills; and to moysten them with the Stream of
living Waters, unless they compel Him with his Heavenly Gifts to retire, by
relying on other Physicians, burdensome Traditions, and unnecessary puddled
streams, which Simoniackes, or rather D^moniackes, do trucke and utter for
money, under the Title of Holy Water, Indulgences, and sanctified Wares,
like-charmed so^owles, or Amulets, to preserve men from Cerbirus, and
Purgatories Bugs, thereby making Merchandise of the Bodies and Souls of Men;
as is Prophesied in the Revelation: which Avarice of theirs is flat contrary to
the examples of the Apostles, and the Gospel, where St. Peter told the Creeple
in Salomons Porch: Gold and S^luer have I none; And to Simon Magus, Thy money
perish with thee.

[Apostacy] signifies a Reuolting or falling off from the true Religion, to the
Doctrine of Devils. To discern the true Catholic Church, search the
Scriptures: How she fared in this World after the Ascension of our Savior,
^ad the Histories of the Church, and you shall find her commonly pers^cuted,
and subject to crosses, and Fiery Trials, even to this our Age. First, by the
Jews. Secondly, by the Roman Emperors. Thirdly, by the Arrians. Fourthly, by
the Goths and Vandales. And lastly, by the cunning and more dangerous
practices of the Romish Prelates, for their advancement to the double
Supremacy. How this Church being once the Mother of the West, grew to be
Apostate, it is to be supposed, that Satan took hold of the darkness of Men's
consciences, presently after the erup^ions of those bloody Northern Nations,
about 500. or 600. years after Christ, his principal stings and more palpable
violences being somewhat restrained, and bound by the Angel, not to employ them
against the Elect so Tyrannically, and openly, as he used to do before the
limited and sealed 1000. years, of his Mystical rest^aint. About which time,
or within a while after, and for the like ambitious ends, he seduced Mahomet
in the East; So that Faith departed according to St. Paul, from the Temple of
GOD, the true Visible Church then consisting but of few Families, and shadowed
under the Woman, with her man child in the Revelation, Fled into the
Wilderness, for fear of the Dragon. And Gods two Witnesses were Massacred in
the streets of spiritual Sodom and Egypt, and their carcasses there left
vnbu^ied; as was Prophesied by St. John. Amidst these abominations and
desolations, it pleased God to stir up the Spirits of sundry Good men, to
awake them out of their dreams: As St. Bernard, to inuaigh against their
Princely Pomp, and Supremacy; Berengari^^, against Transubstanciation; and the
Waldenses and Albigeois against most of their Idolatries: The last of which
began above 300. years before Luther was borne. How the true Church was
dealt with in Affricke, Aethiopia, Georgia, and in the East, by reason of their
remoteness we know not so distinctly. But it is very probable, that the old
Dragon was not Idle, but did his utmost endeavor to ouer-whelme the poor
distressed Saints, as it were, with a Flood of impieties through all the World.
But thus was she used in our Western Parts, until of late years by the
Resurrection of those two Mystical Witnesses, and the imprinting of the Bible
in the Mother Tongue, which in a manner lay moathcaten in the Sodomites
Libraries, after the Preaching of Wicliffe, about the year 1380. and
afterward of Husse, Luther, Cal^i^, and after the Martyrdom of many excellent
men, she found at last some rest in this Island, and other places, in despite
of the Herod's, A^abs, and Hamans of the times. One maine difference I observe
betwixt these two repugnant Churches, how the one resembles Abel and Jacob for
their mildness and patience: And the other Came and Esau for their malice and
cruelty: which their bloody Inquisitious, Tortures, Massacres, with the
transcendent Powder Plot do apparently testify. The one maintains her cause
peaceably by the Gospel of Christ; the other by Worldly Traditions, and Men's
authority: And when these serve not, with Fire and Sword they force their
Opposites to acknowledge the Popes Supremacy, being but the mark of Ambition,
and therein going beyond the Turks, who to his Mufty or Ma^omet, compelles no
man's Conscience; a though in all other matters belonging to a Christian, one
Scholasticall Question excepted (which might be left to the Beholders and
Believers disc^etion for the Form and wonderful manner, as is the Knowledge
of the personal Trinity) they cannot deny any Article Faith, which the
Protestant holds. Whereby it appears, that the Church continued not long a
Uirgin after the Apostles times, according to the ancient saying of Eusebius:
Ecclesia post Apostolorum tempora non mansit d^^ Virgo: And that the Mystical
Where with her Sc^rlet-coloured Beast of the seven hilled Ctity, the great
City, which bare dominion over all the World, was certainly meant by Rome: To
which the chief Fathers of the Primitive Church do consent: Lacta^tius lib.
7. H^oronim. in Daniel. Augustine. lib. 20. de C^uitate Dei. cap. 19. And St.
Chrysostom ^^ opere imperfect. in Matthew. most plainly writes, that Antichrist
was to have ^^ show all that, which the true Church has indeed, viz. Baptism,
the Communion, Bishops, etc. Therefore let such, as have once tasted of the
fruits of the Gospel, beware of Apostasy and back^-sliding. For as St.
Augustine in the afore-sayd Book, cap. 8. unto a doubt, Whether any One shall
turn to God, during the Reign of Antichrist: He thus answeares: The Diueli
shall have a continual fight with those that are in the Fa^^h already, of whom
he may perhaps Conquer some certain number, but none of Gods Predestined,
no, not one; Since it is not in vain wha St. John the Author of the Revelation
says, in one of his Epistles, concerning Apostataes: They went out from us,
but they were not of us, for of they had bin of us, they would have continue a
with us. To confirm our wavering and lukewarm Christians, I advise them to
ponder with an indifferent judgment, these ensuing verses, which for a
conciusiue monitory to my Newlanders Cure, I here subscribe ou^ of my Cambrens.
Caroleia.

Can ^idiore Fides lusir^ b^^ lam^ne M^ndum, etc,
Our Christian Faith^^ in'd in the ^rime,
When Men^^u'd nee^e the Apostles time.
But afterward Eclips^d of Light,
She lay r^ti^'d from most Men's sight.
Returned n^w She lends her Rays
To Britain, where as yet she stays.
FINIS.

