THE MEMORABLE, AND TRAGICAL HISTORY, OF THE PERSECVTION IN AFRIC: under
GENSERICKE and HVNRICKE, Arrian Kings of the Vandals.

WRITTEN IN LATIN BY the blessed Bishop VICTOR of Vtica, who personally (as
also S. AUGUSTINE the famous Doctor) endured his part thereof.

WITH A BRIEF ACCOMPLISHMENT of the same History, out of best Authors:
together with the life and acts of the holy Bishop Fulgentius, and his
conflicts with the same Nation.

Nothing new under the Sun. Eccles. 1. The Spirit and the Spouse say, come,
and who hears let him say, come. Apoc. 22. Printed with License. 1605.

In the margent P. S. imports the edition of Paris by Sonnius.

In the margent P. F. imports the edition of Paris by Fremy. ANNO. 1569.

In the margent B. imports the edition of Basil. ANNO. 1541.

TO THE VIRTUOUS, AND DEVOVTLY AFFECTED, HIS DEAR MOTHER: PERSEVErance in the
paths of Godliness.
THERE want not ( Dear Mother) who with their new gifts, will impart to you
the hopes of an happy year: weary I no less then your self, of novelties,
present you rather with a jewel of no less antiquity, then price: which long
has unworthily layen hid, when most of all stood the virtue thereof in
request. Stale it is not, neither does the age thereof diminish the estimation,
but enhaunce it: quality of writers and Authors being now at that pass, that
by proportion of antiquity their value comes to be rated. No otherwise then
as in precious stones and gold is commonly accustomed, the first whereof the
more families they have enriched and beautified, less are held in suspect; the
later, how much farther years it pretends in the stamp, fayrer currence it
commonly finds in the exchange, countenance being derived from the
continuance. Marvel not if to you a woman, I translate a Divine; to one
nothing curious in controversies, send a Father of the primitive Church. No
Author this above your reach; no high discourse of difficile questions: but
being deliverer of a plain history, fuller of excellent examples, and pithy
motions to perfection, then of subtle points or intricate matters; I judged
nothing more worthy on which you might employ your vacant hours, or I my time
and travail. Great plenty of things deserving mature consideration herein you
have: peruse them, use them, print them in your mind; and what you admire in
others, apply to your self.

R. Y. S. M. L. A. D.

THE PREFACE OF THE TRANSLATOR.
BY that which I found in my self, when I happened to read this tragical
history, and by well peysing the substance of this Author, it was not hard for
me to perceive, that if he spoke English, he might work meruails in souls. To
instruct the understanding, to move the will, to illuminate the heart, to
enkindle the mind, to remove the mists of ignorance from men's wits, to inflame
the right believing soul unto zeal, I saw matter more then sufficient. Let
me deserve the blazon of a liar, if reading this discourse, the attentive and
impartial vmpeere admire not, to see how like evermore thorns are to
thorns; and grapes unto grapes; wheat unto wheat; and chafe unto chafe;
sheep unto sheep; both children of darkness and of light to their
forefathers. If therein the weak in faith find not assurance of Gods
assistance; the tempted, discreet means of resistance; the sound consolation
incredible; the corrupted their souls touched to the quick. If herein be not
many notable singularities of Historical antiquity, and so many passages of
points Ecclesiastical, that the faith and face of the universal Church of
Christ, at those days may most lively thereby be described; the belief,
rites, ordinances, and government thereof: even at those days, when the three
famous and chiefest Doctors, Hierome, Ambrose, and Augustine, had immediately
before together flourished. Argument and form of the persecution, was no
other, then this which follows. After the Vandals had as an vncatar acted
torrent, or mercylesse inundation, ouerrunne France and Spain, they passed
into Africa, wrested the same from the Roman Empire, there established the
seat of their Kingdom, and jealous of their new conquered Dominion, deemed
nothing more secure then as the Mediterrane Sea did by vast and boisterous
waters sever them from the Empire: so by dissonant and irreconciliable
opinions, to divide the peoples hearts from all society with the same, to
alienate them from the communion in belief with Greece and Italy. Whereunto,
when the Arrian heresy (which had already infected the Vandals, and in Afric
had long since canker-wise crept into many hearts) seemed most proper;
Gensericke their King by terror of laws gave countenance to the same, and
enterprised the utter extirpation of the faith. Not in deed urging in express
terms to deny Christ our Lord to be equal to his Father, or to confess any
point of Arrianisme against their conscience (for it had been too palpable
abomination even to the simplest senses) but only importuning for conformity
sake, to suffer themselves to be sprinkled with water of the Arrians hands,
under certain form of words different from the Catholic manner, and at
leastwise to forsake the accustomed sacrifice of the Church, and resort to
their pretended prayers. For recusancy of which sacrilegious impieties, such
things endured the Godly of those times, as have scant been heard of: whose
calamities make the subject of this book. But no wisdom is there against the
will of the highest, nor counsel against his determination, nor preuc^tion
against his providence, nor machination against his might; who first by
horrible famine and mortality eased for a season the yoke of his afflicted, and
finally after foure-score and ten years, subduing the Vandals by the hand of
the valorous Belisarius, reunited the Province both to the Roman Empire and
communion of the true faith: Full is the history Ecclesiastical; full are
Eusebius, Sozomen, and Theodoret, of the persecutions raised by Jews and
Infidels, against the (...)smoothly delivered as might be required: the law of
a Translator abridging my liberty. For had I not in this case chosen rather to
be seen Religious i^sister, then ^ond lice^tiate Paraphrast, more could I have
beautified and graced my labor, to the Reader perhaps, but not to myself, who
hold precise truth to be the very beauty as of history, so of translation.
Neither becomes it me to excuse the harshnesse of the African names, which
Pliny aduertiseth scarcely able to be committed to letters. In the edition of
Basil, two books of the three are by chapters divided, but so vnfittingly to
the context of the matter, that a dim judgment may apparently discern, that
neither Victor, nor yet any man of learning was deviser of such disorderly
order, and confused distinction. The whole have I digested into chapters also,
but in a more proper and convenient sort: as combination of the several
matters best disposed. At places of mark, or else of special difficulty, by
the Authors words inserted in the margent, shall the judicious reader be
vnpreiudiced of his own sense. The care of whose commodity might have further
extended my preamble to so important an Author; but that little said sooner
finds pardon, then does prolixity.

(*)

THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAPTER. I. The horrible cruelty of the Vandals, upon their first arrival in
Afric.
THE sixtith year (as is An Chris^^ 427.
apparent) has now his course, since the cruel and savage Nation of Vandals
set foot into the bounds of Afric, crossing over with easy passage at the
strait, where between Spain and Afric, this great and large Sea presses it
self into the narrow distance of twelve miles. Their whole power then passing
over, by policy of ali. (...). (...) and Agat. Trizeric
Gensericke the Captain, it was forthwith (for greater terror of their name)
ordered, that the whole multitude should be nu^bred, as many as their mothers
womb had until then brought forth, amounting old and young, servants and
masters, to fourscore thousand. Which number being doubtfully published, is
even at this day thought to be so great of men of arms, whereas the number of
such is now but small and weak. Finding therefore a peaceable and quiet
Province, their wicked troops did on all coasts set upon the flourishingst
part of the land: who wasted, destroyed, and with fire and sword consumed every
thing, not sparing so much as the shrubbes and bushes which bare any fruit,
least those, whom peradventure dens in the mountains, steep cliffes of the
earth, or other bard places did hide in secret, might (being fled away)
sustain themselves with such forage. Thus while with cruelty they raged, no
place remained free from their vexation. In Churches especially and Basilicis
Sanctorum
Temples of the Saints, in Church-yardes and Monasteries more villainous was
their fury, and with greater flames they burnt down houses of prayer, then
they did Cities and Towns. Where by hap they found the gates of Gods
honorable Palace shut, with strokes of their Dext^um, (...) may als^
Gauntl^^ Psalm. 73
Maces they forciblie made entry: so that it might rightly at that time be
said. As if they had been in a wood of trees, so hewed they down with axes
the gates thereof: in the axe and hatchet they threw it down. Thy Sanctuary
in earth they burned with fire; they contaminated the Tabernacle of thy name.
How many excellent Bishops, and Nobi^ sacerd^^^
noble Priests were by diverse kinds of pains made away, being tortured to
deliver up what gold or silver soever they had, either of their own, or
appertayning to the Church. And that all which was extant might through
constraint of pain be uttered, they urged the offerers afresh with torments,
pretending part only, not the whole to have been delivered. The more also that
any man rendered, more they thought he reserved. Mouths of some they opened
with poles and bars, thrusting in stinking mire and dirt to extort confession
of money. Some they tormented with wresting their foreheads and legs with
sinews, Rem^entib^uis.
until they twanged with stretching. To very many (as if they had been
pitched or rozend vessels) they unmercifully powered in at their mouths
seawater, vinegre, dregs of oil, grease, with many other matters of
torment. Neither weakness of sex, nor respect of gentry, nor reverence of
Priesthood mitigated their fierce minds. Nay, there did their fury most
abound, where appeared any dignity or worthiness. How many Priests, and how
many notable personages they charged with mighty loades, as if they had been
Cammelles, or other beasts of burden, able I am not to declare: nor yet those
whom with gaddes of iron they hastened forward: some of which pitifully under
burdens yealded their ghost. Aged gravity, and reverend gray hairs, adorning
the head like woole, found no privilege of mercy: guiltless infancy felt
their barbarous rage, which dashed them against the ground, violently pulling
the little ones from their mothers breasts: others wide stretching their tender
legs, tore them a-sunder from the fundament. Captive Sion might then sing in
her gates. The ^udith. 16.
enemy has resolved to fire my territories, to slay my infants, and that he
will dash my babes against the ground. In some edifices of the greater
buildings and houses, where fire could less serve their malice, demolishing
the roofes and walls, they left their beauty equal to the earth. So that now
the ancient statelines of the Cities, which was in time past, no more is to be
seen, then if it had never been: yea most Towns have few or no inhabitants.
For even at this day what so may be found remaining, B. desolabantur. P. S. P.
F. desolantur.
are eftsoons laid wast and desolate: as they utterly have in Carthage
ruinated the Theaters, the Temple Memory, with the passage surnamed An Idol of
the Africans, of which mention, Tert. Prosp. Am.
Celestis. And to speak of those things which touch us nearest, the chief
Church where lie entombed the bodies of the holy Martirs Perpetua and
Felicitas, that other of Celerina, of the Scillitans, and the rest of the
Churches vnsubuerted, Suae religioni licentia tyrannica mancipauerunt.
they by licentious tyranny enslaued unto the service of their own religion.
But where any munitions were, whereunto their laberous fury could not by
assault attain, innumerable multitudes being brought together round about such
Castles, with deadly weapons they slew them, to the intent that by stench of
putrefying carcasses, they might extinguish, whom, kept off by walls they
could not approach. (...)(afterward King of Italy) who out of it paid him
always tribute, as to the Lord thereof, retayning nevertheless a portion unto
himself. Besides this he speedely charged his Vandals, that they should
utterly chase away naked the Bishops, and the Laytie also of the better sort,
from their Churches and mansions. Which was accordingly in most of them
performed: Many, as well Bishops as Laymen of mark, and honorable persons, to
be slaves unto Vandals, we our selves have known.

CHAP. IIII. How the Bishop and Clergy were handled at Carthage.
AFTER this commanded he S. Augustine wrote his book de haer^sibus, unto his
Disciple Quoduultdeus, perhaps this man. And his Epistle 19. unto Deo-gratias,
seems unto him, who was this man's successor.
Quoduult-deus Bishop of the said City Carthage (a man well known to God and
the world) and with him a very great company of the Clergy, naked and spoiled
to be thrust into wether-broken ships, and so banished: whom God of his
merciful goodness vouchsafed by prosperous navigations to bring to the City of
Naples in Campane. Senators and men of worship he first quayled by cruel
confining from their mansion places, and afterward expelled them beyond the
Sea. Now then the Bishop being (as has been declared) thrust out with his
Clero venerabili.
reverend Clergy, forth-vvith delivered he up to his own Religion, the Church
called Restituta, at which the Bishops customably made their abode: the rest
also which were within the wales, he took away, together with the goods
unto them belonging, and of those without the walls, he seized as many as he
would; especially upon two very fair and large of the holy Martyr Cyprian; the
one where he shed his blood, the other where his body was buried; which
place is called Mapalia.
Sheepe-cotes. But who is he that can without tears call to mind, how he
gave commandment, that the bodies of our dead should not (but in silence and
without solemnity of hymns) be brought to the grave? Whereunto he also added,
that the Clergy remaining should be punished with Exilio ali. Exitio,
exile. While these things were doing, the Magni Sacerdote^
principal Priests and notable persons of those Provinces, which (...)with to
be brought: which Sebastian taking in his hand, spoke thus. This loaf that it
might come to this finenesse and whiteness, as to be counted fit for the
Kings boorde, was first boulted from the base gurgeons and branne, then, of a
heap of flower was moystened with liquor, and so passed water and fire,
coming thereby to be both fair to sight, and pleasant to taste: *
Even so have I also already been grownd in the Mola catholicae matris.
mill of our Catholic Mother, purged as clean flower, and tried with the
sieve, sprinkled with the water of Baptism, and baked with the fire of the
holy Ghost: and as this bread out of the Oven; so have I by the divine
Sacraments (God being the workman) issued pure and clean out of the
celestial Font. But may it please you to perform that which I now propose;
let this loaf be broken in pieces, steeped in water, molded again, and
then put into the oven, thence if it come out better then it already is, I
will do as you exhort. Which proposition when Gensericke with all them in
presence had heard, he was so entangled, that he could find no solution, and
therefore afterward slew that warlicke personage, by another sort of
argument.

CHAP. VI. The Church sore oppressed: Bishops banished.
TO return from whence I digressed: savage commandments raised up daily
terror, so that compassed in midst of the Vandals, we had not any leisure to
take breath: neither might place of prayer or Immolandi.
sacrifising, be any where obtained by our complaints, so that the prophefie
was then manifestly fulfilled. Now is there neither Prince, Prophet, nor Dan.
3.
Captain: nor place to sacrifice unto thy name. Every day wanted not injuries,
even to those Priests, who were in such regions, as paid contribution to the
Palace. *
If any man in his exhortations to the people, named by chance (as the manner
is) Pharao, Nabuchodonosor, Holofernes; or any such like, it was laid to his
charge, that this he had mentioned in derogation of the Kings person, and
banishment was his immediate reward. Nevertheless as this persecution was in
some place openly practiced; so in an other quarter was it more *
covertly put in ure, that by such deceit sooner might the name of the Godly
be extinguished. Many Priests we knew at that season for this cause exiled; as
Urban Bishop of Girben, Crescens metrapolitan of the Aquitan City, who had
under him six-score Bishops suffragans, Habet-deum of Theudeles, Eustrace of
Suffecta, and two more of Tripoly, one of Vicissibrata, and Cresconius of B.
Nicenum.
Even: Foelix also Bishop of Adrument, for that he had *
received one John a Monk from the other side the Sea, with diverse others
also, whom it were over long to recite: during whose exile, nevertheless it
was not permitted to enstall others in their Cities. Amidst those troubles
stood the people of God fast in their belief, and like bees laboring their
hiues, and combs, increased and grew strong by the Melleis fidei clauiculis.
Exodus 1.
sweet tentrels of faith. In so much that the Scripture was accomplished. The
more they were afflicted, the more they multiplied, and prevailed exceeding
much.

CHAP. VII. Of Deo-gratias and Thomas, Bishops of Carthage.
IT came to pass in process of time, that to the city Carthage, after so long
discontinuance and desolation, was at request of Valentinian the Emperor,
ordained a Bishop, who had to name Deo-gratias. The actions of whom and what
God wrought by him, who so should endeavor particularly to set down, the day
would fail him before he had delivered any just part thereof. Being created
Bishop, it fell out (our sins so deserving) that Gensericke in the fiftenth
year of his reign, took the most noble and famous City Rome, carrying away
with him the treasure of many Princes, together with the people. After the
arrival of which captive multitude at the African shore, the Vandals and
Moors sharing them (as the fashion of the Barbarians is) husbands were
separated from their wives, children from their parents. Forth-vvith this
notable Prelate full of Gods spirit, caused all the golden and silver vessels
belonging to divine service, to be sold for their redemption from barbarous
(...)little dying, seem now to be only three; if at leastwise there be so
many: Vincent the Vigitane Bishop, Paul the P. F. P. S. have Gigitanus and
Sinnaritan.
Sitmaritane (a Paul indeed no less in desert, then name) and one Quintian,
who flying the persecution lives now a forraigner in Adessa a City of Macedon.

CHAP. VIII. The notable constancy of Maturian and Maxima, as well in vowed
chastity, as in profession of faith; and what followed thereof.
WE find in that season many martyrdomes, but of Confessors a great multitude:
some of whom I will endeavor to recite. One of those Vandals whom they call
Millena^ios.
Coronels of thousands, had to his slaves P. F. Martinian.
Maturian and Saturian, and two of their brethren: and with them was fellow
servant, a notable handmaide of Christ named Maxima, both in body and force
beautiful. Maturian being an Armourer, and doing service very agreeable to his
Lord, and Maxima governing the household, it entered into the Vandals imagination
to join them in marriage, thinking by wedlock to establish their loyalty
toward him. Maturian (as worldly young men are wont) affected the marriage:
Maxima already Deo sacrata.
consecrated to God, rejected the spousals of men. When the time came that they
should go to the solitary chamber of their secrets, and that Maturian
(ignorant what God had decreed of him) was desirous to be bold with her, as
with his wife, the servant of Christ with quick voice answered him Christo
membra corporis mei dicaui nec possum humanum sortiri coniugium.
To Christ (O brother Maturian) I have dedicated my body, neither can I be
partaker of humane *
marriage, seeing I have already a heavenly and true spouse; but this counsel
I give thee. It is in thee if thou will so bring the matter to pass, that thou
thy self may also delight to become his servant, whose spouse thou see I
have chosen to be. So well framed this motion through our Lord Gods
appointment, that giving ear to the Virgin, he adua^ced the gain of his soul
in his young years. To the Vandals ears came not the contract of this
Spiritualis secreti commercia.
spiritual secret, until Maturian now mortified and changed, persuaded his
brethren likewise, that as his true brothers they would partake of the
treasure, which he had found. He thus Conuersus. At this day such as entering
Monasteries became not Ecclesiastical, are called Conuersi (conuerts)
converted with his three brethren, they altogether, with the Maid in their
company, issuing privily forth, were associated into the Tabracene Monastery,
which the noble Pastor Andrewe then governed. And she not far from thence
lived in a Monastery of Puellarum.
Virgins. This could not be hidden from the Barbarian, who by diligent search
and many rewards, made enquiry after them. Finding out therefore, Non iam sua,
^ed Christi mancipia.
no more his slaves, but Christ's, with fetters and torments, he vexed the
servants of God: dealing with them, not only that they should use carnal
knowledge; but (which is worse) that with filth of rebaptisation they should
defile the beauty of their faith. King Gensericke, to whose ears this matter
at last came, gave charge that they should be so long tortured, until they
consented and yealded to his will. He comma^ds strong trunchio^s knotted like a
saw, and Palmatos
as big as one could gripe, to be addressed with their clubbed ends: which
not only brake their bones, dashing against their backs, but pierced inward
also with their sharp pricks, and fetching streams of blood, by renting the
flesh discovered the bowels. Nevertheless in the day following were they
always made whole, in so much that often (and for a long space) no signs of
their hurts appeared, which by Gods holy goodness were evermore cured. This
passed, and Maxima remaining under fore imprisonment, was streatched out upon
an unmerciful Compede crudeli P F. Cuspide.
pair of stocks, whom as the servants of God visited with great resort,
before them all the strong timbred engine and huge pieces of wood, became
rotten, and fell asunder. This miracle both is famous by the report of them
all, and the party to whom the prison appertayned, affirmed to me with an oath
that it was true. But when the Vandal neglected to acknowledge her virtue, Gods
anger began to work revenge in his house. He himself with his children
dyed, and the best also of his cattle perished. The Lady remaining a widow,
destitute of Sons and substance, offered as a present the servants of Christ
to P. F. S^saon.
Sersaon the Kings cosen; Who having received them very thankfully, an evil
spirit began presently by occasion of the Saints, in sundry wise to vex his
children and family. What happened the King had word by his Kinsman, and
decreed thereupon that they should be sent into banishment to B. Capsus
Capsur a Heathen King of the Moors. As for Christ's handmaide Maxima, he of
his own motion, as one confounded and overcome, dismissed her: who yet lives
Mother to a multitude of Virginum Dei.
Gods Virgins; and is one whom I know well. They were conuayed and delivered
up to the said King of the Moors, inhabiting in the desert called Caprapict,
where the Disciples of Christ, beholding amongst the Gentiles diverse profane
sorts of sacrifices, began by admonition and example also, to inuit the
Barbarous nation unto knowledge of our God. By which means they gained to
Christ a huge multitude of the rude Gentiles, amongst whom the name and fame of
Christian religion had never before been blazed, nor spread by any man. Then
bethought they how best the unmanured and barren soil, might by preaching be
cultured, and prepared to receive the seed of the Gospel, and subsequently be
watered with holy Baptism. Sent are messengers through the wide journies of
the wilderness, and ariuing at length at *
Rome, make petition that some Priest and with him Ministros
Deacons, might be sent unto a people embracing the faith. Which suite Pontifex
Dei.
Gods high Bishop with no small joy accomplished. Erected is a Church; baptized
are wonderful great numbers of the Barbarians, and of those which were
Wolves, increases a plentiful flock of Lambs. Relation whereof when Capsur
had made to Gensericke; swelling with envy, he willed the servants of God to
be drawn by the feet at Chariots tails in full course, so to end their lives
amongst thickets and thorns, and that the bodies of those innocents haled
forwards and backwardes, should be torn with sharp prickles of the bushes
and brambles: being in such wise bound, that they might view each others end.
Who as they thus tied beheld one another, the wild horses being in race, and
the Moors lame^ting at the sight, every of them at the point of the swift
flight thus took his farewell. O brother pray for me, God has fulfilled our
desire: O this is the way to the kingdom of heaven. In such wise praising and
singing, and the Angels rejoicing at the sight, their souls departed; where
even until this day our Lord Jesus Christ leaves not to work great *
miracles. B. Faustin Bishop of Buronitanus. P. F.
Burtinita protested to me once, that in his presence a blind woman there
received her sight. (...)they entered at the very hour, when the maritha,
Galibus, Ammonis, Ptol.
divine Sacrament was in distributing to the people, and with extreme fury
Corpus Christi and sanguinem pauimento ^^^rserunt* etc.
scattered on the pauement the body and blood of Christ, profaning the same
under their beastly *
feet.

CHAP. X. The glorious profession of Armogas, his miraculous tomb. The happy
constancy of Masculas.
AT this time Gensericke by the setting on of his Bishops, gave commandment
that none but Arrians should bear office in his, or his childrens Court. They
came amongst others, to our B. Armogaster.
Armogas, whose legs when they had often and long strayned with big
stringes, and with nipping and twanging sinews had as yet rather wrinkled
only, then furrowed his forehead, wherein *
Christ had fixed the standard of his Cross: the Saint looking up to heaven,
the strings and sinews brast in sunder like spiders twist. When the Torturers
saw the sinewie B. Caballini^.
thongs burst, they brought again and again stronger cords, yea P. S. P F.
Canabiuis.
horse-ropes; all which came to nothing at his only calling upon the name of
God. Hanging also by one foot with his head downward, he seemed to all men as
if he slept upon a feather-bed. When Theodoricke his Lord, and son to the
King (torments not preuayling) would have commanded him to be beheaded, he was
stayed by his Priest Iocundus, telling him: you were better make him away by
sundry vexations. For if you kill him with the sword, the Romans will begin to
publish him a Martyr. Theodoricke hereupon condemned him into the Province of
Bizagena, there to dig pittes: afterward (as it were to greater despite) he
willed that he should be a Cow-heard hard by Carthage, where he might be seen
of all men. At which time having revelation from our Lord, that his hour of
rest approached, he called unto him one Foelix a worshippefull Christian,
Steward of the Kings Sons house, and which reverenced Armogastes as an
Apostle, and said unto him: the time of my dissoluing is at hand, I desire you
by the faith which both of us embrace, that you will bury me under this Elm
tree, which if you do not, you shall render account thereof to God: not that
he cared where or how his body should be buried, but that it might be manifest
what Christ had reueiled to his servant. Foelix answered: far be that from
me, venerable Confessor: nay, I will bury you in a Church with that triumph and
honor that you deserve. Blessed Armogastes replied, not so; but you shall do
as I have said. He loath to contristrate the man of God, promised indeed to
fulfill that which he requested. Within very few days, the performer of so
good a confession of faith, dyed. Foelix hastened to prepare the designed grave
under the tree; and because the knotty roots entangled with the dry earth,
bredde delay; least the Holy body should be buried with the latest, cutting
the roots quite away, and digging much more deep, they beheld a ready coffin
of very glistring marble, such as perhaps few or no Kings have enjoyed.

But neither am I to pretermitte one B. Masculinum.
Masculas Archimimum.
Master of the revels; whom diversely shot at, to deprive him of the Catholic
faith, the King himself at last with glosing words invited, promising to
heap upon him riches, if to his will he lent an easy ear. When for all this
he remained constant and unconquered in faith, the King willed that he should
undergo the sentence of death; yet craftily gave secreat instructions, that
if at the exigent he dreaded the stroke of the brandishing glaiue, so much the
rather he should dye, not thereby being rendered a glorious Martyr: if
contrariwise he were found constant in his confession, the sword should be
stayed. But he (Christ giving him solid foundation) became an immovable
pillar, and returned a glorious Confessor. Though the envious enemy would not
make him Martyr: yet could he not violate the dignity of a Confessor.

CHAP. XI. The magnanimious resolution of Saturus.
WE knew an other at the same time by name Saturus, who being a bright member
of the Church of Christ, many times Catholica liberate.
with catholic liberty reproved the impiety of the Arrians: and Steward he was
of Hunricks house. Conspired it was through the instigation of P F P. S.
Ma^inado.
Mauridan a Deacon, whom ungracious Hunricke singularly respected, that
Saturus should be made an Arrian. Honors with much riches are proffered in
case he consent, dire torments are prepared if he refuse, this option being set
before him, that unless he obeyed the Kings commandment at the first
discussion, presently forfeyting house and substance, his slaves and children
should be sold, and his wife before his eyes, be delivered up in wedlock to a
camel-driuer. He on the other side full of Gods spirit, preventing in a sort
their wickedness, doubted not to exasperate their fury so far. Whereupon his
Often after is mention, likewise of laymens vviues, but never of Priests
vviues (notvvithstanthe chief rage was against them)
wise without her husbands priuity, secretly besought respite, and obtained
it at their hands, who had in charge the putting of this rigorous sentence in
execution. Then went she a second Eve unto her husband, being before hand
Consilio magistrata.
taught her lesson, and advertised what to say: yet found she not him an Adam,
that would dare to touch the illecebrous aples of the forbidden tree. For Non
Indigens sed Saturus.
not Indigent, but Satured was he called, saturate with the plenty of the house
of God, and one that had drunk at his delicious stream. To the place where
her husband al solitary was at his prayers, came this woman; her garments rent,
her hair about her ears, accompanied with her children, and a little sucking
infant in her hands; whom casting at her husbands feet, and with all her
arms about his knees, she hissed forth this serpentine voice. Have compassion
(O my sweetest) of me thy poor wife, and no less of thy own self; have
compassion of these children common to us both. Here behold them before thine
eyes. Let them not be subject to servile condition, whom descent of our stock
has made noble. Let not me be yoked to a base and shameful marriage, yea and
my husband yet alive: me (I say) who so often at feasts applauded to my self
in my Saturus. God knows full sore against thy will shall thou but do that,
which voluntarily perhaps many have yealded unto. He gave her for answer those
words of Job. Job ^.
Thou have spoken like a foolish woman. Well should I be afraid, if there were
no other joy, then the bitter sweets of this life. Thou seruest now the Devils
turn, O wife: who, if thou did love thy husband, would never draw him to
a second death. Let them take away my children, separate my wife, spoil me of
my goods, I secure of my Lords promise, will stick fast to his words. If
any man shall not forsake wife, children, Luc. 14.
lands, or house, he can not be my Disciple. The end was this: the woman
refused by advised reasons, went her way: Saturus courageous i. to Mardome.
for a Crown, is examined, spoiled, punished, and sent away a beggar,
forbidden by going abroad to have any vvhither to resort. All took they from
him, only of Baptismes stole could they not bereave him. Thus passed this, and
Gensericke commanded the Church of Carthage, the Priests and their Deacons
being dispersed into sundry places for want of a Bishop; which was hardly
opened at meditation of Zeno the Emperor by Seuerus a noble man of Rome, where
upon they al returned from banishment. What i. Gensericke.
he did in Spain, Italy, Slauome, Champayne, Calabre, Poole, Sicil, Sardinia,
Abruzo, Venice, Lucania, Epire, Greece, they can best declare which endured it.
Here let the end be of our no less arrogant then cruel persecution, sustained
under Gensericke. He reigned Procopius. 39.
thirtyseauen years and months three.



THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAPTER. I. The dissimuled demeanor of King. Hunricke.
GENSERICKE being dead, B. Honerichus. Nundrius. Procop. Honorichus.
his eldest Son Hunricke succeeded, who in the beginning of his reign, was
somewhat tractable and moderate (after the accustomed subtilety of the
Barbarians) especially concerning our affairs in religion. So that whereas
heretofore under King Gensericke it had been proclaimed, that there should be
no spiritual assemblies: now people made their meetinges afresh. And to give
remonstrance of a religious Prince, he caused the Manichaean heretics
diligently to be searched out; many of whom he burnt, most he sent away to
foreign ships. All which The Anabaptists burnt under Q. Elie were all of
them Protestants.
Manichees in a manner he found to be of his own religion, principally such as
were Priests or Deacons of the Arrian heresy: which set him more on fire,
because of the shame thereby redounding. One amongst them was found called
Clementian a Monk, who had this their poesy charactred on his thigh: A
Manichaean Disciple of Christ Jesus. For this cause did the said tyrant the
more endeavor to please; because in this one thing he much displeased, that
with insatiable desire evermore eagrely gaping after his pray, he burdened the
provinces of his Kingdom with sundry vexations and impositions; so that of him
precisely it might besaid A King needing reuenewe is a great B. Calamitas. P.
F. P. S. Calumniator.
calamity.

CHAP. II. Eugenius created Bishop of Carthage, and of his virtue.
ZENO the Emperor and Lady Placidia making intercession, Per edicta libri.
by their letters, authorized that the Church of Carthage might to themselves
elect for Bishop whom they thought good, having been destitute of such an
ornament now full 24 years, it was condescended unto by Hunricke, and license
granted. He sent therefore to the Church Alexander a noble man, who brought
this message; that the Catholics should in his presence, postulate for
themselves a worthy Priest. He sent also by his Secretary B. Iutarit
Vuitared a Proclamation to be publicly read, containing this tenor.

Our Lord the King has willed us to show you, that the Emperor Zeno, and most
renowned Placida, have written by Alexander a noble man, requesting by their
letter, that the Church of Carthage may have a peculiar Bishop of your
religion. This he has given commandment should be performed, and has
written back unto them, or prescribed their Ambassadors to make report, that
according to their desire, ye may ordain Bishop whom you will, under this
condition, that in like sort the Bishops of our religion that are at
Constantinople, or in any other Provinces of the East, may by his commandment
have free liberty to Populo tractare*
preach to the people, and exercise Christian religion, in what *
language they will in their own Churches, in such sort as you here, or in
other Churches of Afric, have free arbitrament to Missas agere.
say Mass, or preach in your Churches. For if this be not observed toward
them, not only the Bishop that shall be created and his Clerks, but all other
Bishops also with their Clergy over the African Provinces, shall be commanded to
the Moors. As soon as this edict was in my own hearing read before the whole
congregation, the 14. Calendes of P. F. July:
June; we began sorrowfully to murmur amongst our selves: for that by this
politic pretext, a persecution was like to follow; and it is well known
that to the Ambassador we made this answer. If the matter go thus, and stand
upon such pernicious conditions, the Church delights not to have a Bishop: let
Christ govern it who at all times has vouchsafed to guide it. Which
information the Ambassador neglected to admit, and with all the people burned
with desire to have present dispatch, whose cry was intolerable, and could
by no means be appeased. Of this holy man much writes Greg. Tur. de gl.
Confess. l. 2
Eugenius therefore a holy man and one acceptable to God, was chosen Bishop, of
whose election the Church of God was greatly recomforted, people Catholic
living under a barbarous government, triumphed to see the ancient creation of
their chief Bishop, again renewed. The greatest number of young men and women
by their universal joy well witnessing, that they had never seen a Bishop
sitting in his Pontifical Throno.
Throne.

This man of God, that blessed Priest Eugenius, began by virtuous
conversation to be reverently esteemed, even of Hiis qui foris sunt, he
alludeth to the Apostles phrase 1. Tim. 3. intending such are not united unto
the Church of Christ.
those without, and to be so loving to al, that he would gladly have left his
life (if it might be) for every of them. Such great alms also our Lord did by
his means exhibit, that it seemed incredible how so much could be bestowed,
where the Barbarous possessed all, the Church having not the value of on penny.
His humility, charity, and piety wherewith he was endued from heaven, who so
would attempt to express, he should fail of his purpose. It is for certain,
that money never stayed with him, except perhaps it had been offered when the
Sun having ended his course, gave place to darkness; and then only he
reserved what might serve for a day, not what covetousness might have wished,
our Lord daily sending him greater store. But his fame waxing every where
glorious and manifest, the Arrian Bishops, especially Cyrill, began to be
tormented with sore envy, and pursued him with daily quarrels. To be short
they put into the Kings head, not to suffer him to sit in his Pontifical
Throne, nor preach after his accustomed manner: Further to forbid him, that
any men or women attyred after the Vandall manner, should be seen in the
church. The Bishop answered as became him: The house of God is free for all;
those which enter, no man may drive forth: and the rather, for that an
exceeding multitude of our Catholics went after their guise, by reason of
service in the Kings Court.

CHAP. III. The terrible usage practiced upon Courtiers, resorting to the
Catholic service.
SVCH answer, as soon as the King had received from the man of God, he
ordained torturers at the Church-gates, who, when they espied man or woman clad
like one of the Vandall nation, forthwith clapping on their heads flesh-hooks
and writhing about the same their locks of hair, with a strong twitch pulled
away both hair and scalpe withal, from the head: some being thus served, lost
therewith their eyes; certain also dyed outright. The women after this torment
endured, were carried through the streets to the gaze of the City, with a Crier
before them, which they (who suffered it) made reckoning of, as a great gain:
many of whom we knew; but any one of them to have for the pain forsaken their
straight way, I never knew. When by this means he could not infringe the
constancy of any one of the faithful, he determined that none of our religion
being of his Court, should receive their provision of corn, or accustomed
penfions. He proceeded also to try them with rural labors, and sent men of
good calling and delicately brought up, to the Country of Vtica, there under
the seruent parching of the Sun Vt Cespites messi^m desec^^ent.
to delue for tillage, whither all of them cheerfully going forwards,
rejoiced in our Lord. Amongst whom one of the company had a withered hand,
which for many years stood him in no steed, who therefore not untruly
alleged that he could not work yet was he so much the more violently pressed
forth. But as soon as they came to the place, and that all falling to their
prayers mourned, and principally for him; through the mercy of God, that dry
hand of the Confessor became hole. This was the entrance of Hunrickes
persecution, and now began our grief and Part^^^^tio.
travailing.

CHAP. II. The horrible tyranny of Hunricke toward his own lineage.
HE, who had now begone to show himself desirous (although it otherwise
fell out) to leave his Kingdom to his children after his death, persecuted
cruelly his brother Theodoricke with his sons, and the sons likewise of his
brother Genton, of whom not one should have escaped, had not death interupted
his designment. First for as much as he knew the wife of B Dederichus and The
dericus. P. F. and P. S. Theodoricus.
Theodoricke to be a politic woman, he slew her upon pretended ruin, least
by some witty wile she should (as I suppose) arm her husbands eldest son
against the tyrant, as she that was both wise and sage: After whom was also
slain her eldest son, who had been brought up in learning, and by the
constitution of Gensericke, should first of all his nephews enjoye the
Kingdom, being the eldest of them all. Proceeding yet farther, he resolved
upon more cruelty, and caused Iocundus a Bishop of his own sect (whom also
they called Patriarch) to be buried in the marketplace, before the stairs of
the new street, in face of all the people; for no other cause, but that he
was held very dear in the house of Theodoricke the Kings brother, by whose
assent it may be, that the said family might have obtained the Kingdom. Which
impious villainy gave us to foresee the mischief that hung over our own
heads, saying one to another: he that shows such cruelty to his own Priest,
when will this fellow spare us and our religion? Next he banished with
inhumane exile, Godagis the elder of Gentons sons, and his wife, without
permitting the solace of servant or hand-maide. His brother Theodoricke
likewise (his wife and son being before slain) he sent packing, naked and in
distress: after whose death he set his little infant, and two daughters of ripe
years, on Ass backs, and to their great affliction sent them wandering far
away. Diverse Earls and Nobles of his own nation he pursued, laying false
surmises to their charge, for that they B. made themselves a brotherhood.
favored his brother. Some of them he burned; others he slew with the sword,
a right imitator of his Father Gensericke, who drowned his brothers wife in
Amsag the B. faetidum.
famous River of the Ptol. Cirtesii, whose City was Cirta Iuli^.
Cirtenses, weighty stones hanged at her neck: and after the death of the
mother, slew also her sons. Sundry had been commended unto Hunricke (and
that under an oath) by his father Gensericke at his death, whom, he unmindful
of fidelity, and violating his oath, put to death by fire, and sundry torments,
B. ^ldicus
Heldicas, whom his father had sometime made governor of his Kingdom, now
an aged man and full of years, he beheaded, and burnt his wife in the midst of
the City, together with an other woman called ali. Th^ucaria.
Thamaria: the bodies of whom he willed to be drawn through the streets,
hardly suffering them at the entreaty of his Bishops, to be buried at evening,
when they had layne all the day in open view. P. F. P. S. Gamut.
Caniut brother to Heldicas, having fled to their Church, he might not slay,
whom yet he shut into a filthy draught, and made him there live a long space:
lastly condemned him with a certain goat-heard and a Country fellow, to dig
holes for vines; whom besides this he caused to be rent with terrible whips,
twelve times in the year, that is every month once, scant granting them a
little water and brown bread. This they suffered five years or more, who if
they had been Catholics and endured for their faith, these punishments might
have auayled them to an eternal reward. But thus much I could not but write,
least the kings impiety even toward his own company, should be omitted; who
not only brent with flames his Bishop locundus (as I have already told) but
very many other in like manner of his Priests and Deacons, that is to say of
Arrians, he addicted either to flames or to Bestiis mancipauit
keep beasts. All those being now in short space cut off, whom he feared; and
having established (as he thought) the Kingdom, which nevertheless was to be
but short and transitory, being somewhat secure and void of affairs, he
addressed all the instruments of his fury, to persecute the Catholic Church.

CHAP. V. Visions sorewarning the Catholics of persecution toward them.
YET before the tempest of persecution Thou give to them which
fell, the imminent mischief at hand, was foreshewed by many visions and tokens,
which went before it. For almost two years 1. fear thee, a token to fly from
the face of the bow. Psalm. 59.
before it came, a certain man saw Faustus Church glittering with accustomed
ornaments, and while he rejoiced in the brightness of so great glory, as the
tapers gave goodly light, and as well the rich pals and clothes as the lamps
glistered; suddenly (as he said) the amiable clearenesse of that light
vanished, and darkness succeeding, a favor abominable arose, and all the
company of the fathers present, were by certain Arrians driven out of doors;
so much the more to be lamented because he saw not the former beauty restored
any more: this vision he which saw it, told in my hearing to holy Eugenius. A
certain priest also saw the same church of Faustus full of innumerable people,
and a little after none at al, but in their place a multitude of swine. An other
3.
saw a floor of wheat ready to be winnowed, the corn not (as yet) separated
from the chafe; and while he wondered to see so great a confused heap,
sodaynlie a tempestuous whirle-winde with roaring noise began, the approach
whereof the rising of the dust showed; by the force hereof all the chafe flew
away, the corn remaining. Then came a certain tall personage, of a goodly
countenance, and costly apparelled, who began to cleanse the wheat, casting
away the empty and pined grains, such as were unapt for slowre, until having
thus tried, and leased a good space, he had brought the greatness of that
heap to a quantity, though winnowed and fine, yet passing small. Moreover, an
other told us thus. 3.
A certain high man stood upon our Lords hill, which is called Ziquens, and
cried on the right hand and on the left. Get ye hence, get ye hence. There
was one 4.
which beheld in a rudy sky, sulphury clouds tossing up and down, which
began to shoot forth mighty stones; these stones falling to the earth kindled
more fiercely, and flashed with greater flames, and entering into houses, burnt
those whom they found within. He that saw it said that he hid him self in a
chamber, whither the ^^^me, through Gods mercy, could not approach: that the
words of the Prophet might as (I think) be fulfilled. Shut thy door, and be
hidden a little space, Isa. 26. ^.
until the anger of God pass. The reverent Bishop Paul saw also a tree,
streatching out with flourishing branches to the very heavens, which also was
so well spredde, that it ouer-shadowed all Afric: and when al people took
pleasure in the talenesse and beauty thereof, there came (said he) an Ass with
great violence, who rubbing his neck against the stock of the root, over
threw by his shouing, that wondrous tree, not without a great crack.
Quintianus 6.
likewise an B. Venerable.
honorable Bishop saw him self standing upon an hill, from whence he
beheld an innumerable flock of sheep, and in midst of the flock were two
boiling pots. Butchers were also there, who did cast the flesh of those
muttons into the seething pots, and by so doing the whole flock was consumed.
Imagine these two pots to be the Cities Sicca Veneria, and B. Lara. but Ptol.
has Lares
Laribus, where the multitude was first assembled, and whence this fire(...)

CHAP. VII. The horrible banishing of almost five thousand persons, with
certain pittyfull accidents happening in the same.
WITH what floudes of tears shall I now present, how he banished to the
wilderness Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and other members of the Church, four
thousand, nine hundred, seauenty and six: amongst whom some had the gout,
others through very age lost their bodily sight. Amongst whom was blessed
Foelix Bishop of P. F. P. S. Abdiritanus.
Abbiris, who had fourty-foure years continued Episcopal dignity, and being
stricken with a palsy, neither felt any thing, nor could speak at all. Of
whom being very careful, because he could not ride, I persuaded that the King
might be moved by some about him, to permit him at least (being almost at point
of death) to remain at Carthage: for to banishment he could by no means be
carried. Whereunto (as is reported) the Tyrant freshly answered: If he cannot
sit upon a beast, let wild bulls be coupled and draw him tied fast with ropes,
to the appointed place. We carried him therefore throughout the journey, bound
overthwart a Super b^^donem.
mulets back, as if he had been a logge. All were brought together to the
Cities of Sicca and Laribus, whither the Moors resorting, should receive them
delivered up to their hands, and transport them to the wilderness. Then came
thither two Earls, who with damnable subtilty began in sweet communication
to deal with Gods Confessors. What mean you (say they) to be so obstinate,
not to obey our Lord the Kings laws; who may honorably stand in his presence
if you speedely obey his will? Straight way all with a great shout cried out
and said: We be Christians, we be Catholics, we inuincibly confess the
Trinity one God.

They were after this shut in a prison very grievous, but somewhat large, where
I found means to get in, made an exhortation to the brethren, and Diui^^
misteria celebrandi.
celebrated the divine mysteries. There were also very many little children,
whom their mothers followed, with motherly affection: some rejoicing; others
drawing them back: some were glad that they had borne Martyrs; others
persuading to the deluge of rebaptization, endeavoring to recall them from
confession of their faith: but their allurementes could not then overcome any,
neither made any one stoop unto earthly affections. It likes me here briefly
to declare what a good old woman did. As I travailed accompaning Gods army,
setting forwards more by night then by day, because of the heat; I beheld a
poor woman carrying a bag, and other implements, leading in her hand an
infant, and encouraging him in this wise. Run Domine meus.
Sir: see thou all the Saints how merry lie they go forward, and hasten
to their Crown? Whom when I rebuked, for that she seemed unseasonable,
presuming to thrust her self amongst the professed warriors of Christ, and
being a woman to associate her self with men. She answered P. S. has it but
once.
Benedicite, benedicite, and *
pray ye for me with this my little nephewe. For sinner though I be, daughter I
am to one, who was Bishop of Zurina P. F. Zurita.
I asked her why then she walked in so mean a sort, and for what cause she had
under taken so long a journey. Who replied: With this my little boy I go to the
place of banishment, least the enemy finding him alone, call him from the way
of truth, to death. To these words I could answer nothing else, the tears
trickling down my cheeks, but only, Gods will be done. The adversary, who
now perhaps said in his heart: I will part the spoils, Exodus 15.
I will glutte my soul, I will slay with my sword, my hand shall rule. As
soon as he saw that he could not catch one, sought narrow and filthy places
wherein to pen up Gods company. Then was to them denied all comfort of
access, for permitting whereof the keepers had been beaten with staves, and
sorely punished. The Confessors of Christ are tumbled one upon an other, as
swarms of grasshoppers, or (to speak more properly) as grains of corn. In
which thronging together, there could be no means of stepping a side to do
the office of nature, but of necessity even there was the receptacle of their
ordure and urine, so that the horror and stench thereof surpassed all other
manner of pains. I was once (not without much a do, and deep bribes
bestowed on the Moors) permitted to enter whilst the Vandals slept. Stepping
in I began as at a mire, to sincke up to the knees, and saw that of Jeremy
come to pass, who were bredde up in Saffron Ierem. 4.
(...), embraced (...). In fine being called upon by the insolent and clamorous
Moors, to hasten forward their imposed journey, issuing forth upon a Sunday,
their garments, face, and head besmeared with dirt: in cruel wise were they
led away by those Moors, singing yet unto our Lord with great joy: Glory is
this to al his Saints. Psalm 14^.
Gloria haec est omnibus Sanctis eius. Present was there also at that time,
Cyprian the blessed Prelate Bishop of B Vnzibil. but Ptol. V^^^^bi^a* Pl^^
Vl^^uburita
V^izi^ir, who to their singular consolation, cherished every one with godly
and fatherly affection, and not without streams of tears, ready to leave his
own life for the brethren, and to yield himself voluntarily to the
fellowships of their pains, if he might have been suffered. He spent in very
deed in that hard distress, all that he had, bestowing it upon the
impouerished brethren: for he sought occasion how he might be joined to the
Confessors, being himself a Confessor already in preparation of heart, and in
virtue: afterward passing many bickerings and calamities of prison, he
enjoyed to his great gladness, the exile which he so desired. How great
multitudes followed from sundry Countries and Cities, to see the Martyrs in a
longer sense then it is now a days taken
Martyrs of God, the ways and paths bear witness, not able to contain the
flock of people, who coming as beholders, ran up and down on the higher
ground. An inestimable troop also of the faithful, with wax tapers in their
hands, descended down; who casting their children at the feet of the
Martyrs, cried out thus. *
To whom will you leave us wreatches, while you go forwards to your Crown?
Who shall christen these sucklings in the font of the everlasting water? who
shall impart unto us the benefit of Penance, by Reconciliationis in dulgentia.
Matt. 16.
reconciling and indulgence, absoluing us from the bands of our sins? for
as much as it is said, whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in
heaven? who shall with solemn prayers commend us to the grave, when we dye? By
whom shall the wonted Rites of the Diuini sacrificii.
divine Sacrifice be performed unto us? Our hearts serve us well to go with
you, if we might; that so no necessity might separate the sons from you our
fathers. A midst these words, not destitute of B. praises
tears, is no man any more admitted to go forwards with them for their
comfort: but the whole crewe was pressed forwasrds and made to run, that they
might reach to the laborsome lodging where the The Arrabians at this day call
such a troup Carauanna and very near to Cannaua is the word Conuoy, usual
through Christendom in the same sense
Cannaua was prepared. As often as the men fainted, or any other (yea although
tender children) they were first punched forwards with the tops of staves,
or with stones; but afterward the Moors were commanded to tie by the feet,
those which were not able to go, and hale them through the hard rough places,
like carcases of brute beasts. So, first were their garments rent, then all
parts of their bodies. For here a head was dashed against the Gladios acutos
petrarum.
sharp-edged rocks, there sides were thumpt; so that life was gasped out, even
between the hands of them which haled them: the number of whom I could not
reckon, thy were so many. Extant remains to be seen all along the common
Aggerem publicum.
high way, the reatchlesse burial of the Saints, their graves witnessing,
where they lie. The rest as stronger, arrived at the wilderness, where being
settled, they had barley (as beasts) given them for food. Where also is reported
to be so great plenty of venomous worms and scorpions, as to them who know it
not, might seem incredible, which with their very breath infect and poison,
even such as are far of. And they say that no man stung with one of those
Scorpions, ever escapes; whose deadly venime nevertheless, was at no time
found to have hurt any one of Christ's servants, through his merciful
protection. But when as a while they had been fed with barly-corne, that
same also was afterward with-drawne, as though God, who rayned Manna to the
ancient Fathers, could not as well sustain his banished ones in so desolate a
place.

CHAP. VIII. Hunricke summoneth the Catholics to disputation with the Arrians.
SHARPER proceedinges were yet farther continued against the Church of God: he
which evermore destroyed the members thereof, being desirous to tear in
pieces the whole body. For upon the day of our Lords ascension, an Ambassador
of the Emperor Zeno (not the King himself) being present, came this precept
directed to Bishop Eugenius, to (...)safed to advertise my meandness by his
secretary Witared, who because it concerned religion and faith, did in the
Church rehearse his charge unto us, both Clergy and people being present. By
the contents whereof we understand the Kings Writ, to have in like sort gone
forth to all our Coepiscopos.
brethren Bishops, appointing us to meet at a determinat day, to dispute of
our faith. This ordinance we signified, how reverently we embraced, and to
the said secretary my meanenes gave information, that all of the parties beyond
the Sea agreeing with us in one Religion and communion, ought to have notice
hereof (for those of the Kingdom are all ready to obey) especially for that it
is the common cause of the whole world, and not only of the Africane Provinces.
For as much then as I promised to exhibit by B.Sancto
a second bill, a further answer, I humbly beseech your Honor, to present
unto our Lord and merciful Kings ears, the information before mentioned,
that his clemency may in good sort know, that we (God-willing) by no means
shun the order taken for disputation; but that without assent of the whole,
we must not take upon us to determine matters of faith. For this cause require
we, that he vouchsafe of his great bounty, justice, and vvisdome, to condescend
thereunto. Dated by Eugenius Bishop of the Catholic Church of Carthage.

When this information was put up by blessed Eugenius: he who had now
conceived mischief, was pricked forward to utter forth his impiety with worse
vexation, and by P. F. P. S* Ob^d^s.
Cubadus Provost of the Realm, sent to Eugenius this word. Subdue to me all
the earth that the whole world may be brought under my power, and then B.
Euangelium.
( Eugenius) will I fulfill thy demand. Whereunto blessed Eugenius replied,
as he well might. That which has no reason ought not to have been spoken:
This is as one should bid a man soar up in the air and fly, which is
contrary to the fashion of humane nature. For I said if the Kings mightiness
desired to understand our faith, which is the only true belief, let him send
to his friends, and I will likewise write to my brethren, that our Bishops
may come, who together with us may demonstrate our common faith, especially to
the Church of Quae caput est omnium Ecclesiarum.
Rome which is the head of all Churches. To this answered Cubadus. Then of like
you and my Lord the King are hail fellows. Eugenius answered; Not so, but as
I said, If he desire to know the true faith, let him write to his friends,
that they send directions for our Catholic Bishops, and then will I write to
the Bishops of our side: for the case is one and the same, of all the whole
Catholic faith. This did Eugenius, not for that there wanted in Afric that
could refell the adversaries objections, but to the intent that they might
come, who being far from their Dominion, might have more confident liberty,
and withal open unto all nations our injurious oppression. But he that
contrived nothing but deceit, would hear no reason, compassing by sundry
presumptions, to molest and grieve whom soever of the Bishops he heard say to
be learned. Already had he the second time banished Donatian Bishop of B.
Vinia^ense se^undum, ^^c.
Vibia, with an hundred and fifty bastinadoes; and the Subfetulan Bishop
Praesidius, a sharp witted man: After them served he in like sort Mansuetus,
German, Fuscle, and diverse others. While this was doing, he commanded that
none of our religion should have any of theirs to sojourne at our board, nor
that they should at all eat at meals with Catholics. Which thing was to them
nothing beneficial, but turned to our great advantage: for if their speech (as
the Apostle 2. Tim. 2.
teaches us) is wont to creep like a canker, how much more could their
familiarity at table infect? seeing the same Apostle 1. Cor. 5.
commands not so much as to communicate with the wicked at their meat. But
now where the fire of persecution was once kindled, and that the fury of the
malicious King did every where flame, our Lord showed a miracle by his
faithful servant, which I may not pass over.

CHAP. IX. Eugenius Bishop of Carthage restores by miracle, sight to a blind
man.
THERE was in this city Carthage a certain blind man, well known to all the
City, by name Foelix, this man was visited of God, and at night by a vision
received he this commandment. Get thee hence and go to my servant Eugenius,
say that I have sent thee to him, and at the hour when he halloweth the Font,
where by those which come to the faith may be Christened, he shall touch thy
eyes and they shall be opened, and thou shall see the light. Warned by such
apparition, yet reputed he himself (as it often falls out) beguiled by a
dream; neither would he arise, but drowned again with sleep, was in like
manner again called upon to go to Eugenius. He neglected nevertheless as
before, and the third time being hastily and sharply rebuked, raised up the
boy, which was wont to reach him his hand, and gets in all haste to Faustus
Church, and after prayer made, he signifies to Peregrine a Deacon (neither
without streams of tears) that he had to speak with the Bishop, and to
declare a secret unto him; which the Bishop understanding, willed the man to
be brought in. For already in solemnity of the feast, resounded the Hymni
Nocturni Cantante populo. Which term of Nocturne remains at this day in the
churches office or service*
Nocturne, Hymns throughout the Church, and the people were singing with loud
voices. The blind man told in order his vision, and plainly said: I will not
leave you until according to our Lords hests, you yeald unto me my sight.
Depart from me said the holy Eugenius, a sinner I am, and of all other sinners
most unworthy, as one, who therefore am reserved unto such times as these. But
the other clasping about his knees, said nothing else then as before: Render me
my sight. Eugenius then esteeming it a certain kind of shameful B.
crudelitate.
rigor, if he should stiffly refuse, and because withal the time did call P.
F. P. S. credulitate.
him away, accompaned with the Clergy he went along with the man to the Font.
Where kneeling down, not without great groans, he pierced the heavens with
sighs, and Crispantem benedixit aquae fontem. P. F. alueum fontis.
blessed the whiuering waters. As soon as he had risen from his prayer, he
said to the blind: I have told thee already (brother Foelix) that I am a
sinful man: but he, which vouchsafed to visit thee, perform to thee according
to thy faith, and open thy eyes. At these words he signed his eyes with the
standard of the Cross, and through the grace of God, the blind man received
sight: whom he there retained by him, as long as the baptising endured; least
by reason of this so great a miracle, the people should oppress the man with
great concourse about him. Then was it manifested to the whole Church; and the
blind man went with Eugenius to the Altar (as the manner is) to make an
offering to our Lord, for his health received, which the Bishop took and laid
upon the Altar: and the people through extreme joy, gave an P. S. P F.
irreuocabilis B^^naestimabilis.
unappeasable shout. Straight way went one with hasty report hereof, to the
King. Foelix is featch away, examined what had passed, and how he received his
sight. He uttered the whole in order: the Arrian Bishops said that Eugenius had
wrought by sorcery. And because (oppressed with the clearness of the thing, so
that they could not shadow it) they were greatly confounded (for Foelix was a
man well known to the whole City) if it had been lawful, they would therefore
have slain him, as the Jews sought to put Lazarus to death after he was
raised to life.

CHAP. X. The impudent and unreasonable proceeding of the Arrians, about their
challenge of disputation.
NOW drew near that quarrelling day, appointed the Calends of February;
there assembled Bishops, not only of Afric, but of many Islandes also,
wearyed with affliction and sorrow. Many days together there was no mention
of disputing, until in the meane-space i. the king
he had singled out the skilfullest and learned persons, to the intent that
by sundry calumniations he make them away. For one of that learned crewe, named
Laetus (a stout and most learned man) after long imprisonment he consumed by
fire, thinking by so doing to strike a fear into the rest, and bleamish the
cause. At last yet began the conflict of disputation, at the place which the
adversaries had chosen. Our Divines therefore eschewing all tumultuous clamor
(least the Arrians should after say that they had by some of ours been
ouer-ruled) chose certain amongst their own company to answer for all.
Cyrill placed aloft for himself and his Satellitibus.
attendants, a most stately throne, we standing on our feet: whereupon our
Bishops began to say. Conference is there always to be taken in hand, where
not proud superiority of power bears swaye; but where an assembly is by
common consent made, that the disputers debating the controversy, and each
part doing their endeavor, the truth may come to light. But now who shall be
the disputer? who the defender? which with upright balance may either confirm
that, which is rightly avouched, or refell unreasonable assertions. When they
used these and such like words, the Kings secretary answered. The Patriarch
Cyril says, that some of you arrogantly and unlawfully usurp to themselves
the name of Catholics. Our company then with protestation of the same, said:
let it be read unto us by whose authority Cyril takes upon him this title.
Thereat our adversaries making a great stir, began to cavil. And forasmuch
as our side requested, that if the wiser people might not examine the matter,
at least they might be lookers on; all the sons of the Catholic Church there
present, were commanded to have a hundred stroks with a cudgel. Then began
Blessed B. Eusebius.
Eugenius to say aloude: God, behold the violence, which we suffer, and
consider the tribulation, which we sustain of our persecutors. With this our
men turning to Cyril, said: propound that which you intend. Cyril excused
himself that he understood not Latin. Our Bishops replied that they always
knew him to have spoken Latin, that therefore he ought not now to draw
back, especially seeing he was the kindler of those coals. But he perceiving
the Catholic Bishops to be ready for to join with him, would needs by diverse
illusions and shifts, avoid audience: which our part fore-seing, had composed
a Pamphlet concerning faith, very seemly and sufficiently compiled: this they
now exhibited, with protestation: If ye be desirous to know our belief; the
faith which we hold, is herein comprised.

The exhibited book here mentioned, is omitted. For though P. S. erroneously
entitle it Victors; yet Victor himself has already testified the contrary:
and Gennadius notes the Author thereof to have been Eugenius.

THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAPTRR. I. The Churches are closed: the Catholic Bishops by Proclamation
deprived of their Seas, and their goods given to Arrian Ministers.
OUR book being put up and perused, yet could not they with their bleare eyes
behold the light of truth: but wood for anger, and storming with outrageous
language, they took it very ill, that we called our selves by our name of
Catholics. And forthwith they falsely suggest to the King, that with clamorous
noise we avoided audience of the matter, who giving credit to their lies,
kindled at that present with choler, hastened to fulfill that which he had in
his heart. And during the abode of the Bishops at Carthage, he sent his
messengers secretly with an edict through the Provinces, by force whereof in
one day he closed all the Churches of Afric, and gave unto his Bishops for a
gift, all the substance of the Bishops and of the Churches. And more then this,
not knowing himself what he said, or of what he spoke, the law which our
Christian Emperors had long before decreed against them and other Heretics,
for the honorable maintenance of the catholic Church, the same they blushed
not to set forth against us. Adding much of their own heads, as seemed best
to their tyrannical power: For this is the form of the proclaimed law.

A PROCLAMATION.
HVNRICKE King of the Vandals and Alanes, to all subjects of our Realm. It is
the part of triumphant virtue, and a thing worthy our Maiestatis Regiae.
royal majesty, to recoile evil devises astainst their Authors. For whosoever
inuenteth any wickedness, let him impute it to his own folly, if he fall
into mischief. In which thing, our Grace following the aim of Gods judgment,
has assigned unto all persons, as their deserts good or badde require.
Provoked therefore by such as have thought meet to resist the commandment of
our Father of ^nclytae recorda^^onis.
famous memory, or of our own Mansuetudinis.
clemency, we do now take upon us at length, the censure of severity. For
whereas by our authority, we have proclaimed amongst all our people, that in
the shieres of the Vandals, the Priests of the Homou^^an^.
Consubstantials should not have their assemblies, nor take upon them any of
their mysteries, which indeed do rather contaminate, then other wise. This
when we saw to be neglected, and that very many were found, which affirmed
they kept and retained the uncorrupted rule of faith: it is well enough known,
that they were all cited under nine months warning, that they should with out
any fear, assemble together for disputation sake (if at least they had any
thing to say for their purpose) at the Calends of Febr. the 8th. year of our
Reign. To whom after their meeting at the City of Carthage, when delay of the
time prescribed was expired, we are known to have granted farther respite of
certain days. As soon as they showed themselves ready for the conflict, it
was the first day propounded unto them, by our reverend Bishops, that they
should Propriae.
directly prove consubstantiality by the divine Scriptures: or at leastwise
condemn that, which was decided and Amputatum est.
cut off, by No meruail though the Arrians lie in the number for neither also
were they two Counsels, being by the Church of Rome rejected.
more then a thousand Bishops from all parts of the world, at the Councels of
Arimini, and Seleucia; which thing they would not do, but drawing the matter
to a sedition, incensed also the people. The second day likewise, when we
commanded them to make answer concerning the same faith; as it had been
proposed unto them, they enterprised their former rashness and misdemeanour,
perturbing all things with sedition and clamor, that they might not at al
come to the conflict. Whereunto we them provoking, have ordained that their
Churches shall be shut up, with this prouiso: so long to remain closed until
they assent to proceed unto disputation: Which they waxing obstinate in their
wicked devises, have refused to accomplish. So that it is in this case
necessary, and most just with all, to return upon those men, what in the
corpse of those laws is expressed, B. induxisse cum errore P. F. induxisse
secum in errorem. In P. S. this clause wants.
which the Emperors by them induced into error, did at several times
promulgate. These laws are extant in the decrees of Theodosius the worthy
Emperor. B. superstition.
The substance of which laws seems to contain, that no Church should be
open to any other, then to the Bishops of their own institution, that it
should be lawful for none other to Conuictus agere.
live collegially, to make assemblies, or to have or build any Churches at all,
either in the City, or yet in the simplest places; but that also attempted,
escheat to the Prince. And moreover, that inheritances annexed to any Church of
their faith, should not any more be paid to their Prelates. Nor that such
persons should have license B. Commeandi. P. F. P. S. Commemorare.
to pass up and down, whither them pleased, but should be banished from all
Towns and Cities, neither have authority either to baptize, or to dispute of
religion. That also they should have no leave Ordinan di, it is meant of holy
orders.
to give orders, either to Bishops or Priests, or others appertayning to the
Clergy; a rigorous penalty being set down, that as well they which should
suffer themselves to receive such honors, as those also that were Ordina^ores.
giuers of such orders, should every of them, be fined in ten pound of gold,
with their farther extension, that they should not be permitted to make
supplication about it. Yea, if so be they had In B it wants.
by special service deserved respect, In B it wants.
yet should they not prevail. But in case that notwithstanding this detriment,
they persisted, then should they by convenient prosecution, be exiled out of
their Country. Toward the comminalty extended likewise those Emperors their
severity, so that they might neither bequeath, nor give or take, even that
which was cast off and forsaken, not as made over upon trust, not by legacy,
not by grantes, not by executorship, not by any Codicillo
bil or other manner of writings. They also made such as were Milita^ent
palatio
pensioners in the palace, liable to penalty of an excessive forfeiture,
Albetvvene this sign, and the like far after follovving, is in B. most
confusedly misplaced.
after the rates of their degree and dignity, that spoiled of all honorable
privilege they should incur infamy, and find themselves noted for public
offenders. To the Officialibus iudicum diuersorum.
offices also of several tribunals, was prescribed the penalty of 30. po^do.
thirty pound of silver: which if they who persisted in their error, had five
times paid, then should such persons be convicted, whipped, and so banished.
Next had they given in commandment, that the books of all those Priests,
whom they persecuted, should be cast into the fire, and all other such books;
which in like manner we also now command to be done with those books, by
means of which, iniquity has induced it self into error of that name. For
as touching the several persons, of whom was spoken, these ordinances they
made, that P F. Illustres, spectabiles, senatores, populares.
persons of excellency should every of them forfeit fifty pound of gold, the
honorable forty pound, Senators thirty, common Gentlemen twenty, Priests
thirty, decurions five, merchants five, Plebeii.
common people five, Circumcelliones.
wandering ruffians ten; and who might happen to continue after this damage,
their goods confiscated, they should by banishment be punished: upon Ordines
ciuitatum.
corporations in Cities, procurators also, and takers of leases, this penalty
they inflicted; that if they concealed, and did not disclose or atach such
persons, presenting them to judgment, they themselves shall make good the
forfeiture. Moreover to those who took the lands of the Crown to farm, this
mulct was set down, that as much as was their yearly rent to the Kings
household, so much should they semblably pay into his Exchequor for a fine; as
in general the like to be observed in all, either hyrers or possessors of
land, which shall be minded to endure in the same superstition, I here do
appoint. Of Judges farthermore, that who so were found not to be most instant
in prosecuting this affair, should be punished by outlawry, and loss of life.
Also of the chief officers, that three should be punished, the rest be
amerced, and cast in twenty pounds of gold. Of necessity therefore must all
the Homousians be bound by the very like constitution, whom it is evident
indeed to have held, and still to hold the substance of ae wicked belief:
unto whom we now by this our decree denounce, that they abstain from
Hominibus, but surely for omnibus.
all the a foresaid matters, which shall be prosecuted throughout all Ordines.
estates in the Cities; as likewise upon Justices, who neglecting the former
ordinances, can be proved not to have grievously punished such as withstand the
same. To all persons therefore entangled with the errors of the forementioned
faith of the Homousians, which has wholly been heretofore so condemned by a
Council of such a great number of Priests, we enjoin and give commandment,
that they abstain from all the foresaid affairs and contracts. Let them
know, that nothing is permitted unto them, but that semblable punishment
attendes to inuolue them every one, unless before the Calendes of June, in the
eight year of our Reign, they convert unto the true *
Religion, which we reverence and honor. Which prefixed day for no other
purpose has our piety afforded, then to the end that unto such, as before hand
renounce their error, pardon be not denied, and the obstinate be by due
punishments chastised. But whosoever shall persevere in that error, whither
they enjoy Knighthood of our house, or happily have charge under several
Titles and employments, let them be compellable to infliction of those mulcts
above prescribed, according to the qualities of their degrees: nothing in the
mean season being of any validity, which any of them may happen by surreption
to obtain, against private persons of what calling and place soever they be:
This our proclamation wills, that to be observed, which in the former laws
was concerning such expressed, that they may undergo congruent punishment.
Judges provincial slackly putting our ordinances in execution, we will that
they be sentenced by their superior Judge. *
But to true worshippers of the Majesty divine (that is to say unto our
Priests) we by this our constitution do decree and provide, all manner of
Churches belonging to the whole Clergy of the name above mentioned, in what
places or Countries soever they stand within these Dominions, which Propitia
diuinitate
by the grace of God are under our imperial government, together with all such
things as to the same appertain; not doubting but to relief of the poor it
shall prove more beneficial, which to our Sacrosanctis.
thrise-holy Bishops is so justly given. We notify then unto all men this law
of ours, issuing from the very fountain of justice, that none may pretend
ignorance of our commandment.

Fare ye well 6. Call. of March. Carthage.
CHAP. II. Extreme proceedinges of Hunricke against the Bishops.
AFTER these lamentable edicts, farced with intoxicate poison, he wills all the Bishops which were assembled at Carthage (whose Churches, houses, and
substance he had already seized) to be despoyled in their lodgings, and so
driven out of the Town gates. Neither servant, nor beast, nor garment to
change, was left them. It was farther more forbidden, that any man should
harbor any one of them, or give them susteynance. And who so should attempt
for pity to do the contrary, he with all his family should be brent by fire.
Prudently did the Bishops, who were then cast forth, in that (though begging)
yet they departed not from thence. For had they gone their ways, not only
should they never have been recalled: but they would have belyed them (as
they did) that they shunned disputation; especially because when they should
have returned, their churches had no goods left, all being rifled. While
therefore the Bishops lay round about the walls in the open air, it fell out
so, that the wicked Tyrant went forth toward the fish-pondes, whom they
thought good to meet in the way, saying: Why are we so afflicted? For what
evils committed suffer we this? If called to dispute, why are we spoiled? why
are we slaundred? why are we deferred, and driven to remain amongst the
dunghils here without in the Country, afflicted with hunger and nakedness,
far from our Churches and houses? Whom he beholding with a fell regard,
before he heard their complaint, willed the horse-me^ with full course to ride
over them, that by such violence they might not only be trampled upon: but be
slain outright. Many of them were then sore crushed, especially aged men. Then
to the men of God was it commanded to present themselves, and meet him at the
Temple of Memory, unwitting what treachery was there prepared.

CHAP. III. A fraudulent oath is proposed to the Bishops.
THITHER when they came, in a writing delivered unto them, was this serpentine
subtlety enclosed. Our Lord King Hunricke, although lamenting your obstinacy,
refusing as yet promptly to obey his will, and to become of the same religion
where of he himself is, being now in purpose to deal graciously with you,
will (if you swear unto the contents of this paper) send you to your Churches
and houses. Hereunto answered the Bishops with one voice: We say still, as we
have already said, and will ever say: Christians we are, Bishops we are; we
hold the Apostolical and only true faith. A little silence having ensued after
confession of their faith, the Kings commissioners proceeded hastily to extort
an oath from the Bishops: whereupon the blessed men Bishop Hortulane, and
Bishop P. F Florentinian.
Florentian joyntlie replied: Depute you us brute beasts, that we should easily
and unadvisedly swear, ignorant what the writing contains? The Kings
messengers without more stay disclosed to them the purport thereof, which with
colorable words was glosed: for thus the entrapping tenor thereof comprised.
Swear ye, if ye desire that after the death of our Lord the King, his Son
Hildericke succeed in the Kingdom: and if none of you will send any letter
beyond the Sea. This oath if ye refuse not to take, he will restore you to your
Churches. The merciful plain meaning of many, minded to have sworn (whereas
God indeed prohibiteth swearing) least Gods people might afterward say, that
the Priests by not swearing, gave cause that their Churches were not restored.
Others of the Bishops more circumspect, smelling out the guilfull treachery,
denied to swear, alleging that it was forbidden by the authority of the
Gospel; our Lord himself denouncing. Yea and shall not swear at all. Matt. 5.
Then inferred the Commissioners: Who purpose to swear let them go apart.
Which when they did, by notary was straight enrolled what each said, in what
City he was entitled. The like was done to them that would not swear. Then
were both parties committed to ward, and not long after, the deceiptfull drift
of the oath, which before lay hid, plainly appeared. To those which would
swear, it was said: for as much as contrary to the commandment of the Gospel
you would have sworn, the Kings will is that you shall never see your
Churches; but being banished you shall lawfully receive wast and uninhabited
places, there to husbandry the ground; yet with this clause *
that you shall neither say Psalms, nor pray, or hold any book to read in
your hand, nor baptize, nor give orders, nor Reconciliare praesumatis.
presume to reconcile any man. In like manner to those which refused the oath
they said. Because you wish not the reign of our Lords Son, therefore you
would not swear: for which consideration it is commanded, that you shall be
sent away into Corse the Island, there to hew timber for ships.

CHAP. IIII. The horrible cruelty of the Heretics: the constancy of Dionisia
and her Son, with others.
THE Beast thirsting after innocents blood, proceeded (during that the Bishops
were not as yet exiled) and sent through all the Provinces of Afric at once,
his cruel tormentors; so that no place, no house, remained free from
lamentation, screeching, and outcryes. They spared not any age or sex, but such
only as yealded to their will. Some they cudgeled with staves; some they hunge
up; others they burned. Women (and especially Gentle-women) they tortured
openly naked, against the law of natural honesty. One of whom our
Country-woman Dionisia, I will succinctly entreat of. When they saw that she
was not only bolder, but more beautiful also then other Matrones, they willed
her first to be vnrayed, and made ready for cudgels. Who in her pain cried
boldly unto them: I am assured of my God; vex me how you list, only my
woman-hood diclose ye not. But they with greater rage set her naked upon an
higher place, for a public spectacle. Amidst the stripes of the wounds, while
streams of blood flowed over all her body, with a free voice she spoke thus
unto them: Ye Ministers of Satan, that which you do, reckoning it my reproach,
is to me an honor. Moreover in so great extreamities, and already now a
Martyr; being her self Diuina^um Scripturarum ^cientia plena.
well seen in the Scriptures, she animated others to Martyrdom. By this her
holy example, she saved almost all her Country. And beholding her only Son
(who was deinty, and as yet of tender age) to be somevvhat daunted with fear
of pains, chaslising him with her looks, and becks, and checking him with
the authority of a mother, she so encouraged, that he became thereby much the
more constant: to whom amongst his terrible torments she spoke as follows.
Remember (O my child) that in the name of the holy Trinity we were baptized In
Matre Ecclesia Catholica.
in our Mother the Catholic Church: let us not loose the garment of our
salvation, least he which invited us, find not at his coming a nuptial
garment, and say to his servants. Cast them into utter darkness Matt. 22.
where shall be weeping of eyes, and gnashing of teeth. That pain is to be
dreaded which never ends, and that life to be desired which always lasts:
With such words as these she made her son a Martyr. For the honorable youth
(who had to name Maioricus) yealding his spirit, in the combat of his
confession consummated his triumphant course: and she embracing her sacrifice,
giving God thanks by mouth as much as ever she could, chose to bury him in her
own house, in consolation of her hope to come, that as often as upon his grave
she powered out prayers to the Trinity, she might conceive confidence, that she
should never be estranged from her son. How many were by her (as I said)
gained to God in that City, it were tedious to recite. For how great things
her sister likewise, called Datiua; and B. Leotia. P.S. P. F. Leontia.
Loice daughter of the holy Bishop German; and the honest Physician B. Aemylius.
Emelius, cosen to Datiua; and devout Tertius a man famous in Confession of the
Trinity; or Boniface the Sibidensian did endure; with what torments they were
Euiscerati. i. bovveled.
torn: let him orderly declare that is able.

CHAP. V. Admirable endurance of Maiorc; and incomparable conquest of Victoria.
WHo can also express, what pains Maiorc a noble-mans slave of the town of
Tuburb, did sustain for Christ? who after innumerable blows of staves, was
lifted up with pullyes, and being carried through the City in hanging wise, was
now hoysted up a loft, and in a moment by letting the ropes ship, lighting
upon the slintes of the streets, with the peyse of his body, dashed against the
stones like a stone. He was moreover often times haled along, and so crushed
with the sharp pointed flintes, that you might have seen (by reason the
utmost skin was rent asunder) the oflappes of his inward parts, hanging at
his sides and belly. This man had suffered not much unlike matters, in the time
of Gensericke, rather then he would bewray the secrets of one of his friends.
How much more then, would he be furnished with constancy about Sacraments of
religion? and if he showed himself so trusty to his friend, which only loved
him; how much more did he owe to him, who shall fully reward his loyalty?

What outrages were done in the City Cluse, it is not in me to declare; for the
very number of Martyrs and Confessors, it is not possible to recount. One
Matron amongst them called Victoria, a true amplifier of her name, as she hung
burning over a soft fire in the face of the people, was thus entreated by her
ungracious husband, her children standing by. Why suffer thou, O wife? If
thou despise me have pity (thou hard hearted woman) of these little ones, whom
thou have engendered. How happens it that thou regardest not thine own womb,
and set nothing by those, whom groaning thou broughtest into the world?
Where is the plighted troth of matrimonial love? where are the bands of
wedlock? Where is the honest contract drawn long since between us? Regard I
pray thee thy children and husband, and fulfill quickly the Kings
commandment, that thou may est escape the torments yet at hand, and be
rendered to me again, and to our children. But she neither giving ear to her
childrens crying, nor to the Serpents flatteries, casting her eyes vpwardes
from the ground, contemned the world with the desires thereof. Whom when the
Executioners perceived to be dead, after that her shoulders were with long
hanging out of their place, took her down fully bereft of life. And (as she
afterward told us) a certain Virgin came to her, who touched every part of
her body, whereby she became immediately whole and sound.

CHAP. VI. The resolute constancy of the Proconsull or Marshall Victorian, and
his brave answer.
IN what sort to extol Victorian of the City Adrument, and at that time
Proconsull of Carthage, through default of words I am ignorant. No man in
Afric was richer then he, and held he was in estimation with the impious
King, as one very faithful in all things given him in charge. The King sent
him word after a familiar sort, that if he gently assented to his
commandment, he would make account of him above all other: but the servant of
God gave this confident answer. I am assured of Christ, my God, and my Lord:
say thus to the King. Let him lay me upon coals, thrust me upon beasts, put me
to all kind of torments; if I give place, then in vain was I christened in the
Catholic Church. For if there were no other life then this alone, which is
present, and that we hoped not after an other which is eternal* yet would I
not do it, and for a little temporal glory be so ungrateful to my Creator,
which in such sort has bestowed upon me his faith. At which answer the Tyrant
chafed, and with what torments and how sore pains he afflicted him, humane
eloquence is not sufficient to express, who triumphantly and happily
consummating his course, received the Crown of Martyrdom.

CHAP. VII. A story of two brethren in like sort, tormented with equal pains.
NEITHER is any body able to explicate the conflicts of the Martyrs, which they
atchiued at the City of P.S. Tambar. P. F. Tambay.
Tambad, where two brothers of the City of Aquisregie^^^^.
Kings-water, well assured in our Lord, gave each to other their faith, how
they would request the torturers, that they might be handled with like pain
and punishment. When therefore at the first, hung up with weighty stones at
their heels, they had remained in that case all the whole day; the one of them
desired that he might be let down, and that a little respite might be given
him: the other brother fearing least he would haue-denyed his faith, cried to
him from the engine where he hung. Do not so, do not so brother: that was not
our oath to Christ, I will accuse thee, when we shall appear before his
terrible Throne, since we swear upon his body and blood, to suffer together for
his cause.

Saying these and other words, he imboldned his brother in such wise, to the
agony of his passion, that he cried out with a loud voice. Put me to what
punishments you will, persist, urge us being Christians, with your cruelest
torments: as my brother does, so will I also. With what fiery plates they were
scorched, and with what instruments each was feared, and with what torments
they were tortured, the thing it self declares, in that the executioners
themselves did cast them out of their sight, saying: These fellows will make
all the people follow, so that no man at all will be converted to our
religion. This they said the rather, for that no bluish wannes, no token of
their torments any thing appeared.

CHAP. VIII. The Courage of the Tipasenses: and of them which spoke, their
tongues being cut out.
LET us now hasten to speak to the honor of God, of that which was done in
Ptol. Tipasa, at this day Tenes* or Tun^^.
Tipas, a City of the great Mauritania. As soon as the Townsmen saw an
Arrian, from a secretary of the Court, made their Bishop, and sent to destroy
their souls, almost all the City fled into Spain (the passage being very
short) so that very few remained behind, such as found no means of shipping:
whom the Bishop of the Arrians first by fair means, afterward by threats,
assayed to compel to Arrianisme. But they constant in faith, not only derided
his madness, while he persuaded them: but also boldly celebrated the divine
mysteries, assembling together in one house. Intelligence received, he secretly
sent information thereof unto Carthage: whereupon the King in a great rage,
directed thither a certain Earl with charge, that in midst of the
marketplace, all the Province being there assembled, their tongues and right
hands should be cut off at the very root and stumpe: yet through the
assistance of the holy Ghost, they so spoke and speak still, as they did never
before. If any man be incredulous, let him go now to Constantinople, and there
shall he find Reparatus a Subdeacon, one of that company, speaking (and that
eloquently) without any impediment. For which cause he is greatly reverenced in
the palace of the Emperor Zeno, the Queen especially honoring him with
singular respect.

CHAP. IX. The incredible tyranny of Hunricke toward his one Vandals
Catholics.
WHo may now in fit terms discourse, and reckon up together the diversities
of pains, which by their kings commandment, the Vandals practiced against
their own people? If a writer attempted particularly to recount the things
that have passed in Carthage only, though simply without all flourishing
speech, yet would it trouble him to recite the very names of the torments:
which to be true, is to every body manifest, and is easily proved. For you may
daily see some without hands, others wanting their eyes; some deprived of
their feet, many that have lost both nose and ears; diverse whose
shoulder-blades are fallen out of their place by long hanging, or whose heads
were sunk down between their shoulders, by reason they were daily tortured,
and by ropes had bin much wafted up and down in the air. There were which by
racking of the ropes insunder, fell headlong from the height where they hunge;
and with mighty pitch very many lost the state of their brain, together with
their eyes: and some their bones being crushed insunder, yealded forth with
their lives; others lived not long after. He that thinks this a fable, let
him ask of B. Auius.
Vranius the Ambassador of Zeno, in whose presence such things were most of
all put in execution, because coming to Carthage he had cast abroad, that his
coming was for the defense of the Catholic Churches. Wherefore the Tyrant to
give him to understand that he stood in awe of no man, in those places and
streets (...)to be racked ( Epidophorus sitting by and raging) before his
torments took out Sabana. In Spain this word is at this day current In Greek
also Sabanon, signifies any cloth to mundifie vvithall.
the Chrisome clothes, wherewith he once vested this fellow at the Font, when
he undertook for him, which privily he brought about him to this purpose; and
wauing them in the air, and lifting them up that all might behold it, he is
said with such words as these, to have moved the whole City to lamentation
and tears. These are the Lintea^^ina.
linen (O Epidophorus, thou abused minister of error) which shall accuse
thee, when the Majesty of the great Judge shall come: they shall be diligently
by me kept, in witness of thy perdition, and condemn thee headlong to the
bottomless depth of the pit which burns with brimstone. These did cladde
thee, arising without spot out of the Font: these shall vehemently persecute
thee, when thou shall with the rest, inherit the flames of hell; because thou
have put on cursednesse as a garment, renting and forsaking the true and holy
robe of Baptism and faith. What will thou do (O wreatch) when the servants
of the house-holder shall begin to call together, those that were invited?
Then the King beholding thee who were once called, and seeing thee to want thy
wedding raiment, shall with terrible indignation say unto thee. Friend, Matt.
22.
how enterst thou in, not having a nuptial garment? I see not that which I
gave thee, I acknowledge not this to be that, which I bestowed upon thee: Thou
^a^t lost the habit of thy Knighthood, which in defense of thy Virginal body
thou waredst. Ten months I covered thee, I drew the sign of my Cross upon
thee, I washed thee clean with water, and adorned thee with the purple of my
blood: I perceive not my seal in thy face; I see no character of the Trinity:
no such can be at my banquet. Bind you him hand and foot with ropes, who
would voluntarily separate him self in such sort from his Catholic brethren.
He has enlarged and pitched his lines, a snare, wherewith he has both
entangled him self, and stopped others from my feast. He has laid for diverse
a stumbling-blocke in their way: therefore with eternal shame and everlasting
ignominy, I cast him out from my table. While Muritta spoke, Epidophorus being
put to silence, was seared in conscience before the day of the fire everlasting.

CHAP. XI. Banishment of the Clergy of Carthage: the notable constancy of
twelve Quyristers.
AL of them therefore preparing their backs for strokes, cheerfully went
forwards to banishment, who being yet in their long journey, outrageous and
unmerciful men came (by setting on of the Arrian Bishops) to take from them,
that which peradventure Christian piety had given them for susteynance: when as
each of the^ so much more gladly sung. Naked I came sorth of my mothers womb,
and naked now I go to exile: sor God is not to seek, how to feed his
hungry, nor how to clothe us in the desert. Two Vandals moreover, who had
often under Gensericke been Confessors, contemning their riches, went with
these of the Clergy into banishment, and their mother in their company. Out of
this multitude of Confessors (that is to say of the Clergy of Carthage) as
they were in their journey, twelve children by the suggestio^ of al Theu^^rius.
Theucorius (who of a Lector was become a runnegate) were to be separated,
such as he knew to have clear strong voices, and fit for music, and had
been his Scholars while he was Catholic. Quickly upon his information were
men sent, and with barbarous fury boys to the number of twelve, are recalled
from their journey, all separated in body not in mind, from the flock of the
Saints; dreading yet their ruin, with sighs and tears they clasped their
fellows knees, that they might not be drawn away; whom nevertheless the
rude Heretics, parting with their menacing swords, carried back to Carthage.
But though they were dealt with all not by fair means (as their age seemed
rather to require) they were found more resolute then for their years; and
least they should sleep to death, they lighted to themselves the lamps of the
Gospels light. At this the Arrians conceived grievous indignation, blushing for
shame to see themselves overcome by boys, and enflamed thereby, will them to
be beaten afresh with wandes, whom few days before they had cut with many
lashes. Sores are made upon sores, and the hurts renewed wax raw afresh: yet
came it to pass through our Lords assistance, that their small age tainted
not for pain, and their courage increased, so that they waxed strong in faith:
whom now Carthage honors with great affection, regarding this Quyre of
twelve boys, as of twelve Apostles. They dwell together, they table together,
they sing together, they rejoice in our Lord together.

CHAP. XII. The Martyrdomes of certain: and the evil entreaty of Bishop
Eugenius.
IN those days two Merchants of the same City, who both had to name
Frumentius, were crowned with a notable Martyrdom. Seven brethren also, not
by nature, but by grace (as which lived together in one Monastery)
accomplishing the agony of their confession, came to the garland whose
flourish never vadeth: Liberatus the Abbas.
Abbot, Bonifacius a Deacon, Seruus a Sub deacon, Rusticus Sub diaconus.
a Subdeacon, Rogatus a Monk, Septimus a Monk, and Maximus a Monk: For as
then more cruelly did the Bishops, Priests, and Clergy of the Arrians rage,
then the King and his Vandals. For every where those Bishops with their
Clergy, ran up and down, persecuting us with their swords by their sides,
as namely one Antony a Superintendent of theirs, and somewhat crueller then the
rest; whose practices against us were so abominable and incredible, that they
can not be uttered. His residence was in a City near to the wilderness,
which joyneth upon the Province of Tripoly. As an insatiable beast thirsting
after Catholics blood, he ran here and there, roaring after his pray: and
impious Hunricke acquainted with his fierce disposition, would needs banish
Eugenius into the coasts of that wilderness. But Antony to whose custody he
was committed, kept him so close and straight, that no man could have access;
and besides by sundry afflictions, guiles, and pains, thought to make him
away. The holy man while he bewailed the sore persecution, and wore out his
aged limbs by rough haire-cloth, and lying on the bare ground, watered his
couch with devout showers of tears; fell at last into the troublesome disease
of the palsy. At news whereof the Arrian conceiving great joy, ran in have
to the Cell of Gods exiled servant: and when he perceived the true Bishop,
through stopping of his disease to maffle in speech, he cast in mind to
destroy him outright, as to whom he wished not long life. Willing therefore
the sharpest vinegre to be brought that could be found; he powered the same into
the reverend old man's jaws, notwithstanding that he abhorred and loathed it.
For if the Lord of us all, which came to that end to drink it, when he had
tasted it, refused to drink; how much rather should this faithful servant
and Confessor of his reject it, when heretical fury pressed it upon him? By
this vinegre increased that noisome disease, of which yet afterward (Christ
of his pity mercyfully assisting) he became hole.

CHAP. XIII. The barbarous and vain outrage of an Arrian Superintendent,
against a Catholic Bishop.
BY the like banishment and usage of Habet-deum, and other of our Bishops, is
easily manifest, how grievously the City of Tamallum, wherein Antony made his
abode, might be vexed. For whereas he had, with sundry afflictions given him
vexation, neither could make him an Arrian, but found the Champion of Christ
always constant in his profession; nevertheless had promised his confederats
to overcome him, saying: If I make him not of our religion, I am not Antony:
now perceauing that he failed of his boast, he invented thus to do. Tying the
Bishop hand and foot with big bands, and gagging his mouth that he might
not cry out, he cast upon him water of rebaptization, as he counted it: as
though he could as well bind his conscience, as his body; or that he were not
present by his grace, who hears the groans of the fettered, and searches
the secrets of hearts; or as though the false water, could take away such a
perfect resolution, as the man of God had already sent to heaven, tears being
the messengers of his heart? He then loosed the man of his bands and with
semblance of great joy merrily said. Behold brother Habet-deum you are now
made a Christian of ours (what can you now do, but consent to the Kings
pleasure?) to whom Habet-deum answered. Nay (wicked Antony) Ibi est mortis
da^natio.
there is mortal sin and damnation, where consent of will is obtained: I
stood fast in faith, and confessing it with often speech maintained with open
protestation, that which I believe now, and always did. After that thou had
bound me with chains, stopping the entrance of my mouth; in the tribunal of
my heart sent I up to the view of the heavenly Emperors, the acts of this my
sufferance, the Angels subscribing thereunto.

CHAP. XIIII. More of the Arrians tyr any, and how they rebaptized people by
plain violence.
LIKE violence was generally used by the Tyra^ts. For the Vandals were to this
purpose, sent about every where, that they might bring al passingers, to be
destroyed by their Priests: who when they had slain their souls with that
erroneous water, gave them a bill or ticket; that they might no more have
violence offered. For it was not lawefull either to private men, or to
merchants and men of affairs, to pass any where, except they showed a
testimonial, discovering the death of their own souls. Revelation whereof,
Christ long since opened to his servant John, where he says. It shall be to
no man permitted to buy or sell, but to Apoc. 13
him that has the mark of the beast in his forehead, and in his hand. Their
Bishops also and Priests, march about towns and villages in the night season,
with a band of weaponed men, and (thieves of souls as they were) B. Despicatis
pos. ianuarum. PF. Despicatio ianuarum
breaking open doors, entered in with water and sword: and whom they found at
home (some of them peradventure sleeping in their bedds) they sprinkled with
their thunder and fiery shower, and all at once with Simoniacall cry, called
them their Christians: so that they seemed rather to make a May Game of Suae
hae reseos aquam. and so has B.
their heretical water, then a matter of religion. Those of least capacity,
and dull spirit, reputed, that by this means, the sacrilegious abomination was
accomplished in them: but the wiser sort comforted themselves, in that it could
not hurt them, which had been done to them repugning or sleeping. Many did
presently cast ashes upon their heads; some did put on mournfully haire-cloath,
because such a change had happened, others did anoint themselves with filthy
dirt, renting to fitters the Chrysoms which had been laid upon them, and with
faithful hand casting them into draughts and stinking places.

CHAP. XV. Children taken from their parents: the manly courage of a Phisicions
wife.
WITH semblable force, was before my eyes, in Carthage, a Gentleman's son of
seven years old taken from his parents, by Cyrillas commandment. The mother
(all matronlike gravely laid aside) ran after the thieves through the City,
her heaire about her ears, and the child cried as well as he might, In P. F. is
thrice repeated Christianus sum.
I am a Christian already, by Saint Stephen I am a Christian, whose mouth they
stopped, and drenched his guiltless infancy in their puddle.

Like prank they played with the children of honest Liberatus the Physician:
For being commanded with his wife and children to banishment, the malicious
Arrians thought it best, to divide the little children from the parents to prove
if by tenderness of affect on they might overthrow the fathers constancy
Separated are the younglings from their parents, whereat as Liberatus was about
to shed tears, he was by his wife reprehended, and the tears as they were
issuing forth dried up: For in this wise she spoke unto him. And will thou (my
Liberatus) loose thy soul for thy children? esteem them as if they had never
been borne; for Christ will at full be revenged in them* See you not, how they
cry, and say that they are Christians? What this woman did also in the sight
of the Judges must not be concealed When her husband and she were imprisoned
(but severally that one might not see the other;) word was sent to the woman,
that she should now lay away her stubbornness, for that her husband had
obeyed the Kings commandment, and was become a Christian of theirs. Let me see
him said she and I will also do as please God. Being led out of prison, she
found her good man standing before the judgment seat, compassed with a great
multitude; and thinking it to be true which the enemies had feigned, caught
houlde with her hand upon his garment next to his throat, and before them all
throtled him, saying: ungracious and reprobate, unworthy of Gods favor and
mercy, why would thou flourish for a little while and perish everlastingly?
what will thy gold profit thee? what will thy silver; will they deliver thee from
the furnace of hell? This she said and much more. To whom her husband
answered: what ailest thou woman? what see thou? or what may thou (perhaps)
have heard say, concerning me? In the name of Christ I remain Catholic still,
neither shall I ever forsake that, which I yet hold fast. Then could the
heretics, being guilty and detected of their lie, no longer color their
treachery.

CHAP. XVI. The voluntary exile of sundry persons: the Supplication of Bishop
Habetdeum to the King.
I Have briefly spoken already of the monstrous violence and outrage by them
used. Which many fearing, hide themselves: some in caves; others in uncouth
places, both men and women, no man being of their counsel: where for want of
relief, overcome with hunger or cold, they breathed forth their contrite and
afflicted souls, carrying with them among their tribulations the security of
an inviolate faith. In such plight was found Cresconius a Priest of the City
Mizent, in a cave of the B. Quiz^n. P. F. and P. S. Ziquens but Ptol. has Vuic
zan and Pliny Quiza.
Quizan mountain, already dead, and his body beginning to draw to corruption.
Seeing we have newly mentioned Habet-deum, he came to Carthage and thought good
to go to the abominable King, to manifest to him his conscience, which had
always been familier and well known to God. Neither could Antony hold him
back for very shame. He offered to the King a Supplication having in effect
these words? What have you now obtained at their hands which are fled? or of
them which you banished? ye have daily spoiled them of their substance, ye
have deprived them of Church, country, and home: you have only left them
their soul, which also you seek to make *
captive. O times, O corrupted manners? All the world understands it, and the
persecutor himself sees it. If it be faith which you follow, why vex ye the
members of the true faith, with so enormious persecutions? what meddle you with
our banishment? (...)ley, began to bring forth a duskish, rather then a
flourishing hay; forthwith a scalding wind was at hand, scorching it all, and
withering it away. For the dusty season under a hot air, chafing al things,
had filled every place as with a cloud. Al traffic was ceased, no ploughes
with laboring Oxen turned up the gritte of the ground; for neither were Oxen
alive, nor any ploughes remaining. And of the country Peasants, part were dead
the other part seeking their graves. And for as much, as through the
inconvenience of the famine, neither buying nor selling were accustomed, nor
the earth duly tilled, troops, and in a manner carcas^es of old people, of
young men and maids, of boys and girls, were in every place scattered
abroad, through towns, villages, and each particular city, wheresoever they
could, and in such sort as they could, and in such sort as they might. For
seeing they were become like a naughty Number. 20. Psalm. 57.
and froward body, provoking Gods wrath at the waters of contradiction; they
felt hunger as dogs, not that they might find food, but that they might
feel the Trinity revenging, whom they had so denied. Some did spread
themselves over the fields; others sought the secretest places of the woods,
searching after old roots of herbs, or of such trifles. There were, which
about to enter into their house, fell down by companies on the very threshold,
being conquered by famine. The high ways and paths were full of carcases: the
stincke breathing from the dead, killed the living on all sides. Burials
abounded of those which daily deceased, and there was no virtuous ability to
bestow the charity of the grave: for famine raging, the living were not
sufficient to bury the dead; and they themselves also soon after to dye. All
men greatly desired to turn their own liberty and their childrens, into
bondage; but they found not unto whom. Mountains and hills, Streets of the
Cities, ways and paths, made one common grave for all, to whom consuming
need denied sustenance. The Vandalls themselves, whom before the sundry
spoils of many Princes, and possession of Africa had enriched, were now most
of all oppressed with necessity: and how much the statelier they seemed to
themselves, by multiplying (...)Could they well be called by any other name
then Barbares, a name importing their fierce cruelty, and dreadful terror?
with how great gifts soever ye honor them: with how great services soever ye
appeasethe^, they know not how to do otherwise, the^ to envy Romans. And as
tou ching their inclination and aim, they evermore endeavor to blemish the
glory and stock of the Roman name: neither are they willing that any Roman
should remain alive. And where they are found to spare whom they hold in
subjection, it is but for their service that they spare them: for they never
loved any of the Romans. If ever barbarous and rude Pagan, cared to debat with
us in matter of faith by argument, then will likewise the Arrians heresy come
to disputation. But when could it ever observe any reason, since it seperateth
God our Savior from God the Father: By fraud and calumniation maintain they
their cause: and like a tempestious whirlwind, with their storming rage, would
they turn all vpside dowe. If disputation by Bishops was expedient, what is to
do with hanging up from ground, with fire, hooks, and with gallows? why has
continually the Arrian brood invented such kinds of torments against
guiltless persons, as not Mezentius himself did ever excogitat? Against
innocency have outrageous furor and covetous cruelty fought; to destroy men's
souls, and rauin away their substance. If conference were wished, whereto
tends rapine of other men's goods; and not only from Priests, but from all
the Laity; who rejoiced when they were spoiled, and with great consolation
received the ransacking of their substance.

CHAP. XIX. Lamentation of the Auctor for the misery of Afric: and invocation
of the prayer and meditation of Saints, for redress thereof.
Approach now (I pray you) all ages, al sexes, all estates: approach all ye that
bear the name of Catholics; who are over all the world borne in your Fathers
bosom; who alone know how to impart a true brotherly affection, who have
learned of Paul our instructour both to rejoice with them which joy, and to
lament with them which sorrow. Assemble together (...) and young men have
learned to tread sharp and rough ways: trained up in cloisters of
monasteries, they have been led into captivity of the Morians: and her holy
stones are dispersed, not only in the higher end of the streets, but even in
the dreary metal mines. Tell confidently you may unto her protector what
tribulation she is in, and how her stomach is disquieted with excessive
weeping. For she sits among the Gentiles finding no ease, and there is no
man to comfort her. I sought among the Fathers of the East to see who bewailed
her, and there was not any. I searched a comforter and I found him not, while
in her hunger she fed upon gall, and in her thirst drunk vinegar: imitating
the passions of her spouse and Lord: who therefore, suffered for her, that she
might follow his steps. Pray O ye Patriarchs, of whose stock she is borne,
who now so traiueileth in earth. Pray, O ye Prophets, knowing her affliction,
whose praise you by Prophecy, so long before did sing forth Be Suffragatores.
intercessors for her, O Apostles, seeing to gather her together you ran as
swift coursers over the whole world, our Lord reyning the bridle. Thou
principally, O blessed Peter, why art thou silent for the sheep, Ioh. 21.
and lambs commended to thee, with great care and regard, by our universal
Lord. Thou, O holy Paul, instructor of the Gentiles, who from Jerusalem unto
Slauony did preach the Gospel of God; aduize what the Arian Vandals do, and
how thy children lament in captivity. O all ye Apostles, pour forth together
your groans for us. Well we know that we are unworthy for whom you should
entreat: forasmuch as these calamities which have fallen out for our
probation, have not bin sent us as to the just is wo^t, but as plagues for our
deserts: yet pray for us your children (evil though we be) as Christ praid for
the Jews his enemies. Let that suffice for our chastisement, which has
already been laid upon us: and now at last let forgiveness be solicited for
sinful wretches. Let it be said unto the revenging Angel; It suffices;
hold thy hand. Who is ignorant that our approbrious wickedness procured all this
for going astray from Gods commandments, and refusing to walk in his law.
But prostrate we beseech you, that ye despise not Vestros peccatores.
your miserable sinners; for his sake who from poor fishermen raised you to
the hight of Apostolical dignity.

Most mischievous Huneric held the dominion of his kingdom seven year, ten
months: then consummated the race of his life by a death correspondent to his
demerits. For he putrified and boiled out vermin; so that not his body, but
gobets of his body may be said to be buried. Ier. 22.
And as that King long since tra^sgressor of the law given had no other
burial then the burial P. P. Ni cas^j etc.
of an Ass: so perished and soon, this (execrable Tyrant) by semblable
ignominious death.

CHAP. I. B. The Passion of seanen Christian brethren. Seek lib. 3. cap. 12.
The Passion of seven blessed Martirs which suffered at Carthage under King
Huneric The 2. day.
6. Non. of July.
AT te^pting to set forth the triumphs of blessed Martyrs, I first implore
aid of God, to the declaration of their acts, that he which accomplished
unto them conquest and victory, vouchsafe also to affoorde unto me (although
unworthy and undeserving) some ornaments how mean soever of utterance: For
then shall I be able to express what is desired, if they for me wretch make
supplication unto our Lord. The seventh year it was of most cruel and no
less impious Huneric, when behold the ancient enemy, that old and crafty
serpent, spitting forth the venim of his threeforked tongue, using for an
instrument one Ciritlas a Bishop Ariomanitaru^ P. F. B. Ariahoru^.
of the Arrian-madd heretics, subuerting and possessing the mind of the
bloody Prince, so to persuade him, that he could not ever enjoy a peaceable,
and long continued reign unless he utterly abolished the very memory of
innocents, (though nevertheless through Gods just judgment prevented by a most
shameful death, scraling with vermin he breathed out his ghost) with gory mouth
began to pursue the multitude of Catholics, who through all the Province of
Africa had multiplied much like what was foretold to Abraham the Patriarch: to
wound the^ by the Gladio rebaptizatis.
glayne of rebaptization, and to soil with his muddy swarth, the stole of one
clean baptism, which Christ washing in the wine of his flesh, and wringing in
the press of his Cross had perfectly whitned. The Tyrant therefore admitting
(as he was both easy to be carried away, and fierce) that serpent in
suggestion, began to shake all Africa at once with savage edictes.

CHAP. II.
FIrst and foremost he sent parling by inhumane banishment into far lands a
notable company of Priests and Deacons: to whom for compassion he commanded to
give the Bis-acutum.
twy-edged sort of grain which only beasts feed upon; and neither dishusked
by the myll; but the branny scorce remained upon it. Afterward moreover, his
madness and impiety increasing most unmercifully gave he commandment this
simple sustenance to be withdrawn. Not long after this, willed he yet
further, the Churches ( Per iudicafis venerabilibus portis.
whose gates were in time past held so venerable) to be mured up stronly with
huge morterworks. As for monasteries; as well those of me^, as those of holy
virgins, he charged to be delivered up together with their dwellers into the
hands of the Gentiles, (that is to the Morians.) Semblable was the lamentation
of all; semblable entire and full of resolution of dying for Christ: semblable
floudes of tears trickling from their eyes For our Lord now permitted them to
be fed with the bread of tears; and to drink their measure of tears, if not
tears without measure. And if there were Genesis and percutia^ coruoru^.
of Ravens some prone to destruction, which departing forth of the arc stayed
eger upon the dead carkases; greater yet was the number of happy Doves
persisting in the name of the Trinity. How many noble and excellent persons;
Lords of ample and large demayn excha^ged land for heaven, re^dring up both
body and goods? and how many tender and noble Gentle-women were contrary to
natural honesty whipped with rods, in face of all the people; and excruciated
with sundry torments, ever bare away triumphant monuments of victory? How many
young children deriding the inhuman edictes, first despised the world ere they
entered the enticing paths thereof?

CHAP. III.
IN those days were also seven (as concerning association of our Lords
feruice, brethren) who dwelt with one heart and

CHAP. 4.
SOON came this to the Tyrants ears, who drunken with fury, willed them yet
more to be constrained by unheard of torments, and loaded with more plensant
shackles. The^ gave charge that a ship should be filled with bundles of dry
fuel; them to be fast bound in the same vessel; so fire to be applied in
the midst of the sea; whereby they should be burnt to death. As they were
brought forth out of the prison; the multitude of Gods people accompanied those
warriars of the Trinity, who as innocent lambs were led to be sacrificed;
contemplating the weighty and horrid yrons; no less then as rare jewels. For
bonds these were not indeed to be reputed, but rather ornaments of bravery.
With cheerful alacrity went they toward execution, as if they had hastened
unto a banquet; singing through the passages of the streets with one voice
unto our Lord; Glory in the Luke 2.
highest to God; and in the earth peace to men of good will. This is our
desired day; more festifull then any festiuity: Now behold is 2. Cor. 6.
the acceptable time; now behold is the day of saluations when for the faith of
our Lord God we endure addressed death, that we may not lose the garment of
obtained faith. The people also with common voice cried: Fear not O servants
of God, nor dread the threats and terrors of tribulations present: dye we
rather for Christ, as he died for us, redeeming us with the price of his saving
blood. One nevertheless by name Maximus a child of their company, labored
those authors of evil with vehement endeavor to disioyne from society of the
Saints, saying Why hastnest thou pretty boy unto death? let them go, they are
mad; hear thou our counsel, that thou may obtain thy life, and go to the
great Kings court. Whereunto he, though a child in years, yet cried with mature
gravity, no man gets me from my holy Father that Liberatus, and from my
brethren, who bred me up in the monastery: with them I lived in the fear of
God, with them I desire to dye; with whom also I trust that I shall attain the
glory to come. Think not that you can seduce my childhood: seven souls since
our Lord would assemble us, he will in like sort vouchsafe to crown us all
with one martyrdom. As none perished of 2. Mac. 7.
the seven Machabees so the number of seven shall (...)church of Celebrina.
Thus in confession of the Trinity suffered the thrise-blessed Martirs,
accomplishing a glorious prosecution of their combat, and receiving crowns of
our Lord. To whom is honor, and glory, world without end, Amen.

The end of B. Victors history of the Arrian persecution in Africa against the
Catholics.
Plame. 146. Our Lord reedifying Jerusalem shall gather together the
scatterlings of Israel: he who heals the crushed in heart and binds up
their bruises.
COncerning process of the persecution after the good hound King Huneric had
yelped up his last; not much is extant in authors: albeit that it continued
outright (not at all times indeed with tenor of equal terror) some 90. years
space, as witnesses Justinian in his laws. But good estimat thereof may be
gathered by the life of S. Fulgentius most authentically written by one of his
own disciples unto his successor Foelicianus.

THE LIFE OF SAINT Suarius 1. die Ianuarij.
Fulgenti^us Bishop of Rulp.
HVNERIC the Arrian Vandals, after that Carthage had been by them subdued,
exiled all the Senators into Italy: one of whom was Gordian Grandfather to
Fulgentius. Which Gordian being deceased, his son Claudius returning to
Carthage, although their house had been given to Arrian Priests; yet
recovering great part of his heritage, by favor which he found at the Kings
hands: and departing to Lepte, there established his habitation. Fulgentius
there borne, was by the diligence of his careful mother Mariana (For soon was
his Father taken from the life of this mortality) trained up in learning: and
caused to be instructed in Greek before he took ni hand Latin, that thereby
he might attain to greater perfection and skill in that strange tongue. So
highly profited he in all good parts together with increasing years, that his
mother exceedingly rejoiced in his wisdom and towardnes: greatly easing by his
presence the discomfort of her lost husband; and permitting to his government
the ordring of her household. In which charge he bare himself pleasurable to
his friends, reasonable to his ^llwillers; to the servants as well mild in
direction as severe in correction; and diligently uphold his patrimony. Being
at length instituted the Kings collector, and prescribed to be rigourous in
exacting of the rated payments: heavy to his soul, began the burden of worldly
business to wax. And vain flattering felicity yielding disgust, by little and
little the love of spiritual life seemed to take root in his heart first
increased a desire of reading and praying: then cast he in mind to frequent
monasteries; and beheld by experience the sweet conversation of Gods servants.
Who^ perceiving as they had no worldly solace, so to have no wearines; as no
temporal joys, so no vexation of spirit: and withal discerning with what
cheerefulnes and alacrity sundry persons, yea yong-men, walked the straight
way of perfection in perpetual continency; he brake out with himself in
these words. Why trau^ile I in the world which shall yield me no future and
lasting reward? Although better it be to weep well, then joy ill, yet if to
joy be our desire; how much excels their joy, who have a good conscience
toward God, who dread nothing but sin, do nothing but accomplish the
commandments? Change we labors: and as I before endeavored among my noble
friends to appear more noble: so now let my employment and solicitude be
among the humble and poor servants of the Highest to become more poor and
humble; turning by Saint Matthew's example from a Publican to a Disciple.

Resolved to renounce terrene delights, were stricken with wonder and admiration
at his extraordinary carriage: imputing this strict demeanure of a man so
delicately brought up to proceed from necessity and privy poverty. When he had
now made some proof of such things wherein he conceived difficulties might
grow: and well understood the ability of a courageous will provoked and aided
by the concurrence of divine grace: perusing (among other theological
treatises) the discourse of Saint Austen upon the 36. Psalm, his love of
perfection more strongly increased: so that he determined out of hand to
effectuate his holy design. It came in his mind by secret departure in
unknown apparel to sequester himself: but then reflecting that his
conversion, if hidden, would only avail himself; if published, might be an
incitation to others: he without delay went to Bishop Faustus a good and godly
personage (one of those Prelates whom Huneric had confined unto certain places
near unto their own country; whereby they might sooner relent) beseeching at
his hands monastical habit. For in a little monastery which he had erected,
held his residence. The prudent Bishop well knowing the worldly conversation of
the young man in time past, gave no credit unto his purpose, nor comfort unto
his request: but willed him first leanre to become a less delicat layman: and
gently put him from him. But he humbly kissing the Bishops hand besought him
very affectuously not to repel him utterly; but graciously to open unto him
the monastery door, and admit him for one of his disciples. Importunity
declared sincere resolution; sincere purpose deserved credence, and obtained
admission. Fame of the thing spreading abroad; some despaired success because
of his former daintines, others considered his excellent wit were raised into
expectation of some noble and worthy consequence. Diverse of his familiars
excited by imitation of his renu^ciation, addicting themselves to the like
life, only his inconsiderat and worldly minded parent grew greatly disquieted
and frighted. As if her Fulgentius were now dead (albeit well were he dead
who so died) she impatienly runs to the monastery, brawleth with B. Faustus,
and cries out; Restore the son to his mother, the (...)strayned here and
there up and down by fleeing to hide himself: and Fulgentius had no better
shift then to get to another little monastery governed by Abbot Foelix; who not
ignorant of his virtue, gladly would have designed unto him: which honor
Fulgentius constantly refused: but to take part of the charge upon him, the
consent of the company imposing it, he could not stiffly deny. So that these
two holy Fathers equal in love of God and their neighbor, equal also in
virtue, and like in conditions, mutually governed; each fearful of offe^ding
the other, each vigilently attending to the behoof of the covent: but one
peculiarly addicted to instruction and institution; the other to ordering the
affairs and to necessary provision.

This monastery being in like sort by Afric; lastly settled in the territory
of Sicca, not without great favor of people and no less profitt and gain of
souls: Until one Foelix a Priest of the Arrian heretics, who not far of
preached his perfidious doctrine against the ancient faith, through emulation
and spite spurned against them. This fellow, great in power and auctority, but
greater in malice, growing into fear, least by means of Fulgentius (whose
learning now began to wax famous) sundry whom the Arrian nouelty had reduced
might be reconciled: caused to be beset all the ways and paths of the resort
of these two Monks. For Fulgentius though no Priest, yet under habit of a Monk
fulfilled indeed the office of a Priest; not by reconciling any, but by wholesome
aduertiseme^ts winning and drawing whom he could to reconsiliation. Necessary
it was that who had showed themselves such valiant wariours by abstinence,
should a little fall into persecutors hands, to the intent that by participating
also in the combat of martyrdom, suffering inflicted torments for their faith,
they might know and understand how much they had profited. It fell out
therefore that these two as they walked by the way, lighted into the watchmens
hands: and after apprehension were presently severed, and carried (well charged
with bonds) unto the Arrian Priest. Without fault became they in this sort
prisoners, and without war captives* Foelix at the very first fright cast
away from him certain money which he happened to have about him for the
brethrens sustenance; committing unto GOD that which only for Gods servants,
had been reserved. The Arrian at their approach before him very roughly and
bluntly demanded why they came out of their country in secret sort, to subvert
Christian Kings: Kings terming all such as he and his like had perverted from
the faith Catholic. As they prepared to answer and would feign have spoken;
he commanded them first to be scourged. Foelix out of his great charity made
presently request, that brother Fulgentius might be spared: who (said he) can
not well live to endure the extremity of the torment, but will of liklyhood
send forth his innocent spirit under your hands: let rather your wrath be wholly
wreaked upon me; in whom lies the absolute cause of our action. What I
confess I know to be true. Foelix therefore was most cruelly beaten: but not
that Fulgentius should escape: Who being of tender constitution, as
noble-borne, with much ado susteyning the blows of the staves (as himself
afterward told us) advised how either to mitigate the enraged tormentor, or
to gain some respit and ease and cried out, that willingly he would say
somewhat, desiring that he might be heard. Stripes and bastanados being
intermitted, he began with his sweet eloquent mouth to recite cause of his
travail into those quarters: giving to the Adversary no small wonder at his
learning, and his flowing speech. Almost had the Priest forgotten his cruelty,
and shame of the injury was ready to embrace his obdurat heart: yet least he
should appear ouercomne with his words, he cried out fiercely: Lay him on
lustely, and multiplying your blows rend this pratler: what? weenes he, I
trow, to seduce me also? Incredibly hereupon is he again beaten: and then both
of them deformedlie shaven, stripped of their clothes and sent away packing all
naked. But unto them *
bredde neither such nakedness, nor such boldness, confusion: Nay verily by so
base an injury sustained for conscience sake, singulerly were they beautified.
Forth then from the Arrians house departed they no otherwise the^ as from a
glorious combat, and as crowned with laurels of victory: and in their return
found luckily the money which Abbot Foelix had thrown aside. Rumor of this
detestable fact gave unto sundry no small offense, and namely to the Arrian
Bishop of the dioces: who had held Fulgentius dear and much favored him,
while he was yet a layman; and was now ready to prosecute revenge of his
proffered violence, in case he would seek it. Whereunto when many persuaded
him, Fulgentius gave them this humble denial. Lawful it is not for a
Christian to meditate revenge: well knows our Lord how to repay the injuries
inflicted on his servants. If my case be venged, then loose I reward of my
patience. Especially seeing it might scandalize many little ones, if I a
Catholic and a Monk, should require judgment at an Arrians hand.

Fulgentius reading the wonderful lives Egyptian Monks, sailed thitherwards
(accompanied with only one brother) as well to live under a more stricte rule,
as also to leave the title of Abbot, and to live again under obedience. Driven
was the ship by force of weather and wind to the haven of Syracuse, chief
City of Sicilia. Bishop there, at that time was holy Eusalius; who had a
proper, monastery, whereunto he frequently resorted, when he was somewhat void
from Episcopal cares. In very charitable sort were they by this Bishop
entertained: he perceiving the sufficiency of Fulgentius enquired the cause of
his voyage; who pretended search after his parents; as loath of pure humility
to lay open his intended purpose: (and spiritual parents he indeed sought)
Eusalius easily found the feigned answer, and by further questions receiving
the true motive, diswaded such journey, assuring him that Egypt *
was in schism and separated from the communion of Blessed Peter: and added
Without faith impossible is it to please God: and what profits it to afflict
the body with fasting, when the soul shall want spiritual comfort? Neither
put thou thy faith in hazard upon conceived regard of a more perfect life. At
Syracuse lived Fulgentius one winter and though not but at the good Bishops
charity, yet ceased he not of that little studiously to relieve the
necessities of others: and winter being past, he visited Ruffinianus, a Bishop
likewise but heretically living in an obscure small islet of the Sicilian shore;
beseeching his advice also concerning the purposed journey. Of whom in semblable
sort dissuaded; he was about to return to his monastery: but better advised
would not omit the memory of the Apostbes: *
but sailing to Rome venerably visited the places of holy Martyrs: and there
beholding the order of the Roman Nobility, triumphant pomp of King Theoderic,
and universal gladness of the city; he yet respected not such worldly toies
with delight, but by sight thereof stirred up his mind to desire of heavenly
joys: giving this lesson of admonition unto his company. How beautiful may
the celestial Jerusalem be when terrestrial Rome so glittereth? If such
honor be given to lovers of vanity; what glory shall be imparted to the
Saints, lovers and followers of truth?

Returning into Africa to the incredible in a manner of all humane solace and
necessaries. Where being received; as much as he passed all others in
excellency of learning and spiritual eloquence, so far subjected he
himself to al in humility and obedience: many books he there copied out
very fair with his own hands, and not seldom made necessary implements of
Palm leaves. The rather in such secret sort had he sequestered himself into
other quarters, for that his estimation was grown to be such, as that the
noblemen and gentry employed themselves in a kind of contention who might most
gratify him: of whom Siluester the principal man of the Bizacene province
bestowed upon him a seat singulerly fertile, and most commodious for erection
of a monastery: which he gratefully accepting edisied indeed such a place; but
more glorious by the brightness of the virtues there resident, then of curious
or magnificent building: neither endured he there to stay. His old Monks
recovering notice of his abode, let not instantly to require him: and great
grew the dissension; these seeking to regaine him, those other to detain him:
his own choice was to remain with the later, in subjection: but the former
complaining to B. Faustus, he laid challenge to Fulgentius as to his Monk;
threatening excommunication to the others if they obstinatly resisted. In fine
to his old monastery was he constrained to return: where that he should no
more attempt to slip away for love of spiritual vacance, they caused him to
be consecrated Priest.

Sundry Cities wanting Pastors (for Fulgentius for theirs, and elected him
outright. Secure nevertheless held he himself by reason of the prohibition;
until such time that the Bishops which yet suruiued decreed *
that contrary to the Kings commandment and order, Bishops should be ordained
in all places vacant: for then hid he himself, nor would be found. According
as the Bishops had defined, were there out of hand, in all have (least
advertisement should over soon arrive at the Kings ears) worthy Priests and
Deacons every where taken, blessed and consecrated: *
Only Fulgentius who was most of all sought for, no where appeared. All
solemnities of co^secratio^ being past, returned he, and discovered himself,
well hoping now to be safe. But otherwise disposed God; For by great hap the
city Ruspae remaining as yet unfurnished, the citizens getting incling of his
discovery came unto him, invade him, hold him, carry him with them and not
request but constrain him to be their Bishop. In which prelacy and dignity he
nothing forgot the integrity of his former state, neither gave over to be a
monk. Mean and simple attire he used, often went barefoot; wholly abstayned
from flesh, oil, and wine: in no place would he be without company and
presence of some monks of his. Shortly after ensued that which was before well
enough forseen to be a lykely consequent; but contemned in respect of the
churches necessity and destitution: that is, that the King exiled threescore
Bishops and more into Sardinia: among them this holy Saint, who gladly mounted
the commanded vessel, rejoicing that he had a part in such a glorious
confession. Diverse of his monks and clergy followed him: and arriving into
Sardinia, at Calaris began he a kind of monastery: For the Clearks and Monks
lived together at the same table and in the same house: only the Monks more
strictly possessed nothing, in propriety. And hereby his sermons converted he
many to monastical life.

Among the crafty fetches and persecutory Trasamund, whereby he endeavored to
allure Catholics* unto the Arrian inventions, he feigned desire of becoming
a Catholic: and proposing diverse foolish and deceiptful questions pretended
that he could not find any man sufficient to answer him: Hearing therefore of
Fulgentius he hastily sent for him. Who with good courage coming to Carthage,
seriously confirmed the Catholics in their faith: and with great pleasantness
of speech, and gladness of cheer, he answered to all questioners, rejecting
no man: so that sundry already rebaptized he reclaimed from their error, and
reconciled them, instructed them to lament their fall; others he exhorted not
to loose their souls for temporal commodities: and whom he saw at the pinch
of perdition, with mild words he so stayed and animated to a noble and
generous resolution, that they were ashamed, and sorrowfully repenting,
desisted to accomplish the Fiendes suggestion. Certain also by him established,
who before were tottering, let not with great confidence to reprove the
weak-grounded impudency of the Arrian party. Thus turning the Omnipotent of
heaven his enemies devise to his proper glory. After this champion of Christ
had stood in the Princes sight, he was by him both found and acknowledged to
be every way aunswerable to the report which went of his wisdom and
learning: and certain difficulties were proposed unto him shortly to be by
him answered by writing. Which answer being framed, was first by the learned
Catholics conferred upon, and then brought to the peoples knowledge before
that it was delivered up. The King perusing the same with great attention;
praised his wisdom, wondered at his eloquence, commended his humility: yet was
not worthy to understand the truth. Not long was his stay in Carthage: for the
Arrians clamorously incensed the King, complaining that Fulgentius had already
reconciled some of their Priests, that the people fell apace unto him, and that
their whole religion stood in hazard. By whose importunity the King committed
him again into Sardinia. Late in the night was he brought a board the ship,
that his departure might be for the present concealed from the people: but by
contrary winds so long was he delaied upon the shore, that during many days
together, almost all the city came to him and taking their farewell
communicated at his hands. Great lamentation arising at his departure, he told
to luliates a merueilous devout man (whose sorrow among the rest was most
extreme) both that he should shortly return, and the Church obtain peace:
desiring him to keep it secret. So great was his humility, that he never was
delighted with doing miracles, neither desired that grace. Requested to pray
for others necessities, he usually received these words: Thou know (O Lord)
what is our souls health, grant of thy mercy unto our necessity as far
forth as shall not hinder our spiritual profit. Whatsoever he by prayer so
obtained at Gods hands, he imputed it to their faith, saying God had granted it
to them, not to him. He was wont to say that Miracles make not a man just and
righteous, but famous.

Returning again to Sardinia he began Who takes of the common so much,
becomes debtor to all: which debt only humility ought to pay. He gave to
every one what their need or manifest reason required; but if any presumed to
ask, he denied it although there were happily good cause. For (said he)
Monks ought to content with that which is given them: and they which ask; be
it that they need it, yet are they in bondage to carnal desires: and have not
their mind perfectly set upon heavenly things; seeing what they cannot give by
worldly bargaining and business, they labor to purchase by petition. Very
pleasing was it unto him, if any of the brethren proposed a hard question: and
gladly heard he the doubts of any brother were he never so simple; neither
would he for weariness or tediousness cease to yield them reason until
they confessed themselves satisfied. In correction so long would he appear
severe, as the necessity of discipline did compel; remaining, even when he
seemed most displeased and angry, nothing at all in mind troubled or
disquieted.

Trasamund the King taken away by Hilderic succeeding yealded liberty to the
Catholic Church; and recalled the Bishops from exile: and Fulgentius was with
inestimable devotion of the Africans every where received no less then if at
every place he had been the peculier Bishop. With lights, lamps, tapers, and
boughs they met him: with whom rejoicing he now rejoiced, as before with them
lamenting he had lamented. So enflamed was the devotion of people, that a
shower happening, they with their garments held hollow over his head as by a
tabernacle, sheilded him from the rain. Enjoying his proper Sea, yet lyked he
still to reside among the monks; and in the monastery made himself subject to
Abbot Foelix: and whereas in all great matters of the diocese his authority and
advise was sought, yet within the monastery in every thing, were it never so
small, would he be ruled by *
Foelix. Most of his clergy chose he out of the monastery, to increase love and
amity in time to come between the Clergy and monks. He prescribed to his
Clergy to hold their houses near unto the Church,, to dress each his gardayn
with his own handy labor, to have a singular regard of prono^cing and singing
well.

In the Council of Vincense being by sentence of all the Bishops preferred in
place before B. Quodvultdeus, who claymed the pre-eminence to his proper sea:
the devout Father would not for the present disprove the judgment of the
Counsel; but at the next Counsel he made supplication that B. Quodvultdeus
might be recited and set before him; which was granted.

A year before he deceased, forsook Circina, with a few brethren; and there
lived he in a monastery upon a little rock: as fervently persisting in
mortification, as if he now began a fresh a penitential life. But by
importunity of the people, needing him and complaining of his absence, he
returned and shortly fell into greiuous pangues of sickness: lying so some 60.
days he often cried; O Lord, give me here patience, and afterward pardon.
Physicions persuading him to use a bath; Can bathes (quoth he) make that a man
having accomplished the course of nature should not dye? if not; why then
induce you me now at my last end to dissolve the rigor of my long-obserued
profession? Calling lastly the brethren about him, he thus spoke unto them.
Careful of your souls health (dear brethren) have I perhaps been austere and
hard unto you. Whosoever is greiued, I beseech him pardon me: and if my
severity have possibly passed measure and due moderation, pray ye to God that
he impute it not to me. They all kneeling down acknowledged, and affirmed him
to have been always loving, gentle, and mild toward them. He replied. God
provide you a Pastor worthy of his Majesty. Then calling for a sum of money,
which as a faithful steward he daily accustomed to dispense unto the needy, he
willed it all presently to be disbursed: and reciting by memory the wydowes,
orpha^ts, pilgrims, and poor, he allotted to every one their portion. Soon
dyed then amidst his prayers this verteous man; and famous Doctor of the Church
the first day of a new year, the 25. year of his episcopal dignity, the 60.
of his life, having written very many treatises, against the heretics; sundry
sermons, and epistles. Whose tongue was of such force to move, that the Bishop
of Carthage hearing him preach two days at Carthage, could not co^tayne from
tears all the while, for joy that Gods goodness had given to his Church in
those afflicted and confortlesse times, so noble an instrument of his glory.



there for sandy deserts, neither at all, unless they would turn Black-moors.
Occasion of which their passage over the Mediterrane, was this. Of the two most
eminent personages for martial affairs; and famousest generals of the Roman
Empire Aetius and Boniface; this later being by Valentinian the third, then
Emperor, placed Governor of Afric; the former (who by overthrowing Attila
with his innumerable Hunnes won afterward incredible honor, but withal
puffed up his heart with swelling ambition) plotted surmises against him; as a
destroier of the province, with advise, that best might this appear in that
happily he would refuse to obey, if he were sent for. By letters in the mean
spaceful of feigned amity, gave Aetius advertisement to Earl Boniface that he
was held suspect, and like shortly to be discharged of his dignity. Whereupon,
being presently revoked into Italy, he made answer of express denial: then,
to prevent punishment, directed message unto the Vandals in Spain, promising
if they would pass unto him, to part Afric with them. Which no sooner had
they done, but that to the Earl came commissioners from Empress Placidia,
mother to Valentinian: for he having bin always before found most loyal,
great was the wonder at this strange demeanure. To whom he had rendered reason,
expostulating his services and the unkind abuses offered, laid also before
their eyes the letters of Aetius, and that they had returned due report of the
truth, he was restored to grace. Hereupon, whereas before no arguments neither
yet S. Augustines own * Epistle unto him (which seems Epist. 70.
about this point) could auert him from conceived indignation; he now promised
to do his utmost for dispatching away and ridding the Vandals whose society he
now began to detest. And first with many thousands of coin he assayed the^:
which offer rejected, he met them in battle but received an utter overthrow at
their hands. Divine vengeance ouertooke yet Aetius after certain years; for
attempting extraordinary greatness he was by the Emperor prevented and put to
execution. Genseric who performed this invasion was but base son to
Godegiscus, Procopi.
though being a warriar he prevailed to exclude from the regiment his younger
brother Gonthar the lawfully begotten heir, and lastly made him from life.

CHAP. II.
TOuching the precise time of those things, which B. Victor mentions; In chro.
Prosper who was bred up under S. Austen notes in his chronicle, that the
Vandals crossed into Afric during the consulship of Hierom and Ardaburius,
which fell in the year of our Lord 427. insinuating that the siege of Hippo
with the death of the famous Doctor was 3. or 4. year after: that in the year
435. peace was made with the Vandals, the region about Hippo being yealded them
to inhabit: and by him it seems that in the year 437. it was, that Genserich
persecuted and chased the Bishops of his province, depriving them of their
church, because they refused to become Arians, and embrace that religion which
he prescribed them to admit. But unto the Vandals savage proceedings may
(besyds the words of Victor this more patheticall description of the first
atte^pts set down by Bishop Possidius another of Austens disciples, yeald no
ungrateful light. In short time after, through the will and Possidius in vita
Aug.
power of God, it came to pass, that a huge band, well armed with sundry
weapons, well exercised in wars, of inexorable enemies ( Vandals, and Alans,
associated with the people of Goths, as also persons of sundry other nations)
disborded itself by ship, out of the parties of Spain on the other side the
sea, and rushed upon Africa: and piercing through all Mauritania, eue^ unto our
prouincies, raging with all cruelty and atrocity, by spoiling, slaughter, and
sundry torments, by fireing and other mischifs, as innumerable, so unspeakable,
destroyed whatsoever came in their way: sparing neither sex nor age; neither
the Priests or ministers them selves; neither the very ornaments, furniture, or
aedifices of Churches. This most fierce proceeding, and hostile depopulation,
that man of God Austen did feel don, and ponder to be don, not as other men
did, but more deeply and profoundly considering the same; and therein
principally regarding before hand the dangers yea deaths of souls, more then
ordinarily was wont; Tears became his food both day and night ( *
for who adds understanding adds grief: and an intelligent heart is as a
corrosiue vermin to the bones) so that most bitter and above others moornfull
led he in patience the last act both of his old age and life. For already saw
this man of God the cities together with their buyldings utterly subverted the
inhabiters of villages some of them extinguished by their deadly enemies,
others of them chased away and scattred abroad: the churches destitute of
Priests and ministers; the holy Virgins also, and.a. Quoscunque contine^tes.
what men soever professed co^tinency, every where dispersed of these, part to
have dyed by torments, part to have been slain by the sword; part the
integrity of mind, body, and of faith being quite lost in captivity, after an
evil and hard sort* to serve their enemies. He perceived likewise the hymns
of God, and lauds to have perished from the churches; church buyldings in very
many places wasted by fire; the sole^nities which unto God are due vanished out
of their proper places:.b. Sacrisicia.
sacrifices and sacraments divine either not sought for; or not easily the
person found who might impart the^ to the seeker: of those who fled into the
mou^tain forests, and rocky caves, or dens, or else fortresses, of what sort
soever; certain to have been surprised and slain, the rest disfurnished and
deprived of necessary sustentations thereby to pine trough hunger: the governors
moreover.c.
themselves of the churches, and Clericos.
those of the clergy who happily had by Gods grace either not lighted upon
them, or else escaped their incursions, spoiled of all things and made bare, in
most poor plight to beg relief. Scarce three among innumerable churches saw he
now remaining, that is of Carthage, Hippon, and Cirta; which by special
benefit of God were not subverted; and the cities of these stand permanent as
furnished both by divine and humane aid: albeit Hippon after his death emptied
of indwellers was by the adversaries fyred. Amydst which evils comforted he
himself with the sentence of a certain wiseman saying. No great thing shall
it seem that timber and stones fall; and that men which are mortal must dye:
all these accidents, he (as deeply wise) with plentiful tears daily
lamented. Augmentation finally gave this also to his moornfull lamentations
that those foes came in like manner to besiege the said city of the Hippone^ses
Regiorum, al. regionu^.
Regij, which until then held her former state. Forasmuch therefore as in
defense thereof was constituted one Earl Boniface, he who sometime had been
confederat of the Goths army; their siege continued about the city almost 14.
months: the benefit of the sea shore being withal cut of. Thither had we also
from the neighboring territory, together with other our associat Bishops,
betake^ our selves by flight; and there remained during the whole siege. Where
very often we had mutual talk concerning these misfortunes: and considered
the dreadful judgments of God laid now before our eyes: saying; Just art thou
O Lord, and rightful is thy doom. And altogether grieuing, groaning, and
shedding tears, we besought the Father of mercies, and God of all
consolation, that he would be pleased to relieve us from this tribulation. And
it happened that sitting with him at table, and intercourse of speech passing, he
began to say in our presence; Ye shall understand, that at this present of our
calamity, I ask of God, that either he vouch safe to free this city so by
foes environed: or in case it otherwise seem good unto him, then to enharden
his servants with courage to endure his pleasure; or at leastwise to take me
unto him self, out of this world. By which saying of his being instructed from
thence forwards together with him, and with our several companies, and those
which inhabited the same city, of the highest God we required the like.
Behold then, the third month of the siege, took he his bed, travailed with
fevers; and began to be exercised with his last sickness. Neither surely did our
Lord defraud his servant of the fruit of his prayer: for both to himself, For
the Vandals through famine left the siege. Proc.
and to the city, he in season obtained what before he had with wette prayers
earnestly sued for.

CHAP. III.
HEreunto may be added, that Carthage as is gathered out of Prosper was by
Genseric, impudent violator of the concluded peace, fraudulently surprised in
the year of our Lord 439. and that 15. years (...)for conscience sake, like
favor from heaven to have bin found. Neither may I let pass, that Afric as
most other regions scourged of God might (it seems) not untruly cry out,
Before I was abased I sinned: for Psalm. 118.
so far was it run in diliciousnes and loosenes, that in Carthage (as
bitterly lamented Lib. de prouid.
Saluian Bishop of Massilia at the very same season) might be seen men of more
discipline and severity in life to be hissed at in the streets, as if they
were wonders, or monsters; not doubting to pronounce thereof, That the passage
of the Vandals into Afric was not to be imputed unto Gods rigor, but to the
Africans wickedness; and Lib. 3. cap. 19.
Victor himself acknowledges no less. Add we this also out of Procopius,
that for better custody of the purchased pray were ordained in ambushes and
places fit for guard, both Vandals and Alans under no fewer leaders then
fourscore; whom they termed Chiliarchs ( Lib. 1. cap. 8.
Victor Millenarians) that is, Captains of thousands. Whereby the army
consisting of but 50. thousand gave show of 80. thousand. Whereas also at the
beginning Vandals only and Alans were held in roll; yet admitted in time were
other also of barbarous nations; passing all under the name of Vandals, except
Maurusijs.
Moors only, who at the last were in like manner received into the army

CHAP. V.
THree tragical acts having been by B. Victor of Vtica so represented, as
that we have not only heard, but in a manner seen with our eyes, what can not
but make pious hearts to bleed: and a forth act being also performed, wherein
some qualification and hope of better times began to appear: it shall not (I
know) be ungrateful to all Christian ears, if I exhibit the last accidents of
this veritable history; to which the Omnipotent himself gave a gladsome
Conclusion.
catastrophe. Nay I may not be so harsh to their patient and compatient hearts,
who have sorrowfully (though not tediously) through passed the rufull
relations; as to defraud the^ of the consolatory part remaining behind. So to
do where impiety; at least, a kind of inhospitality. And besides the
intermediant chances not unpleasant, the final event most delectable to recite;
evidently shall it be manifest how a well prepared breast, should in adverse
times not be dejected; for that God by admirable and incomprehe^sible means
compassed what we can not conjecture. Co^pendiously therefore to set down out
of Procopius; what he at large delivers the abstract and sum of things is
as follows.

CHAP. VI.
I.
GENSERIC being very far stepped into age, at the time of his death, left in his
last testament, among other things this disposition, that the succession of his
Kingdom should always pass unto the nearest in blood of the males, and among
equal in blood to the eldest. Thirty and nine years after the taking of
Carthage, dyed he: and to him succeeded his elder soon II.
Huneric, the other brother III.
Genzon being before departed this life. Successors to the hound Huneric were
first IIII.
Gundabund son to his brother Genzon, who continuing in the steps of his cruel
predecessors, afflicted the Christians (so always and no otherwise terms
Procopius the Catholics, excluding the Arians from that honorable name) and by
death was to late called away in the twelfth year of his reign. After whom V.
Trasamund took in hand the affair of government: a man far passing his
antecessors as well in wisdom, as magnanimity and courage: who also (by a
contrary course unto them) not by torments and vexations, but by rewards and
honors invited the Christians to for sake their ancient faith, and pass unto
his Arianism, but those who would not relent, he no way pressed with punishment
and affliction. And with Anastasius the Emperor he always maintained good and
perfect frendshipp. In this man's time received the Vandals a sore overthrow at
the * Moors hands, far greater then ever they had in any skirmish before. In
the teritory of Tripolis was a General of the Moors named Cabaon, who
perceiving the Vandals to intend him war, used this not absurd stratageme. He
first willed all under his command to use abstinence in diet to contain from
dealing with women, and to refrain from all injury and wrong: then made he a
double munition or fortification; within the one shutt the women, prohibiting
under (...)to Justinian the Emperor was this Hilderich, even before he was
Emperor; and sundry presents had passed between the^. There was in the stock
of Gizerich, one Gilimer, son to Genzon (of whom is before mentioned) and
next in age unto Hilderich: a skilful warrior, of a sore wit, well furnished
with means and every way apt to invade the state; and who otherwise by
proximity and age was expected to succeed. But impatient of stay he let not
to thrust far into the interest royal, to usurp auctority; proceeded to
traduce the King unto the Vandals as a dull and not daring Prince: charging him
also calumniously that he intended to resign and deliver up to the Emperor
the whole dominion, together with the Vandals. To which surmises credit
ouerlightly given, Ilderich after seven years government is together with
Amer and his brother Euagenes committed to ward; Gilimer created King. News
whereof being brought to Justinian the Emperor: he by courteous advertisement
wished Gilimer not so to violate Gizerichs will and testament; nor persist in
so open wrong. Upon which message Gilimer forth with put out Amers eyes, and
held the other two in streighter custody: and to second Ambassadors which
Iustinia^ shortly sent again, he finally answered, that the Emperors
curiosity was over great to ingest himself into the actions of other Princes;
and pretended that Ilderich had attempted somewhat against those of the
bloodroyall, neither ought to be King for that his cares and employments were
not upon his kingdom.

CHAP. VIII.
GREAT indignation conceived the Emperor at his tyrannical obstinacy:
Wherefore the Persian war (as God would have it) being with good success
freshly ended, and Belisarius the great Captain, then present in
Constantinople, he resolved enterprise for the liberty of Afric. Some
repugnance yet therein he found, for the common people repiningly murmured and
objected the Emperor ^^os fleet, that was in like attempt utterly defeated,
and the dreadful overthrow given to Basiliscus, whereby perished an entire
army, and the common wealth became extremely impouerished: they refused
therefore to contribute unto this war. Furthermore not the stoutest of the
Captains, (in whom lay the hope of well carrying so great a charge) but were
discouraged, and sore dreaded the greatness of the danger: seeing first they
had to overcome the Seas, then out of ships to assault a strong and potent
kingdom. The soldiers also so lately returned from the Persian brunts, grudged
that they should now suddenly be destined to other unknown people and
sea-combates, ere they had once been so much as warm in theie own country.
None yet was found who had the heart or would presume to dissuade the Emperor,
except only John the master of the Palace who with a grave and vehement
oration dehorted that enterprise, which upon human reasons he held to be
abhorred: telling him plainly that by this journey he should abuse to liberally
both the blood of his best soldiers, and the public treasury, and abilities
of his subjects: vpbraiding that Carthage which he would impugn was distant
by land 140. days iorneies, and by sea so far, that scarce in a year should
report return of what was done: that if he subdued the Vandals, yet should he
not be Lord of Africa, both Sicilie and Italy being under those strange nations
dominion: happily also by this provocation might he draw wars to his own
gates, and to the walls of Constantinople. He besought him therefore to desist
from undertaking so doubtful and dangerous business, and adding labors unto
labors.

Much moved the words of John the Emperors mind; and much remitted he of his
former feruor, toward poor Afric. There came not long after a certain Bishop
out of the parties of the East, and obtaining to relate unto the Emperor, that
which he came for; told him that he had received from God a vision, wherein
appeared the Emperor himself; and was sharply by the Almighty reprehe^ded and
accused of great impiety, that having conceived the good purpose of delivering
the Christians in Afric from the hands of the barbarous, he had afterward upon
no cause forsaken the enterprise: and that God promised the Emperor to assiste
him; and to bring Afric into his subjection, as it had been unto the former
ancient Emperors. No longer differred Justinian (annimated by this oracle) but
furnished ships, ordained Belisarius general.

CHAP. IX.
THe first beginning of good luck to this actio^ was that Pudentius an
African, reuolting from the Vandals, sent hasty word to Justinian that if the
army came to Tripolie, he should easily obtain that teritory for that few
soldiers were there to resist. Which Belisarius accordingly, by the aid of
Pudentius brought to good effect. Presently upon which, Godas in likemaner, one
of Gilimers captains, gouuernour of the great Island Sardinia, and by nation a
Goth, sent submission to the Emperor, saying he chose rather to serve a just
King, then a Tyrant whose co^mandments were unjust. Toward Carthage were then
directed 1000. footmen, and four thousand horsemen: with them 400. Eruls and
600. Hunns all using their bows. The navy was in all 500. vessels, mariners
3000. and of voluntary adventurers from Constantinople 2000. In the seventh
year of Justinians empire was this expedition addressed: and Epiphanius Bishop
of the city blessing (as the manner is) *
the fleet in the Emperors presence led one by one into a ship, such soldiers
as had lately been baptized. In this fleet passed with the rest Procopius
author of this history, consailor for the wars unto the General Belisarius:
and passing by Syracuse he got intelligence that the Vandals, were attempting
against Goda, but that there was of the Roman forces no dread at all: in
so much that Gilimer as most secure had abandoned the sea costs, and was
resident at Hermione four days journey up into the country.

Approaching to sight of the African shore, great consultation was had how to
proceed. Archelaus (contrary to the affection of the soldiers, who weary of the
sea would presently have set to shore) persuaded to defer landing, for that
all that shore was both subject to te^pests, and destitute of havens: adding
that all the towns of Afric, except only Carthage were by Gizerich in time
past disma^tled of their walls: for which respects he preferred directly to
assail Carthage near whereunto was a goodly haven, and unguarded; from whence
their could be no (...)more distance to hold on the left hand; on the right
hand kept he the sea: commanding the navy as well as they could to observe the
proceeding of the army, and to keep near unto it. In this order marched the
army forwards, no faster then after 80. furlongs to a days journey: with such
moderation also and discipline, that the husband men round about, hid not
themselves for fear, but securely brought all necessaries to the camp and
freely sold them.

CHAP. XI.
GILIMER upon first news of his foes approach, wrote unto his brother Ammat at
Carthage, that he should put to death Ilderich, and whomsoever else of their
kindred that he had in prison: and have the Vandals with all the munition of
the city in a readiness; that they might in the streights at Decimum (a place
70. furlongs from the city) enclose the emperials as fishes in a net,
between their two armies. Belisarius being come to Decimum; Gilimer upon that
very day dispatched his brothers son Gibamund with 2000. Vandals, charging
the^ to keep on the left hand, and he himself pursued the tail of the Roman
army: meaning that so they should be on three sides invaded. And surely had
not Ammat by three hours space prevented his opportunity, enough to do had
the Romans found: but he about noone went to Decimum: and (which was as bad)
leaving behind him at Carthage the best part of the Vandals, he hastily left
them word to follow him to Decimum, and going forward with a few encountered
with John, where 12. of our valientest being at the first overthrown Ammat
himself soon bare them company; whose death seen, the Vandals mainely flying
back stroke terror in the rest whom they met from Carthage; who conceiving
the victors to be more in number then they were, turned likewise back: and
were chassed by John to the very gates of Carthage; loosing in their whole
number near 2000. persons. About the same time met Gibamund and his 2000.
soldiers, with the Hunnes, in the field of Salt, 40. furlongs from Decimum,
void of habitation or trees: and were by the^ at the first onset ouerthrown
and slain. Belisarius in the mean space drawing toward Decimum, knew nothing
of all this which had happened; and sending before him the Captains of the
confederats, he followed with the maine battle. Gilimer and his Vandals
meeting with the foremost; great grew the contention whether party should gain
a certain high hill which seemed of great advantage. From which the Vandals so
drove the Romans, that they fled to a town 7. furlongs thence, (where
Belisarius had placed Vliar a captain of spears, with 800. men of arms) in
confidence of there being succored. But the contrary fell out; for these
likewise growing into great terror took fearful course toward Belisarius. At
which time, if Gilimer had followed his fortune, hardly could the Romans have
sustained him, so great was their dread, and so great the multitude of the
Vandals. Or if he had gone toward Carthage, he had oppressed John's troops
which strayed out of order, he had saved the city; and meeting with our fleet
had with no ado destroyed it: But he descending down the hill, at the sight of
his brothers body gave his mind to lamentation and funeral. And Belisarius
after he had stayed those which fled* and vpbrayded them of cowardice; and
received advertisement of Ammats death, with what else had passed, in posting
speed he courageously flew toward the Vandals, whom finding unwary of his
appraoch, and in little order he put suddenly to flight; the night hindering
their pursuit.

CHAP. XII.
THE next day passed the whole army to Carthage, but coming late entered not
the city: although the Carthagineans presently set open their gates, placed
cressets and torches in every quarter, and made bone fires throughout the city
all the night long. Annexed to the Kings Palace was a strong prison; wherein
among others, were diverse merchants, who had bin desired to aid Gilimer when
the war began: and were to have bin executed the same day, wherein Ammat was
slain so near was their life at the brinke. The keeper of this prison
understanding what had passed at Decimum; and seeing the fleet now drawing
toward the port; coming in to the^, who since their first imprisonment never
heard glad word, but in dongcons hourly expecting death; asked them what they
would depart with all their goods to him which would set them free. To their
answer to take what he would; he replied, that they should only swear to
stick by him in any troble that might befall him concerning them. Which
granted, setting them at liberty, he himself went away with them. Belisarius
before he would enter the city, again admonished the army how singular
modesty would be expected at their hands, in this so great and godly a city;
showed them that they ought to repute all the Africans as Romans; and how
shameful it were to be uncivil and rude toward those, whose liberty and
safety they came to assert against the Arrianizing Vandals. Entering he mounted
into Oilimers Throne; where came before him certain merchants, and others,
complaining that the night last past their goods had bin rifled by his
mariners. The just and general Chieftaine, lover of all honesty, and obseruer
of equity, forced Catonymus author of the insolency under oath to bring forth
all the parcells stolen; which he accordingly represented; but perfidiously
notwithstanding upon a sudden secretly fled to Constantinople with those
rapines, where not long after taken with an apoplexy, berefte of his wits,
and deprived of his periurde tongue, he deceased in a most wretched plight: At
his entrance memorable it is to see the great discipline of the army, and the
singular confidence of the inhabitants; for neither was there any ill language
given on any side, neither was any shop shut, or any thing not set forth to
ordinary sale. Which was wonderful strange in a city freshly taken, and
changing government. The Vandals which had fled to the churches; he took into
protection, and gave them safety: then addicted his mind to repair the walls
which were exceedingly ruinous.

CHAP. XIII.
AN old said saw had been in the mouths of the multitude, that G. should
chase B. and again B. chase G. which now all saw appara^tly fulfilled in
Genserich and Boniface, Belisarius and Gilimer. Cleared also was at this time
another ambiguous prediction, much to benoted: and thus it was. Principally
honored above others, among the Carthaginians, was the holy man Cyprian, whose
feast they yearly celebrate in the most goodly temple of the same Saint a little
without the City. This church had the Arrian heretics taken into their own
charge, expelling the Christians, and driving away the Priests with great
reproach. The Africans being much grieved hereat, it is said that Cyprian
appeared in a vision, willing the Christians to be of good comfort, for that
shortly he himself would revenge the injury. With great certainety expected
the Africans this promised event; utterly to seek when or in what sort it were
to be expected. Upon the very eve of this Saints feast was it, that the nany
imperial was discovered from Carthage: whereupon the Christians as soon as
Ammat was departed against the Roman forces (while the event was yet uncertain
of battle) taking to themselves good hope presently thrusting out the Arrians
receased the Temple sanctify it a new, purge the superstitions of the Arrian
heretics; hang up rich and beutifull offerings, set lights in redynes; put in
order the golden vessels and precious paraments, fetching them forth from their
secret repositories. The rest of the Christians also when they heard of the
good success at Decimum, hastening to the same church lightened all the tapers,
and lamps; assisting the Priests to whom the function of all such things
appertained. In so much that the Vandals themselves held so manifest a
fulfilling of this prophecy in great admiration.

CHAP. XIIII.
GILIMER ignorant how to repair his state, solicited the vplandish of the
Africans to intercept Roman soldiers if they stragled, promising for every head
brought him a piece of gold. Many indeed of the servants were in that sort
slain; whom Gilimer performing his covenant, supposed to be so many men of
arms. Neither fownd he presenter confaile then to send for his brother Zazon
(who in this mean season had received Sardinia from Godas) and concerning his
hasty return, he sent him a letter, wherein he thus complained: It was not
Godas that called thee into Sardinia* but the bitter fate of the Vandals bereft
me at this exigent, both of thee (...)the Moors most wretched and miserable;
they ever after the conquest of Africa kept a most bountiful; went attired in
silks and veluets; gave themselves to plays and sports, to music and
hunting, to banqueting and recreations. Moors contrariwise lead their lives
in cotages, where they scant stand upright or can stir, wanting neither
Sun, nor snow, nor any other misery of their climat: sleep on the bare
ground (the best among them laid but somewhat between) forbidden by law of
their country to change attire after the seasons; but a boystrous course
ragged weed they at all times wore alike. Ignorant they are what bread or wine
is; but, whether it be wheat, rye, or barley, which they can get, they neither
grind it to meal, nor bake it, but eat it just as beasts do. This harsh
conversation and custom made the Vandals to think death not unpleasant, nor
seruage shameful. Which not being hidden from Pharas, he by letters invited
Gilimer to render himself, which he not without abundant tears perused, and
returning answer that he had rather suffer what he did, then what his enemies
would do unto him; he concluded with request of a citharne, a lofe of bread,
and a sponge. Which last clause was not understood, until the messenger
explicated, that he desired a lofe, because since his coming to the mountain
he never had so much as seen any baked bread; a sponge, to wipe away his
tears; the citharne, to solace his calamities with some wonderful dittie,
being expert in music. Pharas pitying his case, and in him the uncertainty of
humane condition; satisfied his petition: but more strictly observed his
custody and charge. Three months continued this siege; Gilimer no less
afflicted in his health the^ in his heart, constantly yet persisted obdurat,
until a poor Moor-woma^ in his sight had set certain bruised corn, to dry
over a hyrdle: near thereunto sat two children; the one Gilimers brothers
son, the other the woman's: who grievously pining with hunger; the Vandal
first caught the lump raw, and scalding hot, and thrust in his mouth; which
the other, tugging him by the hair of the head, forced him, half bitte^ as it
was to deliver out of his throat. Which Gilimer seeing presently conceived it
ominous to his own fortunes and upon conditions pacted, rendering himself was
sent to Carthage.

CHAP. XVII.
OPtion after this came to Belisarius, from Justinian the Emperor, that either
he should come to Constantinople together with Gilimer and the captive
Vandals, either else stay behind them, at his discretion. But he finding that
envy, had begun to thrust out his sting against him, resolved upon going in
person to excuse him self unto the Emperor. And there according to his worthy
deserts received he those honors, which never had any private man since the time
of Titus and Vespasian; but only Emperors themselves if fortunately they
subdued some whole nation. For at his entrance, before him went the trophies
and spoils, with the captives; and he himself triumphing (yet on foot)
followed after through the city. The spoils were no mean matters: golden
thrones of estate, rich chariots, precious furniture, plate of massiue gold,
precious stones, silver many thousa^ds of tale^ts: Much of that which had in
times past been taken out of the palace at Rome. Among which were also sundry
noble and excellent peers of the Jews, which of old were by Vespasian and
Titus translated from Jerusalem out of the Temple. These a certain Jew
beholding, forbore not to say aloud, that those things ought not be but where
King Solomon first placed them: that for profaning them had Rome by Genseric
been sakt, and for the same respect Gilimer by Belisarius overcome. Which
speech coming to the Emperors ears, he greatly dreaded, and willed all those
things to be carried unto Jerusalem for the Christians churches. Last of all
followed Gilimer with the principal of the Vandals: and coming unto the
Emperors presence lamented not* but only vtred those words of the Scripture:
Vanity of vanity, and all vanity. To him and Eccl. 1.
to his kindred assigned the Emperor certain honorable enterteinement in
France: but into the number of the Patricians or Nobility he might not be
admitted, because he would by no means renounce the Arian sect. Shortly after
was to Belisarius decreed a triumph after the fashion of the ancient
Captains. Carried in a silver chair of honor upon the sholderes (...)and
Arians; and reuolting from their Christian Emperor Rodulph of Austria, have
voluntarily submitted to the heathen Tur^k^, and made a league with Hell. God
of his holy mercy auert the dreadful conseque^ces, which I have horror to
think upon how imminent they are upon our neighbors necks. Beginning with
pitiful ruins of the faith and the detested propagation of infidelity in
former age: I am constrained by similitude of causes to dread like lamentable
effects in this of ours* and thereby with regret and obtestation of public
moan, through expectation of public miseries, to conclude the Vandal
persecutions: Which otherewise, seeing the Almighty restored to the African
church, golden times, ought to have ended in a golden period.

TWO TABLES. BY THE FIRST NVMBER is designed one of Victors three Books: by M.
The Passion of the seven Martyrs: by F. The life of Saint Fulgentius: by C.
The continuation to the History. The last number imports the Chapter. A
SVMMARIE OF THE Catholics faith and practice.
ABb^ss^s, or Mothers of Nonries. 1. 8. 2. 6. Abbot, 3. 12 M. 3. F. 3.
Alliluya, song solemnly at Easter. 1. 9. Altar 1. 9. Altar-cloathes. 1. 9.
Angels inuocated. 3. 19. Archdeacon, 3. 10. Benedicite, 2. 7. Benediction of
Bishops craved of the people. 2. 7. Blessing of the ships by a Bishop at their
setting forth. C. 9. Bishops. The excellent virtue, charity* and a^mes of the
Catholic Bishops, 1. 7. 2. 2. M. 2. F. 5. F. 8. 9. They refuse to deliver up
church-ornaments to the officers. 1. 9. refuse an oath unjustly te^dred. 3. 3.
refuse to exclude from Catholic service such as returned to the Catholic
faith. 2. 2. Bishops are ordered in dioceses vaca^t, contrary to the Kings
inhibition and commandment. F. 6. Bishop received with procession F. 9. Cat
olique. Catholics hold fast this name and deny it to the Arrians. 2. 10. Only
Catholics held for Christians. 2. 7. The Church termed Our Catholic Mother.
1. 5. 3. 19. M. 3. Character in Baptism. 3. 10. Chastity. vowed and professed.
1. 8. M. 2. C. 2 Seek Nonns. Chrisom-cloth. 3. 10. Christian. Seek
Catholic. Churches. Seek Saints. Churches opened and ceased upon sometimes
through zeal. 1. 9. C. 13. Clergy, S. Priests. Confessors in act. 2. 7. in
heart 27. sometime called Martyrs. 2. 7. Constancy of Catholics in general. M.
2. M. 3. Singulerly, in an Earl solicited by the King 1. 5. in a proconsull or
Marshall. 3. 6. of the husband against wife and children. 1. 11. of the wife
against husband and children. 3. 5. 3. 15* of children. 3. 15. M. 2. of 12.
Boys, quiristers. 3. 11. of a young boy a Monk. M. 4. The constancy of
Catholics was admired and wo^dred by the persecutors themselves. 3. 7.
Conversion of many Arrians; and of their Priests. F. 7. Cross. Confidence in
the wood of the Cross. M. 5. that is in the work performed on the wooden
cross. Disputation. S. Religion. Eucharist, Real presence. 1. 9. Faith. The
Arrians seem to have only an opinion not faith of their doctrine. 2. 8.
Friars. that is Brethren: (the French word being Freres) 3 12. Heretics.
Compared by God to Asses, Butchers, Sulfury clouds. 2. 5. Their society held
pernicious. 2 8. Heresy is a spice of madness or fre^cy. M. 1. Hermits, F. 5.
10. Hymns, 2. 9. M. 5. Lamentation, concerning the persecution 3. 9. C. 2.
Lector, one of the ecclesiastical orders. 1. 9. 3. 10. 3. 11. Lights, used at
the public service and processions. 2. 5. 2. 7. C. 13. F. 9. Mass, The
solemn sacrifice of Christians. 1. 6. C. 2. celebration thereof, 2. 7. 3. 8.
frequented notwithstanding laws to the contrary. 2 8. Miracles, in confirmation
of Catholics in their faith 1. 8. 2. 3. C. 4. C. 14. C. 10. 2. 7. 2. 9. 3. 5.
3. 8. M. 5. By visions 2. 5. 2. 9. C. 8. C. 13. By strangely plaguing the
persecutors. 1. 8. 1. 9. 3. 2. 3. 17. 3. 19. Monasteries, are often mentioned.
Monks, 1. 6 1. 8. 3. 12. F. 5. The sweetness of monastical life. F. 1.
Strictnes thereof and poverty. F. 2. voluntary obedience. F. 8. Nocturns, which
name at this day remains in the Catholic Mattens* 2, 9. Nonns, Virgins
consecrated to God, 1, 8. 2. 6. incapable of marriage, 1, 8. Nonries, 1, 8.
Offerings, and donaries hang up in the churches, C. 13. Orders, Holy orders* 3,
1. Patience, S. Constancy, F. 4. Persecutors of Catholics horribly stricken by
Gods hand, S. Miracles. S. Peter. seek Pope Pilgrimage to places where Martyrs
had suffered and miracles there done, 1* 8. in the end of the chapter, to Rome,
F. 5. Pontifical throne of Bishops, 2, 3. Pope, honorably mentioned as Gods
high Bishop 1. 8. At his hand is direction and aid sought for the conversion
of the infidel Moors, 1* 8. To S. Peter was the government of the universal
Church principally committed, 3, 19. Communion with the Church of Rome; or
separation from it is reputed all one as with or from S. Peter himself. F. 5.
Prayers, Public prayers by night upon solemn vigils, 2* 9. Poverty,
voluntary S. Monks. Priests, The clergy of Africa to have lived unmarried it is
in a manner manifest; in that not once in so great and long a persecution is
mentioned any ecclesiastical persons wife, whereas of laymens wives is
frequent mention. Prison, Mass and sermons in a prison, by stealth, 2. 7. M.
3. Procession with wax-lights and tapers burning, 2. 7. F. 9. M. 5. (F. 7.
Prophecy of religion to be restored. C. 13. Pulpit, wherein Lectors red and
song; as
(...)Certain voluntarily followed the Clergy into bannishment. 3. 11. Yookes
rifled, prohibited. 1. 9. 3* 1. 3. 3. Buryall. Sotemne bury all forbidden. 1.
4. Catholics buried sometime under a tree. 1. 10. somelime in private houses. 3.
4. Bishops confined. F. 2. forbidden to be harbored or relieved. 3. 2 1. 9.
Catholic. The Arrians quarrel about this name, and vngracefully challenge it.
2. 10. Chastity. All professors of the continent life are hated and chased
away. M. 2. C. 2. a. Vowed and professed chastity is by the Arrians despised
and commanded to be violated 1. 8. Sacred virgins shamfully handled and
tortured by them. 2. 6. Churches shutt up. 1. 11. 3. 1. M. 2. fraxed and brent.
1. 1. taken from Catholics and by the Arrians addicted to their Common prayer.
1. 1. 1. 4. 3. 1. abused to stables. C. 6. Churches ransaked and spoiled. 1. 9.
3. 1. Cle^gy of the Arrians, extraordinarily rage above others. 3, 12. 3, 13.
3, 14. M. 1. F. 4. Confining of Bishops to certain place for mansion. F. 2
Covetousness insatiable after Catholics goods. 1, 1. 1, 3. 1 Counsels. The
Arrians allege false counsels for countenance of their error. 3. 1.
Disputation coulorably offered by the Arrians and violently demeaned. 2, 8. 9,
10. 3, 1. 3, 18. F. 7 Envy of the Arrians at the virtue of the Catholic
Bishops. 1, 7. 2, 2 Heretics. The Arrians burn Manichaeans to take from
themselfes the note of heresy. 2, 1 Imprisonment is over all. Laws and
Proclamations. Benefit of law and justice denied to Catholics. 3, 1
Martyrdom is frequent in sundry chapters. For envy of this name and glory;
certain are made deferred to long vexation. 1, 10. C. 3 Mass^ decreed and
forbidden. 2, 8. 3, 1. abolished. C. 2. Catholics slain at it, and put to
death for hearing it. 1, 9 Miracles misinterpreted and discredited, 2, 9. M. 5.
C. 13 Monasteries held in special hatred, 1, 1. delivered to the Moors. M. 2
Monastical persons persecuted, M. 2. urged to break their vow and marry, 1. 8.
extremly hated, S. Priests. Nonns scattered, and tormented, 2, 6 Oaths of state
deceiptfully tendered to entrap, 3, 3 Persecution. Spoiling of goods, death, and
are over all. Occasion strangely sought under pretext whereof to begin
persecution, 2, 6. Disobedience and state is still urged and pretended, 1, 5.
3, 1. 2, 7. F. 6. Persecuting in one place they of policy abstained in another,
1. 6: and sometimes mitigated for ostentation of clemency, 2, 1. Gods honor,
zeal of justice and clemency also are pretended, 2, 8. 3, 1. The civil laws
ordained by ancient Emperors against Heretics are retorted upon Catholics,
3, 1. Catholics making supplication are worse entreated, or fruitless, 1, 4.
3, 2. 3, 1 6: fly over sea, 1, 7. 3, 8: fly into deserts, 3, 1 6: they are
thrust to day-labour* 1, 1. 2, 3. 3, 3: they are pined, 2, 7. 3, 2. M. 2.
deprived of their dignities and fo bidden to bear office, 1, 6. 2, 6. Enticing
allurements and promises, to pervert, M. 3. M. 4. C. 6 Prayers: Catholic
service and prayer countermanded* 1, 6. 3, 3. The Arrians urge that public
prayers should be admitted in any languague indifferently. 2, 2 Priests used
with all rigor, 1, 4: bannished, and horribly used: M. 2. S. Bannishment*
Spoiled of their substance, and terribly entreated, C. 2. Maliciously slandred
of incontinency, 2, 6. Punishment inflicted for receiving a Monk from beyond
the sea: 1, 6 Proclamations against Catholics, 2, 8. 3, 1 Reconciling by the
sacrament of penance, forbidden, 3, 3 Resort mutual of Catholics is
forbidden, 1, 11 Rites ecclesiastical abolished. C. 2 Rome. Peculiar malice of
the Arrians against the sea of Rome, 1, 7. They surname Catholics, Comans, 1,
10 Sacrament of Christ's body and blood irreuerently cast under foot, 1, 9
Scripture. The Arria^s provoke to it alone, 2. 8 Serches by night, and
ransaking of houses, 3, 15 Torments: 3, 4: 5: with cords, 1, 1: hotyrons, 1,
6. 2, 6. 3, 7: Stocks: 1, 8: whipping and beating: 1, 7. 34. 3, 11. 1, 8: F.
4: ha^ging by the heels: 1, 10: 2, 6: maiming and dismembring the body: 3, 8:
3, 9 Watch and ward to apprehend Catholics: 3, 15: F. 4 Women uncivilly and
vnshamfastly used: 2, 6: 3, 4: M. 4
Faults escaped.
Fol. 9 read Merely was my aim to show* f. 10. read licentious f. 15. read
barbarous f. 20 read but for singula f. 30. read made of stubbed palms f. 40.
read such as are f. 52. read burned in f 65. read larger sense f. 75. read
vvhiuering font. f. 83. read true councels f. 114 read Emperor. f. 119. read
he farther came to Carthage f. 123. read no ability f. 127. read mothers P. F
f. 128. read touches us f. 132. The passion of the 7. martyrs is distinct by
it self and no partt of the 3. book. f. 133. read rebaptizationis f. 134.
read serpentine f. 137. read us none f 138. read peasant f. 143. read Rusp.
Surius f. 149. read heritage f. 153. read baldnes. f. 155. read Eulalius f.
156. read shelty f. 168. read Visigothes f. 169. read seemed they and the like
discover f. 172. read Hieron. f. 179. blot out 180. f. 209. read Carried. f.
211. read large and f. 212. read moan.

