VIA RECTA AD Vitam longam, OR A PLAIN PHILOSOPHICAL DISCOVRSE OF THE Nature,
faculties, and effects, of all such things, as by way of nourishments, and
Dieteticall observations, make for the preservation of Health, with their just
applications unto every age, constitution of body, and time of YEAR.

WHEREIN ALSO, BY WAY OF Introduction, the Nature and Choice of Habitable
Places, with the true use of our famous BATHES of BATHE is perspicuously
demonstrated.

BY To: VENNER, Doctor of Physic, at Bathe in the Spring, and Fall, and at
other times in the Borough of North-Petherton near to the ancient Hauen-Towne
of BRIDGEWATER in Somersetshire.

LONDON Printed by Edward Griffin for Richard Moore, and are to be sold at his
shop in St Dunstans Churchyard in Fleet Street, 1620.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, FRANCIS, LORD VERVLAM, LORD High Chancellor of
England, etc.
Right Honorable,
I Often meditating with my self, to whom I should (according to the ancient
and well approved custom of the best learned of all ages) consecrate these my
labors, I at length resolved, in testimony, of my devoted affections to your
Honor, as also in regard of the worthiness and utility of the subject (which
is the Dieteticall part of Physic, that for preservation of health
appertains to all men, but to none, as I suppose, more then to your Honor,
who under his Majesty, does chiefly weild the state of our Reipublique) to
commit them to your Honors protection. Whereunto, your benign Nature,
excellent learning, and singular respect toward learned men, have not a little
also encouraged me. If the work shall yield any manner of delight or profit to
your Honor, I have my aim and contentment. The God of Heaven grant you a long
and healthy life, with a prosperous fruition of your Place and Dignities, to
his Glory, your own Comfort, and the Good of his Majesty's subjects. Thus
referring both my self, and this work to your favorable acceptance, I in all
observance humbly rest

At your Honors service and command, TOBIAS VENNER.

OF THE NATVRE AND CHOICE OF HABITABLE PLACES.
Whether a temperate air be the best and wholsomest for the preservation of
life?
SEeing that, for the continuance of life and health, there is so great respect
to be had of the air (for without it we can scarcely live a moment of time)
and place of habitation, as of the meats we eat; I therefore thought it meet
to express, by way of Introduction, the knowledge of those things that
demonstrate the salubritie of habitable places, which is expended cheifely in
three things; in purnesse of the air, quality of the soil and situation, and
wholsomnes of the water: from which every man may easily gather and conceive of
the healthfulnes of his habitation. And first as concerning the air, that is
the best and wholsomest to preserve life, which is subtle, bright, and clear,
not mixed with any gross moisture, or corrupted with filthy or noisome vapors,
which also with calm and pleasant winds (for great and boisterous winds are to
the lungs, eyes, and ears hurtful) is gently moved: for such air is in
substance pure, in qualities temperate, and therefore most wholesome. But the
air that is infected with corrupt and filthy vapors, euaporating or breathing
out of standing pooles, channels, or other impure places, or which is so shut
up with hills or mountains, that it cannot be freely perflated and purified
with the winds, is not fit for preferuing of health; like as neither that,
which is affected with too much heat or cold, or suffers often and sudden
mutations. For as a pure, clear and temperate air is good for every age and
constitution: even so impure, gross, cloudie and intemperate air is to every
age and constitution hurtful. Therefore touching the knowledge of the goodness
of the air, it must be considered that it be not vaporous, moi^, or putride,
not too hot or too cold, not ouer-moist, or dry: for a vaporous, cloudy, gross
or putride air does cause theumes, annoy the lungs, corrupt the humors, infect
Air vaporous, gross, or putride,
the heart, deiect the spirits, and subvert the habit of the whole body.

Air too hot does relaxe the ioints, resolve the humors, and spirits, cast
down the strength, greatly weaken the Air too hot.
concoction, with all other functions of the vegetall faculty, because it
dissolueth and draws out the natural heat. Moreover it makes the color
yellow, because it corrupts the blood which rubifieth the color, and causes
choler to exceed other humors. Last of all, it heateth the heart with an
unnatural heat, it dissolueth, wastes, and consumes the humors, and causes
them to putrify, and flow to the concauities and weak parts of the body; and
therefore it is not agreeable to healthy bodies: Notwithstanding it is
available for over cold, moist, hydropicke, and paraliticke bodies, and such
as are affected with the crampe proceeding of too much cold and moistu^e.

But air temperately hot does maintain the natural heat, confirm the
strength, and makes all the operations Temperate air.
of the body more lively: it is very comfortable and agreeable to every
constitution.

Air too cold is of a congelatiue power, and therefore Air intemporately cold.
weakneth the sinews, and greatly hurts the brain, breeds catarrhes, and
Astl (...) is a disease when ye lungs are so stopped and clogd with phlegm, as
that they cannot dilate themselves: by reason whereof a man cannot breath but
with wheasing, panting, etc. Air meanly cold.
asthmaes, and extinguisheth the natural heat, especially in weak bodies, by
congealing the substantial moisture thereof, and consequently it being not
able to actuate as it ought, putrifieth. It is less hurtful, nay sometimes
profitable to bodies that are exceeding hot: and to sound bodies it is more
convenient and agreeable then air that is over hot.

But air meanly cold is healthful, because it impelleth the natural heat
into the inner parts, and so causes a strong digestion, provoke the appetite
and makes all the hidden operations of nature more effectual: For such a
coldness is proportionably contrary to the natural heat, by reason whereof,
the natural and genuine heat is by an Antiperistasis fortified, and the
digestion, which is the root of life, confirmed.

Air too moist, such as is commonly in marish and low Air too moist.
places, is to all bodies most hurtful, because it too much lenifieth and
moistneth the body, and fills it with excrementall humors, and causes
distillations, the very root almost of all diseases of the brain and sinews,
as cramps, palsies etc. with pains in the ioints; and to speak all in a word,
a general torpiditie both of mind and body.

But that air which is meanly moist, especially in the Air indifferently
moist.
summer time, is agreeable to most complexions; for it makes a good color,
softneth the skin, and opens the pores, whereby is caused the better
difflation, and discussion of vaporous superfluities; but yet it somewhat
makes the humors prone to putrefaction. This air verily is very agreeable to
bodies of a dry constitution, but unto other, by reason that it soon causes
putrefaction of humors, it is far less convenient.

A dry air is contrary unto this, and it is most agreeable to moist
constitutions. A dry Air.


Now these things, which I have hitherto declared, concerning the election of
air, being considered, it does plainly appear, that of the same a temperate
mediocritie in caliditie, frigiditie, humiditie, and siccitie, as much as
possibly may be; besides the lucide and clear substance of it, is for the
preservation of health to be desired, because such air does cause and conserve
the health of the inhabitants. For nothing verily causes the body more lively
and iocunde, and less dull and unapt about the voluntary and animal motions,
then to live in a pure, clear, and temperate air, which has in it no mixture
of any filthy or offensive vapor. And there are two things that do plainly
manifest the wholsomnes of such air, as first, places What things declare the
wholsomnes of the a^re.
free from very low valleys, and moors, and foggie mistes in the night; then
the bodies of the inhabitants, as an acute wit, a sound and lively color, a
stable integrity of the head, quick sight, perfect hearing, sound smelling,
clear voice, and no difficulty of breathing, or vnlustinesse of the limbs:
For by these signs the wholsomnesse of the air is approved, and by the
contrary the offensive and noisome breath thereof is detected.

But seeing that it is not every man's lot to live in a pure and healthy air,
and such is the necessity of the air, that even for a moment of time it
cannot be eschewed, it must needs follow, that from it our bodies receive very
great alterations: Wherefore the euillnesse of the air being known, and the
alteration which it makes in our bodies considered, it may be easy in our
meat, drink, exercise etc. to object the contray, which may much hinder,
infringe, and attemper the action and power of the air; but yet I counsel all
such as are truly generous, that they make their habitations, so much as may
be, remote from low, fennie, and moorish places; for the health of the body
ought to be preferred before any pecuniarie profits.

Whether the habitation that is somewhat eminent, be for health the best
approved?
WIth good reason did our Ancestors build their houses toward the South and
the North, because through the northern windows, the north wind might in the
summer pass in to cool the bloomie air in them, and that the sun, which
rectifieth the air, might through the southern windows in the winter enter
into every room. For otherwise they cannot have the benign and sweet aspect
of the sun and the pleasant and healthful blasts of the North wind at those
distinct times of the year. But they did, for the most part euilly set them
(more regarding their commodity then health) in deep and crooked places,
because in such places they cannot be freely perflated and purified with the
winds. Neither is that house or place of ha^itation to be commended, that lies
open to the West, because it is perpetually subject to the moist and
excrementall blasts of the West wind. But in mine opinion those houses and
habitations are best, which are somewhat eminently situated on pure and firm
What place for habitation is best.
ground, far off from low, marish, or other filthy places, (for there the air
is for the most part temperate, subtle and pure, seldom infected with
vaporous blasts) having springs or brooks of pure water near adjoining, lying
open to the South and East, with hills (which may somewhat hinder and keep
back the vaporous West wind, and the sharp North wind in the winter) a
little remote on the West and North side, having windows looking not only
toward the South and North for the reasons aforesaid, but also, so much as may
be, toward the East, because the sun in the beginning of the day, arising
upon them, does excellently clarify, and purge the air of them, and is all
the day after better exposed to the most wholesome blasts of the East wind.
But here advertisement must be given, that the Eastern windows or casements,
be not set open, before the Sun has somewhat purged the air, and dissipated
the clouds, especially in moist seasons: for the morning air, by reason of the
coldness and moisture of the night, is gross and impure, very hurtful to
them that have weak brains, and subject unto rheumes, until it be
illustrated by the presence of the Sun, and purified by his heat and splendour.

And here I would not, that the Reader should so conceive me, as that I judge
the West-winde, to be at no time wholesome: verily, I think nothing less, for
it is sometimes wholesome enough, as if in the time of its blowing, the air be
bright and clear, especially if it blow in the declining of the day, and the
beginning of the night: for then it is the purer and less gross, by reason of
the presence of the Sun in the west part, which attenuateth the blasts of it.
Wherefore I do conclude, that in an house, to the end it may be perflable, it
is expedient to have windows on every side, which may, ad placitum, be opened
and shut up again.

Why are those that inhabit eminent places in a free and open air, of a more
long and healthy life, and also of a more acute, generous, and magnificent
mind, then those that inhabit crooked, low, and marish places?
THis question consists of two parts: the reason of the first is, because the
air in eminent and open places, both by reason of the continual motion of it,
as also of the firm solidity of the earth, is more subtle and pure, whereby
it comes to pass, that the inhabitants, are even to extreme old age, seen
to enjoy very good and perfect health.

But in crooked, low, and marish places, for such verily are the spirits, as is
the air which is inspirated: the Inhabitants are sickly, and have turbid and
obfuscated spirits, by reason of the grosnesse and impurity of the air. For,
impure, gross, and intemperate air does corrupt the spirits and humors: from
whence proceed infinite diseases, and untimely old age. Therefore eminent
Regions, because they are with pure winds freely perflated, are more healthy,
then low and marish places, and in them men live not only more healthfully,
but also longer, and from hence it was, that Plato wrote, that he ever found
the longest livers in high and temperate Regions.

Therefore he that desires to live a long and healthy life, must dwell in an
eminent and champion country, or at least, in a place that is free from muddie
and waterish impurities: for it is impossible, that a man should live long and
healthily in a place, where the spirits are with impure air daily affected.
Wherefore I counsel them, that wish to enjoy true health, and a firm state of
body, to take special care that they live not in waterish places, or in a
gross, corrupt, and filthy air, or otherwise subject to vaporous blasts,
which annoy the spirits, breed rheumes, and are very pernicious to the lungs.

Now the reason of the second is evident, by that which has been showed
concerning the former: for those that live in eminent and champion countries,
by reason of the tenuitie, purity, and wholsomnesse of the air in such
places, have clear, pure, and subtle spirits, from whence it comes, that
they are witty, nimble, magnanimous, and alta petentes. But the contrary is
seen in low and marish places, for there, the Inhabitants, by reason of the
euilnesse of the air, have gross and earthy spirits, whereof it is, that they
are for the most For some have their natures rectified by education.
part men, humum tantum sapientes, dull, sluggish, sordid, sensual, plainly
irreligious, or perhaps some of them, which is a little worse, religious in
show, external honest men, deceiptfull, malicious, disdainefull. Wherefore,
seeing that the diversity of spirits, and differences of wits and manners, do
so much proceed from the condition and nature of the air, I do here again
advertise all such as are ingenious, generous, and desirous of perfection, both
in mind and body, that they endeavor by all means, to live in a pure and
healthy air, and so seldomly as may be, frequent places, where the air is
wont to be infected with vaporous impurities.

Whether fountain water, in goodness and wholsomnesse, excel other waters?
THat water is esteemed to be the best and wholsomest, which is most clear
and thin, pure in taste and smell, altogether clean from any impure, terrene,
or other dreggy mixture. And such is, before all other, fountain water, if it
rise in a pure, high, and open place, and that against the East, for then it is
the better depurated with the morning Sun, and pure oriental winds. Of
fountain waters, those that rise against the North, because they have not the
radiant aspect of the Sun, which purifieth the waters, are least commendable,
for they are not easily concocted, they weaken the stomach, and cause
fluctuations, and flatuousnesse in the body. But there are some fountain
waters, not to be allowed for alimentary uses, and such are those, which rise
from sulphurous, bituminous, or metalline places, or which are carried through
like veins of the earth, because they receive an unpleasant savor and smell,
and also an evil quality from those things that they issue from, or run
through.

Next unto fountain water in goodness, is raine-water, so it fall not in a
boisterous or troublesome air; for the Sun, from all waters and humid
places, draws up the thinner and purer portion resolved into vapors, which
is the matter of rain to come. Notwithstanding, the goodness thereof does
alter according to the diverse parts of the year; for that is the best, which
falls from the middle Rain water alt^reth in goodness, according to the
times of the year.
of the Spring, to the middle of Autumn, because in those seasons, the air is
for the most part pure, seldomly corrupted with noisome vapors, which defile
the raine-waters. And there are some, to whose opinion a man may easily,
without error subscribe, which think, that such raine-water is not inferior
in goodness to fountain water. But the waters which fall with great tempests
of winds, hail, thunder, and lightnings, are, by reason of many confused
vapors and exhalations collected in the air, impurer, and therefore not so well
to be approved for the health of man's body.

River water has the third place of goodness, both by Riuer-water.
reason the action of the Sun upon it, as also because that by motion, it
becomes thinner, except it be polluted by the mixture of other things, as it
comes to pass in rivers, that run through marish places, or near unto
populous Towns or Cities: for then, by reason of all manner of filth running,
or cast into them, they become very corrupt and unwholesome. Therefore where the
Inhabitants through the want of most wholesome fountains, are constrained to
make use of river water, let them take especial care, lest insteede of that
which is wholesome, they take that which is corrupt and very offensive to the
health of their bodies: Wherefore let them make choice of that river water,
which is not subject to the aforesaid hurts; but runs with a full stream
upon gravel, pebble-stones, rocks, or pure earth: for that water, by reason
of the purity of the place, motion, and radiant splendour of the Sun, is
thinner, sweeter, and therefore more pure, and wholsomer, and in my opinion, it
is doubtful, whether fountain waters surpass in goodness such river waters.
But if the river waters shall not be clear, but slimie and muddie, and the
same, for want of better waters, necessarily used, as in many low and marish
places, then let them be kept so long in some vessel, till that the gross
part rest and settle in the bottom, for by this means, the thin and purer
part of the water may be taken and used, and the grosser cast away.

Well-water is judged inferior to the former, in purity and wholsomnesse, not
only because it is void of motion, Well-water.
but also because it is not illustrated of the Sun; notwithstanding, if the
Well be dug in pure earth, and the mouth open to the air, not shut up in a
dark obscure place, not beset with a filthy bottom, but a pure, gravely, or
rocky, then the water, especially if it be often drawn, is very good and
wholesome.

And here understand, that the waters that are drawn Pump and Cisterne waters.
through pumps, because they are shut up from the air, are worse then other
Well-waters, for they more quickly putrify, and acquire an ill quality. The
like may be said of Waters carried through pipes of lead.
Cisternewaters. Neither are the waters which are carried throw pipes of lead,
so wholesome as they are supposed to be, not only because they are shut up from
the air, but also because they are thought to acquire an unwholesome quality
from the lead: they are troublesome to the stomach, and ponderous to all the
bowels; but these hurts in their boiling, are well removed.

All standing waters, as of pooles, motes, and of pits, Standing waters.
which in low and marish places, are very usual, are most unwholesome, and
altogether (as pestiferous) to be avoided and eschewed, for in that they are
standing, or creeping with a very slow pace, the parching heat of the Sun
often working upon them, does more mightily pierce to the bottom, and so
leaving the grosser part, draws up the thinner, whereby it comes to pass,
that the waters appear muddy, and of a leadish color, corrupted both in smell
and taste. Waters that are taken near unto the seashores, Waters near the
sea-shores.
or arms of the same, are for the most part corrupt, and of a stinking smell,
and unpleasant savor, and therefore naught and unwholesome for man's body.

Whether Snow waters be in goodness matchable to river water?
NO, and the reason is, because that while the snow is engendered, the thinner
part of the matter, is (as it were) pressed forth of the cold, and converted
into clouds, the grosser part remains, and is turned into snow: whereof it
comes, that snow-waters are gross and over cold, and therefore hurtful to
man's body; for they cause rheumes, and greatly hurt the sinews. Moreover,
they breed spleneticke passions, by causing the spleen to grow great, they
confound the breast and liver, cause asthma's, and fill the stomach with
flateous crudities: wherefore the use thereof, especially in elder years, does
undoubtedly induce exitiall affects to the sinews, joints and bowels. But snow
water is, of some in these days, greatly esteemed of, to cool and extinguish
thirst. Perhaps, in hot countries, and in hot seasons, it may be for some
bodies agreeable; but in our northern countries, it is at no hand to be
allowed, except to such as are impensiuely hot; for it is only profitable to a
stomach that estuateth with heat.

Whether in waters that are naturally warm, which we call hot Bathes, it be
healthful for healthy men to bathe?
WAters naturally hot, and of a medicinable faculty, such as are our famous
bathes of Bathe, are of singular force, not only against diseases gotten by
cold, or proceeding from a cold and moist cause, but also bring in time of
health, exceeding comfort and profit, to all cold, moist, and corpulent bodies:
for they open the pores, resolve, attenuate, digest, consume, and draw forth
superfluities, and withal, strongly heat and dry the whole habit of the body.
They are of excellent efficacy against all diseases of the head and sinews,
proceeding of a cold and moist cause, or of a cold only, or moist only, as
rheumes, palsies, epilepsies, lethargies, apoplexies, cramps, deafness,
forgetfulness, trembling, or weakness of any member, aches and swellings of
the joints, etc. They also greatly profit windy and hydropicke bodies, the
pain and swelling of any part of the body, so that it proceed not from an
hot cause, the sluggish and lumpish heaviness of the body, numnesse of any
member, pain in the loins, the gout, especially the Sciatica, cold tumors of
the milt and liver, the yellow Iaundice in a body plethoricke or phleg^aticke.
They are also very profitable for them that have their lungs annoyed with much
moisture, because they consume and dry up that moisture: and to make slender
such bodies as are too gross, there is nothing more effectual then the often
use of these waters. Wherefore let those that fear obesitie, that is, would
not wax gross, be careful to come often to our Bathes: for by the often use
of them, according as the learned Physician shall direct, they may not only
preserve their health, but also keep their bodies from being vnseemingly
corpulent. They are also singularly profitable to women, for they help them of
barrenness, and of all diseases and imperfections of the matrice, proceeding
of a cold and moist cause. They also cure all diseases of the skin, as scabs,
itch, old sores etc. All which to be true, we daily find with admiration to
the exceeding great comfort of many, who with deplored diseases, and most
miserable bodies resort to our baths in Bathe, and are there, by the help of
wholesome physic and virtue of the Baths, through the blessing of Almighty
God, recovered to their former health. But hot bathes, to bodies naturally hot
and dry, are generally hurtful, and so much the more, as the body is drier
Hot Bathes hurtful to hot and dry bodies.
and the bathe hotter, because it distempereth and consumes the very habit of
the body, and makes it carrainelike lean. Wherefore seeing that natural
bathes are not indifferently agreeable to every constitution, I do advise that
not any one go into them rashly, or upon an approperous judgment, but that he
be first advised by some faithful, judicious and expert Physician, and to him
expose the state of his body, whereby he may understand, whether or no it may
be expedient for him to attempt the same. And whereas in Bathe there are diverse
bathes, and they differing in their heat, he must also from the learned
Physician be directed in which to bathe; neither must he only understand which
Bathe to use, as most convenient for his present state of body, but also when
and how often to use the same. Besides this, he must (according as his state of
body shall require) be purged before he enter into the bathe, and be also
directed in other things how to order himself, before he go into the bathe,
while he is in the bathe, and after that he is come out of the bathe, and when
he leaves the bathe. And must also, in the intermitting times of bathing and
sweating, take such physic, as his disease and present state of body shall
require. The neglect of all these, or of some of them, either through ignorance
or voluntary wilfulnes, may be the cause that some that take great pains to
come to the bathes, are not by them healed of their infirmities, but oftentimes
never return to their homes again; or if they do; it is most commonly with
new diseases, and the old worse then ever they were: Whereas many of a
generous and religious understanding, using the true helps of physic with
the bathes, are of their diseases perfectly cured. And here I exhort the
Physicians, in regard that the Bathes, which proceed from Sulphur, or from it,
take their chiefest virtue and strength (as our Bathes in Bathe do) do weaken
and subvert the stomach, especially of some bodies, that they have an honest
care to corroborate the same by such means as shall be best fitting for the
present estate of the body. Here also I advertise such as in the declining or
fall of the year, which we call the Autumn, shall for the health of their
bodies repair to our Bathes, that they defer not their coming till the
middle of September or after, as many ignorantly do; but that they rather be
there by the end of August, that they may have the commodity of the Bathes
before the air grow to be too cold for bathing in hot Bathes, as commonly it
is in October, especially toward the end thereof: for if they shall make use of
the Bathes when the air is cold and moist, or very inclinable thereunto, they
shall receive (the pores of the body being open by reason of the efficacy of
the Bathe) far greater hurt then commodity. But perhaps some out of an
ignorant timorousnes will object, that to come to the Bathes at the end of
August is too soon upon the Dogge-dayes. Herein they are more scrupulous, then
judicious; but to yield them satisfaction, I answer, besides the alteration of
seasons from their ancient temperature, in this decrepit age of the world, that
though the middle part of the day, about the beginning of September, shall be
hot; yet the mornings and euenings, which are the times for bathing, are rather
cold or declining to a temperature, and the heat of the day following upon
bathing, is that which we specially respect for the health of our Patients, for
whom we approve the use of the Bathes. And verily, whosoever shall but consider
the great variablenes, and inconstant disposition of the Spring, from its
ancient temperature, especially of later years, must (in my opinion) confess,
that the month of September is most commonly, in regard of the disposition of
the air, so fit for bathing in hot Bathes, as any in the Spring. Wherefore
such as for the health of their bodies repair to our Bathes, shall, if they be
there by the end of August, receive a double commodity: For first, they shall
have the whole month of September very convenient for bathing, and physic
also, as shall be occasion, yea and part of October, as the disposition of the
air shall permit: next, sufficient time for their return to their homes,
before the air grow too cold, or the weather distempered: for to expose their
bodies to travel in foul and intemperate weather, upon the use of the Bathes,
induces, (the pores being open) besides feuerous distemperatures and
ventosities, oftentimes very great and dolorous affects of the brain, breast,
sinews, and joints. Thus much I thought fitting to advise concerning the use
of our Bathes, and the rather that such as preposterously use them, may not
erroniously detract from the admirable virtues of them.

Now I will in one thing give my advise to the Governors of the place, in which
I shall nothing doubt of their unanimous assent, as also of the approbation of
all truly generous and religious Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, that shall for the
health of their bodies resort thither, which is, that the immodest custom of
men and women promiscuously at one time going into the Bathes, may be reformed,
which (in my judgment) may with no less fitnes, then decency easily be
effected. For whereas there are four public Bathes for strangers to bathe
in, (of which the Kings Bathe is the hottest, and it is for largenes and
efficacy a kingly Bathe indeed: next unto it for efficacy of heat is the hot
Bathe, and the Bathe that is adjoining to the Kings Bathe now called the
Queens Bathe: these two Bathes are near of one temperature. The Cross Bathe
is for heat the mildest; it is very temperately warm: the use of this Bathe
may, by the advice of a discreet Physician, sometimes be very profitably
admitted even to hot and dry bodies) I would; that men only use the Kings
Bathe one day, and women another, that all occasion of offense might thereby be
removed: and because the Cross Bathe, and Hot Bathe are near together, I
would that the day that men use the Cross Bathe, women use the Hot Bathe, and
the day that women use the Cross Bathe, men use the Hot Bathe: which order may
be likewise observed in the use of the Kings Bathe, and of the other adjoining
to it. For by this means such as please, or rather shall be so advised by
their Physician, may without all offense, use one Bathe or another every day.

But perhaps some will object against me, that they came far, and with great
expense to seek their health at the Bathes, and therefore that I do them
great wrong to seek to barthem of the use of the Kings Bath every second day.

To whom I answer; that not the immoderate and preposterous use of the Bathes,
(for that is pernicious) but the tempestiue and moderate use of them does
acquire their health: for to use the Kings Bathe oftener then every second day,
and to sweat 2, or 3 hours upon the bathing, as shall by the advice of the
learned Physician be thought meet, for the particular state and constitution
of the body, besides other fitting courses of physic, is more, if you
rightly weigh the great heat and efficacy of the Bathe, then in any state or
constitution of body can be well allowed, except perhaps in a few, that shall
be of a very cold and moist temperature, for whom there may be a toleration.
Now by that which I have written of our Bathes of Bathe, it may plainly unto
all men appear, of what excellent efficacy they are, if they be rightly and
iudiciously used: and seeing that in the true use of them, there are many
things, as I have partly before touched, to be considered; I do therefore
again advise all such as are respective of their health, that they enterprise
not the use of them without the counsel of some honest and learned Physician;
which if they do, the incommodum may be maius commodo.

And so I conclude this Introduction.

OF THE DIVERSE kinds of Bread. SECT. I.
Whether Bread that is made of the middle and purest part of the meal not
separated, be the best and wholsomest?
AMong the things which serve for meat, I may with very good right give the
first place unto bread, for it is the simplest nourishment, and to our nature
very familiar: if it be well made and prepared, the nourishment which it
yields is very substantial and exceeding good. But the virtue and goodness of
the bread is to be taken from the nature of the grain, and manner of
preparation. Concerning the preparation, I will only touch it a little
hereafter, where I will show the properties, that ought to be in the best and
wholsomest bread. And whereas there are diverse sorts of grain wherewith bread
may be made, yet we most chiefly use three, Wheat, Rye, and Barley, for we never
use Beans, or Otes, except in a very great scarcity of the former. For Bread
made of Beans is very dry, by reason whereof it is brittle, unpleasant, and
hard to digest, it can in no wise be wholesome, for it fills the body full of
wind, and is void of any good alimentall juice. Of Oats in Wales, and some
of the Northern Shires of England, they make bread, Bread of Beans and Oats.
especially in manner of Cakes, which kind of bread is of light digestion, but
windy, and yields a weak nourishment to the body: while it is new, it is
meetly pleasant, but after a few days it waxes dry and unsavory: it is a
bread of light nourishment, and (in my opinion) not agreeable for men,
especially for such as have not bin from their youth accustomed thereunto. But
these and the like sorts of bread, I separate from this Treatise, both because
that in regard of our great plenty of Wheat, Rye, and Barley, it is lawful
even for our poor people to make of them, or of the mingling of them, bread
abundantly; as also, because that other sorts of bread are with us grown out
of use, wherefore of these only will I entreat. Of these three, the bread
which is made of Wheat is by reason of its moderate temperature, the best and
worthiest of praise, for it is easily digested, and very strongly nourishes
the body; but it is purer or impurer, according to the finenes or coursenes of
the flower whereof it is made. For of the meal there are four parts: Pollen,
Simila, Secundarium, and Furfures.

Pollen is the purest part of the meal, that is, the finest part of the
flower; of this is made the whitest and purest bread, very profitable for thin,
weak, loose, and extenuated bodies; but not so commendable for those that are
healthy and strong, and therefore if any such use it, they are more curious
then judicious.

Simila is that part of the meal, which is the mean between the finest part
of the flower and the coursest, which is called Secundarium of this together.
With the finest part of the flower is made the wholsomest and best nourishing
bread, and it is in greatest use among the better sort of people.

Secundarium is that part of the meal, whereof yeomanbread is made, which some
call second bread. This bread Second Bread.
because it has in it the finer part of the bran, does not give to the body
so great nor so good nourishment as the former; but it quickly descends from
the stomach, and makes the body soluble, and therefore sometimes good for
such as are wont to be costiue; and if a quantity of Rye flower be added to
it, there will be made of them both an yeoman-bread, for strong and healthy
bodies very convenient.

Bread made only of the brannie part of the meal, Brown Bread.
which the poorest sort of people use, especially in time of dearth and
necessity, gives a very bad and excrementall nourishment to the body: it is
well called panis ca^icarius, because it is more fit for dogs then for men. But
if the grossest part of the bran be separated by a Searce, and Rye flower, or
else Barley flower and Rye flower together be added to that which is sifted
from the grossest bran, there will be made a brown household bread agreeable
enough On^ way Bread.
for laborers. Sometimes only the grosser part of the bran is by a Searse
separated from the meal, and a bread made of that which is sifted, called in
some places, One way bread, wholesome enough, and with some in very familiar
use: it nourishes less then that which is made of purer flower; but by reason
of some part of the bran which is contained in it, it does sooner descend and
move the belly, for there is a kind of abstersive faculty in the brain:
wherefore, for those that are healthy, and yet subject to costiuenesse, and
also for such as would not wax gross, it is most profitable.

In time of scarsitie of corn, bread is also wont to be made of the whole
meal, from which the bran is not separated, and it is well called panis
confusaneus, because all Panis confusaneus.
the meal, no part thereof being by sifting taken away, goes into the making
of the bread: this bread speedily descends and yet it is troublesome to the
stomach, and fills the belly with excrements.

Bread made of Rye is in wholesomnes much inferior Rye Bread.
to that which is made of wheat: it is cold, heavy, and hard to digest, and by
reason of the massiuenes thereof, very burdensome to the stomach. It breeds
a clammie, tough, and melancholicke juice; it is most meet for rusticke
laborers, for such by reason of their great travail, have commonly very
strong stomachs. Rye in diverse places is mixed with wheat, and a kind of bread
made of them, called Messeling bread, which is wholesomer Messeling Bread.
then that which is made of Rye, for it is less obstructiue, nourishes
better, and less fills the body with excrements.

Some use to make bread, especially in the times of scarsitie, of Rye and
Barley mixed together; but this kind of bread is more excrementall then the
former, yet better then that which is only made of Barley: for Barley bread is
less nourishing then Rye bread; it is cold and dry, hard Barley Bread.
of concoction, and breeds not a tough juice, but rather somewhat clensing,
and therefore it has speedier distribution through the body, then Rye bread
has; but it gives a dry and excrementall nourishment to the body, fills it
with wind, and greatly hurts the stomach.

How many properties ought there to be in the best and wholsomest Bread?
I.
Seven: The first is that it be made of the best wheat; for according to the
difference of the wheat, is tho goodness or badnes of the bread. That wheat is
best which is of yellow color, of a close and compacted substance, clean,
weighty, and so hard, that it will not easily be broken between the teeth:
contrary to this is that which is of a laxe and open substance, such as is
commonly grown in low and vliginous places. And if wheat that has all the
aforesaid properties cannot conveniently be had, yet let it be such as is of an
hard compacted substance, and weighty: for it is generally to be observed in
every kind of wheat, that the better and wholsomer bread is always made of
the weightier and more compacted wheat, and the wo^ser of that which is more
light and open.

The second property is, that it be fitly leauened; for the leaven causes the
bread to be of thin parts, by reason 2.
whereof, it is more easily digested, and breeds better humors. But the
leaven must be fitly proportioned, because common experience proves in men's
stomachs, that bread much leauened is of heavy digestion, and of no commendable
nourishment. All the ancient Physicians deemed unleavened bread to be very
unwholesome, because it is of hard digestion and breeds obstructiue humors.
Howbeit we daily prove that no bread is lighter of digestion, or gives better
nourishment to the body, then our manchet, which is made of fine flower of
wheat, having in it no leaven, but in steed thereof a little barme. But by
this I reject not the use of leaven, to the making either of manchet bread or
of greater loaves, as a thing very profitable and good; but I leave it as a
thing indifferent, and every good housewife to her own custom herein: only I
advertise, that the leaven and barme be fitly proportioned. And by the former
rule of the ancient Physicians, all sorts of cakes, simnels, wafers, fritters,
pancakes, and such like, are to be rejected, if they be not well corrected
with some other good ingrediences.

The third property is, that it be temperately seasoned 3.
with salt, for bread over sweat is of hard digestion, and breeds obstructiue
humors, and bread over salt is a dryer, and breeds aduste and melancholicke
humors. But that which consists in a mean between both, is pleasant to the
taste and more acceptable to the stomach.

The fourth property is, that it be light, and somewhat 4.
open, and such, although it be great in show, yet it is of small weight, and
therefore easily digested, and easily distributed from the stomach.

The fifth property is, that it be very well wrought and 5.
labored with the hands and brake, and not ouer-liquored, as many negligent
and slothful servants oftentimes do, to save that labor; for then it is
heavy to the stomach, and breeds clammie and naughty juice.

The sixth property is, that it be well baked; for bread 6.
that is ill baked, whether too much or too little, is of ill digestion, of ill
distribution, and therefore very troublesome to the stomach.

The last property is, that it be not eaten over new, as while it is hot, nor
when it is stale and grown dry. It must 7.
not be eaten hot, because it will fluctuate in the stomach, slowly descend,
oppilate, and abundantly breed wind in the bowels, by reason of a vaporous
humiditie that is in it while it is hot, which in cooling euaporateth: and
because it furneth upward, it causes drowsinesse, confounds the senses, and
very greatly hurts the brain it self. Wherefore bread while it is hot,
although it be to some men's pallats very pleasant and acceptable, yet it is to
the body unprofitable, because it breeds flatulent and obstructiue humors.
In like manner, bread that is stale and grown dry, because it has lost his
natural temperature, is unprofitable; for it is hardly digested, and yields
little nourishment, and the same not good, but melancholic. Wherefore it
follows, that the bread ought not to be too old, nor too new: and to avoid
all the aforesaid discommodities, I hold; that the bread ought to be kept the
space of 24 hours, or at least one night in some cold place after the baking,
before it be eaten; and also that it be not above two or three days old in
the summer, especially if it be made in the form of manchet or smaller loaves;
nor above four or five days old in the winter; for by how much more it is
dried and indurated, by so much the worse it nourisneth, and is of harder
concoction.

Whether Biscuit Bread yield to the body any profitable nourishment.
Biscuit bread is only profitable for the phlegmatic, and them that have
crude and moist stomachs, and that desire to grow lean, because it is a very
great dryer; and therefore let such as are choleric and melancholicke beware
how they use it. The like may be said of the crust of bread; for it is also
very hardly digested, and breeds choler adust and melancholic humors.
Wherefore let the utmost and harder part of the crust be chipped away, of which
let such as are by nature choleric and melancholicke have special care. But
it is good for the phlegmatic, and for such as have ouer-moist stomachs, and
yet healthy, and desirous to grow lean, to eat crusts after meat, the very
superficial and burnt part of them only chipped away, because they press
down the meat, and strengthen the mouth of the stomach, by drying up the
superfluous moisture of it.

OF THE DIVERSE kinds of Drink. SECT. II.
Whether it be wholesome for northern people, that inhabit cold countries, to
drink water at their meals, in steed of Beer?
ALthough Water be the most ancient drink, and to those that inhabit hot
countries, profitable and familiar, by reason of the parching heat of the
ambient air, which does exceedingly heat, inflame, and dry their bodies; yet
to such as inhabit cold countries, and especially not accustomed thereunto, nor
the constitution impensiuely hot, requiring and forcing the same, it is by the
contrary, in no wise agreeable: for it does very greatly deiect their
appetite, destroy the natural heat, and overthrow the strength of the
stomach, and consequently, confounding the concoction, is the cause of
crudities, fluctuations, and windiness in the body.

What, in general are the commodities of wine?
Many and singular are the commodities of wine: for it is of it self, the
most pleasant liquour of all other, and was made from the beginning to
exhilarate the heart of man. It is a great encreaser of the vital spirits, and
a wonderful restorer of all powers and actions of the body: it very greatly
helps concoction, distribution, and nutrition, mightily strengthens the
natural heat, opens obstructions, discusseth windiness, takes away
sadness, and other hurts of melancholy, induces boldness and pleasant
behavior, sharpeneth the wit, abundantly reuiueth feeble spirits, excellently
amendeth the coldness of old age, and corrects the tetrick qualities which
that age is subject unto; and to speak all in a word, it makes a man more
courageous and lively, both in mind and body. These are in general the
commodities of wine, which are so to be understood, as that a mean and
frugality be had in the use of it, notintemperancie and drunkenness;
otherwise what can be more hurtful then wine, seeing that the same
immoderately taken, destroys the life and prosperous The discommodities of
wine immoderatly taken.
health, disturbeth the reason, dulleth the vnderstanstanding, confounds the
memory, causes the lethargy, palsy, trembling of the hands, and a general
weakness of the sinews. Wherefore let wine be moderately used, that neither
distillation, nor inflammation, nor exiccation, or drunkenness follow; for if
it be taken beyond measure, it will not be a remedy and confort for the
strength, but rather a poison and utter overthrow. But seeing that there are
diverse sorts of wine, and the same not indifferently agreeable to every age
and constitution, I will therefore (that every man may make choice of those
wines that are best agreeable for him) speak of the particular differences of
them, according to their several qualities, especially of such wines, as with
us are most usual.

White Wind and Rhenish-wine, do least of all wines Whitewine and Rhenish wine.
heat and nourish the body, they consist of a thin and penetrating substance,
wherefore they are quickly concocted, and very speedily distributed into all
parts of the body, and therefore they less annoy the head, then any other
urine. They cut and attenuate gross humors, provoke urine, and cleanse the
blood by the reins. They moysten the body, and canse sleep, mitigate the
pains of the head, proceeding from a great heat of the stomach, but
especially the Rhenish wine. They are most accommodate for those that are
young, for hot constitutions, for hot countries, and for the hot times of the
year, and for those that would be lean and slender: They are less hurtful,
for such as are feuorous, then other wines are; but being well mixed with
water, they are very profitable for all hot distemperatures. It is very
expedient to drink White Wind or Rhenish-wine in the morning fasting, and also
a little before dinner and supper, with a limmon A little sugar may be al^o
added thereto, as is hereafter showed; but it is more medicinable, in ^egard of
the penetratiue faculty of it, if it be taken without sugar.
macerated therein, and the juice pressed forth, especially for them that have
hot and dry stomachs, or are subject to obstructions of the stomach, of the
mesaraicke veins, of the liver, and of the reins: for it greatly refreshes
an hot and dry stomach, stirs up the appetite, cleanses away the sl mie
superfluities of the stomach, mesaraicke veins, and other obstructiue matter
in the passages, by way of urine. But it is very hurtful to drink White Wind
or Rhenish-wine with meat, or at the meals, or presently after meal; except
for such as are affected with too much astriction of the stomach, because they
deturbe the meats from the stomach, White and Rhenish wines, whether good to
be taken with meat, or after meal?
before they are concocted, and so cause them to pass crude and indigested,
whereby it comes to pass, that the whole body does greatly abound with
flateous crudities.

White and Rhenish wines are very pernicious for such as are rheumaticke, and
subject to fluxion of humors into the joints, or other parts of the body, and
therefore let such very carefully eschew the use of them.

Claret wine is very near of a temperate nature, and Claret wine.
somewhat of an astringent faculty, as the savor of it does plainly show: it
breeds good humors, greatly strengthens the stomach, quenches thirst,
stirs up the appetite, helps the concoction, and exhilarateth the heart,
it is most profitable for them that are of an hot constitution, for young men,
and for them that have hot stomachs, which it does excellently refresh. But it
greatly offends them that are of a cold and moist constitution, that abound
with crude humors, and that are subject to distillations from the brain,
especially if it be taken immoderately, or not with meat: for it, being taken
with excess, or out of meal, is of all wines (in regard of the rheumaticke
nature of it) the most pernicious: and therefore let such as are subject to
cold and rheumaticke diseases, beware how they use it. But verily, it being
moderately taken at meals, it is for temperate bodies, so as it be a pure and
quick wine, scarsely inferior to any of the regal wines of France: and for
such as are inclined unto heat, so they are not much subject unto rheumes,
excels both them, and all other: for it notably rectifieth the stomach, and
wonderfully comfort the same, breeds most healthful blood, and acceptable
to the heart. It is of all wines the best for choleric bodies, and the worst
for phlegmatic.

Sack is completely hot in the third degree, and of thin Sack.
parts, and therefore it does vehemently and quickly heat the body: wherefore
the much and untimely use of it, does ouer-heat the liver, inflame the blood,
and exciccate the radical humor in lean and dry bodies: wherefore to them
that are young, and all such as are of an hot and dry temperature, it is
greatly hurtful. But if it be moderately taken of them, for whom it is
agreeable, it makes the stomach strong to digest, helps the distribution of
the meats unto all parts of the body, concocteth crude humors, and consumes
the excrementall; and to speak all in a word, it mightily strengthens all
the powers and faculties of the body. It is most accommodate for old men, for
gross men, for stomachs that are weak, and full of cold and crude humors,
and for all that are of a cold constitution, and also for cold countries, and
for the cold and moist seasons of the year. It is cheifely to be drunken
after the eating of meats of gross substance, and such as consist of an
excrementall moisture, as Porke, fresh fish, etc. Whether S^cke be best, to be
taken with sugar, or without?


Some affect to drink Sack with sugar, and some with out, and upon no other
ground, as I think, but that, as it is best pleasing to their palletes. I will
speak what'I deem thereof, and I think I shall well satisfy such as are
judicious. Sack taken by it self, is very hot and very penetratiue, being
taken with sugar, the heat is both somewhat allayed, and the penetratiue
quality thereof also retardated. Wherefore let this be the conclusion: Sack
taken by it self, without any mixture of sugar, is best for them that have
cold stomachs, and subject to the obstructions of it, and of the mesaraicke
veins. But for them that are free from such obstructions, and fear lest that
the drinking of Sack, by reason of the penetratiue faculty of it, might
distemper the liver, it is best to drink it with sugar, and so I leave every
man that understands his own state of body, to be his own director
herein.

Malmesey is in operation very hot, and by reason that Malmesey.
it is sweet, it nourishes very much, and therefore the use of it is exceeding
profitable for old, cold, weak, and decayed bodies, for it mightily che^isheth
the natural heat, and fortifieth all the powers of the body. It is convenient
for all cold bodies; but for such as are hot, it is greatly hurtful, because
it is very easily converted into red choler. It kills worms in children, by
a certain natural and hidden property, if they drink it fasting.

Muskadell is even in all respects equal to Malmesey, Muskadell.
and therefore if that be wanting, this may well supply the turn: the use of
it is good for old and cold bodies; but very hurtful to such as are of an hot
temperature.

Bastard is in virtue somewhat like to Muskadell, and Bastard.
may also instead thereof be used: it is in goodness so much inferior to
Muskadell, as the same is to Malmesey, the use thereof is likewise hurtful to
young and hot bodies.

Canarie-wine, which bears the name of the Islands Canarie wine,
from whence it is brought, is of some termed a Sack, with this adiunct sweet,
but yet very improperly, for it differs not only from Sack, in sweetness
and pleasantness of taste, but also in color and consistence, for it is not
so white in color as Sack, nor so thin in substance; wherefore it is more
nutritive then Sack, and less penetratiue. It is best agreeable to cold
constitutions, and for old bodies, so that they be not too impensiuely
choleric, for it is a wine that will quickly inflame, and therefore very
hurtful unto hot and choleric bodies, especially if they be young.

Tent is a gross nutritive wine, and is very quickly concocted Tent.
into blood, but the same is oppilatiue, and therefore it is very hurtful for
such as are subject to obstructions. It is fit for them that are extenuated and
weak, and stand in need of much nourishment, and the same somewhat astrictiue.

Greek wine, which is of a blackish red color, is of a very temperate nature,
hotter then Claret, and sweeter, yet Greek wine.
with some pleasing sharpness adjoining, it breeds very good blood, reuiueth
the spirits, comfort the stomach and liver, and exceedingly cheereth and
strengthens the heart. For aged people, and all such as are naturally of a
weak state of body, it is most profitable.

Wine of Orleance is stronger then any other French wine, and very pleasant
withal in taste: it is for goodness Wine of Orleance.
scarsely, or not at all, inferior to Muskadell: It is hurtful to the
choleric, and all such as have hot livers and weak brains, for it does
quickly over heat the liver, and assault the head. But for other bodies,
especially if they incline to a cold constitution, and for cold and weak
stomachs, there is not a better wine, if there be so good. For it does not
only comfort the stomach, help the concoction, and viuifie the spirits, by
reason of a generous heat in it, but also furthereth the distribution of the
meats, and consequently a good nutrition through the mediocrity of its
substance. It is very hurtful to them that are young, and that are of an hot
and choleric temperature; but to the aged and phlegmatic very profitable.

There are also other French wines (would to God they Vin de Coussy, and d'
Hai, Regal wines.
were so common as Claret) which for pleasantness of taste, mediocrity of
color, substance and strength, do for most bodies, for ordinary use with
meats, far excel other wines: such are chiefly Uin de Coussy, and d'Hai, which
to the Kings and Peers of France are in very familiar use. They norably
comfort the stomach, help the concoction and distribution of the meats, and
offend not the head with vaporous fumes. They are Regal Wines indeed, and
very convenient for every season, age, and constitution, so they might be had.

Red wine is of an austere sharp taste, of an astringent Red wine.
faculty, and therefore only good for physic uses, to stop choleric
vomitings, and fluxes of the belly. There are also other sorts of wines,
altering according to the diverse nature of the vine, soil and air, whose
differences may by their color, taste and consistence, easily be discerned.
And here I would have you generally to observe in the use of wines, that those
wines, which are more mild, temperate, and least assaulting the head, are more
wholesome for the body: and those more hurtful, that are strong, acute and
vaporous, especially if there be not a mean in the use of them, and a respect
also of the age, complexion, and time of the year.

Moreover, it is to be understood, that wines differ very Wines differ in
goodness according to their age.
much, according to their age: for wines that are new, are unwholesome, and the
more new, the more unwholesome, for they have in them little heat, and consist
of a gross and excrementall substance; wherefore they do not help, but much
hinder the concoction and distribution, cause fluctuations in the body, and
cholick-torments, and abundantly breed obstructions of the liver, milt and
reins. But their superfluous and excrementall moisture is, in process of
time, concocted and overcome of the heat, and then they become more hot, more
pure, and much more wholesome.

And here it is to be observed, that all wines have not Why all wines ^aue not
the same time of continuance.
the same time of continuance; for there are some, which by reason of the
weakness of their heat, cannot long be kept, as Whitewine, Rhenish wine, and
Claret; for these, and such like, do in six or seven months, or within,
according to the smalnesse of them, attain unto the height of their goodness;
and after a year, do begin to decline, and lose much of their goodness,
especially the smaller sort of them. But the stronger sorts of wines, as Sack,
Muskadell, Malmesey, etc. are best, when they are two are three years old: for
these, by reason of their strong heat, do a long time reserve their perfect
vigor. And as these wines, being too new, are unwholesome, so be they also, if
they be too old, as when they have passed four or five years, because they
heat beyond measure; for the older they grow, the more heat they acquire, and
in process of time, the siccitie of them is correspondent to their heat.
Wherefore such wines, are rather merely to be reputed among medicaments, then
aliments, because they have a far greater faculty of altering the body unto
heat and siccity, then they have of nourishing. The use of them, especially
Wines too old are very hurtful.
if it be often, is hurtful to the sinews, and an enemy to procreation,
because they dry up the geniture, perturbe the understanding, and by reason of
their tart and vehement fumes, affect the membranes of the brain with a cruel
pungitiue pain. They are only, in the way of physic, good for weak and
moist bodies, that are decayed of their natural heat. Wherefore wines that are
over old, or too new, are to be eschewed; for those do too much heat, and
these do nothing at all, so long as they be new, and are so far away from
helping the concoction, as that even themselves are with difficulty digested.
It remains therefore, that neither the wine which is too new, nor that which
is too old, but that which is a mean between both, to be the most wholesome.

But whereas it has been said before, that new wines Whether all n^w wines do
breed obstructions?
breed obstructions, it is not so generally to be taken, as that all new
wines do breed obstructions; but that is to be understood of the must of
sweeter wines, which have in them no mixture of nitrous or biting lees, for
such verily do breed gross, flateous, and obstructiue humors. But those
wines, of which sort are White and Rhenish wines, that have in them any mixture
of nitrous lees, are so far off, from breeding obstructions, as that nothing
can be more contrary to their nature, because ^hey provoke urine, and strongly
move to stool, which they perform especially through the acrimonie of the
lees, and also through the abundance of wind, which they breed. Wherefore
those new wines alone are drunk without hurt, or with least, which consist of
a thin substance with nitrous lees, of which sort, as I have said, are White
and Rhenish wines, and these by reason of their quality of cooling, What new
wines not perfectly depurated, may without hurt be drunken, and of what bodies?
moistning, and of moving the belly, may be good for young men that have hot
stomachs, and such as are choleric by constitution; but are very hurtful for
old men, and such as are phlegmatic, so long as they are new and not
perfectly purged from their dregs. Very well therefore said Galen, that must or
new wine has no other use, but to move the belly, which faculty if it want,
it is extremely ill and hurtful to the body.

How many precepts ought there to be observed in the exhibiting of pure wine in
respect of the age.
Five: The first is, that it be not given unto children, for this will be as if
you should add fire unto fire: for they being of hot and moist temperature,
would thereby become over hot, and their heads also filled with vapors, whereof
ensue many evils, and sometimes the falling sickness. The second is, that it
be not given to youths, as from 14 years of age unto 25; for wine is unto them
most repugnant; because it does above measure heat their hasty, hot, and
agitating nature, and extimulate them (like mad men) unto enormious and
outrageous actions. The third is, that it be very moderately given, and that
not too often unto young men, as from 25 years of age unto 35, and that it be
also of the smaller sorts of wines, as Claret etc: especially if they are of
hot constitution: for otherwise it will make them prone unto wrath and
unlawful desires, dull the wit, and confound the memory. The uforth is, that
it be more liberally given unto them that are in their manhood and constant
age, as from 35 years unto 50: and let such, when they are past forty years
of age, begin to make much of the use of wine; and yet if they be of hot
constitutions, let them abstain from the stronger sorts of wines, especially
from the often use of them, because they will be offensive unto the head and
sinews. The fifth is, that it be given with a liberal hand unto old men, and
that also of the stronger sorts of wines, especially when they are in the
latter part of old age, as from 60 years upward unto the end of their life.
For unto old men there come four excellent commodities, by the use of pure
wine. The first and greatest Four principal commodities come unto the aged by
the use of pure wine.
commodity, seeing that they are cold, and for the most part almost without
good alimentall blood, is because it greatly corrects the coldness of their
age, and brings them unto a better temperature of heat, with increase of
blood. The second, because it expels sadness and melancholy, whereunto that
age is most subject. The third is, because it makes them to sleep well, which
by reason of the siccitie of the brain, and paucitie of vapors, many old men
oftentimes want. The fourth and last commodity is, because it remoueth
obstructions, whereunto they are very subject. To conclude, as pure wine is
most unmeet and hurtful for children and such as are young: so for old men
it is most convenient and wholesome.

Whether the use of Wine mixed with water be fit for all times and profitable
for all bodies?
IT has been a very ancient and profitable custom to mix wine with water in
the hot seasons of the year; for the wine by reason of the subtilitie of it,
does facilitate the penetration of the water, and carries the same, which
otherwise is of an obtuse operation, unto all the parts, at what time as they
shall need to be cooled and moistened. And from hence it is that wine much
alayed with water does better quench thirst then water alone. But it is not
profitable for all times; for in the winter, by reason of the cold and moist
constitution of that season, pure wine is rather to be used. Neither is it
convenient for all bodies; for to old men, to the phlegmatic, and such as
are of a cold temperature, or have weak stomachs, the use thereof is hurtful,
as may be gathered, by that which I have before spoken of the use of water.

But wine diluted is good for young men, for such as are choleric, and are of
an hot constitution, for hot countries, Wine alayed with water, for whom
profitable.
and the hot seasons of the year, especially in the summer; for then by reason
of the parching heat, wine alayed, that is to say, thin small waterish, and in
no wise strong, is to be drunken. By all which, it is apparent, that four
things are to be considered in the use of wine mixed with Four things to be
considered in the use of wines diluted.
water: the country, the time of the year, the temperature of the body, and
the age: for it is more or less to be alayed, according as the country, the
season of the year, the age, and temperature of the body shall be hotter or
colder. Whereunto you may also add, that the nature of the wine is also to be
respected, because it is more or less to be diluted according to the efficacy
and strength of it. But that the unlearned may not be deceived in the manner of
mixing wine with water, I will set down some particular forms thereof, which
I would have to be understood of the smaller wines, of wihch sort are the
White, the Rhenish, and the Claret, because they more avail for quenching the
thirst, and cooling of the body. For bodies therefore of an hot and dry
temperature in cold countries, and in the summer season, let three parts of
water be The manner of mixing wine with water for every temperature of body.
mingled with one of wine; or if the time be very hot, and the thirst
molestious, and the body also youthful, and strong, four parts of water may
be mingled with one of wine. But for such hot and dry bodies in hot countries,
and in the hot seasons of the year, the wine is so to be diluted, that only a
very little smacke of the wine be perceived. For such a mixture takes away the
hurts of the water, and sufficiently helps the distribution of it into the
body, for quenching the thirst and moistning the dried parts. But verily for
them that inhabit cold countries, and are of a mean temperature, it is best in
the summer season to mingle an equal portion of water and wine; or if the time
be very hot, and the age youthful and strong, they may take two parts of water
to one of wine: for that which is overmuch alayed or mixed with water, except
it be for necessities sake, as in a feuerous distemperature, is to Northern
people hurtful, because it does too much diminish their natural heat, hinder
the digestion, and breed inflations, and collicke torments. Wherefore wine not
much, but meanly diluted, is to our Country men, for the most part, in time of
health and heat agreeable, because it does best temper their humors, penetrate
and cool the parts of the body, and assist the natural heat, against the
ambient heat of the air: I say, in time of health, because the bowels burning
with a feuerous distemperature, it is lawful, yea very expedient, to mingle 6,
7, or 8 parts of water with one of wine, especially if the body shall be
youthful, and of an hot temperature, that the vehement heat, which otherwise
will quickly subvert the state of the body, may be extinguished. But for them
that are cold by temperature, or well stricken in years, pure wine is in time
of health more convenient, as I have before showed. And in any feuerous
distemperature, they may not in the mingling together of water and wine, to
alay their thirst, take above four, or at the most five parts of water to one
of wine, least that the hurts which water is likely to bring to such bodies,
should be greater then the commodity of cooling and quenching the thirst, as
may be gathered by that which I have before declared of the use of water. And
here understand, that wines of a thick consistence are not Why wines of a
gross substance ought not to be dilut^d?
to be diluted, because they are fulsome to the stomach, and by reason of the
subtilitie of the water, become more vaporous, and offensive to the head. Now
by that which has been said of wines, it may easily be collected, that it is
convenient for temperate bodies, and chiefly for old men, for the
phlegmatic, and such as are of a cold temperature, and for the cold seasons
of the year. But to young men, that have hot constitutions, and above all
others to the choleric, in whom the liver is over hot, and in the hot seasons
of the year, it is very hurtful, especially if it be strong. And it is also
hurtful to them that have weak brains, and feeble sinews; and therefore all
such must either forbear wine, or use it very moderately, and well tempered
with water in hot seasons.

Whether it be expedient for health to be drunk with wine once or twice in a
month?
O How impudently would our drunken potisuges vaunt themselves, if for the
health of the body, I should approve the cus^ome of being drunk once or twice
in a month! Verily, it has bin written and affirmed by some of the ancient
Physicians, and approved as a thing wholesome: because drunkenness observed in
manner aforesaid (for often drunkenness they did condemn) does (as they say)
by inducing sleep, alleuiate and make quiet the animal powers, provoke
vomiting, urine, and sweat: whereby it comes to pass, that the weak and
troubled spirits, through immoderate cares and perturbations, are reviued, and
pacified, and the evil humors not only eiected from the stomach, but also
expelled from all parts of the body. But this their assertion, as it is most
ungodly, so it is unto the health of the body most pernicious: for
drunkenness spoyleth the stomach, makes the blood waterish, hurts the
brain, dulleth the senses, destroys the understanding, debilitateth the
sinews, and su buerteth the powers of all the body. Wherefore seeing that all
drunkenness is evil, and hurtful to the true health of the body, and that
the disease is pernicious, which does chiefly distemper the place of
understanding; they erred very grossly, that thought drunkenness profitable
once or twice a month. Neither are their reasons of such validity, as that
they should persuade any to a custom no less hurtful to the mind then to
the body. For the animal powers defatigated, or otherwise disturbed, may be
helped with a safer, better, and a more godly remedy, then by an unquiet and
turbulent sleep, caused by means of drunkenness: for drunkards verily do
not enjoy sweet and quiet sleep, whereby the animal powers are truly
refreshed. In like manner, to procure vomiting, urine, and sweat, by means of
drunkenness, as it is wicked, so it is also beastly. Moreover by a remedy of
this kind, the hurt is far greater then the help; for drunkenness, besides
that it does extinguish the light of the understanding, causes the Apoplexy,
and such other like diseases of the brain, and oftentimes a sudden
suffocation. In a word, it does by much more hurt all the parts and faculties
of the body, then any way help by euacuation of superfluities, as the
barbarous Authors pretend for their assertion: for infinite are the hurts that
drunkenness brings unto man's body. Well therefore was Androcides wont to
say unto Alexander, being about to drink wine, that he might beware of
excess, O Rex memor sis te terrae sanguinem bibere. But here I will not deny,
but that it may be very lawful and expedient, for To drink ad hilaritat^m,
whether lawful and profitable.
them that are wont to be wearied with great cares and labors, to drink
sometimes until they be merry and pleasant; but not drunken: for in observing
such a rule, the aforesaid crapulentall hurts are not induced, but the spirits
and the whole body, are thereby so recreated, refreshed, and renewed, as that
the next day, they do more ingenuously undertake, and more readily execute
their accustomed businesses.

Whether Beer be more wholesome then Ale?
Beer that is too bitter of the hop (as many to save malt are wont to make it)
is of a fuming nature, and therefore it engenders rheumes and distillations,
hurts the sinews, offends the sight, and causes the headache, by filling
the ventricles of the brain with troublesome vapors: whereof not only the
internal, but also the external senses, are very much disturbed and hurted:
and therefore such Beer is worse then Ale, notwithstanding the obstructiue
faculty of it. But if Beer be not made too bitter, but that it have in the
making of it a proportionable quantity of hops, and that it be not drunk
before the bitter force of the hop be thoroughly spent and consumed, it is far
more wholesome then Ale: because the manifold force and efficacy of hops, do
manisestly declare the wholsomnes and excellency of Beer; for hopps do not
only remove obstructions of the liver, spleen, and kidneies, and cleanses
the blood from all corrupt humors, causing the same to come forth with the
urine, which it provoke; but also, makes the body soluble, by excreting
forth of yellow choleric humors. Wherefore seeing that hops do as well make
Beer a kind of medicinable drink, to preserve the powers and faculties of
the body, and to purge and cleanse the blood, as a common and daily drink to
extinguish thirst, I may very well conclude, that it is much better and
wholsomer then Ale, especially for such as be choleric, and have For whom
Beer is better then Ale.
hot stomachs, and that are subject to obstructions of the melt, liver, and
kidneies. But Ale is in the winter season in greatest use, because it cools
less then Beer, as most men think; but it does not by any other reason less
cool, (there being an equal proportion of malt in them both) but because it
has not such a penetratiue power as Whether Beer be colder in operation then
Ale?
Beer has: I know that many are of opinion, that Beer (in regard of the hot
and dry quality of the hop) is in operation hotter then Ale: but by their
leave, if the Beer be kept untouched, till the bitterness thereof be worn
out, I suppose it to be in operation colder then Ale, both in regard of the
penetratiue faculty of it; as also because it expels choler both by stool
and urine. Ale by reason of the grossenes of the substance of it, breeds
gross humors, and in that respect it is more nourishing then Beer, and
therefore more profitable for loose and extenuated bodies, and such as desire
to grow fat; but by reason of the obstructiue nature thereof, it is very
hurtful to the phlegmatic, to such as are gross, and full of humors. Now by
that which has been said, it may easily Whether Beer breeds rheumes more
then Ale?
be discerned, whether Beer more causes rheumes, and distillations, then Ale?
Many are of opinion that it does, which is true, if it be made too bitter of
the hop, or drunk while the bitterness remains; for the more bitter it be
drunken, the more it fills and stuffeth the head, and hurts the same. But
if it be kept till the bitterness be consumed, it is so far away from
breeding of rheumes, as that it is rather good to prevent them by removing
obstructions, the principal cause of rheumes and distillations.

How many properties ought there to be in the best and wholesomest Beer?
SIX: The first is that it be not sour, or of any other unpleasant savor, for
such is hurtful to the stomach. The second is, that it be clear and thin:
for that which is not clear and well defecated, abundantly increases gross,
flateous, and pituitous humors, and so consequently impinguateth the body to
the utter subversion of it: for it obstructeth the bowels, causes the stone
and strangurie, by filling the passages of the urine with gross, faeculent,
and slimie humors, breeds wind, and makes the breath short and painful.
The third is, that it be very well boiled: for that which is not well boiled is
fulsome to the stomach, and puffs up the body with windy humors. The
fourth is, that it be old and purged from his dregs; for such is of a
penetrating nature, of good juice, not windy, and acceptable to the stomach,
both for concoction and distribution. But that which is new, causes the same
hurts, which the gross and not well concocted does. And verily this propertic
is in Beer much to be regarded; for if it be not drunk till the bitte^nesse
of the hop be well consumed, it does nothing less then offend the brain and
sinews with vaporous fumes; but it does the better penetrate and quench the
thirst: and therefore stale Beer is chiefly to be desired in the summer, and
it is a drink (believe me) for all constitutions, but especially Stale Beer
most wholesome in the summer season.
for the choleric and melancholicke most wholesome. But here by the way it is
to be considered, that as Beer very new is unwholesome, so is that also which
is too old, as when it is grown sour, for it very much hurts the stomach,
the liver, and the brain. Therefore they greatly err, that keep Beer till
it be two, three, or four years old: for it is most hurtful to the body,
and pernicious to the understanding. But Beer of a middle age, as from one or
two months old, unto five or six, according to the strength of it, is the
best and wholsomest. And if in that space, it shall only chance to acquire
somewhat a sour smacke, it is not therefore of all men to be refused: for unto
choleric bodies because it represseth the acrimonie of choler, and also to
all them (by reason of the penetrating force which it obteyneth) that are
subject to the obstructions of the stomach, mesaraicke veins, spleen, liver,
lungs and reins it is most profitable. And if such as have the stone, or are
subject to the obstructions of the reins, do daily use such Beer, it will be
impossible, so that they err not in other things, that they should ever be
vexed with the stone, or any other great and painful obstruction of the
reins. The fifth is, that it be of an indifferent strength, not too strong nor
too small, because each excess is hurtful. For that Beer which is of a
middle strength, does heat that state of body which is over cold,
refrigerateth that which is too hot, and preserves the temperate. But that
which is stronger then a mean, is more meet for cold and moist bodies,
especially in the cold seasons of the year: and that which is weaker, for hot
and and dry bodies, especially in the spring and summer: for such bodies
require much cooling and moistning, which small Beer, because that it little
differs from the nature of water, does best effect; but it is rheumaticke,
and impensiuely hurtful to cold constitutions: For you must understand, that
Beer by how much the stronger it is, by so much the nearer it comes unto the
nature of wine, and by how much the smaller, by so much the nearer it
approaches unto the nature of water. Wherefore seeing that there is great
difference to be found in Beer, according to the strength and smalnes of it,
it becomes every man to have special respect of his own state and temper of
body, that thereby he may make use of that which shall be best agreeing unto
his nature. And here I advise all such as respect their own good, that they
drink not Beer that is very strong, but in steed of wine; (for if it be
stale, well depurated from dregs, and thoroughly boiled, it is in operation most
like unto wine) because the often use of it, is very greatly hurtful to the
integrity both of mind and body. And here I admonish our common ale-pot
drunkards, that it is worse to be drunk with Ale or Drunkenness with Ale or
Beer worse then with wine.
Beer, then with Wine; for the drunkenness endures longer, to the utter
ruin of the brain and understanding, by reason that the fumes and vapors of
the Ale or Beer that ascend to the head, are more gross, and therefore cannot
be so soon resolved, as those that rise up of wine: and by the same reason I
conclude, that it is worst of all to be drunk of Ale. The sixth and last
property is, that the malte whereof the Beer is made, be full of pure corn,
as of Barley or Oats, for then the drink made thereof must needs be the
better. And here it may be demanded, whether Beer made only of barley malte,
be better and wholesomer, then that which is made of barley and oaten Whether
Beer made only of barley malt be better and wholesomer then that which is made
of barley and oaten malte mingled together? A fourefold end of the use of drink.
malte in equal portions mixed together, or of two or three parts of barley
malte with one of oaten. To which I answer, that whereas the end of the use of
drinkeis fourefold: 1. To quench the thirst. 2. To temper the natur^ll heat. 3.
To moisten the inward parts. 4. To help the concoction and distribution of the
meats, that Beer made of barley and oaten maltemixed together, does more
effectually accomplish the first three without any manner of hinderance unto
the fourth, and is also of a more lively taste, if it be kept untouched, till
that it has gotten a sufficient stalenes: whereupon I may well affirm, that
Beer made of barley and oaten malt mingled together is better, then that which
is made of barley malte alone, especially in the hot seasons of the year: and
verily for hot and dry bodies, it is at all times much more convenient, because
it receives a singular cooling quality from the Oate.

Whether Cider and Perrie are for common use wholesome and profitable drinks?
Cider and Perrie are usual drinks where fruits do abound: they are cold in
operation, and better or worse, according to the fruits whereof they are made.
In respect of the coldness of them, they are good for such as have hot
stomachs or hot livers, and by reason of a very pleasing sharp taste which
they have, if they be drunk after they be four or five months old, they are
of a notable penetrating faculty, and do greatly help the weakness of the
stomach, and distemperature of it, proceeding of a hot cause: for they excite
the appetite, temper the dryness of the humors and inward parts, assuage the
thirst, and very greatly repress the ebullition of choler. Moreover, by reason
of their penetrable power, they provoke urine, and open the obstructions of the
stomocke, mesaraicke veins, milt, liver, and reins. They are wholesome for hot
and dry bodies, namely, for the choleric, but especially the atrabilaricke.
Yet they are not good to be used as common drink with meats except of them
that have very dry stomachs, and subject to too much astriction of the same,
because they cause the mea^s too speedily to descend from the stomach; and
besides that, the much and often use of them is very hur^full to the liver,
which by ouer-cooling, it does so enfeeble, and dispoliate of its sanguifying
faculty, that the color of the face becomes pale and riueled, and the skin
oftentimes polluted with a white spottie deformity, through an ill habit of
the parts, acquired by the too often use of them. Moreover, the much and often
use of these drinks do exceedingly weaken the brain and reins, whereupon
rheumes and seminall fluxions, aches of the joints, weakness of the limbs and
back do very quickly ensue. They are best to be taken for whom they are
agreeable, in an empty stomach, as mornings fasting, and about an hour or two
before meal, for then they better remove the obstructions, and attemper the
dryness of the parts. Only those that are atrabilary, which abound with
choler adust, because their stomachs are very dry, where-from, for the most
part the meats do very slowly, and that not without some difficulty descend,
may very profitably drink a draught or two thereof at their meals. But let
the phlegmatic, and Cider and Perie very hurtful unto cold bodies, and such
as are troubled with ye wind collicke.
such as are of cold constitutions, or subject unto the windy colic,
altogether eschew the use of these drinks, because they abundantly opplete
their bodies with waterish, crude, and windy humors, with a sudden
labefaction of the liver. They are meliorated, by putting to them sugar,
nutmeg, and especially ginger, which cheifely corrects their crude and windy
quality. Of these two sorts of drinks, caeteris paribus, Perrie for
pleasantnes and goodness has the precedencie, which in taste is like unto a
small Rhenish wine, from which it differs but little in operation. But you
must understand that these drinks while they be new, are very hurtful, because
they consist of much excrementall moisture, which abundantly fills the body
with crude and flateous humors. But after that, the excrementall superfluity
of them, by process of time, is concocted and absumed, which in four or five
months, will very well come to pass, the use of them (as may be very
profitable to cool, to moysten, I have showed and to open obstructions.

Whether Metheglin and Mead are wholesome for every age and constitution of
body?
MEtheglin is a very strong kind of drink, made of two parts of water, and
one of honey, boiled together and scummed very clean, and if Rosemary, Hyssop,
Time, Orgaine, and Sage, be first well boiled in the water, whereof you make the
Metheglin, it will be the better. And afterward, when you boil the same
water with honey, if you also boil in it a quantity of As to every gallon of
water, one ounce of ginger, scraped clean and sliced.
ginger, three or four wambles about, after that it is clean scummed, or el
hang the ginger sliced thin in a linen bag, by a thread, in the barrel,
wherein you put the Metheglin, it will be much the better, and a drink
exceeding wholesome in the winter-season, especially for old folks, and such as
be phlegmatic, and have feeble sinews, cold stomachs and troubled with the
cough. For besides the singular faculty that it has, of heating the body, it
has also a very special abstersorie property, for the remoouing of fleame,
residing and sticking in the stomach, brain and sinewie parts: It is best in
the mornings fasting. But it is not good for such as are hot by constitution,
nor in the hot seasons of the year, because it overmuch heateth the body, and
is very quickly turned into red choler, and therefore let such as are
choleric, beware how they use it. If in their old age, cold fleame shall
somewhat abound in their stomachs, then sometimes mornings fasting, a small
draught thereof may be profitable for them. It must not be drunk while it is
new, for then, because it is not fined from the dregs, nor the crudities
thereof digested, it is very windy and troublesome to the belly. But after
that it has well purged it self, and settled in the vessel three or four
months, and made as before described, there is not for very cold, old and
phlegmatic bodies, especially in the cold seasons of the year a better
drink, as by the properties thereof above showed, may be collected.

Mead or Mead, is like to Metheglin, the cheifest difference is, that it is
not so hot in operation; for Mead is Mead.
made of one part of honey, and four times so much of pure water, or more, and
boiled till no scum does remain. This is a drink of excellent operation, very
profitable to According to the strength you desire to have it, or as the
temperature of the body shall require.
all bodies, from the beginning of April, to the beginning or middle of
September, for the preserving of health, to be taken in an empty stomach, for
it cleanses the breast and lungs, causes an easy expectoration, provoke
and procures urine abundantly, and makes the belly soluble. If hyssop, time,
pellitory of the wall, parsley-roots and fennel roots be first well boiled in
the water, whereof you make the Mead, and ginger also boiled, or hanged in the
barrel, as I have before showed in the making of Metheglin, it will be of a
more effectual operation, for the purposes aforesaid, and a drink believe me,
beyond all other, profitable for them that are subject to the obstructions of
the breast, and reins of the back. But it must not be drunken until the
crudities thereof be concocted, and the dregs settled in the bottom, which in a
month will be well effected.

Thus much concerning the sorts of drinks, which are in common use among us:
there are also sundry other sorts made for our necessities, as Aqua vi^ae, Rosa
solis, Cynamon-water, Hypocras, etc. of all which, because they are to be used
as medicines, I will not speak particularly: only of the first of them,
because that upon any necessity, it is in greatest use and request among us, I
will for the use of such, who now and then need such a comfortable drink,
breefly entreat.

Whether Aqua vitae be good and agreeable for all bodies.
Aqua vitae has his denomination, in that it recouereth and maintains life:
The common manner of making it, is to distill it out of the lees of wine, or of
the lees of strong ale and wine together, by adding thereto licorise,
Annis-seeds and grains; but this common vendible Aqua vitae, both in regard of
the gross substances, from whence it arises, as also of the rude manner of
preparing and distilling it, may more rightly be named Aqua mortis, the water
of death; for it causes more hurt, then commodity to them that use it:
wherefore I will here describe an easy manner for the making of an Aqua vitae,
yet very effectual for them that need such a comfortable drink.

Take of the tops of Rosemarie, of Sage, of Marioram, of Orgaine, of Time, of
Wormwood, of Speremints, of Balm, of each one handful, of Ginger scraped
clean one ounce, of Nutmegs and Cynamon of each half an ounce, of Cloves,
Mace, Pepper and Grains, of each a quarter of an ounce, of Galingale roots
sliced one ounce, of Raisins of the Sun cut through the middle one pound, of
Fennellseedes and Annis-seedes of each two ounces, of Liquorice scraped clean
and cut into thin slices, half a pound: bruize the Spices and Seeds a little,
and break the herbs between your hands, then put all together into a gallon
or two of Muskadell, Sack, or such like strong wine, and so let them infuse in
an Lymbeck-pot close stopped, four and twenty hours upon hot embers, and the
next morning distill them with a very temperate fire, and take especial care,
that the head of your Lymbecke be kept cold continually with fresh water, and
that the bottom thereof be fast luted, that none of the vapors breath forth.
Out of a gallon of liquor, you may draw a quart of excellent Aqua vitae. And if
then to the feces in the pot, you will add a gallon of strong ale, or lees of
wine, or of them both, with half a pound of Liquorise, four ounces of
Anisseeds, and an ounce of Grains, and distill it again, you shall draw an
Aqua vitae, good for your families and poor neighbors in their necessities.

Now to the question I answer, that for the most part there is not any water in
use, which can better fortify life, and hinder the coming on of old age, then
the aforesaid Aqua vitae: for it very greatly comfort a weak stomach,
expels wind, puts off all melancholic passions, preserves the humors
from corruption, and excellently prevails against swounding; for by reason of
a notable penetrable power that it has, it quickly goes unto the heart, and
wonderfully raises up faint and feeble spirits. But the use thereofis not
alike wholesome, and good for all bodies; Aqua vitae very hu^tfull unto dry
bodies.
for unto them that are lean, and of a dry nature, and in the summer, it is
very pernicious, because it dries up, and (as it were) scorcheth their inward
parts, especially the liver, and destroys the natural moisture: But to old
men, to gross and moist bodies, it is very profitable, for it fortifieth their
stomachs, concocteth excrementall humors, discusseth wind, and defends them
from the lethargy, apoplexy, and other cold diseases, unto which, by reason
of their moist habit of body, they are very subject. Wherefore the moderate use
thereof is to he permitted unto cold and phlegmatic bodies, especially in
cold and moist seasons, to wit, upon the taking of much meat, or when the
stomach shall be vexed and distended with wind, the quantity of a spoonefull or
two at a time, well sweetened with sugar, that it may the less affect the
brain and nostrils, or cause any hurt to the liver, through its fervent and
penetrating heat. If it be taken with an equal portion of wormwood water, as
a spoonful or two of the one, and so of the other, with sugar also in it, it
exceedingly comfort the stomach, helps the concoction, and discusseth
wind, without causing any manner of hurt to the liver: and being taken in this
manner after a great meal, or whenever the stomach shall be ill-affected,
by reason of windiness of otherwise, it is not only good for the
phlegmatic, and such as are cold by constitution, but agreeable also and
wholesome for all other bodies. But if such as are impensiuely hot and dry in
their state of body, stand in need of the help thereof in the like cases, I
advise them to take two or three parts of wormwood water, and one of
Aquavitae, mingled with sugar, and so they may securely and profitably use it.

OF THE FLESH OF Beasts and Fowls. SECT. III.
Whether all Beasts and Fowls, are for goodness of meat, more wholesome being
young, then when they are grown unto fuller age?
BEfore I answer to the question, you must understand, that we make four
differences in the age of beasts, that is to say, the time of sucking, of
yought, of middle age, of old age.

Now to the question, I answer negatiuely, for those beasts or fowls, that
have by nature moist flesh, are for goodness of meat more wholesome, when they
are grown to fuller age, then when they are sucking, or very young, because
that then they are over moist, and of an excrementall, slimie, and phlegmatic
juice, which as they increase in age, is much wasted and dried away: wherefore
Hoggrels, and young Weathers, are for goodness of meat better and more
wholesome, then sucking Lambs: and it is the like also of Porke;
notwithstanding, that rosting Pigs are of mostmen greatly desired, and for some
certain bodies very profitable. For verily, these kinds of beasts, that are
naturally moist, are when they are young, wholesome enough, yea, very profitable
in the summer-season, for choleric and dry bodies, because they yield a moist
nourishment, which does well temper and amend the dry temperature, or rather,
the intemperate dryness of such bodies. To all other bodies, especially such
as are cold and moist, they are exceedingly hurtful, because a very moist
kind of food, does in them increase a very moist distemperature, and quickly
makes the same altogether sickly. But those Beasts or Fowls, whose flesh is
naturally dry, are best when they are young and sucking, for then their
dryness is attempered, with the moisture of their youngnesse. And by how much
the younger they are, by so much the moyster they are, and consequently of
easier concoction, and also of better juice, after that they have once attained
unto perfection of flesh. Wherefore Kids and Calves are, for goodness of meat,
better then Goats and Oxen, and the like is also to be said of Pigeons, Fawnes,
etc. And those verily, that are of a mean temper and consistence of flesh, are
for good nourishment the best, and not only in their young, but also in their
full and middle age, very wholesome and agreeable for all bodies. Such are
Capons, Turkies, Phesants, etc. But generally, all beasts and birds, that are
of the fourth age before mentioned, whether they be naturally dry or moist,
are naught and unwholesome; for they are tough, of a very hard concoction, and
breed an evil and melancholic juice; yet they are good enough for robustious
and rusticke bodies.

Whether flesh that is corned and seasoned with salt, be wholsomer then that
which is unsalted?
I Answer, that flesh which is poudred, or seasoned with salt, for the space of
one, two, three, four, or fiuedaies, according as the nature of the flesh, the
complexion of the eater, and the time of the year shall require, is far more
wholesome then that which is fresh and unsalted: because, the salt does purify
the flesh, and make it the more sauoury by drying up and consuming the watery
and excrementall moisture of it. And this is not to be understood of all sorts
of flesh, but of the grosser kinds, as of beef, porke, etc: for such are
wont, and only ought to be sprinkled, seasoned, and conserved with salt. And
I have, not without good reasen before limited the time for seasoning of flesh
with salt, according as the nature of the flesh, the complexion of the eater,
and the time of year shall require, because the flesh which is very gross and
moist, requires a longer salting, that the superfluous moisture thereof may be
the better exsiccated. A complexion hot and dry does require moister meats; but
a cold and moist constitution requires dryer: to the one therefore a shorter,
to the other a longer time of salting the meats is best agreeable. And in
respect of the time of the year, it is sufficient in the Spring and Summer to
have it powdered a day or two; in the Autumn for the space of two or three
days; and in the Winter four or five days at most, because man's body at
that time, by reason of the cold constitution of the season, does more abound
with superfluities. But the flesh which is longer preserved in salt, or brine,
or after that it is salted, hanged up to dry near the fire, which we commonly
call, Martimasse beef, does loose his purity, and is of very hard digestion:
it breeds choleric and melancholicke humors, very apt for adustion,
especially that which is hauged up to dry, and therefore it is to such as be
choleric and melancholic, though for the most part well pleasing to their
pallats, most hurtful. I leave it only as conuenientfor laboring men, and
such as have very strong stomachs, or like to have their meat commend their
drink.

Why is that flesh which is meanly or competently fat, more whole some and
more nourishing then that which is very fat, or lean?
THe reason is, because that flesh which is ouer-fat is hurtful to the
stomach, by causing a nauseatiue disposition, and yields little nourishment,
and the same not good but excrementall: for it is quickly converted into
phlegm, choler, and putrid vapors. And flesh that is lean is of a dry
substance, hard of concoction, and of little and ill nourishment. But flesh that
is meanly fat, is the best and easiest of concoction; for it gives purest
nourishment, and is most agreeable to the stomach. And here by the way observe,
that of flesh the whitest is the best; for by how much it does in color
degerate from whiteness, by so much it is of worse juice.

Whether Kids flesh be better then Lamb? And whether Lamb then Mutton?
THe Arabian Physicians prefer Kids flesh before all other flesh; because (as
they say) it is of a more temperate nature, and breeds pure blood, which is
in a mean between hot and cold, subtle and gross. Ysaac says, that sucking
Kids are for taste, nourishment, and digestion better then other; whose opinion
I approve, because the milk gives and maintains in them an excellent
moisture: wherefore their flesh is singularly good for hot, dry, and extenuated
bodies, and for them that have weak stomachs, and are from some long sickness
upon a recovery to health, so they eat it roasted. But by reason that it
somewhat abounds with an excrementall moisture, it is hurtful for the aged,
and such as are phlegmatic, and that have cold and moist stomachs. For
although Kids flesh be deemed to be temperately hot and moist in the first
degree; yet it is more moist then hot, and withal somewhat slimie: wherefore
to their opinion concerning the goodness of Kids flesh above all other, I see no
reason why I should yield my subscription; for I think Veale to be for goodness
and wholsomnes of meat, rather superior, then any way inferior unto it, as
shall be hereafter showed. But howsoever it be to an Arabian stomach, or
whether the Kids of Arabia be in substance less moist and slimie, then ours,
as it is very likely, I suppose Kids flesh to be somewhat better then Lamb:
for Lamb by reason of much viscous humiditie in it, increases crude and
phlegmatic humors. Wherefore it is not so wholesome in the winter, and former
part of the spring, as it is from the latter end of the spring unto the
beginning of Autumn, in which space (by reason that the air is commonly hot
and dry) such moist flesh is best agreeable unto man's body. It is most
profitable for them that are by constitution hot and dry, and that abound with
adust and choleric humors; but it is not convenient for old men, or for them
that are phlegmatic, especially the much use of it; for by reason of the much
moisture which it has, it repleteth their stomachs with crude and phlegmatic
humors. Lamb of two or three months old is the best; for the younger it is,
the moreit abounds with a crude superfluous moisture; and if it be well
roasted, it gives the better nourishment, because the most part of the crude
superfluities in it, are by the force and esficacie of the fire, well wasted
and digested. Lambs that are weaned, and afterward fatted, are wholsomer for
meat then when they were sucking, because their flesh does less abound with
superfluous moisture; and if they have their feeding in hilly pastures, they
yield the purer nourishment, and are a very good meat, for those that have
weak stomachs, or live a studious kind of life. The flesh of Hogrells and
young Weathers is a right wholesome and temperate meat, it breeds very good
blood, and is easily digested: it is better then Lamb, for it yields a more
pure and substantial nourishment, and is convenient for every season, age, and
temperature. The flesh of elder sheep is not so wholesome, for it is of a
dryer nature, of harder concoction, and of worser juice. It is Mutton.
convenient for laboring men, and such as have good stomachs to digest. Of
Mutton therefore that is the best, which is of an year or two old, or
thereabout; and if it be of a young Weather, it is best of all, for it is of a
very temperate nature, of an easy concoction, and of pure, firm, and copious
nourishment.

Whether Veale for goodness of nourishment be better then Beef?
VEale, if it be competently fat, is pleasant to the taste, and easily
digested; it is very nutritive, and the nourishment thereof is exceeding good.
For hot and dry bodies, for those that are weak, and given to a studious kind
of life, it is far better then Beef. Moreover Veale is a more odo^iferous
flesh then any other, and in this respect it is far before Kids flesh, and not
behind it in any other; but rather (in my opinion) it shall as well for
pleasantness of taste, and goodness of juice, as for sweetness of savor have
the precedencie of Kids flesh. And I belecue that if those Arabic Physicians
had ever tasted of our Veale, they would without any scruple, have given unto
it the pre-eminence. But you must not understand this my assertion of all Veale
indifferently, for it must not be too young, nor lean; for if it be too young,
then it is over moist, crude, and excrementitiall; and if it be lean, then it
is not so nutritive, nor so acceptable to the taste and stomach. But if it be
of the age between one and two months, and competently fat, then it is of an
excellent temperament, and nutriture, and for every season, age, and
temperature exceeding all quadrupedall creatures. And although Veale be for all
bodies convenient, yet for those that are hot and dry, by reason of the pure
and pleasant moisture thereof, it is most profitable. The flesh of Steeres,
which we commonly call Steere-beefe, and so also of Heifers, is of Steer or
Hei^er Beef.
a firmer substance then Veale, it gives to the body much good and
substantial nourishment, and therefore for them that are healthy, and of a
sound slate of body, it is not inferior unto Veale, though it be not
altogether of so pure a temperature, and nourishment. Beef of Oxen that are of
middle age, is for goodness of juice, and easiness of concoction next unto it:
it is agreeable enough for young men that are of perfect health, and for any
that have good stomachs, and are of a firm habitude of body. But Beef of
older Oxen is of a very hard and gro^e substance, it is very hardly digested,
and breeds a thick, gross, and melancholic blood, which by reason of the
difficult distribution of it, causes obstructions, especially of the spleen,
and melancholicke diseases: and therefore to melancholicke bodies it is most
hurtful. But to rusticke men, that labor painfully in the fields, and for
those that inhabit cold countries, whose concoctiue faculty is commonly
strong, it is very agreeable; for by reason of their great labor, and strong
internal heat, they will too soon resolve the juice of lighter meats. But to
those that live a delicate or studious kind of life, it is very hurtful. Now
by this that has bin declared, it may plainly appear, that those hurts that
are of Galen in his third book of the faculties of nourishments attributed
unto Beef, ought to be understood of old Beef, which in truth is unsavory,
tough, and of very hard concoction. Bulls Beef is of a rank and unpleasant
taste, of a thick gross Bulls Beef.
and corrupt juice, and of a very hard digestion. I commend it unto poor hard
laborers, and to them that desire to look big, and to live basely.

Whether Swines flesh be no less wholesome, then it was estimated to be, by
most of the ancient Physicians?
SWines flesh, because of the strong and abundant nourishment that it
yields, as also of the likeness that it has unto man's flesh both in favor
and taste, is of Galen and other of the ancient Physicians, commended above all
other kinds of flesh in nourishing the body. But in my opinion, the choice of
flesh, is rather to be taken, from an odoriferous pleasantnes of the same,
laudable substance, good temperature, easy concoction, and goodness of juice
that it breeds, then from the strongnes of nourishment that it gives, or the
aforesaid similitude. In respect of all which, Veale, Mutton, and many other
kinds of flesh are to be preferred before porke. I confess that porke is to
most peoples pallats very pleasing, and that it, so it be well digested,
yields unto the body much and firm nourishment; but it is with difficulty
digested, and the nourishment thereof is too moist, gross, glutinous, and
obstructiue. Wherefore I will here advertise all pallat-pleasers, that they
shall sooner surfeit, and that more dangerously, with porke, then with any other
flesh: and that pork is good and wholesome for bodies that be young, strong, and
exercised in great labor, and not disposed to oppilations, for the choleric,
and them that desire to be fat. And of such, must Galen and other Physicians,
that have so greatly written in the commendation of Porke be understood. And in
very deed, hot, healthy, and strong bodies, that undergo great labors,
require (for the conservation of their strengths) much firm and durable
nourishment, such as Porke, in regard of the gross substance of it, does very
effectually suppeditate. But seeing that Porke is of hard digestion, and in
substance more gross then convenient, it is not good for them that be aged,
that are gross, that have weak stomachs, or that lead a sitting or studious
kind of life. For in such bodies it causes obstructions of the mesaraicke
veins, liver, and reins, the gowte and dropsy, especially if they shall be
cold and moist by constitution: for unto such, is Porke very greatly hurtful,
because in them it is wholly converted into crude and phlegmatic humors.
Wherefore let such as are phlegmatic, aged, or subject unto obstructions, or
have weak stomachs, altogether abstain from the use of Porke. There is great
difference in Porke according to the age of it: the best is that which is of
the age from six months unto a year, and not over fat: for then it abounds
more with superfluous moisture, nourishes less, and is more fulsome to the
stomach.

Bacon is not good for them that have weak stomachs: Bacon.
For it is of hard digestion^, and breeds dust and choleric humors. But for
strong laboring men, and them that have good stomachs, it is convenient enough.
A Gammond of Bacon is of the same nature, but not so good, for Gammond of Bacon.
it is of harder digestion, and the best virtue that it has, is to commend a
cup of wine unto the pallat.

Brawne is in no wise an wholesome meat, for it is of Brawne.
hard digestion, and breeds gross and tough humors: If it be young, it is
the better, for then it is the more tender and of easier concoction; yet
nevertheless in regard of the crude grosenesse of it, it breeds ill juice in
the body. It is commonly eaten at dinner before other meats, which custom is
very preposterous, for it lets the good concoction and distribution of other
meats. And because it is a meat of gross juice and hard concoction, we
commonly use to drink a draught of strong wine or ale, presently after the
eating of it, to help the digestion, but good wine is badly bestowed upon such
a meat, for howsoeuerit may heat and comfort the stomach, yet it can never
cause that meat to be converted into good nutriment.

But it is worthy of inquiry, whether sucking pigs, that are of most men
greatly desired, which we commonly call Rosting Pigs.
Rosting Pigs, yield good and wholesome nourishment to the body? The flesh of
rosting Pigs is very moist and excrementitiall; yet very pleasant to the taste,
and easily digested: it is very wholesome for all choleric and dry bodies,
because the juice that is bred thereof does excellently temper the overmuch
heat of choleric blood, and very profitably moisten the inward parts. But for
the aged, and those that are phlegmatic, and cold by constitution, it is
greatly hurtful: for by reason of the overmuch moisture of it, it breeds in
them abundance of crude and phlegmatic humors. And verily for the same cause
there is not a better and wholsomer meat for hot and dry bodies; but in regard
of the ouer-moist and slimie nature of it, a cup of good wine will doevery well
with it, as Claret, for such as are hot and dry by constitution; but for other,
Sack is best agreeing with it.

Whether Venison of Fallow Dear be wholesomer then that of Red Dear? And
whether the flesh of Conies be better then them both?
VEnison, whether it be of Fallow Dear, or of Red, is of hard digestion, and
of ill juice; for it engenders gross melancholicke blood, which quickly
causes obstructions of the liver and milt. Wherefore let such as have weak
stomachs, and those also that are by constitution melancholicke, or subject to
obstructions eschew the use of it. It was verily a good invention for amending
of the noisomnesse of Venison, to drink Claret wine plentifully with it,
because that wine causes it to be the better digested, and is also of a
contrary nature to the humor that Venison most of all breeds. Both kinds of
flesh are of a dry temperature, and therefore the fatter the flesh is, the
better it is (especially to eat it cold, because that then the fatnes of it, is
not so fulsome to the stomach as when it is hot) for the siccitie of it being
amended by the fat, is reduced unto a certain mediocritie in such flesh. And
if they be well hunted before they be killed, their flesh is the wholsomer, for
by often and long coursing of them, their blood becomes more thin and
subtle, and the evil humors dissipated, by reason whereof, the flesh is more
easily digested, and yields better nourishment. The younger and the fatter
Dear are to be chosen, because they are of a moister temperature, and
consequently of a softer substance, of easier concoction, and of wholsomer
nourishment. For if they be old, or Jeane, they are of a very hard concoction,
troublesome to the stomach, and unwholesome for the body, because they breed
an earthie and melancholicke blood. I judge the flesh of Fallow Dear to be
wholesomer then of the Red, for it is of a better savor and not of so gross
and hard a substance, and therefore of easier concoction, and of wholsomer
juice. Some do suppose venison of Fallow Dear to be of a middle nature
betweeene the flesh of Red Dear and of Wethers; for after their judgment, it
is by so much moyster, softer and easier of concoction then the flesh of Stags,
as it is drier, harder, and of more difficult concoction, then the flesh of
Weathers: which opinion, because it has some probability, I will not much
contradict: only I think that there is a nearer paritie of nature between
the flesh of Fallow Dear, and of the Red, then there is between that of
Fallow Dear, and of Weathers: for in all respects, caeter is paribus, both for
tenderness of substance, easiness of concoction, pleasantness and goodness
of juice, the flesh of Weathers does far excel it, although some, by reason
of the scarsitie of Venison, may otherwise deem.

To the second question I answer, that a little fat Cony, is for goodness and
wholsomnesse of meat, better then a great Bucke, for although Venison be of
some greatly estimated and desired; yet notwithstanding the raritie and caritie
of it, Rabbets are of a far more excellent nourishment, and for goodness of
meat, but little inferior to the Capon: for they give unto the body a most
wholesome, clean, firm, and temperate nutriture. They are very easily
concocted, and are good for every age, and temperature of body, especially for
the sick, and such as lead a studious, or delicate course of life.

Whether Hares are so profitable for meat, as they are delightful for hunting?
HAres flesh is of a very dry temper, of a hard digestion, and breeds
melancholy more then any other flesh: wherefore it is not for the goodness of
the flesh, that Hares are so often hunted, but for recreation and exercising of
the body: for it makes a very dry, thick, and melancholic blood. The
younger are better then other, by reason that the natural siccity of the flesh
is somewhat attempered, by the moisture of the age. And by the same reason, the
fattest are also best. They are scarcely commendable for any age or
constitution; but most offensive to them that be aged, that are of a
melancholic temperature, or that lead a studious kind of life.

Why is Goats flesh accounted unwholesome, seeing that Kid is of a very
commendable nourishment, as has been showed?
THe wholsomnesse of Kids flesh, is in regard of the youngnesse of it; for as
Kids grow to be Goats, their flesh acquireth a stinking savor, and is also of
a very tough and clammie substance: wherefore it is unpleasant to the taste,
hurtful to the stomach, and breeds a clammie, and fleamie nourishment; yet
in the end of the Spring, and the beginning of Summer, they are better for
meat, then at other times: for then, by reason of the great plenty of young
sprigs and shoots, which yield unto them fittest nourishment, they are fatter,
and consequently of tenderer substance, of easier concoction, and of better
nourishment. There are also diverse other kinds of flesh, which poor people in
time of scarsitie, are oftentimes constrained to make use of: but because they
are altogether unwholesome, and alienate from the taste of wholesome meats, I
will let them pass; only I marvel, why frogs and snailes, are with some
people, and in some count^ies, in great account, and judged wholesome food,
whereas indeed they have in them nothing else, but a cold, gross, slimie, and
excrementall juice: wherefore I conclude, that they are altogether unwholesome,
and that the custom of eating such meat is naught, and that they have very
corrupt stomachs, that desire such corrupt meats.

And thus much of the flesh of beasts. Now I will entreat of fowls, and first
of such as are tame.

Whether does the Capon, for goodness and wholsomnesse of flesh, excel all
other domesticke Fowls?
THe Capon being fat and not old, is generally for all Capon.
bodies, and in all respects, for wholsomnesse of meat, the best of all Fowls:
for it is easily digested, and acceptable to the stomach, and makes much,
good, firm, and temperate nourishment, almost altogether free from excrement.

Hens, if they be young, and meanly fat, are also of easy Hens.
concoction, and of very good and excellent nourishment, even equal to the
Capon; but the nourishment which they make, is not altogether so strong. To
conclude, Hens and Capons deserve one and the same praise of breeding good and
perfect blood. They are very agreeable for every season, age, and constitution.

Chickens, both for pleasantness of juice, and easiness of concoction, are
very grateful to the stomach; for Chickens.
there is not any flesh of lighter digestion, or more agreeable with all
natures. They give a pure and light nourishment, and therefore they are best
for them that live a dainty kind of life, for weak stomachs, for them that
be sick, or weak, and sickly by nature. They are the best, that Pullets.
are grown somewhat great (especially the Pullets) because they are somewhat
of a firmer nourishment; but the male ones, which are called Cockrels, when
they are grown Cockrels.
big, are not so good, and the greater they are, by reason of their salacitie,
the worser they are, because they are of harder concoction, and not of so
pleasant and well sauouring juice: wherefore their stones are taken from them,
and afterward, Caponets.
as they grow in good plight of body, their flesh is of all Fowls the best
and wholsomest for Students, and such as live delicately, or are by nature
weak and sickly: for it is very easily digested, and yields much,
temperate, and excellent nourishment. Ginnies, or Tu^k. es.


The flesh of Turkies, is of a temperate nature, of pleasant taste, not of hard
concoction, of much, good, and firm nourishment, agreeable to every age and
constitution. If the legs and hinder parts of them were, for easiness of
concoction, and goodness of meat, answerable to the breast and fore part, and
the fat also proportionable to the flesh in goodness, they were scarsely
inferior to the Capon; but the fat is grosser, and of worser concoction, then
of any other Foul, very offensive to the stomach, and hurtful to such as
have the gout, or subject unto a defluxion of humors. But although the sat be
not commendable, yet the flesh of the fat Turkey is best, and most wholesome,
because it is of easier concoction, and of more pure and temperate nourishment.
They are to be chosen from the age of six months, unto a year and half, but
they of eight, nine, or ten months old, are the best; for it they be under the
age of six months, then their flesh is too crude and excrementitiall; but most
of all hurtful unto moist and full bodies, and such as are subject unto the
falling down of humors into the legs and feet. And if they be above a year
and half old, then their flesh is of harder substance, and consequently of
more difficult concoction, and of worser nourishment: and therefore most unfit
for weak stomachs and infirm bodies.

The flesh of Pecocks is of hard substance, of evil temperament Pecocks.
and nutriment: for it is hot and dry, digested with difficulty, and breeds
a thick and dry melancholic blood: wherefore it is a convenient meat for them
that have strong stomachs, and that use great labor, for it yields unto such
a strong and fit nourishment. They are best to be eaten in the winter, and if
after that they be killed, they be hanged in a cold place, three or four
days, or longer, if it be in a cold and dry season, the hardness of their
flesh, which is more then of any other Foul, will be somewhat amended. Those
that are very young, and not above a year old, are the best: for as they are
of a more soft and tenderer substance: so also they are of easier concoction,
and of wholsomer juice. They are very hurtful to the melancholic, and to
such as live an easy kind of life.

Pigeons are of an hot temperature and of easy concoction: Pigeons.
they breed an inflamed blood, and extimulate carnal lust: wherefore they are
not commendable for those that be choleric, or inclined unto feuors: they are
good for old men, and very wholesome for them that be phlegmatic; but being
boiled, they are wholesome enough for all hot and choleric bodies, because the
heat of them is tempered by the moisture of the water. They are most convenient
for cold seasons. It is very good, when you eat them roasted, to stuff them
with sour grapes, or unripe goose-berries, and to eat with them the sour
grapes or berries, in manner of a sauce, with butter and a little vinegar also,
if it shall not be sharp enough of the berries, because the sour grapes or
goose-berries, do excellently qualify and temper the heat of them: and being
this way used, they are also the more agreeable for hot and dry bodies. The
eating of Pigeons in time of the plague is much commended, because they are
thought to make a man safe from infection: which thing verily is not repugnant
to reason, for they breed a strong, hot, and somewhat a thick blood. They are
best to be eaten, when they are almost ready to fly, and before their heads
be pulled off, let them blood with a knife upon the inner side of the wings,
for by that means their vehement heat will be somewhat abated. The old Doves,
both for their very great heat and dryness, and also for their hardness of
digestion, are to be eschewed.

Whether does the Phesant, for sweetness and wholsomnesse, excel all other
wild and syluestriall birds? And whether the Teale all other water foul?
THe Phesant is in all qualities temperate, of easy concoction, and
comfortable to the stomach, and of much and excellent nourishment, very
profitable for every age and constitution. For sweetness and pleasantness of
taste, it excels all other Foul, and for nourishment, is of a mean
between the Capon and the Partridge: verily, for goodness and pleasantness
of flesh, it may of all syluestriall Foul, well challenge the first place at
tables, for it gives a most perfect and temperate nourishment to them that be
healthy, and to the weak, sickly, or that are upon a recovery unto health,
there is not so profitable a flesh, for it is very delightsome to a weak
stomach, and quickly, by reason of the pure and restauratiue nourishment,
which it gives, repaireth weak and feeble strengths: wherefore, for bodies
that are naturally lean, weak, or extenuated by long sickness, it is far
better then the flesh of any other Foul.

Next to the Phesant, for goodness of meat, is the Partridge, Partridge.
so it be young: for the flesh of old Partridges, is neither to the pallat,
nor stomach, very welcome, especially if they be not fat, for it is of a very
dry temperature, of hard concoction, and of a dry and melancholic nourishment:
wherefore they are in no wise convenient for the melancholic, or such as are
subject to costiuenesse. But the flesh of them that be young, is of a laudable
temper, of easy concoction, and very acceptable to the stomach, it yields
very good nourishment, which impinguateth the body, helps the memory
increases seed, and exciteth Venus: They are convenient for every age and
constitution; especially for them that have moist stomachs, that are subject to
fluxes, and that are in statu conualescentiae. The young ones, that are taken
even as they are ready to fly, and afterward fatted, are the best, for they
make a pure and excellent nourishment. They are only hurtful to Countrymen,
because they breed in them the Asthmatick passion, which is a short and
painful fetching of breath, by reason whereof they will not be able to undergo
their usual labors. Whe^fore, when they shall chance to meet with a Couie of
young Partridges, they were much better to bestow them upon such, for whom they
are convenient, then to adventure (notwithstanding their strong stomachs) the
eating of them, seeing that there is in their flesh, such an hidden and
perilous antipathie unto their bodies.

Quails are not for goodness and pleasantness of meat, Quails.
so wholesome as they are accounted, for they have in their flesh much moist and
excrementall juice, by reason whereof they quickly putrify in the stomach, and
make a bad nourishment. But they are corrected, by baking them well seasoned
with pepper, cloves, and salt. Some have judged them, by reason of their great
moisture, to be only profitable for melancholic bodies; but their color and
taste, prove their nourishment to be rather quickly converted into melancholy;
except you will, that their flesh have a certain kind of force against
melancholy, by reason of a great desire, that these birds have to feed upon
Hellebor, which is a purger of melancholy. But yet for all this, you shall not
have my assent, that they are good for melancholic bodies, because the
incommodum will be maius, commodo, as by that which shall be by and by showed,
may be collected. In my opinion, they are best agreeable to them that be
choleric, and most hurtful to the aged, and to all cold, moist, phlegmatic,
and paralitick bodies. Some there are, that affirm Quails, by reason of some
maglignity in their nature, to be worse then any other foul, and scarcely
wholesome for meat, which malignity they acquire by feeding upon Hellebor,
which they greatly desire, and other venomous seeds: and Pliny writes, that
they alone, of all living creatures besides man, suffer the falling sickness.
Whereof they conclude, that the use of them engendereth the cramp, a trembling
of the limbs, and falling sickness. To that which others have studiously
observed concerning the nature of these birds, I may well assent, seeing that
even the very color, temperature, and savor of their flesh do confirm the
same. But there are few (I think^) that would fear to incur the aforesaid
hurts, by eating of them, if they might have them. Indeed the scarsitie of
them vpholdeth their reputation, and the hurts that come by the seldom eating
of them are not sensible, but to the curious Indagator and Obseruer of things;
but if they had their fill of them, as they have of any other common flesh,
they would out of their experience esteem of them, no better then they do
deserve. But to prevent and amend, in some measure, the naughty nature of them,
it shall be good to nourish them some time in a convenient place, with good
and wholesome seeds, and afterward to bake them, as aforesaid.

Railes are of light digestion, and of wholesome nourishment, Railes.
they are good for cuery age and constitution, especially for them that be
phlegmatic.

The flesh of Turtle-Doues is of a dry temperature, and Turtle-Dou^s.
therefore if they be old, it is of hard concoction, and breeds a naughty
melancholic blood. But the flesh of them that be young, and not above a year
old, is acceptable to the taste, of easy concoction, and of very good
nourishment, but most profitable for moist and phlegmatic bodies. It is
thought to have an excellent property of comforting the brain, and quickening
the wit.

The Blackbird or Owsle that is fat, is greatly commended Black-Birds.
for pleasantness of taste, lightness of digestion, and goodness of
nourishment.

The Thrush that is of a dark reddish color, is of the same nature: they are
best in the winter, and are convenient Thrush.
for every age and constitution of body, especially for the phlegmatic.

Larkes are of a delicate taste in eating, light of digestion, Larkes.
and of good nourishment, they are good for all constitution^, but best for the
phlegmatic.

Woodcocks are of easy concoction, and of indifferent Woodcocks.
good nourishment. Some judge them to approach somewhat near unto the nature of
the Partridge, and therefore is of them called the rusticke Partridge; but the
flesh of the Woodcocke is more excrementall then of the Partridge, more
inclining to melancholy, and of a more ungrateful favor.

The Snite, for goodness of meat, is inferior to the Snites.
Woodcocke, for he is of a more unpleasant savor, of harder concoction, and
gives to the body a more excrementall and melancholicke nourishment. Both the
Snite and Woodcocke are least of all profitable for them that be melancholicke.

Heathcocks are of much, and laudable nourishment, Heath-cocks.
and also of easy concoction: they are convenient for every age, and
temperature of body.

Feildfares are of a dry and melancholic substance, and Feildfares.
therefore neither for concoction, taste or nourishment commendable.

Sparrowes are of an hot temperature, of hard concoction, Sparrowes.
and of evil juice, especially if they be eaten'rosted, for then they make a
dry, choleric, and melancholicke nourishment. But being boiled in broth, they
become wholesome, and the broth restoratiue.

Linnets are both for lightness of digestion, and goodness Linnets.
of meat better then Sparrowes.

The Crane is of an hard and fibrous substance, and of a Crane.
cold and dry temperature: wherefore the flesh is of very ill and melancholicke
juice, of very hard concoction, and of much more excrement then nutriment.
After that he is killed and exenterated, it is good to hang him up a day or two
before he be eaten, for by that means, the flesh will be the moretender, and
less unwholesome.

The Bustard, if he be lean, is in temperament, excrement, Bustard.
and euilnes of juice very like unto the Crane. But being fat, and kept without
meat a day or two before he be killed to expulse his ordure, and then
exenterated, and hanged as the crane, and afterward baked, well seasoned with
pepper, cloves and salt, is for them that have strong stomachs a good, fit,
and well nourishing meat.

The Heron is of a very hard and fibrous substance, it is Heron.
hardly digested, and breeds an ill melancholicke blood. Moreover the flesh
is of a fishie savor, which in flesh, is a note of greatest prauitie. But the
young Heronshowes Heronshow.
are with some accounted a very dainty dish: indeed they are of a more tender
flesh, and consequently of lighter digestion, and better nourishment, if there
be any good in them at all; but I leave them and commend them unto such as are
delighted with meats of strange and noisome taste.

The Byttour is also of hard concoction, of evil taste, Byttour.
and also of unprofitable and excrementall juice.

The Storke is of hard substance, of a wild savor, and Storke.
of very naughty juice: for he feeds upon venomous worms etc, which he
takes up out of the waters: and therefore let him be excluded from tables.

The Seagull is to be rejected as all other kinds of flesh of a fishie savor:
for he is of a very ill juice, and is not Seagull.
only unpleasant, but also very offensive to the stomach.

Teale, for pleasantnes and wholesomnes of meat excels Teale.
all other water-fowle: for it is easily digested, acceptable to the stomach,
and the nourishment which it gives is very commendable and good, less
excrementall, then of any other water-fowle. It is convenient for every age and
constitution, and commendable also even for them, that be weak and sickly, and
so is not any other water-fowle.

The Radge is next unto Teale in goodness: But yet Radge.
there is great difference in the nourishment which they make; for that which
comes of the Radge, is much more excrementall then that of the Teale. Neither
is the Radge so pleasant to the taste, nor by much, so acceptable to the
stomach, as is the Teale.

Plouer is ofsome reputed a dainty meat, and very wholesome; but they which so
judge, are much deceived: for Plouer.
it is of slow digestion, increases melancholy, and yields little good
nourishment to the body. The like may be said of the Lapwincke. But the Plouer
for goodness of meat shall have the precedence, and be next to the Radge.
Lapwincke.


Wigeon and Curlew are of hard digestion, and of a dry and melancholicke
nourishment: they are good for them Wigeen. Curlew.
that live near to moors, and that have no better meat.

The flesh of the Fenducke or Moore-hen seems for Fenducke or Moore-hen,
the fatnes of it commendable; but it is of hard concoction, and of gross and
excrementall juice. Those that are healthy, and have strong stomachs, may
boldly eat thereof; but I wish other to beware of it.

Ducks, whether tame or wild, are in no wise commendable; for they chiefly
feed upon the very filth, and excrementall Ducks,
vermin of the earth. The flesh of them is neither for smell or taste
commendable: it is fulsome and unacceptable to the stomach, and fills the
body with obscure and naughty humors. The flesh of domesticke or tame Ducks,
gives much, gross, and somewhat an hot nourishment, but very excrementall.
The flesh of the wild ones is of a colder temper, and not so excrementall:
they are only convenient for strong and rusticke bodies. But the Ducklings
that are well fed with wholesome grain, Ducklings.
are of lighter digestion, more grateful to the taste, and of wholesomer
nourishment; yet let old men, and such as are phlegmatic, or have weak
stomachs, beware how they use them.

The flesh of stuble Geese is of very hard concoction, of Goose.
an ungrateful savor, and of gross, melancholicke, and excrementall juice.
But the young Geese, which are commonly called green Geese, are of lighter
concoction, of better taste, and of wholesomer juice, especially if they Green
Geese.
be fatted with wholesome grain. They are best agreeable to choleric bodies;
but they are not good meat for old men, for them that be cold and moist by
constitution, or have weak stomachs.

The Swan in digestion and nutriment, is very like unto Swan.
the Goose; but as he is greater then the Goose, so is he also of a more heavy,
grosser, and more difficult substance to be digested. He yields best
nourishment being baked and well seasoned with pepper, cloves, and salt. It is
a strong melancholicke meat, and therefore convenient for them that use great
labors, and have strong stomachs; but not for them that be aged, or live a
restfull and delicate course of life. Thus much of Foul. Other also there are,
which (because they areseldome in use) I omit: and for them therefore let this
suffice, that there is no small difference between those that live in marish
places, lakes, or standing pooles, and them that wander and feed upon hills,
or other dry places: for according to the nature and temperature of the places,
the flesh not only of Foul, but also of beast, is either competently dry, and
free of excrements, and easy to be digested; or moist and excrementitiall, and
hard to be digested.

Whether the parts of Beasts and Fowls, besides the flesh, as the Brain, the
liver, the heart etc. give good and profitable nourishment to the body?
The brain is phlegmatic, and breeds a cold gross nourishment: by reason
of the fulsomnes of it, it is Brain.
soon offensive to the stomach, causes lothsomnes, and overthrows the
appetite. It is best agreeable to those that are choleric, that are young, and
have hot stomachs; but to old men, and such as are phlegmatic, it is very
hurtful: pepper is the best correctorie for it. The brains of those beasts or
fowls that are of a dry temperature, especially if they live in hilly and dry
places, are for nourishment the best, because there is not in them, that plenty
of excrementall moisture, as there is in the brains of them that are of moist
complexions. The brains of Calves, Conies, Hares, Woodcocks, and Snites are in
greatest use and account; but the Conies brain is for temperature the
wholsomest. The brain of the Hare is said to be good against the trembling,
and shaking of the limbs: I know not whether by reason of the siccitie of it,
or of any hidden propriety; but seeing that the Hare is of a very
melancholicke and timorous nature, I think the brain of any beast or foul of
a dry temperature, to be so good, if not better, against any paralytick or
trembling infirmity of the limbs, as the brain of an Hare.

The Eyes are of a cold and moist temperature, of light Eyes.
digestion; but by reason of the pituitous fatnes of them, they are fulsome and
offensive to the stomach. They make an ill and excrementall nourishment: they
are best agreeable to such as have hot and choleric stomachs, but but to the
phlegmatic, and them that have cold stomachs, they are very noisome. The Eyes
of a Calfe are the best.

The Ears are of hard digestion, and of very little nourishment; Ears.
for they consist of nothing else but gristle and skin.

Marrow is much more laudable then the brain; for it Marrow.
is sweeterand pleasanter, of a firmer substance, and of an hot and moist
temperature. It makes much, good, and pure nourishment: it increases the
geniture, and excellently sustaineth, and restores the vital moisture.
Moreover, it mollifieth the passages of the throat, and lenifieth the asperitie
of it, and delights the stomach, so that it be moderately taken; but if it
be immoderately used, it mollifieth, and relaxeth the stomach, takes away the
appetite, and induces a disposition to vomit.

The tongue is of a spongie and temperate substance, of easy Tongue.
concoction, and of good nourishment, especially about the root: for there the
flesh is sweetest. It is an wholesome meat for every age and constitution.

The maw and bellies of beasts are of an hard, skinnie, The maw and belli^ of
beasts.
and tough substance, they are hardly digested, and yield a cold and gross
nourishment: yet some are well pleased with a fat tripe, and account it a very
good meat: and indeed so it is for them that be given to great labors, and
that have hot and strong stomachs; for in such kind of men, it is not much to
be regarded, how wholesome the meat be, so it fill the belly, and conserve the
strength. But to them that lead a studious kind of life, that are by
constitution phlegmatic, and melancholicke, or have weak stomachs, a tripe
though fat, is very offensive: for beside that it is of hard digestion, and of
ill juice, it is of an unpleasant smell and taste: and therefore noisome to the
stomach.

The Gysard or Maw of Fowls, as of the Goose, Hen, Gysarde of fowls.
etc. is likewise of hard digestion, and of no commendable nourishment.

The wings of Fowls that are young and fat, are of Wings.
easy concoction, and of wholesome juice; but of such as are old and lean,
they are of a hard digestion, and of a dry and melancholicke nourishment.

The livers of beasts, that are full grown, are of ill nourishment, for they
are hardly digested, slowly distributed, Liver.
and breed gross humors. But the livers of them that be sucking are better,
for they have a moister temperature: and therefore they are of easier
concoction and distribution, of pleasanter taste, and of better juice. But they
are not good for them that have weak stomachs, or subject to the obstructions
thereof, or of the liver, melt, or mesaraick veins. The livers of fowls, as
of a Goose, Phesant, Hen, Capon, Turkey etc. are of a good temperature, of
pleasant taste, of easy concoction, and of much and commendable nourishment,
especially the livers of Hens, Capons, Caponets, and Pullets, which if the meat
wherewith they be fatted, be tempered with milk, then their livers are of an
excellent temperature and nourishment. They are convenient for every age and
temperature of body.

The Heart is somewhat of an hard substance, and therefore it is not very
easily digested; but when it is well digested, Heart.
it makes a durable and commendable nourishment. The heart of a fat Calfe is
for pleasantnes of taste, easiness of concoction, goodness of temperature, and
salubritie of juice, the best.

The Lights are of light digestion, and of little nourishment, and the same not
good but phlegmatic. Lights.


The Melt is altogether unwholesome for meat; for it Melt.
is hard of digestion, and breeds a very bad and melancholicke blood, and
therefore to be rejected.

The Kidneies are in no wise commendable, but for the Kidneies.
fat annexed unto them, for otherwise they are of very ill juice, of unpleasant
taste, and of hard concoction. The kidney of Veale, by reason of the
pleasantnes and tenderness of it, is far more nutritive, and more wholesome
then of any other flesh. The kidneies of beasts that are full grown,
especially if they be of big stature, are of no good nourishment, for they are
of very hard concoction, and of a rank and naughty juice.

The Vdders of beasts are not easily digested, they make a gross phlegmatic
blood: wherefore they are not good Vdder^.
for them that live at ease, for the phlegmatic, nor any that have weak
stomachs, or subject to obstructions. Being well digested, they nourish much,
and therefore they are a convenient meat for them that have good stomachs, and
a strong natural heat to digest. The vdders of Cowes are for pleasantnes of
taste, and goodness of nourishment the best.

The feet of Beasts do give a cold and clammie nourishment, Feet.
which quickly stops up the veins. Galen commends the feet of Swine; but
Calves feet and the feet of ros^ing Pigs are of easiest concoction, and of
purest nourishment: They are very good for dry bodies, because in an hot
stomach they digest well, nourish much, and they moisten the solid parts, not
with a light, but a clammie and good nourishment: and for the same cause, the
use of them (especially of Calves feet) is very profitable in consumptions and
rupture of veins; but there must be good heed taken, that they be exactly
boiled, even until that (by reason of tenderness) one part is dissolved from
another: for else they are of harder concoction, and not of so good
nourishment. They are very hurtful unto moist and phlegmatic bodies, and
such as are subject unto the Gout and wind collicke. The feet of a Bullock
or Heifer, which we commonly call Neats feet, tenderly sodden, and laid in
souce, and afterward eaten cold, are accounted very good meat; and so they are
for a choleric stomach, because they make a cold and tough nourishment,
always foreseen, that they be eaten before other meat. But to them that have
cold stomachs, although they may be well liking unto them, they are in no wise
agreeable.

OF FISH. SECT. IV.
Whether the much and often use and eating of Fish be unwholesome, and hurtful
to the health of the body?
IT is, because fish increases much gross slimio and superfluous phlegm,
which residing and corrupting in the body, causes difficulty of breathing,
the gout, the stone, the leprie, the scuruie, and other foul and troublesome
affects of the skin. Wherefore I advise those men that are much delighted with
the use of fish, that they be very careful in the The choice of fish.
choice of it, as that it be not of a clammie, slimie, neither of a very gross
or hard substance, nor oppleted with much fat (for all fat is of it self ill
and noisome to the slomack; but of fish it is worst) neither of ill smell, and
unpleasant savor. Wherefore of Seafish, that is best which swimmeth in a pure
sea, and is tossed and hoysed with winds, and surges: for by reason of
continual agitation, it becomes of a purer, and less slimie substance, and
consequently of easier concoction, and of purer juice. And for the same cause,
the fish that is taken near to a shore that is neither earthy nor slimie, but
rockie and stony, is also best: for the fish that abides in a slimie shore, is
of harder digestion, and of a more slimie and excrementall substance. The fish
also that betaketh it self from the Sea into the mouths or entries of great
rivers, and so swimmeth toward the fresh waters, does quickly become better or
worse: for if they be carried in slimie and muddie rivers, they forthwith loose
much of their goodness; but if in pure, gravely, and stony rivers, then the
farther off they be removed from the Sea, the better they are: for by reason
that the water is contrary to their course, they are the better cleansed from
their slimie superfluities. Of fresh water fish also that is best, which is
bred in pure, stony, or gravely rivers running swiftly. For that which is
taken in muddie waters, in standing pooles, in fennes, motes and ditches, by
reason of the impuritie of the place, and water, is unwholesome; for it
breeds a very slimie and excrementall nourishment, very greatly hurtful unto
them that are subject to the gout, and stone, and obstructions of the breast.
Thus much in general concerning the choice of fish. Now I will breifely speak
of the particular kinds of fish that are most common and in greatest use, and
first of Seafish.

The Sole is somewhat of an hard substance, and yet of Sole.
easy concoction, and free from excrement, in respect of other fish. For
whitenes and purity of substance, pleasantnes of taste, and goodness of juice,
it far excels all other Sea fish; and therefore may well be termed the
Sea-Capon. The Sole verily is to be reckoned among the meats of primest note;
and for such as are infirm and sick, Non magis expetitus quam salutaris cibus.

The Plaice is pleasant to the palate, easily digested, and Plaice.
in the judgment of some men a good fish; but in my opinion, it gives a
watrish and excrementall nourishment, especially if it be not well grown to a
substantial thickne^. It is best agreeable to them that are by constitution
choleric; but to the phlegmatic it is very hurtful, because it abounds
with a phlegmatic juice. The Dabbe Dabbe.
or little Plaice is of the same nature, but more excrementall. Flounder or
Flooke.


The Flounder is in taste, digestion, and nourishment like unto the Plaice,
especially if he be young. That are very tender mouthed.
Some deem this fish not so pleasant in taste, nor so good in nourishment, as
the Plaise, but by their leave, if it be grown to a good thicknes (nam quo
grandior eo melior) by reason of a firmer substance which it acquireth) I
rather think that it gives a better then a worse nourishment, because it
less abounds with a slimie superfluity.

The Gurnard is of harder digestion, then any of the former: some are red, and
some gray: in respect of the Gurnard.
color, there is little difference, if there be any, the red is the better:
both give a good nourishment, and nothing slimie: and therefore they are much
better for them that are phlegmatic, then the Plaice, or Flounder.

The Whiting, notwithstanding that it is unsavory, and nourishes very little,
is of some greatly desired, and Whiting.
commended: verily it is easily digested, and the nourishment which it makes,
although it be little, yet it is good, and very little excrementall.

The Breame is somewhat acceptable to the palate, of Breame.
easy digestion, and of meetly good nourishment, somewhat excrementall. It is
best agreeable for choleric bodies, and worst for phlegmatic. Some love to
eat the eyes of the Breame; but they are very excrementitiall; and so also are
the eyes of any other fish.

Shad and Mackrell are both sweet in taste, and soft in substance; yet not very
wholesome, for they quickly induce Shad and Mackrell.
a loathing noy somnes to the stomach, and breed an excrementall nourishment.
They are convenient for laboring men, and for them that have strong stomachs.

Dog fish and Hake are near of a nature, not of hard Dogge-fish and Hake.
concoction; but yet scarcely of laudable nourishment, for they increase
somewhat crude and watrish humors.

Codfish for whitenes of color, and moderate hardness, and friabilitie of
substance is commended: it is easily digested, Cod-fish,
and yields a meetly strong nourishment, and not very excrementall.

The Haddocke is pleasant to the taste: it is in nature Haddock.
somewhat like unto the Cod; but it is of lighter concoction, and not of so
firm and durable nourishment.

Mullet is a fish somewhat of an hard substance; yet if Mullet.
it be taken in a grauelly and stony shore, is not of hard digestion, is of
pleasant taste, and of meetly nourishment. But if it be taken in a muddie or
slimie water, it is not so easily digested, is hurtful to the stomach, and
breeds gross and excrementall humors. Of Mullets, the lesser are best, for
they are of easier concoction, and of better juice.

The Base is in goodness of juice inferior to the Mullet, for it is of harder
concoction, and breeds a more Base.
gross and slimie nourishment. Both Mullet and Base are agreeable for them
that are of hot temperature, and have strong stomachs.

Sammon is ranked with the best sort of fish, it is very Sammon.
pleasant to the taste, and not very hard to be digested, it makes a good
nourishment, in consistence, neither clammie nor gross; but yet it quickly
oppresses a weak stomach: wherefore let such as are infirm, or have weak
stomachs, so carefully moderate their appetites, as that the iucunditie of it,
entice them not to a perilous and nauseatiue fullness. The belly is to be
chosen before any other part, because it is tenderer, and of a more sweet and
pleasanter taste. The eyes of a Sammon are far wholsomer then the eyes of any
other fish.

The young Sammon, or Sammon. Peale, is far better Sammon-Peale.
then that which is greater, or fuller grown: for it is of a softer and whiter
substance, of a pleasanter relish, of easier concoction, more acceptable and
agreeable to the stomach, and of very good and wholesome nourishment. The
salted Sammon loses much of his goodness and pleasantness of taste, and is
therefore for wholsomnesse of meat, very much inferior to the fresh.

Turbut or Birt is meetly pleasant to the taste, and if it Turbut.
be well digested, it makes a good and firm nourishment: it is somewhat of an
hard substance, and therefore not easily digested. It is a very good meat for
such as are healthy and have strong stomachs; but for the aged, for them that
be phlegmatic, and that have weak stomachs, it is very in convenient and
hurtful.

Sturgion is a very acceptable dish, and best welcome at Sturgion.
tables. It may be much doubted, whether it be so greatly esteemed for the
rareness of it, or for the goodness of meat, or for that it is pleasant to
the pallat, and induces withal a smoothing delectation to the gullet. I will
plainly deliver my opinion, whatsoever the sensual Pallatist shall deem. The
flesh of the Sturgion, is of it self, of a whitish, and meetly pure substance,
and consequently of laudable nourishment, if it were not intermixed with a
gross and nauseatiue fat, by reason whereof it is not easily digested, and is
quickly offensive to the stomach, and makes a gross and clammie nourishment.
Wherefore let such as are aged, and that have cold and weak stomachs,
carefully refrain the use of it. It is most accommodate for the hot season of
the year. The little or young Sturgion, is far wholsomer then the greater,
for he is of tenderer substance, of pleasanter taste, of easier concoction, and
of good nourishment, if you separate most of the fat, which subuerteth the
stomach, and breeds a gross and clammie humor. The belly of the Sturgion
is, even as of the Sammon, to be preferred before the other parts. The
Sturgion, not only which is great and full grown, but that also which is
little, and somewhat tender by age, is very hurtful unto them, that are
troubled with rheumes, and articular greefes.

The Hallibut is a big fish, and of great account: it is of Hallibut.
a white, and somewhat of an hard substance, and therefore not easily digested;
but it is very pleasant to the taste, and for goodness of meat not inferior
to the Sturgion. The belly part, even as of the Sturgion, is the best. It is a
convenient meat for young men, and for hot choleric bodies; but for old men,
for the phlegmatic, and them that have weak stomachs it is very hurtful.

Dorie is for substance of flesh almost of a mean consistence, Dorie.
yet not very delectable to the pallat It gives a meetly good nourishment; but
it is not good, especially the much eating of it, for them that be
phlegmatic, or have weak stomachs, or that are subject to the gout and
stone, because it breeds somewhat a gross and plegmaticke juice.

The Allows is taken in the same places that Sammon Allows.
is, it is meetly pleasant to the taste, yields much, and somewhat a thick
nourishment, yet not ill, so it be well concocted in the stomach; but it is
of hard concoction, wherefore it is hurtful to them that have weak stomachs,
and that are by constitution phlegmatic and melancholic. The Allows that
tarrieth, and is taken in sweet waters, is wholsomer then that of the sea, for
it is fatter, of tenderer substance, of easier concoction, and of better savor.

The Guilthead or Goldine is whiter, and not altogether Guilthead.
of so hard a substance as the Allows, and therefore it is of easier
concoction, and also of better nourishment. The Guilthead is not in season, but
in the winter, for then he is sweeter in taste, then at any other time, and is
convenient for every age and temperature of body.

The Calaminarie, the Cuttle-fish, and Poure-Cuttle, Calaminarie, or Sea Cut,
Cuttle-fish, Poure-Cuttle
are even of one and the same nature, they are of hard concoction, and fill the
body with crude and gross humors. They may in want of better meat, serve for
Mariners, and rusticall bodies, who through the strength of their stomachs and
great labor, are able to convert any gross meat into good nourishment. The
small ones excel the great, because they are of a more tender flesh, and are
with less disficulty digested, They are all hurtful to them that have weak
sinews, and subject to the palsy.

The Wolfe-fish is of a cold and moist temperature, of The Wolsefish.
pleasant taste, and of easy concoction. It breeds a cold, thin, and
waterish juice, and therefore let such as are phlegmatic and rheumaticke,
perpetually shun the use of it.

The Lump or Lompe, is a fish so named from his shape Lompe-fish.
and likeness, and is in taste agreeable to the name; it is of hard
concoction, and of gross and excrementall juice.

The Conger is a long round fish, in shape like unto a Conger.
great Eele, and is therefore called the Conger-Eele: It yields a gross and
excrementall nourishment, as the common Eele does. It is a meat,
notwithstanding that it is to most men's pallats well pleasing, convenient only
for such as have strong stomachs, and that are of a firm state of body. To
the phlegmatic, to them that have weak stomachs, or subject to the dropsy,
gout, and stone, it is very hurtful.

Lampreyes are of some greatly esteemed, but very unworthily, for they are
partly of the nature of Eeles; yet Lamprey.
somewhat wholsomer, because they are not of so clammie and so gross a
substance. They are pleasant to the taste, but not easily concocted. They give
much nourishment; but the same somewhat clammie and tough: wherefore they are
not fit for them that have weak stomachs, or are subject to obstructions.
They also increase melancholy, and are very hurtful to such as are troubled
with the gout, and that have weak sinews. The small Lampreyes are better then
the great, for they are not of so tough substance, and therefore of easier
concoction, and of wholsomer nourishment.

Thornbacke is a fish of moist substance, of gross, excrementall, Thornback,
and putrid juice: whereby it comes to pass, that it is a meat of ill smell,
unpleasant savor, unwholesome nourishment, noisome to the stomach. The use
thereof breeds cold diseases, and the Epilepsie very speedily, if it be
eaten hot: which noisome quality does (as I think) in cooling, somewhat
euaporate, and sooner arise being eaten hot, for that it is so moist a fish,
and full of superfluity. It is a meat only fit for hard laboring men.

The Tuine, Porpuise, and such like great and bestiall Tuine, Porpuise, etc.
fishes, are of very hard digestion, noisome to the stomach, and of a very
gross, excrementall and naughty juice.

Herrings are somewhat pleasant to the taste, yet not very Herrings.
wholesome, at it is often proved by them, who through eating offresh Herring
quickly surfeit, and fall into fevers. The salt or pickled Herring, is of harder
concoction, and gives a saltish and unprofitable nourishment. They are good
for them that want better meat.

The Pilchard is of like nature to the Herring; but, as it P^lchard.
is of pleasanter taste, so it also sooner cloyeth the stomach with a
nauseatiue fullness.

Red Herrings and Sprats give a very bad and adusted Red Herrings and Sprats,
nourishment, they are only good to excite thirst, and to make the drink very
acceptable to the pallat and throat. They are hurtful to them that are by
constitution choleric and melancholic.

Anchoua's, the famous meat of Drunkards, and of them Anchoua's.
that desire to have their drink oblectate the palate, do nourish nothing at
all, but a naughty choleric blood: they excite the appetite, and by reason
of their saltish acrimonie, are also thought to cleanse phlegm from the
stomach and intestines. Wherefore they may be convenient for the phlegmatic;
but in my opinion, the special good property that they have, if it be good,
is to commend a cup of wine to the pallat, and are therefore chiefly profitable
for Vintners.

In shellfish it is to be observed, that some are of soft substance,
Shellfish.
and are easily digested, some of hard substance, and with more difficulty
concocted; but are of firmer and better nourishment.

Of all shellfish, Oysters are of a very moist and soft substance, Oysters.
and therefore easily digested, and least offend the stomach, except they be
taken, as we commonly say, against stomach: and by reason of the saltness of
their juice, they also make the belly soluble; but they give a light, salt, and
phlegmatic nourishment: and therefore they are not only very hurtful unto them
that be phlegmatic, also unto all such as have cold and weak stomachs, because
in them they abundantly increase fleame. Unto choleric bodies, and such as
have strong stomachs, they are agreeable. They must be eaten with pepper and
vinegar, and a cup of good Claret, or Sack, drunk presently after them: for
then they will be the better digested in the stomach, and not so soon
converted into fleame. Onions also sliced in the vinegar, and eaten with them,
is an excellent correctorie for the same purpose, if they shall not be
offensive unto the head of him that eats them. But why are Oysters, why
^sually eaten before meal?
Oysters usually eaten a little before meal, and that with one way bread? For
two respects, as I conjecture: the first is, by reason of their subductorie
quality concerning the belly, which also is helped with one-way-bread: The
second is, because that through their saltness, they excite the appetite.

Among shellfish, Muskels are of grossest juice, and of worst nourishment, and
most noisome to the stomach. Muskels.
They abundantly breed fleame, and gross humors, and dispose the body unto
fevers: wherefore I advise all such as are respective of their health, utterly
to abandon the use of them.

Cockles are not so noisome as Muskels, for they are of Cockles.
lighter concoction, and of better nourishment; yet no laudable meat for such
as lead a studious or easy kind of life, or have weak stomachs.

The Crab is not easily digested, it gives much gross Crab.
and phlegmatic nourishment: it is a meat best agreeing with those that are
of a choleric temperature, and that have hot stomachs. But to old men, to
them that be phlegmatic, and all such as have weak stomachs, and are subject
to oppilations of the breast, distillations from the head, or are otherwise
wont to be affected in the head, it is very hurtful. The fresh water Crab is
wholsomer then the Sea-C^ab, and that also of the sea, is the wholsomer if it
be but taken out of the fresh waters.

The Lobster is not also easily digested, and therefore i^ Lobster.
quickly offends a weak stomach: But being well digested, it gives much
good and firm nourishment; but the same is of an hot and ebullient nature: and
therefore it makes a great propensitie unto venereall embracements. I advise
young men, and such especially as are choleric, and that are of hot
temperature, to refrain the often use of them: for unto hot natures they are
hurtful, and greatly offend the head.

Pranes and Shrimps are of one and the same nature: for goodness of meat, they
excel all other shellfish: they are Pranes, and Shrimps.
of a very good temperature and substance, of a most sweet and pleasant taste,
not of hard concoction, and of excellent nourishment. By reason of their moist
and calorificall nature, they proritate Venus: they are convenient for every
age, and constitution of body, with this proviso, that the stomach be not
weak.

Of fresh water fish the Trout is most commended; it is somewhat of a cold and
moist temper, of an indifferent Fresh water fish. Trout.
soft and friable substance, of pleasant taste, of easy concoction, and of
good and wholesome juice. It yields somewhat a cold nutriment, very profitable
for them that have their liver and blood hotter then is convenient: and
therefore it is with good reason permitted unto them that are sick of hot
fevers. The Trout is a commendable meat for every age, and constitution of
body; except for the phlegmatic that have very cold and moist stomachs.

The Pike is somewhat of firm and hard substance, and therefore a little harder
of concoction then the Trout: Pike.
it is a meat pleasant to the taste, and gives much and pure ^ourishment. It
is agreeable unto all bodies, especially to them that be young, and such as are
by constitution choleric. The Pikrell is the young Pike: It is of easier
concoction, and for pleasantnes of ^aste and goodness of Pikrell.
juice, it may (in my judgment) precede the Trout, and as well be permitted
unto those that be sick; which must only be understood of the river Pikrell:
for that which is taken out of Meeres or other muddie waters, is somewhat
excrementall, and of hard concoction.

The Perch is also somewhat of hard substance, of good Perch.
nourishment, yet a little inferior to that of the Pikrell, or Pike, by reason
of some viscositie in it. And if the Perch be taken out of a muddie or foul
place, the nourishment which it makes will be the more clammie and
excrementall.

The Carpe is of a sweet and exquisite taste; but the Carpe.
nourishment which it makes, is not answerable to the taste of it, which if it
were, it might well be numbered among the fishes of primest note. It gives
somewhat a slimie, phlegmatic and excrementall nourishment, and quickly
satiateth the s^omacke, especially if it be taken out of impure and muddie
waters: wherefore let such as be phlegmatic, utterly eschew the eating of it.

The Barbell is of a soft and moist substance, of easy Barbell.
concoction, not of very pleasant taste, or good nourishment; but somewhat
muddie and excrementall. The greater Barbels for goodness of meat excel the
lesser, because their superfluous moy sture is by their age somewhat amended.
The bowels or entralls of them are to be abiected, as most offensive and
troublesome to the belly.

The Tench is unwholesome, and of hard concoction: Tench.
it is a muddie and excrementall fish, unpleasant to the taste, noy some to the
stomach, and fills the body with gross and slimie humors: Notwithstanding
it is a meat convenient enough, for laboring men and them that have strong
stomachs.

The Gudgion and other such little fishes are of pleasant Gudgion.
taste, of easy concoction, and of good nourishment; but the same little, and
by reason of the tenuitie of it nothing durable.

Eeles are very pleasant to the taste; but they are of hard Eeles.
digestion, of a slimie, gross, and phlegmatic juice, and soon noy some to
the stomach. They breed obstructions, because they make a gross and glutinous
nourishment: they are most hurtful unto them that are subject to the stone,
and gout, and obstructions of the breast. The Eeles that live and are taken in
pure and grauelly waters, are of far better nourishment then such as live in
meeres, and pooles, or any other impure places: and those I commend unto them
that delight to eat Eeles, and that are more addicted to their palate, then to
their health: for although those Eeles that live in purer waters, lose much of
their slimiesuperfluitie; yet they are never of pure and good juice, or
profitable to the stomach; much less those that live in muddie and filthy
waters. Wherefore they are not commendable for any age, or temperature; but
they are most hurtful to them that be aged, phlegmatic, or subject to
obstructions. The roasted or broyled Eele is far wholesomer then the boiled,
because the fire exhausteth, and consumes much of the slimie, and excrementall
moisture that is in it. And by the like reason the powdered Eele is wholsomer
then the fresh, especially for them that be phlegmatic, although it be not so
taken of many, that are sweet and dainty mouthed. To conclude, Eeles whether
fresh or salt, are only a convenient meat for poor hard laborers, for them
that have very strong stomachs, or that have an indulgent respect to their
palate, and appetite.

The Puffin is neither fish nor flesh, but a mixed body of Puffin.
both: for it lives altogether in the water, and yet has feathers, and flies
as other fowls do. Whether they be eaten fresh or powdered, they are of an
odious smell, of a naughty taste, of unwholesome nourishment, and very noy some
to the stomach. Yet great drinkers esteem well of the powdered Puffin, because
it provoke them to drink, which is the best faculty it has: but mark the
end of such, and you shall commonly see them, even in their firm and constant
age, to have turgid, and stroutingout bellies, and a dropsey to be the vpshot
of all their outrageous drinkings.

Whether fresh fish be more wholesome, then salt fish?
ALthough some kind of fish, as Eeles, and such like, which quickly induce a
nauseatiue fullness to the stomach a little salted, be better then the same
fresh, because the salt takes away the fulsomenes of it, and so makes it more
acceptable to the stomach. Yet fish of long salting, (as is our common salt
fish) is unwholesome, and much inferior unto fresh fish. For fresh fish is of
far lighter digestion, and makes a moist and purer nourishment, and is in
some measure, for the most part of it, wholesome for all bodies, especially
such as are hot, dry, and choleric. But salt fish contrariwise is of hard
concoction, breeds adust humors, exiccateth the body, and is hurtful to
most bodies, especially to them, that be choleric and melancholicke.
Moreover, if it be much eaten, it hurts the sight, and causes itch and
scabbinesse by reason of the sharp biting, and burnt humors which it
ingendreth. It does best agree with the phlegmatic, so the stomach be strong.

Of Eggs and Milk. SECT. V.
Why do Eggs give a more speedy, more pure, and more plentiful nourishment,
then any other kind of simple meat?
EGgs do not only speedily and purely nourish, by reason of the tenuitie of
their substance, and excellent a eriall temperament, but also, and that very
plentifully, because of an aptnes that they have in their substance to be
assimilated, and agglutinated to the parts of the body: and that by reason of
a certain analogy or likeness that they have with man's nature: for their whole
substance, by reason of their natural vicinitie unto blood, is easily
converted into the substance of the body. But this must not be understood of
all the egg, but of the yolke only: for the white is of a glutinous, cold and
phlegmatic nature, and consequently altogether of bad and excrementall
nourishment. But the yolke is temperately hot and moist, of good juice, without
excrement, and the blood bred thereof is firm, pure, and full of spirit, very
greatly corroborating the heart. Wherefore eggs are not only a most
accommodate meat in time of health, but also very worthy to be preferred before
any other, in the decay of the threefold Of ye blood, of the spirits, and of
the flesh.
substance of the body. Neither must this be understood of all kinds of Eggs,
but of Hen Eggs only, and the same also new. For the eggs of Ducks, Geese,
Turkeys etc. are of gross substance, of ill smell, of unpleasant taste, of
hard concoction, and fulsome to the stomach. But eggs receive great
alteration, according to their dressing and preparation: for those that are
potched are best and wholsomest, and next unto them are those that are sodden
in the shells; but those that are roasted, or fried are not so good, because the
heat of the fire consumes their aeriall moisture. But which way soever they be
dressed, there must be care taken that they be not made hard: for then they are
oppilatiue, of hard digestion, of slow distribution, and of unwholesome
nourishment. Neither must they be eaten rere, that is to say, little more then
through hot, named in Latin Oua sorbilia, (except in the way of physic to
leuigate and make clear the throat and breast, and to ease the greifes of the
reins and passages of urine made with gravel) because through their overmuch
softnes and cruditie, they quickly weaken and subvert the stomach. But they
must be in a mean between rere and hard, which are called Oua tremula: and
they must be eaten before other meat, because they are quickly digested,
quickly descend from the stomach, and speedily nourish, especially if a
draught of Claret wine best agreeing with eggs. A light and comfortable
breakfast.
Claret wine betaken after them. And if any man desire a light nourishing, and
comfortable breakfast, I know none better then a couple of potched eggs,
seasoned with a little salt, and a few corns of pepper also, with a drop or two
of vinegar, if the stomach be weak, and supped off warm, eating therewithal
a little bread and butter, and drinking after a good draught of pure. Claret
wine. This is an excellent breakfast, and very comfortable for them that have
weak stomachs. Eggs moderately used are accommodate for every age, and
constitution, especially for the elder sort of people, and such as want blood;
but soonest offensive to the choleric and sanguine, for whom in hot seasons
they are not convenient.

Whether Milk do give unto all bodies a good and healthy nourishment.
Milk is moiste in the second degree, and more inclined unto cold then unto
heat; it is of easy digestion, of much and good nourishment: it impinguateth
and causes the body to wax gross, and for amending of a dry constitution,
and for them that are extenuated by long sickness, or are in a consumption, it
is by reason of the excellent moistning, cooling and nourishing faculty of it,
of singular efficacy. But notwithstanding that milk is of light digestion,
and of much and wholesome nutriture: yet it is not good for all bodies; not for
them that are subject Milk not profitable for all bodies.
to windiness of the stomach and belly, or that have impure, weak, and
ill-affected stomachs, because it increases wind, and is by reason of the
differing nature of the parts thereof (for it consists of a threefold
substance, as shall be hereafter showed) in a weak, or ill-affected stomach,
soon corrupted and coagulated: nor for them that are phlegmatic, gross, and
full of moist humors, or subject to obstructions, because it makes them more
to abound with crude, gross, and phlegmatic humors. But being boiled and
eaten with sugar, pepper, and other spice, it is less windy and more agreeable
for such bodies. Now by this which I have breifely showed, concerning the
nature of milk, it may plainly appear, that the use of it, is best agreeable
for the hot seasons of the year, for young men, and especially for hot and dry
choleric bodies: because it does much refresh them with an excellent cooling
and moystning nourishment: and that it is most hurtful to the aged, to them
that be phlegmatic, and that are subject to cold diseases, by reason of the
abundance of gross and phlegmatic humors, which it breeds in such bodies.
Wherefore the use of milk is very hurtful unto them that are subject to
wind, to rheumes, to cold diseases of the head and sinews, to the Gout, and
dropsy in general, the stone or any obstruction of the reins and bladder,
obstructions of the breast, liver, melt, stomach, and mesaraicke veins. And
therefore not so much as the drinking ofa draught of milk in the morning
fasting, as it comes warm from the Cow is to be approved unto them that are
of acold constitution, or any way subject to obstructions; whereas for them
that are hot and dry by constitution, a large draught is very good and
profitable, for it sweetly cools, moystneth, and refreshes the dry and
thirsty parts of the body, and also expurgeth the sharp and choleric
humors by stool. Wherefore the drinking of milk not only in the morning
fasting, as it comes from the Cow, but also at any other time of the day, so
that it be taken in an empty stomach, is to hot, lean, and dry bodies greatly
profitable. But because that milk is apt to corrupt and coagulate in the
stomach, you must take with it a little sugar; or if you desire to have it
more soluble, pure honey: but sugar is better for them that are by constitution
choleric; for by this means it will neither corrupt, nor coagulate in the
stomach. And if you also cause a few Speremints to be put into the vessel
whereinto Sugar and Mints prevent ye corruption, and coagulation of milk in
the stomach,
the Cow is milked, or otherwise steeped one hour or two in the milk that you
purpose to drink, the milk will be much the more agreeing with the stomach,
and not so apt to coagulate.

Milk that is kept till it wax somewhat sour is not unto all bodies
hurtful: for the drinking of it is, in the hot seasons of the year profitable
for them that have hot, dry and choleric stomachs, especially if the head
thereof be taken away, because it greatly cools and extinguisheth the raging
heat and acrimonie of choler. But you must Cautions to be observed upon the
drinking of milk.
abstain after the drinking of milk, from other meats or drinks, or any
violent stirring of the body (all which will cause it quickly to corrupt or
coagulate in the stomach) until it shall be digested in the stomach, which
in an hours space may be well effected, Neither may you sleep within an hour
after the taking of it, because it will make the head heavy by repleating it
with vapors. And whosoever shall use to drink milk, because that it is
hurtful to the gummes and teeth; for the one it makes flaccide, and the other
subject to putrefaction; must have special regard to wash his mouth presently
after the drinking of it, with wine, or strong beer, and also to rub the teeth
and gums with a dry cloth, for the clensing away the sliminesse of the milk,
and for strengthening the gummes and teeth.

But of milk, there is great difference according to the kinds of it. Cowes
milk for sound and healthful bodies The difference of milk according to the
kinds of it.
is best, for it is fattest and thickest, and consequently. of most
nourishment: next unto it, for grossenes, is sheeps milk. But for bodies that
are with long sickness extenuated, or are in a consumption, woman's milk is
best, because it is most familiar unto man's body, and even of like nature. And
next unto it is Goats milk, because it is of mean consistence, for it is not
so fat and thick as Cowes milk, and therefore breeds not obstructions in
the entrals as that does; nor so thin as Asses milk, which also in
consumptions is much commended: wherefore the nourishment which it makes is of
a middle nature between them both. But Asses milk appertains rather unto
physic then unto meat, for it is of a thin and watrish substance, of a
penetrating, cooling and detersiue faculty, by reason whereof, it is of
singular efficacy in consumptions. of the lungs.

Milk, notwithstanding that it seems to be wholly of one substance, yet it is
compact of three several parts, of Milk consists of three several parts,
Cream.
Cream, Curds, and Whey, The first is the very head or flower of the milk: it
is of a temperate quality, hot and moist in the first degree; it is pleasant
to the palate, and very good for the asperitie and siccitie of the stomach;
but it is somewhat of a gross nourishment, and by reason of the vnctuositie of
it, quickly cloyeth the stomach, relaxeth and weakneth the retentiue faculty
thereof, and is easily conuerteted into phlegm, and vaporous fumes. Wherefore
it is hurtful to them that be phlegmatic, that have weak stomachs, to old
men, and such as are subject unto rheumes, especially in the cold and moist
seasons of the year; but unto hot choleric bodies, and young men that have
strong stomachs, it is (especially in the hot seasons of the year) no less
convenient then delightsome: and verily with strawberries and sugar, it is for
them, for whom it is convenient, a very delicate and wholesome dish. And
whosoever he be that delights to eat a dish of cream, let him not be
parsimonious of sugar, for that is the best correctorie for it.

Butter that is made thereof is of like temperature, it is Butter,
of a moystning, mollifying, maturatiue, and resolutiue faculty: if it be
fresh and new, and well tasted, it is very wholesome, especially in the
mornings fasting, for hot and dry bodies: it gives a light and dissipable
nourishment; it is good for the asperitie and siccitie of the throat, and for a
dry cough. But the too much use thereof weakneth the stomach, and causes the
same to abound with a crude phlegmaticall humor. Wherefore the much use of it,
is not good for them that be phlegmatic; but for such, salt butter is more
convenient, because it is less phlegmatic.

The cruddie part of the milk is of an heavy, gross, and phlegmatic
substance, and of the like nature is Cheese; Cheese,
for it is of hard digestion, and ingendreth ill humors and oppilations. And
although it be the property of all Cheese to breed gross and oppilating
humors; yet it alters much according to the newnes or oldnes of it. For that
which is new, is of a cold, moist, gross, and flateous substance: wherefore
for an hot and choleric stomach it is somewhat profitable; but for them that
be phlegmatic or have cold stomachs, it is greatly hurtful. Old hard Cheese
is altogether unwholesome, for it is of very hard digestion, troublesome to the
stomach, breeds choler adult, makes the belly costiue, and is infinitely
hurtful unto hot and dry bodies. Both sorts do very greatly breed the
collicke, yliacke, and nephriticke passions. But that which is a mean betwixt
both, so that it have also all the other properties of good Cheese, and
especially that it be not tart of the rennet, is far wholsomer; for it is more
pleasant to the palate, more acceptable to the stomach, and makes a durable
and meetly good nourishment; yet the frequent and too much use of it, breeds
obstructions, and is offensive to a weak stomach. Wherefore it behooves him
that loves Cheese and his health too, to be mindful of that prouerbiall
versicle: Caseus est sanus, quem dat auara manus. Cheese is best for them that
lead a studious or generous course of life, to be eaten after other meat, and
that in little quantity; for being thus used, it brings two commodities.
First, it takes away satietie, and strengthens the stomach, by shutting up
the orifice thereof. Secondly, Two commodities by eating of Cheese after mest.
it preuenteth the floting of the meat, which greatly hinders and disturbeth
the concoction, by depressing it into the bottom of the stomach, which is the
chief place of digestion. Roasted cheese is more meet to entise a mouse, or
rat into a trap, then to be received into the body; for it corrupts the
meats in the stomach, breeds adust choleric humors, and sends up from the
stomach putrid vapors, and noisome fumes, which greatly offend the head and
corrupt the breath. To conclude, the much eating of Cheese is only convenient
for rustic people, and such as have very strong stomachs, and that also use
great exercise.

Whey is cold and moist, of an abstersive and lax^tiue faculty: Whey.
wherefore it is of excellent efficacy against adustion of humors, and
obstructions of the entrals, it quenches thirst, and euacuateth choler and
melancholy by stool: and therefore the liberal use of it, especially well
clarified, is very profitable in fevers proceeding of choler. The drinking of a
large draught of whey mornings fasting, from the beginning of May unto the end
of August, is for all choleric and melancholic bodies most wholesome, for it
qualifieth the heat of the stomach and liver, brings the body to a good
temperature, abstergeth obstructiue humors in the stomach and mesaraicke
veins, mundisieth the bowels, and makes the belly soluble: white whey, which
comes by pressing of the curds together, is not so thin and waterish as the
former, and therefore not so laxatiue: it gives a cold and moist nourishment,
very profitable unto choleric and dry bodies; but hurtful to the
phlegmatic. The like may be said of the whey that comes in the making of
butter, commonly called butter-milke, which if it be used when itis grown a
little sour, excellently represseth the sharpness of choler, and is very good
for choleric fluxes. Of milk there are also diverse sorts of meats made,
which in a common appellation are termed white-meats: they are all, more or
less, of a crude, gross, and obstructiue faculty, breeding wind, fleame,
White-meats.
and obstructions, especially of the breast: they are convenient for young men,
for them that are by constitution choleric, and that have hot and strong
stomachs; but to old men, to them that be phlegmatic and subject unto
rheumes, they are very hurtful: they are more wholesome and less offensive, if
they be well seasoned with sugar, and spice; etc.

But of all the sorts of white-meats, that which is made Frumentie.
of wheat decorticaced, and boiled in milk, commonly called Frumentie, gives
the most and strongest nourishment; but it is somewhat hard of concoction, and
of very slow distribution, by reason whereof it causes windiness and
obstructions. Wherefore it is not a convenient meat for them that have weak
stomachs, and such as live at rest, or are subject to obstructions, either of
the bowels or reins. But for those that use great labors, and that have strong
stomachs, it is very profitable. And being strained, and spiced with cynamon,
it is a very good medicinable meat, for such as are too laxatiue, and subject
to fluxes and mordications of the belly, proceeding of choler: for it
represseth the acrimonie of the choleric humor, and through the slow
descension of it, abateth the flux.

There is also the like kind of pottage, and much like-likewise Rice-milke.
of the same nature, made of Rice accurately For there is in the pill or bark
of Rice, a causticke or burning quality, very pernicious to the body.
depilated and boiled in milk; but it is of easier concoction, less
obstructiue, and of better nourishment. Being well made and spiced with sugar
and cynamon, it is a temperate meat, very pleasant, easy of digestion, and
restoratiue.

There are also other kinds of food made with Rice, all which are somewhat of
hard concoction, and of an astringent faculty. They are convenient for them
that have good stomachs, and that use to labor and exercise their bodies; but
to the aged, and such as are molested with phlegm and obstructions very
hurtful.

There are also certain I^nckets usually made of milk, Iunckets.
especially in the summer season, as of the best of the milk coagulated, there
is made a kind of Iuncket, called in most places a Fresh-Cheese, which is very
pleasant to the palate, and of easy concoction: it asswageth thirst,
mitigateth the overmuch heat of the stomach, and moy stneth the body, and is
therefore in the hot seasons of the year very profitable for such as are
young, and that are of an hot and dry temperature. But in them that are past
their constant age (except they shall be impensiuely choleric) and that have
cold stomachs, it breeds wind, phlegm, rheumes, and obstructions,
especially of the breast: and therefore in no wise to be allowed to the aged or
phlegmatic. This, or other iunckets, or white-meats of like nature, A Caution
concerning the eating of Iunckets.
must be always at meals first eaten, or at banquets between meals, when
the stomach is empty: for being eaten after other meats, or in the middle of
meals, they do the sooner corrupt in the stomach, and breed more plenty of
phlegmatic and excrementall humors. How great therefore is the error of
eating Custards in the middle, or at the end of meals. To conclude, Iunckets,
and all sorts of white-meats, are more or less, as I have already said of a
crude, gross, and obstructiue faculty, breeding plenty of phlegm: they are
only agreeable for them that have good stomachs, and that are of an hot and
choleric temperature.

Of Sauces and Spices. SECT. VI.
Whether, in the regiment of health, the use of sauces is to be allowed, as
necessary and wholesome?
ALthough that hunger be the best sauce for meat, and thirst for drink, and
that the best means to get them, is exercise and abstinence for a time; yet
besides these natural sauces, there be other which be artificial, and some of
them very profitable (such as are those that are of a delightsome sharp taste,
of a cutting, penetrating, attenuating, and digesting faculty) because they
comfort and strengthen the stomach, disperse the crude superfluities of the
same, excite the appetite, The commodities of Sauce.
make the meat pleasant to the palate, and acceptable to the stomach,
whereupon ensues the better concoction, and more profitable nutriment.

The best and most common of all sauces is salt, which is so necessary for
seasoning and preserving of meats, that we cannot well live without it, and
therefore it has been a good observed custom, to set it first on the table
with bread, and with the same to take it last away. Salt is hot in the second
degree, and dry in the third: it is of a clensing, digesting, attenuating,
drying, consuming, and somewhat also of an astringent faculty. Well therefore
may salt have the first and cheifest place among sauces, for beside that, it
makes the meat sauoury and acceptable to the stomach, and exciteth the
appetite, by corrugating the mouth of the stomach, and titillating the
palate, it also cutteth and attenuateth gross and clammy humors,
preuenteteth and corrects putrefaction, by drying and consuming all crude and
moist superfluities, confirms weak and loose parts, and helps the
concoction, especially in a cold and moist stomach. But the too much use of
salt, The discommodities of the too much use of salt.
by reason that it is hot and dry, of a sharp biting taste, and dries up and
consumes all the humors of the body, is very hurtful, especially unto dry
and lean bodies: for it annoyeth the stomach, exiccateth the liver, adureth
the blood, dimmeth the sight, diminishes the geniture and spirits, causes
itch and scabbinesse, and in a word, corrupts and spoyleth the habit of the
whole body, making it soon old, riueled, and deformed.

Vinegar is the second sort of sauce, which is in common Vinegar.
use: it is judged with a general consent, to be dry in the second degree;
but concerning the other qualities, there is great variance: for some attribute
unto it a cold quality, because it cools and represseth heat, and some an
hot, which may also be easily proved; but in my judgment, it is more cold
then hot, and so much the colder, as it is made of the smaller wine. It
provoke appetite, as salt does, it vehemently penetrateth, cutteth, and
attenuateth gross humors, by reason of the sharp tenuitie of it, it strongly
preserves the humors from putrefaction, by reason of the cooling and drying
quality of it, and therefore the use of it, in time of pestilence, is very
profitable. It also helps the soft and rheumaticke swellings of the gums. It
agrees best with the choleric, because it represseth their choler, and worst
with the melancholic, because it increases their distemperature. The much use
The discommodities of the overmuch use of vinegar.
thereofis, by reason of the cooling, drying, and also mordicant quality of
it, which it has, by reason of some heat, which it still reserueth of the
wine, very hurtful to the stomach, liver, lungs, intestines, matrice, and
sinews: wherefore I advise women, and them that are lean, that have cold
stomachs, weak lungs, and feeble sinews, carefully to eschew the much and
often use of it. And above all, I with Maidens to forbear the drinking of
vinegar, or eating of sops or tosts dipped therein, to make them lean and
low-coloured, lest that by ouer-pearcing, cooling, and drying their liver, they
acquire a big belly (I mean a dropsy) with a lean and ill-fauoured face.
Vinegar that is made of White wine is more opening, and that which is made of
Claret more binding: wherefore White wine Vinegar is generally to be preferred,
and it is also much the better for the stomach and spirits, if it be
rubefied, by maccrating the leaves of red roses in it; but for them that have
loose Rose-vinegar.
stomachs, Claret-wine-vinegar is most accommodate. The often or much use of
vinegar is greatly hurtful to them that are of a melancholic temperature, and
to all such as are subject to the Gout, the Palsy, or other affects of the
sinews.

Verjuce which is made of sour or unripe grapes, or of Verjuce.
crabs, or other unripe sour apples, is like to vinegar in operation, saving
that it is of a more cooling nature, and therefore more agreeable for hot and
choleric bodies. It refreshes an hot stomach and liver, represseth
choleric fumes, and raises up the appetite, dejected through much heat,
labor, or exercise: wherefore it is very profitable for hot and choleric
bodies to be used in way of sauce, and for hot and choleric diseases, in way
of medicine; but it is hurtful to the aged, and to all cold and phlegmatic
bodies. Eisell, or the vinegar which is made of Cider, is also a good sauce: it
is of a very penetrating nature, and is like to Verjuce in operation; but it is
not so astringent, nor altogether so cold.

Mustard is a sauce in common use with sundry meats, Mustard.
both flesh and fish, especially those of the grosser sort. It is hot in the
fourth degree, and is of a dissoluing, attracting, extenuating, and dissipating
faculty. It very strongly heateth the stomach, cutteth, extenuateth, and
scatters gross and phlegmatic humors, opens the obstructions of the
breast, helps the concoction and distribution of meats of gross substance,
comfort the stomach, and dries up and consumes the superfluous moisture in
it. Moreover, it vehemently pearceth the brain, and wonderfully purges it
from superfluities: and therefore the use of it is very profitable for them
that be subject unto cold diseases of the head and sinews, as the Epilepsie,
Lethargy and Palsy: for it opens the passages, and dissipateth and
consumes the humors oppilating the nerves: wherefore, as it is a good sauce,
so is it also very medicinable. It is a most wholesome sauce for them that be
phlegmatic, and that have cold and moist stomachs, especially in a cold and
moist season; but the often and much use thereof is hurtful unto choleric
and dry bodies.

Orenges differ in their temperature, according to the Orenges.
sweetness or soreness of their juice: for the sourer the juice is, the
colder it is, and the more penetrating; but yet with the greater astriction
following: and the sweeter it is, the more hot and less penetrating, without
any or little astriction concurring. The sweet Orenges are not fit for sauce,
because they subvert the appetite, and cause loathsomeness in the stomach; yet
to such as are of a melancholic temperature, they are, by reason of their
temperate heat and sweetness, somewhat profitable. The sour Orenges are cold
and dry in the second degree: they quench thirst, excite the appetite, and
repress choleric vomitings: they coarctate the breast, and astringe the
belly, which are two pernicious properties: wherefore they are greatly hurtful
to the phlegmatic and melancholic, and them that are straight chested. But
sugar corrects their aciditie, and brings them to a better temperament.
They are convenient for hot and dry bodies, so they be not affected with
coarctation of the breast, or astriction of the belly. Those that are of a
meanetaste between both, that is neither too sour, nor too sweet, are cold in
the first degree, and temperately dry: they are best for sauce, because they
are more acceptable to the taste, and more profitable to the stomach. They are
profitable in fevers, to extinguish thirst, and inhibit the putrefaction of the
humors. Orenges sliced and sopped in Rose Water and sugar, are very good to
cool and refresh the stomach in fevers, and so they are also at other times,
for an hot and choleric stomach; the pulpe, or medullary substance of the
Orange is not good to be eaten, except of them that have very hot and
choleric stomachs, but the juice only, because it breeds a crude and ill
juice, and is not easily digested. Therindes of Orenges are hot in the first
degree, and dry in the second, being preserved in sugar, and taken in small
quantity after meat, they very greatly comfort a weak stomach.

Limmons are like in nature unto Orenges, saving that as Limmons.
they are sourer, so are they colder and ore pearcing: wherefore the juice of
them has an admirable force, of cutting, penetrating, extenuating, and
cooling: it stirrtth up the appetite, comfort the stomach, restrains
vomiting, and is therefore very good for them that have nauseatiue stomachs. It
mightily cutteth and attenuateth gross humors, asswageth thirst, mitigateth
the sharpness of choler, and inhibiteth the increase of it. It also
excellently cools and refreshes an hot liver, corroborateth the heart, and
is of singular efficacy against acute and malignant fevers, for it defends
the humors from putrefaction, and corrects those that are putrified. There
is not so pleasant a sauce to be found as this of the Limmon, and it gives a
grace to all other sauces: it is sourer then vinegar, more cooling and more
pearcing, free from any acrimonious or mordicant quality, and therefore more
delectable, and more wholesome then it. It is for hot and choleric stomachs,
the best sauce, and against the vehemency of choler there is not a better
medicine; for it mightily represseth, and extinguisheth the fervent heat of it.
It is hurtful to them that be phlegmatic, and also to the aged, except choler
shall happen to domineire in their stomachs.

The Citron is like in nature to the Limmon; but it is thought to have a more
special property, against malignant, Citrons.
and pestilentiall fevers, and to comfort the heart. The rindes, and also the
white pulpe of Citrons, and Limmons preserved, do comfort the stomach, help
the concoction, corroborate the heart, and are very good against melancholy.

Olives, if they be ripe, are temperately hot, they are eaten with salt, of the
inhabitants where they grow; but they Olives.
are neither good for sauce, nor for meat, for they weaken the stomach, and
breed a putrible and unwholesome nourishment. But the green and unripe Olives
are cold and dry, of an astringent faculty, and these are the Olives, which
are usually eaten with meat to excite the appetite. They are gathered while
they be green, preserved in pickle, and so transported. They excite the
appetite, cleanse phlegm from the stomach, corroborate the mouth of it, and
stay vomiting; but they are hardly digested, excite thirst, breed gross and
melancholicke humors, and being abundantly eaten, they cause headache and make
the belly cosliue, especially those that are preserved only in salt: wherefore
they are not so wholesome a sauce as they are esleemed. They are preserved only
in salt or in a pickle of salt and vinegar. Those that are preserved in salt,
are hotter then the other, for they are hot in the second degree, and of
greater force in clensing of phlegm from the stomach: and therefore they are
best for them that be phlegmatic; and worst for the choleric. But those
that are preserved in a pickle of vinegar and salt are of a more temperate
nature; they repress choler, and stay vomiting more then the other do, and
are convenient for every age and constitution, especially for the choleric,
and therefore they are to be preferred before them. But which way socuer they
are preserved, the green or greenish Olives are to be chosen, and the
yellowish or blackish rejected as abominable for sauce or meat: for the
yellow ones were too ripe before they were gathered, and the blackish are
putrified. The salt liquor or pickle, wherein they are preserved, is an
excellent remedy against sof^ and flagging gummes, and loose teeth, if they be
washed and rinsed therewith somewhat hot.

Capers are very necessary for the preservation of health: they are preserved
in vinegar, or in salt, or in a pickle or Capers.
brine made of them both, which is the best way: Being thus preserved, they are
hot in the first degree, and dry in the second: they are of an abstersive and
opening faculty, they giuevery little nourishment; but they excite the
appetite, notably cleanse away phlegm adhering to the stomach and guts, kill
worms of the belly, and open the obstructions of the liver, but especially of
the melt: wherefore the often use of them with meat is very profitable to
phlegmatic and melancholicke bodies, to such as have moist and waterish
stomachs, that are short breathed, that have hard and ill spleenes, and subject
unto quartaine fevers. Before they be used, the salt must be washed off clean
from them, and they a little while steeped in clean water, and after that eaten
(as other sallads be) with vinegar, and oil also if it shall like the eater;
or if they be eaten with Oximell, they will not only be the more acceptable to
the taste, but more effectual also for the purposes aforesaid.

The young tender buds of Broom are in the spring Buds of Broom.
time gathered and preserved in pickle, in the same manner as Capersare: they
excite the appetite, and open the obstructions of the melt and liver no less
then Capers do, and are also very profitable in obstructions of the kidneys:
wherefore they may well be used with meat as Capers are.

Sampier is in the like manner preserved in pickle, and Sampier.
eaten with meats: it is a very pleasant and familiar sauce, well agreeing with
man's body. It is hot and dry, of an abstersive and diureticke faculty: it
exciteth the appetite, comfort the stomach, opens the obstructions of the
liver, melt, and especially of the kidneys and bladder, by provoking urine:
wherefore it is a necessary sauce, for them that are subject to the stone, and
convenient for every age and constitution of body.

Radish is also used as sauce with meats, but it is a very hard one, and
unwholesome: it is hot and dry, and of an Radish.
extenuating faculty. Those that are very tart in taste, are hot in the third
degree, and dry in the second. They are accounted the best, that are clear,
tender, and tart in taste, and so they are, because they are of easier
concoction, and do more delight the palate. Some Physicians commend the
eating of Radishes before meat, because they excite the appetite; and some
after meat, because (as they say) they help the concoction by depressing the
meats; Radish neither good before meat, nor after meat, nor together with meat.
but I constantly affirm, howsoever they oblectate the palate, depresse the
meats, or excite the appetite, that they are neither good before meat, nor
after meat, nor together with meat. They are not good to be eaten before meat,
for because that they are with much difficulty digested, and make long stay in
the stomach, they hinder both the descension and concoction of the meat that
is taken after them, and are also the cause of stinking belchings, which are
far greater hurts, then the exciting of the appetite is a commodity. Neither
are they good to be eaten after meat, for by reason of the hardness of their
substance, they rather oppress the stomach, then any way help the digestion,
breed windiness, and cause noisome belchings, yea though they be taken (even
as we do cheese) in small quantity. But our usual manner in England is to
eat them together with meat as a sauce, which is the worst way of all; for
being in such manner taken, they greatly oppress the stomach, engender raw
humors, and abundance of wind, cause loathsomnes, disturb and hinder the
concoction of the meat that is taken with them, raise up noisome fumes and
most offensive belchings, which are very hurtful to the eyes and head.
Wherefore I conclude, that they are unwholesome any way to be eaten (especially
for them that have weak stomachs) except for them that be pallate-pleasers,
and that they are only good to be used in the way of physic: for they heat,
cut, and attenuate gross humors, provoke urine, and procure vomiting. And
verily this their heating, cutting, attenuating and vomitorie Why Radishes
breed much windiness and belchings.
faculty, is the principal cause, by working upon the humors and meat in the
stomach, that they break, or rather breed and raise up so much wind, and
avoid it by belchings.

Oil Olive, which we commonly call Sallet Oil, if it Oil.
be of the ripe Olives is moderately hot, and makes the belly soluble; but by
reason of the unctuous substance and nauseous sweetness of it, it deiecteth
the appetite, anoyeth the stomach, impinguateth the liver, and increases the
substance of it: wherefore it is in no wise to be used as a sauce with meats.
But the Oil that is made of the unripe Olives, which is called Oil Omphacine,
is not Oil Om^hacine.
so gross and fattie, as the other, and inclines to a greenish color: it is
somewhat of a cooling and astringent faculty, by reason whereof, it
strength^eth the stomach, and represseth the too-much tenuitie, and
fluxibilitie of the blood in choleric and sanguine bodies: wherefore the use
of it for them that are healthy is very convenient. Of Butter, which is of
great use in sawces, I have spoken in the precedent section.

Honey is hot and dry in the second degree, and of an Honey,
abstersive and soluble faculty: wherefore it is very wholesome for them that
be old, for such as are phlegmatic, and of a cold and moist constitution,
especially in the cold seasons of the year. It is very profitable for such as
be asthmaticke or short breathed, and that are subject unto rheumes, so that
they be not of a choleric constitution, because it does notably cleanse and
mundifie the breast, and lungs, of phlegmatic and rheumaticke humors.
Wherefore I wish all such as are of a phlegmatic The eating of Honey mornings
fasting very profitable for phlegmatic bodies,
constitution, to accustom the eating of honey mornings fasting, and to walk
an hour after it; but it must not be immoderately taken, for, not withstanding
that it is of a clensing and opening faculty; yet for all that, if it be taken
in too large a quantity, it will obstruct and cloy the stomach, because it
consists of a gross substance. But the use of honey is hurtful to them that
are of hot complexion, because it inflameth the blood, and is quickly (by Honey
for whom unwholesome.
reason of the acrimonie of it) converted into choler; it is also hurtful to
such as abound with wind, especially the crude and vnclarified honey, because
there is in it a windy and excrementall moisture. The way to clarify it, is
to put unto it a little water, and so to boil it and scum it so Clarified Honey.
long as any froth arises: for by this means the tartness and flatulent
moisture of it, is for the most part taken away, and consequently becomes a
more wholesome medicinable nourishment. That is the best honey, which is hard
in the vessel and curded like sugar, and which is Notes of the best Honey.
also of a true and delectable sweetness, of good smell, and of a clear
yellowish color; or if it shall be of a whitish color, so that none of the
said notes of goodness be wanting in it, it is never the worse. New honey is
better then old, because some of the moisture of it is in continuance New
Honey why better then old.
consumed, whereupon it becomes more dry, and tarte in taste.

Sugar is temperately hot and moist, of a detersiue faculty, and good for the
obstructions of the breast and Sugar.
lungs; but it is not so strong in operation against phlegm as honey. And here
it may be demanded whether Sugar or Honey be the better? Whereunto I answer,
that Sugar Whether Sugar be wholesomer then Honey.
is generally more wholesome then Honey: for it is of a better temperature, of
pleasanter taste, not so fulsome as Honey, and therefore more acceptable to the
stomach, and consequently far better for sauce, and nourishment. It may be
given in fevers, because it does not inflame the body, nor so soon turn into
choler as honey does; and to conclude all in a word, Sugar agrees with all
ages, and all complexions; but contrariwise Honey anoyeth many, especially
those that are choleric, or full of wind in their bodies. Only Honey is
better for them that have very cold and moist stomachs, and that have their
breasts stuffed with phlegm. Water and fine Sugar only brewed together, is
very good for hot, choleric, and dry bodies, that are affected with phlegm
in their breast: for through the coldness and moisture of it, it excellently
tempereth the heat and siccitie of the breast and stomach, and clears them
of phlegm. Sugar by how much the whiter it is, by so much the purer and
wholsomer it is, which is evident by the making and refining of it. It is made
much after the same manner and form as white salt is. The Sugar is nothing
else but the juice of certain Canes or Reeds, which is extracted by boiling
them in water, even after the same manner and fashion as they do Salt. This
first extracted Sugar is gross, and of red color: it is hot and dry, somewhat
tart in taste, and of a detersiue faculty: by longer boiling, it becomes
hard, which we call Red Sugar Candy, which is only good in glysters, for to
cleanse and irritate the expulsive faculty. This gross reddish Red Sugar Candy.
Sugar is again mixed with water, and boiled, and comes to be of an whitish
color, less hot, more moist, and more acceptable to the taste and stomach.
This kind of second Sugar, we call common or kitchen Sugar. This being the
third time diluted, and decocted, is of an excellent temperament, most white,
and of a singular pleasant taste: this is the best, purest, and wholsomest
Sugar, which gives a grace unto whatsoever it be mixed. And this by The best
Sugar.
rather boiling becomes hard, and of a resplendent white color, which we
commonly call White Sugar Candy: this is the best Sugar for diseases of the
breast, White Sugar Candy.
for it is not altogether so hot as the other Sugar, and is also somewhat of a
more pure and subtle moisture. Wherefore it excellently asswageth and
moystneth the asperitie and siccitie of the tongue, mouth, throat, and
winde-pipe; and is very good for a dry cough, and other infirmities of the
lungs: it is most accommodate for all hot and dry constitutions.

There are diverse kinds of mixed sauces devised and composed Compound sauces.
by the skill of Cooks, to oblectate the palate and throat, to excite the
appetite, and to add a grace unto bad meats, which of ingurgitating belly-gods
are greatly esteemed. But I advise all such as are respective of their health,
to refrain the use of all confused saucs; or to be very circumspect, not only
in the use of them, because they allure the stomach to a gluttenous taking of
meat; but also in the choice of them: for they only are wholesome, that are
somewhat of a sour taste, by putting to them a convenient quantity of
vinegar, veriuce, or of the juice of Orenges or Limmons. But let temperate men,
and such as are studious of their health, content themselves with the simpler
kinds of sauces, because they are for the stomach and health of the body most
convenient.

Whether Cinnamon be the best and wholesomest of all spices?
CInnamon is hot and dry in the third degree, and of an excellent aromaticall
substance: for fragrancie of smell and iucunditie of taste, it excels all
other spices: it strengthens the stomach, preuenteth and correcte^h
putrefaction of humors, resists poisons, exceedingly comfort the
principal parts, especially the heart and liver, and reviueth the spirits. It
also opens obstructions, and strengthens the retentiue faculty of all the
parts, by drying up and consuming the crude and excrementall moisture. It is
convenient for all bodies, especially for them that are of cold and moist
temperature, and that have weak stomachs; but the overmuch use of it, is
hurtful to such as are by constitution choleric. Of one pound of Cinnamon
grossly bearen, a pound of white Sugar, a gallon of Sack, and a quart of
Rosewater, Cinnamon water.
steeped together 24 hours, is drawn by distillation, a water of singular
efficacy against sowning, debilitie of the spirits, and principal part.
Wherefore I wish every man, that is respective of his health and life,
especially such as are of weak nature, never to be without it, and to take now
and then a spoonful or two, especially when occasion shall instant the use of
it.

Next unto Cinnamon, for goodness and aromaticall Cloves.
substance, are Cloves: they are hot and dry in the third degree, they are not
of so penetrating a force as Cinnamon, but more drying; they consume, and
dissolve crude and windy humors, comfort, and corroborate all the principal
parts of the body, especially the stomach, and heart, excite Venus, help the
concoction, discuss wind, make the breath sweet, stay vomiting, and fluxes of
the belly proceeding of a cold cause, or weakness of the retentiue faculty: And
as they are very good for a weak, cold, and windy stomach, so are they also
for a liver collapsed by cold. They are very profitable for the aged, for such
as are phlegmatic, and subject to rheumes, especially in the winter; but the
often and much use of them is hurtful unto choleric and dry bodies.

Nutmeg and Mace are of one and the same faculty: Nutmegs and Mace.
they are hot and dry in the second degree, somewhat of an astringent faculty:
they strengthen the stomach, especially the Mace: they comfort the brain and
animal faculties, especially the Nutmeg: they stay seminall fluxes, and are
good for cold vterine affects, especially the Nutmeg: they discuss wind, and
inhibit fluxes of the belly, proceeding from a cold cause or weakness of the
retentiue faculty. They are good for old, cold, and phlegmatic bodies; but
the much use of them, by reason of their dry temperature, and astrictiue
faculty, is hurtful to choleric and melancholic constitutions, and them
that have costiue bellies. Nutmegs condited.


Nutmegs preserved in Sugar, as soon as they be taken from the tree, are of a
very pleasant and delightsome taste, and of most profitable use, for comforting
of the stomach and brain, to be eaten now and then, especially in the mornings
fasting, and presently after meals: and because they are of a less drying and
binding faculty; they are very good for every state and constitution of body.
Wherefore I advise all those that have weak stomachs, and that live a studious
kind of life, never to be without them, that they may take of them at their
pleasure.

All the sorts of Pepper are hot and dry in the height of Pepper.
the third degree, if not in the beginning of the fourth: they are of an
heating, and resolving faculty: they excite the appetite, comfort the
stomach, help the concoction, and all cold diseases of the breast and
stomach, by concocting, dissipating, exiccating, and expelling crude and
flatuous humors: they also strongly heat the sinews and muscles, and all cold
parts. The round black Pepper is in greatest use for sauce and seasonings of
meats. It must be moderately used, for otherwise, by reason of the acrimonious
heat that it has, it will quickly inflame the bowels, adure the blood, and
consume the genitall seed. By reason of the tenuitie of its substance, it must
be but grossly beaten, that the heat thereof may longer continue and operate
in the stomach: for being smally beaten, it will make lesser stay in the
stomach, and mesaraick veins, and by reason of the penetrating force of it,
sooner ouerheat and dry the liver, provoke urine, in flame the blood, and the
reins. It is a spice, most convenient for cold, moist, and gross meats, for
cold and moist seasons, for the aged, for the phlegmatic, for them that have
cold, weak, and windy stomachs, and that are subject to distillations. But to
hot, choleric, and dry bodies, the much or often use thereof is very
hurtful, especially in hot and dry seasons.

Ginger is the root of a certain plant growing in Barbary Ginger.
and other hot countries: being green and newly dug up, it is hot in the
third degree, and moist in the first; but when it is grown dry, because that
the moisture of it is consumed, it is dry in the second degree, if not in the
third: it is of an heating and digesting quality; but it heateth with a more
durable heat then pepper does, and therefore it is more convenient for a cold
and moist stomach, for which it is of singular efficacy, it discusseth wind,
helps the digestion, and consumes crude and phlegmatic humors. It is very
profitable for the aged, such as are phlegmatic, and full of crude, flatulent
moisture in their stomachs, especially in cold and moist seasons; but the use
of it is not so good in hot seasons, nor for them that are by constitution
choleric, because the often and much use of it will inflame, and distemper
hot and dry bodies.

The green roots preserved, which we commonly call green ginger, or ginger
condite, are of pleasant taste, very Green Ginger.
good to be eaten often times, especially mornings fasting, of them that have
weak stomachs, and bad memories, and that are subject unto rheumes: for they
greatly comfort the stomach and head, and are also very accommodate for all
the purposes aforesaid. Wherefore the use of them is for old men and Students
most profitable. They also increase the geniture. They are preserved two ways,
either in a syrup of sugar, or covered over and incrustated according Candied
Ginger.
to art with sugar, which we commonly call Candied Ginger: this is best for
them that be very phlegmatic, and rheumatick, and that have very cold and
moist stomachs, because they are of a more exiccating nature; but the Ginger
that is preserved in syrup, is more convenient for all other bodies, and for
the two purposes last above recited, because it dries not, as the candied
ginger does, but is rather hot and moist in quality, by reason of a
substantial moisture, that it receives from the syrup, wherein it is
preserved. The roots that are preserved in syrup, while they be fresh, green,
and full of juice, are of soft and tender substance, and of a most pleasant
taste: whereby you may detect the fraud of them, that boil the dry Ginger, to
make it soft, and afterward put it into a syrup, and sell it for green
condite Ginger: for it is somewhat blackish, tough, and hard in biting, and not
so delectable in taste.

Saffron is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first: Saffron.
the moderate use of it, wonderfully refreshes, comfort, strengthens, and
exhilarateth the heart, for there is so great society betwixt it and the
heart, that it is without delay carried thither, and for that cause it is mixed
with all cardiacall medicines. It expels and preserves from all
pestilentiall infections, it opens the obstructions of the liver and gall,
and is therefore good against the yellow Iaundise: it provoke the menstruall
courses, and birth, and therefore women with child must carefully shun the use
of it: it also dilateth the breast, opens the obstruction of the lungs, and
is for them that be short and thick breathed, the last and greatest remedy.
But if it be not moderately used, and that in very small quantity at a time,
it is hurtful and dangerous: for it causes the headache, and offends the
brain and senses, by sending up sharp fumes: it also deiecteth the appetite,
and causes faintness, by too much relaxing the hearr, and pouring out the
spirits.

OF FRVITS, ROOTS, and HERBS, that serve for meat, and are usually eaten.
SECT. VII.
Whether new fruits eaten raw, yield any wholesome or prositable nourishment to
the body?
ALthough all new fruits that abound with moisture, as most do, may seem to
be judged vnwhosome to be eaten raw, by reason that they fill the body with
crude and waterish humors, that dispose the blood unto putrefaction; yet the
moderate and tempestiue use of them, may be very good and profitable, for such
as use to heat and dry their bodies with great labor and exercise, for all hot
constitutions, especially for the choleric, because they extinguish thirst,
cool and moysten the body, and repress the vehement heat and ebullition of
choler. But to the phlegmatic, and such as have crude stomachs, all raw
fruits, especially those that abound with moisture, are greatly hurtful, as
hereafter shall be particularly demonstrated.

And here, before I begin to discourse of alimentary simples, I will advertise
the Reader somewhat, for his better understanding, concerning the fouredegrees
of qualities, that Four degrees in the qualities of Simples.
Physicians constitute and define to be in Simples: as those are said to be hot
or cold, etc. in the first degree, that alter a temperate body; yet if they be
hot or cold, etc. but in the beginning of the degree (for every degree has so
ample a latitude, that in every one we constitute three stations, and therefore
of those things that are in the first degree, some are said to be in the
beginning of the degree, some in the middle, and some in the end) they do not
so evidently alter, but that some consideratiue examination is needful for
discerning of the alteration. In the second degree are those that do so
manifestly alter, as that there is no more need of examination, or conjecture,
for understanding of the alteration: and of this sort are honey and figs for
heat, and lettuce for coldness and moystnesse, etc. Of the third degree are
those that do strongly alter, as Hyssop, Time, Cloves, Sack, if it be not
new: and in the same degree you shall find Time to exceed Hyssop in heat. Of
the fourth degree are those, that do very greatly and vehemently alter, such
as in heating, are of a burning force, and in cooling of a stupefying.
Wherefore that may be said to be hot or cold, etc. in the first degree, which
is but slenderly perceived of the gustatiue sense: that in the second, which is
very manifestly perceived: that in the third, which is so strongly perceived,
as that it somewhat offends the sense: and that in the fourth, which very
greatly affects and annoyeth both the sense and body. And thus much
concerning the understanding of the four degrees in the primary qualities of
Simples. And now because that all fruits, roots, and herbs, have for the most
part some medicinable faculty, and are also oftentimes offensive unto man,
because they engender crude, gross, and flatulent humors, I will particularly
write of such as be in use among us in England, declaring their hurtful
qualities with their good, and how they may be rightly used, and of whom, with
most profit, and least hurt: And first of all of Apples, because of all fruits
they are most plentiful among us.

Apples are of a cold and moist temperature, abounding Apples.
with a superfluous, crude, and windy moisture: yet more, or less, according
to the different kinds of them: for there are many and sundry sorts of Apples,
whose diverse natures and faculties, may by the difference of their substance
and taste be best known and described. For those apples that are of a solid
substance, give a more plentiful and durable nourishment; but they are more
hardly digested, and more slowly distributed. Those that are of a soft
substance, are easily digested, and distributed; but they give a thin,
waterish, and excrementall nourishment. But those that are of a mixed substance,
that is, neither too hard, nor too soft, are both for concoction, and also for
nutriment the best. Now, as concerning the taste: some apples are sweet, some
sour, some of a middle taste, both sweet and sour. The sweet apples are not
so cold as the other be, but are rather hot in the first degree: wherefore they
yield more nourishment then other apples do, and the same not so moist; but
they are not so pleasant to the taste, nor so acceptable to the stomach. The
sour apples are cooling, and therefore they yield little nourishment, and the
same cold and crude; but the raw juice of them, by reason that it is of a
cooling, cutting, and penetrating faculty, with some small astriction also
adjoining, is good for an hot choleric stomach, because it mightily
represseth the fervent acrimonie of choler. But those apples that be of a
middle taste, that is, such as are both sweet and sour, are for pleasantness
of taste, acceptablenesse to the stomach, goodness of juice, and wholsomnesse
of nourishment, beside their medicinable quality against melancholy, and
melancholic affects, the best and wholsomest: for they attemper the siccity of
that humor, and corroborate the heart by their comfortable savor, and the
stomach, by their light astrictory faculty. Such are our Queene-apples and
Russelings, as the principallest, and next our Rosiars, Pearemaines and
Pippins, Deusans, etc. There are also some Apples that are insipid, or without
taste: they are of a waterish substance, altogether unpleasant to the stomach,
and unprofitable for meat. All apples generally are unwholesome in the regiment
of health, to be eaten raw, or before they be full ripe, or soon after they
be gathered, except of them that have hot choleric stomachs, because they
engender crude, waterish, and flatulent humors; but if they be baked, or
roasted, by reason that their flatuous cruditie is by the heat consumed, they
become more digestible, more wholesome, more pleasant to the taste, and more
acceptable to the stomach. Apples may be eaten raw with least detriment in
the winter, and all the year following, according to the durablenesse of them
(for they do soonest rot, that are of soft substance, by reason that Why some
apples putrify sooner then other?
they have greatest store of moisture, and those are longer kept which are of
harder substance, because there is in them less store of moisture: for the
abundance of excrementall moisture is the cause why they putrify) because by
that time they lose much of their waterish and excrementall moisture. And they
are best to be eaten last after meat, because they confirm the stomach, make
good digestion, especially in a choleric stomach. And they are also good to
be eaten at going to bed, of them that have hot and choleric stomachs, or
that are distempered by drinking much wine, or other strong drink, because
they cool the stomach, and repress the vapors that ascend to the head.
Wherefore I conclude, that apples are most convenient for young men, for them
that be choleric, and that have hot strong stomachs; but to old men, to them
that be phlegmatic, that have cold and weak stomachs, and that are subject
to aches of the sinews and joints, they are very hurtful, especially if they
be eaten raw.

Pears are much of the nature of Apples, and of the Pears.
same temperature; but they are somewhat of a binding qualitv, especially those
that be of an harsh and sour taste. The difference of them must be discerned
by their taste and substance, even as of Apples. Those are the best, which are
of a pleasant sour sweet taste: for they comfort the heart, the stomach, and
assuage thirst. Pears make a waterish and corrupt blood, and engender the
windy colic: wherefore they are very hurtful to the aged, to them that be
phlegmatic, that have colst stomachs, and that are subject to the windy
colic; but they are wholesome enough, or at leastwise less hurtful for hot,
dry and choleric bodies, especially if they eat them not immoderately. They
are most hurtful to be eaten before meat, because they bind the belly,
especially those that be somewhat sour, and fill the stomach with crude and
flatulent humors. They are best to be eaten after meat, because they fortify
the digestion, repress the ascending of superfluous vapors to the head, by
strengthening and shutting up the mouth of the stomach, and by reason of their
compressiue faculty, being eaten after meat, they make the belly soluble, and
help the subduction of excrements. Baked Pears are much wholsomer then raw,
and more agreeable to every age and constitution, especially to the
phlegmatic: they are acceptable to the taste and stomach, easily digested,
and give a good and wholesome nutriment.

Peare-Wardons, in regard of the solidnesse of their Wardons.
substance, may be longest kept: they are of all sorts of Pears the best and
who som^st. They are not to be eaten raw, because that, in regard of the
duritie of their substance, they are very hardly digested, and breed a crude
and flatulent humor; yet they may be to an hot and choleric stomach well
liking and agreeable, especially after the drinking of much strong wine or
beer, because by sigillating the mouth of the stomach, and also by reason of
their cold and crude substance, they repress and infrigidate the hot fumes
that vaporate to the head. But being baked or roasted, they are a delicate meat,
and not only good for them that be healthy, but also for such as be sickly, or
sick, because they are very pleasant to the taste, and acceptable to the
stomach, easily digested, greatly comfort and refresh a weak stomach, and
give unto the body very good and wholesome nutriment.

Quince-Pearea are of a very hard and wooddish substance: Quince-Peares.
as they are very unacceptable to the taste and stomach: so they give unto the
body a very unwholesome and earthie nourishment. They are only good for them
that affect strange varieties, and that do love with great expense, to
metamorphize meats of bad juice.

Quinces are cold and dry, and of a binding faculty, they Quinces.
a^e good to stay vomitings, and all kinds of fluxes. Those that are a little
sweet are not so cold, nor so binding, as those that be sour: for the sour
ones are cold and dry in the second degree, and of a strong binding faculty.
To be eaten raw, they are no better then raw Beef, for they are of very hard
concoction, of unpleasant taste, and of most unwholesome nourishment. But the
juice of raw Quinces taken by it self, or with a little sugar, especially of
the sour ones, may be very good for an hot and choleric stomach, for
choleric vomitings and fluxes, and for cardiacall pains of the stomach,
because it quenches the thirst, and mightily represseth the acrimonie of
choler. Quinces baked with Sugar, Cynamon, etc. or preserved, are pleasant,
wholesome, and comfortable, especially to be eaten after meals, because they
help the digestion, by closing and shutting up the mouth of the stomach, and
repress the ascending of superfluous vapors to the head. Being taken before
meals, they bind the belly, and after meals, if they be taken in too large
a quantity, they loose and mollify the same, by a forceable depressing of the
meats: and therefore some commend the much use of them after meals, for such
as are commonly costiue; but they greatly err, because by reason of their
compressiue and depressiue force, they protrude and drive down the meats from
the stomach, before they be digested. The Cotiniate, Marmalade.
or Marmalade made of Quinces, if it be well and accurately done, is very
delectable to the taste and stomach, it comfort the heart, and wonderfully
refreshes a weak stomach, and makes it strong to retain the meat, until
it be perfectly digested, and is also very good and profitable for the staying
of all kinds of fluxes, both of the belly and other parts. Quinces baked, or
preserved, or the Cotiniate made of them, taken in a moderate quantity, are
very good and wholesome for all ages and bodies, especially by reason of their
comfortatiue and astrictiue faculty, for them that have weak and loose
stomachs; except for such as are wont to be costiue, or affected with too much
astriction of the stomach; for whom by reason of their astringent faculty
they are not convenient.

The iuicie substance of the Pomegranet is wholesome and profitable for the
stomach, and therefore good to be Pomegranet.
eaten, notwithstanding that it yields a thin and small nourishment. Some
Pomegranets are sweet, some sour, and some of a middle savor, both sweet and
sour. The sweet ones are not cold as the rest, but rather hot in the first
degree, and temperately moist: they cleanse the mouth of the stomach, moysten
the breast and spiritual parts, and make the belly soluble; but they breed
wind, and in a choleric stomach, they are quickly converted into choler. In
fevers (by reason of their heat and flateousnes) they are not to be admitted.
They are most convenient for them that are of a melancholic temperature, and
most hurtful to the choleric. The sour ones are cold in the second degree,
and of a stiptick faculty: they are more medicinable, and more fit for
physic uses, then the other sorts are: they quench thirst, extinguish the
burning heat of choler, corroborate the mouth of the stomach, stay fluxes and
choleric vomitings, inhibit the ascending of vapors to the head, and are very
profitable in acute fevers, and the Cardiacall Passion proceeding of choler. By
reason of their acerbitie, they are soon offen sieve to the sinews, teeth, and
gummes; but the sourenes of them is well mitigated with sugar, or the sour may
be eaten together with the sweet, for so the one does correct the hurts of the
other. They are good for an hot stomach and liver, and therefore very
convenient for them that are of a choleric temperature; but for a cold
stomach, and especially for them that be old and phlegmatic they are very
hurtful, because they constringe and coarctate the breast. The Pomegranets
that are of a middle taste are almost of the same force and efficacy: they are
not altogether so cold, nor so binding, by reason whereof they are more
plersant to the taste, and more acceptable to the stomach, and therefore more
fit for use in time of health. They are best to be taken after meals to
strengthen the mouth of the stomach, and to stop the rising up of vapors,
especially in them that have hot stomachs. They are also good to be eaten in
the way of physic about four hours after meals, or in the morning fasting,
of them that have hot stomachs, and also weak and subject to vomiting through
the distemperance of choler: for they have a small abstersion, with some
astriction and refrigeration; by reason whereof they purify and corroborate
the stomach, prevent the corruption of the meat, quench thirst, and extinguish
the heat of choler. Wherefore the use of them is most profitable for them that
are choleric, and that have hot stomachs and livers, and most hurtful to
them that be phlegmatic, or that have cold stomachs. The rinds, kernels, and
flowers of Pomegranets are all of a binding nature, and of much use in physic.

Peaches and Aprecocks are of one and the same nature: they are cold and moist
in the second degree: they yield Peaches and Aprecocks,
a cold, crude and unwholesome nourishment; they engender wind, make the blood
waterish, and subject to putrefaction. They are more hurtful to be eaten after
other meats then before; for if they be eaten after other meats, they, floting
in the higher parts of the stomach, are both quickly corrupted, and do also
corrupt the other meats; but being eaten before other meats, they excite the
appetite, quench thirst, and by reason of their moist and slippery substance,
easily and quickly descend, and also cause the mea^s that are taken after them
to pass down the sooner. Wherefore it is not good to eat them, but when the
stomach is empty; and by reason of the corruptiblenes of their substance, a
good draught of Sack, or such like strong wine must be sent presently after
them to digest and correct their crude and flateous moisture. But I hold it
best for such as respect their health, and can subject their appetite, utterly
to eschew the use of these and such like horarie and quickly perishing fruits,
that fill the body with crude, phlegmaticall, and corruptible humors. They are
convenient, or less hurtful for young men that have hot and strong stomachs,
and for such as are of a choleric and sanguine temperature; but for old men,
for them that be phlegmatic, and that have weak stomachs, and subject to
wind, they are very hurtful.

Medlars and Services are of one and the same nature: they are cold and dry in
the second degree, and of an Medlars and Se^uices.
astringent faculty: wherefore they must not be eaten before, but after meats,
in like manner as all other things ought that are of a binding faculty to
close up and corroborate the stomach: and they must be moderately eaten, for
otherwise they will oppress the stomach, hinder the concoction, and engender
a cold, gross, and melancholicke juice. But in case of binding they are best
to be eaten before meat, or at any other time when the stomach is empty: they
strongly repress choler, and stop choleric vomitings and egestions. They are
not fit for meat, until by keeping they become soft and tender; but the juice
of them (being green and hard) is very profitable for physic uses, when as
their is much need of binding. Medlars and Service berries are convenient for
young men that have strong stomachs, for them that be over laxatiue, or subject
to vomiting, and that are by constitution choleric; but to old men, to them
that are of a phlegmatic or melancholicke temperature, and that are commonly
costiue, they are very hurtful.

The unripe Mulberies are cold and dry almost in the Mulber^ies.
third degree and do mightily bind: they are profitable for medicine, but not
for meat. The ripe and new gathered Mulberries are moist in the second degree,
they are also cooling, notwithstanding the modicum of heat in them, and a
little binding, which is evident by their taste. They are acceptable to the
stomach, but they yield little nourishment; they excite the appetite, repress
choler, and by reason of their much moisture, greatly moysten the inward parts,
quench thirst, help the asperitie of the throat, quickly descend from the
stomach, and make the belly soluble. They must be taken, by reason of the
moisture and slipperinesse of their substance, before meat, or at any other
time when the stomach is empty; for they are quickly corrupted, and are
offensive to the stomach, unless they speedily descend: and therefore they
are not good to be taken after meat, because the meat will hinder their
passage. And for the same cause they are very hurtful for them that have
impure stomachs, for in such, they greatly engender wind, and increase crude
and corruptible humors. They are convenient for an hot season, for young men,
for such as are of a choleric and sanguine temperature; but hurtful for old
men, and them that be phlegmatic.

The green and ripe Figs are hot and moist in the first Figgs.
degree: the dry or barrel Figs are hot and dry in the second degree, and
withal somewhat sharp and biting. They are of an abstersive and diureticke
faculty; they are easily digested, and do nourish more then other Autumn
fruits. They are best to be eaten in the morning fasting, and at any other time
when the stomach is empty; for so they breed the better juice, and are the
more medicinable for clensing of the breast and lungs, which is a special
virtue that Figs have: being taken after meat, or before the stomach be
empty, especially the new ripe Figs; they quickly corrupt in the stomach, and
fill the body with crude and flatulent humors. The new ripe Figs do give a
more moist and flateous nourishment, then the dry ones do, which puffs up
the ^esh, and fills the belly with wind; and yet by their windiness they
little offend, because they quickly descend and make the belly soluble, by
reason whereof the wind that they breed does soon pass away; and in this
respect, they are less hurtful then other Autnmne fruicts. They chiefly annoy
their stomachs that are subject to the wind collicke: and therefore it is good
for such to refrain the use of them. The dry barrel Figs are of a stronger
clensing, cutting, extenuating, resolving, and concocting faculty, and
therefore more effectual for clensing of phlegm from the breast and stomach,
and for old infirmities of the lungs. They engender choleric and siticulous
humors; and therefore they are very hurtful to the bowels that are inflamed,
or full of choler. The much use of them, not only because they engender
ebullient humors, but also by reason of their property of carrying forth
corrupt humors, that reside in the body, unto the skin, causes itching, and
scabbinesse, and oftentimes also the lousy evil. They are convenient and
wholesome for them that be old, that be phlegmatic, that are subject to
obstructions of the breast, and for cold and moist seasons; but to the
choleric, and them that have hot livers they are hurtful, especially the
often and immoderate use of them.

The green and ripe Dates are hot and moist in the Dates.
first degree; but if they be old their heat is increased, and moisture
abated. The soft, moist, and sweet ones are to be chosen, because they give a
more restoratiue and comfortable nourishment. Those that are somewhat sour and
of an unpleasant taste are more binding, and altogether unprofitable for
nourishment; and so are also those that are over dry or putrified. All Dates
are of an astringent faculty, they yield a gross, clammie, and an
impinguating nourishment, by reason whereof they are very good for such as are
in a consumption, or have weak livers, or subject unto any flux, or waste.
But by reason of their gross and obstructiue juice, they are hurtful to such
as are subject to obstructions, especially of the liver and spleen. They must
be boiled in broths, or added unto other physical confections, that are made
to strengthen etc: for to be eaten they are not fit for any age or
constitution, because they breed wind, offend the head, and corrupt the
teeth. Moreover the green and ripe Dates do fill the body with crude humors;
and the dry ones are of hard concoction, cause gnawings in the stomach, and
do breed a juice which is quickly converted into choler.

There are diverse sorts of Plums, both of the garden, and also of the field,
and of sundry colors, and of very different Plums.
faculties. The green and ripe ones of what sort soever they are, do cool
and moysten, and fill the body with crude and corruptible humors; yet some are
more wholesome, or at least less hurtful then other: they may best be
distinguished by their taste: for some are sweet, some sour, and some of a
middle taste, both sweet and sour. The sweet Plums do give more nourishment
then the rest, and do more loose the belly; but by reason of their overmuch
moisture (for they are completely moist in the third degree) they relaxe and
weaken the stomach, and for the same reason also the nourishment which they
yield is nothing good at all, but excrementall. They are most hurtful to them
that be phlegmatic, and are only convenient for those that would moysten and
keep their bodies soluble; for by their excessive moisture and slipperinesse,
they do moysten the body, and mollify the belly. But they must be eaten
before meals, or when the stomach is empty; for if they be eaten after
meals, as our manner is to eat them, or before that the meat is descended from
the stomach, they spoil the concoction, and fill up the stomach with crude
and corruptible humors.

The sour and harsh Plums, as Bullasis and other that Wild Plums.
grow wild, and also the unripe Plums, of what sort soeeuer, whiles they are
sharp and sour, are cold and binding, and the more harsh they are, the more
binding: they quench thirst, excite the appetite, bind the belly, repress
choler, and extinguish the burning heat of it; but they are not meet for meat,
esp^cially those that are harsh, because they yield to the body little or no
nourishment at all, and are by reason of their astriction, and duritie of
substance very hurtful to the breast and stomach; yet nevertheless the
moderate use of them may be, as Physic, very profitable to a choleric
stomach. The juice of them, especially of Sloes boiled with a small quantity
of Sugar, and so kept, is of excellent efficacy for stopping of the laske and
bloody flixe, and all other issues of blood whatsoever. The Plums that are of a
middle relish, such as are our Damsons etc. are the best Damsons.
and wholsomest: they are cold and moist in the second degree, they are more
acceptable to the taste and stomach, and yield (although little, yet) better
nourishment then the rest: they excite the appetite, quench thirst, repress
choler, and somewhat also loose the belly: they must also be eaten before
meals, or when the stomach is empty. These, as also all other sorts of Plums,
are best for them that are young, that are by constitution choleric, and that
have hot and strong stomachs; but to them that are old, that are phlegmatic,
that have weak and cold stomachs, and that are subject to the wind collicke,
they are very hurtful, because they breed waterish and flatulent humors.
Plums stewed and eaten with Sugar are somewhat wholsomer then the raw ones, and
more convenient for the stomach.

Dried Plums, which are commonly called Prunes, are Prunes.
wholsomer and more pleasant to the stomach, then the green and dry Plums:
they yield much better nourishment, and such as cannot easily putrify, by
reason that their crude and superfluous moisture is dried up and consumed. The
Dammaske and Spanish Prunes are the best, because they are the sweetest: being
boiled in broths they loose the belly and excrete out choler: being stewed and
eaten between or before meals, they are most pleasant to the taste,
excellently refresh a weak stomach, and do also mollify the belly. They are
most convenient for them that are of a choleric and sanguine constitution.
French Prunes, and all such as are somewhat sour in taste, are also somewhat
of a binding, and not of a soluble faculty.

Grapes, for that they are pleasant to the taste, and also Grapes.
nourish much, may have the pre-eminence among the Autumn fruicts. As they are
diverse in taste, so are they also in quality: for sweet Grapes are hot in the
first degree, and moist in the second: they nourish most, and most of all make
the body soluble; but the nourishment which comes of them is ouer-moyst and
windy, which troubles the belly, and puffs up the whole body. Sour Grapes
are cold and moist, they quench thirst, and mightily extinguish the over much
heat of the stomach and liver, repress the sharpness of choler, and
choleric vomitings, excite the appetite, and strengthen the stomach that is
weakened through the distemperance of choler. They are hurtful to every age and
constitution, except to them that are young, and of an hot and choleric
temperature. The Grapes that are harsh in taste, either by nature, or (as all
Grapes are of what sort soever) before they be ripe, are very cold and
astringent: the juice of them is only profitable in the way of physic to
cool, and to repress choleric vomitings and egestions. Those Grapes that
are of a sour sweet taste, are for temperature and faculty in a mean
between the sour and the sweet: they excite the appetite, cool the heat of
the stomach and liver, quench thirst, repress the heat of choler, and excrete
it through the belly. But all Grapes that are newly gathered, and eaten raw, do
yield unto the body an ouermoyst and excrementall nourishment, they trouble
the belly, fill the stomach with wind, and inflate the melt, especially if
they be immoderately eaten. But of all the sorts of Grapes, the sour and
austere in taste are for meat the worst: for such kind of Grapes do very much
hinder the concoction of the stomach, and engender a cold and raw juice, which
is seldom or never converted into good blood. The sweet Grapes, and such also
as are a little sour, being through ripe, are less hurtful: for their juice
is hotter, and is easilier dispersed through the liver, and veins. And if they
be kept two or three days after they be gathered, and then eaten, they do
nourish the better, and are the less windy, and troublesome to the belly, by
reason that some part of their superfluous moisture is in that space consumed.
But in the eating of Grapes this Caution must be observed, that neither the
skins, nor the kernels or stones in them be swallowed A caution concerning the
eating of Grapes.
down, but only the succulent pulpe, because they are unprofitable to the
body: for by reason of their duritie and siccitie of substance, they offend
the stomach, receive no alteration in the body at all, or very little, and also
hinder the concoction and distribution of the medulline part of the Grape
through the body, which is only nourishing. It is best earing of them when the
stomach is empty, and not after meat; for if they be eaten upon a full
stomach, they spoil the concoction, abundantly breedewinde, and fill up the
stomach with crude and corruptible humors. They are, so they be moderately
eaten, convenient for every constitution and age, except for the phlegmatic,
and them that are old; for in these they excessiuely increase cold, crude, and
flatulent humors, which vitiate the blood, cause rheumes, inflate the melt, and
disturb the belly. But Grapes boiled in butter, and sops of bread added
thereto, and Sugar also, if they be somewhat sour, are a very pleasant meat,
and agreeable for every age and constitution: for they are less windy, more
acceptable to the stomach, and yield more and better nourishment to the body.

Of Grapes dried through the heat of the Sun are Raysons.
made Raysons: the greatest, sweetest, and fattest are the best and wholsomest,
and those we commonly call Raisons of the Sun: for they are of the greatest
and fairest Grapes. They are hot in the first degree, and moist in the second:
they yield to the body much nourishment, and the same very good, for there is
in them no ill juice at all. They are passing good for the liver, and as it
were by Nature appropriated to that part: they concoct raw humors, and by
reason of their lenifying and detersiue faculty, cleanse phlegm from the
stomach and lungs, leuigate the roughness of the winde-pipe; and are
therefore very good for the cough, and other infirmities of the breast: they
do also a little mollify and loose the belly; but the stones in them must be
taken forth, which by reason of their astringent quality, and duritie of
substance, are offensive to the breast and stomach. They are very wholesome and
good for every season, every age and constitution. The lesser and common sort
of Raisins are not so sweet in taste, but have rather a little pleasing
soreness adjoined to them, by means whereof they are more grateful to the
stomach; but they yield less nourishment to the body, and by reason of a
small astriction that is in them, they are not so profitable for the breast;
but for the same cause, they are more convenient for them that are too soluble,
or subject to fluxes, through the weakness of theretentiue faculty.

The small Raisins of Corinth, which we commonly call Currants.
Currants, are much used in meats, and that for good cause: for beside their
pleasantnes in taste, they excite the appetite, strengthen the stomach, comfort
and refresh weak bodies, and are profitable for the melt. They are very good
and wholesome for every season, age, and constitution.

All the kinds of Cherries are generally of a cold and Cherries.
moist temperature; they breed wind in the stomach, and fill the body with
crude and putrible humors. But some are far more wholesome then other: the
best principallest are those that are of a red color, and and of a sour sweet
taste, for they delight the palate, excite the appetite, and are more
acceptable to the stomach: they do moderately cool, quench thirst, attemper
the heat of the stomach and liver, repress choler, and give to the body a
more commendable juice. Being preserved, they are a most choice medicinable
nourishment: and being boiled with butter, slices of bread and sugar between
two dishes, they delight the palate, excite the appetite, and yield a good and
wholesome nourishment, especially for hot and dry bodies. The distilled water of
these, and also of the sour ones, is very good in fevers and inward
inflammations. The Cherries that be very sweet, do deiect the appetite, relax
the stomach, and engender gross and phlegmatic humors. Those that are
sour, do give unto the body no nourishment at all; but they excite the
appetite, cut gross and clammie humors in the stomach, repress the heat of
choler, and are only good for an hot choleric stomach. Cherries must be
eaten fresh and newly gathered, because they quickly corrupt, and that not
instead of meat, but for quenching of thirst, and attempering the heat of the
stomach and liver; and for the same purposes they must not be eaten after
meals, as our common preposterous use is to eat them; but when the stomach is
empty, as an hour or two before meals, because they prowoke appetite,
quickly descend from the stomach, and make the belly soluble. They are
convenient for them that are young, and for such as are of a choleric
temperature; but hurtful to the aged, and them that abound with phlegm.

The green and unripe Goose berries are cold and dry Goose-beries.
in the second degree, and of an astringent faculty: the juice of them is used
in diverse sauces for meat, instead of verjuce, which makes them not only
pleasant to the taste, but also very profitable to such as abound with choler,
and are afflicted with hot, burning, and malignant fevers: for it extinguisheth
the vehement heat of choler, very greatly resists the corruption of humors,
and labefaction of the vital and natural parts. The Goose-berries that are
indifferently ripe, are cold in the first degree, and moist in the second, and
are less binding, then when they are altogether green and unripe. They are of
a pleasant sour taste, and therefore being boiled between two dishes, with
butter, sops of bread and sugar, or as those that are skillful in Cookerie can
best tell, they make a most excellent and delightsome sauce for most kinds of
meats, which yields to the body somewhat a cold and small nourishment; but
it exciteth the appetite, quenches thirst, represseth choler, and adds a
singular grace unto the meats, and a correctorie relish also unto such as are
hot and dry, or fulsome in taste. Being eaten raw, they are very hurtful to a
cold and weak stomach, and for them that are aged, because they increase cold
and crude humors: contrariwise they are profitable to an hot stomach, because
they excite the appetite dejected by overmuch heat, and greatly cool the
inflammations both of the stomach and liver: they are also very good for
women with child, because they help their picarie affections, and notably
preserve them from abortion. But if they are immoderately eaten, they
exasperate and lode the stomach, bind the belly, and inhibit all fluxes,
except they happen to be taken into a cold stomach, for then they oftentimes
rather oppress and trouble the same by some manner of flux. To conclude, they
are so much profitable to the choleric and sanguine, as they are hurtful to
the melancholic and phlegmatic. The Goose-berries that be thoroughly or
ouer-ripe, are not, by reason of their fulsome sweetness, used in sauces,
neither are they any way good to be eaten, for they fill the stomach and
whole body with gross, crude, and corruptible humors.

Ribes, which with us are commonly known by the name of Red Currants, are
deemed to be of the same nature Ribes.
that Goose-berries are. Indeed there is a great parity of nature betweeene
the ripe Ribes, and the Goose-berries that are a little ripe; but between the
ripe Goose-berries, and the ripe Ribes, there is no comparison to be made at
all: for whereas the ripe Goose-berries consist of a very gross and fulsome
substance, the Ribes are of a most pleasant and profitable juice. They are cold
in the first degree, and moist in the second, with a little siccity also
concurring: they delight the palate, excite the appetite, quench thirst, cool
the inflammations of the stomach and liver, and wonderfully refresh and
strengthen the stomach, that is debilitated with heat: they also stay
choleric vomitings, help the Cardialgicke pains of the stomach, and
excellently repress all choleric excretions and exhalations. Wherefore they
are very profitable for them that are young, and that are of an hot and
choleric temperature; but they are greatly hurtful to the aged, to all cold
constitutions, and to such as are subject to obstructions of the breast. The
Rob, that is, the juice of the berries boiled with a third part, or somewhat
more of sugar added unto it, The Rob of Ribes.
till it become thick, and so preserved, is for all the aforesaid purposes
preferred before the raw berries themselves, except for such as are of a very
choleric and ardent temperature.

Barberies are of the same nature and force that the Ribes are, and so is also
the Conserve, or rather the Rob that is Barberies.
made of them, which is in very common use against hot, burning and choleric
distemperatures.

Raspis or Framboise being ripe, are cold in the first degree, Raspis, or
Framboise.
and temperately moist with a small astriction adjoined, especially if they be
not ouer-ripe: they are of good and laudable juice, they comfort a weak and
queasie stomach; but not so well as the Strawberie does, for they oftentimes
corrupt in the stomach: they also quench thirst, assuage the inflammations of
the throat, stomach, and liver, and cool the heat of urine. They may be
eaten by themselves, or with White Wind, Claret, or Sack; or if there be need
of cooling with Rose, or Violet-water and Sugar. They are good for them that
are young, and for hot and dry bodies; but hurtful to the phlegmatic and
aged, and all such as have cold and weak stomachs.

Stawberies are for pleasantness of taste, acceptablenesse Strawberies.
to the stomach, and goodness of juice, to be preferred before the
Framboise: being full ripe, they are cold and moist in the first degree, with a
little siccitie also adjoined. The great red garden Strawberies are the best
and wholsomest: the nourishment which they yield, is little and thin, yet
commendable and good. They are very delightsome to the taste, and acceptable to
the stomach: they excite the appetite, quench thirst, repress the ebullient
acrimonie and fluxions of blood and choler, and excellently cool the
inflammations of the stomach and liver. Being eaten before they be full ripe,
they are, by reason of their earthie substance, quickly offensive to the
stomach. In case of cooling, they may be well eaten with Rose, Violet, or
Borage-water and sugar: otherwise, with White Wind, Claret, or Sack and Sugar,
as the temperature and disposition of the body shall require. The distilled
water of them drunk with sugar, is very good for such as have choleric
stomachs, or inflamed livers, to be taken when the stomach is empty: it is
also good against the cardiacall passions, because it reuiueth the spirits, and
makes the heart merry, and likewise against the obstructions of the kidneyes,
because it provoke urine, and tempers the heat of the reins. These, as also
the Framboise, are with us very usually eaten, with the fattest and best part
of milk, and sugar, which way of eating them, is very fit and commendable for
hot and choleric bodies; but abundantly hurtful for such as have cold
stomachs, and all that are by constitution phlegmatic. There may also be made
of Strawberies, a Conserve, or rather a Rob, as I have aforeshewed of Ribes,
very profitable to all the purposes aforesaid.

The wild or voluntary Srawberies, that I may so term them, are not so good
as those that are manured in gardens, because they consist of a more terrene
nature, by reason whereof, as also of their stipticke asperity, they soon
offend the stomach; yet unto such as abound with sharp choler in their
stomachs, they are very medicinable and good: for they wonderfully assuage and
repress the acrimonious heat of choler. To conclude, Strawberies are in all
respects convenient and good for them that are young, that are of a choleric
and sanguine temperature; but very hurtful to the phlegmatic, to them that
have cold stomachs, and that are subject to the palsy, and other affects of
the sinews.

Whorts, or Whortle-beries, are cold in the latter end of Whorts.
the second degree, and dry also, with a manifest astriction, or binding
quality. They may with us very well supply the use of Myrtils, especially if
they be not too ripe, or when they are but beginning to be ripe: they are
convenient for an hot stomach, they quench thirst, bind the belly, stay
vomiting, cure the bloody flix proceeding of choler, help the choleric
passion, which is a vehement purging of choler upwards and downwards, and in a
word, they are of admirable force against the great heat and fervent ebullition
of choler. But they are greatly offensive to them that have weak, cold, and
phlegmatic stomachs: for in such, they are so far from binding the belly, or
staying of fluxes, as that they rather trouble the same, through their cold
and crude quality. In some places, the people use to eat the Wortles in cream
and milk, which way of eating them is most hurtful, except for such as are
young, and that have hot and choleric stomachs. The juice of the berries,
boyle^ with a third part of sugar added unto it, till it become thick, which
the Apothecaries call Rob, and so kept, is of very good force and efficacy for
the purposes aforesaid, and is, by reason that the cold and raw quality thereof
is in the boiling exhausted, to be preferred in all things, before the raw
berries themselves, except for them that have very hot and burning stomachs.

The common Hedge, or Hasell nut, especially if they Hasell-nuts.
be dry, are of an earthy and unprofitable substance: they are hard of
concoction, and because they very slowly pass through the belly, they are
troublesome, and hurtful to the stomach: they also breed the cough, and are
very pernicious to the lungs: they are only convenient for rusticall bodies.
Those that are newly gathered, are wholsomer then the dry: for by reason that
they are of more moist and softer substance, they are more easily concocted,
and do not altogether so much oppress the stomach. But I wish such as have
weak stomachs, and that are studious of their health, seldom or never to eat
them, because they breed phlegm, violate the lungs, and soon offend the
stomach and belly, by their windy and cloying substance.

Filberds are wholsomer then the common Hasell Nuts, Filberds.
for they consist of a better substance, and although they are also hardly
digested, yet they are profitable for the liver, especially if they be eaten
with Raysons: the immoderate use of them induces the self same hurts, that the
common Hasell Nuts do. Those that have their skins red, are the right Ponticke
Nuts, and are both for pleasantness of juice, and facility of concoction, the
best Filberds. The green ones, that are but lately gathered, are by reason of
some moisture in their substance, much wholsomer then the dry: for the dry
Nuts are hot and dry in the first degree, and in the same, more dry then hot;
and beside that they are with greater digested; they also breed very much
choler.

The dry Walnuts, or Walsh nuts, are hot and dry in the second degree: they are
of hard digestion, and of an Walnuts.
astringent faculty: they increase choler, offend the stomach, hurt the
breast, and cause the cough. Those that in keeping become oily and rank in
taste, are to be rejected, as utterly naught and unwholesome; for they are of an
hot exulcerating faculty: they altogether breed choler, and very greatly anoy
the breast, stomach, head, throat, tongue, and palate. The dry Walnuts are
only good for robustious bodies, and for such as respect not wherewith they
fill themselves. Those that are newly gathered are far wholsomer then the
dry; for they are somewhat of a moist temperature, and of a more commendable
substance; by reason whereof they are more pleasant to the taste, more
acceptable to the stomach, and of wholsomer juice. But they are also hurtful
to them that are streit chested, and that are subject to the cough, or other
affects of the lungs. The great Royal Walnut does for wholsomnes, in all
respects far exceed the rest.

Chestnuts are hot in the first degree and dry in the second: being well
digested, they yield a substantial thick Chestnuts.
nourishment; yet for all that, they are not approved for meat, except in the
time of penury, or for strong rusticall bodies, because they are of hard
concoction, and of slow and painful distribution: they also abundantly
engender wind, bind the belly, and offend the head. Being roasted under the
hot imbers, or boiled, and so eaten with salt and sugar, they are not so hard
of digestion, they more easily descend, and are less windy; yet they make the
body costiue.

The kernels of this fruict are hot in the first degree, and Pineapple or Nut.
moist in the second: they yield to the body much good and substantial
nourishment, and are also of a concocting, lenifying, and clensing faculty.
They diminish and take away the corruption of humors, and also give unto the
body a good restoratiue juice; but they are not altogether easy of digestion,
and they also offend the stomach through their acrimonie, if they be too
plentifully eaten. The newest and the whitest are the best. They must be eaten
with Honey, or Sugar: they are best for the phlegmatic, and them that be
old, with honey: for them that are young, and that are of a choleric and hot
temperature, with sugar; but they must first be macerated the space of an hour
in warm water, and then eaten; for by that means, they are more easily
concocted, and despose all their offensive acrimonie. They are of much use in
physical compositions, especially for diseases of the breast; they are of
excellent efficacy against an old cough, the asthmaticke passion, and
consumption of the lungs: for they mundifie the lungs from phlegm, repress
the ulcers of them, expectorate the putrilaginous matter, and viscous humors of
the same; and repair the strengths. They are convenient in cold seasons of the
year, for the phlegmatic, and them that be aged; and also for such as are
young in affects of the breast, being taken with Sugar.

Pistach or Fisticke Nuts are of an aromaticall savor, Fisticke Nuts.
and do for wholsomnes exceed all other Nuts. The kernels of them are much of
the same efficacy and use in physic, as be those of the Pine Apple; but they
are somewhat of an hotter temperature: the newer they are, the better and
wholsomer they are: the best way to eat them is with Rose-sugar, their skins
being first pilled off, and mace^ated the space of four or five hours or more
in Rose Water. They strengthen the stomach and liver, yield to the body a
good impinguating nourishment, by reason whereof they are very good for bodies
that are consumed, and have lost their strengths: they excite Venus, by
increasing the geniture, and fortifying the reins. They also open the
oppilations of the liver, and mesataicke veins, mundifie the reins, and
assuage their pain. They are good against the shortness of breath, for they
remove the obstructions of the breast, by clensing forth superfluous and putrid
humors that adhere to the lights and chest: for which cause, as also by reason
of their restoratiue force, they are very greatly commended, for those that
have the phthisicke, or consumption of the lungs. They are very wholesome and
good for them that be aged, and for such as are of a phlegmatic temperature;
but not so convenient, but rather hurtful to them that be young, and that are
of an hot and choleric temperature, because in such they distemper the blood,
and being much eaten, oftentimes procure the vertiginous evil.

Sweet Almonds have in them a good medicinable nourishment: Almonds.
they are of an opening, concocting, and clensing faculty, whereby they are
very medicinable to the breast and lungs. Those are best to be eaten which are
somewhat newly gathered, for they are of a good temperature in heat and
moisture, and of wholesome and pure juice; and they the worst, which are
overmuch withered; for the dryer they are, of worse temperature they are, of
lesser and worse nourishment, of harder concoction, and more offensive to the
stomach, through their slower descension. They are als^ eaten in the summer,
before they be through ripe, when as they abound with a milkie ^uyce; at which
time they are very pleasant to the taste, but they yield a gross nourishment,
and do likewise slowly descend: wherefore it is good to eat not only these,
but also the ripe and dry Almonds with Sugar and Raysous, to cause them more
lightly to descend, and with less offense to the stomach. The Almonds that
are not fully ripe, are only convenient, for them that are young, and that are
of an hot and choleric temperature: those that have their full ripenes, and
reserved all the year, so that they wax not too dry, or in their color and
substance vitiated, are convenient and good for every season, age, and
constitu^ion. There is drawn out of sweet Almonds blanched, and beaten very
small, with some convenient liquor, as barleywater, and a little Rose Water, or
such like, a white iuyce-like milk, which with Sugar Candy also put to it,
makes a most pleasant, delectable and wholesome drink for weak and sickly
persons, especially for such as are extenuated Almond milk.
through a seuerous distemperature: for it gives a pure, thin, and moystning
nourishment, which by reason that it is easily distributed, very speedily
moystneth, comfort, and refreshes the whole body, mi^igateth the heat of
choler, and procures sleep. Wherefore it is very profitably given in hot
fevers to cool and moysten, and to those also that have the pleuresie, and
spet up filthy matter: for there is in it also a concocting and lenifying
faculty, by reason whereof, it is very medicinable to the breast and lungs. It
is also good for those that are troubled with a choleric laske, or bloody
flixe, especially being aromatized with a little Cinnamon. To conclude, it is a
drink very profitable, not only in sickness, but also in health, for all hot,
choleric and dry bodies, for students, for them that are too vigilant, and
all such as are subject to infirmities of the breast and lungs, to be taken at
going to bed, and also at any other time, so the stomach be empty, especially
in hot and dry seasons of the year. It is only not convenient for the
phlegmatic.

Many fantastical people do greatly delight to eat Mushrums.
of the earthly excrescences called Mushrums; whereof some are venomous, and
the best of them unwholesome for meat: for they corrupt the humors, and give to
the body a phlegmatic, earthie, and windy nourishment, or rather detriment.
Wherefore they are convenient for no season, age, or temperature.

All the kinds of Melons or Pompions are of a cold nature, with plenty of
moisture: they have also a certain Melons.
clensing quality, by means whereof, they are medicinable to the reins; and
that clensing quality is more in their seed, then in the pulpe: for which
cause the seeds are very profitable for them that are troubled with the stone,
or strangurie. They are pleasant to the taste, but they give to the body little
nourishment, and the same scarsely good, but rather crude, and putrible. They
also breed wind, and gripings of the belly: and therefore those that are
subject to the chollicke, and that have great spleenes, must carefully eschew
them. They are convenient for hot and strong bodies; but very hurtful to the
aged, and to them that are of a phlegmatic and melancholicke temperature.

Cucumbers are of a very cold and moist temperature, Cucumbers.
even in the third degree, especially their moist quality. They yield unto the
body a cold, crude, and waterish nourishment: wherefore the use of them in
manner of a sallet with peper and vinegar, notwithstanding that many desire
them with a wonderful delight, is to be rejected, except of them that have
very hot stomachs; for to such the moderate use of them, by reason of their
cooling and moystning quality, may be sometimes very good and profitable: for
they quench thirst, greatly cool the burning heat of the stomach and liver,
and repress choler. Those Cucumbers must be chosen, which are green, and not
yet ripe; for when they be ripe and yellow, they are fulsome and unfit to be
eaten. The green and unripe Cucumbers preserved in a pickle of vinegar and
salt, are much Pickled Cucumbers.
better then those that are eaten green and vnpickled: for they are of far
better taste, and not of so crude and waterish substance. They excite the
appetite, and are a very profitable sauce for hot and dry bodies. Cucumbers
are only convenient for hot and choleric bodies, and most hurtful to the
phlegmatic, and them that have cold and moist stomachs. The seeds are also
very medicinable, as those of the Melons: they are cold and also moist, but
nothing so much as the fruict: they have an opening, clensing, and diureticke
faculty. Wherefore the emulsion of these seeds, that is, the milkie substance
of them, as also of those of the Melon, extracted with some convenient liquor,
as we do from Almonds, is of singular efficacy against sicknesses proceeding
of heat, especially for the breast, lungs, and reins that are inflamed, for
the strangurie, sharpnes of urine and exulceration of the bladder.

Gourds are cold and moist in the second degree; they Gourds.
are never eaten raw, because that then they greatly offend the stomach; but
sodden, or baked, and that way neither, but of the poorer sort of people: for
they are of a waterish and insipid substance, and do breed in the body
naughty, cold, crude and ^atulent humors: and therefore they greatly hurt cold
and phlegmatic bodies, and such as are subject to the collicke and iliacke
passions. They are only convenient for them that are of an hot and choleric
temperature: for they quench thirst, and cool the immoderate heat of the
stomach and liver. The seeds of this fruit provoke urine, and alay the
sharpnes of it: and therefore they may very profitably be used with the former
seeds in obstructions and distemperatures of the reins and bladder.

The green and unripe Beans are cold and moist in Beans.
the first degree: they yield to the body a crude, gross, and excrementall
nourishment, and fill the stomach and belly with wind: they cause
drowsinesse, and dull the senses, both inward and outward, especially the
sight, and make them pursie, that do often or immoderately eat them. The
windy and ill quality of them is much removed, if they be sodden with Orgaine
and Parsely, and afterward eaten, buttered and seasoned with salt and store of
pepper: for pepper is a special correctorie for all gross and windy meats.
They are best agreeable for them that have hot and strong stomachs, and most
hurtful to the phlegmatic, and such as are troubled with the collicke.
Beans that are almost or fully ripe, are, both by reason of the hardness of
their skins, as also of the grossenes of their substance, by much, of harder
concoction, and worse nourishment, and the dry ones are worst of all. They are
meat only for plough-men, and such as are accustomed to an hard and course
kind of food.

Pease are in their substance much like unto Beans, and eaten after the same
manner; but they are far wholsomer Pease.
then Beans; for they are less windy, and by much, of purer juice, not
breeding so gross and excrementall humors. There are three sorts of Pease
common with us: the white Pease, the gray Pease, and the green Pease. The two
first are usually eaten green before they be ripe, being first boiled, then
buttered, salted, and peppered: they are very delightsome to the pallat, easily
digested, and yield a good nourishment to the body. Wherefore they are even at
the richest tables, not unworthily rancked with the best and choicest meats.
They are convenient for all bodies, except for the phlegmatic, and such as
abound with crudities, or are much molested with the wind; but they are most
appropriate for the choleric, and such as are in their youthly and constant
age. The dry Pease as they consist of an harder substance, so they are of
harder concoction, and of dryer and much worse nourishment; notwithstanding
they are a meat somewhat pleasant to the taste, and convenient enough for them
that have strong stomachs. There is wont to be made of the white Pease boiled a
kind of pottage, and also of the green; but that is not so good, which we call
Pease-pottage; this kind of meat is most used in Lent, and in the winter
season upon fasting days. That which is made with the husks or skins remaining
in it, is not good, but for rusticks, unto whose stomachs the grossest and
hardest kinds of meat are best agreeable. But if the Pease be streined after
that they be boiled, and so the husks which are of harder concoction, and
hurtful to the stomach kept back, and then seasoned with salt and pepper,
and a little butter also added thereunto, it is a meat of meetly good
nourishment, and the more commendable, because it makes the belly soluble, and
deoppilateth or vnstoppeth the veins.

Artichocks are hot and dry in the height of the first degree, A^ichocks.
if not in the beginning of the second, and full of choleric juice. The best
are those that are young, and tender: for when their flowers be out, they are
less pleasant in taste, of harder concoction, and of an ill and melancholicke
juice, especially when their flowers begin to shed. They are unwholesome to be
eaten raw, though some do accustom so to eat them, being very young, with
pepper and salt, because they offend the stomach, hinder the concoction, and
breed ill juice. But being boiled, and eaten with butter, pepper, and a little
vinegar, they are accounted a dainty dish, and restoratiue, being very pleasant
to the taste, acceptable to the stomach, and powerful for the exciting of
Venus. But they are somewhat windy, and oftentimes offensive to the head
especially of such as are of a choleric temperature: wherefore it is not good
for such to eat too liberally of them. They are best agreeable to them that are
of a cold temperature; but hurtful to none, so the use be moderate.

Coleworts or Cole are much used to be eaten, especially Coleworts or Cabbage
Cole.
the Cabbage Cole: there is in the juice of Cole a certain nitrous or salt
quality, whereby it mightily cleanses; but the whole substance or body of
Coleworts or Cabbage is of a binding and drying faculty, because it leaves in
the decoction, the salt quality, which lies in the juice and waterie part
thereof. Cole or Cabbage is of hard concoction, and hurtful to the mouth of
the stomach: it breeds a gross and melancholicke blood, increases wind,
hurts the sight, and causes troublesome dreams. But if it be boiled a
while, and that water cast away, and afterward boiled in the broth of fat
flesh, it becomes more acceptable to the stomach, and far less hurtful
to the body. The top leaves and heads of Cole that are but a little closed,
which we commonly call Puffe-cole, are the best and wholsomest: for by reason
that they are by the heat of the Sun better concocted, they are of tenderer
substance, of easier concoction, of pleasanter taste, and of better
nourishment. But the great, hard, and compacted heads of Cole, commonly called
Cabbage, which are most desired of the common sort of people, are, by reason of
much indigested matter in them, of hardest concoction, and of worser
nourishment. They are only convenient for such as have strong stomachs, and
that use great labor: for unto robustious and rusticke people nothing is
hurtful that fills the belly. Cole or Cabbage is best to be eaten in the
cold seasons of the year; but the young leaves or buds of Cole are also in the
spring time commendable. The use of Cole or Cabbage is not convenient for them
that are aged, that lead a studious kind of life, that have weak stomachs,
that are of a melancholicke temperature, or troubled with wind.

Carrots are moderately hot, and something moist: Carrots and Parseneps.
Parseneps temperately hot, and more dry then moist: they are used to be eaten
first sodden, then buttered etc, and the Carrots are oftentimes eaten with
flesh. They are pleasant to the taste, and somewhat of hard concoction,
especially the Parsnep. Parsneps give to the body much good and substantial
nourishment; but the nourishment which comes of the Carrot is not much, and
the same not so thick and substantial: they neither bind nor loose the
belly, for they are of an indifferent distribution; but the Carrot is somewhat
more easily distributed, then the Parsenep: they are both somewhat windy and
also venerious, especially the Parsenep. Their flatulent quality, and
slownesse of concoction is somewhat removed, if they be well and exquisitely
boiled, and afterward dressed with butter, vinegar, and pepper. They are
convenient for every ageand constitution; except for the phlegmatic, and them
that are entered within the limits of old age, or are much subject to the
winde-collicke, or obstructions of the stomach and mesarick veins; and to such
the Parsnep is more disagreeing then the Carrot.

Turnips and Nauewes are judged to be all one in temperature Turnips, and
Navewes.
and virtues: thy are moderately hot and moist; but I suppose the Nauewe to be
a little drier then the Turnep. Being well dressed, they are pleasant to the
taste, acceptable to the stomach, easily concocted, and engender meetly good
nourishment, somewhat phlegmatic; but very flatulent. The often and much use
of them is hurtful to the stomach, fills and puffs up the body with
crude, pituitous, and flateous humors, which breeds obstructions in the
veins and pores, and annoyeth the sinews. But the crude and windy quality
of them is well corrected, if they be first a while boiled in water, and
afterward in the broth of fat flesh, and then eaten with plenty of pepper,
etc. They are convenient for every age and temperature, except for them that
are very phlegmatic, or often vexed with the wind.

Skirret, or Skirwort roots, are an excellent medicinable Skirret-roots.
meat, they are usually eaten boiled with vinegar, salt, and a little oil,
after the manner of a Sallad: they are also dressed after other fashions,
according to the skill of the Cook, and the desire of the Eater. They are
moderately hot, and somewhat moist: they delight the palate, excite the
appetite, and are easily concocted: they comfort the stomach, and give, though
not much, yet commendable nourishment: they also provoke urine, open
obstructions, and are with all of a venerous windiefacultie. They are good for
every age and constitution.

Potato roots are of a temperate quality, and of strong Potatoes.
nourishing parts: the nutriment which they yield is, though somewhat windy,
very substantial, good and restoratiue, surpassing the nourishment of all
other roots or fruits. They are diversely dressed and prepared, according to
every man's taste and liking: Somevse to eat them, being roasted in the embers,
sopped in wine, which way is specially good: but in what manner soever they be
dressed, they are very pleasant to the taste, and do wonderfully comfort,
nourish, and strengthen the body, and they are very wholesome and good for
every age and constitution, especially for them that be past their consistent
age.

Iringo-roots are hot and dry in the second degree, with Iringo-roots,
a tenuity of substance: they strengthen the stomach and liver, discuss
wind, and are of excellent efficacy for all infirmities of the kidneyes, both
cleansing and strengthening them. The roots condited, or preserved with sugar,
do exceedingly refresh and comfort the body, and restore the natural
moisture. They are very greatly auailable for old and aged people, and for such
as are weak by nature, refreshing and restoring the one, and amending the
defects of nature in the other.

Galicke is hot and dry in the fourth degree: it yields to the body no
nourishment at all, it engendereth a naughty Garlic,
and sharp choleric blood: and therefore such as are of hot complexion, must
carefully abstain from it, especially in hot seasons. Yet it is good for them
that are cold and moist by constitution, and that abound with phlegmatic,
gross, and clammie humors, for it heateth the body exceedingly, helps the
concoction, digesteth and consumes crude and raw humors, dissolueth wind,
atrenuateth and makes thin, thick and gross humors, cutteth such as are
tough and clammie, digesteth and consumes them. Also it kills worms,
prouokes urine, excites Venus, opens obstructions, helps the cough, and pains
of the breast proceeding of cold, and likewise the windecollicke. It is also
an enemy to all cold poisons, and to the bitings of venomous beasts, a remedy
to such as are constrained to take naughty corrupt drinks or meats, and a
Preservative against contagious and pestilent air, and therefore not unfitly
termed, The Country-mans Treacle. But if it be often or immoderately eaten, it
causes headache, and hurts the sight. Being moderately taken, it is
convenient for the phlegmatic, and such as are past their constant age,
especially in cold seasons; but it is altogether hurtful to young men, and to
such as are of hot constitution; and it is at all times and seasons, hurtful
to women with child, and to them that give suck,

Onions are in their temperature and faculties much Onions.
like unto Garlic, but not so extreme hot, they are also more delightsome to
the palate, and more acceptable to the stomach. They help the appetite,
extenuate gross and viscous humors, provoke urine, and remove loathsomeness
of the stomach, and other hurts that come by meats or drinks of evil quality.
Being eaten raw, they nourish not at all, and are very hurtful to those that
are choleric; but good for such as are full of raw and phlegmatic humors.
But if they be sliced and macerated a while in water before they be eaten,
their acrimonious and hurtful quality is thereby something diminished, and
they become more sweet and pleasant to the taste, and are a sauce good, even
for the choleric, especially if there be any superfluity of moisture in the
stomach: for they notably stir up appetite to meat, comfort the slomacke,
and cause good concoction. But being too often, or immoderately eaten raw, they
engender ill and corruptible humors in the stomach, inflame the blood, cause
drowsinesse and the head ach, hurt the sight, confound the memory, disturb
and dull the understanding. Being sodden, especially in the broth of good
flesh, and so eaten with convenient sauce, as butter, vinegar, and a little
pepper, they depose all their hurt, and become somewhat nutritive, and are
accommodate, not only for phlegmatic persons, but also for all other, so the
use be moderate. Wherefore being used in pottage, or othewise boy led for
sauces, they are not hurtful, but wholesome and comfortable to the stomach.
Onions are hurtful to hot temperatures, and to them that be young; but
profitable to such as are of a contrary temperament and age.

Scallions and Chibols are much of the nature of Onions: Scallions and Chibols.
they are delightsome to the palate, and usually eaten with vinegar at the
beginning of meals, for exciting the appetite, and comforting the stomach
that is dejected by overmuch heat, they help the concoction, correct the
euilnesse of bad meats. But the immoderate use of them is hurtful, even as of
onions. Such as desire to eat them in Sallads, I advise, especially if they be
of hot constitutions, that they take with them Lettuce, Sorrel, and Purselane,
that the heat of them, may by the cold and moisture of these be attempered.
They are not good for young bodies, nor the often or much use, for any that are
of hot temperature: they are best agreeable for cold constitutions, and for
such as undergo great labor, and exercise of body.

Leekes are hot in the third degree, and dry in the second, Leekes.
and of an attenuating and abstersive faculty; yet very unwholesome: for they
engender a naughty melancholic blood, breed wind, and replete the head with
melancholic fumes, which hurt the sight, and cause troublesome and fearful
dreams: they are also, by reason of their acrimonie, very hurtful to the
stomach and sinews, especially being eaten raw. Being boiled, they are less
hurtful, by reason that they lose much of their sharpness, and make the body
a little soluble; and yet being so used, they yield to the body no good
nourishment at all. They are not convenient for any age, season, or
temperature, especially for the choleric and melancholic; but are a meat
only allowable for rusticke and robustious persons.

Ciues, or Chiues, are of a mixed nature between the Onion Ciues.
and the Leeke, participating of them both, as may be gathered, both by their
smell and taste: they attenuate, or make thin, open, and provoke urine; yet
engender hot and gross vapors, which are hurtful to the eyes and brain.
They work all the effects that the Leeke does, but not altogether so
hurtfully: wherefore they are less offensive, and more wholesome for the pot,
then Leekes.

Lettuce is cold and moist in the second degree: it is of Lettuce.
easy concoction, of meetly good nourishment, and of a soluble faculty,
especially if it be boiled. It has this commendation, that of all herbs, it
breeds least evil juice, and that it is with least offense eaten raw. The
nourishment that it yields, is not much in quantitity; but it notably cools
a hot stomach, and helps it when it is troubled with choler: it quenches
thirst, preserves the blood from distemperature, causes sleep, asswageth
pain of the head, proceeding of heat, and is very profitable for Nurses that
are of an hot and dry temperature: for whereas, through heat and dryness, they
grow barraine and dry of milk, it increases milk, by tempering the heat and
siccity of their bodies. But in bodies that are naturally cold, it does not
increase milk at all, but is rather an hinderance thereunto. This herb is
much used in Sallads in the summer time, with vinegar and sugar, and that not
unworthily, for it procures appetite to meat, and tempereth the heat of the
stomach and liver. Some use to eat oil also with it in their sallads, which
is not good, especially if it be not a true Oil Omphacine: for Lettuces and
Oil eaten together, Lettuces eaten with oil in sallads, to what bodies only
convenient.
do very greatly weaken and relax the stomach; but for the same reason, it
may very profitably be admitted to them, that are affected with overmuch
astriction of the stomach. It was used in ancient times, to be eaten only at
the end of supper, for repressing the vapors that come of intemperate eating
and drinking, and for procuring of sleep: Moderata enim veterum erant prandia,
coenae vero crapulae and ingluuiei dedicatae. But in these days, it is
commonly eaten at the beginning of meals: In my judgment, it may well be
eaten at both these times, to the health of the body: for being taken at the
beginning of meal, it does stir up the appetite, which oftentimes is
dejected by overmuch heat, and eaten after, or at the end of our meals, it
defends the head from superfluous and offensive vapors, by reason that it
cools and inhibiteth the rising up of them from the stomach into the head.
But the often and much use of Lettuce, does weaken the stomach, and infringe
The hurts that come to the body, by the too much use of L^ttuce.
the natural heat, dim the sight, by incrassating the animal spirits, and
hinders procreation, Semen, e^sque matoriam, infrigidando, ac extinguendo, and
makes the body lumpish. The use of Lettuce is very hurtful to phlegmatic
and melancholic bodies; but it becomes less hurtful unto them and all
other, that are not by constitution impensiuely hot, if Mints be eaten with it;
or if it be boiled and eaten with vinegar and pepper: for Mints do
excellently correct the cold and crude moisture of Lettuce, and corroborate
the stomach; and being boiled, it is more easily concocted, and yields to
the body more, and better nourishment. But whether it be eaten raw, or boiled,
as the constitution of the body shall rerequire, this is certain, that there
cannot be found any simple medicinable meat, wherewith sleep may be procured,
and the unquietness of the spirits, and heat of choler appeased, as with it.
It is of all herbs, the best and wholsosomest for hot seasons, for young men,
and them that abound with choler, and also for the Sanguine, and such as have
hot stomachs. It cannot be spoken with how great efficacy, it does, being
eaten with vinegar, extinguish the burning heat of the stomach.

Purselane is cold in the third degree, and moist in the Purselane.
second: it is much used to be eaten raw in sallads in the summer-season: it
cools an hot stomach, provoke appetite, quenches thirst, helps the
inflammations of the liver and kidneyes, and also of the head and eyes, by
extinguishing the raging heat of choler, and allaying the distemperature of the
blood. In a word, being eaten with vinegar, it is of admirable force against
the burning heat of the stomach, against choleric vomitings, and
inflammations of all the inward parts. But the often and too much use of it,
weakneth the stomach, and hurts the sight. It is also boiled, and eaten with
oil, salt, and vinegar, in manner of a sallad, and then it is of easier
concoction; but the nourishment that comes of it, being eaten either raw, or
boiled, is very little, cold, gross, and moist, which unto the phlegmatic,
to the aged, and to such as have cold stomachs, is greatly hurtful; but very
greatly profitable to choleric, and also to the sanguine, and all such as
have hot stomachs, or any way subject to inflammations of the Purselane
preserved in pickle, a very wholesome Sau^e.
inward parts. If it be preserved in a pickle made of vinegar and salt, as is
usually done for Sampier, it becomes a very wholesome sauce for every season,
age, and constitution: for so it rather heateth then cools the stomach, and
by reason of an abstersive faculty, which by that means it acquireth, purges
the stomach of gross and putrid humors.

Sea-Purselane is moderately hot, and full of indigested Sea-Purselane.
moisture: the leaves thereof are boiled, and preserved in Pickle, as Capers or
Sampier are, and eaten in the same manner at tables: they excite the appetite,
and are pleasant to the taste.

Prick-madam is of a watery substance, and cold in the Prick-madam
third degree: it is used for a pot herb, and also in sallads in the
summer-season, in which it has a pleasant taste: it is of singular force
against the heart-burne, and all inward inflammations. It is very wholesome for
the choleric, and such as are young, and have hot stomachs; but not
convenient for the phlegmatic, and them that be aged.

Spinach, or Spinach, is cold in the first degree, and evidently Spinach.
moist almost in the second: it is commonly used in brothes or pottage, and in
sallads also, when it is young and tender. It is also boiled, and eaten, being
prepared with butter, vinegar, etc. but it soon weakneth the stomach,
increases wind, and waterish humors, and yields to the body little or no
nourishment at all: it makes the belly soluble, moderately cools the lungs,
represseth choler, lenifieth the asperity of the throat and wind pipe, and is
good for the breast that is affected with immoderate heat. It is hurtful for
the phlegmatic, and such as have cold stomachs; but convenient for the
choleric, and them that have hot stomachs.

Blites, or Bleets, and Orach, are near of one nature Blites and Orach.
and faculty: the Bleete is cold and moist in the second degree: Orach is cold
in the first, and moist in the second: they are reputed among the number of
pot-hearbes, and are in some places eaten boiled, as other sallad-hearbes are:
the only good property in them is this, that they make the belly somewhat
soluble, for they are of themselves unsavory, of a crude and waterish
substance, and therefore of little or no nourishment at all. They weaken and
annoy the stomach, especially in such as are phlegmatic, they are only
allowable for choleric and dry bodies.

There are three sorts of Beets, the white, the red, and Beetes.
the dark green: the last is not to be reputed among alimentarie simples.
The white Beete is a common Pothearbe, it is cold in the first degree, and
moist in the second: the other kinds are somewhat dry, and all of them
abstersive, by reason that they have a certain salt and nitrous quality
joined with them; but the white Beete least of all. The white and red Beets
being eaten, boiled in the same manner, as Lettuces are, do quickly descend,
open the obstructions of the liver and spleen, and make the belly soluble.
They yield to the body very little nourishment, and being much eaten, they are
offensive to the stomach; but the red Beete is to be preferred before the
other. The broths or pottage wherein they be boiled, are good for such as are
wont to be costiue, or subject to obstructions of the liver and spleen; but
the leaves themselves eaten, are only convenient for such as have strong
stomachs. The leaves of the great red Beete, or Roman Beet boiled, and eaten
with butter, or oil, vinegar, and pepper is a most The great red Roman Beet.
pleasant and delicate sallad, or meat. But what excellent and dainty meat
might be made of the red and beautiful root, which is to be preferred before
the leaves, as well in beauty, as in goodness; I leave to such as are expert in
Cookery, assuring them that they may make thereof many and diverse dishes
delightful to the eye, pleasant to the taste, and wholesome to the body.

Mercury is much used among other pot-hea^bes: it Mercury.
is moderately hot and dry, and of an abstersive faculty: it makes the belly
soluble, and euacuateth choler, phlegm, and waterish humors. It is very good
to be used in broths or pottage, for such as are costiue and subject to
obstructions.

Mallows are are also numbered among the pot-herbes: Mallows.
the best and wholsomest of them is the curled Mallow, called of the vulgar
sort, French Mallows, and next to them the common Mallow: they are a little
hot, and of a moist and slimie substance: they are not good to be eaten boiled,
as Lettuce and some other herbs are, because they Mallows very hurtful to
the stomach.
engender a gross and slimie juice, which is very offensive to the stomach,
inducing loathsomnes, by weakening and relaxing the same; but being used in
broths or pottage, they make the belly soluble, and are less hurtful to the
stomach. They are profitable for such as are wont to be costiue, and affected
with too much astriction of the stomach. They are for physic uses of
singular efficacy in all obstructions and inflammations of the reins and
bladder.

Sorell is cold and dry in the second degree, and because it is sour, it
cutteth and extenuateth tough and gross Sorell.
humors: it exciteth the appetite, quenches thirst, cools an hot stomach,
mitigateth the inflammations of the liver, opens the obstructions thereof,
and is very profitable in all hot and pestilentiall fevers; for it strongly
represseth choler, and marueilously preserves the humors from putrefaction.
Wherefore in the time of pestilence, or any evil constitution of the air, to
prevent infection, it is good oftentimes, especially mornings fasting, to chew
the leaves of Sorell, and suck down the juice. And this proves that
Greene-sauce is not only good to procure appetite, to cool an hot stomach,
and to temper the heat of the liver, but also wholesome against contagion. The
like may be said of the juice hereof, which makes a very profitable and
pleasant sauce for many meats, especially in hot seasons. A posset made of the
juice hereof with some midling Ale or Beer, is very good for such as are
troubled with any hot ague, or inward inflammation, for it exceedingly cools
the body, and quenches thirst. A syrup made of the juice hereof, is of
excellent efficacy in all hot and pestilentiall fevers, and a present remedy
in all fluxes, especially of blood. The leaves sodden and eaten in manner of a
spinnach tart, or otherwise, loosneth the belly, and does attemper and cool
the blood exceedingly. The young and tender leaves are good in sallads with
other herbs, especially with For the one does correct the siccitie, the other
the frigiditie of the Sorell. Endive and Succorie.
Lettuce and Mints, the mixture of which three do make a very wholesome and
delicate sallade. Sorell is good in hot seasons for such as are young, for the
choleric, and the sanguine; but hurtful to the melancholicke.

Endive and Succorie, because they are much like in operation, I join them
together. Succor^e is completely cold in the first degree, and dry in the
second: Endive is cold in the first degree, and whilst it is young, it is
rather moist then dry, and is much like to Lettuce in taste and efficacy.
They are somewhat astringent to the stomach; but by reason that they be
something bitter, they do also cleanse and open, especially the obstructions of
the liver and gall: they repress choler, and are excellent, as well in meat as
medicine, for an hot stomach and liver. The young and tender leaves and stems,
which are best for meat, because they are in taste more pleasant, and less
offensive to a weak stomach, are eaten either raw in sallads with Mints and
other like herbs, which way they are wholesome for an hat stomach; or boiled
and afterward eaten with oil and vinegar in manner of a sallade, and so they
are less offensive to a cold and weak stomach: for to be eaten raw, they are
very hurtful to them that have cold and weak stomachs, and that are subject
to distillations. They are also uery wholesome to be boiled in broths: but what
way soever they be used, they temper the heat of the stomach and liver, cleanse
the blood, singularly open the obstructions of the liver, and strengthen the
same, especially Succorie: for among medicinable nourishments there is none
that does so greatly delight the liver, and profit it being inflamed, and by
reason of siccitie obstructed, as Succorie does. They are not good for the
aged; but very profitable for such as are young, for the choleric, sanguine,
and them that have hot stomachs.

Dandelion is like in temperature and effect to Succorie: Dandelion.
it is good to be used in pottage, or boiled whole in broths, or eaten in
sallads, and is effectual for those things, for which Succorie is.

Borage and Buglosse are hot and moist in the first degree: they purify the
blood, expel melancholy, and have Borage and Buglosse.
a special property of comforting and exhilarating the heart. Whereby it
appears that the custom of putting or macerating them, especially the
flowers and freshest leaves, In wine, is very good, and cheifely to be
frequented of students, and such as are subject to melancholy: they are also
good in broths for such as are weak, sad, and melancholicke. The flowers are
very good in sallads, and the conserve made of them does perform all the
aforesaid things with greater force and efficacy. The leaves boiled and eaten
in manner of a Spinnach tart, or otherwise, are very wholesome; for they
engender good humors, and make the body soluble. They are good for every
season, age, and temperature. Lang de beuf is in all things Lang de beuf
of like operation with Borage and Buglosse.

Burnet is dry in the end of the second degree, if not Burnet.
in the beginning of the third, and hot in the first: it is very astringent,
and therefore effectual to stop the laske, and all fluxes of blood, and to
repress choleric vomitings, being boiled in broths for the purpose, or used
any other way. It is also very effectual against the plague, and other affects
of the heart, as sowning, and the trembling thereof, especially being macerated
in wine, and the same drunken: for the leaves being put into wine, especially
The excellent virtues of Burnet in wine.
Claret, yield unto it not only an excellent relish in drinking, but also
makes it much more comfortable to the heart and spirits: it notably
strengthens the stomach, expels melancholy, and makes the heart merry.
Burnet is good for every age, season, and temperature, especially for the aged,
and such as are subject to melancholy.

Cinquefoyle is dry in the second degree, and hot in the beginning of the
first: it has an astringent and consolidating Cinquefoyle.
faculty, and therefore very profitable to be used when there is need of
binding, as in fluxes etc. It is a very good pot-herbe for such as are too
laxatiue, of what age or constitution soever they are of; but if there be no
need of binding, it is not convenient for the aged, nor for such as are of a
melancholicke temperature.

Strawberrie leaves are in temperature and faculty much like unto Cinquefoyle.
Strawberrie leaves. Violets.


Violets are temperately cold and moist: they are good for all inflammations,
especially of the lungs, for the hoarsenes of the breast, and asperitie of the
winde-pipe: they extinguish thirst, temper the sharpnes of choler, mitigate the
burning heat of fevers, and cool the inflammations of the liver, kidneies, and
bladder. The green and freshest leaves of Violets boiled in broths or possets
with other cooling herbs, as the young and tender buds or leaves of Endive,
Succorie, Lettuce etc. are very good to cool, moisten, and make the body
soluble, to avoid choler, and to bring the parts inflamed to a good
temperature. The flowers are to be preferred before the leaves, for by reason
of their sweet and pleasant smell, they are also very comfortable to the
spirits. These and also the flowers of Borage, and of the Rose, are with good
authority used The flowers of Violets, of Borage, and of the Rose are very
wholesome in Sallads.
in sallads; for they please a weak stomach, comfort the heart, temper and
purify the blood, expel sadness, and are enemies to melancholy. Of Violet
flowers with sugar, there is made a Conserve, and also a Syrup, most
effectual for all the purposes aforesaid. There is likewise made of Violets
and Sugar, certain Plates, called, Violet Tables, which are very pleasant to
the taste, and comfortable to the heart and spirits.

All the sorts of Roses have in them diverse and sundry Roses.
faculties, because they do consist of diverse parts: for there are in them
both earthie, waterie, and aerie parts; which notwithstanding are not in all
Roses after one sort: for in one kind these excel, in another those. As in
the White, Damask, and Musk Roses, moist, aerie, and spiritual parts are
predominant, by reason whereof they are more forceable to make the belly
soluble; but this their solutiue faculty lies altogether in the juice of
them, and not in the distilled water. The juice of the Damask Rose does move
to stool, more then of the White; but most effectually of the Musk Rose: yet
the Damask Rose is for goodness, and pleasantnes of smell fittest for medicine,
or meat, and therefore is more commonly used. In the Red Roses, earthie parts
are predominant, and by reason that they are of a more earthie substance, they
are also of a drying and binding quality, yet not without certain moisture
adjoined while they be fresh, which they loose when they be dried: and for this
cause their juice is of an abstersive and solutiue faculty, and their infusion
does also make the body soluble, yet not so much as of the others aforesaid.
But all the Roses have a predominant cold temperature in the first degree:
being dried and their moisture gone, they do bind and dry, and likewise
cool, but not so much as when they are fresh. The sweet and pleasant smell of
Roses is very comfortable to all the senses, spirits, and principal parts of
the body, and so is the distilled water of them, which does also gently temper
and coolethe inward parts. The same being put into iunketting dishes, sauces
and such like other things, gives unto them a delectable and comfortable
taste. The Syrup made of the infusion of Roses, called of the Apothecaries,
Syrup of Roses laxatiue, is a most singular and gentle loosening medicine; for
it proiecteth not only those excrements which stick to the bowels, but also
carries downwards out of the stomach and mesaraicke veins, raw, phlegmatic
and choleric humors, and also alayeth the extremity of heat in agues and
burning fevers. The use thereof is profitable to make the belly loose and
soluble, and may be taken at all times, and of all sorts of Sy^upe of Roses
laxat^e not good for such as have weak and moist stomachs. Conserve of Red
Roses.
people both old and young, except of such as have weak and moist stomachs;
for by reason of the relaxing faculty thereof, it makes the stomach more
slack and weak. The Conserve of Red Roses comfort the heart and liver,
strengthens a weak stomach that is moist and raw, and stays all fluxes
both in men and women: It is passing good to be used of students, especially at
their going to bed, who for the most part have weak stomachs, and subject unto
Rheumes, Coughs and Consumptions: for it is of a notable abstersive,
consolidatiue, and confortatiue faculty. Roses boiled in clean water until
they be very Roses preserved.
tender, and afterward with a competent quantity of sugar preserved, are so
well for goodness, as pleasantnes of taste, to be preferred before the crude or
raw Conserve, especially for such as have very weak and feeble stomachs. The
like may be said of Sugar-Roset, which is very delightsome Sugar Roset.
to the pallat, and comfortable to the stomach: it strengthens the heart, and
remoueth the trembling thereof, comfort the brain, and is, by reason of its
clensing and consolidating faculty, of singular efficacy in consumptions of
the lungs. The use of it is most profitable for them that have weak and crude
stomachs, or are affected with superfluous moisture in the lungs, and subject
to consumptions.

Gillowflowers some are in color white, some purple, and some yellow. As they
are in beauty, and sweetness, so Gillowflowers.
they are in virtue and wholsomnes; but the yellow Gillowflowers are of
greatest efficacy. They are somewhat of an hot and dry temperature: they
notably comfort the heart, delight the brain, and senses, and reviue the
spirits. They may be preserved in Sugar in the same manner as we do Roses, and
so they are good against pestilentiall infections, the palsy, crampe, and such
like infirmities of the brain and sinews. The same flowers infused in
vinegar, and set in the sun for certain days, as we do for making of
Rose-vinegar, do make a very pleasant and comfortable vinegar, good to be used
in time of contagious sicknesses, and very profitable at all times for such as
have feeble spirits, and that are subject unto sownings, as well smelled unto,
as eaten as a sauce with meats.

The flowers of Marigold are temperately hot, and Marigold.
somewhat dry with all: they strengthen and comfort the heart, and expel any
noisome infection: wherefore the use of them in pottage or broths is very
commendable. They are of no less force, being dried, and so kept all the
winter for the same purpose. They are very wholesome for every season, age, and
temperature, saving for the choleric, and sanguine, that are much subject to
inflammations. The leaves of Marigold are in no respect like to the flowers in
virtue and operation: the only property that they have is to mollify the
belly, and procure solublenes, being used as a pot herb.

Asparagus or Sperage is hot in the beginning of the first Asparagus.
degree, and temperately moist: the first and tender sprouts thereof boiled,
and afterward seasoned with oil, vinegar, salt and pepper, and eaten in
manner of a sallade, are pleasant to the taste, acceptable to the stomach,
easily concocted, and yield to the body a moist and wholesome nourishment: they
also gently loose the belly, open the obstructions of the liver and melt,
cleanse the breast, excite Venus, and are good for obstructions of the kidneys
and bladder. They must not be eaten cold, for then they are nauseous to the
stomach: and if the first water wherein they are boiled, be cast away, and
they again sodden in fresh, or rather in the broth of flesh, they depose all
their bitterness, and become more pleasant to the taste, and more comfortable to
the stomach. They are good for every age and temperature, especially for old
men, and such as are subject to obstructions.

The buds or first sprouts of the Hop which come forth Hop-buds.
in the spring, are good while they be tender to be boiled and eaten with oil
and vinegar in manner of a sallade, as those of Asparagus are: they are hot and
moist in the first degree, they are pleasant to the taste, and of very pure and
wholesome juice: they do effectually open the obstructions of the bowels,
especially of the liver, and by a certain singular prerogative, mundifie and
purge the blood, both in opening and procuring of urine, and likewise in making
the body soluble, avoiding thereby the super fluities of choler, and
melancholy. Wherefore the use of them is in the spring time most accommodate
for every age and constitution, especially for the choleric and melancholicke.

Parsley is hot and dry in the second degree: it is among Parsley.
the pot-hearbes the chiefest, and in such frequent use that no meat is thought
to be well dressed without it, and no table to be well set forth, if even the
dishes themselves be not adorned therewith. In sauces it is very pleasant to
the taste, and comfortable to the stomach: to broths it likewise gives a
pleasant and delightsome relish: it exciteth the appetite, discusseth wind,
mundi^ieth the stomach, provoke urine, opens all obstructions of the
inward parts, especially of the liver, reins, and matrice. The roots have
likewise an opening and dissoluing faculty: wherefore the use of them in
broths is very wholesome and good; for besides their medicinable quality, they
make the broth delightful to the taste, and very agreeable to the stomach.
Parsley eaten raw is not altogether of laudable nourishment; for it breeds a
choleric blood, and is hardly digested: wherefore it is good to eat it but in
small quantity, and that together with Lettuce, and such other like cooling
herbs. But being boiled, and so any way used, it is of better taste, of
easier concoction, and of far more laudable nourishment. Raw Parsley is
hurtful to the choleric; but being boiled, it is wholesome and convenient for
every age, season, and temperature. Women with child may not be bold in the
use of Parsley; for by reason of its opening and relaxing faculty, it may
prove dangerous unto them.

Alexanders are of an attenuating, and abstergent faculty, more hot and biting
in taste then Parsley: they discuss Alexanders.
wind, open the obstructions of the liver and melt, and provoke urine more
effectually then Parsley does. The young leaves and little tender stems boiled,
and eaten, seasoned with vinegar, in the beginning of the spring, are pleasant
to the taste, acceptable to the stomach, and of wholesome nourishment. The
same being also preserved in a pickle of vinegar and salt, are a very wholesome
sauce with meats, exciting the appetite, clensing and comforting the stomach,
and removing oppilations. They are convenient for every age and constitution,
especially for the phlegmatic, and such as are subject to obstructions.

Penieroyall or Organie is hot and driein the third degree, Penie-royall or
Organie.
and of an excellent extenuating, dissoluing, mundifying, and corroborating
faculty: It is very good for such as have squamish and waterie stomachs; for
it notably strengthens the same, helps the concoction, and asswageth the
pains both of the stomach, and also of the belly proceeding of crude and
flatulent humors: It also provoke urine, cleanses the lungs, and mundifieth
the breast from gross and thick humors. In a word, it is of all pot herbs
the best and wholsomest; for it is of such an excelient smell, and delectable
savor, that it makes every thing wherein, or wherewith it is boiled no less
wholesome, then sauourie. It is good at all times, and for all sorts of people,
especially in the Spring, Winter, and Autumn, and for the phlegmatic,
melancholicke, and such as are aged.

Hyssop is for smell and taste, but little inferior unto Organie: it is hot
and dry in the third degree, and also of Hyssop.
an excellent attenuating and mundifying faculty: it is comfortable to the head
and stomach, and passing good for an old cough, and shortness of breath: for
it notably purges and mundifieth the breast and lungs from gross and
phlegmatic humors. It is at all times, especially in the spring and winter,
most expedient and profitable for the aged, the phlegmatic, and all such as
abound with cold and rheumaticke humors.

Time is a very aromaticall and comfortable herb, hot Time.
and dry in the third degree, and of a discussing and mundifying faculty: it is
very comfortable to a weak stomach, and of singular and excellent efficacy
against the windiness of it, the Collicke Iliacke, and nephriticke passions,
the cough, shortness of breath, melancholy, and obstructions of the matrice.
The herb dried and decocted, or made into powder, and so any way used, is of
far greater efficacy, then when it is green, for all the purposes
aforesaid. The use of Time is most appropriate for the phlegmatic, and the
melancholic; and being timely and moderately used, convenient for every age
and constitution.

Sauory is hot and dry in the third degree, of an attenuating, Sauaury.
discussing, and mundefying faculty: it comfort and strengthens the
stomach that is weak, and prone to vomit, helps the digcstion, discusseth
wind, comfort the brain, quickneth the sight, cleanses the breast, and
passages of urine. The herb dried and used, as I have said of Time is of
greater efficacy, then when it is green: in a word, it is altogether of like
virtue with Time, especially good for all such as abound with cold and
phlegmatic humors.

Mint is hot and dry in the beginning of the third degree, Mints.
whereof are diverse kinds, but two only appertaining to meat, and they also
most fragant in savor, that is the red garden Mint, and the Speare-Mint, and
of these two, the Speare-Mint is the more excellent, both for savor and virtue.
The fragrant smell of them does very greatly comfort the brain and spirits,
stir up the senses, especially the memory, and make the heart cheerful:
Wherefore I advise all such as lead a studious kind of life, to smell
oftentimes unto them. They do maruellously corroborate a cooled and weak
stomach, stay the hicket, and vomiting, and looseness of the belly, dry up
and consume crude and superfluous humors in the stomach, excite the appetite,
and cause good digestion: in a word, they are of all herbs, the wholsomest
for the stomach, and to it most acceptable. They are passing good in sallads,
for they give Mints very wholesome in sallads.
unto them a very pleasant, odoriferous, and comfortable relish; but they must
be mingled with Lettuce, and other cooling herbs, for otherwise, by reason of
their heat, they will quickly offend an hot stomach and liver. They inhibit
the crudling of milk in the stomach, and therefore it is good to macerate
them a while in milk, that is to be drunken, for fear lest that it should
cruddle or wax sou^e in the stomach. They notably strengthen the seminall
vessels, incrassate and make fruitful the geniture, especially the red garden
Mint: wherefore it is of special and singular use in all seminall fluxes. They
are also of singular use in the Stone and Strangury, being boiled in wine, or
possets for the purpose, and also in broths: for besides that, they dissolve
and consume the crudities of the stomach, and strengthen the same, they also
purge the reins, and vrinall passages, of gross and slimie humors. The juice
of Mints, taken with the juice of a sour Pomegranet, or with some other
competent thing for the purpose, effectually stays vomiting, and scowring in
the choleric passion, and also the effusion of blood, from the inward parts.
Mints boiled in White wine with a little vinegar added thereto, and the mouth
washed therewith, helps the ill savor of the mouth, and putrefaction of the
gums. The dry powder of Mints, taken with warm milk, is a very good medicine
for worms in children, or old folks. The powder of Mint^, is also of
singular efficacy against cruditie, and rawnesse of the stomach, and
effectual also for most of the purposes aforesaid. The often use of Mints is
hurtful to hot and dry bodies; but very profitable to the aged, phlegmatic,
and melancholic.

As Mints are appropriate to the stomach: so Bawme Bawme, and Basil,
and Basil are to the heart. Bawme is hot and dry in the second degree, and
Basil is likewise hot in the second degree; but has a superfluous moisture
adjoined with it. They are singular good (especially Baulme) for the heart and
infirmities thereof, for they strengthen the vital spirits, expel all
melancholy and sadness, and make the heart merry. Bawme is also good for a
moist and cold stomach, to help the concoction, stay vomiting, and to open
the obstructions of the brain. It is an herb greatly to be esteemed of
Students, for by a special property, it drives away heaviness of mind,
sharpneth the understanding, and increases memory. Wherefore it is good to be
used in b^oths, or eaten by it self in manner of a sallad, with oil and
vinegar, and sometimes also with Lettuce, Purselane, and other herbs. Basil
I deem to be rather fit for medicine, then for meat, because it is of ill
juice, of hard concoction, offensive to the stomach, filling both it and the
belly with wind: and being much eaten, it is also very hurtful to the sight.
But yet it is worthy to be esteemed for the sweet savor thereof, which is very
comfortable to the heart, and good also for the head, so the brain be not
weak, for it causes headache in such as have weak brains, by reason of the
strong savor which it has, especially being often smelled vntc. Bawme is good
in sallads and broths, for every age and constitution, especially for the
phlegmatic and melancholic; but Basil not convenient for any.

Marjorame is hot and dry in the beginning of the third Marjorame.
degree: it is of thin parts, and of a digesting faculty: this herb is
passing good in broths, or sallads, for it comfort the stomach, and helps
the concoction thereof, corroborateth the liver, and is good for the
obstructi^ns of it: it also comfort the heart, but especially the brain
quickneth the sight, and is of marvelous efficacy against all cold
infirmities of the head. Moreover, it provoke urine, and discusseth wind
with much efficacy. The Herb dried, and made into powder, and any way taken,
does notably comfort a cold and windy stomach, help the digestion, strengthen
the brain, prevent convulsions, and all infirmities of the sinews and brain,
proceeding of a cold and moist cause. In a word, it is an herb worthy to be
much esteemed of all persons, even for the pleasant smell of it, which to the
heart and head is very comfortable. The use of Marjorame is not good for hot
and choleric bodies; but for the phlegmatic, and such as have cold
stomachs, and ouer-moyst and weak brains, it is marvelous good and
convenient.

Betouie is hot and dry in the second degree: it has a Betouie.
cutting and attenuating faculty: It takes away obstructions of all the
inward parts: in a word, the virtues of it are innumerable; but it is chiefly
good for the brain and sinews, and all infirmities proceeding from the
imbecility of them. The use of it, in broths, or otherwise, is good for every
age, season, and temperature, but chiefly for such as have weak and feeble
brains.

Sage is a most wholesome herb, hot and dry in the beginning Sage.
of the third degree, and of an astrictiue faculty. It helps the concoction,
and discusseth wind, singularly comfort the head and brain, quickneth all
the senses, especially the memory, and strengthens the sinews. Wherefore the
use of it is exceeding good for such, as are subject to the palsy, or
trembling of the hands, and all other affects of the sinews and brain upon a
moist cause. It may be eaten in sallads, or any other way used; but in sauces
with meats of moist substance, it is of singular profit, for it exciteth the
appetite, and corrects the superfluous moisture of the meat. The often
chewing of it in the mouth, is very profitable to the sinews and teeth, for it
strengthens the one, and preserves the other from putrefaction. The use of
Sage is very good for women with child, especially such as are subject to
abortion. And out of it may be extracted etc, for women that are barren, a
remedy of excellent efficacy, to make them fruitful and apt to conceive; but
yet not convenient for all that are childlesse. Sage, especially the much and
frequent use thereof, is hurtful in hot and dry seasons, and to lean and dry
bodies; but very profitable to the phlegmatic, to the aged, and to such as
have ouer-moyst and weak brains.

Rosemary, is in virtue and quality, much like unto Rosemary.
Sage, for it is both hot and dry, and also astringent: the use thereof is very
profitable, for it corrects the superfluous moisture of meats, corroborateth
and raises up a cold and weak stomach, discusseth wind, sweetneth the
breath, comfort the heart, brain, and sinews, quickneth the senses and
memory, and strengthens the sinewie parts. Wherefore it is good against the
rheum, and all infirmities of the head, brain, and sinews, proceeding of a
cold and moist cause. The Conferue made of the flowers of Rosemarie, and also
of Sage, which I wish to be often used of Students, especially mornings
fasting, and sometimes after meal, does greatly delight the brain, revive the
spirits, quicken the senses, comfort the heart, and makes it merry. Rosemary
is most accommodate for cold and moist seasons, for the aged, phlegmatic,
and rheumaticke.

Costmary and Maudline are hot and dry in the second degree, they are good for
a cold stomach and liver, and Costmary and Maudline.
provoke urine: the smell of them is comfortable to the brain. Costmary is
also called Alecoast, and it does well answer to the name, for if it be ste^ped
a while in Ale, or put into a vessel, and Ale tunned thereunto, as is vfually
done in the making of Sage Ale, it makes a pleasant drink, and very
comfortable to the stomach, brain, and sinews. They are good for the aged
and phlegmatic; but hurtful to such as are young, and of an hot and
choleric temperature.

Tansie is hot and dry in the beginning of the third degree: it strengthens
the sinews, and is very profitable to Tansie.
the stomach, for it concocteth and scowreth downwards crude and phlegmatic
humors, which adhere and cleave thereunto. From hence may be gathered, that
Tansies in the springtime, are very wholesome, and good for the stomach, for
the clean sing away of phlegm bred therein, by the use of fish in the
Lent-season. And here many may see their error detected, that for the making
of Tansies, do confusedly use to give only unto them a delightful green
color, beside the juice of Tansie, the juice of other herbs, perhaps
altogether unwholesome, or at leastwise unfit for the purpose. But if any please
to add to the making of Tansies, the juice of Sorrel, they shall willingly
have my assent, especially if they make them for such as are of a choleric
temperature. The seed of Tansie is of singular force against worms, for in
what sort soever it be taken, it kills and expels them. Tansie is
convenient for the phlegmatic, and the aged; but hurtful to young and
choleric bodies.

Clarie is hot and dry in the third degree: the only use Clarie,
thereof is for the imbecility of the reins, and for stopping of seminall
fluxions, for which it is very profitable, being boiled in broths, or any other
way used.

Rocket and Tarragon are near of one nature and quality, Rocket and Tarragon.
hot and dry in the third degree; but Tarragon, in regard of the aromaticall
and cardiacall savor of it, is to be preferred before Rocket. Among all
herbs of an acrimonious savor, and that are used insallads, they may have the
pre-eminence, especially Tarragon, for by reason of its aromaticall and
cardiacall quality, it is much more comfortable to the stomach, heart and
head, then Rocket is. They cut and extenuate phlegm in the stomach, excite
the appetite, and help the concoction. They are good in sallads, but not
alone, but joined with Lettuce, Purselane, and such cold herbs, for the
qualifying of their acrimonious heat: otherwise being eaten alone, they
distemper the liver, and cause headache. Wherefore the best way to makesallads,
is to mingle hot herbs and cold together, except you will make them of
purpose to cool or heat, as the nature of the stomach, and temperature of
body shall require. Rocket and Tarragon are convenient for the aged and
phlegmatic, not not for the choleric, and such as are of hot temperature.

Towne-Cresses, or as the vulgar sott do pronounce, Town Cress^, or Town
Ka^se,
Towne-karse, is more biting in taste then Rocket or Tarragon, and therefore
more hot and dry. It is eaten with other sallade herbs; but what way soever
it be used, it notably heateth a cold stomach and liver, cutteth and
attenuateth gross humors, mundifieth the lungs, helps the Asthmaticke,
opens and strengthens the melt, and is well near as good, and as effectual
against the Scuruie, as Scuruie grass. It may not be eaten in sallads, but in
small quantity, and that with Lettuce, and other cold herbs; for it will
quickly offend the stomach, distemper the liver, inflame the blood, and annoy
the head. Water Cresse or Karsse is altogether of like nature and faculty, as
Water Karsse.
Towne-Karsse is, and is also very effectual against the stone. They are good
for the phlegmatic, aged, and such as are subject to obstructions.

Auens are hot in the end of the first degree, and dry in the end of the
second, with a kind of scowring, or clensing Auens.
quality: they are very wholesome in pottage or physical broths, though they
make them look black: for they cleanse away such things as adhere to the
entrails, and are good against cruditie or rawnesse of the stomach, windiness
of the belly or sides, stopping of the liver, and clottered blood in any inward
part of the body, especially being decocted in wine. The roots of Auens are in
the Autumn and Winter very profitable in physical broths, or other
decoctions, for all the purposes aforesaid. They are good for every season,
age, and temperature, saving only for the choleric which are free from
wind, and obstructions of the entrails.

Filipendula is hot and dry even in the third degree, of Filipendula.
an opening and clensing quality, and yet with some little astriction adjoined.
Although this herb be in physical uses cheifely profitable for the stone and
strangurie, yet I thought it meet, because it is common in gardens, not here
to omit it. Wherefore such as are subject to the stone and strangurie, may to
their ease and comfort use the herb in their pottage, broths, or possets.

Cheruill is of a temperate heat, and moderate dryness: Cheruill.
it is an herb exceeding good and wholesome, very pleasant to the taste,
delightsome to the stomach, and comfortable to the spirits and senses. It may
be used in pottage, broths, and sallads etc. In sallads with other herbs it is
most acceptable, by reason that it gives unto them a very pleasant and
delicate relish; but for sallads, the seeds while they are green, or the round
tufts or heads which contain the seed, do far excel the leaves, which for
pleasantnes of taste, sweetness of smell, and wholsomnes for every age and
temperature, do also excel all other sallade herbs. And to be eaten by
themselves as a sallade, with Oil omphacine, vinegar, and pepper, they exceed
any other sallade for a cold and feeble stomach. The roots of Cheruill boiled,
and after dressed, as the cunning Cook best knows, or only eaten in manner
of a sallade with Roots of Cheruill exceeding, wholesome.
oil and vinegar, are singularly good and wholesome for weak and aged people,
and for such as are dull and without courage: for they delight the stomach,
rejoice and comfort the heart, increase strength, excite Venus, and depell old
age.

Wormwood is hot and dry in the end of the second Wormwood.
degree: it has a clensing faculty with some astriction adjoined: it is
marvelous profitable to a weak stomach that is troubled with choler; for it
cleanses it through its bitterness, and by reason of the binding quality, it
also strengthens, and comfort the stomach. Moreover it is good against
windiness, and griping pains of the stomach and belly: it strengthens the
liver, and riddeth it of obstruction, and the blood of putrefaction, clensing
by urine, naughty choleric and superfluous humors. It also helps the
spleen when it is ouer-charged or filled with gross feculent blood, by
causing it to pass downward by the stool, together with the excrements.
Wherefore in regard of the great commodity that Wormwood brings to the
stomach and liver that are weak and oppressed through the redundancie of
choler or melancholy, I advise all those in whom those humors exceed their
limits, to eat oftentimes the young and tender tops, or leaves of Wormwood in
sallads with other herbs; but specially to drink mornings fasting, and
sometimes also before meals a draught of Wormwood wine, or Beer, or in want
of them, of white wine or stale beer, wherein a few branches of Wormwood have
for certain hours bin infused: and I assure them that they shall find great
commodity thereby; for it will cleanse the stomach, liver, gall, and spleen,
The wholesomnesse of Wormwood wine or beer, and for whom it is most
convenient.
discuss windiness, cause them to have a good appetite to meat, to be free
from worms, the laundice, and other diseases proceeding of choler. Hence it
may appear, that those, who, being of a phlegmatic or moist temperature, do
for the weakness and windiness of their stomachs, make often use of Wormwood
beer, or of the herb infused therein, as aforesaid, are much deceived,
except that choler or melancholy shall accidentally happen to abound in their
stomachs, because Wormwood is first and cheifely good for the choleric, next
for the melancholicke, and is now and then also convenient for the sanguine,
because the sanguine constitution is very apt to grow choleric; but for the
phlegmatic it is nothing at all available, unless that choler or melancholy
shall happen to offend their stomachs through obstructions of the gall or melt:
and for such in regard of the weakness and windiness of their stomachs,
Wormwood wine, or the herb infused in wine, as aforesaid, is far more
convenient then any Absinthiarie beer.

The seeds of Fen^ell are hot in the end of the second degree, and dry in the
beginning of the same: the green Fennel.
branches are less hot and dry. The sweet Fennel does so far exceed the
common in virtue and goodness, as it does in pleasantnes of taste: it comfort
a cold stomach, discusse^h wind, provoke urine, and has a singular
property, of sharpning the sight. It is also very good to be used of Nurses,
for it increases passing good and wholesome milk. The roots are also very
good in broths or other decoctions for the same intents, especially for the
obstructions and pains of the kidneyes. But the seeds are of greatest force
for breaking of wind, for comforting the stomach, and asswaging the pains of
it, for corroborating the brain, and preserving the sight. To conclude, the
branches, seeds, and roots of Fennel are very good for the head, the lungs,
the liver, and the kidneyes: for they both open, and corroborate those parts.
The young tender branches are very good in sallads, and they are likewise,
being preserved in a pickle of vinegar and salt, very wholesome to be eaten as a
sauce with meat in the winter season. The round tufts or heads of Fennel,
which contain the seed, are exceeding wholesome to be eaten; but there are
commonly bred in them little worms of a greenish color, A caution concerning
the eating of the round tufts or heads of Fennel.
which are very venomous to the brain and senses: wherefore I advise: that the
said tufts or heads be opened, and the worms carefully shaken off, and
afterward washed clean and macerated a while in cold water, and so eaten in
manner of a sallade, either by it felfe, or with other herbs: they are of an
excellent confortatiue nature, and do notably discuss wind, and open the
obstructions of the liver, breast, and brain. The green seeds whilst they be
tender, and of a yellowish color, are also passing pleasant and wholesome to be
eaten in manner of a sallade, or otherwise, for all the purposes aforesaid.
Fennel is very wholesome and agreeable for every season, age, and temperature,
especially for the phlegmatiake, and such as are troubled with the wind.

Anise seeds and Careway seeds are answerable to Fennel seeds in operation and
virtues: they discuss wind, Anise seeds, and Careway seeds.
comfort the stomach, and help the concoction. They are very wholesome to be
eaten any manner of way, especially for such as have weak stomachs, and that
are much subject unto wind. But in meats I prefer the Carewaies before either
Anise or Fennel seeds, because they are more acceptable to the stomach, and
more delightsome to the taste.

Coriander seeds are of many people much used for the wind, but with very
great error, I doubt not: for the Coriander seeds.
herb it self, which bears the seed is of a very noisome and venomous
quality, whereof the seed in some measure does participate. For if it be
indiscreetly used, and not well corrected of that filthy and malignant
quality, which it receives from the herb, it hurts the sight, and
peruerteth the understanding. The best way to prepare the seeds for correcting
their hurtful quality, and so to make them wholesome and fit both for meat and
medicine, is to infuse them 24 hours at the least, in white wine vinegar, then
to take them and dry them, and so to keep them for their use. Being thus
prepared, they discuss wind, exiccate crude humors, strengthen the mouth of
the stomach, and repress the ascending of vapor's to the head. They are very
convenient for cold, phlegmatic and rheumaticke bodies.

OF THE MANNER and Custom of Diet. SECT. VIII.
Whether a precise and exquisite manner of Diet be best for the preservation of
health?
ALthough it be very certain, that a precise and exquisite manner of Diet be
of greatest moment, for the preservation of health, in such as are naturally
infirm, and not of a valetudinarie state of body; yet we see by daily
experience, that such as are of an healthy and sound constitution, if they
always observe a precise and curious manner of living, do for the most part
live less healthily: and the reason is, because they wholly addicting
themselves to a curious and accurate kind of Diet, do suddenly upon every
light cause, and occasion of change, incur and fall into diverse diseases and
distemperatures: wherefore a precise and exquisite custom of Diet is not
convenient for any, but for weak and sickly bodies. But that you may know what
manner of Diet is best for healthy men to observe, you must understand that
there is a threefold Diet, Accurate or precise, Vulgar or common, and
Subvulgar. Three sorts of Diet.
An Accurate Diet is that, when a man takes his meats in a certain measure,
order, and number, and at fixed times, and they also such as are agreeable to
his nature and constitution of body, nec latum vnguem, as the saying is, ab ea
regula discedit. A vulgar Diet is opposite to the Accurate, it is plain and
rude, of no respect or consideration: for they which observe this kind of
Diet, do make no choice of meats, no set or fixed time of eating: for sometimes
they eat liquid meats, sometimes hard, sometimes gross, sometimes fine,
sometimes salt, sometimes fresh, sometimes temperate, sometimes intemperate,
sometimes of evil juice, and sometimes of good: sometimes they fill and glut
themselves, sometimes they rise with an appetite, sometimes they eat twice,
sometimes thrice, sometimes four times or oftener in a day. A Subvulgar Diet is
as it were a mean between the Accurate, and Vulgar: for it is not so rude and
plain, as the Vulgar, nor so precise and exact, as the Accurate: for they
which observe this Diet do commonly eat at set and appointed times, and that
also with some respect and choice had of the meats. From this distinction of
Diet I answer, that a Subvulgar Diet is fittest for healthy men to observe; for
they accustoming themselves to a mean and an indifferent kind of Diet, do far
more safely, and with much less peril sustain the variety and change of
air, meats, drinks etc, which even by an inevitable necessity are incident
unto us in this life, then they which observe a precise and Accurate Diet.
Neither do they with such contrary meats, and perverse manner of living,
ouer-charge and oppugn Nature, as those do that use a Vulgar Diet, which is
only fit for agresticke bodies, for whom I write not these things.

Whether it be good for the preservation of health never to eat without
acertaine appetite and desire?
SEeing that there is nothing that does so greatly obtunde and weaken the
native heat, and extirpate health, as a fastidious fulness of the stomach, and
that nothing does so soon cause the same, as when meats are taken without
appetite and desire: I therefore advise all such as are in health, and that are
desirous of the continuance of the same, that they eat not unless the appetite
be certain, and the superior intestines empty of the meats formerly received:
for it is most hurtful to the body to ingest nourishment upon nourishment not
digested; for by such means the oeconomie of the stomach is confounded, and
the coucoction, which is the root of life, consequently marred. It is a
physical axiom of perpetual verity, that the imperfection or fault of a
former concoction, cannot be amended in the next: wherefore if the stomach
perform not his office, there can never of crude chyle be made good blood in
the liver, neither of impure blood any good assimilation in the parts. And
therefore intemperate men, which do not give time for the first concoction,
do fill their bodies with vicious humors, and wax turgide and discolored,
destroying first (by their intemperancle) the force and faculties of the
stomach, next of the liver, and at length of the whole body. Wherefore it
shall nothing profit a man to use meats of good and wholesome juice, except they
be digested in the stomach: for even as ill humors are bred of these, as of
contrary meats, if they obtain not a good concoction in the stomach. To
conclude therefore, seeing that a good concoction of the meats is a matter of
so great moment for the preservation of health, I counsel all such as are
truly respective of the same, that they oppressenot their stomachs with
untimely, or immoderate eating, and before all things, that they eschew and
abhor a fastidious saturitie, as a thing most injurious to Nature, and
pernicious to the health of the body.

Whether it be good to provoke with Sauces an appetite to meats, the stomach
being well and naturally affected?
IAnswer, that it is better to fast and expect that hunger may excite an
appetite, then to irritate the same with sauces: for to a man living wisely and
soberly, salt with hunger, is the best and wholsomest sauce. But when hunger in
gluttonous persons excite not the appetite, then the Cook is put to his shifts
by strange mixtures of things to consect a sauce, which may repair the
palate, please the throat, and excite the appetite. And from hence not simple
diseases do spring up, but inexplicable, and multiforme, exceeding oftentimes
the Art of Physicians. For I would have them to know, that dolorous Gouts,
grauedinie of the head, caliginousnes of the eyes, tortures and dissolutions of
the limbs, trembling of the hands, and many worse miseries then these, are not
apt to be bred by parsimonie, and a phylosophicall diet, but by an abundant
plenitude, occasioned by luxurious excess. Wherefore my counsel is, that meat
expect an appetite, and that the stomach be by no means untimely alliciated
unto meat; for, as I have said in the former question, it is the hurtfullest
thing to the body, to ingest meat upon meat undigested. But if the stomach be
ill affected, as when it is by any distemperature, or debilitie derected, I
then aucrre, that it is lawful, yea very expedient, to excite an appetite with
convenient sauces, so as it be done with this caution, that the stomach be not
by them stirred up to the taking of more meat, then it can well digest. And
here I would have such also as are healthy to know, that I do not so straightly
restrain them from the use of sauces, neither that I am against sauces so
morose (for although they allure us to inordinate and immoderate eating, yet
the fault is rather to be attributed to our imprudencie, and intemperancie,
then to the sauce) as that I do altogether deny them to such as have sound
stomachs, and appetites naturally good, but affirm rather, that some simple
sauces (abandoning all strange and disordered mixtures) according as the
temperature or state of the stomach, nature of the meat, and time of year
shall require, so that they be soberly, and not untimely or gluttonously used,
may sometimes be allowed, and that profitably, not only to such as have weak
and foeble stomachs, but also to them that have both stomach and appetite
healthful and firm enough: for they cause the meats to be taken with greater
delight, and such as are eaten with delight, are commonly best concocted. Of
which sort are first, as most common, Vinegar, Verjuce, and Mustard, next
Orenges and Limmons, and then Capers, and Sampier; for these two last, because
they have greater force to excite the appetite, then to nourish, are also
ranked among the sauces. And all these are not only good for exciting the
appetite, but oftentimes also very profitable for the stomach it self, and
other parts: for vinegar attenuateth and cutteth gross humors in the
stomach, and represseth choler: Mustard, by reason of the heating,
extenuating, and resolving faculty that it has, is very good for a cold
stomach and bteast, which commonly are stuffed with crude and phlegmatic
humors: Verjuce, and the juice of Orenges and Limmons are exceeding profitable
for an hot stomach and liver, and therefore very wholesome for hot and
choleric bodies: Capers are very beneficial to the spleen, and Sampire to
the kidneyes. At what time therefore it shall please any one, or that it shall
seem good to help his appetite, let him then, according as the condition and
constitution of his body shall require, make choice of one or another of the
aforesaid sauces. As if the stomach shall be affected with gross and tough
humors, then Vinegar is a good and profitable sauce: If the stomach be stuffed
with cold, crude, and slimie humors, Mustard: If the liver or stomach be of
hot temperature, or disposed to inflammations, Verjuce, the juice of Limmons,
Citrons, or sour Orenges: If the spleen be subject to obstructions, Capers:
If the kidneyes, Sampire, etc. But all strange and confused sauces, especially
such as are not of a comfortable pleasant sharp relish, which are made to
oblectate the palate, abandon, as hurtful to the body, and acceptable only
to lurching and devouring Bellygods. And here I cannot but again admonish all
such as are studious of their health, that they do not, by sauces, or delicate
and dainty meats, provoke their stomachs to excess; for meat, by copious
quantity, oppressing the stomach, does greatly weaken the natural heat, and
subvert the digestive faculty; and therefore, though it be of good juice,
because it cannot be concocted, and euinced of nature, fills the body with
crude and flatulent humors. Eat ye therefore without saciety, and use those
meats with great sobriety, that besides the satisfying of hunger, do induce
appetite and delight.

Whether meats much desired, albeit not laudable, are to be preferred and
eaten, before such as are better, being not desired?
I Answer, that the meats, which are most desired, though less good, are to be
preferred, and rather eaten: the reason is, because the meat which is desired,
and taken with delectation, is more welcome to the stomach, more firmly
detained, and consequently, better digested; whereas the meat that is not
desired, nor taken with delectation, but rather against stomach, is, though it
be of good and wholesome substance, seldom well digested. But this is not so
generally to be received, as that every kind of meat desired, ought to be
preferred before better meat not desired: for if the meat desired be of very
ill nature, then it is rather to be eschewed. For example sake: if any of a
sound and healthy body, shall more desire Beef, Porke, or Mutton, then Capon,
Veale, or other meats of like goodness; Beef, Porke, or Mutton, are to be
granted unto him. But if there be very much difference between the meat, which
is desired, and a better that is not desired, that is, if the meat desired, be
of a very naughty and ill property, then it is not to be exhibited, because it
may bring much hurt to the body, especially if in such case the appetite be
often yielded unto, and the body not rustickly strong. Wherefore it must be
regarded, whether the appetite be enormous, or too too irregular, as it is,
when it desires meats very hurtful, and to be rather abhorred, then eaten:
for then it is not to be satisfied, except sometimes in women with child, for
fear of abortion. They therefore that live licentiously, and doenot only
satisfy their appetite, without any respect had of the meats or drinks that
they desire, but also do much delight in their dissolute manner of An
admonition for licentious livers.
living, and do deride others that observe better order, are here to be
admonished, that they cease to take pleasure in an evil custom: for although
they be lusty and strong for the present, and can for a time well digest,
suffer surfeit, and bear immoderate diet, either by reason of their age, or by
reason of a firm constitution, or by reason of custom, and are not annoyed
with any manifest malady; yet let them be sure, that time will hasten their
punishment, and that a riotous youth breeds a miserable age, full of pains
and ^oathsome maladies. But it seldom comes to pass, that those which lead a
dissolute and disordered life, all the time of their youth, live until they
be old: for unless they relinquish their evil manners, and change the
course of their life, they are oftentimes unawares afflicted with some violent
disease, and so end their days with miserable torture, perhaps in the flower
of their age, when they would most gladly live. Wherefore let all lewd and
licentious persons know, that it is far better for them to relinquish their
evil manners, and change the course of their life, while they be young, and
by sober and temperate living, to preserve their health, then by surfeit, and
all manner of disorder, to make their bodies weak, sickly, deformed, and
odious both to God and man.

How manythings ought such as are studious of their health, specially to
respect, in electing meats convenient for their nature and constitution?
THree, the complexion of the body, the quality or temperature of the meat, and
the substance of it. The complexion or temperature of the body, is either
temperate, or intemperate: if it be temperate, then meats of like temperate
quality are convenient, for conservation of the temperature: If it be lapsed or
distempered, then meats of a contrary quality, agreeable to the lapse, that it
may be reduced to a temperature, are to be assumed. If therefore the lapse be
in heat, meats and drinks of cold quality agreeable to the lapse; if in cold,
other in like manner of hot quality, are to be used. The like also is to be
done in lapses of drought and moisture. And if the lapse shall be of diverse
qualities composed, a compound manner of reduction must also be observed. But
in making this reduction, it is to be observed, that a cold constitution
lapsed, requires a stronger quality reducing it, then an hot, because it is
more remote from the beginnings of life. The like respect also, in reducing a
constitution lapsed, is to be had of the age. And here it is also to be
noted, that as some bodies are subject to obstructions, and some to immoderate
fluxions: so are there also some meats, that are of an attenuating and soluble
faculty, which are good for the former; and some of an incrassating, and an
astringent, convenient for the latter, so they be moderately, at times
convenient assumed. But if any shall eat meats, that are not convenient for his
constitution and state of body, by reason of a great desire, that he has unto
such, he ought to take them with their correctories; as unto moist and
phlegmatic meats, to add things of contrary quality and substance: for by
this means they will be made more agreeable to the body, and so taken with
less offense. Thirdly, the substance of the meats ought to be considered, for
some meats are gross, and of hard substance, some thin, and of tender
substance: these are convenient for a weak stomach, those for a strong: for
meats that consist of thin parts, are in a strong stomach, by reason of the
great heat of the same, soon corrupted, adusted, and converted into choler: as
for gross and hard meats, they do greatly oppress a weak stomach, and
infringe the natural heat. Wherefore the meat, as touching the substance of
it, ought to be correspondent to the concocting heat of the stomach: and
therefore to such as have strong stomachs, meats of strong nourishment, and of
slow digestion, are most agreeable; but to them that have weak stomachs, that
live at rest, and are subject to obstructions, meats of lighter substance, and
of easier concoction, are more accommodate. Besides the complexion of the body,
the temperature of the meat, and the substance of it, which are chiefly to be
respected in the election of meats, the age of the person, custom of diet, and
time of the year, ought not to be neglected, in which every one may easily
direct himself.

Whether the ordinary use of two meals in a day, be best for the preservation
of health?
I Answer, omitting the precise observation of the time, country, and custom,
that the use of two competent meals in a day, viz. of Dinner and Supper, is
generally best for them that are within the limits of 25, and 60 years,
leading a studious, or sedentary kind of life, if they desire to avoid
crudity, the original of most diseases. But such as use much exercise, or are
of an hot and choleric temperature, may eat oftener, as three times in a day,
and that more largely at each meal, for the restitution of the substantial
moisture, which by reason of exercise, and a strong natural heat, is much
exhausted. Wherefore I advise them, not to be altogether fasting till dinner,
but to break their fast with this threefold caution, that they find their
stomachs A threefold caution to be observed in the use of break. fasts.
to be clean and empty, that the breake-fast be slender, and that of meats of
light digestion, and that it be taken about four hours before dinner. And
here I may not omit to advertise all such as have plethoricke and full bodies,
especially living at rest, and which are of a phlegmatic The use sometimes of
one meal in a day, for what bodies convenient.
temperature, that they not only eschew the use of breake-fasts, but also
oftentimes content themselves with one meal in a day: for by this means,
nature being for a time disburthened, as it were, of meats, uses all her
power, in digesting and expelling the relics, whereby it comes to pass,
that the ouer-plus of blood is abated, raw humors concocted, all manner of
excrements expelled, and the whole body consequently, reduced to a sound and
healthy mediocrity. Here it may be demanded of such, as for the health of
their bodies, can oftentimes be contented with one meal a day, whether it
were better to take it at supper, then at dinner. Whereunto I answer, that
Whether in eating one meal a day, were it better to take it at supper, then at
dinner?
at supper, because in the night season, and in sleep, the spirits are more
intense to concoction, being not withdrawn unto outward and animal actions;
yet with this prouiso, that they sup not late, for great and late suppers are
very offensive to the whole body, especially to the head and eyes, by reason of
the multitude of vapors, that ascend from the meats that have been plentifully
received. Wherefore they must, after supper, refrain from sleep, or lying
down, three hours at the least, and be sometimes walking, sometimes
standing, and sometimes sitting, that the meats may be the better digested, and
passed from the stomach, the vapors in some measure consumed, the eyes and
the whole head consequently less annoyed. But if any shall erroniously
accustom the use of one meal in a day, and shall then lurch and devour so
much, or more, as may well serve for two competent refections, as some, that
usually make but one meal in a day, are wont to do, I must tell them, that
two moderate refections were far more commendable, and better for their
health, then unreasonable feeding and glutting of themselves at once, whereby
all the powers and faculties of the body are oppressed, the stomach weakened,
crudities and obstructions occasioned.

Here also may those demand, that usually make two What space of time ought to
intercede dinner and supper?
meals a day, what space of time ought to intercede the refections. Our usual
time for dinner, in all places, is about eleven of the clock; and for supper,
in most places, about six, according to which rule, we commonly sup about six
hours after we have dined, allowing an hours space for a meal. I do well
approve of the distance between the meals, and also of the allowance of an
hours space for a meal; but if Students, that may command the time, and
others also, that lead a generous kind of life, shall alter the time for
refection, as to dine about ten, and to sup about five, or six, according as
their appetite, strengths, and disposition of body shall require, they shall
have my better approbation, and that for three reasons. The first is, because
it is not good to be so long fasting in the morning, except for moist and
phlegmatic bodies, as aforesaid: for the stomach being ouer-long empty,
attracteth from the intestines, and other parts, naughty fumes, and putrid
humors, which do not a little hurt both it and the head, especially in such
as are of a choleric temperature. The second is, because a larger time may be
allowed, as shall be requisite, for the concoction and distribution of the
meats received at dinner: for we ought not to cat again, if we will be
diligent obseruers of our health, until the meat eaten before, be first
concocted, and well avoided out of the stomach, and the appetite thereupon
certain, as it is formerly demonstrated. The third reason is, that they, who
being subject unto rheumes, having supped by six, which order for Students is
very well observed in our Universities, will be the freer from nocturnall
diseases and rheumes, unto which Students, and such as live a delicious, easy,
and sitting kind of life, are most subject: and others that are free from
rheumes, and nocturnall passions, having supped by seven, will afterward be
the better disposed to rest, for it is not requisite, that they, especially
having dry brains, should refrain lying down to rest, above an hour or two
after supper, which is only convenient to prevent obstructions. And this order
of supping being obserned, there will remain a competent time, both for one
and the other, before they go to bed, as the space of three or two hours, for
the meats in some measure to concoct, and descend from the stomach: for there
is nothing more hurtful to such as are subject to rheumes and obstructions,
then to sleep, or lie down within two or three hours, even after an ordinary
and frugall meal, because the vapors that then arise from the meats, residing
and concocting in the stomach, beside the inhibiting of the distribution of
them, are very offensive to the head, being not by convenient watching, and
moderate motion of the body, in some measure discussed. Thus much concerning
the ordinary refections, for such as are within the limits of 25, and 60
years, whereof every one may make use and application agreeable to his state of
body, and course of life. Now concerning the refections of others, that are not
within the aforesaid limits of years, a word or two breefly.

They therefore that are past their declining age, and entered within the limit
of old age, as those be, that are past 60, or 63 years of age, may not
precisely be tied to any fixed times for their refections, but may eat three
or four times a day, or oftener, as their stomachs shall require, a little at
a time, by reason of the imbecility of their digestive faculty. Neither may
children by any means be tied unto fixed meals, for they, by reason of their
great increase of body, continual motions, and dissipable substance through
the pores, require much and often nourishment. And those also that are in their
youthful age, as from 14, to 25, being of hot and choleric tempe^ature, both
because they have not attained unto the Acme, or full height of their growing,
as also by reason of their strong natural heat, require much nourishment, and
are not always to be limited to two or three meals in a day. But such as are
in their youthful age, having gross bodies, and of a phlegmatic
temperature, may never exceed three meals in a day, but rather oftentimes
content themselves with two at the most, that by this means, their moist and
crude humors may be concocted and abated, and their bodies kept within a
laudable mediocrity. And here I advise all such as are solicitous of their
health, to observe at their meals three things, which I add as an Appendix to
that which has been spoken.

The first is, that putting aside all businesses, and shaking off all serious
cogitations, they take their repast quietly Three things to be obse^ued at
meals.
and merrily, and not eat, or come to their meat with a troubled or meditating
mind, for that will pervert the concoction, and cause the meats to corrupt in
the stomach, by reason of the retracting of the spirits to the head. The second
is, that they give the meat due preparation for the stomach, which is the
exact chewing of it in the mouth: for the well chewing of the meat is a great
furtherance to the well digesting of the same: and therefore they greatly err,
that eat over greedily, and snatch up their meat hastily, because it is both
hurtful and indecent. The third is, that they reside not in the chair of
intemperance, that is, prolong not the time in eating and drinking
superfluously, but only sit so long at meal, as that they may give unto
Nature a competent refection: for the ingestion of too much meat is burdensome
and injurious to all the body. But if they shall at any time exceed in eating
and drinking, they must make amends with a following parcitie; as if the dinner
shall be larger then ordinary, let the supper be the less, or none at all:
for there is no man, albeit very careful of his health, which does not in this
now and then transcend his limits.

Whether the eating of one or of diverse sorts of meats at a meal are alike
profitable for the health of the body?
IT is a common received opinion, that the eating of diverse sorts of meats at a
meal, is for such as desire to live in health utterly hurtful, and to be
rejected: for by reason of the disparitie of their nature and substance, they
are seldom at once well concocted, and distributed. Moreover variety and
change of meats do greatly please the pallat, and are as it were a spur unto
satietie. The strong and healthy bodies of agresticke men, which at their
meals commonly use but one simple kind of food, do seem to approve this
assertion, and also the weak and valetudinarie state of many others that use
to feed on diverse dishes at one time. Contrariwise he that will consider and
look Reasons that make for variety of meats at meal.
into the diverse constitution and fabric of the parts of the body, shall
find that variety is much more agreeable unto it, then singleness: for which
cause doubtless, variety of meats as it is delightful, so also naturally to be
desired, and therefore more profitable. Wherefore he that in this case
condemueth variety, seems also to reprove Nature; especially, because it
puts off a fastidious tenderness of the stomach, and exciteth the appetite,
and is also beneficial for costiue bodies. Now from that which has bin said,
it is apparent, that the state of this controversy consists in this, that
the use of one sort of meat at a meal, is in its nature more profitable, and
more safe, in so much as concerns the natural actions of the stomach and
liver; but in regard of the variety of the parts and substance of the body,
variety of meats is much more agreeable, and so on these grounds stands the
controversy to be decided. In so much as the reasons of both opinions seem to
be of good force, there must a mean and rule be found out, that may direct
when, and how the one, or the other, that is, one or d uers sorts of meats at a
time, may be in use, and necessary: for neither always, neither to every one,
neither of every sort, ought variety, or singlenes of meats to be exhibited.
For the manifestation therefore and solution of The solution of the
controversy.
this matter, it must be observed, that there are some kinds of meats that in
nature and concoction differ little, and some much: Such as in nature and
concoction differ little, may at one time be eaten of them that are in health,
so they be not immoderately ingested: for too much meat, though it be of like
nature, of easy concoction, and of good juice, is offensive to the stomach,
and breeds crudities. I say of them that are in health; for to such as are
sickly and infirm, sundry meats at one time, though they differ little in
nature and concoction, are oftentimes troublesome and offensive, because their
digestive faculty is weak, scarcely able to digest one simple kind of meat.
Wherefore it cannot be granted, that meats, which in substance and qualities
differ much, may at one time be assumed, esp^cially of them that have weak
stomachs, without hurt, according to the first assertion. But if they shall be
near of one substance, although of differing kind, nor much disagreeing in
qualities, there is no let, but that they may at once be concocted, because the
same heat, and same time only will suffice for the concoction of them. For the
reason wherefore variety in meats is hurtful, arises from the great
inequality of their substance, or from the contrariety of qualities, or from
the facility of corruption of one, with the disficultie of concoction with
another, not verily from variety. As put the Case: What does prohibit, but
that Veale, Mutton, Capon etc. may be eaten at one time? Neither the
inequality of their substance, nor contrariety of qualities, and therefore
they are without any offense, with like labor concocted. The conclusion
therefore may be, that it is better to eat only of one sort of meat at a
meal, then of sundry sorts, that in substance and qualities differ much; but
if they shall be near of a nature and quality, or not much differing, then
variety is to be preferred for the reasons before alleged. Here I may not by
the way ouer-passe without just reproof the The eating of flesh and fish at
one meal not wholesome for the body.
eating of flesh and fish at one and the same meal without any respect: for
the most part of fish and flesh do in no wise accord, but are of a very
discrepant nature, not able to be well concocted together in the stomach, by
reason whereof they daunt and overthrow the digestive heat, and fill the
stomach with discordant humors, which oftentimes produce strange and dolorous
symptoms. Wherefore my counsel is to all such as are studious of their health,
especially to them that have weak stomachs, that they, eschew this evil
custom, and relinquish it to bellygods, and them that have unbridled
appetites, who rather choose for a momentarie pleasing of their pallats, to
live fettered with Gouts, racked with Fevers, and tormented with stones, then
by moderate and discreet feeding, to acquire an happy, sound, and healthful
state of body. Now to that which is urged against variety of meats, that it
entiseth to repletion, and sacietie, conuinceth not this assertion; for that is
not the fault of Nature, which is well pleased with a mean, but of ignorance,
and indiscretion. Wherefore it was well said of Plato, that there is danger in
variety, for no other cause, but for that we easily yield to pleasure and
sensuality. The offense therefore, if the matter be rightly weighed, comes
not from the meat, but from our unbridled appetite. Neither is the example of
agresticke people of any force: for the healthinesse and sound state of their
bodies is not to be attributed to their plain and simple food, but to their
great accustomed labor and exercise. Variety therefore of meats may offend
with immoderation, never with temperancie. Wherefore to conclude, I advise all
such as are respective of their health, especially that are of tender nature,
and state of body, not to eat at one time meats greatly differing in nature
and concoction; for every inequality of concoction, is a praeludium of
cruditie, and corruption, which the liver cannot correct. Neither at any time
sensually to oppress and labefie the digestive faculty of the stomach, with
too great variety of meats, although they differ not much in nature and
concoction: for to feed upon more then four dishes even at a geniall meal,
is somewhat immodest and excessive.

Here some may demand, whether bread, which is the very ground of our
nourishment, be, to be always taken Whether bread ought to be taken with ye
meats in any suitable measure and proportion.
in any certain measure or quantity? Whereunto I briefly answer, that it is,
in regard of the meats that are eaten with it, to be taken in a diverse measure
and proportion: for the bread that we eat, ought to be double to the flesh, so
much and half so much as of eggs, and threefold unto fish, especially of the
moister sort, that the superfluous moisture of it, may by the siccitie of the
bread, be attempered. They err therefore that eat very little bread with their
meats: for you shall find them to have tumide bodies, or at least, waterish
and impure stomachs, by reason of windy crudities, wherewith they abound.

Whether it be better to suppe more liberally, then to dine?
IT has bin a great question, whether the Supper should be greater then the
Dinner; or contrariwise, the Dinner greater then the Supper. But this doubt
with certain cautions may easily be discussed; for neither the one, nor the
other may without limitation, and distinction be affirmed. Wherefore I answer,
that it is more expedient for such as are healthy and strong to eat more at
Supper, then at Dinner, and that for two reasons. The first, because the
coldness of the night, and sleep ensuing do greatly help concoction, through
the regression of the spirits and heat into the interior parts. The second is,
because the time from Supper to breakfast, or Dinner is much longer, then from
Dinner to Supper: and therefore it is very meet, that the Supper should in
some congruent measure, be greater then the Dinner, according as the time
following, in both respects, is more fit and commodious for concoction. Great
and weighty affairs either public or private, and also serious meditatious
may be a third reason in time of such occasions, to eat more freely at Supper
then at Dinner; because men after a full meal, are commonly very unapt unto
any labor or exercise, either of mind or body. And besides that, if they
should eat much at Dinner, and afterward by necessity of their place and
calling, undergo any great or weighty business, they quickly subvert their
state of body; and the reason is, because much meat does first contract to the
stomach the spirits, and almost the whole force of Nature, for the concocting
of it, which serious meditations, or businesses of importance do afterward
divert to the head: whereby it comes to pass, that the spirits can neither
sufficiently assist the brain in contemplation, nor the stomach in
concoction; but the meats in the stomach, by reason of this distraction, being
destitute of sufficient heat, become raw, and fill the body with gross,
putride, and flatulent humors. And here I must advertise them that they err
not in eating more liberally at Supper then at Dinner, as to fill themselves
till their bellies strout, and that they can scarce breath; for I mind not,
nor in any oase approve such a large Supper, but a frugall rather; yet such in
which is eaten more then at Dinner, for the reasons before alleged. But this
(as I have said) is not so generally to be received, as that it may be
expedient for every man to eat For whom it is not convenient to sup more
liberally, then to dine.
more liberally at Supper, then at Dinner: for it is not convenient for gross
and phlegmatic bodies, for fear of a sudden suffocation in sleep, or at
least, of troublesome and painful sleep, which in them, by reason of the
straitness of the passages, may through much phlegm, and a large Supper,
often be occasioned. Neither for the same reason is it good for them to sup
more liberally, that are very old, or subject to obstructions, or nocturnall
diseases, for in such the distribution of then nourishment is commonly
difficile, which always indicateth a slender Supper. Neither is it convenient
for them to sup more liberally that are troubled with rheumes, or any
infirmity of the head, except there be a dry distemperature of the brain,
because a full Supper repleteth the head with vapors. Therefore to conclude
this question, in making a larger Dinner or Supper five things are remarkable:
the concoction, the space between the meals, the businesses, the
distribution, and the condition or state of the head. In respect of the
concoction, of the space between the meals, and of businesses of great
weight, it is better to sup more liberally then to dine, for the reasons before
alleged. But in respect of a difficile distribution, it is better to dine more
liberally then to sup, because a more easy and better distribution of the
nourishment into every is made by day, when the body is in motion, then by
night, when it is at rest. In like manner in all infirmities of the head,
except there be, as I have said, a dry distemperature of the brains, it is
better to dine more liberally, then to sup, because the head will be less
anoyed with the vapors that ascend from the stomach. And here by the way I
advise all such as are subject to distillations from the head to forbear
liquid meats at Supper, and to sup for the most part on roasted meats, because
they are less vaporous; but for such as are wont, by reason of a dry brain,
to pass the night without sleep, or competent rest, moist and sorbile meats,
because they best refresh the brain, and procure sleep, are most profitable:
and for the same reason, it is best for them to make a larger Supper, then
Dinner, that the brain may more plentifully with vapors in the night season be
refreshed.

Whether it be better to begin, and also to end the meal with meat, then with
drink?
THis is a question worthy of consideration, because an orderly manner of
eating and drinking at meals does much concern the stomach, and the good
concoction of the meats. And forasmuch as it is not good for all men to begin
and end their meals alike, I advise all such as are respective of their
health, to search out and consider thoroughly the nature and disposition of
their stomach, for there is in it humor, or siccitie, which will demonstrate
in what manner it is best for them to begin and end their meals. Wherefore he
that is studious of his health, ought to consider, whether his stomach be
moist or dry, or of a mean betwixt both. If there be excess of moisture in
the stomach, like as commonly is in them that be phlegmatic, then to begin the
meal with drink, is very hurtful, because it weakneth the stomach and
liver, deiecteth the appetite, breeds much wind and crudities: and it is
also no less hurtful to end with drink, because it subuerteth the
concoction, and abundantly fills the body with crude and flatulent humors.
But if there be excess of dryness in the stomach, like as commonly is in
such as be choleric, then it is good to begin the meal with drink, that the
present thirst may be assuaged, the stomach moistened, and the appetite, which
overmuch heat and drynes does deiect, excited: and it is also no less
auayleable to end with drink, both because, that whatsoever of the meat shall
remain in the mouth of the stomach, may therewith be carried toward the
bottom of the same, where the concoction is perfected; and also that thirst,
seeing that they are by nature very thirsty, may be prevented. If the stomach
shall be neither too moist, nor too dry, but of an indifferent temperature,
then, I say, it is best to begin the meal with meat, but to end it with
drink, to the end that no part of the meat may stick, or be at a stay about
the mouth of the stomach, but may of it be carried into the ventricle, which
is the bottom of the stomach, the very promptuarie for the meats, and place
of absolute concoction. And here I must advertise them that shut up their meal
with drink, that they do it with a moderate draught, for to end the meal
with much drink does, by euerting the concoction, cause eructations, and beget
much wind and crudities. But those that are subject Wherewith it is best for
them that be rheumaticke to finish and shut up their meals.
unto rheumes and distillations from the head, ought not in any wise, having
not dry and thirsty stomachs, to shut up the meal with drink, and then also
but with a very little quantity, because it increases rheumaticke humors; for
it is much better for them to take always some stypticke thing after meal
(the which is likewise good, and far better then Beer, for hot and dry
bodies, that are rheumaticke) that may inhibit the ascending of vapors, by
closing up the mouth of the stomach, as are, Quince preserved, the juice of
Pomegranet of a middle favor, which is neither too sour, nor too sweet, and
the Conserve made of Red Roses: the use of these upon meals is very profitable
for all such as are subject unto rheumes; but the Pomegranet is most agreeable
to them that have hot, choleric, and thirsty stomachs. Now whereas it has
bin showed, that it is expedient for some constitutions to begin their meals
with drink, I must advertise the Reader, that he take it with some limitation,
as that there be no broths or po^age at table, for if there be, they are to be
preferred before drink, and always taken in steed thereof, at the beginning
of meal (except of them that are molested with rheumes, or affected with
crudities of the stomach; for unto such, liquid and potulentall meats are not
profitable) because they are acceptable to the stomach, and do as it were, by
reason of their liquiditie, very fitly prepare the way for other meats.

How many things ought those that are studious of their health, to observe in
the use of drink?
THe necessity and use of drink is first to preserve natural moisture:
secondly, to make a good mixture, concoction, and distribution of the meats:
all which, that they may be effected without inconveniences, three things must
be regarded and observed in the use of drink. The first is, that it be taken
moderately at meals, and that not at two or three great draughts, but by
sundry little draughts: To drink little and often at meals, is better, then to
drink much at once.
for abundance of drink at meals, marreth the concoction, both by causing the
meats to fluctuate in the stomach, and also by weakening and relaxing the same:
whereupon crude and phlegmatic humors are abundantly increased, and
consequently rheumes, fluxes, and many other inconveniences to the body and
members. And the drink must be mixed with the meats, not by great, but by
sundry little draughts: for great draughts, do weaken the stomach, infringe
the natural heat, which then is in concoction, drive down the meat too
hastily, and corrupt the whole body with over much moisture and cruditie.
Wherefore my counsel to them is, that are respective of their health, that
they drink at their meals often and li^le at a time, and also that they
swallow down the drink not hastily, but leasurely: for the drink being mixed
with the meats, by diverse little draughts leasurely taken, well tempereth them
without anoyance, both for concoction, and also for distribution. For examples
sake: with us to whom Beer is more agreeable for an ordinary drink, then A
general rule for drinking at meals.
Wine, let this be a general rule for taking of drink at meals. Let the
first draught be of an ordinary Beer for thirst sake: the second also of
Beer for mixture of the meats: the third and fourth of wine, or in want
thereof, of stronger Beer, for the better mixture, concoction, and
distribution of the meats; and if it be a geniall meal, or much larger then
ordinary, another draught of wine is also allowable. Afterward upon meats
taken again, let there be assumed a draught of ordinary Beer, and therewith,
or a little meat superassumed, according to the nature of the stomach, as is
demonstrated in the precedent question, let the meal be concluded. But to this
rule every one may not exactly betake himself; for of drinking at meals, no
certain prescript can be constituted, because the drink is to be increased,
and diminished, according to the temperature and disposition of the stomach in
heat, and coldness, dryness, and moisture, loosenes, or stipticknes; and also
according to the temperature and substance of the meats. Wherefore you must
consider whether the meat be correspondent to the stomach, or not: As whether
a dry meat be taken into a dry stomach, or a moist: for if a dry meat be
received into a dry stomach, then the drink is to be increased; but if it be
received into a moist stomach, then the drink is to be taken in the same
measure, as if both stomach and meat were of an indifferent temperature. In
like manner the substance of the meat ought to be considered, whether it be
gross, or thin: if gross, then a larger quantity of drink for the
concocting and distributing of it is necessary: if thin, then a less portion
will susfice. The like Indication may be taken from the disposition of the
stomach, which if it be subject to laxitie, then a less portion of drink; if
to stypticitie, then a greater is to be assumed.

The second thing that is to be observed in the use of drink is, that the
drink be attempered to the temperature of the air, of the season, of the
country, of the meats, and of the person receiving it: for by this means, the
native heat will be the better moderated, and the body consequently preserved
in a sound and healthy temperature.

The third thing which, concerning the use of drink, those that are studious
of their health ought to observe, is that they wholly betwixt dinner and
supper, abstain from drink, excepting only a Dilutiue draught, whereof I
will hereafter speak, because it breeds crudities, except necessity, as
sometime in them that be choleric, or custom shall require it: the later of
which, notwithstanding is vicious, and therefore by little and little to be
relinquished.

Whether the drinking of wine at meals only, between the eating, and not
also before and after meal, be expedient and profitable for the body?
THE wholsomnesse of wine, in helping the concoction, nutrition, and
exhilarating the spirits and heart, moderately taken at meal, as the
temperature of the body, and time of year shall require, is so well and
commonly known, as that it needs not any demonstration. But whether it be
expedient to drink wine presently before, and after meal, it is a matter not
so evident. In my judgment, the whole determination of this doubt, is to be
gathered from the nature of the wine, and from the temperature of the stomach,
and disposition of the body that takes it. For example sake; The drinking of
wine before meal, is not convenient for them that are young, or for any that
have hot stomachs, because it will distemper the liver, cause in flammations,
and consequently, mar the concoction of the meats. But for old men, and all
such as have cold stomachs, a little draught of Sack, or of any other wine of
like nature, is very profitable before meals, because it discusseth windy
crudities, exciteth the appetite, and fortifieth the natural heat for
concoction; yet with this prouiso, that they even forthwith go to their meal,
for otherwise it will by euaporation greatly offend the head. But verily I
suppose the drinking of White or Rhenish wine, with a Limmon sliced and
macerated therein, and a little also of the choycest sugar added thereto,
especially if the Drinker be of a tender palate, to be very wholesome and
good, as a preparatiue draught before meals, for all bodies (except for such
as are subject to a defluxion of humors, or else abound with much moisture and
crudity) especially for such as are subject to obstructions, because it
cleanses away slimie humors, adhering to the stomach, opens the
obstructions of the mesaraicke veins, of the milt, of the liver, and of the
reins, exciteth the appetite, and erecteth the digestive faculty of the
stomach. As concerning the drinking of wine immediately after meal, there are
some that do altogether prohibit it, and not without good reason, becauseit
hurts the brain and sinews, by euaporating from the stomach; yet by their
leave, a little draught of Sack, or of any other wine of like nature, may not
be hurtful, but rather oftentimes very profitable to them that have cold and
weak stomachs, so they be not affected with infirmities of the head and
sinews, because it helps the concoction, by comforting the stomach, and
repairing the natural heat. But the drinking of a great draught is in no wise
expedient, because it subuerteth the concoction, by causing the meat to pass
from the stomach indigested, and greatly also offends the head with acute
vapors.

Whether it be profitable, or in any sort necessary for such as are in health,
to drink between meals?
I Answer, that it is very hurtful to drink between meals, so long as the
meats that have been taken, remain undigested in the stomach, and not past
the first concoction (except great thirst and siccity of the stomach and
throat shall require it, and then only a little is to be taken, that the
dryness may be somewhat mitigated) because it interrupteth and confounds
the concoction, by disturbing the natural heat that is in working, and
consequently makes the body to abound with crudities. But after that the meat
is concocted and descended from the stomach, which will be in three or four
hours after the meal, it is good to drink one meetly large draught, of White
or Rhenish Wine, or stale Beer, or of Sack, so the person that take it, be of
a cold constitution, and so much the rather, if he be aged, and the season
of the year also cold, to wash and cleanse out of the stomach, the relics
of the meats, and to cause a more facile and speedy distribution, or passage of
the meats concocted through the mesaraicke veins unto the liver. Wherefore,
this drinking of Wine or Beer between meals, as the constitution of the body
shall require, may well be termed both dilutiue and dilatiue, and is good for
all men, especially for such as are subject to obstructions of the stomach,
and mesaraicke veins, that conueigh the alimentary chyle or juice, which
comes of the meats, concocted in the stomach to the liver, to be made blood.

Whether the custom of drinking fasting in the mornings, and and like wise
evenings, even at the time of going to bed, be to be approved and consented
unto?
THE custom of drinking in the mornings fasting, a large draught of White
wine, of Rhenish wine, or of Beer, has almost with all men so far
prevailed, as that they judge it a principal means for the preservation of
their health; whereas in very deed, it is, being without respect had of the
state or constitution of the body, inconsiderately used, the occasion of much
hurt and discommodity. For conuelling therefore of this vain custom, I
answer, that the drinking of a large draught fasting of the aforesaid Wines, or
of stale Beer, if it shall be more agreeable to the body, is only good for
them that are of an hot and dry constitution, or subject to obstructions, so
they be not of a very cold and moist temperature, that the siccity of the
stomach, may be mitigated, and any slimie or obstructiue humor residing in
it, in the liver, veins, or reins removed, and cleansed away: which the
taking of a large draught fasting of stale Beer, or of one of the aforesaid
wines, especially if a Limmon be macerated in it, as aforesaid, do notably
perform. But this may not so generally be taken, as that it is allowable for
every one that has an hot and dry state of body, to drink a large draught
mornings fasting, for it is not convenient for such as are very rheumaticke,
though they are of a dry temperature of body, because it will greatly encreaser
heumes; but to such, a small draught, to temper only the siccity of the
stomach, is to be exhibited. And here it may be demanded, whether or no it
be good to drink stronger wines fasting, as Muskadell, Malmsey, or such like:
I know that it is utterly forbidden, as pernicious to the body, which I
likewise auerre, in respect of the younger sort of people; but for the aged, in
whom the radical moisture and heat is decayed, I deem it to be very
wholesome, especially in cold countries, and in the cold times of the year,
because they are very comfortable and restoratiue: wherefore to drink mornings
fasting, a draught of Muskadell or Malmsey, and also to eat tosts of fine
manchet-bread sopped therein, is no bad break fast for old folks, as I
suppose. Hence it may appear, that it is not altogether unwholesome, to drink
strong winenext the heart, so there be respect had to the age, to the time,
and to the country. As concerning the use of drinking, at the time of going to
bed, I affirm that it is in no respect allowable, but for hot and choleric
bodies, who commonly have dry and thirsty stomachs, to whom a little draught of
Beer, and that also but of mean strength, for allaying only the siccity of
the stomach, may be admitted. I say a little draught, because a large one may
breed crudities in the stomach, offend the brain, and make it subject to
distillations.

The conclusion therefore is, that to drink mornings fasting, is very hurtful
to the phlegmatic, and at the time of going to bed, for all bodies, except for
them that have dry and thirsty stomachs, because it fills their stomachs and
veins with crudities, and the brain with superfluous vapors. Wherefore the
custom of drinking, mornings and euenings, is to be refrained, except of them,
for whom it is convenient, as aforesaid, and with great caution to be used of
such, as are much subject unto rheumes, though the temperature of their body
shall require it.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 9. lin. 7. after reason read of. page 12. lin. 27. for an approperous
read a preproperous. page 18. lin. 26. the full point that is between these
words, together with, must be taken away. page 25. lin. 33. for urine read
wine. page 44 lin. 5. read thus at the imperfect parenthesis (as I have showed)
may be very profitable to cool, to moysten, and to open obstructions. page 56.
lin. 36. for dust read adust. page 81. lin. 32. after phlegmatic read but.
page 109. lin. 7. after aged read for. page 109. lin. 29. for the two purposes,
read the purpose. page 126. lin. 26. after best read and. and leave out one and
in the next line. page 131. lin. 13. after greater read difficultic. page 169
lin. 5. leave out not. page 184. lin. 32. after ought read at least.

A Table directing to the principal things contained in this Treatise.
A
Air, the differences and properties thereof. page 1, 2, 3, 4.

What things declare the wholsomnes of the Air. 4

The morning Air very hurtful to them that have weak brains, and subject
unto Rheumes. 6

Ale, for what bodies more profitable then Beer, 39

Ale very hurtful to phlegmatic and gross bodies, and such as are subject
to obstructions. 16

Alexanders. 157

Almonds. 134

Almond milk. 135

Allows. 79

Anehoua's. 81

Anise-seeds. 167

Apples. 112

Aprecocks. 118

Appetite to meat, whether good to provoke with Sauces. 171. And whether it be
good for the preservation of health never to eatwith out a certain appetite.
170

Aqua vitae, the use and properties thereof. 46, 47

Artichocks. 138

Asparagus. 155

Auens. 164

B
Bawme. 159

Barbaries. 129

Basil. 159

Barbell. 84

Base. 78

Bacon. 56

Bellies of beasts. 71

Beans. 137

Beetes. 148

Betonie. 161

Beef. 54

Beer, whether more wholesome then Ale? 38. For what bodies more convenient
then Ale. ibid. whether Beer breed rheumes more then Ale?

How many properties ought to be in the best and wholsomest Beer? 39

Stale Beer most wholesome in the summer season. 40

Whether Beer made only of Barley malt be better and wholsomer, then that
which is made of barley and oaten malt mingled together. 42

Birt. vide Turburt.

Blites. 148

Black birds. 66

Borage. 151

Bread, the diverse sorts thereof. 17. 18. 19. 20. what bread is the best and
wholsomest. 18. Se^en properties in the best and wholsomest bread. 20 21.
Biscuit bread, and the crusts of bread, whether profitable to the body. 22. 23.
Bread whether ought to be taken with the meats in a certain measure and
proportion. 184

Brawne. 57

Brain of beasts and fowls. 70

Breame. 76

Athreefold caution to be observed in the use of Breakefasts. 177

Bustarde. 67

Butter. 91

Buds of Brcome. 101

Burnet. 151

Buglosse. 151

Byttour. 68

C
Capon and Caponets. 61

Calaminarie or Sea-Cut. 79

Carpe. 84

Capers. 101

Carrots. 140

Careway seeds. 167

Chickens. 61

Cheese. 91. Two commodities by eating of Cheese after meat. 92

Cherries. 126

Chestnuts. 132

Chibols. 144

Cheruill. 165

Citrons. 100

Cinnamon. 106. Cinnamon water. ibid.

Ciues. 144

Cinquefoylc. 152

Cloves. 107

Clarie. 163

Cockrels. 61

Conger. 79

Cockles. 82

Codfish. 76

Coleworts, or Cabbage Cole. 138

Costmarie. 162

Coriander seeds. 168

Conie and Rabbets. 59

Crane. 67

Crab. 82

Cream. 90

Curlew. 68

Cuttlefish. 79

Currants. 126

Red Currants. vide Ribes.

Cucumbers. 136. Pickled Cucumbers. ibid.

Cider and Perrie, whether wholesome and profitable drinks? 42

D
Dabbe. 75

Dates. 121

Damsons. 123

Dandelion. 151

Three sorts of Diet, and whether an exquisite Diet be best for the
preservation of health? 169

Dinner and Supper what space of time ought to intercede? 178

Doggefish. 76

Dorie. 78

A fourefold use of Drink. 42 To drink ad hilaritatem, whether lawful and
profitable? 37

In the use of Drink three things to be observed. 189. To drink little and
often at meals is better then to drink much at once. ibid. A general rule
for drinking at meals. 190. Drinking between meals whether healthful for the
body? 192 Drinking mornings fasting and likewise evening at the time of going
to bed, whether healthful and profitable for the body? 194

Ducks and Ducklins. 69

E
Eyes of beasts. 71

Ears of beasts. ibid.

Eeles. 84

Eggs. 86

Eisell. 97

Endive. 150

F
Fenducke. vide Moore-hen.

Feet of beasts. 73

Fennel. 166

Feildfares. 67

Fish, whether the often use thereof be wholesome for the health of the body? 74

Figgs. 120

Filbords. 132

Fisticke nuts. 133

Filipendula. 164

Flesh of beasts and fowls being young, whether more wholesome, then when they
are grown to fuller age? 49

Flesh corned or seasoned with salt, whether more wholesome then unsalted? 50

Flesh that is meanly fat, why more wholesome then that which is very fat or
lean? 51

Kids flesh whether wholsomer then Lamb? 52

Flounder, or Flooke. 75

Framboise. 129

Fresh fish whether more wholesome then salt fish. 85

Frumentie. 93

New Fruits whether wholesome to be eaten raw? 110

G
Garlic. 141

Ginnies. vide Turkies.

Ginger. 108. Green Ginger and canded Ginger. 109

Gillowflowers. 154

Goats flesh. 60

Goose. 69

Green Geese. ibid.

Gooseberries. 127

Gourds. 137

Grapes. 123

Gurnard. 76

Guilthead. 79

Gudgion. 84

Gysards of Fowls. 72

H
Habitation that is somewhat eminent, whether best for health? 6

Hares, whether so profitable for meat, as delightful for hunting? 59

Hake. 76.

Haddocke. ibid.

Hallibut. 78.

Haselnnts. 131.

Hens. 61.

Heath cocks. 67.

Heron and Heron-showe. 67.

Heart of Beasts. 72.

Herrings. 80.

Honey. 103.

Hop-buds. 156.

Hysop. 157.

I
Iringo-roots. 142.

Iunkets. 94.

K
Kids flesh. vide. Flesh.

Kidneies of Beasts. 72.

Water Karse. 164.

L
Lamb whether wholsomer then mutton? 53.

Larkes. 66.

Lapwinke. 68.

Lamprey. 80.

Lange-de beef. 151.

Leekes. 144.

Lettuce. 145. being eaten with oil insallades, for what bodies only
convenient? 145.

Livers of beasts and fowls. 72.

Limmons. 99.

Lights of beasts. 72.

Linnets. 67.

Lobster. 82.

Lump or Lomp-fish. 79.

M
Mackrell. 76.

Marmalade. 116.

Mallows. 149.

Marigold. 156.

Marrow. 71.

Maw. vide. Bellies.

Mace. 107.

Maudline. 162.

Medlars. 119.

Melons. 136.

Mercury. 149.

Metheglin and Mead, whether wholesome and profitable drinks for every age and
constitution of body? 44.

Meats much desired, albeit not laudable, whether they are to be preferred, and
eaten before such as are better being not desired? 174.

How many things ought to be considered. in electing meats convenient for the
constitution and state of the body? 175.

The ordinary use of two Meals in a day, whether best for the preservation of
health? 177.

One Meal in a day for what bodies sometimes convenient? 177.

Whether it be better to begin and also to end the Meal with meat then with
drink? 187.

Whether in eating one meal a day, it be better to take it at Dinner, then at
Supper? 178.

Three things to be observed at Meals. 181.

Whether the eating of one or of diverse sorts of Meat at a Meal be alike
profitable for the health of the body? ibid.

Milk. 88. It consists of a threefold substance. 90.

Mints. 158.

Mush-roomes. 135.

Mustard. 98.

Mullet. 77.

Muskels. 82.

Mutton. 52. 53.

Mulberries. 119.

N
Nauewes. 141.

Nutmegs. 107. Nutmegs condited. ibid.

O
Oil olive. 103. Oil omphacine. ibid.

Olives. 100.

Onions. 143.

Orenges. 98.

Orach. 148.

Orgaine. 157.

Oysters. 81. why they are usually eaten before meals? 82.

P
Parseley. 156.

Partridge. 64.

Parseneps. 140.

Perrie. vide Cider.

Pepper. 108.

Pears. 114.

Peaches. 118.

Pease. 138. Penny royal. 157,

Pecock. 62.

Perch. 83. Phesant. 63.

Pilchard. 81.

Pine apple. 133.

Pigeons. 63.

Pike and Pikerel. 83.

Pistach. vide Fisticknut.

Plouer. 68.

Plaice. 75. Plums. 122.

Porke. 55. 56. Rosting Pigs. 57.

Potatoe roots. 141.

Porpuise. 80.

Pomegranet. 177.

Pompions, vide Melons.

Pranes. 38.

Prunes. 123. Prickmadam. 147.

Puffin. 85.

Pullets. 61.

Purselane. 146. 147.

Q
Quails. 65.

Quinces. 116. Quince pears. 115.

R
Railes. 66.

Radge. 68.

Radish. 102.

Ra^pis. vide. Framboise.

Rabbets, vide Conies.

Raisons, 125.

Rice-milke. 94.

Ribes. 128.

Rosting pigs. 57.

Roses. 153. conserve of Red Roses 154. Rose sugar. vide Sugar Roset.

Rosemarie. 162.

Rocket. 163.

S
Sack whether best to be taken with sugar or without? 27.

Sammon and Sammonpeale, 77.

Salt. 95.

Sauces, and whether the use of them be necessary in the regiment of health?
95.

Sampier. 101.

Saffron. 110.

Sanorie. 158

Sage. 161

Scallions. 144

Scruice berries. 119

Sea gull. 68

Shad. 76

Shrimps. 83

Skirret roats. 141

Snites. 66

Sole. 75

Sorell. 149

Spinach. 147

Speragevide Asparagiu,

Sprats. 81.

Sparrowes. 67

Sturgeon. 78

Storke. 68

Strawberries. 129

Strawberrie leaves. 152

Sugar, and whether wholsomer then Honey? 104

Red Sugar, and white Sugar Candy. 105

Sugar roset. 154

Succorie. 150

Supper or the Dinner whether ought to be the larger? 185

Swan. 69

Swines flesh vide Porke.

T
Tansie, 162

Tarragon. 163

Teale. 68

Tanch, 84

Thrush. 66

Thorn back. 80

Time. 158

Tongue of Beasts. 71.

Trout. 83

Tripes vide bellies of Beasts.

Turkies. 61

Turtle-doue. 66

Turbut. 77

Tunie. 80

Turnips. 141

Town Cresses or Town Karse. 164

V
Venison of Fallow Dear whether wholsomer then of Red? 58

Whether Veale, for goodness of nourishment excel all other flesh of
quadrupedall creatures. 54

Veriuice. 97

Violets. 152

Vinegar. 96

Udders of beasts. 73

W
Water, whether the drinking thereof be good for Northern people. 24

Of the differences of Waters. 8. 9. 10.

Wardons. 115

Wallnuts. 132

Whiting. 76

White-meats. 93

Whey. 92

Whorts. 130

Wine, the diversities, commodities, and faculties thereof. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29,
30. White, and Rhenish wines, whether good to be taken at meals or after
meals? 26. For what bothey are most hurtful. ibid.

New Wines, why unwholesome. 30 whether all new Wines breed obstructions. 31

Wines too old very hurtful. ibid.

Wine, whether good to be taken at meals only between the eating, and not
also before and after meals. 191

Four principal commodities come to to the aged by the use of pure wine 33.
Whether the use of Wine mixed with water be fit for all times, and profitable
for all bodies. 33

How many precepts ought to be observed in the use of pure wine in respect of
the age? 32

Wines of a gross substance ought not to be diluted. 35

The manner of mixing wine with water for every temperature of body. 34

Four things ought to be considered in the use of wines diluted. 34

Wings of fowls. 72

Wigeon. 68

Wodcokcs. 66

Wolfe-fish. 79

Wormwood. 165

The wholsomnesse of Wo^mewoodwine or beer. 166

FINIS.

