(...) THE SWORD BEARER.

OR, The Bishop of CHICHESTER'S Arms emblazoned in a Sermon preached at a
Synod By T. V. B. of D. sometimes Fellow of Queens College in Oxford, and now
Pastor of the Church at Cockfield in Southsex.

The Arms.

Out of his mouth goes a sharp sword


LONDON. Printed by B. A. and T. FAUCET, for R. Milburne, and are to be sold
at the great South-doore of Paul's. 1627.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN God, GEORGE, Lord Bishop of CHICHESTER, my
very good Lord and Patron.
MY LORD:

THe subject of this Sermon is your Coat of Arms. The most goodly and fairest
arms that ever I or any in the world set his eyes upon. CHRIST JESUS the great
Pastor and Bishop of our souls sits in your azure field in a fair long
garment of beaten gold, with a sharp two edged Sword in his mouth. Is it
accounted a great grace, and that for Kings and Princes too, to carry in their
Shields, a Lion, an Eagle, a Lilly, a Harp, or such like animal or
artificial thing? How much more honor is it then I pray you to carry CHRIST
JESUS in your Shield, who is Lord of Lords and King of Kings? I have put the
best colors upon this worthy subject as would drop from my Pencill, but still
I see, Materia superabit opus, the matter will go beyond the workmanship. I
can say so feelingly of my self, who am privy to mine own great weakness;
I durst say so of any other that will undertake this task, I mean to emblazon
this Coat: Let him be as quick and curious, and cunning and expert, and
every way as well furnished for this employment, as mortality is capable of,
yet still he shall come short of giving this charge his due; Materia superabit
opus still. All my fear is, the matter is so high, and the workmanship about
it so slender, that the workmanship will more disgrace the matter, then the
matter will grace the workmanship. I know mine own self best, and I measure
my self by my self; and yet I know it is my master CHRIST whom I here
describe; and I know that my master (where there is a good heart) well accept
the will for the deed. I do not boast of performance, but can comfort my self
in my endeavor. My undertaking has been grateful to some, and I am told my
labor may be profitable to others. Now then in adventuring to send it abroad
for the profit of others, both Law and Equity has Entitled your Lordship to
the Patronage of it. For me to seek another Patron, were all one, as if I
should rob your Lordship of your Coat, or bestow your arms upon another.
Besides, your Lordships many favors heaped upon me do Challenge not only
the fruit of my studies, but bring me further into your debt, to owe unto you
even my self. Accept then I pray you graciously what is offered dutifully, and
bless him with your prayers, who prays for Gods blessing upon you and yours.
Ever resting

From my house at Cockfield. Feb. 24. 1626.

Your Lordships Servant to be commanded in the work of the Lord.

THOM: a VICARS.

(...) THE SWORD BEARER.
REVEL. 2. Verse. 12. And to the Angel of the Church of Pergamos write, these
things says he that has the sharp two-edged Sword.
THis Chapter and the next contain Praeloqu.
those seven Epistles, written from the seven Spirits of GOD, to the seven
Churches of Asia, by that heavenly inspired Penman and Secretary of the LORD,
Saint John the Divine. It is true which St. Gregory has observed, that the
whole Scripture is nothing but Epistola Creatoris ad Creaturam, the Epistle of
the Gregor.
Creator, GOD, to his Creature, Man; wherein he has plainly set down in such
fair Characters, that he that runs may read it, his will and good pleasure
both touching the manner of his own service, and touching the means of our
salvation. But that was spoken more generally and after a large acception of
the word, Epistle; but the Epistles in these two Chapters are so properly and
strictly Epistles indeed, consisting of all the substantial and needful parts
of a Letter, and so curiously penned according to the rules of Art and precepts
of Rhetorique, that neither the Author of Epistolographia, as * acute as
Alstedius.
ever, or of Institutio Epistolica, as * critical as ever, can find any want
or defect in them. This Epistle Lipsius.
we have now in hand, being the third in number, parts it self into these
three heads. The first is (...) the Exord or entrance into it; the second is
Partition.
(...) the Narration or matter of it; the third is (...) the Colophon or
conclusion of it. My text meddles only with the Praeloquium or Preface.
Wherein I desire you to observe these three remarkable points. First, the
Superscription of the letter, which contains a description of the party to
whom the letter is sent, To the Angel of the Church of Pergamos; II. The
Secretaries Commission, Write. III. The Subscription of the letter, which
contains a description of the party from whom the letter comes. These things
says he that has the sharp two edged Sword.

For the first, the party to whom this letter is sent, I.
that is expressed in the first words, To the Angel of the Church of
Pergamos.] What is meant by the Angel here is not agreed upon on all sides.
Beza commenting Interpretation.
upon the first verse of this Chapter where the same word is used, as generally
it is throughout, in the preface of every Epistle, begins to pick a quarrel
with Bishops where he needs not. For, being prepossessed with a conceit of the
presbyteriall government and paritie of Ministers (which, good man! was his
oversight) will not allow that by this word Angel should be meant the Bishop of
Ephesus, or the Bishop of Smyrna, or the Bishop of Pergamos etc. and yet he
opens this word (...) with an other term which is equivalent to Bishop, and
that is (...) a superintendent, or such an one as is set over the rest of his
Colleagues to direct and admonish them, according to whose directions they are
to proceed in admonishing and teaching of their particular Churches. These be
his own words in the Exposition: Beza.
and what is this other I pray you but a Bishop? I am sure that learned and
godly Calvin, although he speak much and inveigh greatly against the
tyrannical pride and pomp of the Prelates and Bishops in Popery, yet he did
never dislike of the calling it self, but does confess it to be of GOD, and
to be of an ancient standing in the Church, even in the Prime and most Pure age
of it; wherein he says there was always one selected out of the presbyters
and set over them as an overseer or Bishop, ne Calvin.
ex aequalitate, vt fieri solet, dissidia nascerentur; and he gives this reason
for it, Because Paritie among Churchmen was the high way to bring in contention
and confusion into the Church. Lib. 4. Instit. c. 4.. 2. Therefore we think
thus, that in the mother Cities there were Bishops, and that therefore this
word Angel reaches unto them; and in the other Churches appending there were
ordinary Pastors, and that this title of Angel does belong also unto them.
Bishops and Ministers are Angels. I do not now Observation.
speak of their nature, but of their office. And indeed, to say as the matter
is, this word Angel is Nomen Explication.
officij non naturae, a name that does rather import the office then the nature
of that thing which is so imposed. Thus S. John Baptist who was the Minister of
Probation.
Christ, is called the Angel of the Lord, Malac. 3. and I have heard some
learned Divines of opinion upon the mentioning of that place of the Apostle, 1.
Cor. 11. 10. That Women ought to have power on their heads because of the
Angels (and it is Lyra's exposition too Lyra.
upon that text) that by Angels there are understood Gods Ministers. The
Apostles argument being this. Women when they come to Church ought to be
covered and veyled, least they be occasions of sin and a stumbling block to
the Minister in the exercise and performance of his holy function. For if they
should appear in the Congregation with their heads uncovered, their hair
displayed, their breasts naked; what do they know but that by gazing upon
them, the Minister might withdraw his mind from his business, and so be hindered
or disabled for that time in the performance of his holy function? therefore
ought the women to have power on their heads, because of the Angels, that is,
the Ministers. Howsoever that interpretation hold, sure I am that the Bishop of
Ephesus and the Ministers of the other Churches here in this Chapter are called
Angels, To the Angel of the Church of Pergamos. This title brings to our Use I.
consideration these two things. 1. The duty of Ministers, 2. The dignity of
our calling. First, our duty. My beloved brethren of the Clergy, you are
Angels, that is, Gods Messengers and Ambassadors; and therefore with all
diligence and faithfulness you must remember to deliver Gods word unto the
people, without adding or diminishing; for that is the property of a
messenger. Thou shall therefore receive the word at my mouth and deliver it
unto them, says the Lord to the Prophet Ezekiel. 3. Nay this meditation must
ascend yet higher, you are Angels, and therefore ought ye as chearefully and
readily perform Gods will here on earth even as the Angels do it in heaven,
who stand ever in his presence ready pressed to do his commandment. They are
spirits; you are men; both are Ministers. They ministering Spirits in heaven,
you ministering Angels on earth; and therefore see that you give none offense
in any thing, but approve your selves as the Ministers of God in all purity
and alacrity; for these are the properties of Angels. The second thing, that I
told you Use II.
this title or appellation pointed at, was the dignity of our calling. The
Ministry, as the world goes now a days, is a profession that is more subject
to contempt and vile usage then any calling whatsoever. And therefore the Lord,
that he might meet the better with those base conceits the wordlings have of
his servants, and the more to advance the honor of his own ordinance, he
has been pleased in the scriptures to grace the Ministers of the word with as
fair and honorable titles and appellations, as any other calling whatsoever.
To what end should I now recite them all? Let it suffice that in the text they
are called Angels. Do thou think to rail and revile the Kings messenger,
and yet be guiltless? and will'st thou kick and spurn against thy Pastor, the
messenger of the Lord of hosts, and think to go unpunished? What man! Do
thou not esteem highly of the Angels? how comes it about then that thou
esteemest so basely of the Miuisters? oh my Christian brethren, deal not so
foolishly, as to say or think it of thy Minister that he is but a base
Pedanticall fellow, or a poor bell'd priest. For, I tell you of a truth, the
Lord will not suffer these flowts and scoffs to go unrevenged. And the more
his Ministers are scorned of wordlings, the more honor he looks should be put
upon them by you that are his servants, according to his own example. And
therefore howsoever the world thinks of us, yet do not you account of a
Minister as of an ordinary man; for he is an Angel upon earth. Let him not be
twitted and scorned, let him not be slighted and neglected, let him not be
coursly and roughly entertained, but let him be reverenced and respected and
honored according to his place and calling; for he is an Angel. And herein
you have an excellent pattern in the Galathians, whose religious and
cheerful entertainment of St. Paul is set down for your imitation; to teach
you with what reverence and affection you ought to entertain a good Minister,
even no otherwise then they did St. Paul, and that was as an Angel. So he
testifies of them. Ye received me as an Angel of God. Galat. 4. 14.

Secondly (before we leave this first part) observe here that the Angel is
confined to his place. Observat.
He is not a Minister at large, but the Angel of this Church. Not of all the
Churches, but of this Church. The name of Oecamenicull or Universal Bishop was
not heard of in those days. That is a later brood of Antichrist. Let him be a
Bishop, he is confined to his own charge. Let him be an inferior Minister,
He is confined to his proper cure, the first Angel at Ephesus, the second at
Smyrna, the third at Pergamos. He must not step beyond his limits. I grant the
Bishop has a larger scope like unto that prime and common intelligence the
Philosophers speak of which regulates the Primum mobile in that most apparent
diurnall motion common to all the Spheres; the inferior Ministers being those
other particular Angels or intelligences (according to that opinion) assisting
each particular orb in his own proper periodicall motion; yet both are
limited. If he be a Bishop, he is limited to his own Diocese, and he must
not be (...) a busy Bishop in another man's Diocese. If he be an inferior
Pastor, he has his particular flock too, whereof the holy Ghost has made
him a Bishop or an Overseer, as the word imports, and he must take heed unto
that, Act. 20. No Pastor unconfined to some Church. No Bishop set over all
Churches. It is true Saint Paul says of himself that he had the care Proleps.
of all the Churches, 2. Cor. 11. 28. But first, it is one thing to have a
Christian care and another thing to have a particular charge over all Churches.
Secondly, Saint Paul was an Apostle, and that office is non-dated long ago.
And I take it, this is a difference between an Apostle and a Bishop or
ordinary Pastor; that the Apostles were not confined to any set place, but
were appointed to go into all the world, and to preach the Gospel to every
creature: but Bishops, and Pastors are confined to their own Circuites and
Churches; To the Angel of the Church of Pergamos.

I have done with the Superscription, I come now II.
to the Secretaries Commission, in this word, Write] It is the voice of Gods
spirit to Saint John. A word much used in scripture, but especially in this
book of Revelation very frequently. Cap. 1. 19. Write the things that thou
have seen. Cap. 14. 13. And I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me,
Write. And in this and the next chapter often, Write. Hence we gather diverse
things. The first thing we gather Observat. 1.
hence is the divine authority of this book. ot. John is not the Author of it,
but the instrument only to convey it unto us. The holy Ghost is the inditer,
John is but the writer of it. So that what S. Paul says of the whole
Scripture, we may truly affirm it of this book, that it is (...) given from
God by inspiration. Which I note against the error of all such as have either
doubted or denied this book to be in the Use.
Canon of scripture, or of authentical authority. Secondly, Write. I know and
confess that God might Observat. 2.
have written this book and the whole scripture with his own finger, as he
did the ten commandments, they were written with the finger of Gods own hand;
or God might have spoken these things himself to the Churches, as he dealt with
Moses, to whom he talked as one friend to another face to face: but it has not
pleased him to deal with us after such an immediate manner, least we might be
too much daunted with his glory. And therefore, because he would graciously
descend to our weakness, he has used the Ministry of his servants to
deliver unto us his holy Oracles; not that he needed their help at all, as
Kings and great men need their Secretaries, but only to remember us of these
2. short instructions. 1. To let us see our own weakness, that we Use.
are not able to sustain Gods immediate presence, and 2. to teach us a
necessary and most excellent use of the ministry, which God has established
in the Church merely for our benefit. Thirdly, Observat. 3.
Write. And why must these things be written? was it not enough to have them
delivered over by word of mouth from the father to the son, and so have
remained as a Tradition perpetually in the Church, but they must be written?
But who is this that calls Gods actions into question? We see it was his will
to have these things written, and let us rest in that, and know that it was not
expedient for us that it should be otherwise. If they had not been written;
peradventure, nay without all peradventure, they would have been corrupted and
received addition or diminution according either to the over-quick or over-dull
capacities of men in the long line of succession, but being once written, that
fear is past.

The text will not admit of any addition, but it will plainly appear to be
interlined, and their can nothing now be taken from the text, but it will
plainly appear to be blotted out. The Papists may tell us that the Canon of
the Scripture is not perfect Use.
unless we add thereunto unwritten Traditions. But we know the Canon is
perfect, Adoroplenitudinem Scripturarum says Tertullian, I adore the
perfection of the scripture, and we dare not add any thing to it. We fear
the curse denounced in the last of this book, which is set down with
earnestness and a solemn protestation. I protest unto every one that shall
add any thing to this book, God will also add unto him the plagues that are
written in this book. Revel. 22. 18. They may tell us of a twofold word of
God. Scriptum and non Scriptum, the one written, the other unwritten. But we
cannot admit of this distinction. If it be the the word of God, it is written;
as Saint Ambrose says excellently, Quod non legi, usurpare non debeo. I dare
not make use of any thing as authentic proof that I read not written in the
scriptures, Write. Fourthly Write. Words you know are Observat. 4.
but a wind and they quickly vanish in the air with the sound, sed littera
scripta manet, if they be once put in writing, then they stand upon a sure
record both for our own present use and the benefit of all posterity. And
therefore when the Lord had wrought a great deliverance for his people, the
Prophet says, This shall be written for them that come after, and the people
which are yet unhorne shall praise the Lord. They are not content to praise God
themselves for his deliverance, but they will have it written down for them
that come after, that they also may have occasion thereby to praise the Lord.
These things then must be written, both for their use that then lived, and also
for our benefit, that by this excellent means they might the better be
preserved in the Church, to be read and learned of us. For whatsoever was
written before time, was written for our learning, that we through patience etc.
Romans 15. 4. And Use.
has God taken such care to have these things written for our learning? What
shall we think then of the folly, shall I say? or the madness of Popish
Bishops and Prelates, which strike the Bible out of Lay men's hands and will not
suffer the common people to have or use the holy Scriptures, least forsooth
they should turn heretics and Apostates from the faith. Was not the world,
trow you, come to a fair pass, when the Bible was not only put into the
Index of prohibited books, and the people interdicted and debarred utterly
from once peeping into it, but when it was accounted a capital crime for a man
to have the New Testament in his house, or any English. Scripture about him?
yea, such a crime, that Gods book it self shall be cast into the fire to be
burnt, and Gods Servant that used it, shall fry at the stake for it, as is
happened in our forefathers days. good Lord! No wonder, if thou John Husse,
poor Apostrophe.
Hus significas anserem.
goose of Bohemia, be derided and thy Monuments blackt over with dust and
cast behind the screene to be meat for moathes, when the Monuments of Gods
sacred word are so slighted and disgraced and cast sub scamnum under the
bench, as Luther complained. No wonder Luther, if thou be condemned for an
heretic and thy works burnt at Rome by the Pope, when the sacred word of God
is condemned for making men heretics, and burnt in England in the open market
places was it now not high time think you, for the Lord to lay to his hand?
for they had destroyed his law. Yes, the Lord arose and his enemies were
scattered, and all they that hated his word did fly before him like smoke.
For all those Gardiners and Bonners, those Iehoiakims and Antiochusses that
wrought despite to Gods word are dead and rotten and their names are perished
with them, sed verbum Domini manet in aeternum, but the word of the Lord
endures for ever; and this is that word that is preached among you; this is
that word that God has appointed to be written for your sakes, and has
preserved mightily unto these times, wherein we enjoy it in great purity.
Only let us remember to make good use of this loving kindness of the Lord, to
read in the book of God continually, to delight in it, to meditate therein day
and night, as it is in the 1. Psalm. There are none now debarred from reading,
we have the free use of the Bible; neither is the book sealed, but wide open
and plain enough in your own Mother tongue. It is not in the heaven in Gods
bosom, that you should say, who will ascend up into heaven and fetch it down
thence, that we may know it. For God has revealed himself in the holy
writings: Neither is it beyond the Sea in the bosom of the Pope, that you
should say, who will climb over the Alps and go to Rome and bring it thence
that we may know it and do it: but the word is near unto you, even at your
doors in a manner, nay, it is in your mouths, and in your hearts to observe
it. I shut up the point with that excellent exhortation of the blessed Apostle.
Let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteously in all wisdom, Coloss. 3. The
word of Christ is the holy Scripture, this you must get to dwell in you, you
must not give it lodging in your breasts as in a thorough-faire, for a night,
and so farewell, but you must get it to dwell in you, and that not sparingly,
but plenteously and in all wisdom too. Coloss. 3. 16.

So from the Secretaries Commission, I come to the III.
Subscription of the letter, which contains a description of the party from
whom the Epistle is sent, These things says he that has the sharp two edged
sword.] The words in this description are very emphaticall. Interpretation.
It is clearly proved, as the learned in the Greek tongue know, by the
apposition of the article to every word; for thus it runs in the original.
These things says he that has (...) that sword, (...) that two edged sword,
(...) that sharp two edged sword. Of these in their order. And first of the
sword (...), then of the two attributes given to it (...) and (...) that it is
a two edged sword, and that it is a sharp sword. By the sword here is meant the
word of God, which is called the sword of the spirit, Ephesians. 6. and compared to
a sharp two edged sword, Heb. 4. Now the word of God is called a sword in a
double relation. 1. In relation to Christ, 2. In relation to Christians.

First, in relation to Christ the word that is the sword Observat 1.
is an embleeme of his Majesty and authority in governing the Church, and
shows him to be a King. Kings and Princes you know have the sword borne before
them, as an ensign of their authority: So Christ our blessed Savior is no
sooner made King of the Church, but he has this sword set up before him as a
token of his Majesty, as you shall find in the 2. Psalm. I have set my King
upon my holy hill of Sion, I will preach the law whereof the Lord has
Probation.
said etc, verse. 6. I have set my King, there Christ is made an appointed King
of the Church: I will preach the law, and there is the sword set up before him,
whereby he is to govern the Church unto the end, and that is the preaching of
the word. And hereof you have a most manifest proof in that description of
Christ, Revel. 19. where he is set out in his full glory, Upon a white horse
with many crowns on his head and with his heavenly guard and attendants about
him, but where is the sword? It is presently said in the next words that out of
his mouth there came a sharp sword that with it he might smite the Nations and
rule them with an iron rod. This place consorts wholly with the 2. Psalm. Yet
that we might not at all doubt of whom this scripture is meant, his name is
called the Word of God, that is, the essential word of the Father verse. 13.
and verse 16. he is called King of Kings and Lord of Lords. By which it is
plain that in relation to Christ, this sword is an embleeme of his authority
and dominion over the Church. And let us make this use of it, that seeing
Christ Use.
has set up the word in the Church for our government, let us learn like
obedient Subjects to submit our selves to Gods ordinance, and give up our
selves wholly to be guided and governed by the scepter of Christ's word. Let it
have such sway and authority in our hearts, that whatsoever we find therein
condemned, we may avoid that, and whatsoever we find therein commended, we may
follow after that; and be sure we do nothing, if it be possible, for which we
have not some ground in the scripture.

II. In relation to Christians, the word of God is called a sword, and that in
a twofold respect. 1. In respect of that it works in them; 2. In respect of
that it works for them. First for that it works in them; so this
appellation of a sword sets out the virtue and power and efficacy of the
word of God. It is a powerful word and lively in operation, yea sharper then
any Observat. 2.
two edged sword, piercing even to the dividing a sunder Probation.
of the soul and the spirit, of the joints and the marrow and is a discerner
of the secret thoughts and intents of the heart. Heb, 4. 12. No wonder then (as
it has been observed) that in some congregations whilst the Minister was
speaking in the Pulpit, there appeared compunction in the hearts, tears in the
eyes, blushes in the cheeks, fear in the consciences, and a kind of horror
over all the body of the auditorie. For why? it was not the power of him that
spoke, but the power and efficacy of the word that he spoke, which wrought all
those passions and strange motions in the hearers. Ense velut stricto quotiens
Lucilius ardens Iuvenal.

Infremuit; rubet auditor, cut frigidamens est
Criminibus, tacita sudant praecordia culpa.
Iuvenal a Poet spoke it of Lucilius another Poet. I may more truly affirm of
a Preacher, that brandisheth this glittering Sword and lays about him
manfully to strike down sin and impiety, that he makes men sometime to wax
red, sometime to grow pale, sometime to swet and fret and scratch where it does
not itch, and to be so exceedingly moved, as though they were sitting upon
nettles or standing upon thorns, and all this from the force and power of Gods
word, which is lively in operation, and pierces deeper then a two-edged Sword
and is privy unto all their secret and bosom sins be they never so retired,
and enveloped never so closely in the inmost corner of the heart. So that, if
men would rightly consider, it is the most foolish thing in the world for a man
to resolve to live in any Use.
known sin, and yet to desire to live under the ministry of the word. For
well I wot that sin is a work of darkness and cannot abide to be discerned,
well I wot that sin is a sore in the soul and cannot abide to be touched; and
a man cannot live under a preaching Minister, but he shall at one time or other
have his most secret Corruption ripped up before his eyes, and his bosom and
beloved sin discerned and divided from him by the power of the word. Neither
let men come and chide with the Minister and say that he has made a sermon
purposely against them, and to disgrace their persons in the face of the whole
congregation. For, it may be the Minister never dreamed of them in particular,
and if Gods word has reached even to their souls and taken them tardie in
their finnes; let them not quench the spirit, nor despise prophecy, but
acknowledge the working of that word and the virtue of that Spirit, by which
the Minister speaks so home unto the Conscience, which is able to discern in
it self, and to direct the tongue of his servants to disclose unto others
Adams nakedness under his Fig leaves, Ieroboams wifes dissembling under her
mask, the juggling of Gehezi under a fair attendance, the bloody heart of
Hazael under a sweet countenance, the sacrilege of Ananias under some
charitable pretenses; and the devouring of widows houses in the Pharisees
under a color of long prayers. What think you? Will any be so desperately
foolish as, when he sees a Sword lifted up to smite, will run directly under
the stroke of it? Truly this is the case of all such as will needs live in any
known sin under the doctrine of the word. For every time that they come to
Church, and that the Minister has occasion to touch upon that point, they
run directly under the stroke of this Sword. And therefore if their souls
be pierced, and their hearts pricked, and their consciences gashed, and their
spirits wounded within them, they may even thank themselves for it, and never
chide nor complaineof the Minister.

Thus of the first reason, why the word is called a Sword in respect of
Christians, namely for that it works in them. now come we to the second
reason, why it is called a Sword in respect of Christians, namely for that it
works for them. And so this appellation of a Sword does import that excellent
use that a Christian Observat. 3.
may make of the word of God in all his trials and temptations, in that whole
combat and spiritual warfare against sin and Satan. For in a combat the
sword is a most useful weapon, not only for defense and saving of our selves,
but for offense and daunting of the enemy. And therefore the blessed Apostle
Probetion.
when he sets down that same (...), the whole armor of God, which a
Christian Soldier is to girt about him, that he may stand fast in the evil
day, he does especially remember among the rest the Sword of the spirit which
is the word of God Ephesians. 6. 17. In the former verse he gave him the Shield of
faith, in this verse he puts into his hand the Sword of the spirit. By the
shield of faith are quenched all the fiery darts of the devil; but by the
Sword of the spirit his darts are driven back into his own bosom. The shield
of faith can but keep of the darts from of us that they hurt us not, it can
not drive the adversary out of the field; but the Sword of the spirit puts him
to slight and gives him the foil. This is plainly proved by our Saviors own
example, who, when Satan came to tempt him, puts him to the worse and made him
flee out of the field by maine force of argument taken out of the holy
scripture. For when Satan tempted him to distrust of Gods providence and to
shift for himself, to satisfy his hunger with victuals of his own
provision, he repells this temptation, and beats it back with a Scriptum est,
It is written, that manliveth not by bread only, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God. When he tempted him to Presumption, that he
should not go down from the top of the temple the ordinary way, but should
take a shorter cut by casting himself down from thence, he repells this
temptation, and beats it back with a Scriptum est, It is written, Thou shall
not tempt the Lord thy God. Lastly when he tempted him to idolatry, by a fair
promise of the whole world for but bending of his knee, he repells this
temptation and beats it back with a Scriptum est, It is written, Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. And by this means he
made the devil avoyde and flee out of the field, for the text says that upon
this, the devil departed from him, and the Angels came and ministered unto him.
Math. 4. And all this for our Use.
instruction. That whenever the devil shall come and tempt us either to
pride or covetousness, or adultery, or any other sin, we be sure to make use
of the Sword of the spirit, that is, be furnished with plain testimonies of
holy Scriptures to repel and beat back all his temptations. Against Pride,
remember that of the Apostle James, God resists the proud: against
covetousnes, remember that of the Apostle Paul, A covetous person (which is an
idolater) has no part nor portion in the Kingdom of God or of Christ: against
adultery, remember that of the same Apostle, that no whoremonger shall ever
enter into the Kingdom of heaven. And so whatsoever sin it be he tempts thee
unto, be it error in judgment, be it corruption in life, be sure that thou
be always furnished with a Scriptum est to dead the temptation and drive
away the tempter, according to our Saviors example. And so much of the Sword;
now we come to the two Epithites or attributes given unto it in the text,
(...), and (...).

I. (...), that is, if you will interpret it ad verbum, a double mouthed Sword,
by an elegant metaphor most usual among the Hebrews, the mouth of the Sword
being put for the edge of the sword. This sword has 2. mouths, that is, two
edges, (...) a double edged sword. Now the word of God is compared to a
Observat. 4.
double edged sword by reason of that double effect it works upon the hearts
of men. It has two edges, and it cuts with both. But the one edge cuts so, as
that it lets out only the impostume, and corrupt blood, upon which there
follows health and salvation, the other edge cuts more deeply and gives a
mortal blow, upon which there follows death and destruction. For the better
opening Probation.
of this, observe that in the visible Church of Christ there are intermixed two
sorts of people, and will always so remain until the day of separation at
the last judgment. Then they are called sheep and goats, now they are called
elect and reprobate. Both these living within the borders of the Church, where
God has set up the ministry, do both of them hear the Preacher, and receive
the word, but with different success, for to the one it is the savor of life
unto life, and to the other it is the savor of death unto death 2. Cor. 2. 16.
That position in philosophy is most true, Idem qua idem semper facit idem,
that if the cause be the same in each respect, then it brings forth always
the same effect; but if it vary never so little, either intrinsecally in it
self, or extrinsecally in respect of some circumstantiall adjacent, it
produces not only different, but also most contrariant effects, as we see in
the fire. The same heat that melts wax till it drop again like water,
hardneth the clay till it be a very stone. And we see the same in sweet
ointment, as Gregor: Nyssen has observed, (...) Greg. Nyssen.
(...), Even as the same ointment which adds life and strength to the dove
takes away both life and motion from the beetle: so the word of Christ, or
Christ preached, to the Jews is a stumbling block, and to the Grecians
foolishness, but to them that are called both of the Jews and Greeks it is
the wisdom of God and the power of God. Romans 1. 24. By this then we have now
delivered there is taken away a scruple of some Ministers, Use. I.
who dare not in a manner preach some part of Gods word, I mean the Law, and
the threatenings of the Law against Sinners, because that by the preaching of
these things many fall back into desperation and damnation. But the man of God
ought not to be offended at this, for what says the Apostle? We are the sweet
savor of Christ unto God both in them that are saved and in them that perish
2. Cor. 2. Let us be careful to discharge our duties, and let us leave the
success to God. And let this be our staff of comfort to support us in the
exercise of our ministry, that whether the word that we preach work life and
salvation in our auditors, which we so much desire, or it work death and
destruction in them, which we so much fear, yet still we are the sweet savor
of Christ unto God both in them that are saved and in them that perish 2. Cor.
2. 15. Secondly, hereby we have an error corrected Use. II.
that runs among the people, They cannot endure at no hand that the preacher
should open the doctrine of the Law or denounce the curses contained in Gods
word against sinners. Why I say they, this is the ready way to plung men into
the pit of despair and to send them to hell before they be dead. But these
people do not rightly understand themselves. It is not for them to prescribe
unto us either the form or matter of preaching. We are tied unto both; to
press the law with all earnestness, and to preach the Gospel with all
meekness of spirit. A necessity is laid upon us for both, and we must not
keep back any part of Gods counsel from the people. And let men content
themselves, and never storm at the matter. Let them look carefully about
them, and let them be assured of this, that God will have his glory upon them
either in their conversion, if they belong to the number of his chosen
servants, or in their confusion, if they be rejectaneous and castawaies. The
Lord has created all things for his own sake, even the wicked men against the
day of evil. Prove. 16. 4.

II. (...). We have done with the first attribute, a double edged sword, there
remains now the other only, a sharp sword, and this seems to give life to
that which went before. If it were a sword and had never an edge, it would be
of no use; if it were a sword which had two edges, and they were dull and blunt
ones; it would be but of small use, and therefore as it is a sword, and a
double edged sword; so it is a sharp two edged sword. If men will walk on in
sinful and wicked courses, they must not make account Observat. 5.
to go away smoothly and never be touched for it. They shall meet at one time
or another with a sharp sword in their way, which God has set up in the
ministry of his Word, and they shall not avoid it. For what Esaias, the Lords
Prophet, says of himself, every faithful minister of Christ may apply to
himself. The Lord has called me from the womb and made mention of me from
my mothers belly and he has made my mouth like a sharp sword. Esaias 49. 2.
Ministers must deal sharply with notorious sinners. If Herod will play
Probation.
the wanton and keep his brother Philips wife against Gods law, he shall be
sure to hear of it as well by S. Ioh. Baptist. It is not lawful for thee to
have her. Math. 14. 4. If the Scribes and Pharisees will take part with their
fathers and progenitors in their viperous qualities, they shall be sure to
hear of it as well, by the same S. John. O generation of vipers, who has
forwarned you to fly from the Wrath to come? Now also is the axe laid to the
root of the trees. Every tree therefore that brings not forth good fruit is
cut down and cast into the fire. Math 3. 10. Indeed I confess in the text
there, it is called an axe, Now also is the axe laid to the root, but that axe
there is all one with the sword here, and so you have them both expressed
together in one verse Hos. 6. 5. I have hewn them by my Prophets, and I have
cut them with the words of my mouth. An elegant metaphor, to express Gods
sharp dealing with that sinful and rebellious people, that were grown
tanquam nodosa ligna, says Zanchius; such knottie pieces of wood that a
plainer would not serve the turn to smooth them, but they must have an axe to
hew them; so knottie and hard withal, that a knife would not serve to prune
them, but they must have a sword to cut them asunder. Dolavi eos I have hewn
them by my Prophets, there is the work of the axe; secui eos I have cut them
with the words of my mouth, there is the work of the sword. And because we have
made mention of Zanchius his interpretation on that place, let us also take
notice of his application. Discant hinc concionatores Use. I.
non semper blande and leniter agendum esse cum populo. Let all preachers
learn from these proceedings of God, not always to sing a song of peace, but
to take up the axe of reproof, and to lay about them with the sharp sword of
admonition, that sinners may see their daingerous estate and how to avoid it.
For, as he goes on there well, mostly now adays men are hypocrites Zanchius.
and carnal Gospellers and outside professors, who cannot endure any voice
but the sweet sound of the Gospel, that Christ is the Savior of the world,
that he died for our sins, and that by his death he has wrought a full and
perfect redemption; and yet in the mean time no show nor touch of any true
repentance in them for sin, no change in their lives at all, but remain
obstinate and obdurate in sinful courses, and will in the length kill their
own souls merely with flattery, unless some speedy and sharp course be
taken to rouse them out of their security. I know there is a more gentle way
and milder course to be Proleps.
taken with sorrowful and relenting sinners, of whom there is hope that they
will be reclaimed and reformed by that milder course, but I speak now of
notorious and obstinate sinners, which are settled upon their lees, as the
Prophet speaks. And yet in dealing with them, I grant that the Minister ought
to use a great deal of discretion. For though the minister have the face of an
Eagle, that is, be able to soar up never so high in the contemplation of
divine Mysteries, though he have the face of an Ox, that is, be as painful
and diligent in his place as an Ox is at his labor, though he have the face
of a Lion, that is, be as bold as a Lion in rebuking of sin; yet if he have
not also the face of a Man, to guide and direct all these things according to
discretion; they are nothing worth. But here now falls in that maine question;
What is discretion? I fear there are some Clergymen, I will not say, that
make an idol of it; but that do not well in opposing Zeal and discretion, as
though they could not stand together, and under pretense of discretion slack
their pains in preaching, grow perfunctory in their persuasions, cold in their
reproves, healing the sores of the daughter of my people with fair words,
and, I fear, preaching peace, peace, where there is no peace. But if this be
the discretion they mean, then welfare the ardour of Elias, the fervencie of
Phineas, and the godly zeal of Moses. Of Moses it is said that, although
according to the testimony of Gods spirit, he was the meekest man upon earth,
yet in Gods cause he was zealous to the death. Causam populi precibus egit apud
Deu^ (says Philo) Philo.
causam Dei gladijs egit apud populu^. For when he was to plead for the people
unto God, he did it by prayers; but when he was to plead Gods cause with the
people, he did that with swords. It is an excellent speech of S. Austine, Non
omnis qui parcit, est amicus; nec omnis, qui verberat, Augustine.
inimicus. He that spares when he should smite is no friend, and he that
smites freely when there is cause is no Enemy. Meliora sunt vulnera amici
quam voluntaria oscula inimici. Better are the wounds of a friend, then the
voluntary kisses of an enemy. Melius est cum severitate diligere, quam cum
leuitate decipere, And it is always better to love, though our love be mixed
with severity and sharpness, then to deceive by too much lenity and
gentleness, Aug. Epist. 48. Uincent. Too much eagerness is naught, and so is
too much remissness too; but, beloved, charity is so cold, and piety so
rare, and the days so desperately wicked, that I make it a great question
whether a man can now be over zealous in Gods cause. O beloved, we are fallen
into those days, wherein the people for the most part non sustinent veritatem,
they cannot abide to have the truth spoken home plainly and particularly. Is
any covetous? ulcus est, ne tangas, it is a sore and a gall, take heed how you
touch it. Is any a drunkard? ulcus est that's a gall too, take heed how you
touch it. Is any sacrilegious? ulcus est, a sore gall I promise you, it must
not be touched. Is any an oppressor? ulcus est. That Is a very sore gall too,
and take heed how you touch it. For and if you do, then be sure the galled
Horse will kick and fling, and you must look for nothing but hard measure from
that furious beast. Amant veritatem lucentem (says Augustine) non
redarguentem, If you will weaue out unto them some goodly fair plausible
discourses, they will hear you as long as you will; but come once to use this
sharp sword, to reprove sin and rip up their secret offenses, then they
will cry out presently, Away with such a fellow from the earth, for it is not
fit that he should live any longer. These things being considered, I trust it
does appear Use. II.
that it is not for Ministers to disharten their brethren, or to pick quarrels
one with another for preaching plainly and powerfully: they should rather join
the right hands of fellowship to outpreach sin, to out pray sin, to outface
sin, and they should whet one another on by their good example, as Iehu said
unto Iehonadab, If thine heart be upright with me, as mine is with thee, then
come along and thou shall see what Zeal I have for the Lord of hoastes 2.
Kings 10. And I wish heartily that in these last times and therefore the
lewdest and of loosest manners, all the Ministers were such as Bernard
describes de Consid. lib. 4. Qui Regibus se Ioannem exhibeant, Aegyptijs Mosen,
that would be as sharp with Kings and great ones as S. John was with Herod;
that would spare mighty sinners no more then Moses did the Egyptians; Qui
fornicantibus Phineam, Eliam idololatris, Elizaeum avaris, that would be
another Phineas against fornicators, another Elias to idolaters, and another
Elisha to the covetous; Qui Petrum mentientibus, Paulu^ blasphemantibus,
negotiantibus Christum that would beat down with their voice horrible liars,
as Peter did; that would confound palpable blasphemers, as Paul did, that would
whip out gross sacrilege, as Christ did the buyers and sellers out of the
temple. I must yet go on a little further with that mellifluous Author, Qui
vulg us non spernunt, sed doceant, that do not despise Bernard.
the meanest, but rather teach them. Qui divites non palpent sed terreant, that
do not flatter rich men in their sins, but thunder against them. Qui minas
principu^ non paveant sed co^temnant, that do not fear the threatenings of
great men, but contemn them. Bern. de Consid. ad Eugen. lib 4. c. 6. And I
have learned a good Collect out of our Common prayer book, which I shall ever
put up to God in the behalf of my self and the rest of my brethren in the
ministry. That God would grant unto his servants with all courage to deliver
his word, and, according to the example of St. John Baptist, constantly to
speak the truth, boldly to reprove vice, and patiently to suffer for the
truths sake, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

I have done with the text and each particular thereof Appendix:
I proposed to speak of. I must now entreat leave of you to run over it
again, not any more as an Interpreter, but as an Herald. For the Bishops arms
of this Diocese, grounded in this text, gave me first occasion to fasten on
these words as a fit theme to be entreated on in this Synodicall assembly. And
I will now for a Conclusion, before we part, blazon those Arms. I do not
profess any great skill in that honorable science of Heraldrie, I am but a
novice and of small understanding in it. And therefore if my terms be not so
jump and proper to Armorie, as they should, I must entreat your patience and
pardon, who are better seen in the Art, then my self. In every Coat or
Escutcheon (and so in this) there are two things observeable. The field and the
charge. The field here is azure or sky-coloure, which is supposed to be the
color of the heaven, if there be any color in it. Azure in blazoning
moralized signifies purity and sincerity. This is a fit field to place Christ
in. And it does teach us thus much, that the Bishops conversation must be in
heaven, as St. Paul Observat.
says, Our conversation is in heaven, whence we look for a Savior etc.
Philip. 3. 20.

We have done with the field; for I will but touch upon every point, because I
know before whom I speak; I come to the charge. For order sake we will make
this partition of it. The charge is either maine and principal, or it is
circumstantiall. The maine or principal charge is Christ, who is described in
this text. Lord! what a great honor it is for a man to carry Christ in his
shield? But yet is it a far greater grace to carry Christ in his heart. This
does teach that the Bishop Observat.
must be an imitator and follower of Christ, as he has him in his shield, so
to hold him still in his heart, to express him throughout the course of his
life, and to resemble him in all his actions. Now it is written expressly of
Christ, that he went about into all the Towns and villages Preaching and doing
good among the people. And I have heard it of Richard, Bishop of this See, who
for his sanctity and holy life had the title of Saint put upon him. I have
heard it I say of him, that in every three year he was wont to go over all
his Diocese Preaching. I wish the Bishop that now is had as good means to do
this as he had then. I am sure there wants no good affection. And the desire of
performing this business, if strength and means were answerable to the mind
and intention, is as full and perfect in our present Diocesan, as ever it was
in S. Richard.

I have done with the principal charge, the Circumstantiall follows, which is
nothing else but a description of the maine charge, that is, of Christ. Now
Christ here is set out unto our eyes in these three things. 1. in respect of
the positure of his body 2. in respect of the habit 3. in respect of an
adjunct. The site and position of his body, is sitting upon a bench. Sitting in
blazoning moraliz'd signifies gravitie and constancy, and therefore Observat.
1.
you have Kings and judges and other princes pourtraited for the most part
Sitting in the place of judicature. See King James his Pattern for a Kings
inauguration. Page 33. and sequ. There is one thing more which Sitting imports,
which is so well practiced by our Diocesan, that I cannot slip it over in
silence, and that is his residence and living upon his Charge. And indeed
Observat. 2.
where should a Bishop live, save in his Diocese? He must be no flitter, he
must be a sitter there. I am sure that the Angel brought that good news of
Christ's birth unto the shepherds (...) as they were watching and attending
their flock. Luke 2. and assure your selves that then shall a man meet with
the best news and receive the greatest comfort, when he is in his proper place
and busied about the works of his own calling. See Didac. Stella in Luke 1.
verse 11. Stella.


The second thing in this description is the habit, and that is a long
glittering garment of beaten gold. Here are many observations. I will point
only at this one. It is of pure beaten gold and it is also a glittering
garment. The life of the Bishop as it must be pure in it self without blot; so
it must appear pure in the eyes of men without Observation.
blemish; Let your light so shine before men that they may see your good
works. Math. 5.

The third thing in the description is the adjunct, and that is a sword in his
mouth. What is meant by the sword I have told you above, here only observe that
it is in his mouth. Not in his hand but in his mouth. The Observat. 1.
sword in the hand does import Temporal power, but the sword in the mouth,
Spiritual. The Pope of Rome does indeed challenge to himself both swords,
applying that of the Apostles, when they said to Christ, Ecce duo glady lo
there be two swords, most foolishly to the maintenance of his Spiritual
swaggering in the Church, and his secular dominering over the whole world. But
questionless he is but a mere usurper; and so we leave him. But for our
Bishops now, who are Lords also and Ba-according to the Statutes of this
Realm, they have Temporal jurisdiction, we grant it, and a sword put into
their hands, but whence had they it? Surely not from Christ, but from the
Prince. Christ it was that put the sword in their mouths; and if they have at
any time (as they have, and that worthily too) an other sword put into their
hands; this is not the guist of Christ, they lay no claim unto it so; but the
grace of the Prince, and so they acknowledge it. Secondly, the Observat. 2.
sword here is in Christ's mouth, as you see. I told you that by the sword was
meant the word. This then teaches, that the Bishop is not to deliver any
doctrine unto the people that he has not fetched from Christ's mouth. What I
have received from Christ that I have delivered unto you. 1. Cor. 11. There is
but one thing behind, and that is the color of the sword It is gules that is,
red: Red in blazoning does signify blood. This is then a bloody sword, and it
does teach, that the Observat. 3.
Bishops doctrine must be so piercing and sharp, that it draw blood upon
offenders. I have spoken fully to this already. I will therefore cease to
prosecute it any further. I will add this one thing only, that the sword both
of Bishop and Minister must be like to the sword of Saul and Jonathan, which
never returned empty from the slaughter of the mighty; and most happy of all
other Bishops and Ministers shall he be at the last judgment whose sword shall
be found the most red of all by the blood that he has drawn with it upon
sin and Satan. I have said. Consider what I have said, and the Lord give you
a right understanding in all things.

AMEN.
O LORD, that give thy holy Word,
send Preachers plenteously;
That in the same we may accord,
and therein live and die.
O holy Spirit direct aright
the Preachers of thy Word,
That thou by them may cut down sin,
as it were with a Sword.
FINIS.

