A PROSPECTIVE GLASS TO LOOK INTO HEAVEN, OR The Celestial CANAAN described.

Together with the SOVLES sacred Soliloquie, and most ardent desire to be
invested into the same.

Sung in a most heavenly Hymn, to the great comfort of all good CHRISTIANS, by
the MUSES most unworthy, JOHN VICARS.

REVEL. 21. 1. And I saw a new Heaven and a new Earth. 1. COR. 13. 12. Here,
we see as through a Glass. LONDON Printed by W. Stansby for John Smethwicke,
and are to be sold at his Shop in Saint Dunstanes Churchyard in Fleet Street.
1618.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SOCIETY OF THE GOVERNOVRS OF Christ's Hospital, I.
V. Dedicateth all his poor endeavors, and wishes the Kingdom of Grace here,
and the Kingdom of Glory hereafter.
YOur Worships favors, from my Birth still found;
Have me in all my best Endeavors bound:
And, since I Owe more then I Know to Pay;
I rest your Worships, to my Dying-day.
Your Worships in All, always to be commanded, JOHN VICARS.

To the Right Worshipful, Sir JOHN LEMAN, Knight, President of Christ's
Hospital, and Alderman of LONDON, I.V. wishes all earthly Prosperity, and
the Real fruition of this Ideall description.
REligions Rules and Natures Bonds bind All,
To keep account and true memorial
Of favors past or present; lest with shame,
Ingratitude should Crack their Credits fame.
Since then ( Right worshipful) these Bonds All bind,
This Duty needs to Me must be assigned;
Who, from your Worships undeservedly
Have found much favor and great courtesy:
Whose sweet Effects have my good so effected,
As Black Oblivion may not make neglected.
And since your Worship worthily is made
The President, chief Pillar, Prop and Aid
Of Government in that blessed Hospital
Of Christ's poor members, Orphans poor and small;
I, therefore joy, thus to Congratulate
Your Worships hap, their Help so fortunate.
As also that I may express, in part,
Some sincere Fruits of my most grateful Heart:
By Dedication of this my poor Mite,
To your good Worship; due to you by right.
Which, hoping you ( Right Worshipful) will take
With kind acceptance: Heavens great King you make,
A blessed Partaker, of that Majesty,
Which my weak Pen can here but Typisie.
To your Worship in his Power and Prayers duly and d^tifully Devoted, JOHN
VICARS

To the Godly Reader.
SInce, for the most part, all men take delight,
Of novelties to hear, to write, to tell
Of treasures and of pleasures, which excel,
Which best may please their itching ears and sight.
And for that cause have many Captains stout
By Sea and Land (to find out and discover
The admirable works of Heavens Arch-mouer)
Trauail'd the Globes-circumference about,
Yea, many wise Cosmographers have spent
Much time and travail, cost and care to write
The Nature, Manners, Riches, and Delight
Of famous Kingdoms in Earths Continent.
But I, the most unworthy of the most,
Have vnderta'ne by Heavens all-blest direction,
To contemplate the unspeakable perfection
Of New Ierusalems most sacred Coast:
In which Survey (lest I, with Icarus
Should soar too-high; or, lest with Vzzah, I,
Should touch God's Ark, into Heauens-Secrets pry;
Or question what God does inhibit us:)
Prophetick-Iohn I here have made my Guide,
And by his Plat-forme drawn this Map of mine,
And heereto Barnards, Napiers help Divine,
And Brightmans bright assistance have applide.
Wherein (good Christian Reader) thou may find
Things admirable, glorious, sweet and rare;
Treasures and pleasures, matchless, past compare,
Such as transcend the reach of humane mind:
And such indeed, as, though I had the skill
And Tongue of wisest men and Angels bright,
Yet were I most unable to Indite
The true perfection of this Sion-hill.
Wherefore, as old Historians testify
A wise Geometrician once to have found
The foot of Hercules cut in the ground
Of high Olympus-hill apparently,
Did by the length of's foot delineate
The whole Proportion of Alcides great:
So, though the Fabrique of Heavens supreme Seat
In its perfection none can demonstrate,
Yet by some things expressed in sacred writ,
And circumstances suting to the same,
We may thereof in mind conjecture frame,
Although (alas) we come far short of it.
No man's Imagination can conceive,
No Understanding comprehend the same,
No Tongue can tell the majesty and same,
But those (as Christ says) which do it receive.
And therefore, He, Hid-Manna does it call,
Hidden, because unsearchable, unknown,
Manna, because more sweet than Hony-combe,
Manna delightful, meat Angelical.
O then, auaunt, thou fond Poetic fiction
Of Greeks supposed (but false) Elysean fields,
Which they do dream, such sovereign solace yields,
Which they to get, have suffered much affliction.
Why boast the Egyptians of their high-topt Spheres?
Cloud-kissing pinacled Pyramides?
Assuerus, his pompous Palaces?
Of these and more than these, what now appears?
What talk we of East Indian Merchandise?
What of West Indies Mines of massy Gold?
What of the richest Jewels to behold?
What of most precious Pearls of rarest price?
Here Is work of wonder, worthy admiration,
Here is a Structure, which out-lasts Times date;
Here is a Country rare, fair, fortunate,
Here Is to be viewed the Land of sure-Saluation.
Would thou be Rich? o, here is true Wealth indeed:
Would thou Liue-euer? here is Eternity,
Would thou Liue-merry? here is Festiuity,
And perfect Joy, which does Earths joy exceed.
Here, in this Heavenly Canaan, thou may find
Rivers, which flow with Milk and Heny sweet,
Here, as Companions, Angels shall thee greet,
Here Is joy to fill Soul, Body, Heart, and Mind.
Since then, the Subject whereof now I treat
So Holy is, ( kind Reader) me excuse,
That I, profane Poeticke Phrase refuse
In this discourse of Heavens supernall Seat:
For, it is not Fame, nor hope of worldly wealth
That I desire; The Golden Age is past.
But that I wish, Thine as mine own Soules-Health,
For which, I pray, and shall while breath does last:
For Love, I only look for Love again,
This, if repayd, repayes my greatest pain.
Thine in Christ Jesus, JOHN VICARS.

To the Author, in praise of his Prospectiue Glass.
THy Verse contains pure language in true measure,
Thy View descries the Best blessed Syon-hill,
Thy vow discovers thy religious Will,
Thy Drift is to disclose to all this treasure:
Thy Verse, thy View, thy Vow, thy Drift declare
Thy Wit, thy Skill; thy Will, thy Zeal, all rare.
Thine in the truth of a friends affection, I.H. of Cambridge M. in Arts, and
Preacher of Gods Word.

A loving LOOKING GLASS, sent to his friend, M. JOHN VICARS, in return for
his Heavenly PROSPECTIVE GLASS.
MY looks can show me Heaven through Thine,
My love can show thee, but his Heart, through Mine,
Love, looks, Heaven, and my Heart best part of friends,
Thy Glass, Grace, Friendship and thy Zeal commends.
NATHANIEL CHAMBER, of Grayes-Inne, Gent.

A Prospectiue Glass to look into Heaven, Or, The celestial CANAAN
described.
THE Armi-potent, All-seeing All-Creater,
The All-mightie Artizan of Earths Theater,
Having inclosd in his vn-clasped Book,
When Heaven and Earth their first foundation took,
And therein registered this firm Conclusion,
An Universal end, and All-Confusion
Of all the World, which when once discreated,
Should be refined, renewed and re-created,
This great Decree will doubtless ratify,
And for the Elects-sake do it more speedily,
As Sybells, Prophets, and Apostles wise,
Yea Christ himself did truly Prophetize.
Then pallid Death, whose Ash-pale face did fright
The stoutest Champion, most vn-daunted Sprite,
Having at Length with strength enough displaide,
His All-Tryumphant Trophies, having made
A massacre and havoc of all flesh,
Thinking to Nimrodize it still afresh,
Like proud disdainefull Pompey at the last
Shall meet our Caesar, and at's feet shall cast
The Glory of his Mortall-wounding might,
Shall lose his fatal Sting which did so bite
And pierce the Hearts of every Mortal Creature,
TO reduce to Dust each Wormelings Dusty feature.
Death being then Man's fatal final foe,
Him, Christ victoriously shall overthrow,
From forth his Claws shall strongly wrest the conquest,
And fell All-felling Death at's feet thus vanquished.
But as the Corner-creeping Thief does watch
With sure advantage unawares to catch
The careless Servants left the House to keep,
Whom when he finds snorting fast asleep,
Suddenly sets upon them, thus does prey
On's hopt-for Booty, and then hastes away.
Or as it fares in a fair Summer morning,
When the Great-Light the azure Skie's adorning,
And new-now risen from the Antipodes,
His radiant Rays displaies the world to please:
At whose sweet Sight the pretty Lark does rise,
Wi^h warbling noates wau'ring ith lofty Skies,
Earth having op't her Shop of sweet Perfumes
Of fragrant flowers, herbs, plants, and pleasant bloomes,
A gentle Wind fannes coolness through the Air,
The Suns increasing heat thus to impair,
Each Creature much delighted at the heart,
To see this Sight; now ready to take part
Of pleasure, in this pleasant Day begun,
When as upon a sudden, over the Sun
A mighty Raine-swolne-Cloud begins to spread,
And furious Winds through the Air are nimbly fled
From forth their Stations, blustering up and down,
The angry Heavens upon the Earth' gin frown,
And from their Spouts power down great streaming Showers,
Dashing and washing Trees, Plants, Herbs and Flowers,
With Light-heeld Lightning, and such Cannon-Thunder,
As Heaven and Earth were rest and cleft in sunder,
Damping the former hope of sweet delight,
By this so sudden Change amazing sight:
Even so this Second-Comming of Christ Jesus
From Sins most heavy hateful Yoke to ease us,
To Purge the World of its Impurity,
To Plague the Atheists Incredulity,
TO Avenge the Blood of his dear slaughtered Saints,
To Give an End to their sad sighs and plaints,
Shall Sudden be, will come at unawares,
When Worldly-men are plunged in worldly Cares,
When Lust-full-men are most a Sensualizing,
When fawning Guathoes most are Temporizing,
When as Voluptuous-Vaine-lings sport and play,
When they do least expect, suspect this Day,
Then shall this Vnsure-Certaine Doomes-Day come.
To Some most well-come, wo-full unto Some,
Unto the Wicked terrible and fearful,
Unto the Godly, comfortable, cheerful,
Unto the Bad a day of Lamentation,
Unto the Good a day of Consolation,
Sharp to the Wicked, joyful to the Just,
Gods wrath the Sinner scattering as the dust,
Then, as in the days of Noe, with wondrous change
Shall dire destruction int'all places range.
As, that, with waters woeful inundation:
So, this, with fires all-spoyling conflagration.
As, that, with water, coold the heat o^ Sin,
Wherewith the World had then inflamed bin:
So, this, with fire to burn the rotten sticks, 2. Pet. 3. 10.

Of want of Love (combustible dry li^ks)
Our Globy-Gran-dame Earth, shall then all flame,
Like a huge Bon fire, and about the same
The bound-lesse ground-lesse Sea, bright Fishes station,
Shall b'exciccated with strange admiration:
And that great-little, nimble-scale-arm'd host,
No longer shall through the watry-Region coast.
Yea, then that huge Leuiathan (Sea's wonder,)
Shall cease his sport, and roaring voice like Thunder.
Then Heaven and Earth, shall variated be,
To pure perfection in the highest degree;
Then all the Spheres, the Stars and heavenly Motions, Genesis 1.^4.

Which served for Time-distinctions, certain Notions,
Planets and Plants which Man on Earth did use,
Their Power in Man and Virtue then shall lose.
Yea, all vicissitudes, all alternations
Of Heaven and Earth, shall leave their antique Stations, Es^^ 65.17 66. 2^.

Shall be dissolved, cease, and have an end,
Mountains shall melt, and to low Dales descend. Apoc. 20.1^.

The Creatures then, which groan and moan in pain,
Freed at the least, if not renewd again:
A brief description of the Day of Judgment: by way of Introduction to the
subsequent discourse.
Then shall be heard a loud hart-daunting voice,
A heavenly Trump shall sound with ecchoing noise,
By Gods all-pot^nt power and providence,
Shall all flesh of this vast circumference
Hear and appear by that loud Trumpets summon,
At this Grand Sessions all the world in common.
Then rattling, roaring thunder shall be heard,
Dan. 12.2.
Whereby the wicked shall be frighted, feared,
Apoc. 20.12.
Then all the world shall be as flaming fire,
Christ our Iust-gentle Judge with love and ire
1. These. 4.1.
Shall come with all the host of winged Legions,
Mat. 25.31.
Soaring about the bright-starre-spangled Regions.
With whom, Apostles, Prophets, Martyrs fly
In complete glory in the glistring Sky.

Mercy and Justice marching cheek by iowle,
Shall his Divine triumphant Chariot roll,
Whose wheels shall shine with Lightning all about,
With b^a^es of glory each-where blazing out.
Who shall in's hand a Book in folio bear,
Wherein man's faults and follies written were.
Then shall the wicked Sin-polluted Goats
The most miserable condition of the ungodly.
Ingu^^t in sorrow, roar with hideous noates,
Howl, groan, and grieve, and lamentably moan
At God^ ^^^^nall and tribunal Throne,
Holding their hands at's Bar with grief and horror,
Shall beme the Judges sentence to their terror,
Their se^se-accusing Conscience telling them
Mat. 18.
That they are Guilty, and will them condemn.
And Satan's Sergeants at their elbowes stand,
To bear their souls and bodies out of hand
To his infernal Iay^e, with fiery chains
To bind them fast to Hells never ending pains.
Their Sins, I say, will stand at their right hand,
And at their left will damned Devils stand:
Within,
th'accusing Conscience crying shame,
Without them, all the World a burning flame:
Under their feet, Soule-frying, gaping Hell,
And ore their head^, their Judge most fierce and fell.
Too late they then weep for vn-wept-for Sin,
Too late they wish they never borne had bin,
Too late ashamed at Heavens most glorious light,
They wish, but vainly wish, that mountains might
Them cover, smother, from heart-searching Judge,
Thus rest of comfort, up and down they trudge,
And then the just chief Justice wrathfully, The Judges sentence to the
wicked, Go ye Cursed.

On's left hand, says to th'wicked, Stand you by,
You aw-lesse, lawless, wicked, hence, depart
Into eternal terror, pain and smart,
Depart, I say, you Cursed, go, begone
Into the depth of Hells deep dungeon.
That Prison where your damned souls must lie,
And dye a thousand deaths, yet never dye. Deuteronomy. 12.2. 2. These. 1.7. Revel.
14.10.

Where shall be weeping, wailing, schreekes and groans,
Gnashing of teeth, Hell-howling, sighs and mones,
Devils tormenting you in flames eternal,
With fearful frights, by hellish Fiends infernal,

For ere to be sequestered from all joy,
In end-lesse, rest-lesse, mercy-lesse annoy.
O woeful Wages for their works of Sin!
O how much better they never borne had bin!
O that when they were borne, they then had did,
Then thus for Sin, Hells horror to abide!
But, as we see after a mighty Storm, Simile.

The Sun shines out with beams bright, fair and warm:
So, the God-fearing, and Sin-flying Sheep,
Which did Christ's Laws and Heasts sincerely keep, The happy citate of the
Godly. 1. These. 4.26.

Which his distressed Members clothed and fed,
Which to their power the Poor had comforted,
To these blessed Saints (I say) at's right hand placed,
Who shall be with celestial glory graced,
Whom he elected to be Angelized,
Whose souls in joy shall be immortallized;
With sweet aspect to these will Christ thus say,
Come, come you blessed of the Lord for ay.
Come, dear adopted Brethren, come to me, Come ye Blessed.

With me you all shall glorified be,
Receive the Kingdom for you all prepared,
Ere Earths foundation was to The Earth declared.
For your good-seruice under my Faiths banner,

You shall be crowned with my chief Champions honor.
Since for my sake you once lived in annoy:
Now with me come into your Masters joy,
Into that joy, whereof none shall be able
You to deprive, it is so firm and stable.
Thus then the Lord-Chiefe-Iustice having driven
The rout of damned Reprobates from Heaven,
And having with the Fan of his Decree,
The Chafe from's Wheat thus cleansed and made free:
Thus in a bundle having bound the Tares,
The con-corrupted heap of hellish wares:
And by the power of 's irefull Iron rod,
His Foes beat down and under foot thus trod:
His Church from all uncleanness purifi'de,
His sacred Sons enthroniz'd Saintifi'de:
Now, The description of the Church, the Lambs Bride.
shall they all with joy inexplicable,
With great content and comfort amiable,
Behold and see the New-Ierusalem:
The City of the Lord, vouchsaft to them.
That sole Metropolis, that sacred Seat,
Wherein our Trine-One Lord most good, most great
Had long time promised, and now means to dwell,
With all his Saints in virtue that excel.
This being that sweet Spouse spiritual,
That blotlesse, spotless Bride celestial,
To whom the Lamb Christ Jesus is contracted:
Now ready that the Nuptials be enacted,
Who being in her Militant estate,
Was then with blemishes contaminate,
Was often Sin sick, by Her Sinful Course,
And as it were in danger of Divorce;
By Re-re-la^ses and her often offense,
Though still protected by Heavens indulgence.
But now being in her pure and glorious state,
In Heaven triumphant, vn-contaminate,
Conformed unto, confirmed in purity
All-Chaste, now placed in sweet security,
Now vn-diuorceable, Lovely and sweet,
Is new, Ca^tic. 1. etc.
prepared Her Bridegroom thus to meet.
Her Eyes like Orient-Pearles, her Cheeks with dimples,
Most amiable, fair, free of least Freckles of frailty, or spots of impuritie.
Pimples,
Her Lips like threads of Scarlet, Currall red,
Her Temples fair, her Hair like golden thread:
Het Breath more sauourie then mellifluous dew,
Her Breasts like two young Twin-Roes white of hiew,
Araide in fine pure linen, clean and white, Psalm. 45.

In Vestures wrought with gold which glister bright,
And cast an odoriferous fragrant sent,
Of Spikenard, Saffron and most pure ointment,
Attended on by Virgins virtuous, chaste,
To mere her Bridegroom, thus She forth does haste.
Oh sacred fight, sweet show, souls sovereign bliss,
When thus the Bridegroom his dear Spouse shall kiss,
Marriage of Manna and of Mel compacted,
Whereby our souls with Christ are aye contracted!
Prefigur'd in the sacred Sacrament
Of Christ's last Supper, given to this intent.
Thus Christ (I say) his Love, his Dove shall meet,
Thus they each other kindly then shall greet:
Thus shall this glorious City then appear,
Wherein the Just shall reign with joy and cheer.
But now ere we behold this blessed Theater,
Let me herein be the Angels Imitater,
TO each godly Reader here to signify A caution to the Readers.

This observation, of importancie:
That since in this great Cities model rare,
We are to meet with wonders past compare,
We shall behold inimitable Art,
Such as may quickly wonder-strike the heart,
And seem to Reason's Sin-blear'd, flesh-blind eye,
TO exuperate the bounds of Verity:
Therefore a Winged-Messenger from Heaven.
To th'blest Evangelist this charge has given,
To register in Time-concluding scrowles,
To write this Truth in Scriptures sacred rowles,
That heavens All-seeing, All-fore-seeing King,
Truth's spotless Fountain, Faiths ore-flowing- Spring,
That Alpha and Omega, First and Last,
Who was, is, shall be, when all Times are past,
That all herein contained is most true.
Who is as powerful to perform his Will:
As readie-prest his Mercies to full-fill;
Whose Promises are all Yea and Amen:
Has promised (and what is he among all Men
Has ever known the Lord to falsify
His Cou'nant made, or from his Word to fly?)
Has vowed (I say) that he will all things renew,
All imperfections bring to perfect hiew,
And make the joy of's glorified Saints,
Endless and free from future moan and plaints.
Yea, with such grace and forcible persuasion
He seems to counter-maund all frail evasion
Of doubting or demurring in this kind;
As if he should have said; Man, be not blind;
Let it not seem an intricate hard thing,
That I, the Lord, these things to pass should bring,
I, which of Nothing, All things did create,
I, which but breathed and made each Animate,
I,
the Arch-Mouer of what ere does move,
Shall ought to me so difficult then prove,
As not my beck and bow straight to obey?
O no, be wise, do not my power gainsay.
Be not incredulous to fear or doubt,
For I, the Lord, this thing will bring about:
Not only for my Power, but Promise sake,
God has promised, and will perform. God has power, and can perform.
And the great care which ore my Saints I take,
To crown them all with promised Salvation,
Their Foes to fell to Hell with dire damnation,
That true Believers then may find me true,
Atheists their Infidelity may rue.
Yea, with a triple-firme ingemination,
Has Heaven confirmed this faithful protestation.
And what so scornful, scoffing Cham so bold?
What impious Atheist dares it vn-true hold?
What feare-full, fault-full, or vn-faith-full Caine,
Does dare this Truth, deride, doubt or disdain?
Doubtless the simplest peevish Grammatist,
The rudest Rusticke, who yet never wist
What it is to sound Heavens depth of Prudencie:
Would soon condemn them of Absurdity.
O the great wisdom and indulgent Grace!
Of heavens great King, himself so to debase;
Precept on Precept thus to us to teach,
His Will so often t'inculcate and to preach.
Line after line, yea now and then a little,
Our Faith more soundly to confirm and settle.
Us to inform in his pure Verity,
Us to reform from Infidelity.
Therefore such faith-lesse and incredulous,
Such grace-lesse, god-lesse, irreligious, The reward of Wauerers and
vn-beleeuers.

As do deny or will besie this Truth;
Shall be rejected to their endless Ruth,
Shall never have part nor portion in this joy,
But be obtruded unto dire annoy.
And their too-light, too-late belief shall rue,
When they receive their meede and merit due;
When with the damned Sin-co-operators
They shall of woe and horror be partakers.
Read then with Faith, and what thou read'st, desire,
And that thou can not comprehend, admire.
But, here as at a stand, I stand amazed, The Author justly confesses his
inability and unworthiness to describe this glorious City.

That I a dust-borne Babe, poor, weak, and crazed,
Of stammering tongue, a child in understanding,
Of heart often subject unto sins commanding:
Should undertake ( Worm that I am) to pry
Into the depth of so great Mystery.
That to describe, which asks an Angels skill,
A Souls which of that sight has had its fill;
And yet all too-too-little, to declare
The beauty infinite, the splendour fair
Of great IEHOVAH'S Palace Crystaline,
All full of heavenly glory, all divine;
Which to describe, the more I do contend,
I more admire, and less do comprehend:
And whose rare Fabrique and celestial sight,
I rather could stand wondering at, than write.
Pardon, oh therefore pardon (Lord) I pray,
My great presumption, let thy Grace always
Illuminate my Sin-caecated heart:
And to my Lays thy sacred help impart.
That naught may be misse-done, misse-thought, misse-said,
O Lord, I crave thy sacred Sovereign aid.
Give me a voice now, O Voice all Divine!
With heavenly fire inspire this breast of mine,
And since thou, Lord, art able to declare
By th'mouthes of Babes, which weak and tender are,
Thy might and power: Lord (though unworthy I)
Into my heart infuse abundantly
The sovereign Graces of thy holy Sprite,
That my weak Pen, thy wondrous Praise may write.
That thy Inspiration
Enthousiasme of Propheticke skill,
May on my Lays like Honney sweet distill:
That by Diuine-Diuine John's godly guide,
I from the Truth may not once step aside.
But by his true Prophetical direction,
May methodize Ierusalems perfection,
That all that read it, may enflamed be
With hearts desire therein to reign with thee,
To make great haste and speedy properation,
To this blessed City with due preparation.
As God, The description of the heavenly Jerusalem.
the e'reliuing, all-good-giuing King,
The First that moves of every moving thing,
When unto Moses he vouchsaft to show
The Land of Canaan, which did ouer-flow
With Milk and Honney, which he vowed to give
To Jacobs offspring, wherein they should live;
On top of Pisgah Mountain did him place,
Deuteronomy. 34.1.
That Moses might from thence behold the grace,
The pleasure, wealth, and riches of that Land,
Which they should have by power of his right hand:
Even so, the Darling of Christ Jesus, John,
Raped in the Spirit was also placed, upon
A high-topt Mons mentis, ho^ est, altae and diuinae contemplationis.
Mount in Pathmos, whence he might
Contemplate this great Cities glorious fight;
A sight more glorious far, then that the Matt. 4.8.
Devil
(That subtle Serpent, firebrand of evil)
Showed to our Savior in his great Temptation,
When he with Satan fought for our Salvation.
Thou well-beloued of thy Savior dear,
(Says a blessed Angel unto John) draw near,
With joy come hither, stand a while by me,
And thou the heavenly Canaan shall see.
The Churches glorified spiritual state,
Thou shall behold and swee^ly contemplate
The spotless Spouse, th'immaculate chaste Bride,
With which the I am he Christ Jesus will abide:
The joy in God, and godlies consolation,
The elected Saints most holy Habitation:
Prepared for them by the Trinity,
Where they shall reign, remain eternally,
Called the great City, holy Canaan:
Great, whose Inhabitants none number can,
Holy, because no putrifacting Sin,
Nor least impuritie can there creep in;
Called Canaan, or New-Ierusalem,
A Place of peace, Saints rest, Souls Diadem.
Now this most holy heavenly Habitacle, The total beauty of this City.

This most magnificent Saints receptacle
Was beautified, adorned, and decorated,
Was richly filled, was rarely illustrated
With glory, which did from the Lord proceed,
Whose most refulgent splendor did exceed
The luster of all precious stones most bright,
They all came short of this most glorious Light.
Yea, as a fair transparent Jasper green, A green Jasper.

So shall his Saints felicity be seen:
For ere to wax most fresh and always flourish,
Because Gods power and prudence shall it nourish:
It being pure as any Crystal clear* Clear as Crystal.

Where by nor blot, nor spot can there appear;
No staynes of foul terrestrial uncleanness,
No gross pollutions of impure obsceannesse,
Shall this their joy obnubilate, make dim,
Or once eclipse their beauty, framed by him;
Gods gracious presence and great Majesty
Shall it so deck, decore and glorify. Objection. Why the Light of Gods
glory is compared to a Jasper stone^

Here it is no triuiall question, why the Light
Of this blessed Cities luster exquisite
Is to a precious Jasper stone compared;
And why 't might not have been as well declared,
By the Sun, or Moon, or Stars most excellent,
Or Artificial Lights which men invent?
All these are Lights, true; but too-light they be,
Compared with Light it self, in th'highst degree.
First, Answer. 1.
in regard the Suns far piercing rays,
With its bright beams the eyesight much decays,
If the beholder thereon fixtly look,
Nor can his sight the brightness thereof brook:
But, precious stones have no obnoxious might,
But with their splendour rarely do delight
The eyes of their beholders, so that they
The more on them they look, the more they may.
Whereby, egregiously they intimate
And to us point the sweet and delicate
Delight, we shall in heavenly knowledge find,
So to affect and recreate the mind,
As that the more we thereof do possess,
The more our Love thereof we shall express.
Again, 2.
the Artificial Lights men make,
As Torches, Tapers, Lamps, and Candles, ^lake;
Are soon burnt-out, extinct, and therefore need
Some fomentarie adiunct, them to feed:
But as for precious stones, their sparkling light
Is genuine, by Nature shines bright,
And glisters in the most obscure-darke place,
Always retayning their resplendent grace:
And therefore do most lively represent
The splendour fair and beauty excellent
Of th'euer-selfe subsisting Deity,
Always the same, One-same eternity.
This City is inuiron'd, The particular description of the City. This Cities
fortification is in a Wall, Gares, and foundation.
bounded round,
With a great high-topt Wall, thick, strong and sound:
Which unto us does thus much intimate,
That, though in the Churches-Militant-estate,
The Congregations of Christ's faithful Saints
Were still molested, full of woeful plaints,
Tossed to and fro with storms Tyrannical,
With persecutions most Satanicall:
And like Noes-Arke were never in peace or rest,
With worldly-billowing-waues dashed and distressed:
Yet in this Church-Triumphant, What the Wall signifies.
they shall be
From all heart-hurting fear of danger free.
Surely, Securely kept from least annoy,
In heavenly saf'tie sempiternall joy.
For why, the Doctrine Apostolical
Shall as a firm invincible strong Wall
Debar and keepe-out, heart-deluding Errors,
All unclean Creatures, Liars, and the terrors,
Which their abominations might effect;
For, this Wall Doctrinall does them reject: Ierem. 1.18. A good Preacher is
called a Wall. The Gates.

And thus the Prophet Jeremy does call
A Constant Preacher, a strong, ^razen Wall.
Now, this strong Wall is made more admirable,
By stately Ports and Groundwork solid, stable,
Twelve Gates are 'bout it placed conveniently,
Which thus much do unto us signify: What the Gates do signify.

That all her Friends and Citizens shall see,
The way to the City easy, plain to be;
Practically difficult, Doctrinally plain and easy.
Plain to the Just, to the vn-iust Narrow straight,
Easy to those, to these most intricate.
And on these Gates were Charact'red most fair,
The Names of Isr^els twelve Tribes; to declare
Their good assurance and their ready way,
That none might wander, err, or go astray.
There needs no use of a conducting Guide,
Their way lying ope' to them on every side.
But here by the Names of Isreal's twelve Tribes, Note.

The sacred Spirit unto us describes
(They being, once, Gods sole peculiar Vine,
Till they did from his Love and Lure decline)
That, by a figure, are in them included
The Elected Gentiles, once from Grace secluded.
Even People of all Nations under Heaven Gal. 3.7.

(To whom, Salvation, God in Christ has given)
Are here all taken for sp'rituall Israelites,
Whom Christ the Cornerstone to the Jews unites.
At these twelve Gates, twelve Angels there did stand.
But, not like Edens-Angels, Genesis 31 Twelve Angels at the twelve gates
in their hand
Holding a sword, a sword like fiery flame,
To daunt and drive, what ever thither came;
But, here these Angels stand like Porters kind,
That Abr'ams faithful Sons access may find
Unto the Tree of Life, and Sacred Spring:
Which grows and flows from Christ this Edens King.
The excellent situation of the Gates. Ezech. 48.31.
With most commodious decent Situation
Are these twelve Gates placed 'bout this heavenly Station;
And good Ezechiel does them thus digest,
Three East, three North, three South, and three by West.
These three Tribes names Dan, Joseph, Benjamin,
Ore the three Eastern Gates were to be seen.
Ore the three Ports set on the Northern side,
Judah.
Iud', Leui, Reubens names might be descride.
Ore the three Southern Gates the inscription
Of Simeon, Isachar, and Zabulon.
Also the three Gates on the West part, had
The names of Aser, Napthalim, and Gad.
Of which most decent triple distribution
Of these twelve Gates, this is the resolution;
Namely, that all the Saint-elected Souls,
Whose names are written: Heavens eternal Rowles,
From what soever quarter of the Earth, Revel. cpa. 21

They had their first original and birth:
Yet, have but one especial means t'ascend
Unto this City, their Hopes happy end.
To wit, the blessed profession of the Trinity,
Hereby, to Christ they are joined in near Brethren.
Affinity.
And, that they thus, professing Three in One:
Shall find the way wide ope' to heavens high Throne
Shall find the path most patent, plain and straight,
And at the Gates twelve Angels for them wait.
A twelfe-fold Groundwork and Foundation strong, The Foundations.

Did also to this mightie-wall belong.
I mean not to the City, but the Wall,
For, 1. Cor. 3.11.
of the City, Christ is All in All.
Upon which twelve Foundations glorious, rare,
Christ's twelve Apostles names were graven fair: Twelve foundations the twelve
Apostles.

Who, here are said to be this Walls foundation,
By their Apostolic Administration,
For, having first by their blessed Ministry,
Christ Jesus Doctrine preached publicly
Unto the World: As the first Instruments
Are therefore, thus, the twelve strong Firmaments: How the twelve Apostles are
the twelve foundations.

Not that they are the principal Foundation,
But having first place in this Fabrication,
Are (as I so may say) the first stones laid,
On which the building of this Wall was made.
For, no man is so silly, as to say,
That the Foundation does it self down lay:
But, that is the office of the Architector,
Which is Christ Jesus, this great works Director.
This Cities Sovereign, whose vn-shrinking shoulders,
Are this most glorious Cities firm vpholders.
Who laid his twelve Disciples as Supporters
Of this Quadrangled Walls most spacious Quarters,
As those in whom his Churches Doctrine pure
Did most consist and constantly endure:
Thus are the Apostles Grounds of Ministration,

But Christ the only Basis of Salvation.
But what says Rome to this? that Man of Sin, Romes usurpation of Supremacy
from S. Peter touched and briefly confuted.

Who proudly reigns and rules as Lord and King,
Peter's supremacy, superior State,
Is here (me thinks) quite torn, worn out of date.
For, though our Savior called his Faith, the Rock,
Whereon he would build his Church, his Love, his Flock,
And his and all the Apostles Doctrine pure,
To be his Churches Groundwork, grounded sure:
Yet, neither is St. Peter here expressed,
To be in dignity above the rest:
Nor yet to be the principal Foundation:
But One with others have their pointed Station.
Then (surely) hence, it is most apparent plain,
That Antichrist of Rome does not maintain
His proud prioritie, from Peter's Faith;
But from his Person (whom he falsely faith,
To Have been Romes Bishop, which, nor he, nor's crew
Shall ere be able to approve as true)
His Person it is, I say, not Doctrine pure,
Oh this it is the Pope can worst endure:
Therefore since he mis-deemes Christ's blessed Foundation,
He never shall have least part in Christ's Salvation.
But now return we whence we have digrest, The Cities quantity measured.

The Light-bright Angel (which did manifest
Unto S. John this glorious sacred Sight)
Now like some noble Pers'nage, Princely wight,
Like to another prudent Nehemie,
Or like good Ezra full of prudencie,
By the Symbol of a Golden Reed in's hand,
Did represent, that he with that Met-wand,
The Cities spacious round should measure out
The height, length, breadth, and compass all about,
Entries and wall, enuironing the same
All under line and measure truly came:
All most exactly formed with due respect,
By the Arch-Artist of this Architect.
Yea, This Golden Reed signifies the word of God, by which all the parts of the
City are to be measured and fitted for this building.
with a Golden Reed he meats the same,
Most fit to measure such a glorious frame.
By which external gesture, the Angel here,
As elsewhere in the Prophets may appear
In their Prophetic Visions used to show
The Lords intent, by thus descending to
Our weak capacity: which never can keep
A verbal document, in mind so deep,
As actual gestures evermore we find,
Examples more than precepts teach the mind. Iere. 27. and 18 Ezech. 4. and 5.
and 40.

And here, by the Angels meating with a Reed,
We are aduiz'd to take especial heed, Examples move more than precepts.

And deeply to imprint in mind and heart,
The subsequent description and rare Art,
The stately Symmetry, worth admiration,
Of this celestial sacred Habitation:
Containing in it an heavenly harmony,
With the chief grounds of Christian verity. The figure or form of the City
four square

This City lay in form Quadrangulare,
By which firm Cubiq, plat-forme, here we are
To understand and note, the stable state
Of this Mount-Sion free from Hostile hate:
Not to be stirred by tempests violent,
Immovable, most constant, permanent.
Which being square, the Gates are opposite
To the four Corners of Earths-Globe aright,
From every part whereof to let in those,
Whom Christ the Lamb to reign with him has chose. The four corners, the
four Evangelists.

The four Euange^sts the pattern are,
By whom this edifice was fashioned square:
By Matthew, Mark, Luke and Christ tend'red John,
Was framed (I say) this Constitution.
And since the twelve Apostles, as foresaid,
Were, by then short and present doctrine, made
The strong Foundation of the holy Wall:
Is It not a Concord most harmonicall?
That these Evangelists most excellent,
By their Long-lasting-written Testament;
Should the four Corners of that square build out,
And it to full perfection bring about.
The Angel then, with his Reed the City meted;
Which by just Measure was thus computated,
Twelve thousand Stades, whereof eight makes a Mile, For more full satisfaction
herein See Napier on the Reus.

Which fifteen hundredth Miles do just compile:
The Length, Height, Breadth, being all of equal space,
Do make* almost, infinite room and place.
Within the Wall: As Christ himself has said, John 14, 2.

In my dear heavenly Fathers house, are made
Many fair Mansions: fit to comprehend,
The Increase of Gods elect, to the worlds last end.
Now then, the total body of this place, What is meant by Longitude, Latitude,
and Altitude.

Does to us represent the beauteous grace,
The great felicity, admired joy,
Which in this City we shall sure enjoy
In the united glorious Deity,
Th'in comprehensible Trine-Vnitie.
The three distinct dimensions, as foreshew'd,
Of Latitude, Longitude, Altitude,
Present the sever all measures of delight, Napier.

Which in the Father, Son, and Holy-Sprite,
We shall possess: and this felicity,
To be alike, of equal Quantity.
There shall we Three in One most clearly see,
There also shall we worship One in Three,
And of this joy we shall have full fruition,
Alike of all, without all intermission,
Even as the Persons are One in the Deity,
And one in substance in the Unite Trinity.
The premises thus re-obseru'd, afford
To us a most harmonious sweet accord,
Twixt God and this his holy Habitacle,
The Lambs sweet Spouse, celestial Tabernacle. A most excellent observation
of all the praemised forms of this City. Napier.

God, the Worlds most admired Artizan,
When first he fashioned and created Man,
Like his own perfect Image did him make;
God would Man should his Makers likeness take:
Even so this Cities specious Symmetrie,
Is shaped like heavens sacred Deity.
As God himself in Trinity is One:
So by this City his true Church is shown.
As of the Godhead there be Persons Three,
And Father, Son and Spirit co-equall be:
So those dimensions, Length, Height, Breadth, are all
By the Angel measured, to be just equal.
As neither Person in the Deity,
Is separable from their Unity:
So none of these dimensions, being Three,
May from a City separated be,
Or other solid body, otherwise
It were not found, but Line or superfice.
The Persons Three and their three Offices,
Are not confounded: and no more are these;
For neither is the Length, the Breadth, and so
The Height is neither breadth, nor length we know,
And even as Athanasius in his Creed,
As wittily, as wisely does proceed,
And says, the Father, Son and Holy-Sprite,
Though three in Persons are one God Unite:
So Longitude, Latitude, Altitude,
Must One sole City evermore include.
The Doctrine also of the Deity,
Is witnest in the Fourfold Verity,
Writ by the four Evangelists: so here
This New-Ierusalem, as does appear,
Is in a Quadrate, or square form set down;
Most like a strong immovable firm Town.
The twelve Apostles, were dispersed and sent
To every quarter of Earths continent,
To preach to all our Saviors doctrine found;
Whereby all Nations Heavens right rhode-way found:
On twelve Foundations, so, stands this great frame,
And by twelve Gates all go into the same.
Lastly the Godhead vniuersallis,
And infinite in glory and in bliss,
Infinitely extended over all:
So in Jerusalem celestial,
Is infinite tranquillity and peace,
Abundant room, for all the great increase
Of Gods dear Saints, who were predestinate
To this Ierusalems most happy state.
Thus having heard this sacred Symphonie
Twixt God and's church: proceed we orderly.
The Angel now here measuring the Wall, The Wall measured.

The mighty Bulwark Apostolical,
Of this Angelicke Seat of sanctity,
Found it to be raised up in Cubits high,
Even by a twelue-fold high-ascending Course, This is spoken Allegorically,
having reference to humane building.

By th'twelue Apostles raised to mighty force.
But this though spoken in a humane sort:
Yet has a heavenly sense of great import.
Namely, that though the Note.
Church, here, Militant
Was evermore distressed with woe and want;
Being by worldly obstacles kept-low,
And never could to full perfection grow:
Yet now in her Tryumphant dignity,
To plenarie perfection springs on high;
This being by twelve Courses signified,
Which twelve times so much more being multiplied,
T'an hundredth forty four Courses of hight,
Do make the Wall to rise, direct upright, Thus far of the form or
constitution of this City: Now of the Matter or Substance whereof it is made.

By Jews and Gentiles mighty multitude,
Whom Grace by Faith will in this frame include.
Thus now, we having seen the stately Statute,
The spacious Compas^e of this Heau'n-built structure:
Let us with our divine Divine behold
The Matter, substance and most precious Mould,
Whereof the Wall, City and firm Foundation,
The twelve great Gates of this Heavens Habitation,
Were Formed, Adorned, yea with what pauement rare,
The Streets were pau'd, all which is to declare
The wonderful unspeakable delight,
Which Gods dear Saints in presence of his sight,
Shall in that life to come, to the full possess:
Esa. 54.11,12
And thus the Prophet Esaias did redress,
And consolate the Jews dis-consolation,
Declaring in his true Vaticination,
The glo^ie of this New-Ierusalem,
Which God would once re-build, remake, for them.
O happy are they, which are interested.
And whose blessed Souls are there into invested!
Now then, The Wall. The Matter w^erof this City is made, and ^^st, of the
Wall, which has a twofold consideration. First in the wh^^e, it is Jasper:
Secondly, in the twelve ^^undations e^pre^^ by twelve Jew ^^^ like the twelve
in ^^arons bres^^plate.
the building of this fenciu^ Wall,
This sincere Doctrine Apostolical,
Of precious Stones, most gloriously did shine,
With bounty and with beauty most divine.
Having a luster like, the Jasper green,
Which evermore to flourish shall be seen.
Hence then, this Note is set before our eyes:
That this ra^e Fabrique, pompous Edifice,
Is all most precious, specious, round about,
As Bright within, as it is Light without.
But in this A very excellent and ^emarkable ob^eruation in the Wall*
Wall, this one thing is most rare,
Is most regardable, beyond compare:
That, though those twelve Foundations firm and strong,
Were so by Course, set and laid along,
As that Course after Course, they are placed all,
And strangely ord'red clean throughout the Wall:
Yet is the Wall, as here we plainly see,
Thus wholly said of Jasper for to be.
Which is indeed to show and signify,
That, though those Ground-props of the Ministry,
Whose rare and diverse gifts in every one,
Are by rich Iew^l^ afterward here shown:
Yet that the Matter and the Luster bright,
Of this great Wall, are said (and that most right)
TO arise from One, which is the Lord alone,
Designed here by this rare Jasper stone.
He only is the Churches Bulwark strong,
For, though to these Apostles did belong
Diversity of gifts of heavenly grace:
Yet each of them in his peculiar place
Did ever build one and the self same thing,
And not themselves did preach, but Christ their King.
The Cities model was of perfect Gold, The City of pure gold.

Most delectable, glorious to behold.
Which Mettle, for its ex'lent properties,
This Cities glory rarely amplifies:
It being of all other chief and best,
For these fine reasons in pure gold expressed. Five excellent properties in good
go^^, Plin. de Metal.

First, that the burning fire consumes it not.
Next, that it takes no canker, stayne or spot.
Again, for use it longest does endure,
As also that the Fire makes it more pure.
Lastly, nor Salt, nor Vinegar can spoil,
Nor any such liquiditie defile
The fair corruscant beauty of the same:
And therefore from the rest it bears the fame.
O! must not then this City needs be stable?
Is It not most strong, invincible, dureable?
Being so free from staynes of all corruption,
Being so far from fear of Foes irruption.
Nay, here is not all, Like clear Glass.
there is one more property
Of rare respect, of precious ex'lencie;
Namely, that it like cleerest glass does glistre,
And thereby casts a more admired Luster:
Whereby, is thus much to us intimated:
That it is not with foul spots contaminated,
But does with such a radiant splendour shine,
That All may always clearly cast their eyne
With most sweet contemplation, on the face
Of Gods great beauty and most bounteous grace,
By re-percussion of those glorious beams
Which from his Godhead, on his Saints forth streams.
Therefore this glorious City of the Lord, The Synagogue of Rome.

Which inwardly such beauty does afford,
Is far unlike the seat of Romes great Whore;
Which She does gild and gorgeously dawbe-o're.
In her external parts; so to delude
The simple and besotted multitude.
Whereas, within She Is wholly inquinated,
With filthy beastlinesle all-vitiated,
And by her cup of poisonous fornication,
Would all d^file with her abomination:
Being beast like drunken with the blood of Saints,
Which to Heavens Throne do send up Abels plaints.
But, Psalm. 45.
this celestial sacred Architecture,
Like Salomons fair Brides most Princely vesture,
Is precious, curious, beautiful w^thin,
Admits no soil, or smallest touch of Sin;
Within, without, all spotless purity,
And inter-mixt with boundless Majesty.
Thus having viewed the City and the Wall,
And what rare substance they are framed withal:
Now let us behold, The matter whereof the twelve foundations consisted.
and that with admiration,
The sumptuous substance of the strong Foundation.
All which, though of themselves they are most precious,
Yet are they made more gorgeous, gay and specious,
Being embost, enamelled and dight,
To make them give a more resplendent sight,
With Patriarchs, Prophet^, and Professors good;
With valiant Martyrs, who, not spared their blood
In Christ's just quarrel, with Interpreters,
And Soule-conuerting holy Ministers:
All these do garnish, deck and decorate,
The twelve Foundations of this blis^efull state.
Which here the Angel fitly does compare
Unto twelve Gems, or precious stones most rare,
Whose virtues, colors, places where they grow,
Is worth our labor severally to know.
The first Foundation is of Jasper stone, Jasper.

An Indian Gemme, as is by Pliny shown;
Whose specious splendour, and whose beauty rare,
It Is easier to admire, than to declare.
For, a confuse promiscuous multitude
Of Noble virtues, it does in it include:
In which, a pleasant multiplicitie
Of Excellencies rare variety
May be perceived: but, which is chief or best,
Cannot be easly seen, or soon expressed:
For, it, as has been showed, does represent
Gods blessed similitude most excellent,
Therefore this stone (and that most worthily)
Has in this building chief prioritie.
The second was a precious Saphyr stone. Saphyre.

Which is reported amongst the Medes to have grown,
Fair goldey spots, this precious stone does garnish,
With a remarkab^e and beauteous burnish.
The third was of a Chalcedonie clear, Chalcedonie.

Found 'bout the Chalcedonian waters; near
The Rocks Semplegad's or those Isles in Thrace:
This stone being named after that foresaid place,
It Is of one color glist'ring like a flame,
And with the Carbuncle does seem the same.
Which with good reason, well may signify,
Of burning zeal an ardent feruencie.
The fourth an Em'raude, or Smaragdes rare. Emeraude.

Which stone it is said does grow in the Scythian Lare,
Of color green, glistring most clear and bright,
Which hiew indeed does most content the sight;
And is internally as admirable,
As for external beauty delectable:
For, it by too-intentiue contemplation
The sight grow dim, this stones rare delectation
Does soon refresh the lassitude of the eye,
And gives the sight perfection speedily:
Whose beauty green, found Knowledge intimates,
Which the eye of understanding highly rates,
"Therefore it is next the Chalcedonie set;
"To show, that where Zeal has with Knowledge met,
"And are conioyn'd in the heart their supreme seat:
"Then are they both most pure and most complete.
For, Knowledge without Zeal brings proud Ambition,
And Zeal without true Knowledge, Superstition.
A Sardonixe is for the fifth Foundation, Sardonixe.

Which is a Gemme found in the Indian Nation,
Whose superficial face is red and white,
Like a Man's nail of's hand, and shines most bright.
And this does also to us signify,
A certain show of chaste Humanity.
A Sardius, Sardius.
Carbuncle or Rubie rare,
Does this most sacred sixth Foundation rear.
A precious stone, which specially is found
By Sardis City, in the Lybian ground:
Of color red like blood, to intimate,
" Severity on Clemency should wait;
And ^^ly's wi^h the Sardonix here placed,
Because the foresaid fleshly colour's graced,
And cannot fade, but fresh viuisicate,
By being joined with this associate.
The seventh Foundation is a Chrysolite: Chrysolite.

An Ethiopian stone which glisters bright,
Of golden hiew, and this does demonstrate
Much dignity, and great Maiesticke state.
The eightth a Beryll, Beryll.
which (as Pliny says)
Is found in Indie: this, for color has
Sea water-greene, betokening Lowliness:
For, water as experience does express,
Yields and gives place to each interposition,
Which is against it set, or makes inscission.
"Set with the Chrysolite to signify,
" Meekness with Greatness should keep company:
A virtuous mean thus ever to retain,
And rash extremes still wisely to refrain.
The ninth a Topaze, Topaze.
which was first found out
By Arabian Rouers, ranging all about,
Called Troglodyt's: this stone's of color green,
And yet not simply so, for in it is seen
Much yellowness, glistring like perfect gold,
Giving a luster pleasant to behold.
A precious stone called Indian Chrysoprase, Chrysoprase.

Does this great Walls tenth firm Foundation raise.
Which also gives a certain golden glistre,
But therein is a Scallion juice commixture.
This Fortresses eleventh and twelft Foundation, Hyacinth and Ametist.

Were both of them two Iems of Indian Nation,
Called Hyacinth and Ametist: both which
Are of a purple color fair and rich.
And now of all that hitherto is said, An observation of the Premises.

Of these rich precious Stones, whereof was made
This twelve fold s^^d glorious strong Foundation,
This is the scope, true vie and a^plication:
Namely, that as a careful Architector,
Who of a P^^nc^ly building is Director; Simile.

And Chief Ore-^^er; sends with expedition
His Quarrions, Maso^^, gives them this commission,
In every quarter to search our and dress,
To hew and ^ut, to hau^ in readiness
The choycest stones that might be got for gold,
For strength to build, and beauteous to behold:
Or, as Wit-wond'rous Solomon is said, Simile.

When he would have the Lords great Temple made,
To send his Princes, to provide each thing,
Which might decore the seat of Heavens great King:
With Hiram his kind Neighbor did compact, King Hiram a true type of the
Vocation of the Gentiles.

For necessaries to that sacred Act:
Who sent both men and all his choicest stuff,
Of every thing abundantly enough:
Even so the Lord, this Cities M^ster Builder, 1. King. 5.2.

Ear^hs-globy Vniuers^s strong-hand Weilder,
To th'building of this blessed Habitation
Sent his Apostles into every Nation,
To Indie, Egypt, Aethiopia,
Arabia, Europe, and Armenia,
Through every Coast in the worlds circumference,
To teach and preach with care and diligence,
To Congregate and bring into his fold,
His precious people; who, like perfect gold
Should gorgeously adorn this sacred frame,
Some Prophets, Martyrs, Preachers of great fame;
Some with one gift, some with another graced,
That in this Structure they might thus be placed,
To frame and build this euer-lasting Palace
Of everliving stones, and endless ^olace.
Who as they had built his Church once Militant:
Now should they thus build up his Church Triumphant.
And as they had converted Souls to Christ:
Their Souls should shine like Stars in glory highest. Dan. 12.3.

Thus then the City, Wall, and Groundwork past,
To the Gates with joy we now are come at last.
Twelve Gates of Pea^le.
Twelve Gates most rich and precious did belong
To the Wall Apostolic, most firm, most strong,
Which Gates, were all of Pearls most Orient:
All of them but One Pearl, which is Christ Jesus.
Yet all were but One Pearl most excellent,
Even Jesus Christ, who is the only Port,
Through whom the Elect must into bliss resort.
Through whom alone by Faith we here are fed.
Through whom at last we all shall taste that bread,
John 10.9.
That Bread of Life never to hunger more,
Which for his Saints Christ has laid up in store.
He only is the Door, by which (I say)
We shall go in and our, feed, live for ay.
Simile.
And as on twelve Foundations did arise
A Wall, as we did formerly premise;
But One in Matter and in luster bright,
Even God the Father, Father of all Light:
So these twelve Ports, are all One Pearl most rare,
Even God the Son whence they derived are.
Octiection.
But here, this one Objection may accrue,
How it may come to pass, a Pearl should show
And represent this Man-God Christ our King?
Answer.
To which Objection, I this Answer bring:
That as the Shell wherein the Pearl does grow.
(Which Pliny plainly in his work does show)
Simile.
Does at a certain ^eason gape and yawne,
And without any generating Spawne,
Draws into it a Dew from forth the Air;
Which, by the Sea, in the Shell grows Orient fair,
And of this Dew does more coagulate,
Christ compared to a Pearl.
Than it is of earthly stuff coaugmentate:
Even so, the Holy Ghost from Heavens high frame,
Upon the blessed Virgin Marie came;
And Gods eternal power, whose breath All made,
Did so Christ's Virgin Mother ouer-shade:
That without any Humane copula^ion,
Christ in her Womb took on him Incarnation.
Yet so, as that his powerful Divinity
Was still assistant unto his Humanity,
Which subject was to Man's Infirmity:
But not to Sins even least Impuritie;
Being thus most perfect God and Man indeed,
Knowing our wants, to help us at our need. Non ignarus mali, miseri^
succurrere poss^t. Heb. 4.35.

Thus then, we see, that these twelve Pearly Gates
Consisting of One Pearl, this intimates,
That we in Heaven or Earth none other have
To invoke, our sinful Souls to save,
But Jesus Christ, true God and Man alone, No salvation but by Christ only.

Who sits (our Advocate) in Heavens high Throne.
Oh then, the wilful madness of our Foe!
That monstrous Beast of Rome, Romes praying to Saints touched.
who though he know
This our Position most Authentical,
Both he and h^s besotted Shauelings all,
Yet, they unto their Saints appropriate,
And unto Angels dare accommodate
The honor only due to Christ blessed Name,
Angels themselves having refused the same.
And since nor Saints, nor Angels know our state, Esaias 63.

Nor have in them, power, us to consolate,
But Christ has willed v^ come to him alone,
Who can and will ease and appease our moan:
Therefore, that they dare add and thus diminish
From Gods firm Truth; they do but strive to finish
And measure up to the full their own damnation,
Threatened to all such in the Revelation.
The Gates thus entered, now we may behold
The Streets within, all pau'd with purest gold, The Streets all paued with
Gold. Glistering like Glass.

Which gave a luster like the cleerest glass,
Even every Street through which the Saints shall pass,
And customarily walk up and down,
Like glorious Kings in pomp and great renown:
Which Streets and parent passages, imply
(Amongst their other joys) the Liberty
And perfect Freedom, which those sacred Saints
Shall fully there possess; without restraints
Of being unto any one place ty'de,
For why, wheres'ere they go, God is their Guide,
They walk in God, and God in them always:
Their beauteous paths shining with his bright rays.
Thus have we seen the Essential Majesty,
This Cities glorious frame and Symmetrie,
Thus far concerning the Essential Majesty and glory of this City.
The most magnificent and blissful State
Of those which are in Christ incorporate:
But yet, whiles here, we see it no otherwise,
Then as we had a Mist before our eyes.
Then as we were in the bottom of a veil,
Whence of a perfect sight we needs must fail,
By reason that cloud-kissing Mountains hie,
And lost^e Trees are interposed to the eye:
And hereby hinder our more clear aspect
Of this most glorious heavenly Architect:
So that, but Aenigmatically, we
1. Cor. 13.12.
As through a Glass, this sacred City see;
Romans 1, 17.
Whiles in the Flesh we live by lively Faith,
As blessed Paul in his Epistle says:
Yet let it joy our hearts, our Souls delight,
That though but thus, we may admire this sight.
That though but with the Prophet Daniel, we
Dan. 6.10.
May ope' the window and look toward thee,
O Date-lesse, Fate-lesse, Rest-full, Blisse-full City;
Where Halleluiah is the Angels Dittie.
The Accessa^ie beauty of this City.
Now let it not be (O! how can it be?)
Tedious to us, to contemplate and see
What Majesty and Dignity complete
Is Accessarie to the glory great
Of that external beauty of this place,
Filled with the glory of the Lords bright face;
Making this City most magnificent,
An abstract Commonweal most permanent.
No Temple.
First, there shall be no Temple in the same,
Wherein to worship Gods all-glorious Name,
No Sacrificing, no peculiar place,
To worship in, or be this Cities grace,
Nor no external Paedagogie, shall
Be useful there, no Service Rituall,
A simple and sincere worship of God without Ceremonies.
Like that under the Law amongst the Jews,
When they did their old Sacrifices use.
But, God the Father, and the Lam^e Christ Jesus,
Shall of such heavy yokes then clearly ease us.
And be a Temple unto his, most fair,
To whose blessed sight Saints with delight repair.
His worship, then, shall be most plain and pure,
And shall for ever constantly endure,
Without all Legal Rites or Ceremony,
Adoring God in Christ in Sanctimonie.
Whose looks to them a^ Lessons shall appear,
His only Name being Music in their ear.
And such indeed is this great Cities State,
So admirable, so inexplicate:
That gold and precious stones being too too base,
To Express the glory of that glorious place,
If Nature did more precious things bring forth,
More amply to describe this Cities worth:
I therefore know not, Nothing fit to represent the heavenly Temple, but God
himself* who is the Temple.
what terrestrial thing
We may with due proportion hereto bring,
To have a fit and true Analogy
Unto this Temple of eternity,
But God himself and Jesus Christ alone;
In whom it may most properly be shown.
Again, this City has no need of Light, No need of Sun, Moon, or Stars.

Neither of Sun, or Moon, or Stars most bright.
For, as the Prophet says, When God again
Shall his dear Church restore and over it reign; Esaias 24.23.

The glorious Light thereof so clear shall shine,
By the blessed presence of the Vnite-Trine:
That even the Sun and Moon shall seem most dark,
And in comparison but like a spark,

To that ineffable, refulgent light
Of Gods blessed countenance and sacred sight.
Whereby alone the Saints shall all possess
Such perfect joy and hearty cheerfulness,
As that all earthly comfort, though it seemed,
And were as bright as Sun and Moon esteemed,
Shall be superfluous, needless, most neglected,
And (unto this compared) not least respected.
Also, the Heirs and Sons of this Salvation, Magnifice^ce and Princely state.

Even all the Elected People of each Nation,
Gentil^
Kings of the Earth whom Euphrates did bar,
And once sequester from Christ's Kingdom far;
So many as are saved (as many shall)
Shall in Jerusalem celestial
With perfect joy, enjoy the full fruition
Of this m^st infinite and heavenly Vision,
And thither shall their pomp and honor bring,
Even unto God and Christ their heavenly King.
But here is not meant their worldly wealth and state,
Note.
Their Gems and Jewels, Gold or Silver plate,
For, since this sacred City needs no light
Of Sun or Moon, which shine on Earth so bright:
Much less shall there be need of worldly pelf,
In this most sacred sumptuous Commonwealth.
But this is hereby understood and meant,
That those good Princes which were eminen^
Virtue and Piety are the riches of the heavenly Jerusalem.
For virtuous gifts of Grace and Piety,
Shall lift up all their whole felicity,
Their glory and their Princely estimation
From earthly unto heavenly contemplation:
And only fix their joy upon the same,
And glory thus to glorify Gods Name.
Security.
The Gates, moreover, of this City, shall
Be never shut, but stand wide ope' to all.
None shall from this felicity be staid,
Nor be shut up, as frighted or afraid.
For there shall be no Enemy to fear them,
No doubt of danger, then shall once come near them,
All spite of former Adversaries cease,
For there shall be perpetual rest and peace.
No Night.
And which is more, there shall be here no Night,
For why, an everlasting splendor bright
From Gods all-glorious presence shall proceed,
A Light more pure than Light it self indeed,
An everlasting Day.
Shall so incessantly shine forth always,
Making an endless everlasting Day.
But here this Night may further intimate,
A twofold meaning L^^'^all, Figurate:
A double meaning of this Night. Literal.
The Literal sense that there no Night shall be,
Is, that indeed the Saints no Night shall see.
For why? as has been said all Times distinctions
Of Day and Night, Summer and Winter seasons
Shall then quite cease and be superfluous:
The Figurative sense and meaning, Figurative.
thus
May be explayn'd, that no obscurity
Of Error or of slye Hypocrisy,
No unclean thing foul or abominable,

No filthy Creature, Liar detestable,
No murdering Caines, no Judas impious,
No ^ham's, nor Achams sacrilegious,
No cruel, faithless, friendlesse envious Elfe
That hu^ts his Neighbor, but much more Himself,
"No Auaricious armed in hooking Tenters,
"And clad in Bird-lime catching all aduenters,
Nor ought that may contagiously infect,
Or once eclipse the joy of Christ's Elect,
Or violate the glorious state and bliss
Which Christ the Lamb has purchased for His:
Nor in the least degree shall hurt or wrong
The flourishing estate, which does belong
To the Saints rare dignity, and perfect Light
Of sincere-worship of the Lord of Might:
Which is his Angels glory and chief grace,
And shall for ever in them keep fir^e place. Zachary 14.20.

But those shall hither come with joys most rise,
Whose Names are registered in the Book of Life, Esaias 52.1.

For whom the Lamb Christ Jesus did ordain
This glorious Kingdom, with him thus to reign;
Who were predestinate to this Salvation,
Before the Worlds original Foundation.
To these alone the Gates stand open wide,
These shall for ever with the Lamb abide.
Lastly, to make this City most complete, Celestial Aliment or Food.

In every part to be as good as great,
The Holy Ghost having at large declared
The Churches glory, being thus compared
Unto a sumptuous City, full of State,
Now finally proceeds to relate,
That, both this City and its Citizens
Are furnished and replenisht with all means
For conservation of their endlesie joy,
Sufficient to protect them from annoy:
The same is the meat and drink in heaven, even Christ.
They have, I say, spiritual lively meat,
Divine Angelike Mann' to drink, to eat,
The sovereign Cant. 1.14.
Balsum to conserve always
Their health, in health, from fall or least decay.
The holy Spirit as erst, here using still,
These earthly terms to expresie Heavens sacred Will.
And all to show Heavens great benignity,
Descend^ng thus to our capacity,
This honored City has in it also
A sacred A River of Water of Life.
River, which does ouer-flow
With pure and precious Water of blessed Life,
Whose st^eames do issue from its Fount most rife.
A current River, not a Poole with soil,
Not ^oul^ or troubled like Egyptian Nile;
Or bill ^wing Euphrates; but sweet and fair
With delectable streams, smooth, clear and rare.
John 4. 14.
A River, for its great aboundancie,
Pure, in respect of its sweet Sanctity,

Of Water of Gods Spirits rare gifts of Grace,
Of Life, whose Tasters live an endless space,
And ^leere as Crystal from all ^pisfitude,
From all unclean corrupt amaritude.
This River shall from Gods great Throne proceed,
And from the Lambs, gliding with pleasant speed.
John 7.
And thus this River here may signify,
The Holy Ghosts gifts, third in Trinity.
Which is not ^le^ghtly ratified, indeed,
In that it is said here, that it shall proceed
From Gods and from the Lambs most sacred Throne,
Which John's shown Prophecy has clearly shown.
Yea, and in the midst of this great Cities street
Pau'd all with go^d, as mould under their feet,
Through all the pleasant passages most fair,
Where to and ^ro the Saiated Souls repair:
The Tree of Life.
On either side this River (rare to see)
Does fluorish fairly a Life-giuing Tree.
Which Tree of Life, does ^hus much to us show,
That to those gracious Waters, which do flow
To all the Graces of Gods sacred Spirit,
Christ Jesus is conioyn'd, by whose just Merit,
His Church has Life, true Peace, and sure Salvation, Christ is the Tree of
life.

Thus having with the Sp'rite Cooperation:
And still residing with his Saints Elect,
Continually does guide and them direct,
Exhibiting to all, by his tuition,
Easy partaking and a full fruition
Of all the Benefits and heavenly Graces,
Which in and 'bout this River he thus places.
Whereon they all shall spiritually feed,
Always desiring, yet never stand in need.
Which Tree of life, twelve sorts of fruit does bear, The Tree of life bears
twelve sorts of fruits.

Whereby the Holy-Spirit does declare,
First that the Lord, who is the God of Order,
Does much detest Confusion or Dis-order. 1. God is the God of order.

In still retayning as he first begun,
The number twelve, which hitherto is done:
And also to express that there shall be,
In Numb'r and Measure full Sufficiency, 2.

To saturate the longing appetites,
Of all the twelve Spiritual Israelites,
Even of all those that so have run their race,
The twelve Apostles doctrine to embrace, Sufficiency.

T'obserue and keep (Maugre the rage and spite
Of Pope or Pagan, foes to Truths pure light.)
Thus then, we see the Angel here observing
An exquisite Decorum, thence not sweruing:
Who, since the City, Entries, Rooms, Foundations,
And Symmetrie of these blessed Habitations,
To the Number-twelue have been accommodated;
And orderly thus still continuated:
Therefore with decent correspondencie,
The Angel to this Number does apply
The spiritual Food, and Furniture most meet,
Making a Consort most harmonious sweet,
Conformably agreeing thus in one,
With The twelve Apostles.
those whence they had their comparison.
Now as twelve sorts of Fruit grow on this Tree,
The Saints to satisfy: so shall they be
For Delicacie, sweet Content and Pleasure. Delicacie.

As every Saint shall have abundant measure:
So shall this pleasant Plenitude of Grace,
No Nauseous Surfeit cause, in any case.
For, as Christ Jesus is that Drink and Meat,
Whereof each Sainted-Soule shall taste and eat:
So is he Sweet, Pleasant and Delicate,
Whereon they feed their fill, yet moderate,
Taking sufficient for their Contentation,
And their beautitudes firm Conservation.
This Tree bears fruit every Month.
Which Truth is farther illustrated here,
In that it is said this Tree of life does bear,
Does every Month bear fruit, green, ripe and fair,
Which with delights their appetites repair.
The monthly fruit argues not times alternation, but Saints contentation.
Not that the Times shall then alt^^ate be,
By years, months, days, as now-a-dayes we see,
For then the Seasons cease, Time's termined,
Sun, Moon, and Stars, are then quite vanished,
As formerly was touched: but here is meant,
That all things then shall give such rare Content,
Shall be so full of rich Variety,
Shall yield such Cordial sweet Sa^ietie,
And with such Fullness all the Saints shall feed,
As that to store and hoord-vp shall not need.
In that the Harvest there shall ever last,
Their pleasant Springtime then shall never be past.
The (...) (...)
Also the Leaves of this most blessed Tree,
Shall Salutiferous and most Sovereign be,
To help, to heal, to cure all Maladies,
Which amongst the Gentile Nations do arise.
So that this Tree not only makes them live:
But to the Elect a healthful Life does gi^e.
Yet here is not meant the Churches final state,
But that, when Antichrist is ruinate,
When God shall th'vnbeleeuing Nations (...),
And faithless Jews, who once from Grace did fall.
The spiritual meaning of the leaves
But by these Leaves is chiefly intimated,
That all the smallest gifts, accommodated
By the Lamb Christ Jesus to the Saints Elect,
Shall serve Some^way their Soule^ with joy to affect.
TO exh^lerate and cheer their sacred mind,
In's meanest blessings they shall comfort find.
But now behold, now follows indeed, No curse or malediction

That which does all the former joys exceed:
The absolute accomplishment of all,
The Accessarie blessings, which befall
The Citizens of this rare Domicill,
The Inhabitants of Gods great Sion-Hill.
Namely, that in it there no Curse shall be, Zac. 14.11.

It shall be from destruction firmly free.
It shall be subject to no execration,
But strongly stand, fearelesse of alteration.
Which is a Symbol, and a certainty
Of this blessed Cities perpetuity,
A most infallible strong argument,
That it is eternal and most permanent.
A threefold reason hereof may be given, A threefold cause of the Cities
perpetuity.

First, that (as is foresaid) this Seat of Heaven,
This holy Habitacle shall contain
No unclean thing, which may its beauty stain.
Again, the glorious Throne and sacred seat,
Whereon Omni-potent Iohouah great,
Whereon the blessed Trinity will reign,
Shall here abide and evermore remain.
Lastly, in that all these his Servants shall
With sincere Love and Zeal Angelical,
For ever invoke his sacred name,
And his due praises constantly proclaim:
Serving the Lord in singleness of heart,
Not once to will from's worship to depart.
But Curses are (we know) for gross Transgressors,
For dis-obedient stubborn Male-factours,
Not for the obedient, faithful and sincere:
Thus then, is their perennitie most clear.
More-ouer, all the Saints of this blessed race, The Saints celestial
contemplation.

Shall see the all-beautious, Light-bright shining face
Of that Arch-Essence of eternity,
To walk and talk with him familiarly:
And with inexplicable sweet delight
Have full fruition of this sacred sight,
Not as he is, Immense and infinite,
For so even Angels see not his bright light,
Who are described covering their face,
With their Angellike wings: in any case
Not able to behold his glorious sight,
He Infinite, they being Definite.
How we shall see God.
Is certain, Yet that we shall have his full contemplation
Is certain, but with this just limitation,
First, in respect of us, we shall possess
Gods great Holiness.
The Lord in us, In respect of our selves, we shall see God perfectly.
and we in him shall dwell
In such full measure, as no tongue can tell;
He will replenish every faculty
Of Soul and Body most abundantly,
With his most precious presence: by his sight
He Will fill our Minds, from da^knesse freed quite,
Our Hearts he will quicken, there shall be no deadness,
Our whole Affections free from gloomie sadness.
What man is capable to comprehend,
Even so great glory God will then extend?

This our sight of God shall be immediate.
No inter-mediums shall our sight deprave.
Here, we as through a glass, or veil, him see,
By mediate Revelations: then, shall we
Of him immediate perfect Sight possess,
Which, none but those that have it, can express
A measure running over, heap^ and pressed,
Will Christ bestow upon his Saints most blessed.
The Saints Co^nizance
His Name shall also in their Foreheads be.
That is, they shall with such bold Constancy,
Zeal profess his Name,
How the name of the Lord is written in the Saints forehead.
That nothing shall obliterate the same;
Or cause them once neglect their pure profession,
By least relapse or indiscreet transgression.
They shall be so conformed, confirmed therein,
To persevere as they did first begin,

Constant, courageous, evermore the same,
Professing still Iehouah's glorious Name.
Again, his Name is said (as here we see)
Upon their Foreheads Caractred to be,
Lord will publicly agnize
Zach. 14.20.
Them, by this Cognizance: and Patronize
(By his All-sauing and All-soueraigne power)
Them and their states, as in a fenced Tower.
And in this City there shall be no Night,
No need of Candle, Sun or Stars most bright,
That is, there shall be no obscurity, Their perpetual light and glory
inculcated.

Or darkness of adverse Calamity,
No Night of obumbraticke cloudie Error,
No frighting Fear, nor no heart daunting Terror,
No sly bi-fronted close Hypocrisy,
Shall vitiate their intact Integrity,
No need of earthly comforts more or less,
No seeking, suing there, wrongs to redress,
By Temp'rall Laws, or Ecclesiastical,
For, there the Trinity is All in All:
And is this glorious Cities great Lord Keeper,
Most vigilant, and watchful, he is No-sleeper.
And, which (as was premised) is the perfection, The plenary perfection of this
City is Perennity

And consummating of this benediction,
This glorious Kingdom, where Gods Saints shall reign,
Shall doubtless sempiternally remain:
Like glorified Kings most gloriously,
Their bliss shall last, past all eternity. The conclusion of All. Simile.

Now as a bounteous hearted King does use,
When he a Fau'rite unto him does choose,
On whom he means largely to bestow
His golden gifts, like Rivers to ore-flow;
What he does promise or by words proclaim,
By's Letters Patent ratifies the same:
Thus, O even thus our bounteous hearted King,
The Heart of Bounty, Love's ore flowing Spring,
Having his Church his Favorite elected,
And promised She shall be by him erected,
Richly endowed, gorgeously beautified,
Rarely be royalliz'd, and sanctified,
Her head adorned with a Crown of gold,
A fragrant Garland which shall never wax old,
Triumphantly in endless joy shall reign,
And see her subject, abject foes in pain;
The Lord (I say) this promise having given,
That all these joys they shall possess in Heaven:
To verify his promise, and confirm
What he has said, beyond Times endless term,
The assurance of these most rich promises.
Has given his Letters Patent, his Broad-Seale
In The sacred Scriptures, which he will never repeal;
Sealed by an Angels testimony pure,
And as his Act and Deed given and made sure,
To blessed John, in the behalf and right
And to the use of all the Saints of Light.
Which being done, makes thereof Proclamation,
With most Emphaticall Asseueration,
That He, the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings,
Has power to do, and will perform these things.
And surely, Heaven and Earth shall pass away,
Yea, all things shall prepost'rously decay,
Ere his pure Word in one least jot or tittle,
Shall fade or fail, or alter never so little.
Atheists.
Which, though some Wretches Atheistical,
Some Revel. 3.16.
Nauseous Neuter, Satan's Tennis-Ball,
Neuters. Sadduces.
Some execrable Sadduces (I say)
Which do the Resurrection denay,
Pythagoreans.
Though some vile Sectists Pythagoricall,
Or Infidells most Diabolical,
Which have supposed the Spirits Trans-migration
From one t'another in Life's consummation;
Which do with deuillish dotage them persuade,
That there is no God which e're the World has made;
Nor that the World e're had a Prime beginning,
And think and hold that it shall never have ending,
Nullifidians.
Although such Nullifidians past all grace,
May entertayne a thought, with brazen face,
And heart of flintie Infidelity,
To think or say that the rare Symmetrie
Of this Jerusalem celestial,
Seems as a thing mere Hyperbolicall,
Incredible to their besotted sense,
And past the reach of their intelligence:
The reward of unbelievers.
Yet let the rabble of such Miscreants know,
That there is against them pronounced a fearful woe;
Their No-beliefe or wavering Vn-beliefe,
Shall fill their Souls with Neuer-ending grief:
And what they erst would not conceive in mind,
Their heart with smart shall then both feel and find.
Nor shall they have least part or portion here,
Of this great Cities pleasure, joy, and cheer,
But from Gods presence shall be separated,
Which is the Second Death never terminated. The second Death. The faithful
Bel^euers.

As for good Abraham's faithful Generation,
Who waver not in tottering haesitation,
Who have a Heartie-thirst, and thirsting-heart
Of these rare pleasures once to have their part:
Whose Hope past Hope does cause their souls aspire, A brief description of
their spiritual warfare and weapons.

By Faith in Christ this Kingdom to acquire,
Wherewith, in the warfare of this Life, they Fight,
Fenc't with the Bulwark of a zeal upright,
Armed at all points, with Christ's blessed furniture,
Wherewith they may most constantly endure
The Fight Spiritual, their Loins to tie
With the strong Girdle of Christ's Verity;
Having the Breast Plate on of Righteousness,
To quench the Darts of Hells outragiousnesse,
And on their Head the Helmet of Salvation,
True Perill-Proofe, against Hells most hot Temptation,
The Sword of the Spirit, brandisht in their Hand,
Wherewith they may courageously withstand
That Brood of Hell, Satan, the World, the Flesh, Their spiritual Enemies.

Which evermore assault the Soul afresh
With hot encounters, hellish Stratagems,
To keep them from this New-Ierusalems
Eternal bliss: In which most faithful fight
If they magnanimously stand upright,
Assisted by that All-Proofe, fervent Prayer,
The Godlies Guard, Supporter, and chief Stayer,
If thus they get (as thus being armed, they shall)
The Conquest, over those Foes fierce Capital,
Even from proud Satan their old Enemy, They that will be crowned in Heaven,
must win the conquest on Earth.

When he shall Challenge them this fight to try,
(As often he will) they never by fraud or force,
By terrors or by torments leave their course
Of constant Perseverance to the end,
But his Hopes frustrate, and their souls defend:
The triumphant inauguration of the Godly into Heaven.
Then shall they like brave Victors have the Crown
Of immortality of blessed renown,
Triumphantly to reign with Christ their King,
And all their Virtues as rich Trophies bring,
And lay before him, for which he will give
A Crown, a Kingdom wherein they shall live,
The Lord in them and they in him shall dwell,
As Christ's Co-heires, whom he loves passing well,
And shall sit down with him as Children dear,
To Sup at 's Table with celestial Cheer,
And then their Thirst of this accomplishment
The unspeakable Majesty and Glory they shall live in.
Shall satisfied be with full content.
Then shall the Holy, Happy, Faithful, see
The Structure of this sacred Frame to be
Far more illustrious, admirable, rare,
Than earthly things could possibly declare;
And that those Stones and Gold were too too base,
To serve t'illustrate Heavens celestial place,
Whose boundless beauty all discourse transcendeth,
Whose infinite felicity never ends,
Yea, that it is such as that no mortal Eye,
Could but as through a Glass the same descry:
Such as no Ear has heard, no Tongue e're told
The Majesty which there they shall behold,
Yea such (I say) as never humane Heart
Could e're conceive the incogitable Part.
The Souls most sacred Soliloquie and most ardent desire to be invested into
this Glory.
O then, my Soul, thou having contemplated
This City all with glory decorated,
Thou having viewed, with Heart-exulting pleasure,
The Majesty unparalleled, the matchless treasure,
The most magnificent, Maiesticke state,
Whereinto Christ will his incorporate:
What will thou thereof with thy self conclude?
What will thou say of this Beatitude?
Oh this, even this, with Peter and with John
At Christ's admired Transfiguration,
It Is good to make thy Seat and Mansion there,
O there it is best to dwell and dwell for e're.
Never did Noble Greece so much affect
Their Poetiz'd Elysean fields aspect,
Never so much did wandering wise Ulysses
Desire his chaste Penelopes kind kisses:
Or rather, more divinely for to raise
My thoughts unto a more religious phrase,
Never did Noah more desire to see
Ararats Hills, where he of's Arc was free:
Nor Sheba's Queen to see wise Solomon,
Nor at Christ's birth more glad was Simeon,
Then does my Soul desire these heavenly fields,
Which perfect pleasure, joy, and comfort yields,
To see my Savior sweet on Sion Hill,
My senses with his sacred sight to fill,
To see him in his glorified state,
Therein to be with him associate:
Even in these Mansions of eternity,
To live in sure in pure felicity.
Which happiness, though yet I may not have,
Until my Soul receive my Corpse from Grave, 1. Cor. 15.

Until I mortal be immortalized,
And with the sacred Angels Not become an Angel, but be like an Angel.
Angelized,
Until in the clouds my Savior come again,
To re-collect the Elect with him to reign.
O yet, my Soul, thy self delight and solace,
To ruminate the joys of that sweet Palace,
To recapitulate the sacred pleasure
The Saints shall then possess in plenteous measure,
Even in the eternal Palace Crystaline,
The sacred Seat of the United Trine;
The glorious Court and heavenly Presence Chamber
Of Heavens great Emperor, wonderful Commander,
That Alpha and Omega, First and Last, A brief description of God.

Who Was, Is, Shall be, when all Times are past,
That mighty, powerful, One sole God most high,
The Eternal King, nay, Selfe-Eternitie,
Infinite, All in All, yet out of All,
Of Ends the End, of Firsts Original,
The Life of Lives, Bounties o're-flowing Flood,
Cause of all Causes, Ocean of all Good,
Vn-Seene, All-Seer, Starres-Guide, Sight of Seeing,
That One-None which to Nothing gave a Being.
There, also shall my Soul behold and see
The most ineffable deep Mystery
Of that incomprehensible Trine-one,
Sitting in glory in his glistring Throne,
With blessed Saints and Angels comitated,
With all the heavenly Host of Soule-beated
The Citizens of the heavenly Canaan.
Prophets, Apostles, Patriarchs of old,
The noble band of Martyrs stour and bold,
Our Parents, Wives, our Children, Kindred, Friends,
Yea all to whom Christ's saving health extends:
All of them clad in bliss celestial,
All shining bright in joy Angelical.
Where in the presence of their heavenly King,
They Halleluiah, Halleluiah sing
To him that sits on the Throne most high,
Making a most harmonious Melody,
With sacred sugared Notes and heavenly Songs,
Singing the praise which to the Lamb belongs.
This being their especial exercise,
Their pleasant practice, customarie guise,
Still to behold the Lords most beauteous face,
Burning with Love of his most lovely Grace,
Their mouths still filled with praises of his name,
In magnifying his immortal fame,
Without all tediousness or intermission,
Protected always by his blessed tuition.
O there is infinite, vn-vttered joy!
The admirable Comforts and unspeakable happiness of the heavenly Jerusalem.
Mirth without Mourning, bliss without annoy,
Health without Sickness or pernicious humors,
Perfection without all Soule-tainting tumors.
Peace without War, and Light without darkness,
Love without Hate, beauty without palenesse,
Sweetness without all fulsome surfeiting,
Life without Death, life ere continuing.
There are no sighs, no sobs, no penury,
No hunger, thirst, but with saturitie,
No chilling, killing frosts, or least extremes,
No parching Sunshine, with hot piercing beams,
No will to Sin, no power to offend,
No enemy least mischief to intend.
Good Paul has there no need to watch and pray,
To labor in the Word both night and day;
And good old Jerome then may cease t'afflict,
Himself, so often, by a life most strict:
To conquer his spiritual Enemy,
To overthrow the old Serpents subtlety.
For there is all peace, security and rest,
That peace which can by no means be expressed:
There Is all perfection sacred Light excelling,
All sorrow, care, darkness and dread expelling.
O Life eternal! holy Habitacle!
Heavenly Jerusalem, Saints Receptacle!
O amiable City of the Lord!
How should my Soul thy praises due record?
What excellent rare things are said of thee?
What things are writ, are hoped, are found to be
In thee! thou have the seat of glory sure,
That Summum bonum.
Good-Best Good-God, joy and solace pure,
Which far exceeds the science and deep sense
Of humane reason and intelligence. A brief recapitulation of the glorious
structure of the new I^rusalem.

For which even Legions of Professors good,
And godly Martyrs have not spared their blood,
But with vn-daunted valiant courage have
Made Lions, Tigres, Fire and Sword their Grave,
That after Death they might enjoy that Crown,
Those Palms of peace, of honor and renown,
Wherewith thy Saints, O blessed Jerusalem!
Are happisi'd in happiness supreme,
Walking as Kings, in those most gorgeous streets,
Where each-one naught but perfect pleasure meets:
In streets, I say, more precious than pure gold,
Glistring with glory wondrous to behold.
The Gates of which most holy Habitation,
Are Pearls of peerlesse price and valuation,
Whose Wall is all of precious stones most pure,
Incomparably rich and strong to endure,
There is that glorious Paradise celestial,
Surpassing Adams Paradise terrestrial,
Wherein are fluent Oily Rivers currents, Rivers of Honney.

Fair Brooks of Butter and sweet Honny Torrents.
Gardens.
Replenished with Garden-walks and Bowers,
With Beds all wrought and fraught with fragrant Flowers,
Bowers.
Whose odoriferous rare variety
Afford most various sweet amenitie,
Flowers.
Whose curious colors, and whose lovely green
Are always fresh, are always springing seen.
There, Spices.
Hearts-ease, Saffron, Lillies and the Rose,
Do savor, sent, spring, spire, with sweet repose.
There are all spices Aromaticall, Plants.

T'affoord delight and cheer the Heart withal.
All these in their Virtues and Graces to Man, not Real existences.
There is that sovereign Balsum med'cinable,
For sent and salve most precious amiable.
All these in thee flourish without defect:
With these the Garlands of the Saints are decked,
Without corruption they continue still,
And sprout and spring about this Sion Hill.
In thee's that Peace of God, which does exceed
Man's understanding and faith-wauering Creed:
There is that glory which does all advance,
Obnoxious never unto Change or Chance.
There Is that eternal Light as sure as pure,
That Sun of Righteousness for e're to endure.
That white and bright blessed Lamb of God most hie,
Who shows and shines most clear incessantly,
Which no time ever shall once terminate,
Nor no disastrous Chance extenuate.
There Is Day which never darkness does admit.
There in their Bowers of pleasure Saints do sit.
There also is certain Security.
There shall thou find secure Eternity.
There all rare Comforts from Heavens glorious King
Successively, successefully do spring.
What e're the Soul can wish, request, desire,
Is there at hand without the least Enquiri^.
enquire:
What e're thou love, there is to be found,
Only, what is Ill, comes not in this blessed ground.
Oh then, my Soul, what pleasure infinite?
Oh what an Ocean of most sweet delight?
Yea, what a most profound and pure Abyss;
Thus to behold the Lord of Lords, is this?
Thus to behold with ravished admiration
The Lords bright face with sacred contemplation?
Yea, with thine eyes to see, what Faiths dim eye
On Earth was never able to espy, The incomprehensible Trinity.

Even that eternal Trinity most blessed,
Which can by Man no sooner be expressed;
August. de Trin.
Than Austines seeming-Lad could power or lade
The mighty Ocean, into the Shell he made
Without a bottom, that his Shell to fill:
No sooner can (I say) Man's stupid Will,
(Till his Corruption In-corruption be)
This holy Mystery clearly know and see.
But when thou Mortal do immortallize,
When Christ thy King, thy Soul once Happy-fies,
Then shall thou taste that God is good and gracious,

Then shall thou live in this his House most spacious,
Then shall thou taste the Spring of Life most sweet,
Then in the Heavens thou shall Christ Jesus meet,
Then shall thy Water of terrestrial grief
Be turned into the Wine of sweet relief:
Then shall thy Sobs be turned into Songs,
Then shall thou triumph for thy worldly wrongs;
O then in that most sacred glorious sight
Is to be found the Fullness of delight,
Of wisdom, beauty, riches, knowledge pure,
Of happiness for ever to endure,
Of goodness, joy, and true Nobility,
Of treasure, pleasure, and felicity,
Of all that merits love or admiration,
Or works comfort or sure contentation.
Yea, all the powers and powerful faculties
Of Soul and Body shall partake likewise,
Sall be sufficed with the full fruition
Of Heavens eternal ternall glorious Vision.
God unto all his sacred Saints shall be
Their Universal sweet felicity,
Containing each particular delight
Which may affect the aspect of their blessed sight:
Infinite both for number and for measure,
And without end shall be their endless pleasure.

To the Eyes he shall be as a Mirror clear,
Melodious Music to delight the Ear:
to the Palate he shall be Mellifluous Mel, All the Senses delighted in Heaven.

Sweetspiring Balm for to refresh the Smell.
Unto the Understanding he shall be
A Light most bright and pure in the highest degree,
To the Will he shall be perfect Contentation,
To the Memory e'relasting Continuation.
In him we also shall enjoy, possess,
What ever various Time could here express:
Yea, all the beauties of his rarest Creatures,
Which may our Love allure by their sweet features,
All joy and pleasure to content the mind,
Such as in the Creatures selves we never could find.
This sight (I say) is the Angels chiefest treasure,
The Saints repast, repose and Princely pleasure,
This is their everlasting Life, their Crown,
Their Meede, their Majesty, their high Renown,
This their rich rest, their spacious specious Palace,
Their outward, inward joy and sovereign solace:
Their Paradise divine, their Diadem,
Their ample bliss,
their blessed Jerusalem,
Their Peace of God past all imagination,
Their full Beatitude and sweet Salvation.
To see him, who them made, re-made, made Saints,
Him seeing to possess without restraints:
Possessing him to love him as their King,
And Loving him to Praise him, as the Spring
And Fountain of this All-felicitie,
And Praising ever this blessed Trinity.
O then,
my Soul, cease not to like, to love,
These admirable, lovely joys above:
And though thy corrupt Flesh is th'obstacle,
And stays, delays from this blessed Habitacle:
Nabal the Flesh.
Although thy Flesh like Churlish Nabal frown,
Refuse the pains to seek this sacred Crown:
Abigal the Spirit.
Yet let thy Spirit like good Abigal
Go forth to find this place Angelical.
Let Hagar never get her Mistress place,
Nor Ismael the Flesh. Isaac the Spirit.
Ismael good Isaac so disgrace;
But strive most strenuously, fight that good fight,
Subdue thy Flesh, withstand proud Satan's might:
And with the Eye of Faith believe, desire
To live with Christ, pray, seek, sue and enquire;
Pray earnestly to Christ thy King above,
In burning Zeal, firm Faith, and fervent Love.
For, what is this World? naught but a flouting fancy,
A Theater of vainness, pleasant Frenzy. What this World is.

A sink of Sin, a shop of all Deceit,
Iniquities chief Center and sure Seat,
A Map, a Mirror of all Misery,
A Dungeon of most dire Calamity,
Lovely to look on like the skarlet Whore,
But dangerous to deal with evermore:
A Mazie Labyrinth of impious Errors,
A Camp of Cruelty, of tears and terrors,
Constant in naught but in In-constancie,

And most Unconstant in that Constancy:
In naught the same, save not to be the same,
And of a Being but a very name:
Still floting, fleeting, never at a stay,
Hates on the Morrow whom it loves to Day.
Yea, it is a Ioab full of craft and guile, The World is a strong and subtle
Wrastler.

Kills his Embracers with a traiterous smile.
A Wrastler it is and trippeth up the heels
Of many a man e're he its grasping feels:
Solomon wise, strong Samson so renowned,
It made their lengths to measure on the ground.
Therefore, to love the World, is naught else, sure, Amor rerum terrenarum, est
viscus spiritualium pennarum.

Then to her Lime-twigs thy poor Soul t'allure,
Which, so, the Feathers of thy Faith will mar,
Thy Soul if it may be from Heavens joys to bar.
Why then (my Soul) should thou to the Earth be thrall, The Love of the
World is the Souls Bird-lime. A most holy expostulation of the Soul,
concerning the World and the Flesh.

Which have a heavenly blessed original?
Which have a heau'nly-blest original?
Why should thou pin thy thoughts on mortal things?
Who art immortal from the King of Kings.
And why should thou, a Sp'rit invisible,
Be pleased with things, both gross and visible?
Striving to pamper thy corrupted Body,
Whose definition is, indeed, that Both-Die:
Both Soul and Body, when the Flesh gives way
To Sin and Satan in their dire decay.
And hence it is that Latinists likewise
Thus The Body.
Corpus fitly Etymologize:
Cor which was once the Heart of pure perfection,
Is thus made Pus, all filth and foul infection.
Why then should thou thy self so low depresse?
Who art of high celestial Nobleness,
One of thy Fathers firstborn Children dear;
Whose name in Heavens blessed Records may appear.
Why should the Worlds false promises delude thee?
Since Heaven with Grace and Goodness has endu'de thee.
Will thou, a Princes Son, a heavenly Prince,
Let Satan's gilded Apples thee convince?
Will thou the Son of Heavens All-sacred King,
Offend thy Father for so vile a thing?
Will thou thy Birth right Esau-like forgo,
For one dire mess of Broth bewitching woe?
Oh, no, deceitful Dalilah, a-dieu,
Thy Sirens Songs my Soul does most eschew,
Thy Crocadile like tears which would betray me, As holy detestation of them.

By Heavens preventing Grace shall never slay me:
For all thy Bitter-sweets, false Protestations,
My Soul esteems but hellish Incantations.
Wherefore, as Amnon being once defiled
With his own Sister, whom he had beguiled,
After the fact, did hate her ten times more
Then ever he had loved her before:
So I, whom thy false Friendship once defiled,
Whom thy deceitful ambush once beguiled:
I hate, abominate thy mischief more,
Than e're I loved or liked thee before.
As Seamen, Rocks, as Children Scorpions fly:
So (Oh my Soul) hate worldly Vanity.
And, oh, what is he? that would not leave most glad
Worlds Vanities, so finite, base and bad
For Pleasures infinite? What Is he would take
Fraudulentioyes, and permanent forsake?
The resolution of a good Christian.
None doubtless, none, but Dastards void of Grace,
None but faint-hearted, fearful Cowards base.
The resolute courageous Christian bold,
Dares Deaths grim face confront, see and behold,
Dares Death defy, and his approach desire,
Because by Death he knows he shall acquire
The end of all his hopes, for, Death's the Key
Which opes the door to true felicity.
Yea, it is no pain but of all pai^es the end, What dea^^ is t^ ^he Godly.

The Gate of Heaven and Ladder to ascend.
And Death's the Death of all his storms and strife,
And sweet beginning of immortal Life.
Therefore with smiling countenance, merrily
To Heaven his place of rest he casts his eye:
And in his heart, these thoughts are often reuolued,
Unfeignedly I wish to be dissolved A most ^oly Meditation of a sanctified Soul.

To be with thee (O Christ my Savior sweet)
Thee my dear Eldest Brother for to meet.
I see thee Christ, I see thee heavenly home,
I gladly would and quickly to thee come.
I see thee, oh thou Saints celestial Place,
I much desire I once had run my race.
But though I cannot with Elias run,
Ith'strength of the Spirit in this race begun

Unto the heavenly Canaan: yet give Grace,
Though I with Jacob halt, to halt apace:
And if not so, yet that at least I may,
Like to an Infant learn to creep the way:
And grow from strength to strength, from grace to grace,
Until I come in presence of thy face.
For, I am weary of this Pilgrimage,
And long for thee my heavenly Heritage.
How often have I thee viewed with admiration?
How often have thou been my Souls meditation?
How often have I been ravished with desire,
That unto thee my Soul might once aspire?
How often have I both scorned and vili-pended
Earths most unpleasant pleasures quickly ended?
Being compared to those joys above,
Which from my Heart, my Soul does dearly love:
My Heart, my Life, my Bl^sse, my Joy, my Gem, Swe^tsolace of the soul.

My Souls dear Soul is New-Ierusalem.
And now I come, my joys, I come to you,
For whom I ^^d so often seek and sue.
I, pain and Death do heartily embrace,
So that my Soul amongst you may take place:
Yea, though even Hell it self were in my way,
And would my journey stop, disturb or stay,
I would it pass and hazard Hells annoy,
To live with Christ in his celestial joy.
Cleombrotus h^^ ^^pe^^te r^^o^mi^^ to enio^ ^^mortalitie.
And, surely, since Heathenish Cleombrotus
Did seem (but desp'rately) so valourous,
Hearing his Master Plato, once, discourse
Of Immortal^tie: with furious force
(From an high Rock) himself did headlong throw,
In hope to be Immortalized so:
O how much rather then, I pray, ought I,
Dying in the Lord a thousand Imposed by others, not exposed to by my self.
deaths to die,
To be invested in that perfect Glory,
Shown and assured in Truths most faithful Story?
He dy'd^ in bare opinion, Souls blind-Loue,
I die in Faith and knowledge from above:
He only hoped to have immortal Life,
I, for immortal rest and glory rise;
He went vn^sent for, I am often invited,
Even Christ himself my Soul has often To desire dissolution, n^^ effect it my
self.
incited:
Incited often, I say, with Resolution,
And Paul's firm Faith, to wish for Dissolution.
Shall then his Pagan-courage mine excel?
Shall fear of death my Christian-courage quell,
Since my sure ground, than his, is much more firm,
And death to me is but my sorrows term?
And that my Soul i'th'end shall sure exult,
Although the way seem somewhat difficult?
Brave resolution of a Christian Soldier.
O no, my Soul, be valorous and stout,
With constant courage persevere, hold out.
None fight but with a hope of Victory:
Thy fight well finished brings eternity.
If one should say unto a Captain stout,
Go forward with bold courage, fight it out;
Do but thy utmost, fight and give not over,
For thou in the end, the conquest shall recover;
Would any David his Goliath fly?

From whom he is sure to win the Victory.
Would any Gideon such a fight refuse?
Could any valiant Iosuah, think you, choose
But enter combat with the proudest Foe?
Whom he with triumph surely shall o're-throw.
My Savior sweet, even thus to me has said;
Take courage, Christian Soldier, ben't afraid, Christ encourages the
Christian Soldier in his spiritual warfare.

Do thou thine utmost, Satan to withstand:
For I will be propitious at thy hand.
Fight valiantly, and though thy foes fierce might
May hap to bring thee on thy knees in the fight,
May often foil thee by his crafty snare:
Yea, though his claws were ready thee to tare,
Yet I will raise thee up, I Will thee defend,
And thou shaltsure be Victor in the end.
Who then (I say) what is he would be so base,
As not this proffer gladly to embrace?
Who could with vile pusillanimitie,
So free a Conquest Coward-like deny?
Shall doting Lovers for their Ladies fight,
And for their sakes account all danger slight?
Shall Merchants venture both their lives and goods,
For wealth and pelse through the Oceans dangerous floods?
Yea, shall the Ship-Boy gladly undergo
All hazzards which or Sea or Shore can show?
Only in hope to gain a Masters place:
And to obtain a cunning Pilots grace.
And shall my Soul turn Coward, fear and fly?
Shall not my Soul control that Enemy?
Whom Christ my General first ouer-threw, Christ is our General.

And thereby all his subtilties well knew:
And knowing them, has taught me how to fight,
Me to defend, him offend, put to flight:
Yea, and has promised he will assistant be,
And in my weakness cause my Foe to flee;
And underneath my feet pull Satan down,
And me as Victor graciously will crown.
O then (my Soul) stand stoutly to it and fear not,
Christ's sacred Arms in vain about thee bear not.
Christ^ duce non vinceris, imo vinces.
Fight this good fight, and let proud Satan know,
Christ being Captain thou wilt him overthrow.
For if Heavens King by Grace be on thy side,
Thou needst not fear what ere do thee betide:
S. Bernard.
No danger, sure, can in that Battle be,
Where thou for Christ, and Christ does figh^ for thee.
And here is my Comfort, this is my Souls stay,
That whether Satan wound, or do me slay,
Dye fleshly Body, so my Soul may live,
Christ to my Soul the Palm of Peace will give.
Simile.
But as a mighty Emperor which proclaims
At some great feast Olympicke warlike Games,
Wherein to him which proves the Conqueror,
And does the best exploits, this Emperor
Will give a Crown, his valor to reward;
Vincenti dabitur.
And him with Kingly favor will regard.
But not the Emperor unto him descends,
But he to the Emp'rours Gallery ascends,
There from his Princely hand to take the Crown,
The triumph, trophie, of his high renown:
Even so the Christian Soldier having gained
The victory, for which he long had strained
With all his power spiritual, to quell
The rage of rau'nous Sin, and Satan fell,
Why the Godly do die.
Must from the worlds Lists in a blessed end
By Death, Heavens glorious Gallery ascend,
There, from the hands of Jesus Christ himself
To take a Crown far passing worldly pelf;
A Crown of joy, even Glories plenitude,
A Crown of bliss, even Heavens beatitude.
It Is not Merit, but Mercy, which crowns us.
Not as the Meede of his deserving Merit,
But as the free-gift of Gods sacred Spirit;
For, having done what ever I am able,
Yet my best service is unprofitable,
Only in Mercy he is pleased to crown
His owne-good-gifts in me to my renown.
O! therefore Death, shall be my welcome-guest,
Death, a welcome Guest to the Godly.
Death, which translates from Labor unto reff,
From wordly sorrow, to Heavens joys increase,
From woe to weal, from trouble to sweet Peace.
From Earth the Stage of instability,
To Heaven the Fortress of true Constancy.
Go then, you godless Heliogabolites,
You carnal Worldlings, proud Cosmopolites,

Go please your selves in swearing, feasting, fighting, A most holy disdayning
of worldly Greatness.

And not what is just, but what is your Lust delight in.
Go please your selves with rich and large extents
Of wealthy Mannours, stately tenements,
Grow proud to see your Underlings beslaued,
And by your Greatness wrongfully out-braued,
To see your Ward-roabes stuffed with proud Apparel,
Your Mouths with oaths, your thoughts with strife and quarrel.
To have variety of worldly pleasure,
Delicate Gardens, Coffers full of treasure.
Treasure (said I?) nay white and yellow Clay,
Bewitching Mammon, Sin-bane, Soules*decay:
Or if there is ought that does you more allure,
Or which you would with more content procure,
Use it, possess it, yet for all this know,
You shall it all with shame and smart forgo.
Yea God will take at Deaths disast'rous day,
Your Lands (your life) your Goods (your gods) away.
This, this (alas) did cause the Prophets cry,
This moved S. Paul with zealous ardency,
Against Worldlings to cry out, and them accuse,
That they themselves, their Souls would so abuse,
Such lying vanities so to respect,
So sottishly their Soules-health to reject,
In Egypt, Straw and Stubble for to buy,
Yea Straw I say and Chafe, which finally
Would their own House burne-downe and ruinate,
And headlong them to Hell precipitate Rich Merchandise.

Whereas their Savior at a cheaper price
Would sell them gold, pure gold, rare Merchandise,
Even all the golden joys and sweet delight
Of Paradise celestial, sacred sight:
That Pearl of blessed Salvation, which to buy
The wisest Merchant would most joyfully
Sell all his worldly treasure, earthly pelf,
With this rare Jewel to enrich himself.
A cheap price.
And what is his price? O cheap, and naught else, sure,
But what thou may thy self with ease procure,
Only thy Heart, it is only this, he craves:
This given to God, both Soul and Body saues.
Not that thy God is better by the same,
But thou ma^e blessed, to magnify his Name:
It Is only thine not his good, he desires,
And for this good he only thanks requires.
Oh therefore silly, simple, sinful Man,
What greater madness? tell me, if thou can?
Than such a proffer, fondly to refuse,
Than Death for Life, for Treasure, Straw to choose;
For precious Liquor, Fountayne-water good,
To hoose foul puddles stinking full of mud;
Oh more then madmen thus to take more pain; The wicked tak^ more pains to
go to hell, then the righteous to go to heaven.

Headlong to run to Hell with might and maine:
Then even the holiest Saints to go to Heaven,
Who often with treates and threats are thereto driven,
But (O my Soul) thy Saviors counsel take;
O do not thou his bounty so forsake!
Go buy of him, give Body, Heart and all,
To purchase this rare Gem Angelical.
And with that Royall-Shepherd David, say,
O thou my Soul trust in the Lord always:
Yea, in his Awe and Law take thou delight,
O like, love, look on this both day and night.
Let it be thy Arithmetike, always

To take account and number out thy days.
A Deaths-head let thy chief Companion be,
An Houre-glasse, Remembrancer to thee.
Let thy chief study be continually,
How to live well, and blessedly to die.
So shall thou (O my Soul) most happy be,
When thou of that blessed City art made free,
When thou, amongst that sacred Hierarchy
Shall sing sweet tones and tunes melodiously;
With Heavens Psalmodicall harmonious Quire
Of Saints and Angels zealous, hot as fire,
The Diapason of whose heavenly Lays
Does warble forth Heavens due deserved praise,
Where thou being graced and placed in heavenly state,
In precious pleasure never to terminate,
Being sweetly raped in heavenly Ecstasy,
Christ's and his Churches Marriage-Song.
Epithalamie,
My Sainted-Soule with sugared voice shall sing,
To God in Christ my Three One heavenly King:
O happy Citizens enfranchised there!
O joyful Qu^risters singing so clear!
Victorious Soldiers thus to be trans-planted!
Where Peace for War, where Life for Death is granted.
Happy were thou (my Soul) most truly blessed,
If thou were once of this rare joy possessed:
That then I might be filled, but never Satisfied.
sated
With that rare sight, which once initiated,
Shall last for aye without Times dissolution,
Shall be most specious without all pollution.
Therefore my Heart (as Heart being chafte and chaced
Simile.
By furious Houn^s most nimbly tract and traced)
Desires the Waterbrooks his heat t'allay,
That so refresht, he thence may scud away:
Even so my Heart (O Lord) desires to see
Those Crystal streams of Life which flow from thee;
Sighs, sues, pursues, her Country to recover,
Here abject, subject, too too triumphed over
By my three fierce and furious Enemies:
Who seek my Soul t'insnare and sin-su^prize,
Even Satan that old Hunter and his Hounds, Satan a Hunter.

The World, the Flesh, which give my Soul deep wounds. The World and the
Flesh his Hounds.

Who more like ravening Wolu^s would feign devour
And captiuate my Soul in hellish power:
But thy preventing Grace (O Spring of Grace)
Prese^^e^ my Soul, dis-nerues their horrid chase;
And as a Bird out of the Fowlers Grin,
Or as Noes Dove looking to be let-in,
Into the Arc of thine eternal Rest:
My tired Soul is unto thee addressed,
My Soul with worlds encumbrances oppressed;
Desires (O Lord) to be by thee refreshed. The Souls thirst.

My Soul does thirst and hastes to draw near,
And longs before thy presence to appear.
O Tree of Life! O everliving Spring!
Whose laud and praise the heavenly Host do sing!
O when shall I come and appear in sight
Of thee, the Sun of righteousness most bright?
When shall my Soul by thine All-sauing hand,
Be led with joy from forth this Desert Land?
When shall I leave this Wilderness of woe,
Wherein my Soul is tossed to and fro?
I sit alone, as on a house the Sparrow:
I^h' Vale and Dale of Tears, fears, sighs and sorrow.
O lead (dear Christ) my Loue-sicke Soul by the hand,
From this vast Wilderness dry thirsty Land:
Cant. 2.4.
To thy ^^ne-C^llers, that I there may taste
Of the W^n^-fl^^ons thou prepared have. Cant. 5.^.

Comfort me with the Apples of thy Grace,
W^^h thy Hi^ Manna strengthen my weak case.
With heavenly Milk and Honny (Lord) make glad
My heart, which worlds afflictions has made sad.
O let me once from Wisdoms sacred Lip,
Celestial Nard, and Rosean Liquor sip.
Yea, l^^ me satiate mine in-satiate thirst,
With that sweet Milk wherewith thy Saints are nourc't,
I thirst, O Lord, I thirst, thou art the Well,

O quench my thirst, and let me with thee dwell.
I hunger, Lord, I hunger, thou art Bread,
Even Bread of Life, O let my Soul be fed.
I seek thee, Lord, yet still I go astray,
Through Highways, By-ways, yet I miss the way:
Thou art (O Lord) the perfect Way and Door,
My Soul will follow, if thou go before.
Direct my feet to leave the paths of Sin,
Open glories Gate, and let my Soul go in.

Let it be Riches to me to possess thee;
Let it be Glory to me to confess thee;
Let it be Clothes, Christ Jesus, to put on;
Let it be Food, his Word to feed upon;
Yea, let it be my Life, to live and die,
For Christ my King, and for his Verily.
So shall my Riches be to me eternal,
So shall my Glory be with Christ supernall,
So shall my Clothing still be fair and new,
So shall my Food be Manna heavenly Dew,
So shall my Life never fade, but ever Spring,
Being still preserved by Christ my Lord and King.
But, oh alas! when shall I see that day?
That Day of gladness never to decay,
That Day of Iubile when all are glad,
That Day when all rejoice, none can be sad?
Whose endless time and never fixed date,
Eternity shall never exterminate.
That Saints blessed The Martyrs Passion-Day was called of old Natalitium salutis.
Birthday, which shall never have Evening:
That Lasting Day to which no Night gives ending.
That rare Grand-Iubile, that Feast of Feasts,
Sabbath of Sabbaths, endlesie Rest or Rests.
To which least Care shall never dare come near,
Wherein the Saints shall shake off palid fear.
O pure, O pleasant most desired Day
Of that eternal springing Month of May!
In which my Soul shall evermore rejoice,
In which my Soul shall hear that happy Voice:
Enter (blessed Soul) into thy Masters joy,

Enter into sweet rest without annoy;
Enter into the House of Christ thy King,
Where Peace and Pl^ntie, Mirth and Joy do spring,
Where thou shall find things most to be admired,
Where thou shall have what most thy Soul desired.
Joys infinitely numberless, I say,
And various pleasures infinitely gay:
Vnspyable, unspeakable by Man,
Immutable, inscrutable to scan;
Where I, thy Soul will feed, will feast, will fill: Our Souls with Christ
shall be fed, feasted, filled.

Feed with spiritual food of my blessed Will,
Feast with the dainties of delight most pure,
And fill with glory which shall e're endure.
Enter, I say, and hear that melody,
Which comprehends datelesse festiuitie.
Where is all good, no evil to abuse:
Where Is all thou wishest, naught thou would refuse, The most absolute and
perfect joys of heaven.

Where Is life e're-liuing, sweet and amiable,
Where is true fame and glory memorable,
Where is, I say, certain Security,
Securest Peace and peaceful Pleasancie;
Most pleasant Joy, and joyful Happiness,
Happy Eternity, eternal Blessedness;
The blessed Trinity in Vaitic:
The Unities Trine-One rare Deity; Visio Dei beatifica, summum bonum nostrum,
August. de Trin. cap. 13.

The Deities Three-One's most blessed Vision,
Which is our Masters joy in full fruition.
O joy of jove's, O joy beyond all pleasure!
Far passing far transcending terrene treasure.
O joy without annoy, O true content!
O sovereign bliss and Souls sweet rauishment!
O everlasting Kingdom, supreme peace!
Where all the Saints enjoy such joys increase,
Where all the Saints are clothed with pure Light,
As with a Garment shining glorious bright:
Their Heads adorned with Crowns of purest gold,
And precious Stones most glorious to behold;
Whose only exercise is to rejoice,
To triumph, and to sing with sacred voice,
Sweet Halleluiah to their Sovereign King,
Which them to this felicity did bring.
Oh! August. Solilo. cap. 36.
when shall my poor Soul be made partaker
Of this great joy, O thou my Lord and Maker!
When shall I see Thee in it, It in Thee?
And therein dwell I in Thee, Thou in Me?
Surely (O Lord) I will make haste and fly,
I Will make no stay, but post most speedily.
I Will never cease to Seek, Seek.
till I have found,
I Will not leave Knocking, Knock.
till my Soul be crowned.
I Will never leave Asking, Ask.
till thou have me given
My Boon, thy Bounty, even those joys of Heaven:
Since then, I say, such is Heavens Majesty!
And since this World is but mere Misery:
What is it can hinder this my speedy pace,
Which I must run, till I have run my race?
Can Worldly power or Principality? Heavenly resolution.

Can Kingly favors, wealth or dignity?
Can worldly pleasures, pleasant unto some?
Can height or depth, things present, things to come?
Oh no, with Paul I Will all abominate,
E're they shall me from Christ's love separate.
I Will cry, Auaunt you Soule-betraying joys,
Which Bee-like bring the Sting of dire annoyes.
Auaunt, I say, worlds momentarie pleasure,
Worlds transitory toys, Earths trash^e treasure:
The love of Christ has so enflamed my Heart,

That as I trust, it never shall thence depart;
And, Lord, confirm, strengthen this Faith of mine,
O let it never faint, fa^le or decline.
But woe to me (poor wretch) who still am feign
Amongst the T^nts of Meshech to remain:
To have my habitation amongst the rout
Of Kedar most ungodly stubborn, stout.
The time, me thinks, is much procrastinated,
O that the date thereof were terminated.
Ay me, how long shall it be said to me,
Wait, wait, expect, and thou the time shall see?
And shall thou see? my Soul, thou art too blame, The Soul here checketh it
self for being offended at Gods trials.

I must accuse thee (O my Soul) for shame
Think not the time too long, count it not much,
That with these trials God thy Faith should touch.
For, as a Goldsmiths waits most carefully
Upon his gold, which he in the fire will try; Simile.

That when it is burned enough and purifide,
It may not in the fire, to waste, abide:
So God his Children dear attends upon, God compared to a Goldsmiths.

When in the fire of dire affliction
He purposes to purify and try them:
When thus enough refined he does spy them,
By no means will he suffer them to waste,
B^^ for t^^^r comfort to them soon will haste.
As that most rare payre-Royall well did know,
Good Shedrach, Meshach, and Abednego:
Whom he in the Babylonian fire did prove,
Yet so respected in his sacred love; Gods great care of his Children. Matthew. 6.

That not so much as one hair of their head
Was burnt or sindg'd, or once diminished.
O then, my Soul, if God have such a care,

As from thy head not one small simple hair
Can fall to the ground, without his providence:
O then have thou assured confidence,
That he thy Soul will never pe^mit to perish,
But in due time will thee refresh and cherish;
And say with Job, that man of God most just,
Lord, though thou kill me, I will in thee trust.
Yea then confess (as it is) that all the woe,
Which in this Life for Christ thou vnder*goe:
That all Ear^h^ torments or affecting toys,
Are most unworthy Heavens most blissful joys.
Heavens joys for weight and measure infinite, Heavens joys set against
Earths joys, by way of Antithesis,

Earths pains to death, but slender, small and slight.
Heavens joys most perfect, absolutely pure,
Earths choicest pleasures pain and grief procure.
Heavens joys are sempiternall, euer-lasting,
Earths joys mere toys, still fleeting, euer-wasting.
O then (my Soul) have patience, do not grudge,
Left so thou make thy Christ thine angry Judge:
Give Patience (Lord) thy sacred Will to bear, Da sacere quod iubes, and iube
quod vis. Simile.

And then receive my Soul, How, When, or Where.
For, as no gold nor silver can be pure,
Until the fires burning it endure:
Nor Stones for Palace-worke can well be fit,
Till they with Hammers often be cut and smit^
No more, I say, is it possible that we
Vessets of Honor in Gods house can be:
Till we be fined and melted in the fire
Of worldly crosses and afflictions dire.
Neither can we as liuing-stones have place,
Ierusalems celestial Walls to grace;
Unless the Hammers of Earths tribulation,
Often bruise the Flesh to work the Souls Salvation,
But though thy Servants (Lord) may often be tempted,
Yet can they never finally be tainted:
They never can be surprised, though often assailed,
For why, Vita sine malis, est sicut auis sine alis.
Heavens safeguard has them never failed.
Christians and Persecutions join together,
Like Christ and's Cross, No Cross, No Crown.
few calmes much stormy weather.
E're the Israelites to the Land of Promise came,
Their temp'rall Canaan, Canaan of such fame;
Th'endur'd much danger, many Miseries:
And shall not I, most patiently likewise
Endure all dangers, all anxietie?
Shall I not undergo all misery,
In this my journey to Heavens holy Land?
O yes, with constant courage to it stand.
For why, I Am sure the more I here endure,
My joys in Heaven shall be more glorious pure.
And who would not to Heaven go joyfully,
Though with Elias he in whirle-winds fly?

Grant therefore ( Lord) I take Earths Nocuments Nocument^ sunt Documenta.

As precious Balm, as my Souls Documents.
Confirm my Faith with constant resolution,
To wait, and fit me for my dissolution:
To wait for thee my Savior, staff and stay,
Till thou shall change my Bodies house of Clay*
That like thy glorious Body it may be,
That so thy power and glory I may see:
That I may hear and see, and bear a part,
In Heavens heart-charming Music sacred Art,
In that rare Consort of Mel-Melodie,
At Christ's rare Nuptials blessed solemnity.
Come then, Lord Jesus (oh, I cannot cease,
To wish my Soul in thine eternal peace)
Give me (O Lord) good Stephens Eagle-eye, Stephens Eagle-eye.

Through thickest Clouds Heavens glory to epsy,
Give me (O Lord) a Voice Angelical,
With Heart unfeigned on thee thus to call:
How long (O Lord) how long will thou delay? The Souls Prayer.

Lord Jesus, come, come quickly, do not stay;
Make haste, and tarry not, I thee entreat,
And draw my Soul from Earth to heavenly seat.
For why? I fear ( Lord, falsify my fear)
That Satan will against me such malice bear,
To cause my refractorie Flesh to stir
My Soul unto Rebellion: so t'incurre
Thy wrath and indignation for the same,
My stubborn Flesh, therefore ( Lord) cu^be and tame,
O, free me from this fleshly Prison strong,
Wherein my Soul has fettered lain too-long:
Fett'red I say, yea fest'red more's my shame,
The Soul bewayleth her misery in the flesh.
More art thou flesh, and much more I too blame,
Who often with Adam fondly have aspired,
And with vain glory led, have often desired
The fruit of the Tree of Knowledge for to eat,
Not of the Tree of Life, more sovereign meat,
And to be red in any other Book,
Much pride and pleasure I have often took:
Than in my Book of Conscience, to behold
The woe whereinto Sin does me infold.
With Wantons I often viewed Prides Looking-glass,
But not Times-Dyall, how my Days did pass.
Yea, on Earths follies I have fixed mine eyes,
Gazing on blazing worldly Vanities.

Yet Lord I know that as thou have a Book,
Wherein my faults are writ on them to look:
So thou a Bottle have, wherein to keep
My contrite tears, when I for Sin do weep.
And though my self vn-worthie I agnize
Unto thy Throne to lift my Sinful eyes:
Yet I my self vn-worthie do not find
To weep before thee till mine eyes be blind.
Lord then vouchsafe, vouchsafe I thee beseech,
An ear an answer to my Souls sad speech.
O come Lord Jesus, come I humbly pray,
The Soul oppressed with worldly miseries, prays.
Speak peace unto my Soul, o do not stay:
Bind up my wounds, make whole my malady
With the Samaritans sweet Charity.
Into my sore, power thou the Oil of gladness,
Revive my Soul from Sin-constrained sadness.
O bring my Soul out of this mire and mud,
This sincke of Sin where I too-long have stood.
Smite off my Fetters of Iniquity.
As thou did Peter's in Captivity.
Stop in me all the Conduits of transgression,
Break Satan's weapons of my Souls oppression.
Yea, let my Eyes be as continual Lauers
To wash and cleanse Sins ulcers stinking savors:
The Lord loves a pure heart.
For a clean Lord (I know) takes delectation,
To have a clean Heart for his Habitation.
Give therefore grace (o Lord) whiles here I live, Ve semperveniunt ad candida
tecta Columba: ingreditur sanctus candida corda Deus.

That I a Bill of due Divorce may give
Unto that Harlot Sin, which too-too-long
Has by false flattery done my Soul much wrong.
O, double, treble happy were I, sure,
If once I might put-off Sins rags impure,
Those Menstruous clothes wherewith I am disguised,
Whereby thine Image in mee's not agnized:
Whereby in thy pure sight I am but loathed.
O therefore that my Soul might once be clothed
With thy most royall-Robes of righteousness, The Soul desires to be clothed
with the Robes of righteousness

Thy Seamelesse, spotless Coote of holiness,
And therein be presented to the sight
Of my great Lord, the Father of all Light,
And be ingrafted and incorporate
Into this New-Ierusalems blessed state,
Into this Kingdom evermore existing,
Into this Kingdom all of joy consisti^g:
Where all thy Saints and sacred Angels reign,
By thee their mighty Lord and Sovereign,
Clothed in Vestures of the purest white,
Still in the presence of thy sacred sight:
Their heads adorned with Crowns of purest gold,
Of precious stones, rich Pearls rare to behold.
Thou Lord alone being the Diadem
Of these thy Saints in this Jerusalem:
Whose only sight, is their beatitude,
Which dures for aye without vicissitude.
But Lord, it may be thou may say to me,
Alas, poor Soul, would thou my beauty see?
None ere could see the glory of my face
And (...) Earth, such is Man's mortal case.
Lord, thus I answer, and I this confess
That thy Celestial glorious holiness
Is so immense, so infinite, so rare,
So great, so glorious, gracious, specious, fair,
That no flesh living can it see, and live,
Yet to my Soul (o Lord) this mercy give,
That so it may behold thy sacred sight,
Let Death with thousand deaths my body smite;
So my poor Soul may see thy Majesty,
Let Death my breath, my life end speedily.
Oh then, I say, and never shall cease to say,
O threefold, fourfold happy, sure, are they,
Blessed are they that die in the Lord.
Who, by a pious life and blessed end,
By Christ, Heavens Ladder, to heavens joys ascend,
Who for the minutes of Earths Lamentation,
Enjoy Heavens endless years of Consolation;
Who from this earthly Prison are set free,
And in Heavens Palace live, O Christ, with thee:
Yea, who being dead to Sin and Earthly joys,
Are there in plenitude of perfect joys.
But oh most wretched miserable I,
The Sea of the World.
Who (in the Floods of worlds mortality,
By huge Heau'n-Mounting, Hell-Descending waves,
By Rocks, Syrts, Whirle-Pooles, all which seem my Graves)
Am still constrained to sail through dangers great,
Which Waters, Winds, Weather, together threat:
And, which is more, I most erroniously
Through ignorance, often wander clean away; The soul ofttimes in danger of
shipwreck, through ignorance and infirmity.

I lose my way, and then am danger'd most,
Not knowing whither my poor Ship does coast:
Being thus exposed to Seas all-ieopardies,
Like Jonah, when from Niniue he flies,
Tossed to and fro even into the Maw of Hell,
By furious Floods which against me rage and swell:
So that my way to the Harbor of my Rest
Thus being lost, my Soul is sore oppressed.
But, which is worst, whiles thus to thee I sail,
I meet Sea Monsters which do me assail:
Resistfull Remora's, Fishes that (though little) yet can stay a Ship.
Leuiathan the Devil.
Remoraes do strive to stay me,
And huge Leuiathan gapes wide to slay me;
Life's, Toys and Troubles, Satan's craft and Power,
Would stay my Voyage, and would me devour.
Restless, redresselesse thus I flote about,
And for thy heavenly help my Soul cries out.
Wherefore Sea-calming, Wind-controlling Lord,
To my perplexed Soul thine aid afford;
For if thou will (O Lord) thou can me cherish: The Souls Prayer.

O therefore help, or else my Soul will perish.
One Depth (o Lord) another in does call, Abyssus abyssum inuocat.

As Waves breake-out and on each other fall:
The Depth of my Calamity profound,
Does invoke thy Mercies which abound.
I call and cry from many waters deep,
My Soul from sinking (Lord) preserve and keep.
O keep me from these dangers imminent,
Which have my silly Soul on all sides pent.
Let thine outstretched- arm, upholding Grace,
Once bring my Soul unto her Resting Place,
From floods of worldly infelicity,
Into the Haven of aeternity.
How long (o Lord) how long will thou prolong,
Thy wrath to appease and ease me, from among
These dire Death-threatning-dangers? o direct
My way o thee, my hope to thee erect.
My Confidence re-plant in thee, I pray,
That so these tempests may me not dismay;

That so these floods, though flow, may not come near me,
That so these blasts, though blow, may not so fear me.
Thou being my vn-rocking Rock, my shield, Gods di^ection must be our Pilot
and Protection.

My fortress strong, which to no force can yield,
Most skillful Pilot, so my Stern direct,
My weather-beaten Boat, so safe protect,
That it these dangers infinite may shun,
And, to my Harbor may the right-way run:
Commiserate, compassionate my case,
And in chine arms (o Christ) my Soul embrace.
Though I with Jonas Seamen lose my wares,
My goods, my life, worlds pleasures, best affairs;
Though Persecutions Rocks my Bark may batter, Rocks of Persecution.

M^ (...) ^^iuen B^^re may spli^, may shatter;
Yet grant (o Lord) I may not Ship wrack make
Of my sure Faith ^n thee; but as the Snake Simile.

Is said t'expose his body to the blow
Of him that smites, to save his head: Even so
I willingly may undergo all Crosses,
And with content may bear the greatest losses,
That I may hold-fast Faith in Christ my Head,

So I may live by Faith, to Sin be dead.
Perieram ni sic periisse^^.
With this Conclusion should my Soul be cherishe,
I had bin undone, had I thus not perished.
Yea with those Argo-Nautae willingly,
My Ship through straightest passages shall fly,
So that in the end I may with joy possess
The Golden-fleece of endless happiness.
Lord, though the Puddle of impurity
Has my poor Soul polluted lothsomely,
The Ocean of iniquities foul flood
Has me besmeard in stinking mire and mud:
O yet, sweet Christ, with Hysop of thy Merit,
Cleanse and make clean my Sin-polluted Spirit;
The blood of Christ only can cleanse us from all our sins.
Wash me, o Christ, with thy most precious Blood,
None, naught but thou, can do my Soul this good.
My well-nigh Ship-wrackt Soul, o Lord, assist,
Which too-too long the way to thee has mist.
Contemn me not, Condemn me not for Sin,
But let my Soul to thy sweet Rest go in.
Remit (o Lord) what I have ill omitted,
Remove (o Lord) what I have mis-committed.
And though I be to pass by the Gates of Hell,
Grant power to pass them, and with thee to dwell.
To dwell I say with thee, in the Land of Living,
Where to thy Saints thy joys thou still art giving
O thou my Souls sweet Soul, The Soul prays that Christ would be
propitious to it.
my Hearts dear Heart,
In this distress do not from me depart;
Be to my Soul as a bright-morning- Star,
Which I may clearly see though somewhat far:
And be (as th'artindeed) the Sun most bright
Of Righteousness, that my flesh-dimmed sight
Being with Faiths Properly a salve for sore eyes.
Collyrium made more clear,
I speedily may see the way appear
To my Hart-cheering long desired Port,
Whereto my Soul has longed to resort,
I may in time see and foresee Sins charms, The Soul by Faith is encouraged
to escape all the dangers of the Sea of this world.

And so prevent the event of Sins great harms,
That on the Shore I may perceive thee stand,
Giving me aim with thy most sacred hand,
To keep the right-way to thine Habitation,
The Haven of happiness and sure Salvation.
That passing thus this Danger-obuious Ocean,
By thee the strong Arch-mouer of each motion,
I may go forward with such circumspection,
And be so guided by thy good direction,
And with thy Grace be so corroborated,
And with Rocke-founded Faith so animated, Dangers.

That as twixt Scylla's and Charibdis fear, Scylla, Charibdis.

My Bark in passage does a full sail bear: Despair and Presumption The
Pharise

I mean proud Pharisaicall Self-flation,
And Grace-les diffident Cains Desperation,
By th'iustified Publican's example, Cain.

Remedies.
I may the right regenerate paths trample
Of that true poenitent good Prodigal, Humility and Poenitencie.

To thee (o Lord) for mercy'cry and call, The Publican.

That by thy gracious guide and safe tuition, The Prodigal.

I may escape Despaires and Prides perdition,
And so with joy, with ^oy unutterable,
Approaching to the Shore most amiable: The Anchor of Hope, fastened with the
Rope of Faith.

Casting the Anchor of a constant Hope
On Christ my Savior, fast'ned with Faiths rope,
I may my Marchandizes bring a Land,
And put them into my sweet Saviors hand;
Even all the gains which I poor Soul had made
Of his good Talent lent to me to trade:
To whom, although I bring but one for five,
Yet will he not my Soul of Heaven deprive.
And though, that one (through mine infirmity)
Has been much blemished with impuritie,
Has bin d^sgrac't, defaced, and much abused,
Yet by my Christ it will not be refused,
But graciously he will take my will for deed, Christ takes the Will for the
Deed.

Will hold me by the hand, and thus proceed:
Well done (good Servant) worthy of my trust,
Well done (I say) thy Service has been Just,
Since thou in little matters have done well,
Thou shall be Lord of things which far excel.
Since thou to do my Will have done thy best, Christ bids the Soul welcome
into Heaven.

Come, come with me into thy Masters Rest.
Even so Lord Jesus, come I humbly pray,
For thine Elects-sake haste that happy day.
I look, I long, that I might once descrie
That happy Day, my Soul to happy-sie:
That I with thee (my Savior) may rejoice,
That with Heart-cheering Music and sweet Voice,
In that blessed Chorus sweet, Angelical
Society of Saints celestial,
The Song of the Saints.
I, Halleluiah, Halleluiah may
Sing cheerfully to God the lord always;
To God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
Unto the Trine-One, mighty Lord of Host.
To this great God be given all thanks and praise,
For his sweet succor in these sacred Lays. Amen.
FINIS.
Omnis Gloria solius est Domini.
Thrice-happy Vision, more thrice-happy zeal, Thus flames us with God, Saints,
Heavens Commonweal.
T. SALISBVRY, Mr in Artibus.

