LETTERS sent from Venice. ANNO. 1571.

Containing the certain and true news of the most Noble victory of the
Christians over the army of the great Turk: And the names of the Lords and
Gentlemen of the Christians slain in the same battle.

Translated out of the French Copy Printed at Paris by Guille^^ de Niuerd,
with the Kings Privilege.

Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman. And are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard by Anthony Kitson.

The overthrow of the Turks army.
THE Christen army being in Thessalonia, in the Haven of Argostelly, and the
enemy in the goulf of the Pante, they took advise what was best to be done.
The Lord Don Iean of Austrie thought it not good to enter into the goulfe,
but the general Biuier, and the Lord Justinian Barbaric thought that best,
earnestly exhorting and persuading to go into Bisterlo. For by this means (say
they) they should obtain the victory: and they concluded that Barbarico with
eight galeys should go to the entry of the goulf, to assay if he could
train out the enemy: And whiles this was resolved, the General Biuier was
advertised, that fifty of the Turkishe Galeys had left the army, and were
gone into Lenant. Whereupon the Lord Don Iean resolved fully too enter the
goulfe, and the sixth of this month, being carried in Pregates, went in
person to take order and encourage all men to be ready on the morrow to the
battle.

On Sunday the seventh of October, was all the Army in a readynesse, the
general being in the midst with fifty galeys, on the right hand the Lord
Barbarico, upon the left the Ioerin, and the Dorian in the arreregard behauing
him self very valiantly. The six greatest Galeys rowed three on front,
with.ij. little Galeys after them. Thus marched they in order, helped somewhat
forward with a small breathe, more favorable to the enemy, and in good time
discovered the other army, which came clustering like a wood, without any
order. For they thought (as after was known) that so soon as they should have
been discryed, our army would have fled, and that they would be ready to
spoil and take some of our Galeys. But seeing that the Christen army made
forward so boldly, they began to put them selves in array, in fashion of an
half Moon. Thus both the armies being approached within Cannon shot, the
six great galeys did break forth, and pierced clean thorough the Turkishe
army, which they put in great disaray with their artillery: which act may
be accounted the only and chief cause of the victory. In the discharge of
the great shot, the Turks were more galled than the Christians. The Catholyke
General, and the Venetian general, having between them the chief Bassa,
boorded his Galey, and took it, and having cut off the Bassaes head, put it
upon a pyke, which Don Iean held in his hand, as a trophee. Ochiali Bassa
with his galeys pressed sore the left side: and all the body of the enemies
charged the body of the christian battle, when Dorian with the arriergard
aided the said body: and on the other side Don Iean sent to succor the left
wing, an other number of Galeys, where there were already seven or eight
Venetian galeys. In this manner fought they continually from morning til night.
But in the end the Chrystians obtained the victory. There were taken.Clxxx.
Galeys of the enemies, xxv. were burned, xv. soonke, xviij. fled, whom the
Christians pursued. The great Bassa of Argier Gitride of the great Turk was
found dead. The Bassa Ochiali fled with a few galeys. Fortua Bassa was not
found dead nor alive. And the Bassa which came in stead of Prely, is he whom
before I have showed to have been taken and kylde. There are slain.xx.
thousand Turks, v. thousand Scarataui and.xiiij. thousand Christians prisoners
set at liberty. And they had taken into their army to relieve them.xiiij.
thousand Spachi, whom they had levied in Morea. The Christians of Greece seeing
yt small number of Turks left, and the whole overthrow given to the Turkishe
army, began to rise. And so soon as the Christian army turned to Corfu, they
with the victory of Seigneur Don Iean, being accompanied with a Fregate, came
to the general, offering to follow what part soever shall please him to go,
saying, to have very well known that the Venetians are chief lords of the sea,
but that never so well tried as at that present. It is marvelous, that in the
six galeys which made the first point, were slain but three persons. And
generally thanks be to God, the whole fleet has had small loss in respect
of the great victory.

God favored the Lord Barbarico so much, that he lived til night, when being
advertised of the assured victory, hie lifted up his hands too Heaven in
token of joy, and therewith yielded up his ghost, being hurt in the eye with
an Arrowe.

The names of the christian Lords and Gentlemen slain in the battle.
The most excellent Lord, S. Augustine Barbarico. The Magific Lord, S. Benet
Laurence. The Lord Andrew Barbarico. S. John Coruaro. The magnific Laudo. The
Lord Marin Contarin. S. Cattauino Mallipirro. The Lord Jerome Contarin, with
three of his Cousins. The Lord Frances Bion. The Lord Anthony Pasquin. The
Lord Theodore Balbi. The Lord John Baptist Benoist. The Lord Jacques de Mezo.
The Lord Anthony de Mallogani Candiot. The Lord Alexander Littico de Affrani.
The Trissan Vesantin.
THe magnifique Lanfran Justinian brought the first tidings of this glorious
victory this day at.vij. of the clock in the morning, landing from out of
his galley at S. Marks. The Prince went to meet him, and at the first
greeting the Lord Justinian kneeling, said: Most excellent Prince, I bring
unto you the tidings of the Noblest victory that ever christian men had. The
Prince with his hands stretched up to heaven, thanked God, and without any stay
with all the Nobility which clustered together, went toward the Church
questioning with the said L. Iustiman by the way, and there caused songs and
Himnes to be sung, praising God, and with great devotion remained above two
hours in the Church. The people and all the Nobles assembled on every side
embrasing one an other, uttering all signs possible of vnexpresseable joy.

From Ancone.
THere is news brought that there is a ship of Ragusa that left Candie, the
thirtienth of September, which brought news that the Galliotte of Famagousta,
in which was laid the munition, reported for certain that the sixte of that
present Month, the town was in good estate and held out lustily: Which if
it be so, the advice of Messino of the fyfte day, which said that the town
was lost from the beginning of Auguste, is not true.

Therefore, Unto God be all honor and glory.
The French King to the Bishop of Paris, with express commandment for
Public thanks to be given to God for the happy success of the Christians
against the Turk.
MY Lord,
I am advertised from my Ambassador resident in Venice, of a happy victory
fallen upon the Christian army by sea against the Turks, who being wholely
vanquished, left dead twenty thousand bodies with one of their principal
Bassaes, five thousand taken prisoners, a hundredth and.lxxx. Galleys taken,
within the which were found and set at liberty fourteen thousand captives of
christians, and all this happening with a very little loss of the christian
army, whereof I thought to give you this speedy report, to the end you might
proceed to give God thanks, as well in our chief church of Paris, as in
all other churches, within your Diocese, with Processions and other such
plausible actions of thanks giving, as are convenient to congratulate so happy
a success as it has pleased the almighty to bestow upon christendom. And
so my Lord I pray God to preserve you in his holy grace.

At Vantiour the last of October 1571. Signed. CHARLES. And under neath.
BRVLART.


Upon the indorcement is written. To my Lord of Paris, one of my privy
Council, or to his Vicares or Deputies.

THE whole Discourse of the Victory that it pleased God to give to the
Christians against the Turks, and what loss happened to the Christians in the
said conflict.

Englished by a French Copy Printed at Paris, by Fleuri Preuost, Privileged
by the King.

Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman. And are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard by Anthony Kitson.

The whole and certain Discourse of the victory that it has plesed God to
give to the Christians against the Turks.vij. October. ANNO. 1571.
THE divine goodness and clemency of the mercyful Lord and God, has
always ben so pitiful and favorable to such as in their afflictions have
acknowledged him, that the remembrance thereof, does altogether make us as it
were perplexed and astonyed: for in all our actions and doings we have tasted
and felt his clemency and marvelous mercies, even at the very hour when we
have had least hope thereof, as the wise man does show us by these words: Men
shall be tickeled with an horrible fear, and even when they have least hope
they shall marvel of their safety. Whereof we have good experience, when that
(besides the innumerable graces we receive daily) he does make us more and
more to know his puissance by such effects as to us seems altogether
impossible, which ought so much the more to make us prompt and ready to
magnify his greatness, to praise and exalt his holy name euerlastyngly. And
therefore his marvelous works ought not to be suppressed or kept in
silence, but rather to be published from nation to nation, that we which
depend upon his goodness and mercy, may render unto him all honor and
praise for ever. The news that is come to our knowledge, of the miraculous
victory that it has please^ his divine Majesty, to give unto the Armies o^
the Emperor, of the Catholyke king, and of the Seigniorie of the Venetians,
against the marvelous and insupportable army of the Turks, for that cause
is to be published to give every man advertisement thereof by the discourse that
follows.

By a Letter written from the Venetians bearing date the nynth day of October
last, it was advertised that the Sunday the seventh of the said month the
army general of the Emperor, the Catholic King and of the Seignorie of the
Venetians, were in Chesauian, within the ports of Argostoly: and the army of
the Turks was within the gulphes of Velapante, looking when the Christians
should come out that they might give them battle, and fight with them. The
Christians being but a few in number in respect of so great and insupportable
an army as the Turks was (the which seemed rather like a Forest than a navy
on the sea, being well nigh two hundred ships and fifty Foysts,) made it
seem dangerous to enter within the goulfe to fight with them: for they were
not equal in force to them.

The noble Don Iean de Austriche, (brother to the Catholic King, and
Lieutenant general of his army) was advertised, that Fifty of his great
Galeys were unfurnished there where one parts of his force was: which gave him
great occasion to have the better will to fight with the rest: To come to
which purpose, he sent out eyghte good Galeys to draw out the Turks to
fight: After the which ^yght (...) the rest of our army did follow in very
good order well furnised (with good hope by the help of GOD to come to good
effect.) They did discover the Army of the Turks, who perceiving the
Christians did approach, came in great disorder to assail them, trusting only
in their forces: But the Christians putting themselves in battle in form of
a Cressent, did compass as well as they could, the Army of the Turks, and
they did it in such sort, (that by reason of the said disorder) after they
had fought valyantly from eight of the clock in the morning until an hour
after dynner, they beegan to obtain victory, which continued until night:
and if it had not been for the darkness of the powder and shot, they had
wholly defeated the army of the Turks, of the which there escaped but only
xviij. Galeys. Which victory was executed with so small a number on our part,
that it was little or nothing in respect of such and so great a victory.

About move was taken the Galey of the Bassa, (that was the Lieutenaunt
general of the Army) whose head was carried to Seigneur Don Iean de
Anstriche, which after he had a good while held the same in his hands, he
commanded it to be put upon the end of a Pyke, and to be set upon the
for eparte of the Galley for victory, and for a trymphe.

Of all the Army of the Turks, there was none sauid but the said.xviij.
Galeys, which were followed a great while by three galeys of the Popes, four
of the knights of Malia, and six of the Venetians, and they came so near
them, that if the darkness of the night had not favored them with the help
of their good Ores, they had not gone to carry the heavy news of the
overthrow of the rest of their army.

There is taken by the Christians Cxxx. great Turkishe galeys and fyftie
Foystes, out of which Galleys and Foystes, have been delivered xiiij.
thousand christians captives with the Turks.

In the said Galeys and foysts was found great store of munitions of war, the
most part whereof was delivered to be sent to Malta.

There was also.xv. Galeys of the Turks drowned.

And there were.xxv. galeys burnt.

And there were.xx. thousand Turks slain with their Bassa, which was the
general of their army.

Besides five thousand prisoners.

The loss that the Christians had, was two Galleyes of the Popes which were
drowned.

And one burned of the Knights of Malta.

Five of the Venetians were lost, of the which two were burnt and three
drouned.

The general of the army of the Venetians, was slain in the said Galleys
that were lost, and.xx. Venetian Gentlemen.

There is dead of the Christians as well out of the said eight Galeys that were
lost, as of them that were slain in the other Galleys, about two thousand
men, of the which there were four Knights of Malta, three Spaniardes, and one
Italian.

The Venetians amongs all the rest did show themselves very valyante, and they
were the first that with great fury did join in combat against the said
Turks.

FINIS.
To the Christian Reader.
WEll beloved Reader,
behold here that which may he faithfully vnderst^^d by the letter written
from Venice the.ix. of October last, of the victory yt it has pleased our
good God to give us against the enemies of ye holy Church. Therefore considering
the times past and present, in the which God all merciful, has delivered and
preserved us from a number of mischeeues and dangers, with the which we
ordinarily are beset, without having any power of our self, to escape the
same, except the immesurable pity of our Lord God should help us. We ought
therefore to sing continually with the royal Prophet, the earth is all
replenished with the mercy of our good God which does maintain us in his
kingdom, in his faith, in his service and in his grace incomprehensible: and
let us firmly believe that he has care of us, and that he does keep and
defend us more warely than the Egle or the Hen do their chickens. Let us
give him therefore without ceassing, glory, and preises everlasting, framing
our selves to marvel at the greatness of his mercy, that does preserve us
always from eminent dangers and perilles.

ARMIPOTENTI ANGLIAE
depiction of a draped female figure on a pedestal, holding the bridle of a
rearing horse in each hand


