Extremities Urging the Lord General Sir Fra: Ueare to the Anti-parle with the
Archduke Albertus. Written by an English Gentleman of very good account from
Ostend, to a worshipful Gentleman his friend here in England, Imprinted
Verbatim according to the Original.

With a declaration of the despe rate attempt made since, by the said
Archdukes forces, for the winning of the old Town.

Printed for Thomas Pauyer.

1602.

Extremities pressing the Lord Gene rall sir Frauncis Veare, to offer the late
Antiparle to the Archduke Albertus.
NOt doubting but your Worship has heard of our late anti-parle with the
Archduke Albertus hear in Ostend, which I assure ^y ^lfe is of many wo^dred
at, and again, knowing that no small number will judge there of, some
according to their understandings, and other some as they are carried with
affection. I have thought good to advertise you of the very truth thereof; for
your worships satisfaction, and better contentment of all Gentlemen to whom it
shall please your worship to impart the same, wherein I assure you I have
plainly and faithfully set down the truth without all favor or affection, as
hereafter follows.

HIs Lordship having by many Letters for the space of two Months together,
solicited the States to reenforce him with fresh supplies of men, was still
answered again with hopeful promises, mean time his troops in town were
generally harrazed and worn out, especially y^ English by guarding and
watching in the works without the Town every second night for the space of
six Months together, their durtie passage thither, and their myrie guard^
there, inse^ing them daily with increase of sickness, so as by diseases and
other accidents of war, he had not remaining at the time of the Parley beg^,
being on Sunday night the 1^ of December after the old style, of 8000 soldiers
and (...), 2150: and such as know Ostend as it is now, and have withal any
judgment in martial (...), can discern that the Town al^ne cannot be
su^tiently guarded with (...) men, leaving out of this computation the outward
works and most part of the Counterscarps, which are in^d principal pillars of
saf^tie to this place.

Again the fury of the sea had so demolished the Rampart of the ^owne, that
the same lay very weak and open i^ many places for the Enemies passage. And
(notwithstanding that good endeavors had (...) used, (...) much cost (...) to
secure us against both those dangers, by store of long (...)-wood lodged in
^ile at the North-west and of the (...) bray, (the support of the foot of the
bulwark called the Sandhill) and of like wood platted along the foot of the
Sandhill to the sea-ward, fastened (besides the workmans art) with great
stones, and well lined with sundry ranks of Pallizad^s armed with long and
strong nails of Iron) yet did the Enemy in the darkness of a boystrous night at
a low water, so arteficially, and wi^h such expedition put fire to the same
pile, entertaining our guards a good, distance from thence, toward the
North-east part of the old Town with an alar^m, in the mean time that few
inclined their eyes to this fiery (...), until the fire had fully embraced the
same pile. This alarm being (to say truth) coldly taken, the enemy (...) his
point till they came to the place of our new (...), being near the North-east
rauelling. and there finding the passage to enter open and no apparante of
r^ance, they entered, and coming to a Corpse du gua^d, they found one only
drowsey bird in the (...) whom they killed, the rest being (...) ^ed after
their ^onted manne^: yet I forbear to name my Nation, Eupho^ gratia.

In the heat of this business, his Lordship slenderly accompanied, fell upon
the skirt of all the place where the enemies were, and being with much
^ifficultie perswad^d to stay his further (...), till discovery might be (...)
before (...), much troubled with fear of treas^n* he sent away Capta^ Studde^
Commander of his own company* with one (...) Greuill, (...) (...), and some
one or two private men besides These stumbled upon the (...), against whom
making a countenance of a charge by their voices, Sa, (...), etc. (...) them to
retire to the sands by the same way they entered ^by it may ^e conc^ed they had
full view of our new (...), there they perceiving the (...) of those that
pursued them, turned head, and with a Musket, shot Captain Studd^r thorough
the arm, and then made away, none of ours in case to follow the^, by reason of
their Cauallary, whereof we have none in town had this error been committed by
any English Commander, I durst have adventured to have made an Almanac of his
end.

This fire burned outragiously for the (...) days and nights without ceasing,
viz. from Thursday night, till Sunday night, neither could our soldiers come
well to quench it, the enemies Cannon still giving against them, when they
offered themselves thereto, neither could the ^lowes of the sea, wa^ing at every
tide far above the height of the fire extinguish the same. For it had gotten
passage into the ground, and there found matter of continual nourishment, by
such timber and posts as were lodged there, for y^ support of the (...) of the
piece, and though it had been quenched sund^y ti^es* yet does it burst out
again, ^ on Tewsday last I saw it burn again my self. Our chiefest enginors
are of opinion that the sand heated with such extremity, by fury of the fire
in the pile of Rise, is the chiefest cause of the long continuance thereof, by
this fire the Faurbray, and the side of the Sandhill lying toward the sea,
were both (...) open again to the mercy of all weathers and violence of the
enemies, in far worse sort then it was before, and this was another instance of
(...), etc.

Another is, and that not y^ (...) passage to allow for his ^. was, we were and
are still many contrary na io^s in town, English, ^rench, Scots, Wallons, and
Duch, and thereby a hotch-pot of contrary and dis^nant humors. A natural
instinct as y^ world knows having disioyntment of affections, yet hitherto
we have had good (...), and by his Lordships well tempered command, all humors
well tuned, nevertheless since the (...) had formerly been practicing by
sowing of factions amongst us, his L. to pr^uent the worst, laid these reasons
as one step to his project.

Further his Lordship had 4 little fortresses called ^eddotts in hand at the
same time upon the Rampart of the old town, for the better securing thereof
with few men if the enemy should attempt us, for those little skonses would have
been their scourges upon their entry, (each on flanking other) and one
guardable against their fury with few men, for besides their Ramparts they now
are fenced about with heighty and very strong pallizadoes, these begun works
lay open and nothing near ^shed, and this was another branch of his Lordships
^eares.

After al these comes the maine which was, as his Lordship was certainly
informed, that the Archduke was resolved that night to attempt (...) manner
following, viz. The count de Bukquoy, who commands the forces on the
East Side of the town, was to give onset at the North-east rauelling of the
old town upon a low water which served that time exceeding well for their
purpose falling out about 6 of the clock at night.

Then from the West they purposed to try us by the Sandhill, and in two places
more of the old Town viz. the port dupied which is a small rauelling in a
counterscarp, lying West North-west from the town, and is indeed a place of
great inport for the keeping of the Towne-dich full with water, and to prevent
the enemies passage to escape our maine Rampart, and this place by fury of the
sea, and rage of their Cannon, lay then merely open and not tenable by any
means.

Their other places where to come on, were our outward works, lying South and
by West from the town, called the South square, the Poulder and the West
square, from which last work commonly called the Colonels work, they had
about 3 weeks before been gallantly repulsed in the night by our guardants,
being all English, and driven to return with far less blood, then they
brought thither.

Another reason which was very powerful with his Lordship, was a noble and
religious care and sense to spare the (...) of so much Christian blood as in
all (...), (if the (...) to carry (...), by the (...) ^urie) must have (...)
shed on both sides.

Invested with these extremes of impendant dangers, his Lordship after many
bitter trauerses through his great heart y^ scorns to stoop, to the mightiest
enemy whosoever, found that nevertheless the be^, and most a^ured passage to
general sa^etie, was to temporize with the enemy by a parley, for dolus an
virtus quis in host requirat, till the finishing of his works in hand, and the
arrival of his succors howrely expected, might settle him again in terms
of better assurance.

But by the way, I had forgotten to tell you (...), that upon preco^sultation,
al our outward works above mentioned, were to be abandoned, ^ all our men draw^
into the town, and so they were, for as I said before, the (...) of our
numbers was such as came far short of a proportionable guard for the town
alone, yet through the slacknes of the states, his Lordship had formerly been
driven to extenuate his said works to half their greatness, to make them
guardable by few men, for they do much import the safety of the town.

Now (...), to lay our weakness thus open to the enemy, to his so great
advantage and incouragment, and notwithstanding to be little or nothing
secured thereby, what a gaul and excrutiament it might be to his L. those that
know the tempe^ of his spirit, can easily conjecture.

So summoning as I said in sort before, all his considerations together, he
fled to that refuge necessity showed him to be the most assured. And her (...)
called all his Captains of the several nations together, or so many of them
as were not in guard, the time would endure ^o delay. This being toward
evening on the Sunday formerly mentioned, they all hearing his conceit,
applaude it, and the Netherlanders more forward then all the rest do almost
press him with importunities to diligent the execution thereof, offering
themselves to be agents therein, but shranke in the wetting immediately: which
coldness and refusal of theirs, had almost quite (...) the clew of their late
resolution. In the ^nde Captain Ogle Lieutenant Colonel to his Lordship, and
Capt. Fairfax are destined to be the men, as ^ostages only for such as the
Archduke should send hither to trea^ with his Lordship.

And so immediately upon sound of one of our drums from the port D^pied,
after loss of some breath by Capt. Ogle who was unheard, called to them a good
space in Spanish from thence, they were roused to attention: being (as was
coniectured) busy about their enterptise, and so, not so attentive as it is
like otherwise they would have been, considering how near and dangerous
neighbors we are one to the other.

All this tedious discourse, I have been bold to trouble your worship
withal, only as a lantern to give you the (...) light I could, for the
through understanding of our estate every way, and now I will bring the acting
of this project before you upon the stage, ^ching your pardon if I shall seem
taxable for idle lightness, by inserting accidental jests in a subject of such
weight and seriousnes: for many times, Ducun^ (...) ^ria ^ga.

His Lordship as I have before declared, having made tender of his harsh
tasting parley, I name it harsh in regard of his constraint, thereto finding
the enemy very tractable, and exceeding prompt to entertain the same, did
without any loss of time the same evening send away to them the two forenamed
Captains, Ogle and Fairfax, upon faith given for their safety and return. A
truce and general cessation of all hostility on both ^des being promised
during the time of their treaty for land matters, but no further. Hereby our
abandoned works remained neutrall, although quited by us, yet not lawful to
be possessed by the^. Upon the arrival of our Hostages in the enemies army,
they were br^ught to his Alie^e at his ^onse of Albertus, he for welcome veiled
his hat sparingly, bad them welcome, demanded of what nati^n they were,
whether they had instruction from our General, to treat with him about this
place, and upon their answer thereto negatiuely, he asked them further if
there were not fraud intended. They answer as Ignorants of any, and that they
are only sent as hostages for such as his highness should please to sen^ to his
Lordship about the proposed (...): and so with a second, but more ^ender
respect with his Hat, they were carried from his presence to the lodging of Don
Augustino de (...), a gray and grave headed Spanyard (...) of the Castle of
Antwarp, (...) C^maunder of the (...) forces at y^ w^st-end of this town, a
gentleman of most acco^pli^ vertoes, by their applauses: in the chamber of this
youth^ull old gallant (for to his gray head he wears a green ha^ite) they
were lodged, the place being beautified with faue hangings and reciprocal
correspondent in the (...). By all the gallants. (...), Italians, and (...)
else of other (...) of any respect, they were entertained, and (...) ^y (...),
and ^auing withal many watchful ^es, and (...) ears on (...): but the
gentlemen both of them, have (...) so (...) well qualified, that neither of
them will ^sily (...) ^y any vna^dnes for taxation of (...), (...) were not
suffered to have further view of any (...), or (...), then where they passed,
neither were they free of a (...), (...) guard over them.

Whilst these flourishes of hostile court^sie (...) (n^ doubt with hope of a
speedy good bargain) and (...) upon our Capt. in the enemies Camp, ^ne
Matheo (...) (...) nor of Sluise, General o^ the Archdukes artillery, and one
of his He (...) his (...) himself at table.
Counsel of war, together with one Matheo Anthonias Sargent mayor to Simon
Anthuzino governor of Antwe^p town, both Spaniards and men of prempt and
smart spiritt^s, and Judicial reach, came into the town, but his Lordship
proiecting still the means to win time, and how to entertain delays, did
as was imagined (upon y^ approach of the two Spaniards) attended over the water
at west, with about 60 horse, cause an alarm to be taken, for he (...) where
he saw them all plainly, and laid hold on the manner of their ^mming for his
advantage, charging them with breach of pr^mise, and other soulder-like (...),
and so (...) neither speak with them, nor (...) them, but gave per^ptorie
(...), that they should be forthwith returned ^ack, (...) they were condu^ed
back to the place where they (...), ^ut the sea being grown which his Lordship
k^we well enough, (...) them passage, and thereupon back again into the town
they came fraught with new hopes of better intertainme^t (y^ heat of their
desire ^ing up the eyes of their judgment) his L. being advertised hereof, gave
present order they should be sent (...) by the East.

Now sir you may please to know that Serano being scarce well pleased (not
^ithstanding the large walk between the ^onse Albertus, and their tre^ches)
grew some what weary, and desired to stay in town all night, but that would
not be granted, and so the Sergiant Mayor of the town (Captain Carpenter by
name, and one Captain Clear a Scotsh man) conuoyde them through the town,
with every stepp up the kneens (at least) in durte and mire, so as the tired
Spaniard began to endure a breach in his patience upon the Spanish bulwark,
which lies at the East End of the town, a special Maguizine of durte and
myres, standing up to the kn^es, he desired some Tobacco for his refreshing,
exclaiming in French, Ah la mechant vil^e de Ostend, but in stead thereof
(because there was none to be had) he, and his associates were presented with 4
potts of good English Beer, which went down merrily, and so thoroughly
be-durted, they were brought to the Sentinel of Cauallarie on the East-sands,
and out of their extremes and my^e wearines, they lodged at East all night,
with Count De Bucquoy, not being able to recover the Archdukes quarter before
the next day at Noone. And hereby so much time was gotten.

After the return of the two Spaniards to their Duke, the same men were again
appointed to try his Lordshippe once more, and sending word over to us
thereof, were admitted to come, (our Captains all this while remaining with
them upon faith given as aforesaid.) The Sergiant Mayor of the town demanding
which way he should bring them in, his Lordshippe willed him to guide them
where they might come soft enough, for fear of embossing their feet on the
hard stones: Saying withal, that besides their durtie walk, they should come
to as cold a bargain as ever they met wtal in their liu^s.

Upon their ent^e (which was upon Monday night) they (...) directly brought to
his Lordship, being in his Chamber, after enterchang of complements, his
Lordship began (...) ^cuse sor the rudenes he had committed the night before,
^sing he had been vn-ciuill, charging (nevertheless, the occasion thereof upon
their strange manner of coming over, and se according to the Law of (...)
which is Que le battu payera L. Amend, they were plagued and must besides
confess themselves worthy thereof.

They being ho^ on the chest, seem (...) to digest that, and say, now they hope
his Lordship and they should agree: he (...), The agreement is easily made if
his highness will raise his siege, and suffer us (as his poor neighbors) to
live by him in peace. Serano replied, that's not his errand thither, but hopes
Que vous serez de nostre bands, his Lordshippe (to cut off further
progression in this discourse) tells them after this wearie-some journey, it is
more ^tting to entertain them with mean refreshing, then with serious
expostulation, and thereupon intreates them to Supper, whereto they yeilde. And
although it were their Christmasse even, and thereby fasting day, they did not
forbear eating fish, eggs, and such ionkets, besides as a town so long
besieged could afford, taking out in Clarret wine what they lacked in meat.
Serano drinking for his share above fifty two glasses of wine, besides (...),
answering every man in the cup, and yet gave no manner of appearance of
yiedling any way to distemper. During their sitting at supper, many smart
testes were bandied with good dexterity on both sides. Amongst others, I
remember Serano plotting a passage by circumsta^ce of words, to discourse of
their perfect business, gave his Lordship occasion to tell him that his Altesse
desired all, and the States would willingly part with nothing. The Spanyard
replied, that the Archduke demanded but his own: to that his L. told him,
he had never studied the Laws to Judge of men's titles, but that in England
we do commonly hold possession, 11 points of the 12, the law is bounden
withal, etc. Another was, his Lordshippe told them, that now his highness
having continued his siege with such admiration and fame, as that in this age
and compass of the world, the like has not been heard off, and driven us to
abandon our outward works, and to retire our selves altogether into our town,
he might with great honor arise and leave us, and thereby prevent the ruin of
his army, which through wet lodging, and continual labor, must needs be
extremely decayed, and also prevent the effusion of much Christian blood
otherwise.

To this Serano replied, that since his L. had with such honor as was
applauded throughout all Christendom, so long preferued this place against so
powerfullan enemy, and that as they all knew most certainly, many extremities
had overtaken him, whereby he was enforced to withdraw himself wholly into
that little ruinous nest, it could be no manner of blemish to him to y^ld, etc.

Thus ^yther of them by contrary intended imputations labored to extol his
own carriage and praises: many other prompt counterbuffes were passed, which
(to avoid tediousnes) I ouer-passe: after supper the S^anyards (wearied with
their late myrie iournies) were by his Lordshippe conducted to their lodging,
where with a slend^r guard for fashion sake, before the outwardest doors of
the house, they rested til morning. Before which (...)* Ships of war ^den
with 6 companies of Zeland soldiers arrived in the road, before the town,
which the enemy without, se^ng it, is easily to judge whether he was offended
or no. He^eupon, b^times on the Tuesdaye morning they sent in post for his L.
resolution, and Serano himself (although ignorant of our supply) importuned
his L. for answer, etc. which he rece^ues forthwith sounding to this effect,
viz.

That it was true that some wants through the long contrariety of the wind
and other accidents had over taken him, and thereby he enforced to m^ke ose of
his wi^, to hel^e ^imselfe b^ winning of time, till his turn was otherwise
sor^ed, and that now since the states had been mindful of him, the wind
prospicious, and his necessity supplied, he could not in honor proceed to
trafique with them any further, neither had more to say to them, until a new
extremity, (if any might happily lay new hold on him) should occasion him
thereto, hoping his highness as a virtuous and worthy Prince would not take it
ill, that as a martial man he had practiced and compassed the best means for
the preservation of his honor and safety by the ordinary and usual course
of men of war.

The Spaniards (having the fair hopes of his fruitful harvest thus quite
blasted with this cold nipping answer) did nevertheless in the most temperate
manner he could, smother and suppress his almost choking discontent: for he
dreamed by y^ negotiating of this business, to have made himself famous to
ensuing ages, and so with this cold breake-fast (in stead of his Christmasse
pie) he forthwith departed, leaving his companion behind him, till our
Captain should be returned homehis passage back was by boat at South-west
from the Polder Rauelling, where he could see almost no part of our
fortification, and upon his repair into their trenches, Capt. Fairfax was sent
home, and the Lieutenant stayed, so as they held the more worthy person. About
4 of the clock the same day, Captain Ogle came to y^ sands at west against the
port Dupied, accompanied with the great Marshall of the enemies Camp, and
with one Owen an Engl^h fug^tiue, staying for the Spanish Seriant Mayor here in
^owne. He having dined with my L. after the duch entertai^ment was conducted
out of town by Capt. Studder to y^ same place where Serano had been formerly
imboated. There was a little straining coursie* who should be passed first. But
the ^utenant Collonell stood not much thereupon, although the worthi^r person
and the subject of a far more absolute and greater Prince, the reason (as I
learned) being because we had been the petitioners, and so the Spaniard carried
it.

This I especi^ly observed being prese (...), and seeing the acting thereof, ^s
I (...) also that his L. (although he speaks Spanish very redily) did
notwithstanding use only y^ French tongue with the two Spaniardes, which (all
the Duch Captains understanding) the^ knew of all that passed, and thereby all
(...) prevented. The truth is, the boat lay^ on our side where the Spanya^d
was, and the water then ebbing, carried it with a swift course to the enemies
side, so that (as it then appear^d) when they had given the ad^we on both
s^des, and Capt. Ogle entered into the boat, the sh^ps could not return
against the stream, but driving with the same, landed him on our countersca^p,
where he thought best, and here ceased our Jubilie, I call it a Jubilie, for
during this cessation of hostility, I think there issued out of the neighbor
enemy towns above ^coo Burgers with their wives, etc. to come to the
Archdukes camp, walking up and d^wne the sands and trenches of the enemy,
very near the town, as though we had been all good friends, and so did their
soldiers likewise: but ours kept within of purpose to conceal our weakness, and
notwithstanding faith enterchangably given to forbear all violence during the
treaty, yet did out whole troops hold continual, and general guardes
without relying upon any promise at all. All this while our works in the old
Town were advanced with all diligence, and secrecy possible, and made
defensible before our Mart ended. Our new forces landed also this day,
between 12 and 2 of the clock in the culde town, in despite of the enemies
Cannon, without any more loss then the hurt of the two shippers, and as I can
learn of two soldiers, but none killed, nor those mortally wounded.

And yet to give the enemy his due by saying the full truth, they were more
then bountiful of powder and shot, to hinder our men's landing. All this while
we remained quiet on both sides without shot little or great, but the next
morning (being Wednesday) they first opened the windows of their wonted
displeasure; it being my Lords pleasure, that every man in town should be
quiet, till the enemy should give occasion to the contrary, and then we
resaluted them with good Cannon, and so all things stand on their former
frame, all our outward works rep^ssessed and guarded as before, and so we
live daily expecting more supplies from the States, that our poor men may
now at last be refreshed in Holland after their long and miserable toil.

We have understood of late by an Italian gentleman one of their Centinells
Perdues, who was brought prisoner into town, that the Archduke is highly
offended with his counsel of war for diuerting him from the execution of his
resolution, which was to have attempted us on the Sunday night, (so often
spoken of before) with 6000 men, etc. that by reason of the extremity of his
passion, few of them dare come in his presence, for preventing his opportunity
by their dissw^sions: and besides that, he is no less displeased to have been
so mocked by his Lordship.

For the future, if the S^tes find themselves able, and have withali a will to
continue the charge, which the defense of this place has already, and will
still draw upon them: (the Archduke continuing his siege by reliening it with
competent numbers of well affected soldiers, and other needful provisions)
there is yet no appearance of danger, nor cause to fear the enemies
preuayling: but if they slack sail, and give the Duke such an other
opportunity (as he had now of late) they, and all the world besides, may be
assured he will make his best use thereof.

By Cannon there remains small hope for him, if the States fail not to send
Rise-wood to repair therewith in the night what he spoyleth in the day: for,
with Rise and sand mingled, we work chiefly on both sides, we have alre^dye
endured about 161500 Canonodoes, and yet all ou^ bastions, and defenses still
firm and tenable, having only their outward faces (...) discountenanced by the
fury of the many shot most of them have endured, especially the sandhill,
which is so farced with bullets, that (our men laboring to drive in spiked
pallizadoes) do often stumble upon 6 or 8 in one hole together: and their
piles, or pallizadoes often hindered in their entrance by the abundance of
bull^ts lodged in their way.

To vnderminevs it is not possible, so long as we can hold what we have, for
to the Landward lie our outworks, to prevent their approches that way, and our
other places of passage are washed very high every Tide, and so the sea
affords them little time to work against us, where it challenges passage.
Besides this, all our Bulwarks looking toward their trenches are united, and
prepared for all such accidents.

Then, either fury, faction, or famine must open him way, for fury here is
little cause of fear, if (as I said before) the States can, and will furnish
their town with sufficient numbers of men.

For faction, the vigilancie, and (...) of the Commander, being a man of sound
understanding, trained in this occupation, may easily break those
impostumations, as hitherto his Lordship has done, to the great increase of
his honor, and better approbation of the soundnes of his judgment: for the
enemy made an English man, one Simon Co^bye, an instrument to work for him
that way: but I pr^sume that Conisbye by the rack, and smart of the whip at the
gallows foot, has learned a lesson to seek some other trade to thrive by,
and the fellow was in my charge to keep, and sound by questioning, and
expostulations, and thereby I know the managing of that business.

And to be famished (unless both the states, and England abandon us) were
very strange: for (notwithstanding all y^ battries the enemy has either at
East, or West, on the sands or piles of the old Haven, or else where) we
have, when the wind serves, some nights 40 sails of Hoyes and Smackes come
in together, and scarce one man hurt. We have furthermore a new haven almost
(...), where night and day Ships may pass at pleasure. Besides, if both these
should fail, the states may (with long boats which they call sloupes) land
any thing in the old town, as they did their Zeland soldiers of late, marie
this place serves only for such small open boats, but for no Hoyes nor Boats
of burden.

And so (...) for a Conclusion, if the states stand upon tear^ of honor, and
start not aside like a broken bow (it having ^een their fashion to grow weary
of such chargeable nurse children, as they term it here) you see many
apparent probabilities for their holding of this town against the Arch^ke, for
a longer time then is expected: he will wast himself before it, and yet all
the charge of his army and of all provisions is borne by the country, who
have, and do still furnish him very pl^ntifull with all necessaries. Besides,
the recovery of this town would be so beneficial unto him, and such ease to
his subjects, as they have good reason to try their uttermost means to carry
it: for besides, that it would absolutely free all y^ sea coasts, and country
within of roads, and incursions, wherewith they are exceedingly infested by
this town, and withal give the Archduke good con^eniencie for the lodging of
his galleys and other shipping with little cost. It would enable him to bring
at the least 6000 men more into the field yearly, then he now does or can. For
he is constrained to hold many guarrisons in skonses builded here and there
in the land, to block up this town, which require many men for their defense,
and draw on for their wages, and by ^ortification, etc. a mighty charge. These
men, and charges I say, if he could prevail here, would be converted to other
uses, and a spacious country of fertile ground now ouer-flowed, and serving to
no use, in few years wholly recovered and made profitable, and all
contributions (which the fear of this guarrison enforces) from the Boores
quite cut off.

As I was about the shutting up of this tedious and ill digested discourse,
News came that the Archduke has now at last pacified, and reconciled all his
mutinous soldiers which have been long time in Brabant, as at Derst, Herentalls
and other places thereabouts, holding for none but for themselves (their
discontent growing from want of pay, which it seems the ^ke has not given
them contentment of.) And that those forces being near 5000, and marching this
way to reenforce the enemies Camp, and to force us if they can, the issue,
time will bring forth. Mean time, with mo^ humble remembrance of duty to
your (...), (...) the (...) ever to bless and prospe^ you (begging pardon for
this ^rtreame ^ediousnes) I take leave. From (...) this Saint Steenens day
after the old style 1601. scribed in have for the most part by candle light.

His Lordship (to leave no stone of advantage (...)) causes every soldier to
come doubly, armed to the watch, every Musketier bringing withal a Pike, and
every armed man carrying a musket, to serve with either as need shall (...).

His own travails (unless he had a body of brass, being continued any long
time) must needs draw him into sickness for there pass few nights, wherein
he walks not abr^ad, or watches not the most part thereof, and in the day
time h^ is so continually possessed with business, that he has no time to
sleep, and few men feed more sparingly. All these balanced together will
confirm I doubt (...) less^ th^n I say.

The declaration of the desparate (...) made since, by the said (...) forces,
for winning of the ^ld (...).
THe (...) the (...) of this part would be (...) his friends. forgot not
presently to write thereof into (...), Spai^, (...) (...), (...) unto (...) his
great (...) hope (...), to (...) the strong town of O^-end, but (...) he had
(...), (as is (...)) (...) with greater wr^th against (...) town then at any
(...). And (...) to (...) with his Colonels and Captains, what course (...)
might best take in this so weighty a cause, and revenge this (...) done to him
and his whole estate. After much (...) and debating (contrary to the opinion
of some of his (...) approved, Captains, and Counselors) it was concluded,
that withal his forces, a desperate attempt should be made at one in^ant, as
well upon the trenches and counterscarps without the ^owne, as upon the (...)
Haven, for the winning of the (...) ^wne, or at the least wise of the sand
hill: The order of which enterprise with the day, and time being now resolved
upon, (...) Wallo^, Germans, and others as had before mutined in diverse
places, were with money paci^ed and commanded to the Camp, Ladders, Shouels,
Spades, Pickaxes, and all other necessaries were provided.

In the mean time the Archduke (to help the error of his former writing, and
persuading himself that the town should not be able to withstand y^ fury of
this forcible enterprise) sent posts into all places (as before) advertising
his friends again of this resolution, and that he made no doubt, but within
ten or fourteen days to have the town at his command.

On Monday therefore, being the (...). day of December last An. 1601, being the
day appointed for this great attempt, An Italian (who was among the rest
appointed in y^ first ranks to begin this charge, at the ^ld Haven, and knowing
the action to be most desperate, and therefore small hope left him ever to
return with his life) ^ed from the enemies Camp, and with his Rapier in his
mouth swoome into the Haven, and being received into the town, declared unto
the Lord General, that the same day about 3 of the clock in the afternoon,
when the water was ebbed from the walls, the enemy would with all his forces
make his attempt both at the ^ld Haven, and at y^ works without the (...) with
ten Thou^and men, and that he was ^ed thither, to (...) his life as is before
^ayd: declaring farther; that it was resolved to renew the assault the two next
^aies following, and affirmed that if they were the first day valiantly
replused, there was no doubt to be had that the (...) would be brought to the
like banquet theother two days*

Sir (...) (judging ^fore that the enemy had some such intent, by reason that
he did all the same day as in y^ night before continue shooting against the
Sand-hill and por^ Dupied) had alredie given order to the Captains for the
^ing of the walls, trenches, and Counterscarps, and caused pieces of Ordinance
to be removed, and planted 7 great (...) pieces upon the ^ance of the Haven,
which were well laden with square and (...) shot, not omitting any things that
a wise and vigilant Commander ought in so weighty a cause to ^esee,
encouraging his people to play the parts of good soldiers, and to bestow their
shot well, and among the thickest of the enemies when they should make their
approach.

When the hour appointed was come, and the water fallen, as is before written,
the enemy marched toward the old Haven 40 men abre^, the foremost rancks
carried Shouels, Spades, and Pick-axes, the next carried Ladders, after them
^wed Targets, armed men, and Muskets, all marched (...) with such resolution,
as if they had made account to have (...) no resistance at all, but they were
as galla^tly, and with like cor^ re^ed, and at al places answered with loss of
their best blo^d, as well without the town, as at the old (...), where the
murdering (...) caused the enemies to fall, as rotten ripe apples from the
trees in a mighty storm. And although they could not enter the haven, but they
must go in water up to the knees, they pressed forward, and those which came
behind, put forward the foremost: But suddenly (as sir Frauncis Veere had before
ordained) two sluices were opened, the one giving way to the land waters, and
the other to the waters of the ditches about the town, by reason whereof many
of the enemies (not able to keep their footing) were drowned, and the others
stood in water up to their Nauels, so that their shot served to no use, for y^
their ^der (...) hereby wet, but were forced to fight with their (...): the
fight continued on both sides with great fury, and ^esolution, until the
darkness of the evening forced them to retire, whereof they were not a little
glad, for the slaughter was very great on the enemies side, most (...),
Duchess and other Nations to the number of 1500, besides many that were
wounded. Many of the enemies had made (...) of bread and cheese tied behind
them to their girdles with a piece of match, thinking therewith to help
themselves for a day or two (if need should so require) after they had gotten
the sand hill as they made full account, and there to secure themselves from
the shot of the town for a time, until they might with greater force and
opportunity obtain the old town. In this assault at all places, there were
not above 40 of the town soldiers stain and hurt: the Lords name be blessed
therefore.

In this assanlt the enemies horsemen were appointed to follow the footmen at
the heels, and were commanded by the Duke not to suffer them to retire, but to
force the^ still forward on their enterprise, which they forgot not to
accomplish: but as it should seem not altogether with their own security,
for some of the horses with their saddells and bridels have ^ince (...) taken
up at Sluice, Flushing, West* cappell, and other places of Zeland, as it pleased
the wind and (...) to (...) them.

The Lord General slept little the (...), but was busied in (...) and
repairing (...) ^ding to the the was re^e, doubting (...) would the next day
renew his attempt, (...) the (...) ^ted not any good will, (...) could not
(...) to (...) so unkind an (...): Yet such as (...) of Fla^ders report that
y^ (...) had appointed (...) ^day la^ ^ast being the xij* day of this month
(...) upon (...) town withal his forces, and to that end had provided 2000*
(...) of proof. (...) the enemies soldiers unwilling to come (...) desperate
(...). have denied there service, so that a mutiny is (...) in the enemies
Camp, 200 and (...) are (...) apprehended and (...) of the ringleaders (...)
whereof we shall shortly (...) further.

In the mean time let all good Christians praise God for these his wonderful
victories, and with humble and hearty prayer without ceasing, de^re him to
continue these his loving favors toward his (...) afflicted Church. And
contrariwise to confound and overthrow all the deseings of this obstinate and
bloud-thirstie Archduke, with all others his adherents and partakers, who seek
and practice all means possible (as ^es both by day and night) to (...), and
(...) the blood of the little flock of Jesus Christ, Amen.

FINIS.

