News from Vienna the.5. day of August.1566. of the strong Town and Castle
of Iula in Hungary, xl. miles beyond the river Danubius, which was cruelly
assaulted by the great Turk, but now by Gods mighty working relieved, and the
said Turk marueylouslye discomfited and overthrown. Translated out of hye
Almaine into English, and printed in Augspurge by Hans Zimmerman.

woodcut of a battle

Imprinted at London by John Awdeley, dwelling in little Britain street
without Aldersgate. The.21. of September. 1566.

News from Vienna the.5. day of August.1566. of the Turks overthrow:
AFter that the Emperor of Turkey had besieged with an army of thirty thousand
horsemen and footmen, the famous town and strong Castle of Iula in Hungary,
lying.xl. dutch miles beyond the river Danubius, which City had by the space
of.vj. weeks sustained many grievous assaults: God through his great mercy and
goodness so comforted the said town of Iula and the poor Christians therein,
at their earnest prayers, that the Turk with all his host was driven back, by
the hands of the General called Keretshim Laslawe and his valiant company. Who
not only defended the said Town, but also constrained the cruel Turks to
retire, to their great shame and confusion, with the slaughter of a great number
of their Turkish rabble. For the which the euerliuyng God be praised for ever.
The manner of their overthrow was this.

As the foresaid General Keretshim did se his advantage, with Captain George
and other horsemen of Schesians and Hungary, he set upon the arereward of the
Turks, and killed about.8. thousand of them, and took also some of their
artillery, and followed them so fast, that the Turks were constrained to flee
into a marrish ground, and to break the wheels of the rest of their
artillery, to save them selves: which the Christians also took, and have
rescued and taken besides from the Turks a great number of Christian
prisoners, and th^rewyth a very rych bootye.

The like also has done that valiant man Magotsrhie the Captain of Erla, the
which making toward the Turks, did encounter with the Tertarians, setting most
valiantly upon them, and killed about eight hundred of them.

A few days past the Earl of Serin did encounter with a Turkish Captain
called Begen, the which Captain then had with him a thousand fresh horsemen
then coming out of Turkye, to go to a town called Fynffekyrchen. Which Earl
did set upon them in the night, and killed the Captain, and took.vjij. Camels,
and.viii. Moyles laden with treasure, and got also two read Gwydons, with a
whole great piece of rych cloth of gold, and also a very fair and strange
Jewel or token of the field. This foresaid Earl did send unto the Emperors
Majesty to Vienna for a present, the foresaid Captains horse, the which was
not one ^y a v^ry fair one and good, but also betrapped and decked most
rychly. For first the poniel and the back part of the saddel was covered over
with plate of fine Arabic gold, and the rest of the saddel beside the sytting
place, was dressed with silver plate very fire gilded, which sitting place was
covered with a fine purple velvet, and ye trappers and bridle beset with little
Turkies and Rubies. The Earl would very feign have saved the said Captain,
but the turkish Ianyssery defended them selves so manfully, thinking to have
carried away safelye their Captain, yt the said Earl with his company was
constrained to kill both them and their Captain.

Also this valiant Earl of Serin has got amongst other great prices from the
Turks.xv. thousand Turkish and Hu^garish Ducates, which money was brought for
the payment of the Turkishe men of war, which are in the town called
Fynffkyrchen. Thus not only this said Earl had got to himself rich and great
prices, but also his Soldiers have met with very rich prays and spoils.

And now to declare the Mahometical and turkish cruelty of these hellish Turks,
which they use against the Christians (which cannot be declared without weeping
and sorowfulnes of mind) is this in effect. Where ever they overcome the
Christians and take them captives, they take the young and lusty men tying them
to their horses and famishe them to death. The old men and women they cut in
pieces, deflouring the maidens and young women very villanously. The sely
Infants and young Babes lying in their cradels smyling upon them, they take out
very cruelly and stick them on long poles and so gore them to death without
pitye or mercy, and this very spitefully they do in the sight of the Infantes
Parents. The residue of them which they keep alive being men, they use as
be^ites for all kind of drudgery and toil, more cruelly entreating them then
their brute beasts. To the women and children which they keep alive, they use
such Sodomish abomination and tyranny as may not for shame be known, nor
without hearty sorrow be declared. Wherefore it behooves al Christian Princes and
good Christians to wythstand this cruel Turckish enemy, and to set to their
helpyng hands, such as can to help to resist him with some power of war:
and such other good Christians as cannot help these our Christian brethren
(so cruelly assaulted) by this kind of means: yet at least to help them with
their godly prayers. For if thus he proceed forward to take the upper land,
it will redound to the great plague and ruin of whole Christendom. Wherefore
that thus it may not come to pas, let us not cease to call upon our heavenly
father for his mighty defense, who so mercifully has heard the prayers of his
poor afflicted children. And also give him hartye thanks for this great
overthrow of this his Christ's and our cruel enemy.

A Prayer and thankesgeuyng, for the defense of the Christians against the
cruel Turk.
O Eternal God and most merciful father we give thee hearty thanks for this thy
mighty woorking in overthrowing that cursed and cruel Turk, the enemy of thy
dear son Christ Jesus, and his dear Christians, and for relieuing his poor
afflicted members, in delivering them from his and their bloody hands:
Wherefore (dear father) we beseech thee to continue in this thy merciful
defending them, and in overthrowing his tirannical power, that they hereby may
well feel and know, that there is none other God besides thee and thy son
Jesus Christ our Savior. Preserve (O Lord) those godly and Christian Princes
which venture their lives against this thy enemy, as namely the Emperors
Majesty with his two brethren, and all his whole nobility, giving them
prosperous succes and victorious conquest. Grant this O Father for thy dear
sons sake Jesus Christ our Savior. So be it.


