A strong DEFENSE OF THE marriage of Pryestes, against the Pope Eustachians,
and Tatanites of our time, made dialogue wise by John Veron, betwixt Robin
Papyste, and the true Christian.

I. CORIN. VII. For avoiding of fornication, let every man have his wife, and
every woman her husband.

HEBRE. XIII. Wedlock is honorable among all, and the bed undefiled, but
whoremongers and adulterers god will judge.

Imprynted at London in Fletestrete nere to Saint Dunstons Church by Thomas
Marshe.

To the worshypful, Master George Basford Leather sealer, Citezen of London.
etc. John Veron wysheth grace, peace of conscience, and increase in all
godlynes from God the father, through his Son Jesus Chyrste our Lord.
FOr as much as many do yet now at this time, in the which it has pleased
God our heavenly father, of his mere mercy and goodness to visyte this
floryshynge realm again, with his holy and sacred word and with the gospel of
his son Jesus Christ, kycke against the lawful marryage of the faithful
ministers of the church holding still opinion that it is not lawful for them,
which are preachers of gods word, and do minyster the sacraments, to be
couppled in Matrimonye: A brief sum of the whole doctrine that is taught in
this book.
I have thought good, somewhat to write of this matter, and to prove by
manyfeste scriptures, and by the autorytyes of the old and ancient writers,
that al they which have not ye gift of chastity may lawfully, and without any
offense of god mary, Hebre, xiii.
yea, although they had by foolyshe and fond vows not commanded of god,
bound them selves to the contrary, that so they may avoid fornication with all
kind of vnclenlines, and kept them selves in that holy estate, undefiled
members of our savior Jesus christ. First, and foremoste these are the words
of thapostell: Marriage is honourabell among all, and the bed undefiled. Whereby
this apostel does admonish us, that as incontinency, is a disease commen to men
of all sorts, and degrees, so marriage being the remedy against it, is offered
by the free mercy and goodness of god, to al manner of men without any
respect, The moderate use of a woman in lawful Matrimony is reputed for no
sin.
and that the moderat use of a woman in lawful Matrimony, is not reputed for
sin, for which cause, he calls the bed of the godly married, undefiled.
Whereunto does that godly aunciente father agree, I mean Paphnutius, who in
the council of Nice withstode those, Sozo. li. i. echi. cap. xxiii. Socrate
constan. Epiphanus. li. ii. cap. xiiil.
yt would have forbidden marriage unto the minysters of ye church, confessing
wedlock to be honorabel, and the cohabytacion of man with his lawful wife to
be chastity. Again, this holy Apostel in his first epistel to the Corinthia^s
says plainly thus: let every man have his wife, and let every woman have
her housbande, i. Cor. vii.
for avoiding of fornication. Which saying, as it ought not to be extended to
those, that have of God, the syngular gift of chastity, so it pertains
generally to al them, that wantinge the same, have need of the remedy, which
the creatoure of all, knowing best the complexcion and nature of men, did
institute and ordeine, saing: Gene, ii.
It is not good for man to be alone. And whereas ye enemies, do affirm, that
this ought to be understood, are unmarried? If a man did use this kind or that
kind of meat, and the physician should say unto him: see that ye use still that
meat, and it shall preserve you from this sickness, or that sickness that ye
are inclinde and given to: if any other which used not that diet, and yet felt
him self subject to that disease, heard this Phisicions counsel, would not
he if he tendered his health, think that this were spoken unto him also? Even
so if the Apostel should say, to them, that be alredye married: See that ye
abide, and contynew still in this holy state of Matrimony, vsinge with all
thankefulnes the remedy that god has appointed for you, and ye shall thereby
avoid whoredom and uncleanliness, and consequently everlasting damnation,
which is of God prepared for whoremongers, and adulterers: Who being unmarried,
and feelynge them selves subject to fornycation (if at least they did tender
the health and salvation of their own souls) would not think this to be
spoken unto them? And that they are bound to use the same remedy against
filthiness and unclean living, i. Cor. vii.
that the married folk are commanded to use? this I am sure, That is with the
fire of concupiscence. I mean, when men's will, for lack of the gift of
chastitye does so give place, to the lust that tempts, that he can not call
upon god with a quyete conscience.
is spoken generally to al, that have not the gift of chastity. Let the
unmarried and widows, if they cannot abstain, mary, for it is better to marie
then to burn. Again if thou take a wife thou sinnest not: likewise if a
virgin mary she sins not, nevertheless such shall have trouble in their
flesh. Whereby he understands the troubles and cares of their children and
family, and other like, which do belong unto the cross that god will have to be
anexed to this estate. Similitude.
And for the which they yt be destitute and void of the gift of continency,
ought in no wise to forbear wediocke. For, that were, as if a man belng
extremely sick, should say: I have need of that Physike, but because it is
better, I will not take it, I had lyeffer dye, than to suffer it to come within
my lyppes: Who would not judge that man, to be worse than mad? But this
goodly liberty that the holy ghost did give unto all men by his holy Apostel,
who says in another place: I do not speak this, to tangle you in a snare,
is clean taken away by the tirannye of that Antichriste of Rome, who did lay
on the necks of his clergy a burdone, heavier tha^ the mount Aethna as the
commune by word goes. Whereof, Aethna is a mountain in in Scicile that
burns continuallye, and is of the Italians called mount Gibello.
many did very greuouslie complain, as it does manyfestly appear by their
own wrytinges. These are the words of Baptista Mantuanus being a Carmelite,
in the life of Hilarious being bishop of Poetiers in France.

Baptista Mantuanus in vita Hilarii.
Integritas vitae, legum prudentia, cultus
Caelituum, tutela inopum, diadema pedumque
Pictauiense tibi, dum nil mortalia euras,
Dum viuis tibi* sort tua contentus, ah omni
Ambitione procul, populo applaudente, tulerunt
Non nocuit tibi progenies, non obstitit vxor
Legitimo coniuncta toro, non horruit illa
Tempestate deus thalamos, cunabula, taedas.
Sola erat in praetio, quae nunc incognita virtus.
Sordet, et attrito viuit cum plebe cucullo,
Propterea leges, quaesunt connubia contra
Esse malas quidem perhibent, prudentia patrum
Non satis aduertit, dicunt, quid far recuset,
Quid valeat natura pati: Ceruicibus aiunt,
Hoc insuaue iugum nostris imponere Christus
Noluit: istud onus quod adhuc qua^plurima mo^stra
Fecit, ab audaci, dicunt pietate repertum.
Tutius esse volunt, qua lex diuina sinebat
Isse via, vete^rumque sequi vestigia patrum:
Quorum vita fuit melior, cum coniuge, qua^ nunc
Nostra sit exclusis thalamis et coniugis vsu.
Which verses, I will English as well as I can, following rather the sense and
meaning, then either the words or the Meter.

The integritye of life,
And of laws the science,
The worshipping of god,
And of them the defense,
Which pore and nedy were,
While thou liuedst, not caring
For worldly pomp and pride,
Nor for richesse passing,
But in all thy pilgrimage,
And life held the content,
With that which god appointed,
And from ambition went,
By this periphrase he understands the byshopryke.
Unto the have brought
Of Poetyers most famous
The myter and croissier both,
Thereat being joyous
The people that in it dweld,
Nor yet did then thy wife
Unto the by the law joined,
Which then was ryfe,
Nor thy lawefull issue,
That by her thou had had,
Hinder the any whit,
But that thou wast lad
With the charge of the flock
Which Christ so dear had bought,
For, then god in those days,
As of men well is thought
Marriage allowed,
And that to it perteyned:
For, then virtue alone,
Whereunto few attained,
Praised and allowed was,
And had in most price,
Which now unknown is,
And dwelles among lyce,
Amongst them, I mean,
That in rags do go,
And in pouertye live,
Miserye, gryefe, and woe,
Therefore, those laws, I say,
Which wedlock do debar,
To be wicked and naught,
Men in wit passing far,
Do judge, and also say,
That the forefathers prudence,
Weygh did not, nor perceive,
The hurtefull pestilence
That thereof did ensue,
And that humayne nature
Such things to bear,
Refuses, this is sure,
That Christ would never lay
On us so unpleasant
Nor yet so hard a yoke,
That strength and might do want.
Such great burden, say they,
Which breadeth man monsters, By it he understands the strange kind of
vnclenesse that was used among them.

Which to many a one,
Will be instead of wonders,
Did come and so proceed
Of bold (what should we it call?)
Arrogancye? not so:
But pitye, they do all
Or godliness term it:
Howebeit they all affirmed
All manner of men's inventions cloked under the name and title of godliness.
That surer it had been,
That way which god confyrmed
By his law to have gone,
And of the fathers ancient
The trade and steps eke,
To have followed, they meant,
Whose life, was far better,
With wife, children, and household
Than our life is now,
That wifelesse life do hold.
First and foremoste we learn by Baptyst Mantuan, who, as I said, was a
Carmelite, that Hilarious, bishop of Poetiers was married, and that neither his
wife, nor his children, yt he had by her, did let him to be a bishop. Secondly,
how that many did complain, yt they were deprived of the liberty to marye,
having the intolerable burdone of constrained chastity laid upon their
sholders, whereby many, not being able to bear it, were driven to commit those
things that were unlawful, and most detestable in gods sight. And therefore
he did right well conclude, yt the life of them in time past, which had wives
children, and housholdes, did far excede and pass in godliness, the life of
the wiuelesse clergy of his time. Siluianus also, bishop of Massilia, showing
ye matrimony is lawful for the ministers of ye church, Siluianus. li. v. De
prouidentia dei.
does speak thus of the forbidding of it. Nouum pro sus est conuersionis genus,
licita non faciunt, illicita committunt. Temperant a coniugio, et non temperant
a rapina. Quid agis stulta persuasio? peccatae enterdizit deus, non matrimonia.
That is to say. Truly this a new kind of conversion. They do not those things
that be laweful, and commit those things, that be unlawful. They do abstain
from wedlock, but they do not abstain from rapine. What do thou foolish
persuasion? God has forbidden sins, and not matrimony. Your deeds do not
agree with your studies. ye yt say, that ye are the workers of virtues, ought not
to be the friends of sins. This is not a conversion, but an auersion or
turning away. Ye yt a great while a go, as ye report goes have forsaken the
work of honest matrimonye, cease at lenghte from wickedness. Polidorus
Virgilius de inuentoribus rerum. li. v. cap. iiii.
So far Saluianus, unto whom Polidorus Vergilius may be ioygned, who in his
books De inue^toribus rerum writes on this manner: This I am able to say, that
it is so far of, that this co^streigned chastity, did pass the chastity of
married folks, that rather no enormytye of sin has purchased and brought
greater infamy and shame to the order more hurt or harm to the religion,
greater grief to all good men, Peradventure may right well be left.
than the blot or blemish of the priests incontinency. Therefore peradventure
it would be both for the profit of the christian common weal, and for the
co^modytie of the order, that ones the right of public marriage should be
restored unto the priests, which they might rather keep godly without any
shame, than thus with such filthy vice of nature to defile them selves most
vncle^ly. Ioha. Anto. Titu. Qui clerici vel vouentes matrimonia contra here
possunt.
Ioa^nes Antonius bishop of Alexandria, does plainly affirm that in the
primitive church it was lawful for Pryestes to have wives, yea being in the
holy orders, so that in the time of the celebration or ministration of the
Sacraments they should abstain from their wives Afterward a forbidding
thereof, did begin in the occidental church, that they which were in the holy
orders, should live a continent life. Farther more this cardynall does say,
that this commandment did mynister an occasyon to snare many souls, and
that therefore he did believe, that as the Church did bring in that
commandment of constreygned chastytye, so she would revoke or call it back
again. i. Cor. vii
Which calling back, should be agreeable with this saying of Saint Paul,
Panormitanus.
touching the Virgins, I have no commandment, but I give consel. The like in
a manner does Panormitanus write, whose words for avoiding of tediousness,
and specially because that they do agree, with them that I aleaged before, I will
now omit: does not pope Innocentius the fourth set forth the same doctrine,
saying received plainly that by the law of nature, Matrimony does let no man
to be received into the holy orders? Innocent.4. in suis commentariis Titu de
conuers. coniug. cap. placet.
For, by the law of nature, he that is received into the holy orders may use
matrimony ready contracted as the oriental church does. Yea, he might also
marrye or contract matrimony being in the holy orders, except the
constitutions of the church should forbydde it. Wherein two things are
plainly granted of this Pope. first, that they that be coupled in marriage,
may both be received into the ministry, and also use (and that by the law
of nature) in the time of it, their matrimonye. Secondlye, how that if it were
not for the constitutions and laws of the church, they might also marye,
after that they be called to the ministerye.

But as for the church, this are we sure of, that the true spouse of our
savior Jesus Christ, will make no laws and constytutio^s contrary to the
word, institution and ordinance of her head and husband, Jesus Christ, who
in all places, both by him self, and by his Apostelles do give unto all the^,
The true church will make no laws contrary to God his word.
that have not the gift of continency, free liberty to marye, and with a
good conscience, to use that remedy, which god from the beginning has
appointed for all men. Therefore the constitutions and laws of the church,
Panormitanus words are so notable* that I could not but bring them.
can not debar from matrimony, those, that by a singular gift and calling
of god, be not appointed unto a single, and wiuelesse life. Of force I am
constrained contrary to that, which I said before, to bring in the words
of Abbas Panormitanus, Panormi. de clericis coningatis. capi. Cum olim.
which are these, Contine^cie is not in the clergy, of the substance of the
order, nor of the law of God. For, else the Greeks should sin: neither
should custom excuse the^, forasmuch as custom ought in no wise to prevail,
nor to bear or have any place against the law of god. And I do not only
believe, that the church has power to grant yt the clergy may marrye, as
the Greeks do, but also that this would be a wholesome statute, for the
profit and health of the souls, that they, which can abstain and merit
more, should be left to their own will, and that they which can not abstain
might marry. For the experience does teach us, that a contrarry effect does
ensue and follow, of that law of continency, since that men live not
spirituallye, nor be clean, but are defiled with the unlawful use of women,
not without great offense against god, whereas the lawefull use of their own
wives, should be chastitye. Therefore the church ought to do, as a good
phisicio^, which having learned by experience, that his medecin does more
hurt than good, does remove or take it away. Hitherto have we taught briefly,
that it is laweful by gods word for all them that have not the gift of
chastitye, to couple them selves in matrimonye, and also that the ancient
ministers of the prymatiue church, as Hilarious and other, had wives, in the
time of their ministry, whereunto I may by the way add these words of
Hierome: If Samuel being brought up in the tabernacle, Hieroni. lib. prun. in
Iouinianum.
did marrye a wife, what is this prejudicial to virginitye? Asthough now in
these days many pryestes have not wives: and the Apostell does not describe
and set forth a bishop to be the husband of one wife having children with
all chastitye? The Apostelle says he, was of the Jews, Idem an Oceanum.
and the primitive church of Christ was gathered of the remnaunte of the
Jews. He knew, that it was granted by the law, and that it was by the
example of the patriarchs and of Moses, a famyliar thing unto the people, to
get children of many wives. Which privilege, was also open or free for the
pryestes. He does command them that the churches, Math. xi^ Gene. ii.
do not challenge or clame the like license, and that the priests have not at
one time.ii. or.iii wives, but one only, co^tenting the^ selves with the first
ordinance of god, where he says: And they shall be two in one flesh. We have
also declared what complaints many godly men have made, that this liberty to
marye, was by the cruel tirannye of the Roomishe beast, taken away from those,
unto who^ the gift of chastity was denied, and how earnestlye they did
desire, that it might be restored again. Now, for as much as I have
sufficiently spoken in my book, of those that by foolish and fond vows not
commanded of God, had rashely and unadvisedly bound them selves to single
life, or rather to unclean chastitye, and unchaste continency: I will shortly
answer certain fond objections, that some worldelynges which nevertheless
will seem to be earnest favorers of the scriptures and of the gospel of our
savior Jesus Christ, be wont to make. Although say they it be lawefull by gods
word that ministers should marye, their wives, and children shall live, so
that they ca^ not lightly give their minds to other things: The fond reasons
of the gospellicke worldlinges.
how can the ministers then, being married: and having houses full of
children, apply their learning, and give themselves to heavenly contemplation,
that they may feed their flock with wholesome doctrine? The whole day will
scarcelye serve to compass and cas^e, how they and their familye may live,
i. Cor. vii.
that we should let pass this saying of Paul: He that is married, cares for
the things of the world, how he may please his wife: whereas he that is
unmarried, cares for the things of the lord, how he may please the lord.
Again: if they be suffered to marye, that will minister a great occasion to
them to be covetous, and to keep nygarde houses, so that the poor shall not
be refreshed by them as they ought to be, they will give them selves to
pourchase houses and land for their brottes: What hospitatytye then shall they
be able to keep? Or if they will not in their life time provide for their wives
and children, shall they not fill the world with beggars? These are the gaye
painted reasons that our gospellicke worldlinges be wont to aleadge, Answer.
for to put the true ministers of ye church from that which is lawful by gods
word, How the text aleadged by the adversaries ought to be taken and of whom
it is understood.
that so they may (whiles they maynteyne their expediencie, I mean that which
they call expediente) fall headlonge into that which is unlawful, and
forbidden of God in his holy scriptures. First, as touching that which they
have aleadged out of the first epistle to the Corinthians, it ought doubtless
to be understood of the^, that having the gift of chastitye, have no need
to marye, except they will, and not of them, which for want of it are fayns to
use the remedy which go denies to no man, that has need of it. For, does he
not say a litel before: They that can not absteyne, let them marye: ^. Cor. vii.
It were in deed to be wished, that all they that be called to the ministerye,
should be endued with that most excellent gift. But sith that it has pleased
god, otherwise, who distributeth his gifts, as he knows to be most
expedient for his glory: and for the profit and edefy^ng of his church.
Mark well this.
Who are we, that should strive with god? One of these three things must we need
to chose? Either we must content our selves, with those ministers, which seeing,
or rather feeling them selves to be destytute of the gift of continency do
in the fear of god marye, that they may keep them selves undefiled members of
our savior Jesus Christ: or else we must call down angels from heaven to
minister unto us: or if they please not, or if we can not have the^ as we
would, we must suffer still those filthy whoremongers, and stynkynge
Sodomytes, that swarmed heretofore over all the whole world, to remain still.
I do not deny, but that there be some, unto whom it is given, that they
should gelde them selves, or make them selves chaste for the kyngedome of
heaven sake, but they are very thin sown. They that be so, let them with
all thankefulnes employe that gift to the aduauncing and settinge forth of
gods glory, i. Cor. vii.
and to the enlarging of his kingedome, having always this saying of Paul
before their eyes: we would that all our brethren and fellow servant were
all, as we are, but every man has his proper gift of God, one after this
manner, and an other after that. But now will I come to the rest of their
objections. As touching the troubles and cares that are commonly in matrimony,
we have spoken of them already, shewinge that they do pertain unto the cross
which God will have to be annexed to this holy estate: and that for them (as I
said before) no man wanting the gyfts of continencye ought to forbear
matrimony. No state of man's life here in this world can be without troubles and
cares.
Howebeit I would by the way that they should show me any estate of man's life
her upon ye earth, that can be without troubles and cares. If any having the
gift of chastity and being called to the misterye, do go about to keep
hospytalytye, how many things, he shall daily and hourly be troubled with all commune experience does sufficyentlye teach us. How many times shall he be
feign to play Marthas part, and by him self to do many things every hour
of the day almost, which if he had a trustye yoke fellow, he neded not to
trouble him self with all? but give him self quietly to his book? Although I
say he does all the day long give him self to his own study, being only
careful over the flock of Christ, yet he is sure that all things shall be
well seen to at home: Whereof else (such is the unfaithfulness of servants,
without one that should always over see him) he will always be in doubt, and
never be quiet in his mind. What shall we say then of those which besides
these comme^ troubles and cares, The intolerable troubles of them that want
the gift of contynencye, and cannot be suffered to mary
do burn with the fire of concupiscence, and cannot be suffered to use the
lawful waters, that God has appointed, for to quench it? How well (I pray
you) shall they be able to apply their learning, and to give them selves to
heavenly contemplation? And as for the feeding of the people with the
heavenly food of Gods word, this I am sure, no man is able to deny, but
that there have been more Godly Sermons made in one year, by faithful
married Mynysters, sense our Sovereign Lady Queen Elyzabeth did come in, than
were made in all Queen Maryes time, by their wyfelesse and Virgyne Pryestes.
But this is very handsome, that they do obiecte, that scarcelye the whole
day will serve them, for to cast, how they their wives, and family may live.
As though whole years will serve their unmarried Pryestes, that want the gift
of contynencye, for to cast, where they may get filthye harlottes, how
they may mayntein^ them like gentylwomen, or rather, which is worse, how they
may abuse other men's wives, and have their children to sit by other men's fyers,
were it not better, for such a minyster, as has not the gift of
contynencye, but yet has the fear of GOD before his eyes, It is not better
in the fight of the world.
to care for his own lawful wife, and for his children lawfullye begotten in
true wedlock, in the which he may keep him self an undefiled member of our
Savior Jesus Christ, than to be put, for want of his lawful remedy, to
carke and care, and that to the utter destruction of his body and soul, for a
vile strumpet, Sapience.
and his bastardes, which another day, shall bear witness against their
ungodly parents? As for the parryll of couetousenesse, and the pourchassynge
of house and land for their brettes, whereby the married Mynysters, shall be feign
to keep nyggarde houses, or to keep less hospytalytye, and give less relyefe
to the poor, than they ought to do. I answer that in this they may be
likened unto a certain great usurer, This is spoken of the wicked worldlinges.
who did hyre Preachers to Preach against vsurye, that all other being by
the terrible threatenynges of Gods word, fraied from that abhomynable sin he
alone might occupye vsurye: Esaias. v,
In like manner, that they may ioygne house to house, A great offense, I tell
you, if the faithful mynysters should with their own money truly gotten
pourchasse ought for their wives and children.
and Land to Land, until there be not one plot of ground left, to be
gotten for money, they will have none of the Cleargye to pourchasse one small
Cottage for their wives and children, to hyde their heads in, after their
deceasse. And why, because that they alone will reygne hear upon the earth,
and will have the whole world in their hands. But in the mean while, no
hospytalytye shall be kept, and the pore shall want their due relief. Pauperes
cura^t scilicet.
As though they care much for the poor, whom every where they do most
ungodly oppress, and with whose blood, the mortar is tempered that their
princelyke hoses be builded with all. Yea, are they not the cause, that the
realm is so full of pouertye? Diomedes was a cruel tyrant which gave men to
his horses to be devoured of them which thing was said of him, because he
caused the whole contry to be eaten up with his horses, so that men could have
no fode.
Do they not with their sheep (being in this point wourse than ever Diomedes
was) eat up whole villages and towns, so that where there were.xl. or.lx.
plowghes going, ye shall now scarcely find.ii. goinge? And where good fermers
dwelled and kept great hospitality reliuing the whole towneship, there they
keep a shepeheard with his boy and his dog, so that a man may as well break
his neck as break his fast there, from whense before no poor boy was
suffered to go away empty or vnrefreshed. And yet they will seem to favor
hospytalytie, for sothe. But it must be at other men's costs, and that they
their selves may be feasted, and have good cheer when they come to Master
persons, or to master Vicares. For, although the faithful Mynister does to
his power refresh his pore neighbors, yet onelesse he does every foot
feast these great cobbes, and make them lustye cheer, when soever they lust
to come, he is not coumpted to keep any house at all. Now, if the paril of
covetousness, which they will have the married ministers to be so subject
unto, can debar them from marriage, which they grant to be lawful by gods
word, what might be said of those that be in office under a prince? might
it not with a better reason be said, that it were most parillous to suffer
them to marrye, No less paryl of covetousness in the^ that be in office under a
prince, than in the Minysters.
left being moved with an inordynate desire to leave their wives and children
in a welthy and rich estate, they should pill and pole the people, and pilfer
from the prince? For, they can no more leave their offices unto their wives and
children, tha^ the ministers can their liuinges. Let any man that has wit
judge, in whether of those.ii. estates their is greater danger of
covetousness, and in whether of them covetousness, can be more hurtefull to
the commune weal. Howbeit, this as the rest is but accidental. For although
some among the ministers, be stricken with covetousness, yet many (god be
praised) have the fear of God before their eyes, and do from the bottom of
their hearts detest and abhor couetousenesse. It was not preiudicyall to the
rest of the Apostels, that Judas being one of the.xii. was both covetous and
a thief. Neither ought this to move any man, where they say, that unless they
do whylles they be alive provide for their wives and children they must fill
the world full of beggars. For they that are godly, will see their Children to
be brought up, that they shall be able to make honest shift for them selves,
Psa^. xxxvii.
after their parents deceasse. Again, is not this David's saying: I have been
young, and am old, yet I saw never the righteous forsaken, nor his sede
beggynge bread? Hereby do we learn, that although the Godly dies, yet his
blessings shall be extended to his posterytye. But in the mean season, this is
not remembered of them, that their wifelesse, priests do fille the whole world
with whoredom and vnclenlines and all men's houses with bastardes, as much as
in them does lie, which thing must needs kindle the wrath of GOD against us,
and at length to bring the same vengaunce upon the whole world, Genesis. xix.
that was by the ryghteous judgment of God poured upon Sodom and Gomorre, and
all the country about. Since now therefore that I have made a sufficient
answer, to the foolyshe and fond objections of our ghospellike worldlinges, I
will make an end, desirynge your good Mastershyppe, to take this my rude
labor in good worth, which I offer unto you now at this present, for a
sign of gratitude and thankfulness, and to declare that although I have not
seen you this great while yet I am not vnmindeful of you, nor of the gentle
kyndenes, that ye have showed to me ward at all times. Thus the lyuinge God
above, who is the geuer of all goodness, preserve you and all yours and send you
prosperous success in all your godly affairs to his glory, and your
everlasting comfort.

The argument of the book.
FIrst and foremost, I call the enemies of the ministers marriage, pope
Eustachians, because that in this point, they follow those aunciente
heretics, whom they called commonly Eustachians, whithe about the year of the
lord.324. held opinion, ye married ministers ought in no wise to be esteemed,
yea that no man ought to receive the holy communion at the hands of them that
were coupled in matrimony, which opinion was thought is strange, that then a
concill was gathered and assembled against in Gangris, The canon of the concill
Gangris.
a town of Paphlagonia, where it was proved to be directlye against Gods word
and the truth thereof. And therefore this canon or decree was made against
them. Qui coniugatum presbiterum discernit, quasi occasion nuptiarum offerre
non debeat* et iam ab eius oblatione abstinet, anathemas^. That is to say, he
that does discern or makes a difference of a married priest, although because
of his marriage, he can not offer, or minister the holy communion, and does
already abstain from his oblation, let him be accursed.

Whereby, as I have proved in my book, we can judge none other, but that the
Popes catholykes, which do so abhor married ministers, making no conscience
at all to receive the sacraments, at a sort of whoremongers hands are by
their own canons, anathema, that is to say, accursed. Against them I have
here in this small treatise written. First, showing that all the scriptures,
that they do aleadge, both out of the old and new Testamente, for to impugn
the marriage of priests, are shamefullye wrested and wrethed.

Secondly I have proved, that all the vows that the religious persons, or
secular priests, did make, for to bind them selves perpetually unto single
life, are directly against the holy and sacred Scriptures, and word of God,
and that therefore they may lawefully break them, and couple them selves in
honest matrimonye, that so living in the fear of God, they may keep them
selves undefiled members of our savior Jesus Christ.

Thyrdelye, I have declared most manifestlye, both by the examples of the
Scriptures, and also by strong arguments taken out of the same, that all
religious persons or seculare pryestes, that have not the gift of chastitye,
ought to marye: in so much that if there be any that having not the gift of
chastitye, will not use the remedy, that God has appointed, for all men: The
Godly Magystrates ought to compelle them, and if they be disobedyente, to
depose them least by their incontinent living, they be an offense and
stumbling block unto the church, and a slander unto the doctrine that they
have taught and set forth. These things have been done briefly and shortly,
meaning hereafter, if any do kick against his doctrine, to answer them
fully, by the leave and assistaunce of my lord and savior Jesus Christ. To whom
with the father, and the holy ghost, be all praise glory, and honor, world
without end. Amen.

DO they disaproue the Apostelles? Peter and Philyp did beget children. Phil^p
also did marrye his daughters to husbands. Neither does Paul stick in a
certain epistell of his, to salute his wife, which he did not carry about, that
he might be the more ready to the ministerye.

Clemens Alexandrinus. Ex Euschii historia. lib. 3. Cap. 30.

I Do not backebite the other blessed me^, which were coupled in matrimony, of
who^ I made mention now. For, I wish, that being worthy of god, I may be
found in his kingedome at their feet, as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as
Joseph, Esaye, and other Prophets, as Peter and Paul, and the other Apostels,
which were coupled in matrimony, which had wives, not for to fulfill the lusts
of the flesh, but to have issue and posteritye. Ignatius in epistola ad
Philadelphienses.

The Table.
A Conscience marked with a hot iron what it is. 52 A notable history 36 A
similitude. 47 A foolyshe objection. 51 A comparison betwixt the pope and
Mahomet. 4 A pretty remedy to bring one to the deuell. 23 A canon against the
making of unadvised vows. 33 Aarons briesthood abolished. 2 His priests must
have no blemishe. 14 Ambrose aleadged. 24 All that have not the gift of
chastitye ought to marye. 6 All christians are priests, and home. 63.
Arnobius. 44 Augustine contra Cresco. 57 Upon. 5. psalm 44 In libro heretico.
53 His counsel. 34 What he says of them that marrye after the vow. 35 Baals
priests and their marks. 2 Baptism and what we do vow therein. 31 By it we
do become the servants of the lord. 32 By the popes laws Pryestes may not
marrye. 9 Canons and rules of the apostels. 56 Christ and his doctrine
contrary to the pope. 56 Christ's body offered once for ever. 13 He has put
down the ceremonies of the old law. 18 He will have us to be free unto him.
38 He called married men to be his apostels. 45 Ciprians counsel. 34
Chrisostom. ad populum antiochenum. 58 Clemens Alexandrinus. 51 Counsel of
Gangris. 53 And who are pronounsed accursed by that counsel. 54 Church of
Christ is obedyente to his words. 9 Conclusion of vows. 45 Distinction. 55
Doctor martine proved a liar. 1 Eufrachians. 53 Eusebius ecclesiastical
historye. 53 God what he wylleth. 24. He has appointed a remedy for the^ that
cannot live chaste. 17 He does allow the company of man and wife to gether. 19
Who they be that tempte him. 16 Godly Counsel. 24 Gregory's repentance. 36.
He says marryage may not be broken for religions sake. 48 Huldaricus ad
nicolaum papam. 36 If by priests we do understand mynisters? all christians be
not priests. 64 Isidorus counsel, upon rash promysses, 33 Mahomets
confession. 3 Matrimonye always in estimation among the gentiles. 50 Mar^us
Antonius flaminius. 44 Monkerye what it is among the Papist. 49 Moses example
can serve nothing for the pope. 11 What he did command the people. 10 Why he
did bid them refrain from their wives. 10 Murderers of them selves. 16 Papist
first argument of our time. 10 Their second argument of our time. 12 Their
third argument. 18 Their forth argument. 21 Their shameless shifts. 11 Their
fifth argument of our time. 26 Their chastity and to whom it is like. 27
They have their wife and Children sitting by other men's fires. 28 Their sixth
argument of our time. 29 Their thunder boltes. 29 We must forsake their vows.
40 They are set forth with feigned chastity. 54 Their argument beaten upon
their own heads. 57 They have put on whores faces. 59 They be married to our
lady. 59 Paschal lamb. 20 Paul's counsel to married persons. 11 How his
words ought to be understand. 26 Three things to be noted upon his words. 22
His saying does nothing pertain to the papist. 26 Priests of Baal. 2 Pope
does blaspheme. 4 Pope has all his service in latin and why. 6 He is worse
than Mahomet which in some point does give more honor unto christ then the
pope. 7 Priests what it does signify. 8 and why they be so called. 8 Priests
of the old law why they did abstain from their wives. 13 Priests of the old
law were married 45 Popish vows separate us from our true spouse Jesus christ.
35 Preachers of our time and their cruel tirannye. 32 Spiritual whoredom. 36
Single life a let to those that have not the gift of chastity. 22 Sinedech and
what it is. 48 Tatius, Martion, and Manicheus, enemies of matrimony. 53 The
conclusion, or epilagus. 64 True chastity. 24 The sixte sinode holden at
Constantinople. 55 Vow, what it is. 29 How many things are to be considered
in making a vow. 30 We must make them no further the^ it lies in us to
perform them. 31 What we vow in baptism. 31 What an ungodly vow is. 37 We
must vow nothing that may let us in our vocation. 38 What liberty and fredom we
lose by popish vows. 39 We must consider the intent of our vow. 40 We may
vow those things that be indifferent and lie in our power. 41 Conclusion of
vows. 43 Wherein they of the old law did confess. 44 What vow god does
require of us 44 The end of vows. 45 What married men might have said to
the Apostels if they had forsaken their wives. 46 When the Apostels did leave
their wives, and when they did not. 47 What sacrifices the priests of the new
testament do offer. 63 What ceremonies the church does use in chosinge or
making of ministers. 64 What god does require of us. 30 Who they be that geld
them selves for the kingdom of heavens sake. 28 Why wydowes were received into
the church. 41.
FINIS.
A strong defense of the marriage of priests, made dialogue-wise betwixt Robin
Papist and the true christian.
The true Christian. Well met good neighbor and in a good time. I pray you,
where have ye been these many days? Ye were not seen here almost this hole
month.


Robyn Papyst. Will ye know where I have been? I have been at London, I tell you:
where I have heard many goodlye sermons, They be no lecherous priests that
take other men's wives, or that have hariottes in every corner.
and specially against your lecherous and carnal priests, which be not ashamed
to say, that they can not live without wives, and so marye, contrary to all
good order, and also contrary to all godly constitutions, ordinances, and
laws, of the catholyke church. A reverend father I warrant you
But against them did one reverend father Doctor Martyn write a most learned
and excellent work, which all the heretics in the world shall never be able
to answer or confute. I would for your own sake that ye had read the hole
book through.


The true Chrystian. I never read Doctor Martyns book: but I have read a
most clerkely answer, that a certain godly learned man, which now for the
truth of gods word, Read his hole book through and thou can say no less,
but that he dooteth in deed.
is feign to flee out of his own natural country, has made against it.
Where your Dooter Martine, is so handeled, that he may be ashamed thar ever he
did set the pen to the book. For almost in every sentence or line that he
has written, he is proved to be a most shameful liar. But we will let
Martines book alone, with the answer that has been made unto it, and come
to your goodly sermons that ye have heard. I pray you now what was the hole
sum or effect of them?


Robyn Papyst. But it is lawful for them to be whoremongers.
The hole sum or effect was, that it is in no wise laweful for priests to
mary, and also, that marriage does let a man to be a pryest.


The true Christian. Of what manner of pryestes did they speak I beseech you?


Robyn Papyst. What Question is this? Be there pryestes of more sorts than of
one?


The true Chrystian. Why should this question seem strange unto you? Do ye
not know that there be priests of Baal, 2. king.xviii
and priests after the order of our savior Jesus Christ? For, Hebru. vii.
of the priests of Aaron, I need not to speak here, sithe that the same
pryesthode, is wholly abalyshed by our savior Jesus Christ, our sovereign
pryeste, which, (as saint Paul says) lives for ever for to make
intercession for us.


Robyn Papyst. I knew not so much. Therefore I thought none other, but that
they spoke of those, that be pryestes after the order of our savior Jesus
Christ?


The true Christian. And which do ye think to be priests after the order of
our savior Jesus Christ?


Robyn Papyst. Those that we do commonly call: sir John, The marks of Baalles
pryestes.
sir Thomas, sir William etc. that have shaven crowns, and wear forked
cappes, with long side gowns and tippettes: which do put on white surplyces on
their garments, whenever they go to their divine service: which do cense
images, and say the holy and blessed mass.


The true Christian. Those are not priests after the order of our savior Jesus
Christ.

For his priests do not disguise them selves after such a sort, Read the.iii.
chapter of the first Epistell to Timothee and the fryste of the Epistel to
Titus.
they are no such marked monsters, but are known by other signs and tokens,
which be expressly set out unto us in gods book. Therefore, those are rather
the pryestes of that stynkyng beast and Idol Baal. Which I do intend to prove
most manifestlye unto you.


Robin Papist. What beast or Idol is it, that ye call Baall.


The true Christian. Will ye have me to tell it you?


Robyn Papyst. And I pray you so to do.


The true Christian. And will ye not be angry with me?


Robyn Papyst. Wherefore should I be angry with you: for I know, that for the
amity and frendshippe, that has been betwixt you and me, ever sins almost
that we were but young babes, ye do wish good unto me, and would that I
should do no worse then ye your self.


The true Christian. I do understand by that beast or ydoll, which I call
Baall, the bishop of Rome: which ye do name your holy father the Pope.


Robyn Papyst. I thought rather that by it, ye did understand that false
prophet Mahomet.


The true Christian. I do not deny but that Mahomet is most detestable, and to
be abhorred of all men. But yet in comparyson of your holy father the pope, in
many things he may be accounted a saynct.


Robyn Papyst. How can that be possible. These your fayenges seem unto me
very strange, yea mine ears do tinkle hear them.


The true Christian. The confession of Mahomet touching our Savior Jesus Christ.
Ye shall understand that my sayenges are most true. For, although Mahomet be
most wicked and deuelyshe, yet does he confess and acknowledge that o^re
savior Jesus Christ was conceived and borne of a virgin, and that the same
Jesus was in his time a great prophet, yea that he was the wisdom and soul
of god. But in this he is most wicked, that he does prefer him self before
Christ, calling him self a more excellent prophet than he was, saying also
that he is the last prophet of all, and that none ought to be looked for after
him. Again, he says that god has reveled more largelye his secrets unto
him, than to any other prophet that was before him. Moreover he does write,
that he has showed unto him a more perfect rule, than the rule of the
prophet Jesus. This is the opinion of Mahomet. Now, let us come to your holy
father the pope. A comparison betwixt the Pope and Mahomet.
The pope does confess that Jesus Christ was conceived by the holy ghost, and
borne of a virgin, that he is the son of God, and also that he was a great
prophet. But afterward, he says as Mahomet, that is to say, that he is a
more excellent Prophet of God, than ever Jesus Christ was. For he says,
The blasphemous saiynge of the Pope.
that god has reveled unto him, more of his secrets touching the salvation of
men, and touching the estate and rule of perfection than unto our savior Jesus
christ and his apostles.


Robyn Papyst. I think none other but that ye do slander him shamefullye. He
is slaundered of the truth.
For if he should say so, he were a very Antichrist, and not worthy to be
accounted a christen man.


The true Christian. Ye shall be judge your self. For I do not intend to make
a lie upon any man. It is a shame to make a lie of the deuell.
Now mark well what I will say, and prynte in your mind the words that I
shall speak, and then I trust that ye will say as I say, except ye be utterly
blinded, and given over into a reprobate sense.


Robyn Papyst. I tell you, neighbor, as I do se the world to go now a days,
I do not intend to set my self styflye against the truth.


The true Christian. Ye will grant me, that these are the words of our
savior Jesus christ Without me ye can do nothing. Meaning thereby, John.xv.i.
that without his special grace we can do nothing that is acceptable or
pleasant unto god. And therefore, saynct Paul says, ii. Cor. iii.
that of our selves we be not able to thynk as much as a good thought Again:
Philippe. ii.
that it is god, that works in us both the will and also the deed But your
holy father the pope says that it lies in man's power, or that man has of
his own nature liberty to do good or evil. By the Roma. iii. Mathe. v. Gala.
ii. iii.
with such a perfection as god does require at our hands, and that therefore,
Ephe. ii.
all men are of their own nature children of wrath, and subject to
everlasting damnation. But your holy father the pope says the contrary,
that is to say, that man is able to fulfill the law to the vttermoste, and to
purchase by his own merits and deseruinges the kingdom of heaven. Jesus
John. iii. v. Roma. x. Gala. iii.
that by the merytes only of his death, passion, and bloudsheding we are
delivered from everlasting death and damnation: but your holy father the Pope
says, that the merits of our own works, and do^nges may save us and that
therefore they are necessary unto salvation. Ioh. iii.v vi Romans iii.iiii. Gala.
ii.iii.
that by faith only, without the works of the law, we are justified, and
that it is the only mean, whereby we can obtain the free mercy of god. Nay,
says your holy father the pope, we are justified by our own works, and by
the worthiness and merytes of them, we do obtain the mercy of God. Jesus
Math. iiii.v. Luke, iiii.
but the living god only. Not so, does your holy father the pope say, ye
shall besides the living god, worship dead creatures Math. vi. Roma. x.
that none ought to be called upon but God only, which doctrine is confirmed
by the example of all the patriarchs, prophets, apostles, and martyrs of god
But your holy father the pope, does bid all men, to call upon the dead
saynctes, excommunicating al them John. v.
Jesus Christ with his apostles does give a strayt commandment that images
should in no wise be honored or worshypped: But your holy father the Pope
does pronounce them al heretykes, that will not honor and worship them.
Jesus Christ says, that he is the way, the truth, and the life, John. xiiii.
and that none comes unto the father but by him. Again, the holy apostelles
do testifye every where, Roma. viii. i. Cuno. ii. i. John. ii.
that our savior Jesus Christ, the only begotten son of God, is the only
intercessour, advocate and mediator betwixt god and men: But your holy father
the pope, does boldy affirm, that all the blessed saints in heaven, are our
intercessours and mediators, persecuting with fire and sword al those that will
not agree unto his doctrine. Math. xxiii.
Jesus Christ will not of long prayers. Our savior i. Cor. xiiii.
that nothing should be done in his church in a strange or unknown tongue,
but that all things should be done to the edefyenge of the faithful
congregation. Nay fie, says your holy father the pope: Why Latin service is
used in the popish church.
that is not decente nor comely. Such service must be used, that no man
almost does understand, that so our Catholic procedynges, being known of no
man, may the longer continue. These be almost the chief and principal
points, wherein your holy father the Pope, does most ungodly prefer him self
before christ How do ye now like his doings.


Robyn Papyst. By your sainges, our holy father the pope, Hold thy self
there Papyst.
does compte him self wiser, than our sauyoure Jesus Christ, being as much
contrary unto him, as Mahomet is, though he will not be a known of it.


The true Christian. Nay, ye shall understand, that he is a great deal worse
than Mahomet. The Pope is worse tha^ Mahomet.
For Mahomet is no traytoure to Christ, nor yet to his church, as your holy
father the pope is, but professes him self an open enemy of his, and of all
his religion. Whereas your holy father the Pope under the title and name of a
true servant of Christ, does both betray Christ and his church, Math. xxvi.
Mar. xiiii. Luke. xxii.
being most like unto Judas, which under the pretense and sign of love, that
is to say, of a kiss, did betray his master Christ. Wherein Mahomet did give
more honor unto Christ's tha^ the pope.
Moreover, although Mahomet be an enemy of Jesus Christ, yet does he give him
more honor then the Pope does. For, Mahomet does confess and acknowledge
that before he was sent of God, and had received the revelation of his rule,
who so ever did live according to the rule of Jesus Christ, he was saved, and
that whosoever shall live according unto it, shall be saved. But that he shall
not be so perfect, as he should be, by keeping his rule. Whereas your holy
faher the pope does playnelye affirm, that no man can be saved by keeping of
Christ's rule only, except he does also keep his constitutions, laws and
ordinances, saying that we must observe and keep them, if we will be perfect
Christians. Is not this to say, that he knows more of the secreetes of God,
than our savior Jesus Christ, or his apostles did?


Robyn Papist. Let us leave the pope to his great judge our savior Jesus
Christ, and come to the matter that we began wythall. Did Christ no where in
all his gospel forbid, that pryestes should marye?


The true Christian. Before we do begin, or go any further, What is meant by
this word priest.
with the matter, ye must understand what we do mean by this word, pryest:
for many are deceived in it. For they think that it does only signify them,
that wear shaven crowns, and white surplyces upon their long side gowns, and
such other gugawes.


Robyn Papyst. What does it signifye I pray you? has it any other
signification than we do give it commonly?


The true Christian. This name priest comes of this greek word, presbiter,
What this word, priest, does signifye
which in our English does betoken an elder.

Now if ye ask me whether Christ has forbidden ye elders of his church to
mary, I answer unto you, that ye shall find no where in all the whole body
of the scriptures, that they are more forbidden to marye, then the other
christians are, which of the holy apostel saynct Peter, are al called a
spiritual priestehoode, for to offer spiritual oblations and sacrafices unto
almighty god.


Robyn Papyst. If this word priest does signify an elder, why do we call the^
that serve in our churches priests, sith that they be for the most part, If
he can say a mass, he is fit enough to be sir Iodn.
young boys and laddes? For in these our days they do preeste some, that be
scarcely xviii. years old.


The true Christian. They be so called, because of the auncientnes, Why the
ministers of the church be called priests or elders.
wisdom, and sobrenesse, and also for the great learning and discretion that
should be in them. For, this word eldershippe, does import and signifye al
these things. If they be not then ancient in age they ought to be ancient in
wisdom and knoweledge, and also in example of godly conversation, and living.


Robyn Papyst. Now therefore I do ask you, whether Christ has not forbidden
such priests or ministers of his church to marye?


The true Christian. No verelye, as ye your self shall easily perceive, if ye
will read diligently the scriptures, both of the old and new Testament.


Robyn Papyst. As I have said unto you already, our preachers of London do
stoutely affirm, that it is in no wise lawefull for a pryeste to marye, nor
for a man that is married, to be a pryest.


The true Christian. In deed it is not lawefmll for popish priests to marye,
what pryests they be that may not marye.
if they will follow the ordinances, constitutions, and laws of your holy
father the pope. For according to his rule, he has rather that his pryestes
be whoremongers. Sodomites, and filthye adulterers, as he is him self, than
that they should be honest married men, according to the institution of our
savior Jesus Christ.


Robin Papist. How know ye that to be true?


The true Christian. God wot, it is very easy to be known. For if one of his
pryestes be found or taken in aduoutrye, Good justice I warrant you.
or in whoredom, by geuyng the bishop a noble or two, or by bryngyng a couple
or two of fat capons unto the commissarie, he shall be quittted, and let go:
But upon a condition, that he do it warely afterward.
but if any of them should go about to take a wife, and so marye according to
the institution and ordinance of god, for to keep him self an undefiled membre
of our savior Jesus christ, he shall be brent up like an heretic, whereby ye
may know that he has rather that his pryestes should walowe in filthy and
stynkinge whoredom, It is a plain blasphemye against the god in earth so to
do.
than that they should ones marye, and that he does esteem it to be a greater
sin to mary, than to be a common whorehunter


Robyn Papyst. But they say, that the church has so ordained long a go.


The tru^ Chrystian. I grant that the popish church has so ordained, but
not the true church of Christ. i. Timo. iii. The true Church of Christ does
set forth nothing contrary to the laws and word of God.
For the true and faithful church of our savior Jesus Christ, which is the
house of god, the pillar and stay of the truth, will never take upon her to
set forth any thing contrary to the mind of her true husband and head, our
savior Jesus Christ, nor yet to teach any thing, that might hinder the
liberty and fredome, that he has both purchased and given unto his faithful
servant and ministers. This true and faithful church, I say, suffering her
self to be ruled, guyded, and governed by the only word and spirit of her
head and master our savior Jesus Christ, will in no wise presume to forbid
any thing that our savior Jesus Christ has commanded, nor to command any
thing that he has prohibited and forbidden.


Robyn Papist. But they do stoutelie maynteyne that this is done according to
the scriptures and word of god. Exodus xix. The first argument that the
Papists of our time do bring against the marriage of pryestes.
For when the everliving and eternal god, did go about to deliver his law unto
Moses, the same Moses being inspyred of the holy ghost, did give a
commandment unto the people that they should abstain from their own wives.


The true Christian. Answer to it.
That example serves nothing for the popyshe church, if ye do well consider
the words of Moses. For he did generally forbydde all the people to come to
their wives: but your holy father the pope does only forbydde his priests.
Again, Moses says not: I command and charge you that ye never come to your
wives, Exo. xix.
or that ye never mary: but says only be ready against the third day, and come
not at your wives. As if Moses would have said: Ye must sanctifye your selves
these three days: therefore ye shall cease from all your bodily labors, and
works, and also from the use of your own wives, that ye may the better pray
unto God, and think on those things, that God has appointed to do on the
third day. Ye see that Moses does command the people to abstain from their
bodily labors, why the people was bydden to reframe from their wives.
and companyng with their wives, only for three days, that they might be
the more ready both to pray, and also to receive the high misteryes, that
God has appointed to show unto them the third day.

The like does the blessed Apostell saynct Paul say unto all christians that
be married, speaking after this manner: i. Corin. vii. This place shall be more
largelye entreated of, afteewardes, about the mids of the book.
wythdrawe not your selves one from an other, except it be with consent for a
time, for to give your selves to fasting and prayer. And afterward come
together again, least Satan tempt you for your incontinenci^. Ye see that
Sayncte Paul will not have a man to withdraw him self from his wife, nor the
wife from her husband, but as far forth as the one can forbear the other.
And if ye consider well the words of Sayncte Paul, ye shall soon perceive,
that he will not have the man and the wife to be long a sunder, least Satan
the Deuell do tempt them, and make them to fall into some abominable sin,
through their incontinencye. For as a man can not always pray and false, so
can not he be always without his o^ne wife. For, to pray, to fast, and to
live chastely without the company of a woman, are special gifts of almighty
God, which he gives to whom it pleases him, and for as long as he thinks
it expedient.

Mark then that Moses did not give a commandment to the pryestes only,
that they should abstain from they wives, The example of Moses can serve
nothing for the Pope.
but also to the hole people. Therefore, if your holy father the pope, will
have this place to serve for his purpose, he must as well forbydde all the
chrystian people to marye, as his pryestes. For why? The one does stand with
no more reason than the other.


Robyn Papyst. Our holy father the pope, does forbydde pryestes to marye,


The true Christian. and as a mediator betwyxte God and the people. And yet he
does not separate him self alone from his wife, for those three days, but
also commands all the people to do the same. This the papystes will never
grant
Do not the holy sacraments and misteryes pertayne to the hole church, I
mean, to all them that be Christians as well, as unto the priests and
ministers of the church? I say, that they can no more challenge unto them
selves of those holy mysteries and sacraments by any right or privilege,
that they have given them of God, than the least christian in the world,
saving only that they are ministers of them, for to distribute and give them
unto the people, thereunto prepared and ordained. Now if the dignity and
worthiness of the things that be ministered, does require that the ministers
be unmarried, how much more does it require, that they which receive such
holy mysteries should be unmarried? For if the marriage does defile the
minister, because yt he does minister holy things, how much more does it defyle
those that receive the^? If the minister ought to be holy in the ministration
of the holy and sacred mysteries, much more ought they, to whom they be
ministered to be holy It is plain and manifest then, that the pope has no more
cause to forbid priests to marye, than all the rest of the people. For,
whether is the ministration of the sacraments, more precious and excellent,
then the receiving of them is?


Robyn Papyst. The second argument of the papist of our time.
I can say nothing against your arguments, but yet our preachers do say,
that the priests of the old law, did absteyne from their own wives duringe
the time of their office and ministration in the temple. As it appears by
Zachary the father of John Baptist. Luke.i.



The true Christian. This example does serve for me, and not for them. For by
it, it is manifestly proved, that the pryestes of the old law had wives.


Robyn Papyst. It is true. Where there is forgeuenes of those things, there is
no more sacrifice for sin. Hebre. x.
to live chastlye, all the days of their life, sithe that they have such an
high sacryfice to offer unto God daily for the sins of the people.


The true Christian. I would feign know, what sacrifice the pryestes of the new
Testament have to offer unto God daily for the sins of the people.


Robyn Papyst. Do they not offer our Sauyoure Jesus Christ, I pray you, both
god and man, unto his heavenly father, for the sins both of the quick and of
the dead.


The true Christian. It has been already sufficiently declared, in the first
talk, In the overthrow of the Mass.
that we had together a pretty while a go, what a blasphemy it is to say,
that Christ can be offered any more. Read also of this in the vi. Dialogue of
my true buckeler and shylde of the Christian faith and in my confession upon
the Creed. Hebre, x.
For, it is to abolishe and put down that omny-sufficyent sacrifice which
our Savior Jesus Christ the high priest did offer once for ever upon the
alter of the cross, and to make it of no more efficacy, strength and value,
than the sacrifyces of the old law.


Robyn Papyst. I have not yet forgotten, what was said then. Therefore, show me
now, why the pryestes of the old law did abstain from their wives in the
time of their Mynystration and office.


The true Christian. Your holy father the Pope, would gladlye set up again,
all the shadows and figures of the old law, which our Savior Jesus Christ
has abollyshed. Why the pryestes of the old law did absteyne from their
wives.
Ye shall therefore understand, that the pryestes of the old Testamente, did
absteyne from their wives, during the time of their office, for to represente,
and sygnyfye, the integrytye and pureness, that should be in our Sauyoure
Jesus Christ the eternal and everlasting pryeste, whose figure they were
only. But it also they did signify and represent that he should be conceived
by the holy ghost, with out the seed or operation of man.

Now these ceremonies are ceased and fully ended, after that our Savior
Jesus Christ the eternal and everlasting pryest after the order of
Melchisedech, has offered him self a sacrifice unto God his father, for the
redemption of all mankind, as he him self did testifye upon the cross,
saying: It is finished. Else, John.xix.
if Christians were compelled to follow the ceremonies of the old law, they
might have no priests but of ye kynred and Trybe of Leuye. But those are most
mete for to be priests now a days.
Moreover, they might have no priests, that were mysshapen, and that had any
blemyshe or fawte in their bodies. For, these be the words, that Moses is
commanded to speak unto Aaron: Whosoever of thy sede in their generations,
Leuit. xxi.
has any deformitye let him not prease for to offer bread unto his god.
For, whosoever has any blemyshe, shall not come nere, as if he be blind or
lame, or that has a bruised nose, or that has any myshapen member or is
broken, footed, or broken handed, or has no hears on his eye brows, or be
maunge, or skaulde, or has his stones broken. So long does the pope follow the
old law, as he does think it to be profitable for him and his kingdom,
No man that has a blemyshe, and is of the seed of Aaron the priest, shall
come nigh to offer the sacrifices of the Lord.

But now, your holy father the pope does clean contrary. For, he does allow
them for priests, which are misshapen, and which have deformyttes and
blemyshes in their bodies, wherein he does well declare, that the Christians
are not subject unto the ceremonies of the old law.


Robyn Papyst. There is a good cause why.
Yet he will allow none that have broken stones, or that lack them.


The true Christian. If the priests had no stones, peradventure there might
be less Chrisomes in the paryshes where they do serve.
Will ye know the cause why he does it? harken in your ear, and I will tell it
you.


Robyn Papyst. Go to, go to: ye will be old John still. But now without all
gestynge, tell me why god would have none to be made pryestes, that had any
fautes in their bodies.


The true Christian. For to signify thereby the great integritye and
perfection, which should be in the highest priest of all, which is our
savior Jesus christ. But mark ye this besides: if your hole father the pope,
will follow the law of Moises, he must needs forbid the priests, that duringe
the time of their office, which, as ye say, does continue all the days of
their life, they should drink no wine, This law would in no wise please the
pryestes of our time. For they love good drink to well.
nor no kind of strong beer or ale. For thus says the lord unto Aeron: rhou
and thy sons, shall drink no wine nor any kind of strong drink, when ye
shall come into the tabernakle of witness. He must also forbid them to shave
their heads, Leui. xxi
and the corners of their beardes. For, God did forbid the pryestes of the old
Testament, the same. Any man may see that the Pope has no more just cause
to forbid his priests to mary, than to forbid them the other things
heretofore reherced and named. Wherefore, The ordinance of the pope is a ioly
bayte for the deuel, for to ketche the souls of men and women with all.
all that he does, is nothing else but a plain tyranny, whereby he does
cast away the souls not only of his pryestes, but also of many pore women
and maidens, and also whereby he does engender in the world a most detestable
whoredom, and filthy Sodomy. When does he presume, I beseech you, to command
any man, that has not the gift of chastytye, to live without the remedy
that God has appointed for every man? If a Priest has the gift of
chastetie, he needs not to command him to live chastelie, if he has it
not, why does he lay such an heavy yocke upon his neck? Does the Pope and
his priests think to rule god as they list? He may if he list, for he is god
in earth.
if your holy father the pope has such a delight to have his priests to be
wiuelesse: why does not he him self give them the gift of chastitye?


Robyn Papyst. God only gives the gift of chastity, as he does all other
gifts: Math. vii. Mar. xi. Luke. xi.
Ask, and it shall be given unto you: Seek and ye shall find, Knock, and it
shall be open unto you.


The true Christian. What soever is necessary unto salvation we have a promise
in the scriptures that we shall obtain it of God, if we do ask it in faith.
Answer.
Again, where have they a promise that god will give the gift of chastitye
unto all those, that the pope does forbid to marye.
But how shall ye be able to prove, that to live without a wife, is a thing
necessary unto salvation? Therefore, if a man, not having the gift of
chastity, or not being called there to of the Lord, does wilfullye and for
his own pleasure separate or bannyshe him self for ever from the holy
estate of Matrymonye, he does most paryllouslye tempte god. For whosoever he
be that will not use in his necessity, What it is to tempt god
the same natural remedy that god has ordained and appointed, without all
doubt he does tempte God. Even as if a man would neither eat nor drink,
though hunger did come upon him never so much, but forsak^nge all kind of
meats and drynkes, that god has ordained for the use of man he should desire
of God that he would take away his hunger by his absolute power. Should not
such a man tempte God? would ye not judge such a man to be a despyser of the
ordeynaunces of the Lord. And if he should dye, Murderers of them selves
would ye not judge him to be a murderer of him self? I say, that it is as
hard for a man, which has not the gift of chastity, to keep him self
from falling into sin, as it is for him to live without meat and drink,
Math. iiii.
without the special gift of the Lord. We do read that our savior Jesus
Christ did fast fortye days and.xl. nyg^ts, and that all that space he did
neither eat nor drink, but that he did hunger at length, and that the
Angels minystred unto him. Whereby it does appear, that when he was a
hungerd, he did both eat and drink, using the lawful remedies and means,
that his heavenly father has appointed. When the gift of chastity is taken
away from a man, he must use the remedy that God has appointed.
So it happens many times, that a man has the gift of chastitye for a time,
but that afterward it is taken away from him. Then must he use the remedy,
that god has appointed and ordained, is it not to tempe God, when a man
feelinge the fire of concupyscence, that burns and tormenteth him, if he will
not use the water, that GOD offreth unto him, which is marriage? Marriage is the
lawefull water for to quench the fire of concupiscence.
It is even as if a man saying his house on fire, would not use the waters that
be round about it, for to quench the burning, but would say, let it alone,
God will quench it. Verelye, I say unto you, that whosoever does in his
necessity despise the ordinance of god, and has lieffer burn than to mary,
he shall never be chaste, but his bed shall always be polluted and defiled: The
punishment of those that despise matrimonye.
and as long, as he shall despise the holy estate of matrimonye or refuse to
use it, god will never give him the gift of chastety, but suffer him to burn,
and to be tormented in his flesh, and to fall from one sin into another. For
do ye think that god does love them, that do despise his ordeynaunces in their
necessity? Do not such persons declare them selves to be most unthankful unto
him? In deed if a man be constrained to be away from his wife for a time, When
we ought to pray most earnestlye for the gift of chastitye.
for to follow his vocation that god has called him to: it is his duetye to
pray unto god, that he vouchesafe to mortifye and quench such fire of
concupiscence in him, duringe the time, that he is away from his wife, and
truly such a man ought to believe that god will hear him, if he does pray with
a faithful heart, having the fear of God before his eyes.


Robyn Papyst. This besides, they said, in their sermons, that when David came
to Abimelech, and required him that he would give him of the holy loves which
they call the show bread: i. Samu. xxi. The third argument of the papists of
our time*
or ever Abimelech the high priest would give him any, he did ask him,
whether both he and his companions has kept them selves clean from their wives.
And hereupo^ did they aledge sayncte Hierome, who writing upon the epistell
to Titus, does say these words: The show bread did signify and represent
the body of our savior Jesus Christ. Therefore, let them, Hierome upon the
epistell to Titus
that will eat the body of our savior Jesus Christ, abstain from their
wives. For if such a cleanelinesse was required, for to eat of the show
breed, how much more is it required, A goodly argument, I assure you.
when we go to feed upon the precious body and blood of our savior Jesus
Christ? Therefore, say they, since ye priests do daily make the precious body
of Christ, and also eat it, in their holy and blessed mass, it is in no wise
lawful for the^ to mary.


The true Christian. Answer.
All this makes nothing against me. For, Abimelech him self the high priest
was married. Therefore they can not prove by this, that the pryestes ought
always to be put from the benefyte of holy wedlock.


Robyn Papyst.


The true Chrystian. Answer.
Because that the law did then require such an outward holiness, and bodily
purifienge. If any had touched but a dead corpse, Leui. xi.xv.
or had suffered any pollution in the night, it had not been lawefull for
them to touch holy things, nor yet to come nere the people or the
tabernacle, except they had been purified before.

Christ has put down all the ceremonies of the old law.
But all such ceremonies, and outward or bodilye purifienges, are taken away by
our savior Jesus christ who does only require now the pureness of the
heart, as he him self does testifye, saying: Math. v.
blessed are they that are clean of heart, for they shall see god. Now, this
clenelines is obtained by faith, without the ceremonies of the law.


Robyn Papyst. But what say ye to sayncte Hieroms words? Me think that they
do make directly against you.

I would feign hear what answer ye can make to them.


The true Christian. This answer do I make: both sayncte Hieromes words, and
also your sayenges were most true, if Christ and commanded any such thing.
But as I have said already before, he has utterly abolyshed and put down,
The honest companynge of a man and a woman together in wedlock is pure and
holy before God.
all such ceremonies and bodilye purifyenges. And now the honest cohabitation
or companyeng of man and woman together in the holy estate of matrimonye, does
in no wise pollute or defile the^, but that they may at all times use and
receive the holy sacraments.

Hebr. xiii.
Does not s. Paul say that wedlock is honorable among all men, and that the
bed of them, that be married in the lord, is undefiled.


Robin Papist.


The true Christian. What we oghte to judge of the sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ, In my light skirmishinge against Marcus antonius
it has been metely well declared in our second talk and communitation, that
we had last together save this. Therefore will I leave the saw, and come to
your saying, which is this: If it was necessary say ye, that they, which
would eat of the show bread, being but a bare figure, should absteyne from
their wives: How much more is it necessary, that they, which eat the body of
Christ daily, as the pryestes do, should keep them selves chaste and be
altogether without wives? Answer.
Ye shall soon perceive how weak your argument is. Exodus xii.
God gave a commandment, that when the paschall lamb should be eaten, the
Israelites should use no leuened bread by the space of seven days, and that
whosoever did eat or keep any in his house, all that while, his soul should
perish from among his people. Now may I make mine argument after this manner:
The one stands with as good reason as the other.
If it was necessary, that they which did eat the paschal la^be should
abstain from leuened bread, not only when they did eat the Easter, but also,
hole sire days after: how much more is it requisite and necessary, that they
which do eat the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, which as ye say
all, was figurate, signified, and represented by the paschall lamb, should
abstain from leuened bread? Yea, how dare your pryestes eat any leuened
bread at any time, since that they do eat and drink the bydy and blood of
Christ almost every day? He will do it for all that, and who so ever does say ye
contrary shall fry a faggot. Ephesi.
It is easy now to perceive, that your holy father the pope has no cause at
all to bring it to be church of christ, whether it be in general or
particular, such outward and bodily sanctifienges or purifienges, except he
will turn all the hole christian religion into a Iuishe supersition, and make
the coming of our savior Jesus christ unprofitable, and also the alliance,
agreement, and conjunction that Jesus Christ has made of the two peoples, I
mean, the Jews and the Gentiles by abolishing and putting down the
ceremonies, to be of no effect.


Robyn Papyst. Ye shall not so escape. For they did bring an other strong
argument, The forth argument of the Papists of our time. i. Corin. vii.
which they ground upon Paul, where he exhorts them that be married, to
forbear the liberty of matrimony, for a time, that they may the better give
them selves to prayer. Sith the^ that priests are bound to minister
continualli in the church and also to pray daily for them selves and for the
people, the church had a just cause to forbydde them to marye.


The true Christian. Did they allege the hole sentence as it lies in the
text?


Robyn Papyst. They did allege it none otherwise then I have rehearced it
unto you already.


The true Christian. Ye may see what thieves they are, The foul shyfte of the
Papists.
they steal in a manner the hole sentence form the people, least the simple and
ignorant should espy out their iuggelyng. The words are these: Withdraw
not your selves one from another, except it be with consent for a time, for
to give your selves to fasting and prayer. And afterward come together
again, lest Satan do tempte you for your incontinencie. I have now reherced
the hole sentence unto you.


Robyn Papist. As far as I do remember, we have had the same sentence
alredye before.


The true Christian. It is most true. Now, by these words, In the answer
of the first argument. Answer.
Saint Paul does not command but exhort them, that be married, if their
mutual dwelling or companieng together, be a let unto them, that they cannot
give them selves to prayers and fasting, to withdraw them selves one from
another, but yet with consent, meaning if they have both the gift of
continencye, during the time of the fasting and prayer, and be able to
forbear one another. But what does it follow? Afterward come together
again, lest Satan do tempte you, for your incontinencye, says he. As if
he should say: if du^ynge the time of your fasting and prayer, ye do feel
that ye cannot re^raine or live chastelye, come together again, lest Satan
under the ^hadowe and color of your fasting and prayer do tempte you. Beware
^n any wise that ye give no occasion unto Satan to tempt you, Thee things to
be noted upon Paul's words.
for your ^ncontinencie. Upon which wor^es three things are to be notes.

The first is, that the blessed Apostel ^oeth only speak unto those, that ^y
mutual companyeng together, ^re let to fast and to pray. where upon I may
make an argument after this sort. If we must leave of, ^he mutual companyeng
together ^n Matrimony, during the time, that it does let us to fast and
pray, ^y much more strong reason, ought ^e to forsake and leave all other
thin^es that do let us to pray or to do those things, that perteyne to our
^ccacion.


Robyn Papist. I do confess that to be true. But what will ye make of it? I
would feign hear what ye will say.


The true Christian. For to help the weak memory of the simple and unlearned,
I will begin again mine argument. If, as I said before, the mutual
companiyng together in holy matrimonye and wedlock, must be forborne for a
while, I mean during the time, that it does let us to fast and pray, how
much more ought we to forbear, yea and to forsake all other things, that do
hinder and let our prayers. The syngle life is a let unto those pryestes that
have not the gift of chastytye.
But to live a wiuelesse life, does let the pryestes, which have not the
gift of chastitye, to pray, and to do other things that perteine to their
office and vocation: Ergoe they ought to forsake that kind of life, and to be
at defiaunce with it.


Robyn Papyst. I deny the minour or second part of your argument.


The true Christian. I desire no better than the commen experience, which we
see daily before our eyes, for to prove it. The commen experyence proves all.


Whereunto might be added the saying of Saint Paul which we rehearsed even
now. Do we not see dailye, I pray you, if a pryest has not the gift of
chastitye, that where as he should study and pray, This is to true.
he does occupye him self all the day long, in seekynge of his harlottes and
whores, and if the find none at the first, he does vex him self, night and
day, studying, how he may, by one mean or other, bring some honest poor
woman or maid to naught? And verelye, if this fire of incontinencye, which he
burns with all, be not quenched by one naughty mean or other, he shall
never be able, to pray, to read, or study, he shall never think of heavenly
things, not yet on any thing, that is good. These things being considered
a right, i. Timo. iiii.
it is an easy thing to perceive, that this wyuelesse life, which truly is
a plain invention of the deuell, does altogether let them, that have not the
gift of continencye and chastytye, to do the things that pertayne to their
vocation and calling. Let these wyuelesse priests, what fair face soever
they bear before men, and how soever they do dissemble, and cloak the fire of
incontinencye, that they burn wythall, be judge their selves. I do only
appeal to their own conscience, which now is, and shall be hereafter a
sufficient withnesse against them.


Robyn Papyst. A pretye remedy to bring one to the deuell.
Ye hit partelye the mass on the head. But ye know what remedy they have in
their canon laws.

Si non cast tamen caute.
The true Christian. That is as much to say, if thou canste not live
chastelye, play thou the knave pryuelye. But to the matter: The second
point, that we shall mark in Paul's words, is that he does prefer, the
honest companiynge together of man and wife in Matrimonye, before fasting or
prayer, Godly counsel.
or before the wyuelesse life in them that have not the gift of continencye
or chastitye. For, he says: And come again together, lest Satan do tempte
you for your incontinencye, that is to say, Sometimes the lyberty of
Matrimonye is to be preferred before prayer and fasting.
if ye perceive, that ye can not live chastelye, during the time of your
prayers, leave prayinge alone: For, then ought ye to prefer the honest
lybertye of Matrimony, before prayer, lest Satan do tempte you. Satan is a
subtle and craftye enemy, therefore, ye must beware of him, lest under the
shadow and color of prayer, he cause you to commytte some filthenesse.
Therefore, Saint Paul says afterward: This I say of favor and not of
commandment. Where upon, I dare boldlye say, that your holy father the
Pope is a very Satan or rather an incarnate deuell, The Pope is a deuell
incarnate.
which under the pretense and color of prayer does cause his priests to fall
into the net of of the devil by many abominable and horrible sins. Why
will the not permit unto them the same, that Saint Paul does both permit
and also command unto all those, that want the gift of chastity? does that
fleashlye Idol think, that to be without a wife, The true chastitye.
is to live chastely? The true chastitye does consiste in the true pureness
of the heart, and mind. Ambrose upon the.vii. Chapter of the first Epistle to
the Corinth. i. Corinth. vii
For as Ambrose says, what does it avail or profit, if thy body being
chaste and clean, they soul or mind be polluted and defiled? To be short,
no man can be coumpted chaste before God, except he be holy both in body,
and also in spirit.

Which thing can not be in such pryestes, that have not the gift of
chastitye, until they use the godly remedy, that is offered unto them in the
holy estate of Matrimonye.


Robyn Papyst. When I do well weighe the words of Saint Paul, where he says.
The single men or women, do care for the things that belong to the lord,
that they may be holy both in body and also in spirit, I do in a manner agree
to your sayenges. But go forwards I pray you.


The true Chrystian. The third doctrine, that we do learn of Paul's words,
is, that there is neither fasting nor prayer, Neither fasting nor prayer can
quench the fire of incontinen^ie.
that can quench the fire of incontinencie, except god does quench it him
self, by his especial grace.

Which thing sayncte Paul does well declare when he says. Come together
again, least Satan do tempte you for your incontinencye. i. Cor. vii.
Mark ye now this: if the incontinencie could be taken away by prayers or
fastinges, sayncte Paul need not to say: Come together again, least for your
incontinencie, ye be tempted of Satan, but rather: continue still in fasting
and prayer, and so shall ye overcome and quench at length the burning
concupiscence of your flesh. Again, he says not: i. Cor. vii.
he that can not absteyne, let him pray and fast, but contrarywyse he says:
i. Cor. vii.
he that has not the gift of chastitye let him marrye. Moreover he does not
write: for avoiding of fornication, let every man fast and pray, or beat
him self, but rather this commandment does he give for auoydinge of
fornication, let every man have his wife, and every woman have her husband.
I do always except them, Who they be that ought to be accepted from this law
that do not tempte God, that is to say, which can not commodiously come at
their wives, by reason of their office or vocation, as many gentlemen and
other be, which by the commandment of their prince, are feign to keep the
wars or marchaundise, folowinge their marchaundise and other like. They that
cannot commodyouselye come at their own wives ought to pray for the gift of
chastytye.
Such are bound to pray unto almightye god, that he vouchesafe to give them
the gift of chastity during the time that they be absent from tdeyr wives:
but yet they ought not to separate them selves, for to long a time, nor
without a just and lawefull cause.


Robyn Papyst. Why does sainet Paul write then that it is good for a man not
to touch a woman? The fifth argument of the papyste of our time. i. Cor. vii.
Here saint Paul seems to allow the opinion of them that say, that it is
meritorious or auaylable unto salvation to live without the company of a
woman, or in the state of single life. Math. xix.
Does not also our savior Jesus Christ say him self, that there be some,
which have made the^ selves chaste for the kingdom of heavens sake.


The true Chrystian. All these places make nothing for the papists. For first
and foremost, Answer. How the words of saint Paul ought to be
understood
the meaning of saint Paul, is not, that to absteyne from a woman, is
meritorious, or available unto salvation, but that it is more commodious for a
man, if he can live so, or has the gift of chastity, to be unmarried, then to
be married.

For, i. Cor. vii.
he that is single and unmarried having the gift of chastity and continency,
cares for the things that perteyne unto the lord, that he may be holy both
in body, and also in spirit: he may at all times go abroad to preach the
gospel, Math. x.
and if persecution does arise for the words sake, he shall neither by wife
nor by children be let to fly from city to city, as our savior Jesus
Christ does bid: and if he fall into the enemies hands, he shall with a
better mind go to the fire. Many other commodities might I rehearce, which
they have, that having the gift of chastity do remain unmarried. But what
does this pertayne to your wiuelesse priests, The saying of saint paul
does nothing pertayne to the papists.
which as vile stinking goats do walowe them selves in all kind of Sodomie
and whoredom? They say that it is not lawefull for them to have wives of their
own, and to touch them, as God has ordained and appointed, but how they
handle other men's wives and common harlots in their blind and theuishe corners,
Roma. i.
the very children in the street are able to testifye. These are they, that
for the despising of the lords institutution and ordinance are given up into
a reprobate sense that they should do the things which are both unseemly and alo
too filthye, Math. xix.
and abominable to be uttered out. As for the words of our savior Jesus
Christ, they are easy to be understood: for, there he speaks of those, that
having received the gift of chastity, do absteyne from marriage, that they may
the better spread abroad and publishe, the glad and joyful tidinges of the
kingedome of heaven. But how chastelye does your wyuelesse merchants live, I
beseech you? Can any man say the^ selves chaste, They be as chaste as sparowes
or as are lusty stalauntes that run among mares.
or that they have gelded the^ selves. Let the pore women and maidens, who^
they seduce and deceive daily, testify of the same. And as for the preachings
of the gospel of god, which our savior Jesus christ does call therein that
place the kingdom of heaven, that is not the mark that they shot at, in
absteining from marriage, but that they may live at ease, and pamper up up
their idell and restye bodies, that so they may do the better service unto lady
Venus at all times, Nay not so, for they be our Ladies knights
whose knights they do declare the^ selves to be. This am I sure of, that
there have been more godly sermons made here in England in a weke, by honest
married ministers, that lived in the fear of god, in the holy estate of
matrimonye, then be now made in a hole year, by your maiden priests and
lusty cha^pions of dame Venus.


Robyn Papyst.


The true Christian. When the apostles had said if she matter be so betwixt
the man and the wife, Answer. Math. xix.
the^ it is not good to mary, our savior Jesus christ did answer and say: Al
men be not able to comprehend or receive this saying, but they to whom it is
given. Now if ye will ask me who they be, that geld them selves or that make
the^ selves chaste for the kingdom of heavens sake: I will answer, They do
geld them selves for the kingdom of heavens sake, to whom it is given.
that they gelde them selves or make them selves chaste for the kingedome of
heavens sake, unto whom it is given. But this (as I have said before) can not
be spoken of your unmarried and wiuelesse shauelinges, for they neither live
chastely, nor yet care for the promoting or setting forth of the kingdom of
heaven, but to set out their own kingdom and glory, yt they may live like
lords and kings and have al men's heads under their girdelles. Now do ye
plainly se, yt the places that ye have alleged, do no more pertain unto
your holy priests than the godly documentes of virginity, i. Corin. vii.
that s. Paul gives in the epistel to the Corinthians, do pertain, to the
hores of the stews. Would God such a law might be made.
If kings and princes would once make a law, that al priests that be found
to live vnchastely, or to lead an unclean and filthy life, should be bre^t up
as they make laws to burn them up, that would feign live in the fear of god,
and keep them selves undefiled members of our savior Jesus Christ, ye should
se shortly these common bulls to sing an other song: But as long as they may
without any fear of punihsement walowe the^ selves in every man's bed, and
have gentilwomen with freeh hoodes (for so make they their boastes) to come
home to them into their own cha^bers, they will be still at defiaunce with
matrimony. And no marvel why? For as long as they may have their wives and
children sitting by other men's fires, But this wisdom of theirs shall be derely
sold the^ at length.
and to be kept at other men's costs and charges, they were fools (since that
they be at this point, that they think that there is neither heaven nor hell)
if they would burden them selves with the charges, troubles, and cares that do
pertain to the holy estate of matrimony. But, alas what shall be the end of
the^? As abominable whoremongers and adulterers, and as stinking and filthy
Sodomites, they shall be cast into the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone,


Robyn Papyst. I perceive that sweet meat must have sour sauce. The syxte
argument of the Papists of our time.
They said moreover, that the pryestes, which did mary in king Edwardes days,
did sin most grievously against god, and not only against the laws and
constitucions of our holy mother the church, because that they did most
ungodly break the vows, which they made unto god. For, say they, if we
should but make a faithful promise unto a mortal man, it were a shame for us
to break it: What ought we then to judge of those that dare most ungodly
presume, to b^eake the vows or promises, that they have made solemnly unto
god, The thunder boltes of the Papystes,
before his holy church? They therefore, that marrye, after they have made
their vow, do not only live in adultery, but also are unfaithful promise
breakers. And they that are such must needs provoke the wrath and indignation
of God, not only against them selves, but also against the contrye that they
dwell in.


The true Christian. Answer. Of vows.
Or ever we do preceade any further, we must mark what a vow is? Secondly
what things ought to be considered in making of a vow. First and foremoste,
it is agreed among all men, that the same, which we call a promysse, in the
respect of men, is called a vow in the respect of god. what a vow is.
But this ye will grant me, that we be wont to promysse those things unto
men, which we know to be acceptable unto them, else our promise shall
skarcely be welcome, it shall skarcelye be allowed or accepted of them, to whom
it is made. How much more ought we to beware, tht we promysse or vow
nothing unto God, except we know by his word, that it is acceptable unto him
for, Leui. x.
he does detestand abhor al manner of worshippinges and seruyces, that he him
self has not prescribed in his holy and sacred word. Esaye. xix, Math. xv.
And for this cause he cries out by his Prophet, saiynge: they worship me
in vain, teaching the doctrines and precepts of men. Therefore, in making of a
vow, How many things are to be considered in making of a vow.
three things are to be considered: what he is unto whom we make the vow: what
we be yt make the vow, and for what intent or in what respect we do make it.
First and foremost, then, we must consider with our selves, yt it is god, unto
whom, we make our vow, which as I said before, can away with no service,
worshippinge or religion, that is invented or found out by man, without or
against his holy word, though in the sight, of the foolyshe world, it seems
never so gay, excellent and goodly. If the thing then, The thing that we vow
unto god, must be commanded in gods book or else our vow is abhomynable.
that we promysse or vow unto him be not commanded or prescribed unto us in
his word, it must needs stink before the face of his majesty: yea instead
of praise or reward we shall receive co^digne punishment, for our abomynable
presumption, and unadvised rashness. God does only require of us an obedience
toward his holy law, What God does require of us.
institutio^s and ordenau^ces, which if we do offer unto him through faith in
our savior Jesus christ, though on our part it be most imperfect, yet will
he accept it for his son Jesus Christ's sake, and impute it unto us, as most
perfect. But if leaving the same obedyence, that we owe unto his holy law,
institutions and ordinances, we do seek new ways for to serve and worship
him, doubtelesse, he will pour the same vengeance upon us, Leui. x. (...) xv.
that he did pour upon Nadab and Abihu and also upon Saul, the first king of
the Israelites.


Robyn Papyst. I do remember well, how sore god did punyshe them. For Nadab,
and Abihu were before the whole congregation of Israel devoured with fire, that
came down from the wrath and indignation of God. And as for Saull both his
kingdom was rent from him, and also he him self, was delivered up unto an
unclean spyrite, which should vex and torment him.


The true Christian. Blessed are ye, neighbor, if these men's harms and
grievous punyshmentes can make you to beware. But now, will I come to the second
thing, that ought to be considered in making of a vow. When we go about to
promise or vow any thing unto almyghtye God, we must not only consider,
that it is God unto whom we make the vow, but also what we are our selves,
that do make it. We must always have before our eyes, that of our selves we
can do nothing. Therefore, to promysse a thing, that it lies not in us, We
must vow nothing that it lies not in us to perform, and whereof we have no
promise in gods book.
to perform, and whereof we have no promysse in Gods book that we shall
obtain it at gods hands (if we do ask it) it is a paryllous presumption and
which deserves no small confusyon and shame both before god and the world.


Robyn Papyst. By your saiynge, all that we promysse and vow in our baptism,
What we do promysse and vow in baptism.
For it lies not is us, to forsake the devil and his works, the pompes and
vanities of this wicked world, nor yet the sinful lusts of the flesh. We can
not of our selves believe all the articles of the christen faith, with all
other things, that we are commanded to believe in gods word. It lies in no
man's power to walcke all the days of his life in gods holy law and
commandments. And yet all these things, we do promise and vow in our
baptism. Therefore, might any man, hearing you speak thus, accuse us al, of
presumption and rashenes.


The true Christian. Answer. God does promise all those things that we do
vow and promysse in baptism, and therefore are we sure that we shall obtain
them at his hands by faithful prayers.
But ye must mark good neighbor that god does in his holy word, require of us
all those things, that ye have reherced, and which we do promysse and vow in
our baptism. For, his will and pleasure is, that we should forsake the devil
and his works, that we should be at defiaunce with the pompes and vanities of
the wicked world, and with the sinful lusts of our flesh. His will and
pleasure is, that we should believe and credit all things, that he does set
forth unto us in his word, taking a sure hold through faith upon his mercy
and goodness, declared unto us in his Son Jesus christ, our lord and savior,
and that all the days of our life, we should endeavor our selves to ye
vttermoste of our power, to walk sincerely in his holy laws and
commandments. Therefore we may be sure, yt he will at al times (if we do
require it of him with faithful prayers) assiste us with his grace, that we may
to his glory and to ye salvation of our own souls perform, and fulfill al
those godly promises and vows yt we have made unto him in our baptism,
wherein we have so faythfullye and so straightly bound our selves unto him,
and his service yt we are no more our own me^. For, why? In baptysme we do
become the servant of the lord, so that we are no more our own men.
by receiving this holy sacrament of baptism, which is a seal of ye covenant
and promises of god, we do acknowledge and confess yt we are bought and
purchased unto him, with the most dear and precious blod of his son Jesus christ
our lord: what presu^ption is it then, since yt we are no more our own me^ but
ye seruau^ts of him, that has so derelye boughte us, which thing as I said
before we do acknowledge, by taking upon us the seat of the people of God:
what presumption, I say, is it for us, to promysse or enterprise any thing,
without the knowledge, will and pleasure of our sovereign lord and master?
But where have we any place, yea, one jot or syllable in all the whole body
of the scriptures, that does certifye us, that it is the will and pleasure of
god (who is our sovereign lord and Master) that we should vow and promysse to
live a single and wyue less life, as long as we have any breath in our
bodies? The cruel tyranny of the preachers of our time.
It is manifest then that all those godly vows, that ye do so magnifye and
extolle, and which your Preachers do defend with tothe and nail,
persecutyng them, most tyrannously and also most cruellye, that perceiving the
error and parall that they be in, do with a good and upright conscience,
being builded in gods word, utterly forsake, and abjure them, it is most
manifest I say, that such vows, are without faith, sithe that they have no
ground nor foundation in gods holy word. Therefore, away with them, for what
can they be else but sin. Whatsoever says saynct Paul is not of faith,
Roma. xiiii. Hebr. xii.
the same is sin. Again: without faith, it is impossible for to please
god. We might say then, and that by good right, that they which are offended
with them, that being better instructed in gods law, do go from such rash
and presumptuous vows, The one stands with as good reason as the other.
and are at defiaunce with them, may with as good a cause be angrye and
displeased with the^, that do fly and forsake sin, or that will to the
uttermost of their power, avoid and eschew those things, which they know
to be abominable and stinking before the face of almighty god Why are they so
blinded, that they will not see this canon of theyrs: Isidorus in sinonimis li.
23. questione 4. capi. In male pro.
In male promissis rescinde fidem: in turpi voto muta decretum: quod incaute
vouisti, ne facias, impia est promissio, quaescelere adimpletur.

That is to say: In those things that be not well promised, break thou thy
promise. In a shameful and dishonest vow chaung^ thy mind: Do not the thing,
An applienge of the canon unto the present matter.
that thou have vowed unware or without deliberation and aduiseme^t It is an
ungodly promise, yt is fulfilled, with wickedness. Now can ye say yt the
promise of your wiue less priests, is good, or yt it is well made, since that
it is without faith, and has no manner of ground in gods book? why should
they not then by the virtue of this canon break it? Again, how shameful and
dishonest the vow that they make is, it is apparaunt to the sight of all men.
For by it they are constreined to forsake the honest and lawful remedy, that
god has appointed for all men, and for lack of it, to walow the^ selves in all
kind of filthy and stinking abomination. Why do they not then (as this holy
decree does bid the^) change their mind, and that betimes, lest for their
stinking and filthy abomination, they be utterly cast out of the favor and
sight of god. Thirdly, the vow yt they make, they make it so unadvisedly, and
without al deliberation, yt many priests can not tell whether they ever made any
vow or not. And as for your friars, Al seculare priests that I have talked
wythall have steadfastly affirmed unto me, that they never made vows saving
only that when the Bishop gave them the ^ote, he did say: Accipe iugum
castitatis. Receive thou the yoke of chastitye.
nuns, and monks, they be feign to make their vows, before yt they know the
bente of their own bow, that is to say, before that they have examined and
tried their own strength, or what they be able, to abide or do. Shall we say,
yt such vows are advisedly done and with such a deliberation, as is required
in so high a matter, as this is They may then by the auctority and virtue of
their holy canones break such unadvised vows. For, besides the before
rehearced canone, these are the words of the blessed martyr S. Ciprian: If the
virgins yt have with faith vowed the^ selves unto Christ, Cipri. li. 1.
epistolarum epistola. 2.
can not persevere or will not: it is better yt they mary tha^ that they should
through their tender niceness or deliciousness fall into the fire. Augu. in
libro de bono coniug^li ad Iulianum. disci. 27. capi. Quondam.
And S. Augustine does allow the marriage of such, inuehing sharpelye against
them, that call such marriage, aduoutrie, and go about to separate them, that do
mary after their vow.

The words are these: Some do suppose, that they that mary after their vow,
are adulterers, but I say unto you, that they which separate the^ do offend
grievously.


Robyn Papyst.


The true Christian. It is not for naught that saint Augustine does both write
and say, Answer.
that they, which judge or coumpte those persons, August. 27. question. 1. cap.
nuptiarum.
which marye after their vow, to be adulterers, are shamefullye deceived by a
foolish similitude, meaning the self same similitude that ye have now
aledged and brought in. Ye shall then understand that we are al both men and
women, as many as do pertain to the covenant of life, married unto the lord.
For, Osee. ii.
thus he says him self unto his faithful congregation and church: I will
mary the unto me in faith.

Again, be not these the words of sayncte Paul, ii. Cor. xi.
I have coupled you (speaking to the hole church of Corinthus) to one man, to
make you a chaste virgin to Christ. In how many places, is the faithful
congregation or church, called the spouse and wise of the lamb? Ye learn by
this, that we are al, Reuela. xix. Ephesi. v.
as many as do believe and put our trust in the everliving and eternal god,
the spouse of our savior Jesus Christ. Therefore we need not to be married or
wedded to him, by such kind of new forged vows, since that we are already
through faith, whereby we do apprehend and take hold upon the couenaunte that
God has made betwyxt him and us, so surely married to him, Ephe. v.
being in many and sondrye places of the scriptures called the spouse and wife
of the lamb, I mean of the only begotten son of God, our savior Jesus
Christ, who has so loved us, that he gave him self for us, to sanctifye and
cleanse us, in the fountain of water, through the word, to make us to him self
a glorious congregation, without spotte or wrinkle, or any such thing, that so
we might be holy and without blame. To tell you the truth, it is rather to be
believed, that by such inverted vows (which we may well call doctrines of
deuels) we are utterly separated and divorced from our true husband our
savior Jesus Christ, By popish vows, we are separated and divorced from our
true husband our savior Jesus Christ.
and coupled or married unto Idolles I mean unto dead creatures, which we
know not whether they be in heaven or in hell. For by them some be married to
Frauncys, some to Dominike, some to Augustine, and some to this or that sayncte
(at least they call them so) and so poor Christ, the only husband of the true
christian church, is utterly forsaken and not once thought upon. All ye then,
that through ignorance and error, have coupled your selves unto such
unlawful husbands, with whom ye do daily and hourly commit spiritual
whoredom (which is the mother and nurce of al filthye and stinkyng
abomination which is committed in the body to the utter castyng away of the
soul) Spiritual whoredom is mother and nurce of all filthye and stinking
abomination. Romans i.
repent betimes and come again to your true and lawefull husband, our
savior Jesus Christ, and stycke to his laws, whereby he has ordained and
appointed, i. Cor. vii.
that for auoydinge of whoredom, every man should have his wife, and every
woman, her husband. Let it not move you, that ye have made a promise, sith
that it was made unadvisedly and without deliberation, and again, since that
it can not be fulfilled without committing great wickedness, and mischief.
For as ye learn by the canone heretofore alleged and rehearced, such a
promise is ungodly, and ought in no wise to be kept. It is not unknown, that
many under the pretense and color of keeping of their vows, or because that
they would not seem to break them have committed most shameful and horrible
murders. We do read in a certain epistell that a famous clerk called
Huldarichus, Huldaricus ad Nicolaum papam.
being then bishop of August, did write unto Pope Nicolas being first of that
name, that Gregorye did on a time cause one of his ponds to be drawn and that
there was found in it above six thousand heads of young infantes which had
been murdered and cast into it, A notable history.
by those, that by their violent and tirannous laws, were forbidden to marye.
The repentance and sobbing of Gregory.
Which when Gregory did see being wonderfully moved in his mind did with
sighing and sobbinge praise and commend highly the saying of Saint Paul, 1.
Cor. vii.
where he writes and says: Better it is to marry than to burn, addyng unto
it: yea, better it is to marrye, and to suffer to marry, than to give occasyon
of such a shameful murder and children slaughter. This was done in Gregory's
time, many hundredth years ago: What, think ye, has been done sense, among so
many thousand of Nonnes and friars, which are spread abroad through out
all the hole world? I do here. Let pass the Sodoniticall and filthy acts,
that these marked mounsters of Antichriste do perpretrate and commit among
them selves, if they chance to want and lack women: And all this do they
forsothe, that they may seem unto men to keep the promysse and vow that they
have made. But, as Isidorus says, What an ungodly promise is.
ungodly is that promise, that is fulfilled with such wickedness and mischief.
Therefore, most derely beloved brethren and systers in Christ break such
devilish promysses and vows betimes, and come away from that whorysh and
bloody generation unto your true and lawful husband our savior Jesus Christ:
and if ye have not the gift of chastity, couple your selves in honest
Matrimony, having the fear of God before your eyes, that ye may keep your
selves undefiled members of our Savior Jesus Christ.


Robyn Papyst. I am sorry that I have brought you so far from the mattyer,
that ye were in, I am affrayed that ye will scarcely remember where ye left.


The true Christian. Take ye no thought for that I remember as well where I
left, as if I had made no degression at al. We were in the second point, which
I said ought to be considered in making of a vow. And in it besides that, which
has been said alredye, this ought diligently to be observed and marked:
Sith that we are able to do nothing of our selves, We must vow nothing that
may let us in our vocation.
and that we be no more our own me^, but are derely bought, we must beware
that we do promysse or vow nothing, that may be a let or a hyndraunce unto
us, in that vocation or kind of life, that it shall please our sovereign Lord
and Master to call us to, as this foolyshe vow of single life, is unto all
those, that lack the gift of chastitye. They their selves can bear record,
what tormentyng and vexation they feel in the flesh, so that the troubles that
are commenlye in wedlock, are nothing in comparyson of it. Can they study or
pray, think you? or can they do any thing, that perteyneth to their
vocation or calling? God knows, there is a poor studyinge, but a more
homelye prayinge, where the fire of concupiscence of the fleash, is kyndeled,
and no laweful water by, for to quench it. Moreover, we must in this second
point, that pertains unto us beware and take heed, that we do not spoil our
selves of that goodly lybertye and fredome that our savior Jesus Christ, has
so derely bought and pourchased unto us, we must take heed I say lest with
our foolish vows and unadvised promysses we do make our selves both
servants and slaves unto those things, that God will have to be servant
unto us. Christ our savior will have us to be free unto him, Christ our
savior will have us to be free unto him
and in his fredome to use all his creatures with thanks geuinge, as he him
self has appointed and ordained, let us beware therefore that we become not,
under the shadow and color of their goodlye vows, the servant of men's
dreams and traditions. Stand fast says Saint Paul, Gala. v.
in the liberty where with Christ has made you free, and wrappe not your
selves again in the yoke of bondage. And after that he had given counsel
touching the wyuelesse and syngle life, he does add by and by these words.
This speak I for your profit, i. Corin. vii.
not to tangle you in a snare. Who considering these things would not judge
them to be stark mad, and besides their own selves, that having such a
goodly liberty and fredome already purchassed unto them, wherein they may
most conuenyentlye serve and worship god, as he him self will be served and
worshypped, do wittinglye cast them selves into a perpetual bondage and
thraldom, where they shall be feign, by reason of their foolish and unadvised
vow, to serve god, as most ungodly, and supersticious persons shall prescribe
and appoint unto them, and not as he him self has wylled and ordained in his
word. There again, shall they lose the free and lawful use or handlynge of
the good creatures of God. What lyberty and fredom we lose by popysh vows.
and though they burn never so much with the fire of concupiscence and
incontinencye, they shall never be suffered because of their wicked bond, to
have access unto those lawful waters, that God, from the beginnynge has
appointed for the quenchynge and puttinge out of it.


Robyn Papyst. But what remedy, when they have once brought them selves, in to
that bondage and thraldom:


The true Christian. Why not? are they not the servants of the lord? Math.x.
we be made to shake of, his gentle and easy yoke, and receive upon us the
intolerable burdone of men's tradytions and dreams: shall it not be lawful for
us, when we perceive our own folly and how shamefully we have been begiled,
for to come again (notwithstanding that we did make a promysse unadvisedly
and without delyberation) unto our sovereign lord and Master, which is our
sauyoure Jesus Christ, who in his holy gospel does cry out and say: Math.
xi.
Come unto me, all ye that labor and are lawden and I will refreshe you?
Again: do ye not think it to be lawful for us, to flee from sin unto god?
If it be lawful to flee from sin it is lawful to flee from popysh. vows.
But it has be already declared, and proved, that all such vows, sith that
they be not of faith, are but abomynation and sin before god. Therefore, we
may lawfullye and with a good and upright conscience, flee from them and
forsake them, whatsoever the wicked world says to the contrary.


Robyn Papyst. There remains yet behind, the third thing, which ye said,
ought to be considered in making of a vow.


The true Christian. Ye say very well, and I perceive that ye are vnwylling,
that I should leave any thing behynd. The third thing then, which ought to be
considered in making of a vow is this: When we go about to promysse or vow
any thing unto god, we must consider and weighe with our selves, for what
intent or in what respect we do it. If a vow be never so lawful yet must
we consider, for what intent we do mark it.
For, it may be so, that being done for this or that intent and in this or
that respect, it shall be pleasant and acceptable unto God, where as if it be
done for an other intent, or in another respect, it shall stink before the
face of his majesty. As for an exaumple, I perceive that the drynkyng of wine,
is hurteful unto me, or that it does let and hinder me in my vocation and
calling: Whereby I am moved to abstain from it altogether: and that I may
have the better occasyon to do it, I bind my self to it by a vow, promisyng
faithfully unto god, that I will all the days of my life (except I be driven to
do the contrary by urgent necessity) refrain from drinkyng of wine, that I
may the better serve him in that state or condytion of life, that it has
pleased him to call me to. This vow, sith that it is made only to this end,
that I may follow my vocation the better, cannot but please god. But if I
should do it, thinkyng or being persuaded that the absteinynge from wine, is
merytorious before god, and that by it I shall deserve heaven or the forgeuenes
of my sins, then must such a vow, be abomynable and stinkyng before the
face of almighty God. Those things may we only vow that be indifferent and
that lie in our power
The like may be said of all other things, that of them selves, are
indifferent, and lie in our power Now, let us grant by way of disputation,
that the vow of chastytye or single life, is lawful or allowed in the
scriptures and word of god: yet onelesse we do take upon us that vow, to
the intent that we may the better give our selfs to the true meditacion of
heavenly things, and again to this end that we may the better edefye the
holy congregation and church of christ, by publishing and preachinge abroad
the glad and joyful tidinges of salvation, all that we do is abominable in the
sight of god. For, if we do it, thinking to deserve heaven by it, or to this
end that we may live at ease, and without all solicitude and care, or
troubles of this world. And also because that we will not be burdoned with the
charges that pertain to the common wealth: although we could live as chaste
a life, as ever the blessed virgin Marye, the mother of our savior Jesus Christ
did, it is impossible for us to please god: all that we do (since that in it we
do not seek his glory, and the profit of our neighbor) will he deteste and
abhor.

1. Tim. v. Why widows were received into the church.
And as it is of men, so it is of women. It appears by the words of s. Paul,
that widows did promise their service unto the church, to this end, that
they might se to the poor which were kept at the costs and charges of the
faithful congregation and in deed they were most mete for that purpose, for to
see the^ to be washed and kept clean, and for to see their meat to be
handesomly dressed. Howebeit saint Paul will have none to be chosen to that
office under three score years of age, biddinge the younger wydowes to marie and
to bring forth children. As for maidens and virgins, that be endued from above
with the gift of chastity, the chief cause why. i. Cor. vii.
S. Paul will have the^ to absteyne from marriage, is, that being free from the
cares and troubles that be commonly in matrimony, they should give the^ selves
to the contemplation and study of heavenly things, and also endeavor them
selves by dilligent reading and hearing of the scriptures, to be holy both in
body and also in spyrite. It appears by sayncte Hieromes writings, that
there were both widows and maidens in his time, which did with the substance
that was left unto them, either by their husbands, or else by their
parents and fryendes, relyue the poor, i. Cor. vii.
and also maynteyne learning if then, either widows or maidens (I do here
speak only of those that have the gift of chastitye) do abstain from
marriage, for any other intent, or in any other respect, than I have said
already: that is to say, if they do think, that by such kind of life, they
shall merit or deserve heaven, or do embrace it, to this end, that they may
be free and exempte from all sorrows and pains that other women suffer in
bearyng and brynginge up of their children, all that they do is naught, God
will have al things to be referred to his glory, and to the profit of our
neighbor.
and hated of God, who will have all things to be done to his glory only,
and for the profit of our neighbor. Ye may now learn by this, how
pleasant and acceptable the vows of your priests, Nonnes, freeres, and
Monks, are unto god. For do they not all, take this vow of single life or
chastitye upon them (though they be as far from keeping of it, as the East is
from the West) to this end that they may live at ease, and be without all
troubles and cares of this common life, pamperinge up or fattinge them selves,
with the sweat of other men's brows?

Again, do they it not to this end, that they may be in estimation among
men, and taken as Gods, reckeninge holy matrimony, which has been
instituted of the lord him self, to be but filthiness and pollution, in
comparison of their counter fayted chastitye? Yea, they that are of the best
sort among them, do think verily that god is greatly in their debte,
because that they do willingly abstain from this holy estate of matrimonye,
yea, if God do not place them in his kingdom of heaven, far above his married
elect and chosen, they are ready to enter an action in the law against him.
Therefore, we may well conclude, that all their vows that they make after the
rules and doctrines of men, The conclusion of vows
without or against gods word, or to any other end tha^ for to set forth the
glory of god and yt profit of our neighbor are stinking and abominable
before the face of almighty god, and that therefore it is lawefull for any man
or woman, yt by the means of them, has been brought into the snare of the
enemy, for to break and forsake them, and if they can not live chaste, to
couple them selves in honest matrimony.


Robyn Papyst. Deu. xxiii.
Yet this shall ye find written in the scriptures: When thou do make a vow
unto the lord thy god, do not defer from day to day to perform it.
Ecclesiastes or the preacher. ca. v.
For verelye the lord shall require it at thy hand. The like shall ye read
in Ecclesiastes otherwise called the preacher, yea says Moses if any thing
be come forth of thy lips, see that thou do keep and perform it: as
thou haste vowed unto the lord thy god of thine own free will, and as thou
haste spoken with thy mouth. What are all men able to say against such
manifest and plain textes?


The true Christian. This are all the godly able to say, Answer. Wherein the
vows of the old law did consist.
that both Moses and Solomon, do speak of the vows of the old law which
did consyst in certain kind of sacrafices, and ceremonies which our savior
Jesus Christ did utterly abolyshe and put down by his coming, so that they
pertayne no more unto us, except ye will have all other sacrifices and
ceremonies to pertayne unto us also.


Robyn Papist. These be also the words of the psalmiste. Psalm. 1.
and pay thy vows unto the highest. Again: make vows, and pay them unto
the lord your God. Will ye say now, Psalm. 76.
that David does here speak of the vows of the old law also?


The true Christian. I will here bring nothing of mine own. First,
Answer. Arnobius in psalm. 50.
ye shall hear old father Arnobius, who expounding ye first verse yt ye have
alleged writes on this manner. What shall thou retche unto me of thine own?
This is thine own, if thou do with a pure heart pour before me praises
and lauds: and pay unto me to vow, that thou haste made me in baptism,
wherein thou did promise that thou would forsake the deuel, God does
require none other vow of us, but that which we have made in baptism.
and keep my commandments. Here do we learn by this most ancient writer
that the vow, which god does now require at our hands, is the promise and
vow that we have made unto him in baptism which we ought as long as we have
any breathe in our bodies, to endeavor our selves always to perform and
fulfill to the uttermost of our power. Marcus Antonius Flaminius in ps^almum. 50
Al we (says Marcus Antonius Flaminius writing upon the same verse) that
profess godliness, do promise and vow that we will prefer the glory of god
before al things, and worship purely and sincerely, August. in psalm. 55.
his holy and blessed name. As for the second sentence yt ye have alleged,
thus does s. Augustine expound it: What should ye vow or pay? The brute
beasts that were sometimes offered at the altar? Offer thou no such thing:
thou have that thing in thee, which thou may both vow and pay. Bring
forth of the cheste of thy heart, the sweet smelle of laud and praise,
bring forth of the cellar of thy conscience the sacrifice of faith. And
whatsoever thou do bring forth, fire it with charity. Now do ye see, how
those holy aunciente doctors, do expound the places, that ye have aleaged out
of Dauyd, and how that those textes do make nothing at all, for the
maynteynynge of the new fourged vows of your wyuelesse cleargye. The end of
vows.
Therefore I say boldlye in the Lord, that all such beggerlye vows
notwithstanding both men and women, that have been or are yet entangled with
them, may lawfully marry, if they have not the gift of chastetye given them:
and that none will find fault with their doings, except it be they, that for
the despysynge of gods holy law and ordeynaunce, are alredye given over into
a reprobate sense.


Robyn Papyst.


The true Christian. We have examples enoughe. For first and foremost, all the
pryestes of the old law were married. The pryestes of the old law were married
Which thing ye have granted me alredye before, except ye have forgotten it.
And in the new Testament Christ our Savior, did call married men, for to be
his Apostels, Christ called married men to be his apostelles.
which thing the heavenly wisdom of the father, would not have done, if it had
not ben lawful for his ministers to marry.


Robyn Papyst.


The true Christian. It is an easy thing to say so, but it is not so easy
to prove it. For if they had put away their wives (as ye say they did) then
should they have done contrary to the doctrine of their teacher and Master,
which says: whom god has joined and coupled togehter, Math. xix.
let no man put a sunder. Again: It is not lawful for any man to put away
his wife, except it be for fornication. Moreover if the Apostels had put away
their wives, with what face, I beseech you, should they have gone about to
teach married men how they ought to behave them selves toward their yoke
fellows? Among all other the blessed Apostel Saynct Peter says: Likewise, ye
men, dwell with your wives according to knowledge, i. Peter. iii.
geuynge honor unto the wife, as unto the weaker vessel, and as unto them
that are heirs also of the grace of life, that your prayers be not hindered.
When both Peter, and the other Apostels also, should have given this or other
like counsel unto married men, What married men might have said to the apostels
if they had forsaken their wives.
might they not by good right have said unto them again: Ah, ye are good
fellows, ye come to teach us, how we ought to behave our selves toward our
wives, and how that we ought to bear with them, as with the weker vessel, to
cherish and make much of them, yea and that we ought to love them, as our
own fleash: how chance that we do not the like your selves, but put away
your own wyueds from you lest ye should be combred or troubled with them,
or lest ye should be feign to do, as ye would have us to do? First, let us
see how well ye agrewith your own wives, Physician heal thy self
or how ye behave your selves toward them: and then will we follow the
godly counsel, that ye give us. Such like tauntes might married men, when they
were taught their duty toward their wives, have given to the Apostelles, if
it had been so, that they had put away their own wives, or had separated them
selves from them. But it is not to be believed or thought, that the apostels
would give any occasyon, whereby their doctrine should be despised, or lawghed
to scorn. This then with the doctrine of their teacher and master being well
considered, I may conclude boldly, that the Apostelles did not put away
their wives, nor yet separated them selves from them.


Robyn Papyst. Do we not read in the scriptures,


The true Christian. Who has taught you, Answer.
to make such a goodly argument? I confess it to be true in deed, that when
the Apostels were called by our savior Jesus Christ, they did forsake all
things, that might have let them to follow him, yea and their own wives
also, but not for ever.

For they separated them selves from them only for a time. A similitude.
As when a king does call his nobilytye and co^munes for to follow him in
wars, or when he does send some of his nobles into forrayne countries for
to be his ambassadors there, then do they all forsake their own business,
yea and leave their own wives also, but not for ever. For they do it only
for a time, that is to say, till their Prince give them leave to return home
again, or till they have done their ambassade. Yea some of them, if they
perceive that the time of their ambassade be over long, do send for they
wives to come unto them. So the Apostels that were married, when they could not
without leaving of their wives do their office nor follow their vocation,
When the Apostels did leave their wives and when they did not.
they did leave them. But when they could do their office or follow they
vocation without leaving of them, truly they separated not them selves
from them. Do we not read, that after Saint Peter was called, our Sauyoure
Jesus Christ went into his house, and healed his wifes mother, Math. viii.
which was sick of an ague? John. xxi.
Moreover, went not Peter to his old occupation again, after that Christ was
risen again from death? where by it is easy to understand, that the Apostels
did not so forsake all, that they had, but that it was lawefull for them to
return again unto their own. Besides all this, i. Cor. ix.
it is plainly written, that both Peter, and other of the Apostels did carye
about their own wives, when they trauayled among forrayne and strange
nacyons, preaching the Gospel of our savior Jesus Christ. Whereby it is
euydente and plain that they forsook them not utterly. Finally in this word,
all, there is a figure to be understood, Synecdoch and what it is.
which is called Sinecdoch, whereby other whilles, part is taken for the hole,
and the hole for part. Therefore, when it is said, that the Apostels forsook
all, it is to be understood of those things yt it is lawful for a man to
forsake: But it is so far of, that the Chrystyan relygion should constrein or
compel any man to forsake his wife and his children (except it be in an
vrgente necessity, as when we must suffer for the word sake) that rather it
does call them all infydelles and worse than infidelles that do not provide
and see to their own householde, i. Timo. v.
of the which household, ye will grant me, that the wife and children are the
chiefest part. Why does not the sayng of Gregory take place among them where
he says: Grego. 27. quest. 2. cap. Sunt qui
some do think that for religion sake, marriage should be disolued and broken,
but we must consider, that though man's law does permit it, yet gods law
has forbidden it. For, the truth him self does say: Whom god has
coupled together, Math. xix.
let no man put a sunder. Again: Let no man put away his wife, except it be
for fornication. Who will wythstande the maker of so strong a law.


Robyn Papyst. Gregory does not speak there of the Christian religion,


The true Chrystian. Very well, Monkery among the papists, is of more
perfection then christ's religion is.
I am content that it be taken so: yet shall ye be feign to grant, that
monkerie is, after your doctrine, a more perfect religion, then the religion
of Christ is. Whereupon I will make mine argument after this sort: It it be not
lawefull to break wedlock for monkery sake, which is of more perfection:
how much less shall it be lawefull to break matrimonye for christian
religion sake, which is of less perfection? But ye say, that it is Gregory's
meaning, that a man or woman may not break wedlock for to enter into
monkerye, much less then shall it be lawful for to break matrimonye for
christian religion sake, which as I said, by your own doctrine, and after the
opinion of many men is of less perfection than monkery is.


Robyn Papyst. Ye said, me think, that both Peter and also other of the
apostelles did carry about their wives with them, when they went about to
preach. Where (I beseech you) do ye find that written?


The true Chrystian. i. Corinth. ix.
Thus is it written, and thus do we read in the first epistell to the
Corinthians: Have we not power to eat and to drink? Have we not power to
lead about a sister to wife, (some do translate these Greek words, Adelphen
Gyneca, a christian wife) have we not power, I say, to lead about a sister
to wife, Cephas is Peter.
as well as other apostels and as the brethren of the lord and Cephas?


Robyn Papyst. Saynct Paul does not there speak of the apostelles wives: Max.
xv.
As we read that certain women, followed our savior our Jesus christ from
Galilee, ministering unto him of their substance.


The true Christian. Without all doubt some expound it so, as ye say. But I
can not see,

It is to be believed the^ that they had their own wives with them, Matrimonye
was always in estimation and honor among the Gentiles.
since that they knew, that even among idolatrous Gentiles, matrimonye was
always had in great reputation and honor. Again, if s. Paul did speak of
such women as followed the Apostelles for to minister unto them in their
necessities, he him self did great wrong unto the churches of Macedonia and
of Achaia, whom he did rob, taking wages of them, ii. epist. to the Cor.
xi. cha.
that so he might preach freelye unto the Corinthians. For, such honest women
might have ministered unto him, as well as unto other, all manner of things, that
he should have neded, without puttinge of the churches of Achaia, and of
Macedonia to such intolerable charges. Whereby it does appear that he did
speak of none other but of the apostelles wives. For his meaning was, that it
was as lawefull for him as for the other apostels, to take a living of them
unto whom he did preach the gospel, not only for him self, but also for his
wife: which thing nevertheless he would not do, least he should be chargeable
unto them. Moreover who has power to lead any other woman besides his wife?
The husband has power only over his wife, and not upon an other woman Since
then that saint Paul says, that the brethren of the lord, and Cephas
(which is Peter) had power to lead women about, it is without all
controversy, that he spoke of none other but of their own lawefull wives.
Euse. ecclesi. hist. lib. 3. cap. 3.
But ye shall hear what Clemens Alexandrinus does say writing against them
that did contemn marriage: Do they (says he) disalowe the Apostelles? For,
both Peter and Philip had wives, and gave their daughters unto husbands. And a
litel after it focoweth. Ibidem.
They report (says he,) that when Peter did see, that his wife was led away
for to suffer, he did rejoice because of the election. And that therefore he
did cry out aloude unto her, when she was led forth, and calling her by her
name did say. O wife remember the lord. Now do ye se plainly, that neither
Philip, who was both a deacon, and a preacher of the gospel, nor yet Peter,
whom ye will have to be chief among the apostels did put away there wives,
till the lord who had coupled them, did put them asunder. I may then conclude
and say, Conclusyon.
that we have sufficient examples both in the old and new Testamente, that
pryestes which want the gift of chastitye, ought to marrye, and have wives
of their own, that they may keep the^ selves undefiled members of our savior
Jesus Christ.


Robyn Papyst. How be ye able to prove, that after they were ones called, A
foolysh objection, how be it the Papystes be not ashamed to use il.
they did company with their wives after the fashion of the world, though
they had them with them, whether so ever they went?


The true Christian. In good sooth, neighbor, i. Corin. vii.
For auoydinge of fornication, let every man have his wife, and every woman
her husband. In this general or universal sentence, They are I warrant you
every enche of them.
Sayncte Paul does comprehend all men, as well pryestes as other, except ye
will say that priests are no men. Therefore they are as well as all other men,
commanded by Paul to have wives of their own, i. Cor. vii.
except they be made chaste from above. Again: they that can not absteyne, let
them marrye. Here does the Apostell, give generally a commandment unto all
them that can not absteyne that they should marye, he excepteth none. Therefore
they that forbid marriage unto any person upon the earth, which can not live
without it, are fellows of them, or rather the self same, that sayncte Paul
does prophecy of, i. Timo. iiii.
saying: The spirit speaks evidently, that in the later times, some shall
depart from the faith, and shall give head unto spyrites of error, and
deuellishe doctrines of them, A conscience marked with an hot iron, is an
unclean conscience defiled, marked, and prynted with many marks of worldelye
lusts.
that speak false by hypocrisy. And have their consciences marked with a hot
iron, forbiddinge to marrye, and commanding to abstain from meats which god
has created to be received with thanks giving.


Robyn Papyst. But once preachers do say, that saynct paul does here
prophecy of certain heretics, which afterward did most falsely affirm
that marriage was instituted and invented of the Deuell. Such were Tatius,
Martion, and Manicheus, of whom saynct Augustine does speak in his book of
heresies. Augu. in lib. heretico.



The true Christian. Those heretics did forbid marriage in general, but your
holy father the pope does forbydde it in particulare. Again there be certain
times in the year, when by his laws no man may marry. Tatius, Martion, and
Manicheus enemies of matrimony.
Is not this to be a companyo^ of Tatius, Martion, and Manicheus, I say, that
the pope can not excuse him self, but that he is a Tatianiste, Martioniste,
and a Manichean, and even of the number of those heretics that saint Paul
does speak of there in the sentence before alleged.


Robyn Papyst. The church does not forbid marriage, but it has only ordained,


The true Christian. Is not the one as evil as the other? Church to require
any such thing of the priests. It is our Sauyoure Jesus christ only, who
is the only Master and head of his congregation and church, to whom such
authority does pertain: As for the authority of ye church it is limited by his
word and can extend no farther, than the word will permit or suffer. In the
mean while both the pope and all his adherentes which either forbid marriage to
them selves or to any other are plain Tatianistes Manicheans and Martionistes.
The Eustachians.
As far, as I remember, there was a certain kind of heretics, which were
called Eustachians, which did so abhor marriage in the Ministers of the
church, that they would in no wise receive the communion, Out of the counsel
of Gangris.
at the hands of them that had wives. And against them was a godly decree
made, in a council that was holden at Gangris in the country of Paphlagonia.
This is the very decre it self: He that makes a difference of married pryest
as though by reason of marriage, he ought not to offer or to minister the
communion, They that abstain form the communyon of a married pryest, are
pronounced accursed.
and does already abstain from his oblation, let him be accursed. Ar^ they not
then all by the virtue of this decree excommunycated and accursed that hold
opinion, that married pryestes may not mynister in the Church of Christ?
Though they be abomynable whore mongers, adulterers, drunkardes, Meet
champions to serve lady Missa.
blasphemous swearers fighters and blasers: yet they will find no fault with
their oblation: If they do but once ringe the belles, to their divine and
holy service, they will flock unto them as the sheep do to the fold. But
if they do hear of a married mynister, though he be never so well learned,
though all his study is to set forth purely and sincere lie gods holy and
sacred word, Nothing can set forth the Pope shauelynges but feygned
chastytie.
and to mynyster most rightly the sacraments according to the lords
instytution and ordeynaunce, though his conversation and living be altogether
angelical, that is to say, most godly and virtuous: yet will our pope
Eustachians deteste and abhor to receive the communion or any other sacrament
at his hands, thinking most ungodly that the married ministers of the church
are more defiled and polluted, by companienge with their own lawefull wives, I
my self have heard a great many say so.
than if being unmarried, they should lie commonly with common whores and
harlots of the stews. Yea, the popes shauelinges their selves, be not ashamed
to say, that it is for them a less offense before god, to lie with a hundredth
harlottes, than to have wives of their own. A very substanciall argument I
assure you.
For, say they, if we have never so many harlottes and take our pleasure with
them, whenever we list, we may repent the next day, and being shriuen, we
shall obtain at our holy father the popes hands (which is the vicare of
god, The Pope is the vicare of God.
here in earth, and has absolute power to do what so ever he list) free
remission of our sins both a paena et culpa: But if we have wives of our
own, we shall live in continual vnclenelinesse, In deed good christian reader
they call matrimonye nothing but vncleanelinesse, and pollution, therefore
that they call it a sacrament, it is for none other thing but that they may
have the handeling of it under their jurisdiction, and ia their spiritual
court. Esaias. v.
and stinking pollution whereby it shall come to pass, that we shall never be
pure and clean, for to come to the altar of the lord. Who would not judge, I
beseech you, that such vile persons are given over into a reprobate sense, and
that all godly knowledge and understanding being by the righteous judgment of
god, taken away from them, they do call that which is good evil, and that
which is evil, good, they do call light, darkness, and darkness, light,
esteminge that to be sweet which is sour, and that which is sour, to be
sweet? In the sixth sinode or counsel that was holden and kept at
Constantinople, where it was forbidden, The sixth Sinode holden at
Constantinople.
that no man should take upon him the vow of single life, and also commanded
that all they that for any ecclesiastical orders, did put away their wives,
should be put from the communion of the faithful: this holy decree was made. If
any man presume contrary to the rules and Canons of the Apostels to deprive
any pryestes or deacons, Distinc. 31. canon. Quoniam in romans ordine.
from the touching and communion or fellowship of their lawful wives, let him
be deposed. Again, if any priest or ^a^on, do for religion sake, expel or put
away his wife, let him be excommunycated, and if he persevere in it, let him be
deposed. Many other Canons and decrees might I aleadge that do pronounce
them to be accursed, that either forbid priests to marrye, or that go about
by vyolent and tirannous laws to separate them that be alredye married in the
lord, from their lawful wives.


Robyn Papyst.


The true Christian. did err: The canons and rules of the Apostels.
else they would not abrogate and put down the decrees and Canons that have been
made in them. But now will we come to the Canons and rulers of the Apostelles,
which are set forth unto us in the book of god: A bishop, says Saint
Paul, must be blameless, the husband of one wife, i. Timo. iii
such a one as rules well his own house, and such a one as has his children
in subjection with all reverence. For if a man cannot rule his own house, how
shall he care for the congregation of christ? This shall ye have in the third
chapter of the Epistel to Timothee, which chapter I would feign have you to
read through for there shall ye also find, that both ministers and deacons
ought to be husbands of one wife. And besides that, what qualities their
wives ought to have. The very like shall ye have in the first Chapyter of the
Epistle to Titus. For, Titus. ^.
there the Apostell writes on this manner: for this cause I left thee in Crete,
that thou should ordeine elders in every city, as I had appointed the.
Gala. i.
If any be blameless, the husband of one wife, having faithful children,
which are not flaundered of riot, nor are disobedient. These are the rules and
canons of the holy apostelles (for having all one spirit, they did set forth
all one doctrine) whereby the elders or priests of the christian church may
law fully marrye. And truly, if an angel from heaven, should teach any
other doctrine contrary unto them, I would coumpte him accursed.


Robyn Papyst. Ambrose, Hierome, and Theophylacte, do expound the words of the
apostell.


The true Christian. When Cresconius Grammaticus did aleadge a certain
epistell of the blessed martyr saynct Ciprian, Answer.
for to maintain his opinion and doctrine against s. Augustine, Augu. contra
Creiconi. Gramaticum lib. 2. cap. 32.
this holy bishop of God did aunswre him thus I am not moved with the
auctority of this epistell: for, I do not take the letters of Cipriane, as
canonical scriptures, but I am wont to try his letters by them (meaning
the Canonical scriptures) and whatsoever in them does agree with the
auctoritye of the canonical scriptures, I do with his praise and thanks
giving receive and embrace it, and whatsoever does not agree with the auctoritye
of them, I do by his good leave, utterly reject and refuse it. Even so now,
will I answer you touching Chrysostom, Ambrose Hierome, and Theophilacte, I
do not take their writings as canonical scriptures unto the which only I do
owe a consent without any contradiction or gaynesayenge) but I do try them by
those heavenly and canonical scriptures, and whatsoever I no find in them to
be grounded upon the infallible word of god, the same do I with all reverence
due unto such worthy men, Aug. in epist. ad fortunatianum de videndo deo.
embrace and receive: but if I find any thing in their writings and works,
that does disagree from the truth of the holy and sacred scriptures, geuynge
them still the honor, that such worthy members of the church do deserve, I
do utterly reject and forsake it. Which thing I intend to do, in this text,
that we have now in hand For, by the leave of holy Chrysostom, and of them
all, S. Paul does not mean in this place, that he which has been the husband
of one wife, The argument of the papists beaten upon their own Heads.
should be chosen to be a bishop but rather he that is the husband of one wife.
For else it should follow, that he which has been blameless, and not which is
blameless, ought to be promoted to ye dignity and office: so that it were
enough for him, who^ they call to such an high rowme, if he has been
blameless, diligent, sober, discrete, a keeper of hospitalitye, etc. nor by
their own saying, it is necessary, and requisite, yt he should be such a one,
neither when he is chosen, nor yet when he is in the office it self. For it
shall be enough, that he has been such a one already. Truly neighbor, the
one does stand with as good reason as the other. Therefore I dare boldly say,
that the meaning of the apostelles is, that a bishop, which has not the gift
of chastity, ought to be the husband of one wife, Extripartita historia. li.
2. capi. 13. did. 31. canone nicena.
that by his chaste and holy conversation or dwellinge with his lawefull
yokefelowe and wife (for Paphnutius did call it chastity to company with his
own wife only, whereunto agrees Chrisostomes saying, Chrisost. ad populum
Antiochenam.
the first degree of chastitye is virginity, the second, faithful
matrimony). He should be an example of like godliness unto all the hole flock.


Robyn Papist. i. Tim. v. This goodly text did gardener aleadge against me.
Let no widow be chosen under threscore years old, and such a one as is the
wife of one man. If ye will have this to be taken, as it is written, and admit
no exposicion, how can she be both a widow, and the wife of one man. As then
the blessed apostel saynct Paul must be understood in this place, so must he
be understood in the other textes that have been aleadged before.


The true Crist^an. both with the Greek and the latin But they are ashamed of
nothing: they have put on whores faces. The papists have put on whores faces
So that they may by hook or by crook maynteyne their kingdom (which is
altogether leasing and falsehode) they care not what they prate or say. Be it
right wrong, it shall out, and all for to dasell the eyes of the simple and
ignorant people. But the most righteous lord, will not always wincke at
their wickedness and ungodly doings, ii. Thesso. iii.
but will (when he sees his time) wake out of sleep, and with the breath of
his mouth ourthrowe their tirannous and ungodly kingdom.


Robyn Papyst. There be some, A substantial exposition, and worthy to be
written in god bachus book.
that by the same one wife, yt the bishop or priest should have, do understand
one benefice. As though Paul should say. The bishop or priest must be
content witho one benefice. These do vnderdand by the bishops or priests
house nothing else but the church and by their children, those that are
committed unto their charge. Some again do say that paul's meaning is, that
they ought to have none other wives but the Church.


The true Christian. Gaye syrs I tell you, for to be ye husbands of the church.
How does it chance then, that they say, that they be married unto our lady?
The holy scriptures do testyfye unto us, ye only christ is the husband of the
church. Therefore, she will never acknowledge such wild and lustye stalantes,
or rather stinking goats for her husbands. Again, if Saint Paul does mean
by these words, let the bishop or priest be the husband of one wife, that they
ought to content them selfs with one benefice: how does it come to pass, yt
some of them have so many benefices, that they do scarcely know the number of
them? Is this to keep the Canons and rulers of the apostels? Moreover where
they say, We will keep them, as long as it is for our profit
y^ by the bishop or priests house ye church, and nothing else is understood
it is a plain and manifest lie, as any man that does but only read the
text, shall easelye perceive.

The words are these: i. Timo. iii.
If a man can not rule his own house, how shall he care for the congregation
of christ? Meaning thereby, that if a man can not rule his own household, or
bring up his youth godly and in the fear of god, he is not worthy to be put
in trust with the church and congregation of Christ. Ponder and weygh the text
diligently your self, and ye shall find, that it is none otherwise than I
say.


Robyn Papyst. Is this word oportet, or must, This question also, did Gardener
ask me.
How does it happen then, that Latimer, Doctor Ridley bishop of London, and
doctor Tailour bishop of Lincoln, with many other, which I could reherce,
whom ye do reckon al to be honest and godly men had no wives?


The true Christian. It is of such importance, or chastity, are bound to
marye, and have wives of their own: Would God this were observed and kept in
all places.
in so much that if there were any bishops or priests, that having not the
gift of continency would not mary, the magistrates (if there were any
godliness or fear of god in their hearts) ought to compel them to mary, and if
they will not obey, to depose them least by process of time, they should fall
into whoredom, and so be an open slander to the church. As for those blessed
martirs of GOd master doctor Hugh Latimer, and the reverend father master
doctor Ridley, most worthy bishop of London: all their adversaries can say
none other. but that they had a most special gift of chastitye, which they
did so declare in their living and conversation, all the days of their life,
that no man could ever lay any thing to their charge, This can I iustyfye.
For I have heard them do it.
touching that matter, and yet both they and also Doctor Taylour, with many
other mo which were gelded or made chaste from above, did stoutelye defend
always, the maryages of priests, and of al other ministers of the church of
Christ.


Robyn Papyst. If so be that al they,


The true Christian. Both Ignatius, Answer. Eus. ecclesiasticae historia li.
iii. cap. xxx
and also Clemens Alexandrinus, which were very nighe the Apostelles time, do
plainelye testify that Saint Paul had a wife. But let us grant that he had
never none, where do ye read in all the new Testament, that Saint Paul was
tempted with the incontinencie of the flesh?


Robyn Papyst. These be his words: There was given unto me unquietness
through the flesh, even the messenger of Satan to buffet me. ii. Corin. xii.
What should we understand and by this, but the filthy lusts and inco^tynency
of the flesh.


The true Christian. How saint Paul ought to be understood in the place
before aleaged.
There Saint Paul understands no such thing, but by the unquietness of
the flesh, and messenger of Satan, he does understand the persecutions and
troubles, which by the stirringe and means of Satan, he was feign to suffer
continuallye, for the Gospel sake, not only of the open enemies, but also
of the false brethren. In so much that some times, he seemed to be utterly
forsaken and given over of god, and that he was the most wretched and miserable
man in the world. For, why? all the world was against him. He could not come
so soon in to a town, but that he was by and by after, with knockes, driven
out of it: Seeing him self many times betrayed, even of those, that he did
trust best: Was not this, think ye, a great temptation to the fleashe?
Therefore, did he many times, pray unto the lord, that he would deliver him
out those afflictions and troubles, which his fleashe, did grudge to bear.
Thus does Theodoretus, Theodoretus Ambrosius and Erasimus in.xii. capitu. ii.
ad Corinth.
Ambrose, and also Erasmus expound this place.


Robyn Papyst. Ye did say a while ago, that neither fasti^g, nor beating of the
body could quench nor put out in man the fire of incontinencie, i. Corin. ix.
that he did subdue and bring his body under? For our preachers do understand
by it, that saynct Paul did mortify in him self, the fire of incontinencye,
by long fasting, by putting much water into his wine, and by beating and
scourging of his body.


The true Christian. Although sayncte Paul had not had the gift of
continency or chastity, yet neded he no long fasting: If our fat red cheke
priests were but half handled as paul was they would not be so lusty as they
are.
for many times being shut up in dark prisons he had nothing to eat. He
neded not to put much water into his wine: For he drank nothing else but pure
water, for the most part. And what need (I pray you) had he, to beat and
scourge his body? Did not he suffer strypes enough of the enemies of the
truth? And that he had the gift of continency, it appears most manifestly
by his own words, which he does speak in the first epistell to the
Corinthians: I would (says he) that al men were, as I my self am. But every
man has his propre gift of God, one after this manner and another after that.
Else without all doubt, he would have used the same remedy, that he did
prescribe, and offer unto other. He did then by these words, mean and
understand that he did subdue and mortifye his body i. Cor. vii. What saint
Paul did mean in the sentence before aleaged.
for to live according to the doctrine that he him self did teach: and that
in all things he gave a good example to the whole world For ye must
understand yt besides the incontine^cie of the flesh, there be in man many
other concupisce^ces which do move a man to offend the lord. These
concupiscences ought to be mortifyed by such means, as God has appointed.
Which thing saint Paul followed, in mortifiyng them that were in his body. As
for the fire of incontinency, it was all together quenched and mortified in
him. As we do learn every where, both by his own words, and also by his
own doings. For as I said before, if he had wa^ted the gift of continency or
chastity, he would with al thanks giving, and submission of heart have used the
remedy, that he wylled all other men to use.


Robyn Papyst. Are all the Christians priests?


The true Christian. If ye do understand by the priests, offer sacrifices
unto him. I say that all Christians are pryestes. All christians are pryestes
and how.
For they are anointed of god not with material or earthly oil where with the
body only can be anointed but with the virtue of his holy spirit, which of
the blessed evangelist saint John, is called anointyng. i. John.v.
The lord then anointing all Christians, with this spiritual unction or
anointinge, did ordeine and make them all, a spiritual or kinglye priesthode,
What sacryfices the pryestes of the new testamente do offer.
not for to offer brute beasts, as the pryestes of the old law did, but for to
offer spiritual sacrifices, I mean, the mortyfiynge of their own bodies,
which is a lively sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God, for to offer also,
the sacrifice of righteousness, Roma. xii.
of praise, and of thanks giving with a contrite and humble heart which are
the true sacryfyces of all them, Psalm. iiii. Psalm. l. Hebru. xiii. Psalm. l.
that do sincerelye profess Christ, and are denominated or called chrystians
of him. But if by priests ye do understand the ministers of the church, I
say, that in the same signification, al Christians be not pryestes: for, If by
priests we do understand minysters, all christians be not pryestes. i. Corin.
xiiii.
they be not all called to the minystration of Ecclesiastical Sacraments, nor
yet to the preaching of the gospel of our savior Jesus christ. For in the
church all things must be done in order.


Robyn Papyst. And ought not the ministers of the church to be anointed after
the manner of the old law?


The true Christian. No, the triyng and examynyng of them whom they do choose
unto that worthy office, What ceremonies, the church does use in chosing or
making of mynysters.
where unto is added the layinge on of hands. Of these ceremonies does Saint
Paul speak^ in his Epystels, but specially in the Epystel to Timothee.


Robyn Papyst. This then have I learned in our^ communication. First that all
the scriptures, which our preachers do aleadge, The conclusion or Epitogus.
for to impugn and overthrow the marriage of pryestes, are shamefully wrythed
and wrasted.

Secondlye, ye have proved unto me, that the vows, whyches all relygyous
persons or seculare priests, did make, for to bind them selves perpetually
unto the state of single life, are directly against the holy and sacred
scriptures, and word of God, and that therefore they may lawefully break
them, couplynge them selves in honest Matrinony, that so lyuinge in the fear
of god they may keep them selves undefiled members of our Savior Jesus Christ.

Thyrdlye, ye have showed and de^lared most manifestly, both by the ^xamples
of the scriptures, and also by strong argument taken out of ^he same, that
all religious persons, ^r secular pryestes, that have not the gift of
chastytye, ought to mary, in ^o much that if there were any, whi^he having not
the gift of chasty^ye, would not marrye, the godly Magystrates ought to
compel them, and if they be dysobedyente, to depose or put them down, lest by
process of time they should become an open sklaunder unto the church. Now
fare ye well in the Lord til another time.


FINIS.

