An Abridgement of the notable work of POLIDORE VERGILE conteignyng the
deuisers and first finders out as well of Arts, Ministeries, Feartes and
civil ordinances, as of Rites, and Ceremonies, commonly used in the church:
and the original beginning of the same. Co^pendiously gathered by Thomas
Langley.

IMPRINTED AT LONdon within the precinct of the late dissolved house of the
Gray Friars, by Richard Grafton Printer to the Princes grace, the.xvi. day of
April, the year of our lord M.D.xlvi.

Cum priuilegio adimpris mendum solum.

TO THE RIGHT worshipful sir Antony Denny knight his daily orator Thomas
Langley wishes prosperitee and long continuance of vvorshippe.
LACTANTIVS writes that certain philosophers of Epicures feet did sore bewail
the estate o^ (...), as weke and far under the degree of beasts, because they
were by nature fensed as well ^ro^ all displeasures and grefes of unseasonable
air, as armed against the assautes and invasions of their enemies, and only
man destitute and void of all such and other like succors and
purueighaunces: For both beasts and birds have every one according to their
kind skynnes, hides, or feathers, to sustein the sharpenes of the cold, and to
bear of the stormi raynes and te^pestes, and also weapons as horns, tuskes,
and other like munimentes too resist their foes, or at the least they have
agilitee and swiftnes, to escape and preserve them selfs from danger
Co^trarywise mankind is of his nature so delicate and tender that he can abide
no heat, no cold, no raynes, nor tempestuous wether: so feeble also he is that
his members be not able to help his own wekenesse, much less too understand
or avoid the power of his enemies. But if these gross and carnal
Philosophiers had withdrawe^ their hearts from vewyng the behauour of the
body, and applied their mind to the contemplacion of the worthiness of the
solle, they should have well perceived their own error, the base and vile
condition of beasts the high dignite of the solle, and the excellent noblenes
of man. For albeit this frail and yearthly body of ours is not so strong as
the brutishe carkeses of beasts be, yet by reason of their grosnes they be
unfit to receive the spiritual solle of man, or to be mete instruments of the
same, where as the imperfection of man's body is abled by the inuentiue and
politic reason of the solle which deuiseth all necessaries, for the use of
the said body by all endeavor and industrye. And that manne, which can shifte
for himself, decline from things hurt full, forsee also things to come, is
judged and reputed worthy the title and name of a man, so he likewise far
excels al kinde^ of living creatures, which although they be better armed
with the gifts of nature* yet for defaute of reason to govern the same, they
be far inferiors to the noblenes of man, which knows through the dotes
and qualites of the solle too devise all necessaries fit for his affairs and
business.

Wherefore me think them worthy of high commendacion, that have bent them
selves wholly to adorn and garnishe this life mortal, with their inuencions,
and to accomplish the feeble indige^ce of our condition, by the diligence of
their provision: as they yt have excogitated and imagined any art whereby the
commen wealth of the world is preserved, or any other handy crafts or
ministeries too the maintenance aid and comfort of the body. Howbeeit they
be worthy to have greatest laud and praise, that by their devises have found
out the sciences liberal, wherewith the divine and imperial part called the
solle of man is bewtified: yet may we not therefore forgette writers of
meaner things, but be of deutie bound to make some worthy memorial of their
benefits declaryng our kindness toward the^: to the intent other might be
incoraged to enterprise the acheuyng of like endeuoures to the great aid and
preferment of the whole common wealth, considryng that their such devises
shall be regestered to their perpetual fame and renoune. And seeing that the
arts and crafts, with other like feats, whose inuentours be contained in
this book, are in this realm of England occupied and put in daily exercise
to the profet of many and ease of all men, it were in mine opinion both a
point of detestable unkindness, and a part of extreme inhumanite too defraude
them of their praise and perpetual memory, that were autours of so great
benefits to the universal world. For as a beneficial gift conferred to a
man that has need thereof, is of the own propre nature comme^dable, so if the
receiver of that so liberal benignitee, show himself in mind inwardly
obliuious and forgetful, or in deeds outwardly unthankful, it is naturally
hated, and as an unnatural vice abhorred.

In consideracion whereof I was moved to take in hand too compile out so well
as my learning would serve me, in a brefe some such things, as Polidore
Vergile has copiousli gathred together by much readyng, by long study, and
has written with great lernyng, consernyng the inuentours of things, to
thentent the autours of such necessary arts might not be forgotten, and
Polidore for his great pain and travail in collectyng and celebratyng the
said arts and sciences might receive thanks according to his deserts. And
although the book translated might have been for the diuersitee of matter
profitable: and for the authors high lernyng laudable, and finally to a good
translatoure commendable, yet in so much, as for the greatness, it should have
been to the berers greuouse, and for length to the reders tediouse, I thought
it best to omit some part, not because any thing was superfluous, or otherwise
written the^ well But for as much as many things might be taken diversely,
and other wise then they were me^t. Therefore I have not admitted any thing in
too this abridgemente, whereby the reader may be justly offended, nor have
on the other side omitted any such sentence, that either co^cerned the title,
or that might in any part please or profit the readers. And as Polidore in
his book written in latin does pretend to replenishe and enriche latin men
with delectacio^ and knowlage of things delectable and worthy knowlage, not
myndyng to derogate either any laudable ceremonies, or to define upon any
matter, now or then being in controversy: even so I much desirouse,
according to the little talent that God has given me, to do all men good,
have translated the said book of Polidore into our English toungue, to the
end, that also artificers and other persons not expert in latin, might gather
knowlage and take pleasure by the readyng thereof.

ALTHOUGH this book be but simple and unfit to be presented to your good
mastership, ye it seemed of very right due to be offered to you because you
have been always, as the most part of men report, and many by experience
can testify, not only enflamed with desire of knowledge of antiquites, but
also a favorable supporter of al good lernyng and a very Mecenas of all
toward wits. Wherefore I dedicate this book to your Maistership for the
conformity of the argument being to your foresaied desire correspo^dent: In
somuche as it conteigneth the original of all civil arts and handecraftes and
also the inuentoures of all such ceremonies as be used in the church. And
here plainly may be perceived what the scripture of GOD commands, what
things men's pollycye have divised for the setting forth of good order, and
what has crepte in to the congregation to the peruertyng of our faith and
seducyng simple people with supersticion: as these manyfolde swarms of popish
religions, that here among us were not long ago used, with other papisticall
baggage. And I took it to be my bond dewtie to bestow the first fruits of
my labors (albeit they be very slender and rude) after such sort, that
they might be, not only a continual monument of the special love and mind
that you have too further the knowlage of the truth and abholishe ignorance,
hypocrisy, and all other like peinted holiness: but also too be a testimony
of my honest and loving heart toward all favorers of good learning and most
specialli toward your Mastershipe, whose worthy fame me^ of pure living and
high knowlage do so extol, both for your alacritee and readiness in
preferryng the blessed word of God and the sincere setters furthe of the same,
that you need nothing the testimony of my commendacion. Notwithstanding when
oportunitee shall be given me, I shall not apere slack in this behalf,
desiryng you in the mean time to take this little book into your tuicion, so
dooyng you shall bolden and encorage me hereafter to employe more earnest
labor in doing some thing that may redownd to your perpetual memory and
renoune: Praiyng in the mean time for the long continuance of your
Maistershipe in health felicitee and increase of knowledge in our lord to whom
be only honor for ever.



The first book.
The first Chapter. The original of the Heathen Gods.
WHAT time the spirits of the air (who^ the scripture callethe rulers of this
world) began to give answers of Prophecy out of Images made to resemble
mortal men, Ephe. vi.
and by their wicked subteltie did pretend the^ selfs some time to be of the
number of good spirits, some time Gods celestial, and sometime the solles
of valiant lords: they brought men into such error, and perplexitee, that
in short space they did all together alienate men's hearts from the religion
and reverence of the very God. And for somuche as their spiritual nature is
subtle, they usurped ye name of good Angels. For after the opinion of
antiquity, not only to every man, but also to every singular place and
family were allotted two Angels: Whereof the one went about to endomage us:
Good angels
the other with all endeavor studied to profit us. These invaded particularly
every house, conueighed them selves into men's bodies, and closly in their
entrails imbecilled their health, procured diseases, illuded their hearts
with fantastical visions and dreams: And by such mischief enforsed men to
repair to them for help, and enquire their oracles and answers, which of
purpose had doubtful understandings: Oracles doubtful.
lest their ignorance should be perceived. What men were deified.
By these deceiptfull means, they were so deified, that sundery people after
diverse sorts chose them gods, and with great reverence worshypped them.
For such men, as every nation had attained any special commoditee by: to
the furtheraunce or garnishyng of their living, or buylders of cities, or
ladies excellent in chastity, or men puissaunt in arms, were honored for
gods, as the Egyptians had Isis: ye Assirians Neptune: Isis. Neptunus.
the Latins Faunus* the Romans Quirene, Athens Pallas, the Delphians Apollo,
Faunus Pallas. Apollo Jupiter. Belus.
the Cretians Jupiter, ye Assirians Belus, and many countries had diverse
other gods, and some which is shame to speak, worshypped brut beasts, and
took them for gods, by reason whereof the Grecians had the opinion that the
gods had their beginning of men. And thus when men withdrewe their
pha^tasies from imagerie to the spirits inuisable, they persuaded them selves
that there were many gods, and of no smaller nombre then mortal men.

Of this variety of opinions the Philosophiers, Opinions of the philosophiers.
which laiyng away al private and public affairs, employed all their study
in tracyng out the truth, took occasion to dispute of the nature of gods
diuersely. As Thales Milesius, which first serched such matters, said that God
was an understanding, Thales.
that made and fashioned all things of the water as matter preiacent.
Pythagoras called him a lively mind, that pearsed and passed through al
things, of whom all living creatures received their life: and Cleanthes
defined God to be the air. Cleanthes. Anaxagoras.
Anaxagoras esteemed him to be an infinite mind, which did move it self,
Chrysippus.
Chrysippus thought he was a natural power endued with godly reason, Some were
of the opinion that there was no gods. As Diagoras and Theodorus affirmed
plain that there was no God at al. Diagoras.


Protagoras reported that he knew no certainty of the Gods, Protagoras.
wherefore the Atheniens banished him out of their empire.

Epicurus.
Epicurus granted there was a god, but such one as was neither liberal,
bounteful, nor that had any regard of things: that is to say, God is no God,
but a cruel and unkind monster. Anaximander supposed the Gods to be borne
and not to dye till after many ages. Anaxima^der.
The Egyptians.
The Egyptians because of the au^cientie of their lineage, feign the Gods to
have begone among them, and that they were but two and everlasting: the
son who^ they called Osiris, and the Moon that was named Isis.
Notwithstanding Lacta^cius writes, that Saturnus was the first father of the
gods, Saturnus father of the gods.
which begat Jupiter, Juno, Neptune, Pluto and Glauca by his wife Ops. And for
the benefits that they showed to their subjects, they were deified of them.
But in such varietee of opinions it is a thing difficile too determine the
first ofspryng of the gods both because they be but vain, and also sprung
out of mortal humanity. And again to speak of God as he is in his
supernatural essence is a thing dangerous, To speak of the nature of God is
dangerous.
because we can neither behold the resple^dent brightness of his majesty with
our corporal eyes, nor with any quickenesse of wit comprehend his infinite
might, as the Poets Simonides did declare very well: Simonides.
for when he was required of king Hiero to show him what thing and of what
sort God was, he desired to have one day respite: when he asked him the next
day, he prayed to have two days: and so often as the king enquired of him an
answer he increased the number of the days of deliberacion: the king
meruelyng that he doubled so many times the days, enquired why he did so? For
ye more (quod he) that I consider the thing and muse on ^t, the more obscure
and in^ricate it seems to me. The wh^che thing if the Philosophiers, ^^^che
like to blind warriers, wanderyng in darkness had done, they would not have
divised so many lies to offend or displease their creator. For it is better to
be ignorant in the truth, then to teach error. Therefore to co^clud (as
Macrobie writes) there is but one God, One God.
subject to no mutabilite, of all natural things one eternal, of all
natural things the cause principal, which says by his Prophet Esaie, I am
God, before me there was no other, neither shall be after me, with out beginning,
only everlasting, of whom Virgil writes thus. Heaven, and earth, and the
water large,
The bright circle of the heavenly sphere,
The spirit all fostereth: and has full charge
Passing through all, to guide it every where.
AND Plato says there is but one God, and affirms that this world was
created by him: and was called God, what God is
because he gives freely to men all things good and profitable, and is of all
goodness in this world the cause principal, fountain and spryng.

The.ii. Chapter. The principles of natural things.
ALBEIT it was convenient to have begone this present treatise of declaryng
the principles of natural creatures, and so consequently to have expounded the
original of the Gods, forsomuche as they have their beginning of the same
things: yet the reverence that I have to the true God, which was before all
other creatures, moves me to begin at him as the cause principal of the
rest. Therefore as concerning the causes of things, I will show first the
minds of the Philosophiers that be most probable, until I come to the truth
self. Thales one of the seven wise men of Greece holds opinion that water was
matter of all things. Water is cause material.
Contrary wise Heraclitus an Ephesian and Hippasus suppose al to be procreated
of fire Empedocles says the four elements were the causes of things as
Lucretius writes. Fire, Four elements.


Of water, earth, air, and firye glede,
All things natural duly proceed.
Anaximenes thinks al things to have their beginning of the air, Metrodorus
affirms the universal world to be eternal without beginning or end. Air.
Epicurus one of Democritus disciples puts two causes Atomos or Motes and
vacuite or emptines, Atomos
of these he says, ye four eleme^tes come. These are the opinions of the
Philosophers, yt were men without the knowledge of God: but (as Moses and
Josephus record) the scripture concludes that God made all things of nothing
in the beginning, The world was made of naught.
as s. John says al thing was made by him. And therefore (as Lactantius
writes) let no man be curious in searching of what stuff God made these great
and wonderful works, for he fourmed the^ al of nothing by the power of his
mighty word. For as David the prophet sings, he spoke the word and they
were made, he gave commandment and they were created. Of the same opinion is
Plato in his book called Tymaeus. Plato.


The.iii. Chapter. The procreacion of man, the diuersitee of languages, and
division of nations.
THE most famous writers of natural hystories (as Diodorus records) spoke of
two so^dry manners of birth: Two opinions of the birth of man.
and first stock of mankind. For they which contend that the world was
vngenerate, and with out any danger of corrupcion, say also that man has
been in a certain perpetuite without beginning. Of this opinion, were
Pythagoras, Architas, Xenocrates, and Aristotle with other Per^patetekes,
affirmyng that al things in the eternal world, which have been or shall
hereafter come to pass, be by generation endless and without beginning, and
have only a circuit and course of generacions, wherein both the birth and
natural resolucion of things may be perceived. Other that suppose this world
had both an original cause of being and shall also sustein an end by
putrefaction, The second opinion.
hold opinion that man had a time of his generation. For this cause the
Egyptians report that men were first borne among them, The Egiptians opinion of
man.
as well by reason of the fruitful rankenes of the soil, and seasonablenes of
the air, as by cause of the river Nilus, which, for the lustye fatnes of the
slyme, does procreate diverse kinds of beasts, and has in it self
naturally a certain power nutratiue. For in the country of Thebais Mice be
engendered of the mudde: Mice engendered of the mudde.
Wherefore men of those parties merueil much, when they be hold the fore
parts of them to the breast walowe and move sensibly in the mire, and the
hinder parts as yet nothing fashioned but all out of shap.

Nevertheless Psammaticus their king, The story of Psammaticus
desiryng to know in what country men were first begotten, devised this
mean. He caused.ii. young infantes new borne to be delivered to his herdmen to
be brought up among his cattle, and commanded that no man should speak any
word to them, because he would know what word they would speak first. Then two
year after, when the herdmen opened the door where they were norished, they
stretched out their hands and cried Becos, which in the Phrigians language
signifies bread. Thus it was known that the Phrigians were the eldest lineage
and first borne. The Ethiopians, of this conjecture, Ethiopians opinion of man.
think them selfs to be the first, because no man would come out of any other
place into that region, and they of that party be by a general consent
called home bread, Aborigines.
and (as Diodorus says) it is probable that those under the Meridional
equator should be the au^cientest of al. For seeing the heat of the sun
dries up the moisture of the earth, and has also of it self a power to give
and preserve the life of things, it is like that the place which marches
nerest to the su^ne should bring forth ye first living creatures. Anaxima^der.
For that cause Anaximander taught that men first sprung of water and earth
warmed with lively heat. Empedocles in a manner confirms the same, where he
writes, that every particular membre was severally made and proporcioned of
the earth (as a mother) and so to have been compacted and co^glutinated by
heat and moisture into the perfect figure and shappe of a man.

Democritus.
Democritus thinks men were first made of water and mudde tempered
together. zeno.
Zeno judges the cause of mankind to have proceeded of the new world. And
men to be only begotten by the aid and comfort of the divine fire, that is
the providence of God. As for the Poets, some feign how man was made out of
soft claye by Prometheus, Poets.
some say that they sprung of the hard stones that Deucalion and Pyrtha cast,
and thus much is of ye vain opinions of Ge^rilitee. But to speak the truth
(as scripture teaches) ye beginning of man was in Iurye. God made man*
For God when he had finished the world, did create the first man Adam of the
yerth in the field of Damasce, Adam the first man.
as some think. Thus Ada^ made by God mariyng his wife Eve was auctour and
beginner of the whole posterite and lineage: But forsomuche as God fourmed but
one man, and endued him with one kind of speech only to utter and declare the
things that he conceyueth in his mind: men perchance will merueile, what the
cause should be that there be at this day so many diverse la^guages, that
according to the varietee of countries there be sundry speches. And therefore I
thought it convenient to show the occasion of ye same. Diuersitee of speches.
What time Nemroth the son of Cham that was son to Noe, after the
universal flud went about to withdraw men (which dread the danger of
drounyng) from the fear of God, Religion.
supposyng all their hope to consist in their own might and power, persuaded
them to build a tower of such altitude, Babylon.
that the water should not be hable to over flow it. Whilst they were thus
earnestly occupied about their enterprise, God divided their speches in such
sort, that one of them could not perceive another by reason of the discord and
disagreyng of their languages. And thus began the diuersytee of tongues that we
use and have now. The same o^casion was that the posterities of Noe were
dispersed and scattered a broad. For when one could not understand another
language, it came to pass that every man departed into sundry provinces and
countries, Division of nations.
and there named places whereof they had the governance, and also cities,
which they builded, after their own names as Eusebius testifyeth. The sons
of Noe were Sem, Sons of Noe.
Cham, and Iaphet. The issue of Sem was Elam, whereof the Elamites came.
Auctours of the names of countries.
Assure, of whom the Assirians were named Arphaxad was auctoure of the Arabians
and Lud of the Lidians: the children of Cham were Chus that named the
Ethiopians, and Mesre the beginner of the Egyptians. Chanaan of whom the
Cananites had their name: the lineage of Chus was Saba whereof the Sabees came,
and Euila auctoure of the Euelites. And semblably we must believe that of them
came al other nations and people of the world, which be now in so great
nombre, that they cannot easily be nombred and counted.

The.iiii. Chapter. The beginning of marriage and sundry rightes of the same.
GOD after that he had fully accomplished, and perfectly polished the world and
the rest of his creatures were in their kind co^summate, then (as Moses
teaches) made man last of all, to be lord and sovereign of the whole body
of the world, as one to whom the other his work should be subject in obedience
because he was fashioned after his own lykenes. And lest so worthy a creature
should by death peryshe, or the world might want his governor and ruler,
Institucion of wedlock.
it lyked him to make woman out of the body of man, and so with the bond of
matrimony combined them together, yt they should not live after the manner of
brut beasts: Therefore has God joined Adam and Eve in marriage in Paradyse
before they knew sin, Marriage began in paradise.
that by the co^gression and company of these two sexes and kinds, their issue
might be enlarged and replinishe the whole world. In this sort was matrimonye
instituted, albeit antiquitee feyneth Cecrops king of the Athenia^s to have
ordained matrimony, Cecrops.
for which cause he was reported to have had two faces. But all countries did
not enter like bond of matrimony, The manners of diverse nations in marriages.
nether kept it after one fashion. For the Numidians, Egiptians, Indians,
Hebrews, Persians, Parthians, Thracians, and almost all the Barbarians, every
one according to his substance married wyfes, some.x. some mo. The Scithians,
the Scotts, and Atheniens used their children and wyfes in common, and
occupied with them abroad openly like beasts, The Massagites married every one
a wife but they used the^ commonly. Massagites. Arabians.
Among Arabians it is the manner that al kynsme^ should have but one wife, and
he that came to meddle with her, should set his staff at ye door: for their
custom was to bear a staff, albeit she lay every night by the eldest: by
this means they were all brethren. An aduouterer was there condemned too
death, Punishment for aduoutry
which was perceived by this if he were of another family or kynred. Where
chanced on a time a strange thing worthy to be had in memory, A storye.
there was a certain kings daughter of excellent beutie, which had.xv.
brethren, that loved her all interely well, and used therefore one after
another to resort and company with her: she began by such daily daliaunce
to be werye of their wanton company, and devised this fea^e, she prepared
staves like her brothers staves, and by and by, as one was gone, she set a
staff at the door like to his, and by that deceyte the other when they came
too the door, supposyng one to be within preased no further: and it fortuned
on a day when they were all together in the court, one of them departed from
the other and repaired to her house, and when he espied a staff at the gate,
thinkyng it too be some aduouterer, for he was assured that he left his
brethren in the court, he ran to his father and accused his sister of
aduouterye: but when the matter was known, it was perceived that he had
falsely sclaundered her. Biyng of wives.
The Assirians and ye Babilonians bought their wives in open market at a common
price, which custom among the Saracens and Arabiens yet still remains.
Nasamones.
The Nasamones when they be first married, use to suffer their wifes the first
night to lie with all her gestes, in the worship of Venus, and from thencefurth
they keep them selves chaste, and pure of living. A certain people of the
Carthagens, which border on Egypt, were wont to offer such maids as should
be married to the king of that regio^, to defloure whom it pleased him. The use
of Scotland.
In Scotland also the usage was that the Lord of the soil should lie with the
bryde before her husband: but for somuche as it was vnsittyng to be frequented
among Christians, Malcolme king of the Scotts.
their king Malcolme the third of that name about the year of our
Lord.M.xcix. did abolishe that beastly abhominacion, and ordained that every
maid should give the Lord for the redemption of her maydenheade a croune of
gold. Single livers
Some people lived single, as certain nations called Cristae and Esseni among
the Hebrews, which did abhor the calamities and trouble in Marriage. Wedlock
was observed syncerelye and reverently of the Romans till deuorcement began,
Deuorceme^t.
which although it be an occasion that women should more earnestly keape their
chastitee, yet our religion does scarcely permit it. One Spurius Seruilius,
Spurius Seruilius.
the year after the city was founded. CCCCC.xxii. ( Marcus Pomponius and Caius
Papirius being Consulles) first sued a deuorce from his wife, because she was
barren: for which fact albeit he took openly another before the censoures that
he did it because too have issue, yet he was among the common sort evil spoken
of. This decre of deuorcyng was taken out of the laws of Moses, Moses ordained
deuorcementes.
which made ye first constitucion of that matter, yet was there this
dyfference, for by Moses it was only lawful for the husband to forsake his
wife, but the Romans decree gave them both like lybertye. Rites of marriages*
The rytes of Marriage were diverse in Rome, the manner was that two children
should lead the bryde and another bare before her a torche of white thorn in
worship of Ceres, that like as she with fruytes of the earth does noryshe
men: so the new Bryde like an housewyfe should bring up her children. Which
manner is used in England, saving yt in stead of the torche, there is borne
here a basen of silver or gold before. A garlande also of corn ears was set
on her head: or else she bare it in her hand, or if that were not, when she
came home whea^e was scatered abroad over her head in tokenyng of plenty and
fruytfulnesse. Also before she came to bed to her husband Fire and Water were
given her, Fire and water given in token of chastitee.
which have power too puryfye and cleanse: sygnifiyng thereby that she should
be chaste and honest of her body. There were besides these diverse rytes which
I omit. Maids of Rome and Greece.
The maids of Greece and Rome (as it may appear by Homere and Catullus) used
customablye to gyrde their preuitie with a lase or swathell till the day of
their marriage. The Bryde anointed the poostes of the doors with swynes grease,
because she thought by that means to drive away all misfortune, whereof she
had her name in Latin Vxor abvn gendo.
. Neither might she step over the thresholde, but must be borne over, to
declare that she loses her Virginity unwillingly, with many other
supersticious ceremonies which be to long to rehearse.

The.v. Chapter. The institucion of religion and who worshopped gods first
with sacrific^.
IT is no doubt but men which at the first with out any governor led an
vplandysh and a rude manner of life, Occasion of Idolatry.
did highlye auaunce in honor and praises their first kings: and by the
persuasion of the devil, either for their wonderful ma^lynes and virtue, or to
flatter the condition of their dygnitie, or for some special benefit that they
received by them, magnified them as gods. Whereby it came to pass that
kings, being well-beloved of their people, left a great desire and feruentnes
of them selves among their subjects and posteritee: by reason whereof men made
Images of them, Images of kings.
to take a comfortable pleasure of the beholding of them: Afterward because to
encorage men to virtue and cheualry, they reverenced the^ as gods, for eueri
valiant courage would with more alacrite enterprise dangerous adue^tures for
the common weal when they perceived the noble acts of worthy and puisant men,
to be recompensed with honor and laud of the immortal gods. Thus temples
began first to be builded, and new service of the gods, by the ordinance
of Melissus, Melissus,
in the time of Jupiter, or not long before. Albeit that the truth and very
original may be absolutely known, let us appoint the custom of Idolatrye to
have begone in the time of Belus king of the Assirians, Belus.
which reigned in the three M.C.lxxx. year of the world, whom the Babilon^ans
first worshypped for a God, and set up an Image of him and therefore they that
think Idolatry has endured from the beginning of the world are deceived.
Herodotus says that the Egyptians first builded alters, temples, Images and
made sacrifyce to the gods, and after taught them to strangers: Some suppose
that Mercurye showed with what ceremonies gods should be honored, some say
it was devised by king Numapompilius.

Diodorus thinks that the Ethiopians did institute the rytes of sacrificyng
to the gods, Ethiopians.
which thing Homere in his Ilias witnesses, where he tells how Jupiter and
the other gods went into Ethiopia to the oblacions that were customably made
there, and also repared thither to feel the fragrant odours, that perfumed
from the sacrifices. And the Ethiopians received for a reward of their holiness,
that they should never be conquered, but ever live in liberty, without any
bondage. Lactantius affyrmeth, that Melissus king of Crete did first sacrifice,
and ordained other solemn rytes in the ceremonies of their gods. Ianus.
In Italy Ianus and his son Faunus appointed sacrifices to Saturn, and after
them king Numa set up a new religion. Cadmus. Orpheus.
Cadmus out of Phenice, and Orpheus out of Trace brought first into Greece the
mysteries, solemnyties, dedicatyng of Images, and hymns of their gods.

Albeit Herodotus says that Cecrops king of Athens fette all such
constitucions and ordinances out of Egypt into Greece, Cecrops.
and first inuocated Jupiter, founded Images, set vpalters, and offered
sacrifices, that were never seen before in Greece. But to God almighty, who^ we
christians honor and serve Cain and Abel first offered, Cain. Abel. Enos.
and Enos first called upon the name of God.

The sixth Chapter. Who found the leters, and the number of them.
LETTERS, wherein is contained the treasure of memory, Letters.
and by whom things notable be preserved in fresh remembrance, after the
opinion of Diodorus, Diodorus.
were found by Mercury in Egypt, yet some say one Menon an Egyptian divised
them, Menon. The Egyptians letters.
but in stead of the letters they of Egypt used to signify and declare the
ententes and conceytes of their minds by the fygures of beasts, fishes,
fowls, and tres Pliny says, Pliny.
he ever thought that the Assirians excogitated the letters. which Cadmus
brought out of Phenice into Greece, Cadmus found.xvi. letters.

Palamedes added four letters.


which were but.xvi in number. A. b. c. d. e. g. i. l. m. n. o p. r. s. t. v.
to these Palamedes added in the battle of Troy other.iiii. (...). Simonides
found as many (...). Whose power is contained in our letters. Aristotle says
there were.xviii. of ye old (...). and that Epicarmus put to the other two th.
and o. Epicarmus.
Hermolaus supposes he put to Y. Herodotus writes how y^ the Pheniciens that
came with Cadmus to enhabite Thebes, Cadmus.
brought letters into Greece, which were never seen in use there before time.
Some think the Ethiopians inverted them, and then taught them to the
Egiptians, that were one of their provinces. But Eumolphus tells unfeignedly
that the beginning of letters did proceed of Moses, Eumolphus*
Moses.
which reignyng long before Cadmus days, taught the Jews the letters, and
thence the Pheniciens received the^, and the Greeks learned of the^. Which
thing is comfortable to the saying of Pliny before rehearsed for Jury is a part
of Syria, and the Jews be syrians. Nevertheless I find by Josephus that writing
was before Noe his flud, Sons of Seth found the letters.
for the sons of Seth wrote in.ii. pyllers, one of brick and another of
stoone, the science of Astronomy, whereof that of stoone, in the time of
Josephus remained in Firia. Philo ascribes the inue^cion of them to Abraham,
which was elder then Moses, albeit I had rather assign to Sethes children the
beginning of writing. As for the Hebrew letters which be now, after the mind
of s. Jerome, were but newly invented, and devised by Esdras: for before that
time the Hebrews and Samarites used al one carecters and print of their letters.

Hebrew letters
The old Greek letters the same yt the Romans use now, as Pliny co^iectureth
by a certain brazen table that came from Delphos, which was dedicated and
hanged up in a librarye in the temple of Minerua at Rome in his time. They were
brought into Italy by Euander and the Archadiens which came into Italy to
enhabite there as Ouide tells in his book De fastis. Euander brought letters
into Italy.


The Hetrurians had also a form of letters by them selfs, wherein the youth
of Rome was enstructed as well as in the Greek letters, which one Demaratus a
Corinthian taught the Hetrurians. Demaratus taught the Hetrurians letters.
And like as the Grecians had enlarged the nombre of their letters, so the
Italyans following their example put to theirs, f. k. q. x. y. z. h. which h.
is no letter, but a sign of asperacion f. they received of the Aeolians, The
letter f. was taken of the Aeolians.
which both among the old Romans and Aeolians had the same sound and
pronunciacion that p. with an asperacion has, which we use in writing Greek
words. And afterward Claudius Caesar, as Quintiliane writes, appoineted yt it
should be taken in the place of v. consonant as fulgus for vulgus, F. for u.
consonant.
fixit for vixit And even so our Englishemen use to speak in Essere, for they
say fineger for vinegar, feale for veale, and contrary wise a vore for a fore,
voure for four And by process of time it was used for ph. in Latyne words
k. was borrowed of the Greeks, but no good auctoure uses it in writing Latin q.
was added because it has a grosser sound then c. q. letter. x. letter.
The letter x. we had also out of Greece, although (as Quintiliane judges) we
might well forbere it, in somuche yt they used for it either c. s. or g. s.
Likewise y. and z were fet from the Grecians and be used of us only to write
Greek words.

The.vii. Chapter. The inuencion of Grammar.
NEXT the letters, the inuencion of Grammar must ordinaryly succeed, both
because it is the fou^dacion and ground whereon al other sciences rest: and also
for as much as it takes ye name of leters. For Gra^ma in Greek signifies a
letter in English. Gra^mer is an art that does co^s^st in speaking and writing
without fault, so that every word have his due letters, and is divided, after
the mind of Quintiliane, Two parts of grammar.
into two parts: the way to speak congruite, and declaryng of Poets. As
Tully writes, there is required in gramariens, the declaracio^ of Poets, the
knowlage of histories exposicion of words, and a certain vtteraunce of
pronunciacion. It had the beginning of markyng and obseruyng what was most
fytte or vnfittyng in communicacion, which thing men counterfettyng in their
speech made this art, even as Rhethorike was perceived. For it is the duty
both of Grammariens and orators to have a regard and respect how to
speak. Hermippus says that Epicurus first taught the art of Grammar,
Epicurus taught grammar first.
and Plato espied and perceived first the commoditee and profette of it. In
Rome it was nothing esteemed till one Crates Malotes was sent by king Attalus to
the senate to teach it between the second and third battailles of Punike,
Crates taught grammar in Rome
a little before the death of Ennius ye Poet. It is of all other sciences the
most special, for it shows a mean and way to attain all the rest of the
faculties and arts Neither can a man come or attain to any excellency in any
art, onelesse he have first his principles of Grammar perfectly known, and
thoroughly perceived.

Therefore in old time Grammariens were called judges and allowers of all other
writers, and for that cause they were called Critici.

In this excelled Didimus and Antonius Enipho, Antonius Enipho a scholemaster.
whose schole Marcus Cicero resorted unto diverse times, after this affairs of
the law were ended: Nigidius Figulus, Marcus Varro, Marcus Valerius Probus,
and the arrogant Palemon with many other. Of the Greeks Aristarcus, Aristotle,
and Theodoces were chief.

The.viii. Chapter. Of Poetry, and Meter, and sundery kinds of the same.
Poetry.
POETRY is a goodly art: as well because no other discipline can be
perceived, except a man study it vehemently, for it comprehends al other
sciences: as for that where other faculties be devised by the pregnance, of
man's wit, this art only is given of nature by a divine inspiracion, without
which Democritus affirms there could never be excellent Poet: for it
proceeds not of art or precepts, but of a natural inspiracion, and spiritual
power. And therefore Ennius called Poets holy, Poets be called holy of Ennius.
because they be by a special prerogative commended and praised to us of God.
The beginning of this art is very ancient and as Eusebius says, Hebrews were
auctours of Poetry.
it flourished first among the Hebrews, that were long before the Greeks. For
Moses the great capitain of the Jews, Moses.
what time he led them out of Egypt into the land of promise, passing the red
sea, which by the power of GOD gave place to them, inspired by the holy ghost
made a song of Exameter verses, to render thanks to God for that benefit.

AND David the holy Prophet of GOD, David
after he was dispatched of all his affairs to war, and escaped the
assaults and dangers of treason, living in great peace, devised many
pleasant balades and tuneable Hymns, The Psalte^ of David.
of the praise of God in sundery kinds of Meter. For as samet Jerome says,
the Psalter of David goes in as good nombre and measures, as either ye Greek
Planudes, or ye Latin Horacius, sometime in Alcaeus nombers, sometime in the
meter of Sappho, sometime with half measures. What is godlyer then the song of
Moses in Deutronomie and of Esaias? Solomon. Job.
more ancient then Salamon? more perfect the^ Job? And we may worthily
ascribe the inuencion of it to the Hebrews, but in deed Orpheus and Linus,
Orpheus. Linus
and after them Homere and Hesiodus did first polyshe and adorn the Art with
all kind of furnature. The Romans received it not till of latter time, for
Liuius Andronicus (as Tully writes) CCCCC.xiii. year after the city was
builded, Liuius. And^onicus.
Caius Claudius, Ce^to and Marcus Tuditanus being co^sulles, set forth the
first Interlude or fable a year before Ennius was borne. Before those days it
was had in such dispyte, that if one had professed him self to be a Poet, he
was taken for a murderer or ruffian. The beginner of meter was God, which
proporcioned the world, The world was made by meter.
with all the contents of the same, with a certain order, as it were a meter,
for there is noone (as Pithagoras taught) that douteth, but that there is in
things heavenly and yearthly a kind of armonye, and oneles it were governed
with a fourmal concord and discribed nombre, how could it long continue? Al
other instruments, that we occupye, be all fashioned by a manner of measure.
And Diodorus assigns the inuencion of Meter, which the Poets fulfilled with
a spiritual influence, use in their works, to Jupiter as to almighty God.

Of Meters there be diverse kinds that has their name, Diverse kinds of meter.
either of the thing that is discribed therein, as heroical Meter is so called
of the valiant deades of arms of noble men, Heroical verse.
that be contained in it, wherein also Apollo gave his Oracles, therefore Pliny
says we have that Meter of Pithius Oracle: or of the inuentoure as
Aesclepiadical or of the quantitee as Iambus, Archilocus found iambus
because it stands of a short and a long, which Archilocus found first, or
of the nombre of feet, as Exameter and Pentameter which is also called
Elegiacal the sheppeheardes songs, Daphnis the son of Mercury found,
Daphnis found ye sheperdes carols
and other diuysed other songs, which I let pass for my purpose is only to
speak of the Inuentours of the Meter, and not to persecute the particulars.

The.ix. Chapter. The beginning of Tragedies, Comedies, Satyrs, and new
Comedies.
TRAGEDIES and comedies had their beginning of the oblacions (as Diodorus
writes) which in old time men devoutly offered for their fruytes to Bacchus.
Tragedies.
For as the aulters were kyndeled with fire, and the Goat leyed on it, the
quyre in honor of Bacchus song this Meter called a Tragedy. It was named
so, either because a Got, which in Greek is called Tragos, was the reward
appointed for him that was auctour of the song, (...).
or because a Goat, which is noyefull to the vynes, whereof Bacchus was first
inue^tour, was sacrificed to Liber: or of the grounds or dregs, which in
Greek is called Tryx, with the which stage Players used to paynte their face,
(...).
before that Eschilus divised v^sers The beginner of them, Vys^rs were found by
Eschilus.
after the mind of Horace, was Thespis: albeit, Quintilianus says Eschilus
setfurth first openly Tragedies before any other, Sophocles and Euripides did
furnishe them more galantly. In Rome Liuius Andronicus made the first Tragedy,
wherein Accius, Pacuuius, Famous tragedies.
Ouidius and Seneca excelled. The Comedies began what time (the Atheniens being
not yet assembled into ye City) the youth of that country used to sing
solemn verses at feasts abroad in the villages, and high ways for to get
monye, they were so named of the Greek word Comos for bankettyng or Come a
street, (...).
and Ode a song. Albeit it is uncertain among the Grecians who found it
first. In this kind of writing Aristophanes, Eupolis and Cratinus bare the
price: of the Romans, Liuius Andronicus found it first. In a Tragedy noble
parsonages, as Lords, A Tragedy.
Dukes, Kings and Emperors be brought in, with an high style: A comedy.
In a comedy, amorous daliaunce, matters of love, and deflouryng of maidens be
contained. Heaviness is apropried unto a Tragidie: and therefore, when king
Archilaus desired Euripides to write a Tragidie of him be denied it, Archilaus.
wishyng that never such thing should chance to him, as should be worthy of a
Tragedye, for it has ever a miserable end, and a Comodie has a joyful end.
A Satyr is a poesy. A satyr^.
rebukyng vices sharply not regardyng any persons. There be two kinds of
Satyrs, the one is both among the Greeks and Romans of ancient time used,
Two sorts of Satires.
for the diuersytie of Meters much like a Comodye, saving that it is more
wanton. Demetrius of Tharsus, and one Menippus a bondeman, whom Marcus Varro
did counterfeit, were writers in this kind. The second manner of Satyrs is
very railyng, only ordained to rebuke vice, and devised of the Romans upon
this occasion. When the Poets, that wrote the old Comodies, used to handle for
their arguments, not only feigned matters, but also things done in deed,
which although at the first it was tolerable, yet afterward, Lybe^ye of the
old satyr
it fortuned by reason that they inueyhed so liberally, and largely, at their
pleasure against every man, that there was a law made, that no man should from
thencefurth reprehend any man by name. Then the Romans in the place of those
Comodies substituted such Satyrs, as they had newly imagined. Then also began
ye new Comedy, New Comedye.
which concerns generally all men of mean estate: and has less bitterness
and railyng, but more pleasauntnes and pastime for the auditors. Menander.
Of this Menander and Philemon were auctours, which aswaged all the
crabbednesse of the old writings. Of them learned Cicilius, Neuius, Plautus,
and Terentius, the form to compyle Comodies, albeit (as Quintiliane says)
they uneath attained to the least portion of their patron, because the latin
tongue is not so fyt to receive the ornaments of eloquencie, as the Greek tongue
is. Satires whereof they were named.
The Satyrs had their name of vplandyshe gods, that were rude, lassiuious,
and wanton of behauour, In this form of writing Lucilius Horatius, Persius,
Inuenalis, obtained great fame and praise.

The.x. Chapter. The deuisers of Hystories, Prose and Rhethorike.
Hystories.
HYSTORIES of all other writings be most commendable, because it infourmeth
all sorts of people with notable examples of living, and does excite noble men
to ensue such actiuite in enterprises as they read to have been done by
their ancestors, and also discorageth and dehorteth wicked persons from
attemptyng of any haynouse deed or crime, knowing that such acts shall be
regestred in perpetual memory to the praise or reproach of the doers, according
to the deserte of their endeuoures. Pliny writes that Cadmus Milesius first
wrote hystories among the Grecians, Cadmus wrote the story of Syrus.
which contained ye gestes of Cirus king of Persia. Albeit, Josephus supposes
it to be more probable that Hystories were begone by the old writers of the
Hebrews as in the time of Moses which wrote the lives of many of the eldest
Hebrews and the creacion of the world: Moses did write the first storye.
or else to the priests of Egypt and Babylon. For the Egyptians and
Babilonians, have been of longest continuance very diligente in setting
furthe things in writing, insomuche, Priests of Egypt wrote stories.
yt their priests were specially appoineted to apply them selves to that
purpose of puttyng in writing such things as were worthy to be had in memory
As concerning the first writers of Prose, I cannot hold with Pliny, which
says Pheresides a Syrian wrote first pro^e in the time of king Sirus.
Pheresides.
For it is no doubt but he that wrote hystories, Prose.
wrote also prose first and Pheresides was long after Moses, which
was.ccccccc.lxxxviii. years before Ioathan king of the Ieues In whose time the
Olimpiades began, and this Pheresides (as Eusebius writes) was but in the
time of the first Olimpiade. Greek stories Latin stories.
Of the Gretians Xenophon, Thusidites, Herodotus, Theopompus, floryshed most in
writing histories of the Romans Titus Liuius, and Caius Crispius Salustius
with diverse other were had in high estimacion. Before that time they used
Annals or Cronicles, which contain only the geastes and factes of every day
severally. The first office of an historiographer is to write no lie, the
second that he shall conzel no truth, for favor, displeasure, or fear. The
perfection of an history rests in matter and words The order of the matter
requires, obseruaunce of times, discripcions of places, the manners, lives of
men, their behauoures, purposes, occacions, deeds, sayings, casualtes,
acheuynges, and finishyng of things. The tenor of the words asks a brefe
perspicuite and sincere truth, with moderate and peaceable ornaments

Rhethoryke.
We may be sure that by and by after men were formed, they received of God the
use of speech, wherein what time they perceived some words to be profitable,
and some hurtefull in vtteryng of them: they appointed and gathered an Art of
speech, or communicacion called Rethorycke, Which (as Diodorus does say:)
was invented by Marcurie: Marcurie. Empedocles.
but Aristotle affyrmmeth that Empedocles was first auctoure of the Oratorial
art. In Rome this feate of eloquence was never forbidden, but in process (as
it was perceived to be profitable and honest) was had in such estima^ion, and
so many, partly for their defense, partly for glory and ambition, employed
their studies in it with such endeavor, that very many of the ignobilitee
were promoted into the degree of Senators, and atcheued much worship by it.
Corax and Thisias gave rules of Rhethorike.

D^mosthenes Cicero.


Corax, and Thysias, being Sicilians gave first precepts in writing of this
Science And their countremanne Leontinus Gorgias succeeded them. Demosthenes o^
the Gretians was pryncipal, of ye Romans, Tullius Cicero had no fellow. Now
as touching the effect and property of it, there be in it (as Cicero writes)
five parts, first to inuente stuff of matter to speak, Parts of Rhethorike.
then formably to order his deuyses, ne^te to polyshe it and furnyshe it with
elegance of terms, and picked words: and to have it in perfect memory, and
last of all to utter it with comely gesture, in such sort that it delight, for
it conueniente treatablenes, teach, and plainly declare the thing, and move
affections of pytie and favor in the hearts of judges or if the cause
permytte, or time require, to excite a cheareful laughyng and abandone grave
seueritye. In terms of them that practice this faculty, we have this
difference: we call him that defends matters, and pleads causes an Orator,
Oratoure, Rhethoricien.
a Rhetoricien, is he that teaches or professes to be a scolemaster in that
art. A declamatour is he that is occupied in feigned causes, Declamator.
either for his own exercise, or to enstructe other thereby.

The.xi. Chapter. Who found Musyke, and what efficacy it is of in humayne
affairs.
MVSIKE, by the testimonye of ancient Poets, Orpheus.
is very antique, for Orpheus and Linus both borne of the lineage of the
gods were very excellent Musicians. And because the one by the sweetness of
his armonie dilinited and modefied the gross hearts, and rude minds of men,
it was feigned that he made the wild beasts, as Lions and Tygres to follow
him: And the praisynges of Gods valiant prowes, and deeds of arms of
Lords were used to be song with Lutes at the royal feasts, as Iompas in
Virgil and Demodocus in Homere bear wytnes.

The fynders of Musyke as Pliny supposes was Amphion the son of Jupiter by
Antiope. Fynders of Music after diverse authors.

Dionisius. zethus.

Amphyon.


The Gretians ascribe the findyng of it to Dionisius. Eusebius says that
Zephus and Amphion, which were in Cadmus days, invented Musyke: Solinus
contendeth that the study of this art came out of Crete, and was perceived by
the ringyng and shryl sound of bralle, and so brought and traduced into
numbers and measures. Polybius affirms that it came from the Archadiens,
Archadiens,
which have an exceadyng mind to that science, and Diodorus writes that
Marcury found the concordes of singyng. Marcurye found the co^cordes.
Albeit, it is like that these only were the first setters out of it in Greece
of late time for Josephus tells that Tubalcain an Hebrew the son of Lamech,
Cubalcain.
which was many ages before them, used much to sing to the Psaltrie and Lute,
notwithstanding who was first procurer of it, and when it was found, it is yet
uncertain, for it seems to have been given of nature to mankind at the
beginning for a special reward, Nature gave musyke* to men.
to mittigate the cruel pains, wherein man is bewrapped and compassed on all
hands, for a child new borne cease of his lamentable cry at the singyng
and lullyng of his nursse. In all king of labors song is comfortable,
Laborers pass the time with songs.
the Galiman, the Plowman, the carter, the car^er ease the tediousnes of their
labor and journey with carolynges, leies, and whistlyng: yea, the brute
beasts be delighted with songs and noyses, as Mules with belles, Horses with
trompettes and shalmes are of a fi^arser stomach to their appointed ministerye.
And of whom I pray you learned the Birds their diversity of tunes? Who taught
the nightyngale so sundry nootes? Doutles even nature was of this agreeable
Harmonye the only scolemasters. But the Egiptians did forbid their young folks
learning of Music because it seduceth and makes effeminate the hardye
courage of men, Musyke makes men effeminate.
and Ephorus says: it was ordained to delude and deceive men. Nevertheless,
Socrates.
Socrates was not ashamed in his old age to learn to play on the Harp, and
Themistocles, because he refused the Harp at a bancket, Themystocles.
was reckened unlearned, the priests of Mars in Rome, called Salii song verses
about the City. And specially the great Prophet David, Salii marti^ David.
which song the mysteries of God in Meter* frequented syngyng.

The.xii. Chapter. Who found Musical instruments and brought them into Italy.
IT is said that Marcurye found the Harp first. Harp. Marcur^*
For as he walked by the River Nilus after an ebb, he found a Tortyse al
wythered, and nothing remainyng but the senewes, which as he fortuned to
strycke on them, made a certain sound: And after the patron of that he
fashioned an Harp, and according to the three times of the year, Three strings
in the harp.
Summer, Winter, and Spryngtyme, he put to it three Strings, a Treble, a
Base, and a Mean.

This instrumente he gave to Apollo, and Apollo delivered it to Orpheus: Some
thyncke Amphion found it. Amphyon.
I find that the Harp had seven strings to resemble the seven daughters of
Atlas, whereof Maia Mercury his mother was one. And then after that were two
other put to, Goddesses of sauoure.
to represente the nine Muses.

Some refer the orygynall of the Harp and Pype too Apollo, for his Image in
Delos (as they say,) has in the right hand a bow, and in the left hand
the goddesses of favor. Whereof one has a harp, an other a shalme, Shalmes.
ye third a pype. Shalmes were at the beginning made of Cranes legs, and
after of great reed: Dardanus Trezenius used first to play and sing with them.
Dardanius. Trezenus Pype.
Pan an vplandy she god, found the pype of small reed first to solace his
love. Eusebius says Cibele found it, and some suppose it was Apollo. Timarias
played on the Harp or Lute, first without dittye, Singyng to the Lute.
and Amphion song first to the Lute, but the Harp was found before by Tubal and
fashioned like the Greek letter delta. D


Hermophilus first distributed the pulse and beatyng of the veins too certain
measures of Music. And the Prophet David found diverse instruments, as
Regalles and Nables. Regalles. Nables.
The Troglodites found the Dulcimers. Pises Terrenes found the Brazen trompe,
Dulcimers.
which the Terrenes footemenne used in their wars, some thyncke it was
Tyrteus or Dyrceus an Athenien. For what time the Lacedaemonians made war
against the Messenians, Brazen tro^pe
and the wars were long differred, they had answer of Apollo, that if they
would win the feelde, they should have a captain of Athens.

AND the Atheniens in dispyte sent to them one Dyrceus a lame and one eyed
fellow, Dyrceus captain of the Lacedaemonians.
and all out of shape: albeit they received him and used his counsel, and he
taught them to play on trumpes, which were so fearful to ye Messenians, by
reason of strau^genes of the noise that they fled forth with, and so they
obtained victory, but in deed (as Josephus witnesses) Moses the valiant
captain of the Hebrews found the Troumpe and made it of silver. Moses found
the trompe Archadiens brought instruments into Italy.
The Archadie^s did first bring al Musical instruments into Italye, where
before that time they used only vpla^dishe pypes. Thucydides writes that ye
Lacedaemonians used first in war Shalmes, Lacedaemonians manner in war.
Clarious and Rebeckes, to thentent that when they were ready to the wars by
such plaiyng they might better keep array. Drumslades. in war.
The Romans fotemen joined Droumslades with Trumpettes. Haliattes king of the
Lydians had in the battle against the Milesians Pipers and Fiddlers plaiyng
together, Pypers and Fiddlers.
the Gretians, as they went to war had Lutes going before them to modefie
their pase, all other countrees (as we do now) used trumpettes in battle.

The.xiii. Chapter. The beginning of Philosophy.
THE science of Philosophy, Philosophy.
which Tully calls the study of wisdom, searcher out of virtue, expulser
of vice after the mind of diverse did proceed out of Barbary in to Greece. For
it is said that in Persie the Magiciens (for so they called their wise and sage
men) were excellent in knowlage, Magiciens.
Chaldees.
in Assirie the Caldees, in Inde the Gymnosophistes, having their name,
Gymnosophistes.
because they went naked, had their part of wisdom, of which faction one
Buddas was chief, in France the Druides, in Phenice Ochus, in Thrace Xamolxis,
Druides. Ochus. Xamolxis. Orpheus. Atlas.
and Orpheus, in Lybie Atlas.

The Egyptians say that Vulcanus, the son of Nilus found the first principles
of Philosophy.

Laertius writes that Philosophy began in Greece, where Museus and Linus were
first learned men, but Eusebius says that Philosophy, like as all other
sciences sprung among the Hebrews, and of them the Greek Philosophiers, Hebrews
were auctours of Philosophy.
which were a thousand year after Moses, learned all their knowledge. As for
the name of Philosophy was not used among them, Pythagoras calls him self a
Philosophier.
till the time of Pythagoras, for he called him self a Philosophier, and his
study of wisdom, philosophy, where before time it was named wisdom, and
they that professed it had the title of wise men. There be of it three parts,
one called natural, Three parts of Philosophy,
another moral, and the faculty of reasonyng called logike, natural treats
of the world and contents thereof, which Archelaus brought out of Ionia unto
Athens. Moral enfourmeth the life and manners of men, this part Socrates
traduced and applied from heavenly things, to the use of life, and to deserne
good and bad, Logike inuenteth reasons on both parts, and was found by Zeno
Eliates, other divide it into.v. parts, natural, supernatural, Five parts.
moral mathematical, and logike.

Dialoges, were made first by Plato, Dialoges.
or at the least furnished with more eloquence, for Aristotle says that they
were divised by Alexamenus Scyreus.

The.xiiii. Chapter. Astrology, the course of the sterres, sphere, nature of
the wyndes.
THE earth is most subject to the influence, and operacion of the Planettes,
and by the temperate seasonablenesse of the co^stellacions it brings furthe
abundance of fruits: and as Julius Firmicus supposes, the sterres have also
a power in the birth of men to make them of one fashion or other, Three power
of the sterres.
this or that complexion, of good or bad disposicion, according to the
respects, conjunctions or opposicions procure. And the Egyptians have devised
and appointed to every night and day his peculiar God, Obseruyng of days.
and what destenie, and what death shall chance to him yt is borne on any
such day. Chaldees.
And the Chaldees said, that to acheue any good or hurtful thing, the planettes
help much

By this occasion men, through diligent obseruyng of the celestial bodies,
Astrology.
invented Astrology, wherein the whole mouable course of the heaven, the
risyng, the going down, and order or the Planettes be comprehended, which
the Egiptians advance the^ selves to have found: Egiptians.
Albeit some say Mercury was auctour of it, and Diodorus affirms it to be
Actinus the son of Phoebus. Mercury.
Nevertheless, Josephus plainly declares, that Abraham enstructed the^,
Abraham.
and also the Caldees in that art, and thence it came into Greece, for all the
learned men of Greece, Grecians learned in Egypt.
as Pherceides, Pithagoras Thales acknowledge that they were disciples to the
Egyptians and Chaldees. But Pliny writes that Atlas was finder of it, Atlas.
and therefore the Poets feign that he bears heaven on his back. Seruius
thinks it was Prometheus thar found it. Nevertheless al these, as I take it,
were the beginners of this faculty every man in his own country only, where
he dwelled: for even from the beginning of the world, Seth his posterity.
Astrology.
the sons of Seth divised first the science of the sterres, and for somuche,
as they feared least their art should perish, before it came to the knowledge
of men (for they had heard their graund father Adam say that all things
should be destroyed by the universal fludde, they made two pyllers, one of
stone, Two pyllers preserved Astrology from the fludde.
the other of brycke, to thentent that if the brick wasted with water or
storms, yet the stone should preserve the letters whole and perfect, and in
these pyllers they graued all that co^cerned the obseruaunce of the sterres. And
therefore it is credible that the Egypcians and Chaldes learned Astrology of the
Hebrews, and so consequently it spread abroad in other nations, and thus began
Astronomy conceived to seduce men's wits. Among ye Romans Sulpicius Gallus,
in Greece Thales Milesius perceived the cause of theclipse of the Sun and Moan
Endymeon marked first the course of the Moon and her changyng as Pliny
writes. Eclipse of ye Sun and Moon.

Endymion perceived the course of the Moon.

Pythagoras. observed the day sterre.

Archemedes devised the sphere.

The wyndes. Aeolia.


Pythagoras (as some say (observed the course of Venus called the day sterre,
but as Laercius supposes it was Permenides. The Sphere was divised by
Archemides a Siracusian, but Diogenes takes it to have been Museus, and Pliny
ascribes it to Anaxima^der. The winds were first observed by Aeolus, as it is
reported, upon this reason. The inhabitants of the Ilelandes about Sicile
prognosticate by the smoke of the said Isles three days before, what wind
they shall have, and for that cause they say that Aeolus has dominion over the
wyndes. The winds, as some divide them, be four according to the four
principal regions of the air, Four wyndes.
they that be more curiouse, make eight. And specially one Andronicus
Cyrrestes, Andronicus.
which builded in Athens a turret, and set on every side of it the Images
of wyndes, graven against the region whence the wyndes came, and set them on
pyllers of marble, and in the myddle he set a brazen Image of Triton, Images
of wyndes.
which he had made so that it would turn with the wind and stand with his face
toward the wind that blewe, and poincte with a rod to the Image of the same
wind, Wethercorkes. Fanes.
which manner is now used in all countrees, for they set up wethercockes or
fanes to show out of what quarter the wind blows.

The.xv. Chapter. Who found Geometry, Arithmetike, with other things.
NILVS THE MOST famous River of the world, from the time, Nilus surundeth
Egypt.
that the Sun be in Tropico Cancri, until it come to the equinocciall line
in Libra again, with an houge abundance of water does ouerflowe all the
douned and plain countries of Egypt: by the altitude and depenes of this
fludde the Egiptians foresee the plenty and scarsitee of fruits to come.
Prognosticacion of ple^tie and scarsnes.
For if it increase but unto the depeth of.xii. or.xiii. cubits, it porte^deth
lack of sufficience if it pass.xiiii. and so to.xvi. it imports great
plenty: in the time of Claudius Caesar it waxed.xviii. cubits and that was
the greatest tide: the least was in the time of the battle at Pharsalia
whereby it signified, how sore that it abhorred the murder of the valiant
Pompeie. What time Nilus with such inundacion had partly minished, partly
transposed, and the same time all together put away the meeres and butrelles
with which they disseuerd their porcions of land they were compelled often to
measure their bonds afreshe: Egiptians found Geometry.
for that cause the Egiptians glory that Geometry was immagined by them to
measure lands. As Arithemetike by the Phenicians by cause to utter their
marcha^dise. But Josephus seameth to attribute both to the Hebrews, Hebrews
after Josephus mind found Geometry.
saying that God prolo^ged the time of their lives because of the studiouse
labor that they employed in serchyng out of Astrology and Geometry, and the
Egyptians were ignorant in Geometry and Arithmetike, Abraham taught the
Egiptians. Contents of Geometry.
unto the time that Abraham taught them. Geometry contains the description
of lengthes, bredthes, shapes, and quantities. In this excelled Strabo in Greece
in the time of Tiberius, and Ptolome under Traianus and Antoninus. In Italy
Plinius and Folinus.

Measures and weightes were found by Sidonius (as Eutropius says) ye same
time that Procas reigned in Alba, Aza in Iurye, Measures and weightes.
and Hieroboham in Jerusalem. Some write that Mercury divised them in Greece,
Pliny ascribes it to Phidon of Argos, Gellius to Palamedes, Strabo to one
Phidon of Elis in Arcadie. Diogenes says that Pythagoras taught the Greeks
weightes and measures, but Josephus affirms that Cain found them first of al.

Nombers some say were invented Nombers.
by Pythagoras, some by Mercury. Liuius supposes that Pallas found them.
Manner of rekenyng years
The manner of countyng years in Greece was by Olimpiades which contained the
space of five years, as the Romans did by Lustra which contained the same
nombre of years, and sometime they noted the nombre of years by letters,
sometime by nails. Countyng by nails.
For every year the Consul or chief judge called Praetor in the Ides of
September fastened a nail in the wall of Jupiters temple next ioynyng to the
temple of Pallas, to signify the space of years. Letters to count with.
And we use to write our nombers with these seven letters.C.I.D.L.M.V..X. or
with these signs. 1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9. which, Figures of Arithmetike
because they be in quotidian use, it needs not to declare.

The.xvi. Chapter. Phisike, and the parts thereof.
PHISIKE, which with remedies provided of God, Inuentours of Phisike.
does much comfort and cure men in their maladies and diseases, that breast
forth one every side, is thought worthily to have been invented of the Gods.
For it is supposed that Mercury found it among the Egipcians, some say it
was Apis their god: or Arabus son to Apollo. Some refer it to Apollo him
self. Apollo god of medicines,
because the moderate heat of the Sun is banisher of all sickness.
Clemente does attribute the fyndyng of it to the Egipcians in general and
the amplifiyng and enlargyng of it to Aesculapius which beside other things,
found the pluckyng out of teth. Notwithstanding, Pluckyng out of tethe.
whosoever found the notable knowlage of medicines, it is no fail but it was
perceived by what things were wholesome and what unwholesome. Obseruyng of diete
was beginning of Physic.
And as they observed how the sick folks used their diete and marked how
some for gredynesse did eat by and by, and some forbear their meat because of
faintness of their stomach, and so were releued, they learned yt abstinence
was a helper and furtherer of health: and by like obseruaunce other precepts
of Phisike were gathered.

It has three parts, one of dietyng another of Medicines, Three parts of
Phisike.
the third of surgery, for by one of these.iii. ways every desease is
releued. But for somuche as it is uncertain and often changes, it ley in
extreme darkness till Hippocrates did renew it: Hippocrates reduced it to an
art.
and where as they had a custom that the pacient being restored to health
should write in the temple of the god that healped him, both his name and the
manner of healyng, that the example might help the like desease: out of all
such precedences he gathered precepts of Phisike, and brought it first to a
formal art.

Archagathus the first Phisician in Rome.
In Rome Archagathus of Peloponesus was first Physician, ye ccccc.xxxv. year of
the City, Lucius Emilius and Marcus Liuius being Consuls, and was made
fremanne of the city, which was first made a Surgion or wou^der, after for
the sharpness of his cuttyng and seryng, he was named a butcher or
execucioner and murderer, and afterward when the nombre began to increase
they were expulsed out of Rome and banished by Marcus Cato as Pliny tells in
xxxvi. book. Marcus Cato banished Phisicians out of Rome. The manner of the
Egiptians in their deseases.


In Egypt and Babylon they used no Phisicians, but brought the sick persons
into the streets and common places, that the men, which passed by, might tell
them what manner diete or means they them selves had used in the like desease
to escape it: nether was it lawful for any man to pass by till he had
commoned with the pacient. In the latter days the Egyptians distributed the
art of Medicines, in such sort, Eueri desease had a sundry Phisician.
that every desease had a diverse Phisician to minister in it, as one for the
eyes, one for the head, other for the entrayles, and semblably other for other
sickness and so it came to pass that al places were full of Phisicians.

In this art excelled Cassius, famous Phisicians.
Calpitanus, Aruncius Rubrius, Antonius Musa, Galenus, Auicenna.

The.xvii. Chapter. The inuentours of Herbs medicinable, what remedies men
learned of beasts.
Herbs were create for man.
NATVRE doubtelesse, the mother and governor of al things did create Herbs,
as may appear by many examples, partly by the delectacion, and partly for
the wealth and preseruacion of men's bodies. For Xanthus an historiographer
(as Pliny records) tells how a Dragon revived his young faune, that was
slain, by the virtue of an herb called Balin: Herb called Balin. Hechwal.
and the Hechewal if a wedge be driven into the hole of her neste (for she
makes her neste in the hole of a tree that she woorketh with her beak)
compels it to fall out with an Herb that she knowethe: and some of the
Indians live only by Herbs, Appianus writes, that the Parthians, which
Antonie put to flight, Parthians.
constrained by extreme famyne, chanced too eat a certain Herb, whose
nature was to make them that eat it, too forgette all other things, and
only dig up stones, as if they would go about some great endeavor, and
after such extreme trauail died. Of such medicines made with Herbs. Chiron
son to Saturnus and Phillara was the fynder, Chiron was authoure of medicines
and salues.
and devised also salues for wounds, soores, and byles, albee it some think
it was Appollo, some refer it to his son Aesculapius, whom Chiron brought
up, some to the Samothracians. But I suppose they attributed the inuencion of
it to Chiron because he found the Herb Centaurie, Ce^tauro was found by
Chiron.
wherewith he healed the wou^d, that he had by Hercules shafres falling on his
foot, as he was ha^dlyng of his weapons: notwithstanding Celsus says that
the art of Phisike is very aunciente, but he makes no mention of the
authoure of it, Asclepiades abholished Phisike.
only he says, Asclepiades, which was an excellent Physician, did
abholishe the use of it for somuche as it annoyed the stomach and engendered
evil humors Mercury found the use of Moly, Moly. Panace.
Achilles Yarowe, Esculapius, Panace and sondery men found sonderye Herbs.
Medicines of Honey, Sol the son of Oceanus invented: and beasts taught men
certain Herbs necessary for medicines. As the Heart stricken with an arrowe
drives it out with Detany: and if he be stynged with a Spider, Detany.
he heals him self with eating Pills or a certain herb named Cancer.
Cancer. Selandyne.
Selandyne, that is a sovereign herb for the sight, was perceived by the
Swallows, which heled the eyes of their young ones with it. The Snaile or
Torteise, ready to fight with the Serpente, armeth him self with Sauery or
Maioram. The Bore in his sickness cures him self with the Iuye. Sauery.
Maioram.
Of the water Horse in Nilus, Yuie.
men learned to let blodde. Lettyng of blodde.
For when he is coarsye and vnlustye he seeks by the river side the sharpest
reed stalks, and strikes and vain in his leg against it with great
violence, and so eases his body by such mean: And when he has done he
covers the wound with the mudde.

The Ibis a bird much like the storke, of the same country taught Phisiciens
to minister clysters: For when she is full, she purges her self with her
crooked beak at the foundament. The wesyl in chasyng the serpente preserves
her self with Rue, Rue. Organye.
and the storke with Organye. In Greece Orpheus, Museus, Dioscorides, in Rome
Marcus Cato, Pompeius Leneus wrote of the nature of herbs. In this time Pliny
thinks, that this art was first received among the Romans.

The.xviii. Chapter. The beginning of Magike. Driuyng out of spirits,
Charms, prophesiyng in sundry manners
MAGIKE had it beginning of medicine, and was the inuencion of Zoroastres king
of the Bactria^s, zoroastres found Magike.
which reigned.viii.C. year after the siege of Troy, the same time that
Abraham and Ninus reigned, about three M.C.lxxxv. years after the creacion of
the world. Lactantius and Eusebius think it was set forth among other
deuelishe sciences by the evil spirits, and Pliny calls it of al arts the
most deceytful. It is compacte, of medicine or phisike, supersticion, and the
mathematical arts. Thessaly used Magike.
The Thessalonia^s most specially were slaundered with the frequent use and
practisyng of this faculty: The writer of this art was Hosthanes. And
Pythagoras, Empedocles, Hostanes wrote bohes of Magike.
Democritus, Plato with diverse other sailed in far countries to learn it: wherein
Democritus was most famous CCC. year after the cytee was builded, in which
time Hippocrates published the faculty of Phisike. The manner to drive out
spirits out of men that were possessed with them, Driuyng out of spirits.
Charms.
and charms to heal corporal maladies, king Solomon taught, as Josephus
witnesses: and he saw it done by Eleazar in his time before Vespasianus then
emperor. Eleazar drives out spirits.
The manner to heal them was such: He put to the nose of the possessed man a
ryng wherein was enclosed a root that Solomon had showed, and so dreue out the
spirit, and straight way the man fell down: then he coniured him with such
orisons ande^orcismes as were appointed by Solomon, to banishe the spirit out
of ye Demoniake

The sages or wise men of Persye, which in their language be named Magi, Magi.
being wholly addict to the honoryng of their false gods, came to such
extreme folly, that they professed openly, that they could not only by the
obseruacion of ye sterres know things to come, but also by other pretensed
arts and mumblyng of a few words, they could do and bring to pass auye
thing that they would. Of them were invented these six kinds of Magike,
Necromancye, Negroma^tie.
which is by raisyng up of dead men, as in Lucane one raised from death,
tells the adventures of the battle of Pharsalus.

Pyromantie.
Pyromantie, that tells things by the fire and lightnyng as Tanaquilla the
wife of Tarquinius Priscus, prophesied that Seruius Tullius should be king of
Rome because she se the fire enuiron his head. The findyng of this Pliny
refers to Amphiaraus.

Ae^romantie that is a kind of propheciyng by the air, as by fliyng,
Ae^romantie
fedyng, singyng of birds and strange tempests of wynd and hayle.
Hydromantie, was propheciyng by water: as Varro writes that a child did se in
the water the Image of Mercury, which in C. and fifty verses told all the
chance of war against Mythridates king of Pontus.

Geomantie, was a diuinacion by openyng of the earth. Geomantie.


Chiromantie
Chiromantie is a coniecturyng by beholding the lines, or wryncles of the
hands called commonly Palmistry.

All which dayne illusions, and false persuasions, it becomes al true
christiens to eschew and abhor.

The.xix. Chapter. Two kinds of diuinacion, sothsaiyng castyng ^^ttes, and
readyng of dreams.
CICERO makes.ii. kinds of diuinacions, Two kinds of prophiciyng.

Natural.


one natural and another artificial. Natural is yt, which proceeds of a
certain co^citacion, stirryng, and co^mocion of the mind, that chances
sometime to men when they be in dreams or slepyng: sometimes when they
prophesye in a manner of fury and rauishyng of mind, as it did to Sibilla and
diverse other religious persons: Of this kind were oracles of Apollo and
Jupiter Ha^mon. Albeit they were often false, because they came of a deuilishe
polycie, and man's subteltye: but such as come of the holy ghost and not of a
phrenetike madness be true.

The artificial consists in those things which come of conjectures,
Artificial.
old consideracions, and obseruaunces of the entrails of beasts, fliyng of
birds, castyng of lottes.

The regardyng of the bowels of beasts began among the Hetrus^ians:
Beholding the bowels of beasts.
For as it fortuned a man that plowed, to raise up a deaper sorrow then he
was wont to do, all suddenly arose out of the earth one Tages, that taught
the^ all the feats of sothsaiyng, but Pliny says one Delphus found it.

Fedyng, fliyng and chitteryng of birds.
The diuinacions by lokyng on the fedyng of birds Theresias a Thebane devised,
Caras first marked the chitteryng of them, and Pythagoras observed their fliyng.

Orpheus added the diuinacion by other beasts. What store we ought to set by
such diuinacions, Mossolanus a Jew techeth us. When he was in the wars, a
certain prophet commanded every man to stand still till he had taken a
conjecture of the bird that flow by: but Mossolanus took privily a bow and
shafte and killed the bird, Mossolanus lets the Augurie.
wherewith the wysarde and diverse other were displeased, then he said to them.
Why doat you so? can ye bird, which knows not of her own death, tell us
the casual adventures of our journey? For if she had had any fore knowledge,
she would not have common hither to have been killed of me.

Castyng of lottes, Numerius Suffusius devised first at Prenest. Castyng lottes.

Dream readyng.




The expou^dyng of dreams Pliny ascribes to Amphiction, but Trogus assigns
it to Joseph son to Jacob, Clement says the Telmessians found it. But al
these were inverted to seduce men with supersticious error and for the
commoditee of them that use it.

Here ends the abrydgement of the first book.
The first Chapter. The original of laws, and who made the first laws.
LAW IS a constant and perpetual good thing, Law.
without which no house, no city, no country, no state of me^ no natural
creature, not the world it self, can consist ferme and stable. For it obeys
God and al other things, air, water, la^d man be in obedience to it, and
Chrisippus calls it a knowledge of all divine and humayne matters,
co^maundyng equitee, and expulsyng wickedness and wrong.

Three laws. Natural.
There be of laws three kinds: one natural, that is not only appropried to
man, but also it concerns al other lively things either in the earth, sea,
or air. As we perceive in all kinds of living creatures naturally a certain
familiaritee of male and female, procreacion of issue and approcliuitee to
norishe the same the which proceeds of a natural law engraffed in the hearts
of every of them: nature her self, that is God, was auctour of this.

The second is named the law that al men use, Ius gentiu^.
generally through all the world as to show a man the way, to communicate to
men the commoditee of the elements, water and fire, to this kind apperteineth
the law of arms, and it is called in Latyne Ius gentium.

Civil law is the pryuate law of every country or city, Civil law.
as of the Romans, Lacedemoniens, and Atheniens. This consists in decrees
of princes, statutes, and proclamacions.

The chief and principal laws were promulgate by God, confyrmed after the
most depured and perfect manner that natural equite could devise or co^ceyue,
and be in stable constance, and subject to no transmutacion. After the example
of these, man has inverted laws to defend and preserve good men, and to
punish and keep evil persons in office and good order.

Such laws Ceres made first, Law makers, Ceres.
as Diodorus supposes, but other think it was Rhadamanthus, and afterward
other in diverse countries devised and ordained laws, as in Athens Draco and
Solon, Mercury. Minos. Licurgus. Phoroneus. Romulus.
in Egypt Mercury, in Crete Minos, in Lacedemony Licurgus, in Tire Thara^des,
in Argos Phoroneus, in Rome Romulus, in Italy Pythagoras, or after ye mind of
Dionisius the Archadians, that were under Euander, as their sovereign lord
and chief captain. Not withstandyng the very true authoure of laws was God,
God was the true author of laws.
which first planted in us the law of nature and in process of time when that
was corrupt by Adam and his posteritee, he gave by Moses the law written to
reduce us again to our first state and true instincte of nature, Moses
promulgated the first laws in writing.
which was before all other. as Eusebius declares.

The.ii. Chapter. Who ordained the first governance of a co^minaltie,
tyranny, with other constitucions.
THE administracion of a common weal, The manner of rulyng the common wealth.
Monarchy. Aristocracie.
is after three sorts, as Plato deuideth it, Monarchy, where one rules,
Aristocratie, when the best men govern, Democratie, Democratie.
or popular state where the common people have a stroke in rulyng the publyke
weal. Principalitee or a kingdom was first begone by the Egyptians which
could live no while without a king or rular: Kingdom began in Egypt.
there reigned first, as Herodotus says, Menes, and their manner was to chose
him among the Priests of their religion: and if it fortuned, that any
stranger obtained the realm by conquest, he was compelled to be consecrated
priest, and so was the election legittimate, when he was king and priest. The
Diadem, that was the token of the honor royal had it beginning by Liber
Bacchus.

The Atheniens first ordained the state of a public wea^e that was governed by
the whole commons, Democratie began in Athens.
as Pliny thinks, albeit they had also kings, whereof Cecrops Diphyes,
which reigned in Moses time was the first. For as Iustine writes every city
and nation had at the beginning a king for their chief governor, First kings
how they behaved them selfs.
which attained to ye dignitee by no ambicion or favor, but by a syngular
wit, and sober modestnes, and reigned with such loyaltee that he seamed only
in title a king, in deed a subject. Ninus king of ye Assyrians, Ninus did
enlarge his empire.
contrary to the old ryte and custom of an ambicious desire that he had to
bear rule, first arrogantly usurped thempyre of al Asia, except Inde. As
concerning the institucion of the common wealth, where the common do all
things, notwithstanding the mind of Pliny. I suppose it began among the
Hebrews, Hebrews ordained Democratie.
which were ruled by a popular state many years before that Athens was
builded. Aristocratie.
The form of polycie which is governed by the best, as ye Romans common
wealth was, I can not well tell where it had it original, oneles I should
assign it to the Thebanes, which in the time of Ninus ruled the Egiptians,
whose rule, because the valiant and noble bare the auctoritee, was called a
power or potencie, which was the three thousand C.lxxxv. year of the world.
Pliny writes that after Theseus, Phala^is was the first tyrante, Theseus
first tyrante.
whereby it appears, that he thinks Theseus was auctour of tyranny, but
Ne^roth of the Image of Noe, Nemroth*
not long after the flud used tyranny.

Bondage, as Pliny takes it, began in Lacedemonye and was their inuencion:
Bondage.
nevertheless I find that it began among the Hebrews, and had the original
procedyng of Chanaan ye son of Cham, which because he had laughed his father
Noe to scorn, as he lay dissolutely when he was dronke, was punished in his
son Chanaan with penaltee of bondage and thraldom a thing to them very
strange, and to his posteritee, grievous. The order of manumission in old time
was in this manner, the lord or master took the bondma^ by the head or some
other part of his body saying I will this fellow be free, The order of
manumission
and put him forth of his hands. The counsel of the Areapagites, which were
called so of the court or street of Mars, were instituted by Solon to judge of
life and death, their custom was to use such seueritee, and entegritee in
judgment that they heard all causes and matters in the night, Ariopagites
judged in the night.
and not in the day: to the intent they should have no occasion to regard the
parties, but only have their eye and respect earnestly to the thing that was
brought before the^. Voices, which be used and occupied in consultacions,
Geuyng of voices.
judgments and elections were first ordained by Palamedes.

The.iii. Chapter. The.iii. manner of regimentes in Rome, the beginning of
ornaments royal with other matters perteinyng to a common wealth.
ROME which was of all the world, the most renoumed cytee both for ye
valiaunce of arms, and civil policy whereby it was governed, had three
fourmes of regimentes. In the beginning it had kings, Kings of Rome.
for Romulus which was builder thereof reigned there, and after him.vi. other
under whom the principalitee lasted CC.xliiii. years after the city was
builded. Then Tarquinius being banished for the notable crime and rape of
Lucretia, committed by his son, it was ordered by.ii. co^suls. Iunius Brutus,
and L. Tarquinius Colatinus: They had the name and title of co^suls, Consuls in
Rome.
of the co^sultacion and provision that they made for the common wealth: they
ruled the empire, co^ducted hosts, and by these officers, because they were
annual ye years were counted. Not.xii. years after the expulsyng of the
kings, when.xl. cities of the Latins, Octauius Manilius, son in law to
Tarquinius being their captain, had made insurrection and conspired against
the Romans T. Largius was created dictator or great master, Dictator first in
Rome.
which office was highest in auctoritee, and as Dionisius thinks, it was
taken of the Greeks, among who^ Elymnetae had the same power that Dictators had
in Rome. Elymnetae.
Liuius refers the original of the^ to ye Albanes: and ye Carthaginie^s had
also their dictators. This magistrate was never used saving in great dangers
of the commonwealth, The space of the dictators office.
and it continued but.vi. months, during that office al other magistrates
were abrogated except the Tribunate or Prouostship of the commons: The consuls
duetye was to name and proclaim him, The time of denouncyng the dictatour
and that no time but in the night: albeit what time the Veients had won ye
Romans camp, A. Cornelius Cosus Marshal of the army, need so co^strainyng,
denounced Mamercus Aemilius for Dictatour contrary to that statute. About three
hundredth year after the buildyng of Rome ye public state was transferred from
the co^sulshyp unto the rule of ten called december viri which endured but three
years, Decrees.
for by reason of the outragiouse lust of Appius Claudius against the maid
Virginea, they were desposed, and consuls were substituted to supplye their
room. Then the CCC.x. year of the city, in the place of Consuls were chosen
marshals or prouostes of armies who^ they named Tribunes, Aulus Se^pronius,
Tribunimilitum.
Attacinus, L. Attilius Lo^gus, and T. Celicius Siculus. The auctorytee of the
commons began daily sedicions and confederaties to increase. In such sort,
ye C. Cunuleius brought to pass that the co^minaltee married with the
nobility, Democratia began in Rome.
and the Tribunes by their earnest instance and suit caused that the high
offices were permitted to the^ of the common sort. As the.ccc.lv. year of the
buyldyng of the City P. Licinius Caluus was made tribune of the host, P.
Licinius a man of the commons.
the.CCC.lxxxix. year L. Sextus Lateranus attained the consulshyp,
the.ccc.xcix. year C. Martius Lateranus was created Dictator.

From this manner of governance, it was by Sylla and Marius brought to one
rular or prince again. L. Sylla C. Marius.
Thus has Rome had al kinds of administracion of the common wealth. Royal
ornaments.
The imperial ornaments of the kings of Rome, as fardels of rods, the a^e,
the garlond of gold, the chair of Iuory, the kyrtyl or cope, chariot, trapped
horses, rings, coote armoures, robes, mantels of estate, enbrodered gounes,
with garments of baudkyn or motley with all other royal apparel began among
the Tuscanes, which Tarquinius Priscus subdued and used these first by the
permission and license of the Senate. The.xii. lictours or sergeantes Romulus
first appointed after the manner of the.xii. nations of the Hetrurians who^ he
conquered, which gave to every of their kings, when he was crouned a lictour
or sergeant: whose duty was to wait on the magistrates and bear the rods
and are of execucion. The rods (as Pliny writes) were of byrche. The
institucion of taxes or nomberyng the people, Taxes or subsydes.
Seruius* Tullius king began in Rome first, but Moses long before that no^bred
the Israelites, and therefore the first tax, subsidy, or tribute was ordained
by Moses among the Hebrews and the cou^tyng of the nombre of the people.

Prisons, fetters, stocks.
Prysons, fetters, stocks, gyues, staves, with like instruments to punish
malefactors, Ancus Martius as Liuie says, did first appoint the^ to keep men
in fear and good order.

The.iiii. Chapter. Who ordered the year, the diversity of it, months, nones,
Ides, halendes and prime.
HERODOTVS writes that the Egyptians before all other men first found out the
year by the course of the planettes, Egyptians found the year.
and divided into twelve months. Diodorus assigns it to ye Thebanes, which
stands well with the opinion of Heredotus, because ye Thebanes be a nation of
Egypt, and Egypt was sometime named Thebe. Seruius says that Eudoxus found it
first, and after him Hipparchus. Laertius seems to ascribe it to Thales a
Milesian, which as he testifyeth, Thales.
first perceived the seasons and times of the year, and parted it into.CCC.lxv.
days: but that as I think was but only among the Grecians. Josephus
witnesses that ye year was divised by the Hebrews in Egypt before Noe his flud.
Diverse divisions of the year.
There be diverse fashions of diuidyng the year, the Archadiens finished their
year in three months, the Cariens and Acarneus in.vi. months: There was a year
that consisted in.xxx. days, which was counted by the change of the moon,
there was also ye great year yt ended, when all the planettes returned into one
poincte or line, The great year.
and after the mind of Cicero it contained.xii.M. nine.C.liiii. years of the
son: Josephus in the first of his antiquity says it co^teyneth but six
hundredth year. The other Grecians nombred the full year with.CCC.liii. days:
Romulus ordered the year March. April.
Romulus first divided the year into ten months whereof March, that he
named of his father, was first, April the second had that name of Venus,
because she was borne of the frothe of the sea, which is called Aphros, May
of the ancient men, June of the young men: The other he named of their order
and nombre as quintilis, sextilis Septe^bre, October, Nouembre, December:
Albeit afterward Quintilis was called Julius in honor of Julius Caesar, and
Sextilis was changed into Augustus, for the memorial of the emperor Augustus
Caesar. Not withstandyng for so much as this year, that Romulus ordered, did
neither agree to the course of ye son, nor chau^ges of the Moon, Numa applied
it to the course of the Moon by puttyng to.lvi. days, Numa added to the year.
whereof he made ii. months, the one he named January of Ianus the first king
of the Latins, January.
February.
ye other February of their god Februus, which had the preemine^ce ^u^t their
purificacions. Afterward Numa of a supersticious opinion yt he had, suposyng
God to be delighted with odd no^bres, gave to January April, June August,
Septembre, Nouembre, December.xxix. days: To March, May, Quintilis yt is
July and October.xxxi. and to February xxviii. days. Julius Caesar made the
year perfect.
Last of al Julius Caesar put to the whole year.x. days and six hours,
whereof he put to these months, January, August, and Dece^ber every of them.ii.
days: And to April, June, September, and Noue^ber he gave to each of the^ one
day. In this manner Julius Caesar accomplished ye year perfectely according to
the course of the sun, and of the.vi. hours every.iiii. year amou^teth a
day, which causes leap year (as we call it) in latin it is named bissextus,
Leap year bissextus.
because every forth year we count twyse the.vi. calend of March. Months.
The months have their name because they measure the space and course of the
Moon. Thus the year has.xii. months, Days of every month.
whereof April June, September, and Noue^ber have.xxx. days, all ye rest
has.xxxi. days, saving February, which has but xxviii. in the year be.lii.
wekes and a day. Days there be.CCC.lxv. and.vi. hours. The calendes, nones,
and ides has their appellacions of ye manner of rekenyng of the Romans.
Calendes.
Cale^des were named of calling, for at every change the chief rular of ye
sacrifices called rex sacrificulus called to an asse^bly in the Capitoly or
place of Rome all them of the country, and shows the^ their festiual days,
and what it was lawful to do ye monthe. The Nones had ye name because they were
the.ix. day from the ides, Nones. Ides.
which ides be ye midde days of every mo^th, and had their appellacion of the
Hetruscanes term iduare that signifies to divide or separate in ye mids.
This fashion of countyng the month endured to the.CCCC.l. year of the city,
and was kept secret among the bishops of their religion till ye time that C.
Slauius, P. Sulpitius Auerrio and P. Sempronius Sophullongus then being
Consuls, against the mind of the Senators disclosed al their solemn feats,
and published the^ in a table that eueri man might have perseueraunce of them.
The Prime, Prime.
whereby we find the conjunction of the move, and all mouable feasts as Lent,
Easter, Whytsondaye with other like, was invented by the great clarke saint
Barnarde.

The.v. Chapter. Who ordained the hours, dyals clockes, deuidyng the day and
night.
HOVRES, Hours.
which being in number xxiiii. accomplish the space of a day and night, were
so named of the son, which in the Egyptians language is called horus. Horus.
Sol.

Mercurius Trismegistus appointed xii. hours


They at the first were appointed but twelve of this occasyon. Hermes
Trismegistus, perceiuyng a certain beast consecrated to their God Serapis, to
make water or piss.xii. times in the day of equal distance, supposed therefore
that ye day ought to be divided into.xii. hours. This number did continue
long, but afterward yt day parted in.xxiiii. hours Anaximene^ a Milesian
found in Lacedemony the first dyal, Dials.
that declares the hours by ye shadow of the Gnomon. It was long before they
were used in Rome, for (as Pliny writes) in the.xii. tables there was only
rehearsed the risyng and going down of the sun, and a few years after,
Noone or midday was added, which the Bedel or common crier did denounce. Bedel
denou^ced noone.
This was but only on clear days, when they might perceive the course and
altitude of the son. The first dyal was set up on a pyller openly, which
stood behynd the common pulpite or bar called rostra at ye cost of M.
Valerius, M. Valerius Messala ordained a dial in Rome Water dyal.
Messala then Consuls in the first battle Punike. The water dial was used
first in Rome by P. Scipio Nasica ye ix.c. year of the city to divide ye
hours of the day and night. Albeit it was inverted by C^esibius of Alexandria.
Afterward clockes made of metal were invented by subtyl wits, Clockes
and sa^d dials were imagined, Sand dial.
whose authors be yet unknown. In some places the clockes strike.xxiiii.
hours by order, Strikyng of the clockes.
in other some, as in the West parts of the world, it smites twyse in the
day.xii. hours in such order that the.xii. hour is at noone and at midnight,
which is more co^modiouse for the rekeners then the other. The days which be
rekened in sundry wise of diverse nations, began in Egypt, Sundry division of
days.
where the year and months were also devised, they take all the space from
midnight to midnight for one day, and the Romans used the same manner. For as
Plutarche writes, the su^ne risyng is the beginning of all affairs and
functions, the night is a time of counselyng and apparaunce, and they had
assigned to every hour a so^dry ministry, as Martial in his Epigramme
declares. The day was divided in sundry wise,
That every hour had a several office,
The.ii. first served for salutacion,
The third for lawyers alteracion,
Two next were spente in labors diversely,
The sixth men might them selfs rest quietly,
The seventh of works was resolution,
The eight was for vvrestlers, and in conclusion,
The nynth was limited for men's repast,
And so forth the other, of time was made no vvast.
The Babilonians called the space between the Sun risynges a day: The
Atheniens named all that was between the goynges down a day. The Vmbrians
count their day fro noone to noone: but commonly the day is called the space
from morning till night. Parts of the night.
The night was divided into iiii. watches, whereof every one (as Hierom
witnesses) contained three hours.

The.vi. Chapter. Who set forth books first, or made a library, Printyng,
paper, parchement art of memory.
Books,
BOOKS, which co^teyne the monumentes of ingeniouse wits, and be a regestre
of all valiant prowess, in Greece were first published, as Laertius thinks
by Anaxagoras: as Gellius says, it was Pisistratus that made the first book,
and exhibited it to be read openly. Pisistratus made the first book.
Notwithstanding Josephus declares yt the Hebrews and priests of Egypt and
Chaldee set forth books first.

The Atheniens seriously multiplied ye no^bre of books, Athens made many books
which Xerxes carried from thence into Persie, and Seleucus king of Macedony
caused them many years after to be conueighed to Athens again. Ptolomeus
lybraries.
After that Ptolomeus king of Egypt gathered together vii C.M. books, which
were all brent in the former battle of Alexandria. Nevertheless, Strabo
records that Aristotle did institute the first lybrary, Aristotle had the
first lybrary.
and left it to Theophrast his disciple, and taught the kings of Egypt how
they should order their lybrary: Theophrast left it to Meleus and of him
Scepsis received it. There was also a lybrarye at Pargamus very ancient.
Asinius Pollio.
In Rome Asinius Pollio had the first lybrarye, which was occasyon that good
wits employed great and grave study in learning to the ample furtheraunce and
commoditee of the common wealth of the city. There be at this day many in
Italy, but the most famous is the liberary, F. Feltrius.
which Frederike Feltrius duke of Vrbine did cause to be edified. Truly the
co^modite of lyberaries is right profitable and necessary but in comparison of
the craft of Printyng, Printyng.
it is nothing, both because one manne may Prynte more in one day, then many
men in many years could write: And also it preserves both Greek and Latin
auctours fro the danger of corrupcion. It was found in Germany at Magunce by
one I. Cuthenbergus a knight: John Cuthenbergus found Printyng.
he found moreover ye Ink by his devise that Printers use.xvi. year after
Printyng was found, which was ye year of our lord. M.CCCC.lviii. one Co^radus
an Almayne brought it into Rome: and Nicolas Johnson a Frenchemanne did greatly
polishe and garnishe it: And now it is dispersed through ye whole world almost.
Before ye use of Paper men used to write in leaves of date trees, and somtymes
on the bark of trees: Men wrote in plates of lead
Afterward they wrote ye public writings in plates or shetes of lead, and
their private matters in tables and wax, for tables (as Homer testifies were
before ye siege of Troy Paper was devised by king Alexander as Varro affyrmeth,
Paper.
it was made of a kind of fenne rishes, that grew in the marishe grounds of
Egypt. But Pliny says, it was used in the time of king Numa, yt reigned
CCC. years before Alexander, and his books, which were found in a chest of
stone in fyld by L. Pitilius a Scribe, were written in paper. In process of
time paper, that we use now, was invented: Paper.
it is made of lynen clothe beaten together in mylles made for that use
Parchement, as Varro witnesses, was found in Pargamus, Parchement.
albeit the writers of Hebrewe stories, as Josephus shows, used parchement:
they wrote also in goat skynnes and sheep skynnes, in old time as Herodotus
declares. There be diverse manner of papers, as paper royal, Diverse manner of
Paper
paper deinye, blottyng paper, matchau^tes paper. The usage of writing by
caractes is very ancient, and was found by Tyrotullius freman as Eusebius
supposes, and Julius Caesar used it much in secret and preuy counsels. The
arts of memory was found by Simonides in Thassalye: For what time he was
boden to a banquet at a noble man's house called Scopa, Art of memory.
it chaunsed that he was sent for to speak with.ii. young men at the gate and
straight way the bankettyng house fell and destroyed all the gestes: Then he,
because he remembered in what order and place every man sat delivered every man
his friend to be buried. By that fact both he perceived the order of the art
of memory and what commoditee came to the remembrance of man by such places
and images as be contained in that feate. In memory e^celled Cyrus king of
Persye, Men of great memory.
which could call every man in his host by name. Cyneas the ambassador of
Pyrrhu^ the day after he came to Rome saluted every order of nobles by their
proper names, Mithridates could speak x^ii. languages. Julius Caesar could
write, reed, endite, and hear a tale al at ones. Adrianus the emperor could
do the same.

The.vii. Chapter. The beginning of war with other things concerning the
same.
CHIVALRY, Mars authoure of chivalry.
wherein is declared the manly courage of noble captains, was devised, (as
Tully says) by Pallas, as Diodorus thinks, the manner of war was found out
by Mars. Albeit Josephus tells that Tubalcain, Tubalcain.
which was before the flud did first practice feats of arms, whereby it
appears that ye use of wars is of great antiquity, but it is uncertain
who was the first warrior. Before the findyng out of weapons, men used to
fight with their fistes, feet, and bityng. And thus began battle, as
Lucretius writes.

Hands gripen, foot, tothe, and nail
Were first weapons used in batail
Afterward they began to fight with staves and clubbes. Staves.
And therefore they assign to Hercules a staff and a Lions skin. For men in
the beginning used staves to revenge their injuries and quarrels, and covered
their bodies with skynnes of wild beasts in stead of armoure. Palamedes.
array.

Watches. Wardyng. Watch words.


Palamedes ordered and set men first in array appointed watches and wardyng to
be kept, and watch words in the battle of Troy. At the same time Synon
excogitated bekons and fyres Pliny says that the Pheniciens invented first
the polycies of war: Diodorus affyrmeth that Mars forged first weapons, and
armed soldiers with the^, and therefore the findyng out of the^ is attributed
to him: but the instruments of war were found by diverse men at sundry times.

Helmettes. Swerdes. Spears. Targettes.
Helmettes, swords, and spears, the Lacedaemonians found: yet Herodotus
supposes the tergattes and salettes to be the inuencion of the Egyptians, and
so to have comen into Greece.

The haberion was devised by Midius Messenius, Haberion. Shyldes.
shyldes by Pretus and Acrisius as they fought together.

Leggeharnes Iauelynes Darts.
Leg harnes and cristes of salettes were invented by the Cariens, Iauelynes
Etolas, Darts with thonges or strings by Etolus son to Mars, bills by the
Thraciens, Iustyng spears. Morespikes.
iustyng spears and morespikes by Tyrrhenus: they were used first in the siege
of Capua, that Fulgius Flaccus laid to it. penthesilea imagined poulaxes,
Polaxes. Huntyng staves. Bow and shaftes. Sithes.


and Piseus huntyng staves: bow and shaftes, sithes Jupiters son inverted,
although Diodorus ascribes the inuencion of the^ to Apollo. Notwithstanding,
Artapanus, who^ Eusebius recites says that the inuencion of Armor, began by
Moses, which being very young acheued the first hardy enterprise against the
Ethiopians. Of all enginnes of war, the Cretians found first the cross
bows, Crosebowes Quarrelles. Boltes Brakes and slings.
the Sirians quarelles, or boltes, and the Phaeniciens found brakes and
slinges: howbeit, Vegetius holds opinion that Baleares, a people which dwell
in the Spanishe seas, ordained slinges. Cranes, Cranes or Vernes.
or vernes to wind up great weightes were the devise of Ctesyphon. The rammar
called in latin Aries, Rammer.
wherewith walls be overthrown, was made by Aepeus at Troy. They sought a
tertise called in latin Testudo too mine walls, Sough.
Artemon Clazemonius instituted. But of all other that ever were devised to the
destruction of man, the go^nes be most deuilishe, Gunnes.
which was perceived by a certain Almaine, whose name is not known: After
this sort, it chanced that he had in a mortar powder of brimstone that he had
beaten for a medicine, and covered it with a stoone, and as he struck fire it
fortuned a spark to fall into the powder: by and by there roase a great flame
out of the mortar, and lift up the stoone, wherewith it was covered a great
heyght: And after he had perceived that, he made a pipe of iron, and tempered
the powder, and so finished this deadly engyn, and taught the Venetians the use
of it, when they warred against the Genuates, which was in the year of our
lord.M.ccc.lxxx. For this inuencion he received this benefit that his name was
never known lest he might for this abhomynable devise, What year gu^nes were
found.
have been cursed and evil spoken of whilst the world stands. The way to
reclayme and ride horses after ye judgment of Pliny Bellerophon taught first:
Reclaymyng of horses.
which rod the swyfte Pegasus into a mountain of Libie called Chimera, as
Diodorus suppose it was Neptune. Brydels by^^es.
Brydels, bittes, horseharnes or trappers the Peletronians a nation of
Thessalie found, and as some think the cast to break wyld horses, was learned
of the^. Also the Numidians rode their horses without sadles. Carts with two
horses and wagons the Phrigians used first chariotes Richthonius divised first
in Greece, Wagons. Chariotes. Fightyng on horsebackes.
fightyng on horseback the Centaures found in Thessalie. Notwithstanding all
the commodities of such beasts, as horses Mules, Asses, and all other bearyng
and drawyng beasts were at the beginning. For it is manifest that the
Egyptians, and Hebrews, Assirians and Arabians used them: but the glorious
Grecians usurp all to their own glory and ambiciouse praise and commendacion.

The.viii. Chapter. The institucion of Olimpiades with other shows and games.
Plays or shows.
OF Plays or shows in Greece there were four principal, whereof the most
principal was Olimpiades: which were kept every.v. year in the mount
Olimpus, and ordaigned by Hercules. one of the five brethren named Idaei
Dactyli, in honor and remembrance of Jupiter. In this game Corilus an
Archadien wan first the price as Eusebius says. Corilus.
Pliny affirms that Hercules son of Alcumena obtained the victory there
first. There was wrestlyng, runnyng with horses and on foot, Exercises used in
the Olimpiades.
turnyng, lepyng, coursyng, with chariotes: contencion of poets Rhetoriciens,
Musiciens, and disputacions of Philosophiers, and great assembles out of all
Greece. The manet was then too proclaim wars, or enter leages of peace: the
reward of the victoures was a garlande of Olive, The reward of the victors
which tree grew there beside. By this they counted their years, as the Romans
did by Lustra and their counsels. The second show was Pithii, which were
in honor of Apollo, and made by Apollo himself, in memorial of his actiuitie,
in vanquishyng the great dragon Pithon, that was sent by Juno to persecute
his mother Latona. The third game was Isthmij devised by Theseus in ye worshep
of his father Neptunus, as Hercules had dooen to Jupiter: They had the name
Isthmij of the narrow place in Greece that Corinth stood in where the plays
were celebrated beside an old temple of Neptune environed with a dark woodde
of peche trees. They that wa^ the mastery, had a garland of pine tree.
The.iiii. game was Nemei, Nemei.
named of ye forest Nemea These feasts the Argiuans kept solemnly in
reverence of Hercules, that slew there the mighty Lion, whose skin he ware
for his coat armor Pirrhus dance was a kind of dauncyng, wherein the
Lacedemonia^s practiced their youth, from they were.v. year of age as a
preparatiue to greater affaieres of war. It was first instituted in Crete by
one Pirrhus yt was one of ye Cibilles priests. Pyrthus dance.
They daunced it in armor and with weapons on horseback, as Solinus
testifies. Naked games.
Naked games were first invented by Licaon: Funeral plays. Wrestlyng. Dyce.
Tables. Tennys.
and funeral plays by Acastus, wrestlyng by Mercury, dice tables, tennys, and
cards were found of the Lidians a people of Asia, and begone not for any
lucre or pleasure but for a common wealth. For whattyme their country had great
scarsenes and want of corn, insomuche that it was not able to suffice the
people, they mittigated and swaged their hunger and scarsitie in this wise, one
day they took their meat moderatly, and an other day by course they applied
such sportes and pastimes to drive away the tediousnes of their famine and
hunger. Chesse.
The chesse were inverted the year of the world.iii.M.CCCCCC.xxxv. by a
certain wise man called Xerxes, Xerxes.
to declare to a tyranne that majesty or authority without strength,
assistens, and healpe of his men and subjects was casual, feeble, and abject to
many calamities of fortune: his intent was to break the fierce cruelte of his
heart by fear of such dangers as might chance or come to pass in the life
of man. There is a game also that is played with the posterne bone in the
hyndre foot of a sheep, Talus.
ox, goat fallow or read dear, which in latin is called Talus. It
has.iiii. chances, the ace point, Canis. Chances. Venus.
that is named Canis or Canicula, was one of the sides he that cast it leyed
down a penye or so much as the gamers were agreed on, the other side was
called Venus that signified vii. he yt cast the chance wan.vi. and all that
was leyd down for the castyng of Canis. The two other sides were called Chius
and Senio: Chius. Senio.
he that did throw Chius wan iii. And he that cast Senio gained.iiii. This
game (as I take it,) is used of children in Northfolke, and they call it the
chance bone, Chance bone.
they play with iii. or.iiii. of those bones together: it is either the same
or very like to it.

There was in old time a game at the dyce called Vultursii, Vulturcii Hercules
Basilicus.
and Hercules Basilicus, that Plautus makes mention of: but the inuentor of
those games be yet unknown, albeit* it seems to be a devise of the Romans,
And likewise the auctour of the game named odd or even, Odd and even.
and holdyng up of hands or fyngers is uncertain. Palamedes.
There be some yt refer the fi^dyng of y^ cards and chesse to ye noble
Palamedes

The.ix. Chapter. Certain plays of the Romans.
Lupercal^a.
LVPERCAL was a Cave at the foot of the Mount Palatine hallowed to Pan a
mystical God of the Archadiens, where the custom was to sacrifice a Goat,
(as Plutarche reports) a Dog, because he should keep the Wolf from their
foldes. The oblacion was made in February about the.xv. kalendas of March
after this rite and fashion. The young men all naked ran and coursed about
wantonly and lasciuiously in honor of Pan, The rites of these feasts.
with whippes or scourges in their hands: And the women offered theimselues to
be beaten with their scourges, supposyng that it helped to the fruitfulness
of children: This pastyme was instituted by Euander, that came out of Archadia,
Marcu^ Antonius in this play naked set the Diadem on Julius Caesers hedde.
Circences.
There was also another show called Circenses which were celebrated in a
place walled about named Circus, where was used fightyng, and coursyng of
horses and runnyng with charettes.

THE Circus that we name listes or tiltes were of great length, and had bars
where the raze should begin and at the other end was the wager set, that
they ran for: there was used in the same place tournyng These were long used
solemnly of the Romans and had the title of great plays or games. The
third kind of plays were Saturnalia, Saturnalia.
which continued five days in December, and were kept very costly and
sumpteously with great sport and gladness, and mutual feasts, and
presented ordinarely one another with gifts. It was also the manner in those
feastful days that servants should have equal power in things and like
aucthoritee and sit at the table with their masters because in Saturnus time
all things were used in common. Ianus ordaigned them in honor of Saturnus (as
Macrobius declares) and some say they began in Athens. Sweard^ pla^ers.
There was also another game of swearde plaiers unarmed: the occasion of their
beginning because the Romans when they went to war should se fightyng,
wou^des and sweardes to thente^t yt they should be ye less afraid of their
enemies armed or be discouraged when they saw blody wounds in the field,
therefore the chief captain or Lyuetenaunt of the host should exhibit to the
people a game of fe^ce or sweard plaiers.

The.x. Chapter. Who found trus^, leages, sundry kinds of making it,
triumph and ouacions.
Truse.
TRVSE, that is called a couenaunte of peace for a season was instituted by
Licaon: it was taken sometime for years, as ye Romans took truse with the
Veientes for.cl. years, Truse for years.
with the Cerites for an hundredth: Sometime truse was made for hours as Caius
Pontius a Samnite required of the dictator of Rome truse for.vi. hours. Hours.
L^ages. Cries.
Leages of peace and cries in common places Theseus did ordeyne in Greece, but
Diodorus assigns it to Mercury. Nevertheless they were in frequent use long
before that time in Assirie and Aegipt, and namely among the Hebrews* For Jacob
made a leage with Laba^. Jacob made a leage with Laban.
And Moses offered co^dicious of peace to the princes of the countries by whom
he passed: Iehosuah with Gabaonites.
and after him Iehosuah stroke up a bond of peace, and made a love day with the
Gabaonites. Therefore it is a great difficulty to appoi^ct the inuentor of it.
There were diverse fashions of making leages, as the Romans manner was of this
fashion. The Heraulde of arms at the commandment of the king took and smit
a hog appointed for that purpose, saying: The Romans leage.
so let Jupiter smyt him that disanulleth this holy leage, as I stryke this
hog. But Polibius writes that the herolde took a stone in his hand and said:
If I perform and stand to the couenaunte of this leage without gyle or fraud,
the gods give me all things prosperous: If I either do or think the
contrary, I pray God that I alone be destroyed and cast away, as I cast this
stone from me, and forth with he threw down the stone.

When the Arabiens make a leage of peace, there stands one between the two
parties yt cutteth with a sharp stone the holowe of the hand of the
co^federates, and with the blood, that issues out, he anoynteth with rags
taken out of their garments.vii sto^es that stand between them and inuocateth
Dionisius and Urania their gods: then the soliciter and entreater for the
peace finds surety for the stranger or citezen that was party. The like
order was used in amities made among frindes.

THE Scythia^s made leages after this manner: The Scythians leage.
they filled a bowlle of wine, and mingled it with the blood of them that
should enter the bond of peace, and then they weete in the boule their
arrows, axes, halbardes and darts that dooen, they with many words vowed and
cursed the^ selves and so drunk the wine both they and all the nobles
present. The same use was among traitoures in their co^spiracies at Rome.
Barceans leage.
The Barceans consented on their leages thus They made their love day over a
deep Cave very privy, and so long as the earth continued, so the pacte
endured. Dionisius, which was replenished with the spoils of many countrees
led the first triumph, Triumph.
and afterward, it was received of sundry nations, as ye capitains of Carthage
when they sped well, triumphed. In Rome Romulus, after he had conquered Acron
King of the Ceninens, crouned with Laurel and carried in chariot with four
horses entered into the city triu^phantly. And dedicated his pray and spoils
to Jupiter as Dionisius writes. Albeit, Eutropius says that Tarquinius
Priscus first triumphed of the conquest of the Sabines. Camillus.
Camillus led the first solemn triumph with white horses* and a gilded
chariot, and a garlande of gold, with all the captives following the chariot
with themes and fetters about their necks. And the senate going before into
the Capitole to Jupiters temple, where they offered a white Bull and then
returned. It was lawful for none to triumph but such as were dictatour,
consul, or praetor, albeit, Cneius Pompeiu^ being but of the order of
knights, triumphed as Cicero tells. Ouacion is a less royalte then
triumphs and was the worship of such as had ended any battle or acheued any
feat without blodshedyng, or when ye battle lacked any of the due cyrcumstances
of apointyng, they that came into the city with that pomp, were crouned with
a garland of myrtyl. And went a foot into the capitole, all the senate following
him, and there offered a sheep The first yt had any Ouatio^ was Posthumous
Tubertus. Posthumous Tubertus. The offering of the Lacedaemonians.
The Lacedaemonians when they vanquished their enemies by craft, policy, or
deceit offered a bull: when they did valiantly subdue the^ by force of arms,
they sacrificed a cock, of ye manner of triumph, read Appianus Liuius or
Julius Capitolinus.

The.xi. Chapter. Garlandes or crounes, the diversity of them, and of
oyntmentes.
PLINY testifyeth that Liber Bacchus did first invent and ware a garland made
of Iuye on his head: Garlondes. Bacchus.
and after it was taken in a custom that when they sacrificed to any of the
gods, they should be crouned with a garland, and ye oblacion likewise.

Notwithstanding I find that the use of garlandes or crounes is of more
antiquity then Liber Bacchus For Moses, that was many years before him, Moses.
made many crounes and garlandes of gold. At the first the manner was, in all
plays and sacryfices to wind garla^des of boughs of trees. And after they
were garnished with variety of flowers among the Sicyomans by Pausias and
Glycera his lemmanne. Pausias.
Not long after the winter garla^des that be called Egyptian, Winter ga^landes.
which are made of wood splytters or Iuery dyed with many colors, began
to be had in quotidian usage.

And in process they made crounes of brasenne plates gylted, Crounes of brazen
plate.
or covered with silver, called for their thynnes garlandes. Last of all
Crassus, the rich did first set forth in his games and shows, crounes with
silver and golden leaves.

And consequently there were inverted many manner of crounes. As the triumphant
croune that the Emperor or graunde capitain ware in this triumph, Corona
triumphalis.
this was first made of Olive and afterward of gold. Muralis.
The murall or wall croune, that was given to him that scaled first the walls.
The ca^p croune, that was the reward of him that entered first in arms into
the camp of his enemies. Nauall or sea croune, Naualis.
which was set on his head that first borded his enemies ship. And all
these were of gold. The Obsidionall croune, Obsidional.
yt was worn of him, that delivered a city besieged, and was made of grass.
There was also a civil croune, Ciuilis.
which was a souere^tie that a citize^ gave to him that had valiantly
preserved him from his enemies, this was made of Oke^ branches. And this manner
of croune the Atheniens did first divise and gave it to the Pericles. Pericles.
There were moreover crounes of pearls, trenche crou^nes, and garlandes
composed of the ears of corn, which as Pliny witnesses was first in use
among the Romans. Garlandes of Sinamome.
But garla^des made of Cinamome, wouen and imbossed with gold VeVespasianus did
first consecrate in the capitolie in the temple of peace. In space of years
the excess of crounes was such that the Grecians in their ba^kettes crouned
both their heads, and cups also, whereof the Ioma^s were auctours. Cups
were crouned.
By this sort of crounes Cleopatra empoysoned Antony as Pliny writes, and
Artaxerxes used crounes or garla^des in his feasts, to this Virgill alluded in
his Aeneidos. They set forth their golden goblettes
And crouned them with fresh chaplettes.
Oyntmentes (as Josephus writes) notwithstanding that Pliny says the
contrary, Oyntmentes
were used long before ye battle of Troy, for Jacob sent to his son Joseph
in Egypt oyntmentes: And Moses, that was.CCC.l. year before the siege of Troy,
makes mention of oyntmentes concerning the sa^ctificacion of the tabernacle,
and priests of the old testament: Albeit it is not known who was first
diuiser of them. Pliny and Solinus report that Alexander when he wanne the
camp of Darius, found among other jewels and spoils a casket of oyntme^tes,
that much pleased him: But Herodotus does declare that it was in frequent use
before Darius time. For Cambyses Cyrus son sent ambassadors to Aethiopus king
of the Macrobians with great presents, Athiopus despised oyntmentes.
whereof a bore of oyntme^tes was parcel. When the king had learned the manner of
ye confection of it, he contemned and neglected it as a thing of no value. It
is not certain when they came into Rome: But I find in Pliny that
the.CCCCC.lxv. year of the city Antiochus being vanquished, and Asia subdued
and conquered P. Licinius Crassus and Julius Caesar then Censours commanded
that no foreign nor strange confection of oyntmentes should be sold in the
city. Oyntmentes might not be sold.


The.xii. Chapter. Who found out metals, smith^s toles, fire, candels, and
belowes.
OF al metal, wherein worldly substance consists* Gold,
gold, that all men so sore cover to have, is the most preciouse. For the
desire hereof they have dug into the deep botomlesse abi^se of the earth,
and at ye length (as Phaletius said) they will dig Pluto out of hell for it.
And Diogenes what time he was asked why gold look so pale, answered very well
saying, because it has many that lie in wait for it. Cadmus, as Pliny
affyrmeth, Cadmus found gold.
found it in the mount Pa^gaeus in T^race, or as some think, it was Thoas and
Eaclis that invented it in Panc^aia. Silver Erichthonius of Athens or Ceacus
found out. I think they report that gold was found in Pangaeus, because there
is great ple^tye in that hyl, Silver.
as Herodotus does write. The five brethren named Idei Dactyli found iron in
Crete. Iron. Lead.
Midac^itus fe^ lead out of the Ilelandes against Spain called Cassitrides,
as Strabo declares. Brass was found by Ciny^as in ye i will of Cypres, Brass.
and Solinas ^ayeth it was found in Crete. Ciny^as also devised the to^ges,
Tongues. Lever. Stithe.
fyle or tape, lever, and stythe. Notwithstanding Clement says that Selme^tes
and Damnameneus two Iues found iron first in Cypres, and the Pa^nonia^s brass.
Aristotle holds opinion that Lydus a Scithian first taught to melte and work
brass, Meltyng brass.
Theophrast thinks it was Delas a Phrigian. Strabo writes that a certain
people named Telchines wrought iron and brass first, and they made a swerd
named Harp, which they gave to Saturn. Harp. Smythesforge.
The smithesforge some think the Calibians found, and some suppose it were the
Ciclopes, which first used the smithes craft. Diodorus holds the opinion
that Idei Dactili and Vulcanus were auctours of fire, Idei Dactili.
yro^, brass, silver, gold, and al yt is wrought with the fire. Sotheryng of
iron.
Sotheryng of iron Glaucus found, and Cadmus meltyng of gold. Nevertheless I
take it that all these before named found the use of such things in their
countries where they were inhabitauntes. For the use of al such metal was
perceived in the beginning of the world by Tubalcain which was son to
Lamech and occupied smithe craft. Tubalcain.
Clement refers the temperyng of iron to Delas. Fire is supposed to be the
inuencion of Vulcanus: Victriuius says that the trees tossed and shaken with
wyndes, by beatyng together of their boughs excited fire. Fire.
But it had been more convenient to have ascribed the gift of it to God,
which gave it to man to be remedy against the danger of cold. Pyrodes
stroke fire out of flinte. Matches.
Pyrodes first stroke fire out of flinte, Prometheus taught first to keep it in
matches: Pliny tells how the spies in armies and camps, Smiting fire with
wood.
or else the shepardes divised to smite fire by rubbyng of two pieces of wood
together. Laurel and Iuye be best for that use. Belowes were found by
Anacharsis as Strabo witnesses: Belowes. Candels.
Candels the Egyptians invented.

The.xii. Chapter. Who ordained coins, lokyng glasses, rings with preciouse
stones.
COYNAGE, Money.
of what metal soever it was made, as it may appear by Josephus, is very
ancient: For Cain Adames son was very gredy in gatheryng together of money.
Herodotus writes, Lydians.
that the Lydians first coined silver and gold to bye and sell with. For before
the siege of Troy as witnesses Homere, men used to change stuff ^or
stuff. Albeit in the time of Abraham there was money current, for he bought the
duble cave, to burye his wife Sata of the Hethi^e Ep^ron for.CCCC. sycles of
syluce, Sycles.
which was before the siege of Troy many years. In Rome the first coin of
gold was smitten the.ccccc.clvii. year of the city. Gold in Rome.
And it was named a ducate, and after it began to be used in many places at
sundry times. Phaedon began silver coin in ye i will Egina. Phedon. Silver was
coined in Egina.
It was minted in Rome.cccc.lxxxiiii. year after the city was builded, the
printe of it was a Chariot with two horses and some with four. Ianus coins of
brass.
Ianus did cause brass to be coined with a face on the one side and a ship on
the other side, to ye intent to gratifye Saturnus (which arrived there in a
ship) by setting forth his memory to their posteritee and successors. Seruius
Tullius.
Seruius Tullius first coined brass with an Image of a sheep and an ox, as
Pliny writes. Lokyng glasses of silver were divised by Praxiteles in ye time
of Pompeius Magnus. Lokyng glasses.
There were also inverted lokyng glasses of steel, lead, crystal, glass,
and mingled stuff wherein we behold our visages. Albeit it is uncertain who did
first find the^, Sydon.
saving that Pliny says one Sydon imagined the^ of glass. Rings.
Rings with a piece of stone wrought in them be reported of Pliny to have been
made of Jupiter for to keep in memory ye punishment of Prometheus, Prometheus
for that he deluded the gods of the element of fire, and did traduce it to
man's use, but that is a fable of small credit. For ye usage of rings and
preciouse stones is of great antiquity, for I read in Genesis that Judas gave
his daughter in law Thamar a ryng, and broches, as pledges of his promise. And
Moses yt was CCC. year before the battle of Troy speaks of rings and
preciouse stones for making of the arc and vestures of Aaron, as onyches and
smaragdus or emrode. In Rome at the first they used rings of iron every man
saving the tribunes. Rings of iron.
It was long before the senators had any ringes of gold and as Macrobie
writes, they used the^ not so much for trimmyng and decking of the^ selves,
Rings served to seal letters.
as because to seal letters with the^: A man might have but one ryng.
insomuche that it was not permitted to any man to have mo then one, and that
was allowed in none but fre men. Afterward they began to grave seals in
preciouse stones. Rings were worn on the left hand.
And, least they should be broken with stresse, they ware them on the finger of
the left hand, that is next the little finger, because the left hand is not put
to much labor as the right hand or else as Macrobie says, because there
goes a vain from that finger to the heart. Knights ware rings. for a
difference
Rings also were used and worn of the knights of Rome that by them they
might be disseuered and known from the common sort of the people.

The.xiiii. Chapter. The original of glass, Ambre, Vermilon, Mirrha, and
Crystal.
IN PHENICE which is a part of Syria, marchyng on Iurye at the foot of the
mount Carmel, there is a pole called Candebea, whereof the river Belus
springs, in the which glass as Pliny writes, Glass.
it engendered For it is reported that on a time when a merchants ship, that
was freghted with saltpeter (for so some expound nitrum) arrived there. Nitre.
And as they romyng on the sa^des and sea ba^kes prepared their meat, It
fortuned that because they had no stoore of stoones to bear up their vessels,
wherein they sodde their meat, they took out of their ship great pieces of
Nitre to set on their victuals, which after they chau^sed to be on fire and
mingled with the sand, there ra^ne bright flakes of this preciouse lycoure. By
this river is Memno^ his toumbe, and as Josephus writes, ye nature of that
water is to turn and tra^sforme other metals into glass. Ambre, Amber.
as Diodorus witnesses, was found in ye I Will Basilia, which lies against
Scithia above Galatia in ye great Ocean, where it was first cast up, and was
never seen nor found in any other place before. Vermilon.
Vermilon or red lead was found in Ephesus by Callias an Athenien: And it was
in Rome counted and taken for holy insomuche yt on their feastfull days, they
pai^ted ye face of Jupiters Image with it, and the bodies of them that
triumphed, and Camillus triu^phed so, as Pliny witnesses. Mirrhe.
Mirrhe, which is an humor co^geled and constipated together with heat,
comes out of ye east parties and namely out of Carmania: Pompeius in his
triumph of the pirates and robberson the sea brought it first into Rome.
Crystal.
Crystal is a stone that is congeled of pure water not with cold, but by a power
divine of heat, whereby it reteineth his hardness, and never rele^teth or
melts, and receives diverse colors, and this is ye mind of Diodorus. But
Pliny holds opinion that it comes of the yse, extremely frosen.
Nevertheless it is uncertain yet who found it.

The.xv. Chapter. The beginning of Imagery, and of Alexanders Image.
CONCERNING the use of making Images, Images.
from whence it came auctours diffre and vary. For Macrobius cites one
Epicadus that says it began of a supersticion of Hercules, Hercules.
which according to the number of his companions whom he lost in his voyage
into far countrees: When he came home into Italy made Images of the^ and cast
the^ down at ye bridge Sublicius into Tibre, to thentent they should de carried
into their native countries, thinkyng that to be a just pa^entacion for their
funerals. Nevertheless he takes it that they came rather of ye custom of the
Archadians, The Archadians manner.
which as Diodorus writes, in their wa^deryng abroad repared into Italy, and
builded a chapel to Pluto and an alter to Saturn, where they pacified Pluto with
the heads of men, and burned the bodies to Saturn. For so they expounded
their oracle. An oracle.
Et capita inferno et patri tra^smittite lumen,
Give heads to Pluto the god infernal,
And Saturn his father the fire lustral.
The sacrifices that were offered to Saturn were named Saturnalia, After
Hercules as he passed through Italy, when he had conquered and subdued Ger^on,
advertised the^ to change that unlucky sacrifice into fortunate oblacions, and
taught them to make Images of little boones and to offer the^ to Pluto: And to
light tapers of wax in honor of Saturn. Lactantius says, Prometheus made
images
Prometheus made first Images of soft clay, and taught ye way to make statues:
Some say, as Diodorus writes, that the Ethiopians found the first use of
Images, and of the^ the Egyptiens learned. Notwithstanding I find that Images
were long before that time: For Rachel when her husband fled out of
Mesopotamia, from Laban his father in law, did steal away her fathers gods,
and therefore it appears that Imagery is of an ancient beginning. And some
there be yt think men took occasyon of God to make Images, which willing to
show to ye gross wits of men some perceiuerau^ce of him self, took on him
the shap of man, as Abraham saw him and Jacob also. And the scripture seems
in sundry places to attribute to him hands, feet, eyes and ears, which be
parts and me^bres of men. And by this means men gathered ye manner of making
images of God, because to keep him in fresh memory. And this is the true
original of Imagery. Spurius Cassius made in Rome ye image of Ceres of brass.
Ceres image of brass*
Afterward were made statues of men to excite and encourage valiant hearts to
high enterprises. And for yt cause ye Atheniens set up ye Images of Armodius
and Aristogito^ that slew and expulsed the tyrannes. Leontinus Gorgias made
him self an Image of pure gold not hollow first and set it at Delphos
ye.lxxviii. olympiade. Leontinus gorgias made him self an image of gold.
Pharnaces caused one to be made of silver like him self, which Po^peie in
his triumph removed. In Italy M. Attilius Clabrio made the first statue of gold
on horseback in remembrance of his father: M. Attilius made the first image
in Rome of gold.
There were also images made of brass, yuory, wood, and marble. The manner of
ye Romans was to set up their Images covered, but the Grecians used to form
the^ naked, and the Romans also had a rite to bre^ne encense, and light
tapers before them. In this art many were very expert, as Pliny reherseth But
Phidias of Athens passed the^ al. In Rome the kyndered and familye of the
Macrians were accustomed to were on the^ the image of Alexander ye great
graven: Phidias.
as me^ in gold or silver women in calls and tynges: because it was reported,
that he should acheue well in all affairs which did bear on him Alexa^ders
Images either in gold or silver. Augustus seal.
And therefore Augustus Caesar ^sed long the Image of him in sealyng his letters.

The.xvi. Chapter. Paintyng, and pott^rs craft, or work^ng in y^arth.
Paintyng.
PORTATVRE, Gyges a Lidian, as Pliny thinks, did first inue^t and divise it
in Egypt. In Greece Pyrrhus ye cosyn of Daedalus, after Aristotle's mind. But
Theophrastu^ says that Polygnotus an Athenian found it, Polygnotus
yet Pliny agrees nether with Theophrast, nor yet with him self: for in
his.^xxv. book he says that Polygnotus a Thasian did first paynt women in
single apparel, and trimmed their he^des with calls of sundry colors, and set
forth pictures to the showing more decente, in openyng their mouths, and made
their tethe to be sightly, and the visages more favorably to behold, but who
found it, it is uncertain. For the Egyptians say they had that art.vi.M.
years before it came in Greece: And they of Greece affirm it was bego^ne by the
Sicyomans, and some of the Corinthians. Albeit all confess it began of the
drawyng of a man with lines. The beginning of paintyng.
In process of time it waxed more sumptuouse with colors. Drawyng pictures with
lines or shadows Philodes an Egyptian or Cleantes a Corinthian divised.
Thelephanes a Sicyonian and Ardices of Corinthe used first this art without
colors, and Cleophantes of the same countries inverted first colors.
Cleophantus invented colors. Pensyl.
Apollodorus obtained much praise with the pensyl. In this excelled Tymagoras,
Pythys Polygnotus Agla^phon with other that Pliny recites in the.xii. book: And
Raphael Sanctus and Vr^inate, is very excellent in expressyng of lively Images
of men in this faculte. The potters occupacion that works all things in clay
and earth, Potters craft,
Chorebus an Athenian found as Pliny in his.vii. book tells. In his.xxxv.
book he ascribes ye original of it to Dibutades at Corinth, which by help of
his daughter inverted this craft, Debutades worker of clay.
for after she understood that a young man her lover should depart into a
strange nation for the tender love yt she bare to him, she drew his Image on
a wall after ye patron of his shadow by ca^del light, which her father filled
and fashioned with clay, and made it into a figure and rese^blaunce of his body,
and dried it with the fire and set it in ye ^o^mon hoote house where ye maids
and women kept bathes: And there it remained till Mummius destroyed Corinth.
Mummius destroyed Corinth.
Some say it was found by Rhetus and Theodorus in ye I Will of Samos, And
Demaratus father to Tarquinius Priscus king of the Romans brought it into
Italy, Demaratus.
and after him Eucirapus and Eugra^mus amplified ye science more coptousely.
Making of mouldes, and the way to work images in the^ Lisistratus a Sicionia^
inverted The potters whele or frame, Mouldes
Potters frame.
as Ephorus says Anacharsis a philosopher of the country of Scythia found:
Some say it was Talus Dedalus sister son The special workmen in this art
were Dimophius and Gorgasus.

Here ends the abrydgement of the second book.
The third book.
The first Chapter. The inuencion of husbandry with other things concerning
the same.
HVSBANDRY or tyllynge the ground Diodorus says, Husbandry.
was excogitat by Dionisius among the Egyptians, Dionisius.
In Greece and Asia by Triptolemus: as Iustine writes, Triptolemus
in Italy Saturnus: but Virgil witnesses, that Ceres was first inuentrice of
it. Nevertheless Josephus declares that it was perceived and found by Cain
Adams eldest son. Cain.
In the beginning men lived by Acornes, Men lived by acornes.

Ceres.

Corn sowyng.


and other fruits of the earth till Ceres, as Pliny tells, taught the^ of
Athens, Italy, and Sicilie to sow corn, which before grew among other
herbs. Diodorus refers the inuencion of it to Isis. Albeit, Iustine
affyrmeth that Triptolemus found it in the time of Herichtheus king of Athens,
but Diodorus says he learned of Ceres, and had commandment to teach it
abroad. In Italy Saturn instituted sowyng as Macrobie testifyeth, Pitumnus
taught men first to mucke and compass their land, and his brother Pilumnus
taught men to bake and grynde, Bakyng and grindyng.
but Pliny says that Argeus a king in Greece taught men to dunge their
lands in the time of Homere. Dungyng land.
And Hercules afterward published it in Italy. Diodorus witneseth that
Dionisius the second yoked oxen to the plough first, whereas before it was
labored by hand, Yokyng oxen
Briges an Athenien, or as some report Triptolemus, and some say one Osiris
found the plough: Trogus did say that it was Habis king of Spain that taught
first to plowe and sow. Plough.
Instruments of husbandry, as Virgyl supposes Ceres found out, Instruments
of husbandry
but we must take it that these men before rehearsed did teach it first in
sundry places, for it is manifest that before their time the Hebrews and
Egyptians had knowledge of this science, As Jacob, when there was a great
derth of corn in Canaa^, sent his sons into Egypt to bie grain. And therefore
without doubt the Hebrews did first find out the way of tyllyng corn,
grindyng with other rustical instruments: Syues and sarces of here we^e found
in France, Siues and sarces.
as Pliny tells, and bultres of linen in Spain In Egypt they were made of
fenne rishes, and bulrishes.

The.ii. Chapter. Wine, oil, honye, chese, and strange trees brought into
Italy.
DIODORVS says yt Dionisius did first perceive the nature of the vine, Wine.
and taught men af Greece to plant it, and to press wine out of the Grape as
Saturnus did in Italye: Some say it was Icarus father of Penelope that found
it in Athens, Icarus.
And was afterward slain of the husbandmen, when they were dronken. Athenaeus
in one place writes that Oresteus son to Deucalion first found the vine
about the mount Aetna in Sicilie: In another place he says that it was found
at ye city Plithina in Egypt. Oresteus.
Aruntes a Tirhene banished out of his country by Lucinon, Aruntes brought into
France.
who^ he brought up of a child, carried first wine into France Seculus the
son of Ventus invented the first food of men of the trees, and Eumolphus an
Athenian taught the manner of orderyng of them, but before all these Noe was the
first that either tylled the land, Noe planter of the vine
or planted the vyneyarde. And when he had drunk of the fruit of ye grape, he
was dronken. Wine tauernes were set up first by the Lidians a people of Asia,
Wine tauernes.
which also found diverse games. Staphilus (as Pliny says) deleied wine
first. Deleiyng of wine.
Drink that is made of barlye which we call ale, and was the common drink of
the Egyptians, was divised by Bacchus: And he taught it to such nations, as
had no grapes growyng. And for yt cause England, Scotland, Irelande, France,
and Germany, and all that border on the west and north seas use this drink,
Albeit, the Germans put hoppes in it, and call it bear. In Greece, as Diodorus
holds opinion Pallas showed the Olive, Olive oil. Making chese.
and the way to make oil. And Aristaeus gathered first ye cruddes of milk,
and made chese, honye. And the oil mylle, as Pliny witnesses,
notwithstanding the Olive was before Noes fludde, and Moses speaks of oil
that was used in sacrifices, whereby it may be perceived that oil was invented
of the Jews Iustine says Gargorus king of Curetes found the fashion of
gatheryng of honye, Gargorus.
Gatheryng of honye.
he dwelled in the forest of Carchesia in Spain. There grew no Olive in Italy,
Spain, nor Affrike In the time of Tarquinius Priscus the.C.lxxiiii. year of
the city. And afterward ye.cccc.xl. year of the city there were some, howbe
it they were nere the sea. But in deed honye was gathered first of the Hebrews
shepherdes. Chery trees.
The cheritres L. Lucullus brought out of Ponthus the year of the
City.vi.C.lxxx. Zinzipha and Tuberes.ii. kinds of appletrees S. Papinius
co^ueighed out of Siria and Affrike into Italy in ye time of s. Augustine. The
Plane tree, the Laurel tree, the Fygge tree, and apple trees, with other which is
not nedeful to rehearse were brought in by diverse men, whose names are not spoken
of by any auctours.

The.iii. Chapter. Who named beasts, instituted sacrifices, huntyng, fait,
pultries.
Adam named beasts.
BEASTS after they were all created in their kind were named by Adam with the
same names, that they be now called: Hiperbius.
Hiperbius son to Mars killed them first, but I had rather refer that to
Abel Adams son: for he did first offer to God the first begotten of his
flock, Abel.
and from him it spredde abroad among the Hebrews, and also other countries.
Swyne was most co^me^ded in sacrifices.
Of al other swyne were the first that were sacrificed of the Gentiles. In the
sacrifices of Ceres godesse of corn, as Va^ro witnesses. In leages of peace,
and in Marriages: At length they came to such outrageous crueltee, that they
sacrificed me^. Eating of flesh.
Flesh was not used to be eaten until the time of Noe: and then God permitted
it, but many countries long after that, forbear and kept great abstinence from
flesh: As in the golden world under Saturn men only lived by fruytes of the
earth. The priests of Egypt refrayned from flesh, eggs, and milk, because,
Priests of Egypt. Eggs. Milk.
as they thought, eggs were but tender and soft flesh, and milk was blod
saving that the color was turned. And the Essenes in Iurye, and Jupiters
priests in Crete eat never flesh. Ba^kettyng dyshes and delycates were made
in Ionia, Bankettes.
and then the evil custom was taken up by other countries: Albeit there were
laws made in Lacedemony by Lycurgus, and in Rome by Fannius. For the
abolishyng of such excessive feastyng, I would some good man would prescribe
now a days a law to be precisely observed of all men, for I think there
never was such riot in feastyng as there is in this time. Huntyng. Fishyng.
Salt.
Huntyng and fishyng the Phenicians found. Salt and the use thereof was
perceived by Misor and Selech. In Rome Q. Hortensius did first setfurth a
Pecocke at ye Augurs feast. Pecocke. Pultries.
Pultries of al kind of fowls were instituted by Marcus Laelius Strabo a
knight of Brundusie. And Alexander Emperor had also such pultries. Warrens
and parkes were made first by Fuluius Hirpinu^ And now they be euerywher used
but most commonly in England to the great damage of good pastures, that might
feed other cattle. The Wolf, ye minotaure, Beasts that be badges.
the horse, the bore, were cognisaunce of the Romans armies: And Caius Marius
in his second consulshyp appointed the Egle for a badge of his army and
legyon, with many other now a days, which be in cote armours of noble men.

The.iiii. Chapter. Who found flax and wolle with such instruments and
arts as long to the same, and sylke.
Lynnen.
LYNNEN or Flare, as Pliny says, was found by the beautyfull Lady Arachne
of Lidia, and she taught also the way of knyttyng nets to take beasts,
Arachne.
Knittyng nets.

Spinnyng Weuyng.


fyshe, and fowls, Minerua instructed the people of Athens first in spinnyng
and weuyng wolle: but in one place Pliny seems to ascribe ye feate of weuyng
to ye Egyptians. The walkers or fullers craft was inverted by Nicias a
Megarien: Fullers craft D^yng wolle Spindels.
The Lidians in Sardes died wolle first.

Spindels for wolle were first invented by Closter son to Arachne. Hangynges
of arryse which be used in halles or chambers Attalus king of Asia, devised:
Arrise clothe.
and Pallas taught the use of clothyng or apparel, as Diodorus writes, and
Eusebius says one Vso a Silician borne, Vso. Apparel.
made first clothyng and apparel for men of beasts skins: but in deed Adam
who^ God did first create, Adam made the first coat of lether.
made the first lether coats for himself and his wife Eve our old mother,
leauyng thereby a patron to al his posterite of that craft.

The shomakers art one Boethoius found. Shomakers craft.
Attalus taught men first to weue gold in clothes. And the Phrigians invented
broderyng. Enbrodryng.
The Greeks devised the mantyle, Mantyle.
and the Hetrurians found the roobes of estate. And mynglyng of diverse colors
in apparel, Motleys.
was the inue^cion of the Babilonians. Sylke, Sylke.
which in all countries is occasion of much dissolut be hauour in apparel, was
found of the Cerites growyng on their trees, and with wetyng they comb it of
and make it fyt for their uses. Spinnyng and weuyng of sylke.

Pamphila. Purple color.

Hercules. Tyro.


Spinnyng and weuyng of sick that comes of worms, Pamphila the daughter of
Platis divised it the I Will Coo. Purple color was found as Pollux witnesses by
this occasion. As Hercules being in love with a beautyfull lady named Tyro,
walked on the sea clyffes, his greyhound chaunsed to find a shel fish called
a purple, and when he had eaten it, the oryent color of the blodde remained
on his snowt: which fresh color the lady espiyng threatened Hercules that he
should never company with her more onelesse he brought her a clothe died with
that preciouse color. Then Hercules willing to accomplish his ladies will
sought the purple fyshe, and carried the blod to his sovereign lady. And thus
began the purple color among the Tyrians.

The.v. Chapter. Buildings made of clay, brick, stone, with other matters.
MEN at the first lived like wyld beasts in caves and wyldernes, and also fed
on fruytes and rotes of the earth: but after they had perceived the commodity
of fire, and felt thereby a great comfort against the vehemencye of cold:
Houses.
some began to edify cotages of boughs of trees, and some dug caves in
the mountains, and by often experiencyng of such means they attained to a
greater perfection in buildyng. And afterward (as wits of men be inuentiue)
they learned to fashion buildyng with walls that they set up with long
proppes. Making walls of houses
And did wind them about with small rods and so dawbed them: and to keep
out the storms, they covered them with reed, boughs or fenne sedges. Thus in
process of time they came to the art of buildyng, Pallas invented buyldyng.
which as Diodorus says, is ascribed to Pallas: but I can rather think that
either Cain or else Iobal son of Lamech found out this craft.

Houses of claye, Doxius son of Ge^llius did first invent and set up, taking
example at the swallows nest. Brykeworke.
Brycke buildings were invented by Euryalus and Hyperbius two brethren of
Athens, as Pliny judges, albeit Diodorus refers it to Vesta daughter of
Saturnus. Epimenide^ of Crete first used to hallowe his house and feldes with
expiations. Blessyng of houses.
Tyle and slate to cover houses were the inuencion of Sinyra son of Agriopa
in the I Will of Cipres. Tyle and slate.
Stone delues
Stone delues or quarrels were found by Cadmus in Thebes, or as Theophrast
writes in Phoenice. Albeit I think the inue^cion of such arts may more
justly be ascribed to Cayn or the posterite of Seth: First pillars.
which did make two pillars one of brycke and another of stone, and wrote in
them all the art of Astronomy, at which time I suppose pillars and brycke were
first made, whereby it appears that the cast of buildyng has been from the
beginning of the world. Nevertheless, I deny not but these before named did
begin edifiyng in sundry countries.

Marble.
Marble was used in buyldyng at Rome of rich men to show their su^ptuouse
magnificence. As M. Scaurus being aediles caused.ccc.lx. pillars of marble to
be carried to the making of a stage whereon an Interlude should be played: but
Lucius Crassus was first that had pyllers of Marble. M. Lepidus made the gates
of his house with Marble of Numedie, Gates of marble.
not without reproach. He was consul the year of the city.cccccc.lxxvi.
Mamurra a knight yt was master of Iuli. Mamurca pinned his house with marble.

Grauers in marble.


Caesar's works in France, pynned first the walls of his house with broken
marble. In grauyng Marble Dipoenus Scylus borne in Crete floryshed first, before
king Cyrus reigned in Persie.

The.vi. Chapter. Who made the first city, tents, temples, and pyttes.
WHEN men were somewhat clamed of their vpla^dishe behauoure by reason yt they
were refreshed of their extreme cold by fire and such houses as they had
devised, Occasion of making cities
they gathered them substance and gods to the sustentacion of their
housholdes and families. But after they perceived that mighty and strong men
did invade and dispoile them of such stuff as they had they knytte them
selves together in a company, and dwelled in one cir^uite, which they walled
about and named it a city. Notwithstanding, there is much diversity of
opinions among writers which was first. For Pliny says Cecrops builded the
first City, and called it by his own name Cecropia, Cecropia.
which was afterward called Athens.

Strabo writes that Phoroneus builded first Argos: Argos. Diospolis,
The Egyptians say, that Diospolis in their country was long before: which is
credible to be so because they be a very ancient nation. Trafon first made
walls: towers, (as Aristotle says,) the Cyclopians edifyed: Walls. Towers.
but Theophrast thinks the Phenicians builded them.

And Vergil refers that feate to Pallas. But to say the truth Cain (as
Josephus declares,) made the first City, Enochia.
and named it Enochia after his son Enoch. And the young men that came of Noe
his lineage by the advise of Nembroth builded the first tower of an exceadyng
heyght which was called afterward Babylon. Babylon. Tents.


Tents Iobal son of Lamech invented, notwithstanding that the Phenicians
affirm that the nepheues of Seculus found them.

Temples, Temples.
as Diogenes supposes were found by Epimenides in Crete. But Victruuius
affyrmeth that one Pythius a Carpenter made the first Temple in Prienne in the
honor of Pallas: Pithius.
Herodotus says that the Egyptians instituted the temples first In Rome,
Romulus builded the first temple in the worship of Jupiter Seretrius. Solomon.
To almighty God Solomon king of the Hebrews builded the first temple three
thousand, an hundredth and two years after the creacion of Adam in Jerusalem.

Pyttes Danaus dygged first, as Pliny teaches, after he came out of Egypt
into Argos a country of Greece. Egyptians.
Nevertheless to tell the very origynall of them, Isaac his shepherdes dygged
the first pyttes, Pittes.
as appears in Genesis. And Moses caused pittes to be dug in the wilderness
when he did conduct the Israelites out of Egypt, Isaac dug pittes. Moses.
which was. ccc.lxxxxiii. year before that Danaus, came into Argos, neither was
it Danaus but his daughters that dygged the pytte at Argos.

The.vii. Chapter. The Laborynthes, turrettes, sundry fashions of burials.
Laborinthes.
LABORINTHES which we may call Mases, were certain intricate and wyndyng works
with many entries and doors, in such sort that if a man were once entered, he
could not issue out, without either he had a perfect guide or else a clewe of
thredde to be his co^ducte. There were four of them most notable as it is
reported: Four laborinthes,
The first was in Egypt, and was called of some the palace of king Motherudes,
of some the sepulthre of Meres: but there be other that say, it was builded
in honor of the son by king Petesucus or Tithoes, albeeit Herodotus says
it was the common toumbe of the kings of Egypt: this stood a little from the
Poole of Myrios. Crete. Dedalus.
The second was made in Crete by Daedalus at the commandment of king Minos,
wherein Theseus of Athens slew the Minotaure. The third was wrought in the
Isle Lemnos by Zmilus, Rhodus, Lemnos.
and Theodorus carpe^ters of the same country

The fourth Porsena king of the Hetrurians caused too be made and set up in
Italy for his sepulcher, Porsena.
it was all of free stone and vaulted. The high steples or turrettes that the
Egipcia^s call Pyramides, were between Memphis and Delta two citees of Egipte,
of such highte, Piramides.
that it was meruaill how the stone and mortar could be carried so high. One of
them that was greatest, was the work of three thousand and.lx. men. in.xx
year, at the cost of king Chemis, The greatest spire Chemis made.
whom Herodotus names Cheopis, Chabreus brother to the same king made the
second turret not equal in hight. The third, king Mycerinus caused to be
wrought.xx. ^ote shorter then his fathers was. The cause of making the spires.
The occasion that they were made, as Pliny tells, was least the people
should be idle, and Josephus says the Egipcians enforsed the Hebrews to
build those Pyramides, because they should be in subieccion too them, and
that they might be made slaves and drudges: or else least the kings should
leave so much treasure to their successors, that it might move them to
sedicion or treason. Mausoleum that was the toumbe of Mausolus king of Caria,
Mausoleum
Artemesia.
his wife Artemesia builded most sumteously, and for that faithful love that
she bare to him, she remaigned a widow all her life time. The manner of burial
in diverse countries is of sundry fashions: Rites of buriyng.

Massagetes.


as ye Massagetes and Derbians judge them that die in sickness very
wretches, and therefore when their parents, and kinsfolk wax aged, they
strangle them and eat them, supposyng that it is better that they should
eat them, the^ ye worms. Albanes.
The Albanes, that dwell by the mount Caucasus, take it to be a mortal crime
if they regard or once name them that be ded. The Thracians keep solemnly
the funeralles of the ded corpse of men with great joy and solace: Thrarie^s
fashion.
because they be dispatched by the death of the miseries humane, and rest in
felicitee e^e^ne: and contrariwise at the birth of their children they make
great sorrow and lamentacion, because of the calamities that they must sustain
in this miserable life. The women of Inde take it for a great honesty and
triumph if they may be buried with their housbande: Women of Inde.
for it is granted to her that loved him best, there be other diverse manner
of buriynges among the Paganes and Heathen people, which for so much, as they
excede the bonds of humanity, and have in them no hope of resurreccion at
this present I omit and over pass the^. The Romans, The Romans burned
their dedde bodies
because the dedde coarses that died in externe battaill were after their
burial dug out of the ground, instituted the manner of burning the
carcases of men departed which rite was executed on Sylla chief of all the
house and kyndrede of the Cornelia^s, Sylla.
which feared lest he should be served as he had used Marius. They had also
in Rome a manner of deifiyng or hallowyng their emperoures ded bodies, Deifiyng
of the emperor
after this sort When the emperor was ded and his body reverently buried with
great exequies, they fourmed an Image of the emperor, pale as though he were
sick, and laid it at the gate of the palace in a bed of Iuory, Herodian.
and the phisicions resorted thither to the bed.vi days continually, the
lords of the senate, and noble ladies and matro^s sta^dyng on every side of
the bed. The seventh day the young lords and nobility bare him on their
shulders in the bed* first into the old place of judgments called Forum Vetus
and then into the field named Campus Martius where they chose their magistrates
and high officers: where they laid him in a tente builded for the nones, like
a tower and filled it with dry wood and sweet oynteme^tes, and after they had
finished the rites and ceremonies of their law, he that should succeed, in the
empire put a fire brande to the tente, and then other laid to the fire good
plenty. And by and by after all was burned, they let fly an Egle out of the
top of the turret, which, as they supposed, carried the solle of the emperor
to heaven, and from thence forth they honored him as a God. Commendacions to
the worship of ded bodies at funerales, Commendacions.
Valerius Publicola first made in ye praise of Brutus, and that was long before
the Greeks had any, notwithstanding Gellius writes that Solon ordained that
law in Athens in the time of Tarquinnins Priscus. Solon.
The Romans used to praise the women at their burialles because on a time
they were contented to give their golden iuelles to make a boulle to se^d to
Delphos, to the God Apollo. Women had commendacions in Rome


The.viii. Chapter. Who made spires called Obelisti, the marks of the
broches, the Egipcians letters, first Sanctuary.
OBelisti, Obelisti. Broches.
which may be called long bruches or spires, were great and houge stones in
Egipte made of masons from the botome smaller and smaller of a large length,
and were consecrated to the Son, because they be long much like the beams
of the son. The first of the^ was instituted by Mitres, Metres.
which reigned in Heliopolis, being commanded by a vision too make it, and so
it was recorded and written in the same. King Sothis set up four that were
every of them, Sothis.
xlviii. cubits long: Ramises (in whose time Troy was destroyed) reared up one
forty cubits of length, Ramises.
and another of eight hundred and nyntene foot, and every side was four
cubits broad. Ptolomaeus Philadelphus made one at Alexandria of fourscore
cubits. Prolomeus.
And Phaeron set two in the temple of the Son of an hundred cubits length a
piece and four cubits broad, Pheron.
on this occasion: It fortuned that this king for a great crime that he had
committed, was stryken blind, and continued so ten years, and after by
reuelacion at the city Bucis it was told him that he should receive his
sight, if he washed his yies with the water of a woman, that was never defiled
with any strange manne, but was alwaie content with her housbande. First he
tried his own wife, and afterward many other til at the last he received his
sight, and married her by whose vryne he was healed, and recovered his sight,
and all the other with his first wife he caused to be burned at once. Then for
a remembrance he made his oblacio^ with the two foresaied spires in the
temple of the Son. Augustus Caesar removed two.
Augustus Caesar brought two of these broches into Rome and set one in the
great Tilte yard or Listes, if I may call Circus in those terms, the other
he set in the field called Campus Martius: In these broches for the most
part were written Images of beasts, The manner of writing in egipte.
whereby their posterity and successoures might perceive the renown of such
princes, and the manner of their vows and oblacions.

FOR the Egipcians used the Images of beasts in the stead of letters, and as
Cornelius writes, Emblemes.
they declared their minds by the figures and shappes of beasts, as by the
Be they sygnified a King rulyng his commons with great moderacio^ and
gentleness, A Be.
Goshauke.
by the Goshauke they mente spidie perfourmaunce of their affairs.

Sanctuaries Neuewes of Hercules.
Sanctuary (as Stacius writes) made first by Hercules neuewes in Athe^s, and
was called the temple of mercy. From thence it was not lawful to take any
manne violently, that repared thither for aid and comfort notwithstanding
Moses which was long before Hercules did institute three franchised tounes,
Moses.
wither it was permitted for them to go, that had done any murder unware or
by chauncemedly. Next after him Romulus ordained a sanctuary in Room to
increase his citezens, Romulus.
and to have more number too build the city. There was a sa^ctuary in the
Isle Calauria dedicated too Neptune, Calauria.
and another in Egipte at Canobicus consecrated to Hercules, Egipte.
and another to Osyridis, and in Siria one hallowed to Apollo. And there be
many at this day in chrste^dome, and namely in England: but now the liberty
and number of them is sore minished, Sanctuaries in England.
because they were occasion of great crimes and enormites.

The.ix. Chapter. Of Theaters, and Amphitheatres, and Bathes.
THEATERS were certain places, Theaters.
as scaffoldes with pentises, wherein the people of Athens stood to behold the
enterludes that were showed, and they were made like half a circle with
benches one above another, that they might without any impedimente see the
places. Dionisius.
Dionisius did first institute them in Athens: in the mids of the scaffolde
or theater stood the stage, wherein Comodies, Tragedies, with other shows were
exibited too the common sort. Of them the Romans took example to make such
scaffoldes: which Quintus Catulus caused to be covered with linen clothes,
and hanged it with silk, Coueryng of scaffoldes.
where as before they had no vaulte to bear of the son or rain. But Marcus
Scaurus being Aedil, that is, Edili^.
having the oversight of all public and private buyldynges, made the first in
Rome that endure^ for the space of thirty days, it was made up with pillars
of Marble. Caius Curio
Caius Curio at his fathers burial builded two theaters of timber after such
a fashion that they might in time of enterludes stand one contrary to another
in such wise that neither play should disturb other: and when it liked him
he turned them together and made an Amphitheatre, Amphitheatres.
which was a round scaffold full of benches of diverse hightes: wherein he set
forth a game of sword plaiers. Pompeius Magnus made ye first standing Theater
of free stone, after the patron that he saw at Mitylene, when he had subdued
Mithridates King of Pontus. Caius Julius Caesar builded the first Amphitheatre
in the field consecrated to Mars, Julius Caesar builded an Amphitheatre.

The use of the Amphitheatre.


In this were set furthe shows of wild beasts, and swearde players: for
the manner was that such, as were condemned too death, or taken prisoners in
war should be cast there to the wild beasts to be devoured and slain. It
was strawen with sand, Sand was strawen in the Amphitheatre
least the blood of those that were slain should defile them that fought,
or discourage their hearts: and therefore, there were certain appoyncted too
toss and straw the sand. Circus.
The place called Circus, that we may call Listes or Tilte yardes were places
walled about with stone of a great length, wherein was used coursyng and
Iustyng, and tourneyng on horseback and on foot by champions and chalengers:
they were first named in Tarquinius Priscus reign, and that was called the
greatest. Circus Maximus.
After that two other were made one by Flamminius, and the other by Nero.

THE first coursyng, Iustyng, and runnyng with other exercises in the Listes
were what time Spurius Marcius, First iustyng in Rome.
Philippus were consuls the year of the city five hundred threescore and seven.

HOATE Bathes or Stues were used first privately of all men according to
their degree and habilite because of the preseruacion of health as they
pretended: Bathes pryuate.
but in process they builded common Bathes and hoate houses too sweat in,
Common Bathes.
and the nobles did Bathe and wasshe with the commo^s, and finally without any
shame men and women were permitted most lasciuiously to bathe together most
notable bathes were they that Agrippa, Notable bathes
and Nero, and Titus Vespasianus with other Emperoures made, as Julius
Capitolinus writes, they were both great and also gorgeously dressed like
citees and big tounes with all places of oportunite too mainteigne excessive
riote in all sorts of men.

The.x. Chapter. Who found the Carpenters craft, and instruments of the same,
Vessels of diverse measures.
Carpentars art.
OAEDALVS, after the mind of Pliny, first invented the art of Carpentrie,
with these instruments following, the Saw, Chippe axe, Saw. Chippe Axe.
Plomlyne. Wymble. Glewe. Squire. Line. Shave.
and Plu^line, whereby the euenes of the Squares be tried whither they batter
or hang over, the Augore, or Wymble, and Glewe to join bordes together. The
Squire, the Line, the Shave, the Pricker or Punche were devised by Theodor a
Samian. Notwithstanding Ouide writes, that Talus Daedalus sister son
invented both the Compass, Compass.
and also fashioned the Saw after the patron of the back bone of a fish: How
ye saw was found.
or as Diodorus says by the example of the chawe bone of a serpent he found
also the Shave, and for such benefits, as he did show and bestow to the use
and profit of men, he was highly commended: Dedalus slew his neuewe for envy.

Pythagoras rule.


but Daedalus enuiyng that a boy being but his pre^tise should excel his
master, cast him down out of a tower (as Ouide witnesses) and slew him.
Pythagoras a Samian divised also another manner of rule or Squire, then this
that we use commonly, fit for all manner of buildings as Victruuius
declares in the.ix. book. Penthesilia. Axe.
Penthesilea queen of Amazons is reported to have found the Axe. Albeit I
think the inuencio^ of this art is more worthy to be referred either to the
Hebrews, which occupied such arts before Daedalus time and in specially in
making of the tabernacle which was curiousli wroughte, or else to the Tyrians,
that were in that faculty far above the Hebrews. Tyrians were connyng
carpentars.
For which cause Salomo^ wrote to the king of Tire for work men to build the
temple. Making of hollow vessels as Barelles or hoggesheddes Speusippus
imagined vessels of Osiare or wicker as baskettes, Barelles. Speusippus
Baskettes. Ceres.
ha^pers with such like Ceres did first divise as Seruius writes.

The.xi. Chapter. Who ruled first on the sea, found ships, merchandise.
STRABO writes that Minos King of Crete had the first rule of the sea: Who
was ruler on the sea first.
but Diodorus says that Neptunus had the Empire of it before him, Neptune.
for he invented the feat in rowyng in boats, Rowyng in boats.
and made a navy, and was made Admiral of it by his father Saturnus. And
Pliny reports that King Erychthras divised boats first and rowed in them
in the red sea, Erichthras divised boats.
some say they were ordaigned by the Troianes in the narowe seas called
Hellesponrus, some think they were invented in the English sea, English seas
and covered with lether and hides of beasts. Danaus was the first that used
any ship when he sailed out of Egipte into Greece: First ship.
as Pliny records, although some suppose the Samotraciens, and some Atlas
that found it. But too speak the truth Noha was the first that made the
ship wherein he preserved from danger of the water all the living creatures
that were saved too multiply the world: Noha made the first ship.
and that was the patron that all other made their ships after. Jason first
made the Galey, Galey.
which Sefostris king of Egypt used after him, and Erythaeus made the Barge
with two order of Doors on a side, Barges.
Amocles or Corinthe, that with three course of Doors on a side: the
Carthagiens, that with four, and Helichthon of Salamis, that with five doors
on a side, which the Romans made in the first battaill Punike Zenazoras
Syracusane divised that, with six row of doors. Hippius a Tyrian conceived
the making of the lighter or merchants ship the Cirenens invented the Noye
or Gallion. Lighter. How. Keele. Brigantyne. Bark. Boats of one piece.
Phoenicians the keele or demie bark, the Rhodians the brigantyne, Ciprians
the bark. Germans the boats of one piece, Illirians the Cock boat or
Lighters. Rudders were found by the Copians, and the broad Doors the Plataeans
divised. Sails Icarus found, albeit Diodorus says it was Aeolus: Cork
^oate. Rudders. Sails. Maste. Cross piece. Ferry boats Ancores.
Daedalus fo^^e the Maste, and the cross piece where unto the sail is
fastened. Fery boats the Atheniens or the Salaminie^s found, close galeres
were found by the Thasians, the Tyrrhenes divised ye ancores, and Eupalamius
made it with two points or tethe, but some refer it to Anacharsis, which
also invented the Grapull or Tacle of a ship. Grapull. Stemine. Stern
The stem of the ship Pisaeus imagened. Tiphys found the strene after the
example of the Kyte, which in her fliyng turns al her body with the turnyng
of her tail. Minos made ye first battaill on the sea. Battaill on the sea.

Marcha^dise.


Merchandise was first instituted for too certify men of necessaries, by
the way of exchange: but after, when money was coined, it was occupied more
for men's private wealth then for any common profit, and for yt cause Cicero
calls it a vile and servile craft. Philosophiers were marchantes.
Albeeit Plutarche witnesses that Thales, Solo^, Hippocrates, and Plato
^erquented this art. The Cartagie^s found it, Cartagiens first marchantes.
as Pliny writes in the.vii. book, but Diodorus says it was Mercury that
found it. And Pliny in the.x. book says that Liber otherwise called
Dionisius inverted the trade of marchau^dise, Dionisius taught the trade of
marchaundise.
and therefore it is to be thought that the Cartagiens learned the cast of
marchaundise of Dionisius. But the Hebrews (as Josephus witnesses) used biyng
and sellyng in the time of Noe, Hebrews did bye and sell.
and Joseph was sold to merchants, and carried into Egypt. The Lidians were
first mercers and cariers abrob of stuff as factours and brokers do with us.
Lidians. Mercers.


The.xii Chapter. Who instituted stews, diyng of hear, barbours with other
things.
VENUS, Venus a common woman
which was begotten of the froth of the sea (as Poets fame) was a common
harlot, and brothel of her body, and had many children by sundry men, as by
Mars she had Harmonia, by Mercury, Hermaphroditus, by Jupiter, Cupido, by
Anchises, Aeneas: And because she alone would not seem to be an hoar, Stews.
she ordained in Cypres that women did prostitute the^ selfs for money to all that came. And Iustine tells, that the manner of the maids of Cypres was to
get their marriage good, Maids of Cypres.
by such fylthy baudry. And to help forth the matter, one Mela^pus brought
out of Egypt into Greece the rites of Bacchus sacrifices, wherein men use to
company dissolutely with women in the night, Bacchanalia
in such wise that it is shame for christen men to speak of, much like
our shows or daunces called maskes in England and bonefyres, Maskes.
Bonefyres. Spu. Posthumous abrogated Bacchus feasts.
as they be used in some parts of the realm. But Spu. Posthumous, Albinus,
and Q. Martius, abolyshed those feasts, I would all maskes and bonefyres were
likewise banished from among us christians. Albeit common women were long before
Venus time. Common women were of long time.
For it appears in Genesis, that Judas son to Jacob meddled with Thamer his
daughter in law, because he supposed she had been an hoore by reason of her
apparel. But to let that pass, yet it is pytie to se among christen men stews
and baudrye maynteyned, as though it were for a common weal: and honorable
matrimony so neglected and polluted without any fear of God. This is a doctrine
of the devil, if there be any. In Moses laws an aduontrer was stoned to death,
and in Greece, Punishment for aduoutry*
in Rome and in Arabia, and diverse other countries he was punished by death,
and among christie^s it reigns unpunished: God will strike ones for all,
therefore let the ministers of the law provide a godly remedy. I would wish
that women would follow the pagane Lucretia, or Hebrew Susanna, and men Joseph,
Lucretia. Susanna. Joseph. Diyng of hear.
Medea found the diyng and coloryng of hear, and our women of England have not
forgotten it, and beside that make their foreheades by their medicines brother
then God made them, Broad foreheades.
with other enormities, wherein some of the phisicians be greatly to blame,
that teach such thynkes to ye frail creature. Bunglyng Phisicians are blamed.
They be ashamed of Gods creacion and handy work in the^ selves or else they
would nor amend it.

Barbours to shave and round, were instituted by the Abantes, Barbours.
because their enemies in war should have no occasion to pluck them by y^
hear P. Ticinius Mena brought them into Rome the.CCC.liiii. year of the P.
Ticinius Mena.
buildyng of the city before they were vnshauen. Africanus was wont to be
shaven every day. There be many other things, Things whose auctours be not
known.
whose auctours for antiquity can not be known, and some because of the
negligence of men that will not write such things.

As no man can tell who began clockes, belles, the shypmans compass, the
gonnes styrops, cappes or bonettes, for that is but newely invented: because in
old time men went bare head, Atheneus in the.iiii. book says that
C^essebius a barboure of Alexandria found out the orga^nes, and brings the
testimony of Aristotle.
water mylles, organnes, and claricymbals, talowcandels, reclaimyng of hawks,
rings, with many other, which for the auncientie, or oversight of men be in
extreme oblivion.

The end of the abrydgement of the third book.
The fourth book.
The first Chapter. The beginning, and increase of Christ's religion.
CHRIST'S religion, Our religion began of the Hebrews.
wherein only rests ye whole hoope of our salvation, began of the Hebrews,
which were so named of Heber, and lived very devoutly, before there was any law
written, only by a natural inclinacion, and high courage excited to ensue
truth and justice.

The first that called on the name of God, was Enos, then Enoche, Enos called
first on God.
Noe And afther him Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, which because he had seen God
was named Israel, Israel.
and of him the Hebrews were surnamed Israelites Of the issue and lineage of
his.xii. sons there came.xii. tribes or generations of Jews, xii. tribes.
every tribe bering the name of one of the^: Job.
Job also was a perfect godly man, albeit an heathen, Joseph.
and Joseph was a myrroure of chastitee. To these men the will, promises, and
reuelacions of God were showed first. Notwithstanding they did not long
persevere in that perfect innocencye of living, but partly for their corruptible
and poisoned nature prone to vice, and partly by reason of the acquayntaunce,
that they had with the Egyptians, Egiptians superstitiouse
a kind of people very supersticiouse and given to much Idolatry, fell from the
purity into such extreme blindness of heart, ignorau^cie of God, and idolatry,
that they differed in nothing from the Gentiles and heathen. But God, as he is
al mercyful and long sufferyng, after.CC.v. years that Israel came into Egypt,
and cccc.xxx. years after Abraham's going thither, by the valiant captayn
Moses delivered the^ out of the thral dome and bondage that they were in and
brought them through the red sea and wyldernes, Moses delivered the Israelites
from bondage.
into the land of promise, the fruitful land of Canaan: And yet they unkindly
forgot all those benefits, and returned to their old wretchedness, and sinful
abhominacions. Last of all, God co^sideryng yt neither law of nature, Gods
mercy is showed.
nor law written, nor his great benefytes, nor preaching of sundry prophets,
whom they most truelly muthered, could turn them from their stefnecked, and
stubburne obstinacy: God is made man.
To show al kyndnes possible, sent his only begotten son equal to him in
essencial power, to be incarnate of a pure maid, that at the last they might
by his example and prechyng have an obedient heart toward their creator,
which was borne (the year of the world.v. thousand.C.xcix. and the.xli. year
of the reign of Augustus Caesar) of the virgyn Mari to be our savior, What
year Christ was incarnate.
and intercessour for us before the judgment seat of the father, as his name
Jesus does pretend unto us.

He by his example, teaching, and miracles, showed the pathe of salvation,
Christ was persecuted to death.
but they enuiousely did persecute him to the vile death of ye cross:
nevertheless by his divine power he roase the third day in the.xviii. year of
Tiberius the emperor his reign and after.xl. days he ascended to the right
hand of God, The year of Christ's death and resurrection
leauyng power and authority with his Apostles to establishe the common wealth
and religion of christians and the.x. day after his ascencion he sent the holy
ghost into their hearts to stre^gthen and teach the^ al truth: The holy ghost
is sent.
This was.xxxiii. years and three months after his incarnacio^. Thus our
religion had it oryginall, and the Apostles by their preaching amplified and
enlarged it very much. For Peter first preaching to the Jews in Jerusalem of
the cruel murder, that they had committed against Christ Jesus, converted and
baptized in one day three.M. men and women. Peter converted, iii.M.
And by the miracle of healyng the lame man at the beautyful gate of the temple
he stayed and confirmed them strongly in the faith, albeit he suffered
persecucion greatly for the same: And Stephyn for his faithful testimony was
stoned to death. Stephyn is martyred. Philippe.
Philip converted and baptized the Samaritanes, and a certain eunuche of
Candaces queen of Ethiopia, the eunuch turned the queen with her famylye, and a
great part of that country to the faith of Christ. Men were first called
christians in Antioche.
After in Antioche the faithful named them selves Christians.

Thomas preached to the Parthians, Matthew in Ethiopia, Thomas. Mathewe.
Bartlemewe Andrewe.
Bartholomew in Ynde, Andrew in Scytia, John in Asia, Peter in Galatia, Pontus,
and Capadocia. Peter was borne in Bethsaida a city of Galile, and brother to
Andrew. Peter bishop of Atioche.
He was by ship of Anthioche.vii. years, and converted many people of Asia:
and after went to Rome in the time of Claudius, and there showed the Gospel
with great increase, at the same time Mari the virgin, Mari the virgyn died.
and mother of our savior Jesus Christ did change her life, and was
Assumpted into the nombre of blessed spirits, which was the year of our
salvation.xlvii. Not long after Paul being converted from his fantastical
tradicions to a preacher of Christ's Gospel, Paul is converted.
was brought to Rome, where he preached boldly the Gospel, notwithstanding the
great persecutions that he suffered for it, Paul was headed. Peter was
crucified.
and afterward suffered death by the way of headyng, at the commandment of
Nero, the same day that Peter was crucified on a cross. Thus daily the
congregation of christians increased more and more, as the Acts of the
Apostles and other histories does declare at full. Albeit there was great
trouble and persecucion in every place, yet God by his power contrary to their
expectacion turned their cruelnes to the furtheraunce of his word,
confirmacion of the faithful, and confusion of them that used tyranny.

The.ii. Chapter. The institucion of circumcision and baptism.
GOD, which had made promise to Abraham, yt he should be father of many
nations, and that all the world should be blessed in his seed (that Christ)
willing to stay his farth in ye same promise appointed the covenant of
circumcision between him and Abraham: Circumcision.
saying, every male shall be circumcised, and the flesh of his fore skin
shall be cut round about, for a sign of the leage and confederacy that I make
with the. Abraham. circumcised.
Upon this commandment Abraham then being.xcix. years of age did cut his
fore skyn, and his son Ismales being then.xii. years old, whom he begatte
by Agar his bondmayde, and al his men servants: For this cause (as s. Cyprian
says) that he might have the first fruits of the blod, Why ye blod was shed.
which should afterward shede his holy blod for the redemption of many, yea
of all that believe in him. The fashion of it was to cut the fore skin of a
man's yard with a knyfe of stone, as God commanded Iosue that he should make
knyues of stone to circumcise all the Israelites the second time, The second
circumcision.
and Moses did circumcise his children with a sharp stone. Chrysostom calls
circumcision the first and most ancient commandment, for there is no nation,
Circumcision.
that gave any precepts or rules to live by before Abraham or Moses: and
therefore it is to be supposed that other countries took example at the Hebrews
to circumcise their children, Other countries do circumcise.
as the Pheniciens, and Arabiens, the Sarrocenes, the Ethiopians, the
Egyptiens, and the Colchians.

This circumcision of ye flesh was a figure to us of the circumcision of the
heart, What circumcision signifies.
and cuttyng away of al superfluouse lust, carnal desires, and imports a
moderacion and mortifiyng of the affectes and concupicences of the old Adam I
mean the sinful body: he that had not this sign was banished out of the
number of the people of God, and had no part in the promyses made to Abraham.
Baptism wherein is left to us a significacion both of the mortificacion of
ye flesh and diyng to the world, Baptism.
that we may walk in a new life, and also of the washyng away of our sins
by Christ's blod, and is the token that we be of the body of the congregation
of the faithful, John Baptest auctoure of baptism.
was instituted by s. John, son of zacharye, the.xv. year of the Emperor
Tyberius reign, in the wyldernes beside the famoose river of Iordane, where he
baptized much people. This baptism and washyng was in the water to signifye
the washyng away of our sins that should be by Christ, which baptized in the
holy ghost and fire. There was signs of baptism in the old law, as the
cloud, Signs of Baptism.
the red sea, ye river of Iordain. The first that was christened of the
heathen was Cornelius of Cesaria, and the eunuchus of queen Ca^daces.

Christenyng of enfantes was institute among us, Christenyng of enfantes.
as cyrcumcision of children was of the Jews celebrated the eight day. Iginius
bishop of Rome ordained first that children, which should be Christened,
should have a godfather and a godmother, for to be witness of the sacrament yt
it was received. Godfather and godmother.
And Victor bishop there did institute that one might be christened either by a
lay man or woman in time of necessity, When lay men may christen.
because enfantes were often in danger. There be three manner of baptismes (as
Cyprian divides it). One in water, Three baptismes.
whereof John was auctour, another in the holy ghost and fire, whereof Christ was
institutour, the third is in blod, wherein the children yt Herod slew, were
Christened. It was also the manner in old time, The old custom of baptisyng.
that they which were grown in age should be baptized in white apparel, and
that was wont to be at Easter or Whitsonday only necessity constrained
otherwise: In the mean time till those days came, they were taught the
mysteries of the religion of Christ, which they should profess. Of that
custom I suppose the sunday after Easter is called the white sunday.
Whitsonday


The.iii. Chapter. Of the priesthod of the Hebrews, and degrees of the same.
LIKE as in ye christen common wealth there be two sorts of men, one called the
laytie, to who^ apperteyneth the ministracion of the public well, Laytie.
and all temporl affairs: the other is the Clergy, to who^ belongs the cure
and charge of ministryng ye word of God, Clergy.
sacraments, and other decent ceremonies: so in the old law of ye Hebrews
there were two jurisdictions, one of the^ was capitaynes and governors of the
commons: the other was the priesthod that did offer up the sacrifices, and
other oblacions. Priesthod.
Of this degree of priests, Aaron and his sons were the first, Aaron first
priest.
ordained and consecrated by Moses at the commandment of God. The manner and
fashion of halowing of the^ and their vestures is declared at large in the
book of Exodus: As for Noe, which made the first alter, Noe made the first
alter.
Melchisedech, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob did make their offering rather of a
natural devotion then any priestly auctorytee. After that the Levites whom we
use to call deacons were created by Moses to minister and serve Aaron in all ye
sacrifices, Levites.
to bear the arc and tabernacle, the holy vessels, and pitche the camp, and
were discharged of al extreme affairs.

Next them were chosen the ministers, Ministers.
which did make redye the sacrifice, as Calves, Oxen, sheep with such other
things, at the commandment of the Levites, these we may call subdeacons.
Certain other were elected to light the tapers and lamps named accolytes.
Subdeacons


The Sextyns or porters were appointed to keep out all profane and unclean
people: Sextyns.
And readers to preach and read the law and prophets on their sabbath days.
Readers.


There were moreover chaunters and syngers to sing the Psalms in the temple,
Chaunters.
whom David and Asaph did institute.

Coniurars were ordained by Solomon Coniurars.
to drive evil spirits out of men.

Al these offices went by succession, neither was one promoted from one to
another. Succession in priesthod.
Thus was the leuitical priesthod appointed, which was but a sign and shadow
of things to come that is Christ, in who^ rests the perfection and co^plete
fulfillyng of the law.

The.iiii. Chapter. Of our priesthod, how it is double, what laiyng on of
hands means.
Christ auctor of our priesthod.
CHRIST Jesus our savior, which was king and priest after the order of
Melchisedeche, in the new testament has instituted among us a priesthod to
offer and do the functions of this new law: And it is of two kinds or sorts.
The one is a spiritual priesthod to offer spiritual sacrifices, Spiritual
priesthod.
in this kind Christ offered and gave up him self a consummate oblacion for
the sins of the whole world as Peter says, Christ died ones for our sins,
he being righteouse for us unrighteous, that he might give us up to God
mortified as touching the flesh but living in the spirit.

OF this priesthode be all christen men, All christen men are priests.
which after the example of Christ must offer our prayers, thanks gyuyng,
and our bodies mortified: we be all of the degree of this kyngly presthode
as Peter and also Ihon in the Apocalipse do bear witness.

THE second priesthode is a ministry, Second priestehode is a ministry.
that Christ did ordain foloyng the order of the law, that we might have our
teachers to enstructe us in the Gospel, as the Jews had their scholemasters
in the law. He did elect twelve bishops, whom he called by a new name
Apostelles because they were appoincted to be embassadoures into all parts of
the world, Apostles.
with the mighty word of his power the glad tidings of his Gospel. He
assigned also.lxx. disciples, Discip^^s.
to who^ he gave the charge and office of preaching and teaching, which in
stead of Aaro^s sons, should be among us as inferior priests, Priests.
and s^^oures of congregacions: and of these began the order of our Priests,
Bishops.
as our bishops had their original of the Apostelles. As for the Apostelles
and disciples, which were ministers and disposers of the mysteries of GOD, had
no other manner of consecratyng, but only the vocacion and eleccion of Christ
into the office And so was Mathias chosen in the Acts into ye room of Judas,
The manner of consecratyng in the apostles time
so were the seven deacons chosen to minister too the poor people of the
congregation. And Titus did chose in every town and city of Crete priests by
the laiyng on of hands, which was a manner of admission without any further
ceremonies, Laiyng on of hands.
whereby authority was given them over the congregation, and boldness to execute
ernestely his office with the assistence of the holy ghost. And therefore in
the beginning of the church when a bishop was consecrated there was used no
other rites or amabges, The fashion of the primatyue church.
but only the people, to who^ the eleccion of the bishop belonged, should
pray: and after the senioures or priests by laiyng on their hands admitted
him too that degree. Of these Peter was called chief and first because both of
his auncientie, and also for somuche as he was first elected. A bishops
office.
A bishops room is not somuche an honor, as it is an heuye burden, not so
much a laud, as a lode. For his deutie is not only to wear a mitre and
crosear, but also to watch over the flock of the Lord vigilantly, to teach
with the word diligently, with example honestly, and in all things too go
before them uprightly, and lead them in the way of truth, that they may
follow the patron of his Godly living, and there as it were in a myrroure
behold how they ought too refourme and confourme their living. Scripture
^ereth these.
And this office of the bishopric and deacons were instituted by the scripture
only, for priests in ye primative church and bishops were al one

BUT the bishops of Rome following the shadows of the old abrogate law of
the Hebrews have ordained a swarm of diverse other orders, as porters, or
sextens, Rome made mo orders.
reders exorcistes, accollites, subdeaco^s, deacons, pristes, bishops,
archebishoppes, as a certain degree one above another, whereby they should
assend to the highest dignity. Caius bishop Rome did begin the orders
first, yet some say: Iginius did ordain those degrees long before Caius time.
And I grant well that Iginius might be the first diuiser of them, Iginius
did divise first orders.
and afterward Caius accomplished the work, and brought it to a final
consu^macion.

The office of a priest.
THE office of a priest (as Christ ordained it) was too teach, baptize, and
minister the Sacrament of the alter, and thanks gyuyng, bynd and lose, and
judge of doctrynes. Therefore, let them take heed that admit such too be
priests, as cannot perform the deutie of the ministry. For many suppose if
they can mumble up a pair of Matyns and say Mass they be perfect priests.

The.v. Chapter. The manner of shauyng priests crounes, who may no^ be
priest, what age he must be of.
THE common and general badge of al Priests is ye shaven croune, The shaven
croune is the prestes badge
where by the Clergy is desseuered from the Layitee, and be put in
remembrance by it how they ought all together to relinquishe and despise all
carnal pleasure, and worldely treasure, and ensue after heavenly things,
which be eternal. This as Beda writes, Occacion of shauyng crounes.
grew into a custom, and was decreed by a constitucion, to the entente that
the thing which was before approbrious, might grow to honor and comelines.
For Peter what time he preached at Antioche, Peter was mocked for his baldness
was scorned and mocked because of his balde hedde, or shaven croune, and it
was a contumeliouse thing both among the Romans and Lumbardes too be
shaven. I think the original cause of it did proceade of the ceremonies of
the Nazarees, Shaue^ crounes came of the Nazarees
which when they had lived long time) as Josephus tells very devoutly), they
shaued their heddes and sacrificed the heir in the fire too God whereby they
sygnified that they did dedicate them selfs wholly to live in a Godly
perfeccion. Samuel was a Nazaree, and Samson also. I suppose, Priests of
Egipte were shaven.
that this rite of the Nazarees came out of Egipte where the Priests were
customably shaven in token of sorrow and heuinesse for the death of their God
Apis. And they were also shaven daily because they should be without filth in
their quoridian sacrifices.

THE significacion of the priests crounes is to declare that they ought to
reiecte terrene and yearthely substance, What the croune signifies.
reseruyng to theimselfes only a compitente sufficience. Anacletus forbade
priests too have beardes.

Siricius decree of them yt were twyse married.

Lame me^ne may not be priests.


Anacletus first forbad priests to have beardes, or long side heir.

Siricius decreed that all those men that were twyse married, or wedded a
widdowe should be no priest. Anastasius commanded that none that was lame or
maimed should be admitted to be a priest. Bonifacius instituted that no man
could be a priest before he were thirty years old, The age of priests.
for that was the age of pristes in the old law: But the counsel of Laterane
thought it sufficient if he were xxv. years old, after the example of the
Levites, which at that age ministered in the tabernacle. Stallyng a bishop.
Anacletus also appoyncted that every Bishop should be stalled and
consecrated of their other ancient bishops.

The.vi. Chapter. Who divised Parishes, and Dioceses the order of Cardinals,
Notaries and Chamberlaynes.
AFTER that the priesthod was ordaigned, both least the cure should be over
great, and also that every manne might know what his charge was, and how
far his office extended, Dionisius.
Dionisius y^ year of our lord cc.lxvii. divided both in Rome and other
places, churches, Churches. Churcheyardes.
churcheyardes, and parishes to curates, and dioceses to bishops, and
commanded that every manne should be contented with his prescript bonds.
Parishes. Dioceses.
But a fore that Euaristus appoin^ted titles of cures to ye priests in Rome,
whose duty was to christen all that were converted from Paganism to christian
religion, Cures in Rome.
and resorted thither to receive the faith, and to bury the dedde. And
afterward Marcellus decreed that there should be.xxv. in number. Cardinals,


THESE because they were ye chief priests in Rome, and had the prerogative
before the rest were named Cardinals and of them without doubt the order of
Cardinals sprung first which for somuche as they were in daiely presence
with the bishop of Rome, that then had the primacie of christendom, were had
in great reputacion and reverence. And Innocencius the fourth of that name,
Innocencius
which was about the year of our lord. M two hundred fifty and four,
willing to augmente and auaunce their dignity, Cardinals ride.
commanded by decree, that from thencefurthe they should ride when they came
to the bishops palace, Cardinal hattes.
and were a red hatte, whereby was mente that they ought to be in ar^dinesse
too adventure theimselfes for the law of religion, and spend their bloudde in
Christ's cause: And Paulus bishop ordained that they should have scarlet
roabes or kittelles. Scarlet roabes.
This order stands of three sorts, for some be bishops and be in number
six. The Cardinals of Hostia, Order of cardinals.
Sabine, Portua, Tuculane, Praenestine, and Albane, the other were either
priests or deacons, albeeit, in no certain or special number. But there is
another order in Room of Notaries, Notaries. Who ordained notaries.
which were appoyneted by Julius the first of that name, too write the acts
of all godly martyrs, and confessoures and registre them for a perpetual
example of constante and verteous living: Albeeit, I think it rather to be
the inuencion and divise of Clemente, which ordained seven Notaries too
enrolle the notable deeds of Martyrs. And Antherius after did more firmly
ratify it. Also Leo the first a godly and well disposed manne, seeing the
people repair thither from all parts of the world for pardon, appoyncted
certain officers of the priests, whom he named Chamberlaynes, Chamberlaines.
too keep the toumbes and sepulchers of the Apostelles and Martyrs, that they
perceiuyng the holy reverence about the Apostelles graves might be more
enflammed with devotion.

BUT all such offices be now perverted and turned from that godly purpose to
vain worldely ostentacion and pomp, Offices be sold in Rome
and be ready merchandise in Rome, the promocions be so great.

The.vii. Chapter. The prerogatives of the bishop of Room and his eleccion.
ONE special prerogatyue and preuiledge of ye bishopp of Rome is, The bishop
of Rome may change his name.
yt he may change his name, if it seem to him not very pleasant too his
ear^s: As if it be a malefactor, he may call his name Bonifacius, if he be a
coward, he may be called Leo, for a carter Vrbanus, and for a cruel manne,
Clemens. This was the ordinance of Sergius, Sergius inverted the chau^gyng of
his name.
and they say they do it after the example of Christ, which changed Simon
Bariona his name into Peter: And of this it came too pass that every bishop,
when he was elected, chose the name of one of his predicessoures.

Bishops of Rome be borne on men's shulders.
THE bishop of Rome is also borne on men's shulders, which custom came of
the eleccion of Stephanus the second, whom the people for his great virtue,
and godliness, with much joy of the eleccion bare on their shulders: The
manner of the pomp of bearyng was admitted, but the counterferryng, and
following of his virtue and sincere living was omitted. Albeeit it might spryng
of a gentle custom, that was among the Romans, that every rich manne or
high potestate should be borne of h^s servants in a bed.

THE authoritee too chose the bishop of Rome belonged first too the
Emperor of Constantinople, Eleccion of the bishop of Rome.
and the deputy of Italy, till the time of the Emperor Constantyne, which
licenced the Cardinals and the people of Rome to elect him. This was about
the year of Christ, cccccc. four score and five. The Empire is removed in to
France by bishops of Rome.
A few years after Gregory the third with other his successoures, when they
were vexed by the Lumberdes, seeing they could not have ready help of the
Emperor of Constantinople, required aid of Charles Marcel^e, Pippin, and
Charles the great king of France. For which benefits Leo the third made and
denounced Charlemayne Emperor, and gave him authoritee to ratify and confirm
the eleccio^ of the bishop of Rome: but Nicolas ye second restrained the
eleccion only too the Cardinals, The cardinals chose him now.
which custom remains at this day.

THE great possessions that the bishops of Rome has contrary to the example
of Christ, whose vicars they name theimselfes, and Peter's poverty their
predecessoure, were given them by Charles and Jews emperoures. Charles gave the
lands to ye sea of Rome.
And yet, notwithstanding all that large benignitee, and kyndenesse showed too
him and his auncetoures, Otho a Germain is made Emperor.
Ihon the twelfe made Otho king of Germany Emperor and afterward Gregori the
third a German borne, because too gratify the Emperor his country manne,
decreed that the bishops of Magunce, Treuerence, and Colyne, the Merques of
Brandbrough, Princes Electoures.

Decre by the Bishop of Room.


the county Palatyne, Duke of Saxone, and King of Boemie should have full power
to chose the Emperor. About the year of our Lord one thousand and two.

THVS the bishops of Room have been enhaunced in worldly power that they
think theimselfes equal with Princes, Kings and Emperoures: But as it was
falsely usurped, so shall it by the word of GOD be roted out and extirped as
an unprofitable tree.

The.viii. Chapter. The deuidyng of Priests into sundry degrees, a manner of
sweryng, and excomunicacion.
GREGORY surnamed the great, where before time, Priests and chief Priests
were only used in the congregation, first divided them into Patriarchs and
Archebishoppes. Patriarchs at the first were of Room, Antioche, Patriarchs
Alexandrie, Jerusalem, and Constantinople: Archbishoppes had their title to
be called Metropolitaines, Archebishoppes.
because their sea was in the mother city of the prouence. Clement the first
ordaigned that all Patriarchs, and Archbishoppes should wear a paul which
does signify meekness and justice, The paul is decreed to the patriarchs.
wherewith they should specially be garnished. Then also the inferior orders
begone too be divided, Archdeacons.
as that the Archedeacon should be above Deacon, and Arche-prieste above the
priest, and over them the Deanes, and then were ordained cannons, that sing in
cathedral churches Antherius permitted that a bishop might change his
bishoppericke, Chaungyng of bishopprickes.
for another upon an honest cause, if he were thought sufficient to discharge a
greater, for his learning and Godliness. Caius first made a statute, that a
priest might not be conuented before a temporal judge: A priest might not be
conuented.
but least any manne should be circu^ue^ted by fraud or gyle, Entichianus
instituted that the accusacion should be put in writing before the judge.
Likewise Cornelius decreed that a man should not take or require an oath of a
priest: but only in matters concerning our religion and faith. An oath might
not be required of a priest


THE manner of swearyng was in old time of this sort: He that should swear,
took a stone in his hand, and said, if I deceive you to my knowledge, The
manner of swearyng.
Jupiter banishe me out of all good me^nes compaignie, preseruyng the rest of
the city, as I cast away this stone from me. And (as Pliny does write) it
was not lawful for any manne too bear an office five days unless he were
sworn. In like manner our bishops, kings, Priests, and other officers
swear before the^ be admitted to the office.

Iustinianus emperor appoyneted first that men should swear by the
Gospel, Sweryng by the Gospel.
and now a days all that swear lay their hand on the book and kiss it
saying, so help me God and the holy Gospel, because as the Gospel of our
religion and faith may for no cause be violated, so an oath in no case may
be broken.

THE fashion of excomunicatyng men that be obstinate and dissobediente too
the officers: Excomunicacion.
Or common transgressors came, as some think out of the rites of the Jews,
which banished out of their Sinagoge all those that ran in obstinacy against
their tradicions.

AND some suppose it sprung of the religiouse folcke in France named Druides,
Druides.
which (as Caesar records) If either a private man or officer were not
co^formably ordered after their ceremonies, excluded him out of their
compaignie.

The.ix. Chapter. Consecratyng Nuns, taking of our cappes, kissyng the Popes
feet, and washyng of feet.
Nuns.
THE custom to consecreate Virgyns making a vow of chastitee was first found
by Pius the first which instituted* also yt none should be made before she
were twenty and five years old: The age of Nuns at their profession.

The time of professyng.


and that they might be consecrated at no time but in the Epiphanie or twelfe
day, Easter even and on the feasts of the Apostelles oules it were when any
vnprofessed wet in poyncte to die. And Sotherus caused that a decre was made
that no such professed should touch coape, Nuns might touch no coape nor
encense.

When it began.


or put e^sence into the Censoures, the year of our Lord GOD an hundred three
score and fiftene: It seems too have begone of the Apostelles, which is
proved by Paul's words, where he says: Let no widdowe be chosen before she
be three score years of age with diverse like sayings. Linus bishop of Rome
commanded that no woman should enter into the congregation or temple with her
head bare, Women may not be bare headed in the church.
which appears to have been taken of the Hebrews: for the bishop in the
old law might not uncover his head, and in Arabia and Cartage it was taken
for an dishonest, and vnreuerent thing if a woman should uncover her head and go
bare. The taking offe of our cappes to our superiors signifies yt we should
disclose and show them all such things as we have in our custody. Taking
offe of cappes.
The rite diabolike of kissyng the bishop of Romes feet, took it original
of the manner of the Romans, which in their Paganite used to kiss the feet
of their priests and other nobles, Kissyng the bishop of Romes feet.
in token of obedience: as Seneca tells how Caius Caesar stretched out his
left foot that Pompeius a Carthagien might kiss it: Po^ponius Laetus writes
that the Emperors used to give their hands to be kyssed of the nobles, and
then to take them up to kiss their mouths, and the commons kyssed their
knees, but Caius Caligula and Dioclesianus made them to stoop to their feet.
This Pagane example our christen bishop and Gods vicar, full ungodly and
ungoodly does counterfeit. Al other bishops used to deliver their right hand
to be kyssed of such as came to salute them: Right hand.
for the right hand, as Pliny says in the leuenth book, has in it self a
certain religion, and therefore we make all couenaunces and promises with it.
Salutyng with kisses.
The manner of salutyng with kysses is very ancient, for it was the usage of
the Hebrews to kiss strangers at their first metyng, as Jacob kyssed Rachel
before he broke unto her that he was of her kyndred, and Laban, after he knew
him to be his sisters son, embraced him with his arms and kissed him. And
the Romans custom was to kiss their kinsfolk, but afterward it was
exte^ded to further familiarity, and is now frequented very laciuiously.
Albeit in Rome it was an ordinance that women should kiss their kinsefolke
because that if she had drunk any wine, Law for drinkyng wine.
contrary to the law made against the women for drinkyng of wine, by such
means she might be espied. Washyng of feet on mau^dy thursday.
Washyng of feet on Maundye thursday, that the priests use among them selfs,
and nobles to inferior persons, is a counterfeete of the institute of Christ,
which to show them a patron of humility and meekness, washed the Apostles
feet. The kings and queen's of England on yt day* wash the feet of so many
poor men and women as they be years old, Kings and Queen's of England.
and give to every of them so many pence with a gown, and an other ordinary
alms of meat, and kiss their feet, and afterward give their gowns of their
backs to them that they se most nedy of all the number. It is a godly
institute, I would there were mo such ceremonies to help the poor. For they
be now neglected and not regarded, but lie dead often in the streets for lack
of sustenaunce.

The.x. Chapter. The institucion of priests called Flamines, with other
religions of the Romans.
NVMA Pompilius the second king of Rome, willing to reclayme yt fierce nation
from war and chiuarie, to the regard of justice, and keeping of peace
ordained to the high God Jupiter a sacred person called Flamen Dlalis, Flamen
Dialis.
that is Jupiters priest And to advance the order he set him in a chariot of
Iuorie, and a costely robe: but so sone as his wife was disceased he was
discharged and gave over his office. He never rode out nor might not lie one
night out of ye city, lest any sacrifices should be neglected by such absence.
Sweryng was clean forboden him, because an oath is a manner of punishment to
any fre borne manne, and namely to a priest which has charge of all divine
obseruaunces: For his word should have the weight of an oath. I would wish yt
our bishops would mark and follow both those properties of these Heathen
religiouse for then the state of our religion should be in better case then it
is, and other would not enforse so lightely a priest to the necessity of an
oath, which should have no other terms, but yea and nay to confirm or deny
their saying. Beside this Flamen, yt was called Dialis because he was
consecrated to Jupiter, there were by the same Numa ordained two other, one to
Mars and another to Quirine, albeit Plutarche says it was Romulus that
instituted priests to Jupiter and Mars. Virgyns vestals were of his bringyng
in also, Vestals.
and founded in honor of Vesta daughter to Saturnus. The first that ever was
chosen in to ye religion, was called Amata, Amata.
and of her al were named, likewise, a maid might not be under six years of
age, nor above ten if she were created of this religion. These continued in
their profession xxx. years, whereof the first ten they spent in learning the
rites, the other ten they ministered, and the last of their years they taught
other nouices, and when her term of years was expired she might marie, or
tarry in that religion still. They were found at the charges of the common
cheste, and if any of them committed any carnal act with any man, she was
borne in the sight of all the people out of the city and at the gate named
Collina was buried quick. They road in a wago^ and other magistrates roase to
them, and if they came by in time of execucion, the condemned was quite
delivered. Pontifex maximus.
This religion began at Alba by the institucion of Ascanius, and was renewed
in Rome by king Numa. A high bishop was also devised by him to have the
chief stroke in all ceremonies of sacrificyng, and he prescribed the days and
places, of sacrifices and in what form they should be done. He ordained also
to gradiuus Mars twelve priests named Salii, Salii.
because they daunsed in a solemn manner, and went about the city with
songs: they wear a brodered coat, with a brazen brestplate, and a round
tergate. It seems that Numa took this rite of the Hebrews, for David went
before the Ark of the lord dau^sing. Heraldes of arms which were called
Facialis Sacerdotes were invented by him to have charge to provide that no
battle were unjustly taken in hand, Faciales Sacerdotes.
they also made leagues, stablished peace, or if it were not duly made he might
break it, and offer oblacion, for the offenses of the capitain and the whole
army. Pater Patratus.
Pater Patratus was an officer that made all leagues or bonds, and was created
by ye Heraldes, as Marcus Valerius first Herald ordained Spurius Fusius first
into ye office of Pater Patratus. After the expulsyng of kings, was an office
called Rex Sacrificulus appoincted, Rex Sacrificulus.
which should do all such customable obseruaunces as the kings should do,
albeit he was under ye high priest or bishop, the first that did bear that
office was Marcus Papyrius. Epulones.
Epulones had the office of appointyng feasts and solemn bankettes to Jupiter
and the other gods: Sodales Titii.
these were also called Sodales Titii, which were ordained by Romulus after he
joined fellowship with Titus Tatius.

The end of the abrydgement of the fourth book.
The fifth book.
The first Chapter. Of the deckyng of churches on holy days, offering of
Images of wax and tables of miracles, solemnisyng first masses of priests.
THERE be many supersticious customs crepte in among the Christen
congregation, which came of a ge^tile opinion: and because they could not
altogether be abolished and extirped, at the lest way they were transposed to a
better use, and removed from Idolatry to the garnishyng of churches and
temples of the faithful people. Deckyng of churches.
As trimmyng of the temples with ha^gynges, flowers boughs, and garlo^des, was
taken of ye heathen people, which decked their Idols and houses with such
array. Offering Images of wax or tapers.
In like manner it is to be thought of the rite of hangyng up Images of wax,
and tapers before saints, or as aften as any membre is diseased, to offer the
same in wax, as legs, arms, feet, pappes, oxen, horse, or sheep, which
were hanged up in the church before that saint, by whom (as they believed
(they had obtaigned health of the said membre or beast: For this came of an
old Paynyme fashion of sacrifices, that the Paganes offered to Saturnus and
Pluto in an Isle of Italy named Cotyllia, whereof I spoke before. I think the
beryng of candels, that we use on the feast of the Purificacion of our Lady
called Candelmasday, Candelmasse day.
came of this gentile rite also, that in burning them we might worship the
saints as they honored their false God Saturn. Lamps. Hangynges. Lights.

Writing tables of miracles.


It seems that lamps and hangyng lights began of the candels that Moses
set up to burn in the tabernacle. The fastenyng up of tables wherein the
miracles are written for a monumente and testimony to the posterite, came of a
custom, as Strabo writes, that is used in Greece, where the manner is, that
whosoever was releued of any sickness or maladye, should hang up a table
conteignyng the recouerye of his health, in the temple of that God that had
preserved him, and specially there were many set up in Aesculapius temple at
Epidaurus. The use of feastyng on holy days, First Mass of priests.
and at the first Mass of priests was borrowed also of Gentilitee, which
honored the day of consecratyng their religiouse as solemnly, as the day of
their natiuite, with denoute and religiouse breakfastes and feasts, calling it
the native day of their sacred parsonages: whereof Apuleius, makes mention.
And it is a good usage, because the day of the birth brings but only life,
the day of consecratyng a priest brings or else ought to procure a good and
godly life. D^inkyng on Maundy thursday.
Albeit on Maunday thursday has been the manner from the beginning of the
church to have a general drinkyng, as appears by s. Paul's writing to the
Corinthians, and Tertuliane to his wife.

The.ii. Chapter. The manner of castyng money to the people, Newyeres gifts,
daunsyng, Ma^yng, Christenmas lords.
IT smells also of ge^tilite, that the bishop of Rome, emperors, and Kings
at their coronacion are wont ^o scatre money among the commons, Castyng of money
abroad
and make royal feastyng, which is a pretense or comfort of the benificence
or liberality, that is to come afterward. For the old Romans used the same
order and institucion in their triumphs, games, and funeral, as Suetonius
records. New years gifts.
Geuyng of newyeres gifts had it original there likewise for Suetonius
Tranquillus reports that the knights of Rome gave yearly on the calendes of
January a present to Augustus Caesar, although he were absent. Which custom
remains in England, for the subjects send to their superiors, and the noble
personages give to the kings some great gifts, and he to gratifye their
kyndenesse does liberally reward them with some thing again. But I commend
more the manner of the Italians, The laudable manner of the Italians.
for there the richest and most noble give to the poor inferiors, it is a
significacion of good and prosperous fortune of all the whole year then following.

Daunsyng.
THE use of dau^syng Liuie says came from the Hetruscanes to Rome which we
exercise much on holy days as they did, not without slander of our
religion, and hurt and damage of chastitee, as for maskes they be so deuilishe
that none honesty can be pretended to color them: Maskes.
Zacharias bishop of Rome made a decree against it, but that avails
nothing. At the calendes of May the youth as well men as women are wont to
go a maiyng into the feldes and bring home boughs and flowers to garnishe
their houses and gates, Maiyng.
and in some places the churches, which fashion is derived of the Romans,
that use the same to honor their godesse Flora with such ceremonies whom they
named godesse of fruits.

Christenmas lords.
THE christenmas lords, that be commonly made at the natiuitee of our lord,
to whom all the household and family with the master him self must be
obedient, began of the equabilitie that the servants had with their masters
in Saturnus feasts, that were called Saturnalia: wherein the servants have
like autorite with their masters during the time of the said feasts.

And this furnishyng of our bellies with delicates, Fastins even.
that we use on fastingham tuiesday, what time some eat till they be enforsed
to forbear all again, sprung of Bacchus feasts, that were celebrated in Rome
with great joy and deliciouse fare.

AND our Midsomer bonefyres may seem to have comne of the sacrifices of Ceres
goddese of corn, Bonefyres.
that men did solemnise with fyres, trusting thereby to have more plenty and
abundance of corn: And the disguisyng and mummyng that is used in christenmas
time in the North parts came out of the feasts of Pallas, Disguisyng.
that were done with visars and painted visages named Quinquatria of the
Romans.

The.iii. Chapter. The manner of annoyntyng priests, kings,, them that be
christened, confirmed or sore sick.
WHAT TIME Moses had builded the tabernable, he was commanded to make a
confection of holy oyntme^t, wherewith both ye work, the vessels, priests,
and also kings which be called to that office or dignity, Kings and
priests were anointed.
ought to be enoyled: So that it came to pass that the annoyntyng was the very
token and difference whereby kings were known among the Hebrews, Anointyng is
the token of kings.

Purple robe is the difference of the Emperor. Aaron and Saul first anointed.


as ye Emperors in Rome were known by their purple robes. Aaron and his
sons were the first anointed priests, and Samuel enoyled Saul first king
over Israel, and so consequentely it grew into a custom that priests and
kings were anointed. By which thing is signified that they be specially
favored of God, and like as oil lies a lofte on the water, The nature of oil.
or other liquore, so the office of a Priest and dignity of a Prince
surmou^teth all other degrees of ministers, both y^ in active and also
contemplative life.

Siluester bishop of Rome ordained first that all that were christened,
churches, and chalices should be anointed with oil. Our oil, Anoyntyng of
children christened, Churches, Chalices. The co^fection of our oil
that is now used is made of oil Olive, and natural Balm, Fabianus
commanded that it should be renewed every Maundy thurseday.

Clemente the first ordained that all children and other that were christened
should be anointed again with Crisme, and he instituted also the sacrament of
Confirmacion, Chrisme. Co^firmacion
supposyng that no man were a perfect christen manne, if that rite and
ceremonye were by negligence omitted. For this cause, that the holy Ghost might
more plentyfully be given to them by the hands of the bishop.

This thing began of the example of the Apostles, which sent Peter and John
into Samarie to lay their hands on them, that they might receive the holy
Ghost. It is only ministered by a bishop in this wise, The manner of
confirmyng.
first he asks the name of the child and then makes the sign of the cross
in his forehed with the C^isme: saying, I sign the with the token of ye cross
and confirm the with the crisme of salvation. In the name of the father the
son and the holy ghost, yt thou may be replenished with the holy spirit
and have everlasting life, sobeit. And then he smites the cheke of the child
softely, but if it be of a great age, he geueh a sharp stroke, that he may
remember that mystery, saying, peace be with the. Felix.
Felix the fourth did institute that such aswere in extremes should be
enoyled, following the example of the Apostles, Exteme unction.
which, as Mark witnesses, cured many diseases by annoyntyng them, and
saint James speaks of a like thing in his Epistle.

The.iiii. Chapter. The beginning of marriage of priests, when it was
forboden, with other laws touching marriage.
MOSES the minister of God amonst the Israelites, which were desirouse to
augmente and amplify their issue, ordained that all men indifferently, as
well priests as lay people should take wifes, least the debarryng them from
Matrimony, might be occasion of greater enormitie and inconueniencie among
the^. Albeeit because of the dignity of the order of priesthode he made
restraint that they should mari none, When a priest might not mary.
that was taken prisoner, bond woman, or deuorsed from their former
housebandes, and the bishops might not be married but too maids. As
concerning our priesthod, Siluester. Bishops married maids.

A priest might but mary on^


Siluester the first after the text of saint Paul, commanded that a priest
should mary but one wife, and after to live sole alone: As Paul had a wife, as
may appear in his Epistles too the Philippians and Corinthians. And Clement
bishop of Alexandria and Ignatius which was in Paul's time witness the same.
Paul.


PETER and Philip had wifues and daughters, Peter and Philip had wifes
whom they bestowed honestly in marriage to housebandes. And saint Peter seeing
his wife led to death for the profession of Christ, with great rejoice of her
constancy said, wife remember the lord. This order the Greeks, and all the
East parts of Christendom use, which would not consent to the counsel of
Nice, wherein it was propounded that the priests should forsake their wifes:
Panu^ius withstode the counsel of Nice.
And namely Panutius the holy and chaste bishop that came out of the borders
of Egipte withstoode that decre very earnesty. Siricius the first forbade the
priests of the West parties and deaco^s to mary, the year of our Lord three
hundred thirty and seven. He instituted also that he that either wedded a
widdowe, or took a second wife, could not be made priest. Pelagius the second
enforsed the subdeacons, Subdeacons forsake their wifes.
to forsake their wifes. And Gregorius, because he thought it violent to
deuorce them ordained that from his time none should be subdeacon on less he
vowed chastitee before. Notwithstanding the laws before made took no effect
among ye priests of the Weste parties until the time of Gregory the seueth
which was the year of our lord.M.lxxiiii. Gregory stablished the single life
of pristes.


AND here Polydore protests that the syngle life of priests does more
harm to the religion, shame to the order, and grief to honest men, then
their constrained chastity profits: if they were restored to the liberty, and
chose it were no prejudice to the christen common wealth, and honesty for the
order. In the beginning men married their sisters and kinswomen, Degrees of
kindred inhibited.
but Moses restrained them of the Hebrews from the first and second degrees,
and Fabianus forbad the third and fourth which custom stands now in effect.
Theodorus did inhibite first that a man might not mary that maid, God
brother and God sister.
to who^ his father was a godfather. It was confirmed first by Gregory and
after by Alexander the third, that no man should mary his brothers wife lest it
should be thought to be a counterfeit of the Hebrews. Lamech had two wifes.
Lamech was the first that ever had two wives, whose example many other ensued
afterward. The custom of purifiyng was taken of ye Hebrews, Purificacion of
women at child beryng.
but there is no day or time appoincted for it. Nevertheless for an honest
order, they use commonly not to be purified before the month day, and then
with a few honest matro^s she comes accompained to the church, and offers a
wax taper and the chrisome.

The.v. Chapter. Of the temples, churcheyardes, when the cross was first had
in reverence.
IN the old testement, Moses set up a tabernacle curiously edified to God
wherein supplicacion and intercession was made to him for the sins of the
people. Moses builded a tabernacle.
And in that he made the Arc of covenant in the which he put the two tables
of stone, The Arc.
conteignyng the law of the ten commandments, Aarons rod, and the pot of
Manna. After him Salomo^ king of the Hebrews made at Jerusalem a temple of
costly araie and sumptuously wrought. Solomon made the first temple to God
I cannot (to say truth) perfectely tell where the first church of christen
men was builded, The first church of christians.
but by all conjecture it seems that it was made of the Apostles, either in
Ethiopia, where Matthewe preached, or in lower Inde, where Bartholomewe
taught, or in Scythia, where Andrewe showed the word of God. Where they
doubtless either caused new churches too be edified, or else transposed the
idolles temples to serve the christen men's use, abolishyng supersticion, and
plantyng the true religion of Christ. Albeit it were not against reason to
suppose there was a temple or house of prayer appoyncted by James at Jerusalem.

IN Rome the first that I read of was consecrated by Pius bishop of Rome in
the street called Patricius at Nouatus bathes in honor of the virgin
Prudentia, First church in Rome.
at the request and suite of Praxedis her sister. And after Calistus made a
temple to the virgin Mari in a place beyo^de Tyberis, and instituted a
churcheyarde in Appius street, A churchyard
and called it after his own name: Abraham ordaigned the first place of
burial.
notwithstanding Abraham was the first that made any place of burial in
Hebron, where he bought of Ephron an Hethite ye double cave for three hundred
sicles of silver with the ground about it, and there was Sara his wife and he
himself buried.

NOHA builded the first alter, Noha builded the first alter.

Bonifacius caused alters to be covered with lenyn clothes.


and offered upon it a burned sacrifice to the lord. And Bonifacius the third
caused that they were covered with linen clothes. Constantinus when he had won
the battaill against Maxentius, by reason of a vision that he saw of the
cross the day of the battaill, Co^sta^tine for bade puttyng too death on the
cross.
ordained that from thence forth no man should suffer death on the cross.
And so in process of time it was had in much reverence and worship. And
Theodosius made a law that there should no Image of the cross be graven in
stone, No Image of the cross might not be graven in earth.

Helene found the cross.


marble, or in earth, lest men should tread on it. Helene Constantines mother
a very virtuous woman repaired too Jerusalem, to seek the cross of our lord
where with great labor and diligence she found it, and with it the other
two whereon the thieves were hanged, but it was easy to perceive Christ his
cross by the title, which then did remain, albeeit sore wasted and corrupted
with antiquitee.

The.vi. Chapter. Of the ancient rite of sacrificyng, feastfull days,
dedicatyng temples, the mystery of Fire, holy Water.
Cain and Abel sacrificed first.
CAIN and Abell the two sons of our first father Adam offered in sacrifice to
GOD the first fruits of their goods. Abell his oblacion was milk. Cain his
gift was corn. Afterward, when the priesthode was ordained, Aaron and his
sons offered diverse things with sundry ceremonies, which be showed at
large in the book of Leuiticus. The Gentiles almost all sacrificed to ye idols
men or women after sundry rites, Men were sacrifyced by the Gentiles.
as appears in the histories and Gentile auctours. And if it fortune that
they omitted any such abominable idolatry, they had great punishment,
Punishme^tes that they suffered for omittyng the oblacions.
destruccio^ of their fruit, corrupcion of their waters, infeccion of ye air
death of catel, great droughtes, women had eiuill deliverance, with many such
plages, as Dionisius Hilicarnasseus witnesses, which the spirits of the air
procured to delude and seduce men and confirm them in their error.

THE holy days among the Jews were diverse, Holy days.
as the Sabbath day, the feast of ye new Moon, the passover, the feast of
sweet bread, Pentecost, the feast of Tabernacles, the dedicacio^ day: which
be al showed largely in the old Testament.

The usage of dedicating churches is of great antiquity, Dedicatyng of
churches.
for Moses did sacrifice the tabernacle, and Solomon consecrated the temple
that he builded at Jerusalem. And Esdras after, when they returned from the
captive of Babilo^ hallowed the temple new again. Of them we receive our rite
of hallowyng of churches, albeit we have mo ceremonies the^ they had.

Fire.
FIRE was kept continually on the alter by the priests, for without it and
salt could no sacrifice be duly made or ordinarely offered, and we in our
Masses have ever a taper of wax burning. And the emperoures of Rome had Fire
bourne before the^, Emperoures of Rome had fire bourne before them.
and the Vestales had ever perpetual Fire in the temple where they served Vesta.

THE spirits of ye air, that gave doubtful answers to them that required
any question of them, were at the coming of Christ all destroyed For what
time he was carried into Egipte, Oracles seized at Christ his coming
which is a country full of supersticion and Idolatry, all the Idols of that
region were overthrown and fell to the ground at his coming thither. And in
the time of Adriane the Emperor, both the wicked sacrifices were abholished,
and also the oracles of Apollo at Delphos, Jupiter Hammon in Egipte, with like
vanities were subverted by the power of God through his son Jesus Christ.

HOLY water was ordaigned by Alexander the first to be consecrated to drive
away spitites, Holy Water
and was commanded that it should be kept as well in churches, as in private
houses for the same use: whereof are grown among the common people many
supersticiouse erroures contrary to the word of God, and therefore it were no
harm if the form of consecratyng thereof were redressed, and changed into a
more godly fashion.

The.vii. Chapter. Who ordaigned praiyng, why we look Eastward, preaching the
Sacrament of the alter.
FOR so much as we are created of God after his own Image, for the entente
to honor and serve him* and so finally too enjoy the eternal enheritaunce of
heaven, Prayer.
which we must attain to by prayer acknowledgyng our own infirmity, and
referryng us to the mercy of our most loving father. It shall be convenient
therefore to declare ye institucion of prayer.

Prayer was at the beginning.
PRAYER therefore was from the beginning, as Abel prayed, Noha, Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, with other Patriarchs prayed to GOD in all their doubtful affairs, and
gave thanks for the good acheuyng of them Moses and Aaron with other as Anna
the wife of Helcana showed us example of prayer: Christ prescribed a prayer.
But Christ is the first that did show to us any special form of prayer, as
appears in the Gospel of Matthew. Afterward, when men began to coumpte and
reken their prayers, as though God were in our debt for often beggyng of him,
there were divised by one Petrus Heremita a Frenchman of the city of Amias
bedes to say lady psalters on, Beads.
the year of our Lord a thousand.xc. that is four hundred.lvi. years ago.
The manner of turnyng our faces into the East when we pray, Turning our faces
Eastewarde.
is taken of the old Ethnikes, which as Apuleius reme^breth, used to look
Eastwarde and salute ye son: we take it in a custom to put us in remembrance
yt Christ is the son of righteousness, that discloseth all secrets. But that
was not lawful for the Hebrews as may seem to us by the setting of ye
tabernacle, and they must ever look toward the temple as the story of Daniell
declares. Moses when he had received the ten commandments, assembling the
people together showed them the will of God, and that was the first sermon or
preaching: Preaching.
and the prophets had without doubt open collacions: Iho^ Baptist.
And afterward Ihon Baptiste in the wilderness of Jury preached, and so did
Christ himself and gave authority to ye Apostles and disciples by special
commandment to do the same.

THE blessed sacrament of the alter was instituted by our savior Jesus Christ,
The institucio^ of the sacrament.
a little before his passion in Jerusalem at his supper, when he had ended ye
Paschal la^be, in this wise: He took bread, and after he had given thanks, he
brake it, and gave it to his disciples saying, take and eat, this is my body
yt shall be given for you: And taking the cup gave likewise thanks, and took it
to them saying, drink all of this, for this is my bloudde of the new
testamente, which is shed for the remission of sins. This under the form
of bread and wine he gave to them particularely his body and blood sanctified
in and by the word? And gave commandment that like sacrifice should be made
in remembrance of him. Alexander decreed that the Sacrament should be
consecrated of sweet bread.
Alexander the bishop of Rome did ordain that this oblacio^ should be made of
sweet bread, where before it was leuened bread. And he commanded that water
should be mixte with wine in the cup.

The.viii. Chapter. Who sacrificed first after Christ's tradicion, and
increased the parts of Mass.
EVERY thing at the first in the mystery of the lords supper was plain sincer
and without any misture of ceremonies, The old rite of consecratyng.
conteinyng more virtue then solemnite. For it is manifest that Peter, which
either first of all, or else with the rest of Apostelles did consecrate often
times after the rite that he had received of Christ by and by after the
consecracio^ joined to the Lords prayer or Pater noster: And I suppose it was
not much differyng from the Mass that is used in the church on good Frydaie.
Celestinus ordaigned the prayers that the priest says when he reuesteth
himself to Mass or at puttyng on his clothes, that begins Iudica me deus.
etc. Iudicame deus.
Albeeit it seems by the words of Chrysostom in ye.xi. homely on Mathewe
that it was taken of the churches of Greece and Asia, which used to sing
psalms while the people assembled together. Damasus instituted the confession
at the beginning of Mass, Confi^eor.
and some refer it to Pontianus. Kyrie eleeson was freque^ted in Greece first,
Kyrie eleeson.
and Gregorius caused it to be said nine times in the latin church. Gloria
i^ excelsis
Gloria in excelsis is ascribed of some too Telesphorus, of some to Hylarius,
of some to Symmachus, and the counsel of Toletane thinks that the doctoures
of the church made it: Collectes.
Collectes Gelasius and Gregory gathered. Grayle.
And the grayle was appoyncted by them also. Alleluya*
Alleluya was translated from Jerusalem to the latyne church in the time of
Damasus. The tract Durandus says was divised by Telesphorus, and sequences
were invented first by one Nothgerus an Abbot. Sequences. Epistle. Gospel.
The Epistles and Gospel were (as Hierom writes) used in the East churches of
very ancient time, wherefore I suppose we had the manner to read the Epistle
and Gospel of those churches: albeit some say Telesphorus ordaigned them,
Saint Hierome did divide the Epistles and Gospelles.

Standing at the Gospel.


and some suppose that Hierom at the request of Damasus did divide them, as we
read them now at this day. Anastasius commanded yt we should stand at the
Gospel in tokenyng that men should be in a readiness to defend the doctrine
of the Gospel. Credo.
The first part of the Creed Marcus ordaigned to be red, after it was made by
the cou^saill of Nicene: And the second part Et spiritum sanctum, that the
counsel of Constantinople composed Damasus caused to be read in ye church.
Entichianus instituted the offertory to be songen whilst the people offered
such things, as went to the relief and comfort of the poor: Offertory.
The offertory remaigneth, but the poverty is forgotten as though they had no
part in Christ and were vile abiectes of the world.

Gelasius made the prefaces, Prefaces.
howbeeit in the beginning they used but one preface. And Sextus put to the
sanctus out of the Prophet Esaias. Washyng of hands began either of the
old testament, Washyng of the hands.
where they did nothing with unwashed hands, or else of the Gentiles, which
before their sacrifices used too wash their hands, as Hesiodus witnesses.

BVRNYNG of encense, Ensence.
yt was occupied in the old testament by Aaron and of the Panimes in their
supersticiouse rites, Leo ye third ordaigned to be had in the latyne church.
The priuitie of the Mass called the Canon was made by diverse persons, as
Gelasius made Te igitur. Canon.
Sitirius added Communica^tes, and Alexander the first, that was long before
them, made Qui pridie, Qui pridie.
and that was the beginning of the Canon before that time. For Alexander was
three hundred.lx. years and more before Gelasius. Hanc igitur Leo joined, Hanc
igitu^
and Gregory annexed three peticio^s in the same Diesque nostros, and so forth.
Innocentius the first instituted that priestest in the upper part of the
church, called the Chansell or quire should kiss one another, and that Pax
bourne should be bourne to the people. Pax.
Blessyng with chalices
Blessyng with hands and Chalices came out of the Hebrews ceremonies: For
Aaron after he had sacrificed, blessed the people. And Christ at his assencion
blessed his disciples. Agnus dei.
Sergius ordained the Agnus dei seven hundred years after Christ to be song
of the Clergy at the time of the communion. The often turnyng of the priest at
the alter, Turnyng about of the priest.
when he says Dominus nobiscum or Orate fratres, came of the Hebrews rites,
wherein sacrifice time the priest turns him to cast the bloudde of the
sacrifice on the people, and the Ethnikes used the same fashion in their
supersticions, and therefore doubtless we had these ceremonies of them.

The.ix. Chapter. Why we say Ite missa est, whereof the word mass and
ceremony came, the first manner of taking the Sacrament.
WHEN Mass is ended the Deacon turnyng to the people says, Ite missa est,
Ite missa est.
which words are borrowed of the rytes of the Paganes, and signifies that
then the company may be dimissed. It was used in the sacrifices of Isis, that
when the obseruau^ces were duly and fully performed and accomplished, then a
screl or minister of the religion should give warnyng or a watch word what
time they might lawfully depart: And of this sprung our custom of syngyng
Ite missa est, for a certain significacio^ that the full service was finished.

Mass is an Hebrew word (as Reucline says) and signifies an oblacion or
sacrifice with all circumstances concerning the same. Mass.


The Romans called all such service, as appertained to their gods,
Ceremonies.
in one general name ceremonies because a certain people named Cerites, which
received deuoutely the relics, and other obseruaunces of the Romans
religious, and preserved them, for when the Frenchemen by the valiauntnes of
their captain ( Brennius that was an Englishe-man) had won the City, for
which benifyte all the rites of their gods universally were named ceremonies.

Alexander inhibited priests, that they should not sacrifice, but once on the
day, One Mass on a day.

Three Masses on Christmas day.


and Telesphorus permitted them to say three Masses on Chrystmasse day: First
at mydnight what time Christ was borne, the second in the morning, when the
shepherdes visited him, the third at further of the day, where before time it
was not lawful to celebrate before the third hour of the day.

Felix the first decreed yt no Mass might be said but in places consecrated,
Mass must be said in places consecrated
saving in the time of necessity, and that none but priests admitted should
intermeddle with the mysteries of consecracion, because that authority was
only given to the Apostles at the beginning, by whom priests be meant and
understand.

Corner masses be forbodden.
Anacletus ordained that no Mass should be done, but in the presence of two at
the least, lest the priest should say in vain to the walls Dominus vobiscum,
when none were present, and therefore they do evil that consecrate in corners
alone. Albeit, Gratianus refers that to Soterus which perchance did renew
that constitucion.

The Sacrament was used of our predecessors in the primative church every
day as Luke witnesses in the Acts of the Apostles, Daily communion.
and Anacletus caused it to be renewed by a decree upon pain of
excomynicacion: And Victor denounced that those should be interdited from al
services, Uncharitable persons were interdited from service.
that when they should receive the Sacrament would not be reconciled to their
neighbors of all grudges hatreddes, and displeasures.

Zepherinus an hundredth year after Anacletus commanded that all that
professed Christ or bare the name of Christians, being of the age of.xii.
or.xiiii. years should at the least once in the year at Easter receive the
blessed Sacrament. Taking of the housel at Easter.
Fabianus decreed that they should receive it thryse in the year.

Innocentius the third decreed that the Sacrament should be kept in the
Churches, Keeping the Sacrament in Churches.
to the intent to be in a redynesse at all times, lest they that were sick
should want that spiritual comfort in that troublesome time of death, and
Honorius the third confirmed the same.

The end of the abrydgement of the fifth book.
The sixth book.
The first Chapter. Auricular Confession.
ALBEIT man redeamed with the precyouse blod of our savior Christ Jesus is
fully reco^siled to God, We be reconciled by Christ
and all the heaviness of his displeasure be appeased: yet the poisoned nature
of man is such, the occasions of sin be so many and great, that in this
slipper way of worldely life we must need, our infirmity enforcyng us thereto,
fall into the snares of the devil and sin. But God, as he is all mercy,
Repentance a remedy of sin.
willing the death of no sinner, but that he convert and live, has left us
the comfortable salve of repentance, as a present remedy against all such
incursions of our enemy, or fragilitye of body) whereby we may with a good
hope call to our heavenly father for the forgeuenes of our offenses and
trespases. For as the prophet Ezechiel records, what hour soever the sinner
does lament and is repentant for his sins, god (for his son Jesus sake) will
no le^ger ^ere the^ in remembrance Therefore whosoever with concupiscence
vanquished, Desperacion is forbodden.
or by lust enforced by error disceyued, or by force constrained does fall to
any spice or kind of injustice, let him not despair in his own conscience, or
mistrust the bottomless mercy of God, but with good courage repair to this
medicine repentance and co^tricion of heart. Consequently it shall be the
penite^tes office and duty, after such heuines taken, as it were by a vomit,
to spue out of his conscience al such unwholesome things as might remain still,
engendre desperacion, or imbecil his hope in ye promises of God. Auticular
Confession.
For this cause confession named auricular, that is made to the priest, was at
the beginning instituted: that men might therein open their hearts to their
curates and receive at their hands the oil of the Gospel of Christ to supple
their raw and stark sores. It was the institucion of Innocentius the.iii.
that so many, Innocencius did ordain confession to the priest.
as were by age subject or in danger to commit sin, should at ye lest once
in the year be confessed to their curates, to who^ it concerns to know the
behauour of his parishners, for so much as he must re^dre a strait account of his
cure. And therefore it is evil in mine opinion to have these common
penite^ciaries, which be occasion, Common penitencers.
that both curates give not their counsel where need is, and also men thereby be
more bold to sin seeing they shall not be rebuked of such common confessors,
but for their monye have ready absolucion with small exhortacion to amend their
sinfulnes. This confession is proved of ye text of s. James where he says
confess your sins one to another, Textes prouyng confession.
and one pray for another, and also of the.xx, chapter of John, where Christ
says, receive the holy ghost. Whose sins soever you remitte, they are
forgeuen them, and whose sins soever you retain, they are retained.
Therefore we must receive confession for the absolucion sake, that is given
into the hands of the ministers.

The.ii. Chapter. Matyns, singyng of psalms by course, Legendes of saints.
Matyns Pryme and hours.
MATINS with Pryme and hours were appointed first by Hierom, for one Eusebius
of Cremona and diverse other, that lived with him, to ye intent that they might
have certain lauds and praisyng of God to sing in the churches And the fathers
and old governors of congregacions received them following this verse of David
in the.c.xix. psalm. Seven times in ye day have I given and song praise to the.
Cipriane writes that the Pryme and other hours took their original of
Daniel. Which after the custom of his country, thrice in ye day, morning
noone, and euenyng, on his knees used to pray. It was also the rite of the
Heathen to have morning prayers, Apuleius de asino aureo libro.xi.
for Apuleius says that their religious, when all things were duly
finished, song salutacions of the new light, and showed that it was Prime of
the day, where he means by salutacions the morning songs that we call
Matyns, and there declares how the hours of the day were sorted and divided
for sacrifices and prayers. Pelagius the second was the first that commanded
priests to say them daily, Pelagius charged priests to say maryns daily
that like as the just man falls vii. times on the day, so by instante and
continual prayer he might as often rise and amend. Gregorius put to the
beginning of every hour, Deus in adiutorium was added by Gregory.

Lady matyns


Deus in adiutorium, and Gloria patri. etc.

Vrbanus the second ordained the lady Mattyns to be said daily, and confirmed
them in the counsel, which he had at mount Clare in France.

The division of David's psalter in to.vii. parts called nocturnes, Nocturnes.
according to the.vii. days in the weke, was the work of Hierome at the
request of Damasus bishop of Rome, which also gave commandment that it
should be read so in the churches, and added Gloria patri to the end of every
psalm. Who made Gloria patri.
The Gloria patri was made in the counsel of Nicene.

Damasus also instituted that the psalms should be song and said by course,
Syngyng Psalm^s by course.
Albeit some say Ignatius did deuyse that before his time, which thing was
learned of David or Asaph, for in the old sinagoge they used to sing their
psalms after that sort, but our singyng is far from their manner. For our
singers cry out so loud, that we hear nothing save a noise, and those that be
present can not be edified with the word. It were great furtheraunce to the
religion, if those singers not far unlike to Iaies were either vanished out of
the temples, Our common singers be rebuked.
or else their syngyng were so modifyed with more soberness, that the words
might be understand to the edifiyng of the layitie, which is sore blinded
with singyng and sound of instruments, that be not fyt to edifye but to
delight the ears. This modest singyng was used by the holy Athanasius bishop
of Alexandria through all his province and diocese, Athanasius
as Austen witnesses. Libro confess. and.x.

The Creed was said every hour. Tunes of the hymns.

Legendes.


Damasus commanded that the common Creed should be said at every hour.
Vitalianus invented the decente tunes, wherein the hymns be song, and joined
the Organs to them. Legendes of saints were made the year of our lord D.ccc.
by Paulus Diaconus and Isuardus a monk at the desire of Charles the great.
Common Legendes.
And forsomuche as the persecucions were so great that in the time of Dioclesian
ye emperor there died.xvii.M. christian men within.xxx. days space, they could
not particulerly write al their lives, but made certain general Legendes of
martyrs, Co^fessours, virgyns, which we now call the common, and the fathers
commanded those to be red in ye church on such saints days. Afterward
many, thinkyng that they should be heard rather for their much bablyng sake,
devised sundry manners of praiyng and diverse uses: Uses in the service.

Benettes use.


as Benettes monks had one use, Barnardes another, and Domynickes brethren had
one order by the^ selves, and every prouincial bishop made a several use in his
diocese, and all were confirmed by the bishops of Rome.

The.iii. Chapter. The beginning of fasting, alms, Aduent, Lent, Embryng
days.
FASTING and Alms deeds be as saint Austen says, the two wings of
prayer, wherewith it is made stronger and lighter to fly into ye presence of
God, and be more acceptable in his sight. Fasting.
Fasting has been used from the beginning of the world What time the fruit
of the tree of knowing good and evil was forbodden to our first parents in
Paradise because by such abstinence they might obtain and enjoy the
felicity everlasting. Alms.
Alms in like manner sprung of the infirmity and nedines of the nature of
men: for as they felt hunger, cold, nakedness, and such other calamities, as
be in our mortal life, they were constrained to desire aid and succor of
other men, and of alms. Moses made the first law of Alms.
Albeit Moses was first that ever prescribed any law of gyuyng alms, as
apereth in the book of Deutronomie. This charitable alms, must be so freelye
given, that we exempte none from the use and part taking of it, and as the
scripture says without respect of parsonnes.

As for fasting of that original proceeded further, Flesh was not eaten before
Noe.
for the use of flesh and wine from Adam till the time of Noha was unknown. And
Moses forbear meat forty days, and Helias did likewise: Our savior Christ
fasted the same space. And God pardoned the Ninevites of their crimes because
they fasted with repentance. Example of fasting.


The Jews also in their law, so often as they either asked any benifite of
God, or would pacify his wrath, or render thanks for his benefytes, or kept
any solemn feasts used commonly to fast. And certees he keeps, (...) the
true fast, True fast.
which forbeareth (...) or forgoeth his supper, but he that mynysheth his
affections, abateth his anger, swageth his pride, modifieth his desires,
mortifieth his lusts, suffers patiently all adversity, that chaunseth to
him, that man is the true faster, Albeit the other is a coadiutoure to that
thing and helps much that purpose. Therefore to the intent we might reclayme
such corrupcions of our old Adam, The Apostles did ordeyne the fast of
Lent, Lent.
as Hierome in a pistle to Mercella does plainly declare. Wherefore they that
refer it to Telesphorus, be foulye disceyued, Telesphorus didappoint it before
Easter.
for he did not institute it first but appoint that it should be kept before
the Easter. And added another weke to it, that we call Quinquagesima. This weke
he commanded priests to fast more then the layitie, Quinquagesima.
because yt they, which ought to be holier then the rest, should in this
ordinarye fast show more abstinence the^ other. The Apostles also instituted
that.iii. wekes before ye Natiuite of our Lord, ^^uent.
named Christmas should be solemnly fasted, which co^stitucion was a while kept
universally but afterward it was resigned to the monks and religious persons.
Calistus or as some think Vrbanus did begin the Embringdaies quarterly for the
preseruacion and amplificacion of fruits ordained for the sustenaunce of man
and beast. Embryngdaies.
Albeit, I ca^ rather take it to be an imitacion of ye old Romayne feasts,
Romans had three sacrifices for fruits.
which thrice in the year had sacrifices for the prosperous success of their
corn, one Vinalia for their wynes, the other Robigalia for all their grain,
least it should be mildued. The third Floralia for all their fruits. These
vain superstitious old bishops of Rome turned to a godly use, Supersticion
turned into religion.
and tra^sposed their feastyng into fasting, that the rather at the
contemplacion of our prayers and fasting, God might prosper the increse of all the fruits to the sustentacion of his creatures.

The.iiii. Chapter. Watches were turned into fastes, fasting of Fridaies and
Wednesdaies, namyng the days of the weke in sundry wise.
IT was the manner, from the beginning of our christen faith, that for so much
as it pleased our savior to be borne in the night, Watches.
priests did rise in the night season, and song the hours canonical
otherwise named the Matyus: and the lay people was accustomed on those
saints euens, that were any solemn feasts, to watch at the tombs of Martyr
spraiyng and singyng holy psalms. Which thing the testimony of Pliny does
well approve, where he writes in a pistle to Traiane, how that much number of
people was slain, in whom he could never espy any fault, saving that before
day at certain times and feasts they arose, and song of co^mendacion of
Christ, whom they called God. But as time is corrupter of al things worldely,
in process as devotion began to abate, in stead of hymns they song
dissolute balades, and prayer was turned into wanton daliaunce.

The youth went about light amorous company, the eldest persons practiced
baudry, women were not ashamed to give them selves to be corrupted in all kind
of whordome. Upon this occasion the old fathers, seeing least it might grow to
a further in conuenience turned the Vigilles into fasting days. Vigilles were
made fastes.
Notwithstanding the priests used their ordinarye times of seruyse, as they
were wont to do, and such feasts were called by the name of Vigilles, and
observed with no less reverence then the fast of Lent. This remedy was
provided after saint Hieromes time, which died the year of our
Lord.cccc.xxii. when Bonifacius the second was bishop of the sea of Rome.

The like custom was also observed among the Egyptians, Egyptians rite in
watches.
which on the euens of their high feasts fasted, and after they had slepte
they offered a cow: Night sacrifices ar abholished.
all such night sacrifices and obseruances for like causes were by a perpetual
law in Greece abrogated by Diagundas a Thebane. The fast of wednesdaie and
Fridaie was commanded by the fathers, Diagundas. Wednesdaie Fridaie.
because on the one day Christ was crucified, and on the wednesdaie Judas
purposed in his mind to betray him as Apolonius the eloquent oratoure
supposed. Siluester the first, bishop of Rome, Days were turned into feries.
abhorryng the memorial of the vain Gentile gods, decreed that the days of
the weke, which had before the names and titles of the Son Moon, Mars,
Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn, should be called the first, second,
third, fourth, fifth, sixte, seventh ferie: in semblable manner as the Jews
coumpted their days from the Sabbath day. He did also call ye first ferie
Dominicus dies, Dominicus dies. Sundaie. Sabbatum.
that we name Sunday, and called Saturday Sabbatum of the old holy day and
rest of the Hebrews: al these things were dooen at the suit of Constantine then
Emperor. Albeit the Apostles before that time had consecrated the Sondaie to
the Lord, because that day he rose from death, and the Jews Sabbath was
turned into it, as may appear by the decree of Pius, that ordained the Easter
to be kept on the Sundaie, Easter is appointed on ye Sundaie.
and therefore I think Siluester did but only renew the same act of the
Sundaie. It was the inuencion of the Egiptians yt the days were first named
after the seven planetes, Days were called of the Planetes.
as Diodorus records. Sa^cte Gregory was the author that neither flesh, nor
any thing that has affinitee with it, White meats is forbode^ of fasting
days.
as chese, milk, butter, eggs should be eaten on such days as were fasted.
We have also a manner usage of hallowyng the table, and meat before we be
set, that begonnen of the imitacion of Christ, which used the same fashion over
the five loves in the wilderness, and at Emaus also he did insemblable wise
consecrate the table in the presence of his disciples: so was the form of
saying grace after supper taken like wise of the custom that Christ commonly
kept at his suppers. Grace at meat.
Readyng the bible at meat
The manner to read apart of the Bible at dinner time has been of long
continuance, and did proceade of the Godly doctrine, that Christ instructed
his disciples in at all times, but namely at his last supper, wherein he
treated of ye perfeccio^ of al ye mysteries of our religion. And thus our
fathers, to keep in memory such an holsom institucio^ did bring in this manner
of readyng the scripture at meat or meal time.

The.v. Chapter. The original of holy days, Paschall candelles, birthe days.
LIKE as the Jews had in their law, which was but only a shadawe of things
too come, holy days appoyncted for the execucion of the mysteries of their
religion, whom they in one general term named Sabbath dais, Sabbath days of
the Jews.

Holy days.


of the rest and vacasio^ that they had from bodily labors: semblably our
fathers have ordaigned festival days in the new testament, wherein Christen
men (all profane businesses, and eiuil matters laid aparte) might wholly apply
and bend themselfes to Godly and spiritual meditacions. As the perusyng and
readyng of scriptures, Works due for ye holidaie
heryng of devout sermons, renderyng honor to God by sacrificyng, praiyng, and
well dooyng, be works fete and convenient for the holy day, and also
reuerencyng the memorial of saints on such days as be assigned to that
purpose, is on the holy day laudable. For oblacion is only due to God as
Paul and Barnabas did openly testify at Listra. For when he had commanded by
the power of the word of God, that the man, which was lame from his mothers
womb should arise and walk the people for wonder and marvel of the miracle
would have dooen sacrifice to them, but they renting their clothes departed out
of the prese and with sharp words rebuked their enterprise, as a thing
unmeet to be dooen to any mortal man, or worldly creature. First of all the
feast of Easter was instituted by ye Apostles, Easter is instituted by the
Apostles.
and prescribed by Pius the first to be solemnised on the Sondaie. Afterward as
it chaunsed that alteracion of that matter arose. Victor.
Victor that was bishop of Rome about the hundred nynetie and six year of our
lord decreed that it should altogether be kept and celebrated on the Sondaie
from the fourtene day of the first month, that was March, Easter is too be
kept in March.
until ye.xxii of the same, least our order and coumpte should agree with the
Jews, which kept it somewhat sooner then that appoyntemente speaks of:
albeeit many foreyne bishops at the first refused that co^stitucion, because
they thought it not out of caurse or amiss to keep that feast after the
precident of saint Ihon the Apostle, Saint Ihon kept ye Jews Easter.
which renewed ever the rite of the Jews in the feast of Easter.

THE custom of hallowyng Paschall candelles on Easter even was commanded by
Zozinus to be frequented in every church. Paschal candelles.


THE manner of keeping holy the birthe day of every manne was much used in
Rome, Birthe days
albeit the Persians had that usage before them, for there it is the fashion
that every manne after his habilite^ should with many obseruances, and great
dentie feasts worship the day of their birthe, and of them the Romans
received that supersticion.

The.vi. Chapter. Of the institucion of holy days, and canonisyng.
AS you have heard ye sanct Ihon the Apostle did celebrate the feast of
Easter, Easter.
eue^ so the other Apostles as it is said were authors not only of the same
Easter feast, but also ordained those days, wherein our savior had done any
mystery concerning out salvation or informacio^, should be kept holy, and to
the intent they might be more reverenced of their posteritee, they themselfes
kept them during their life very devoutly: as the Sondaies. Feasts
instituted by ye Apostelles.
Aduent, the Natiuitee, Circumcision and Epiphanie of our Lord, the
Purificacion of our lady called Candelmas, Lent, Palm Sondaie, Maundy
Thursdaie, when Christ after supper washed his disciples feet Goodfridaie,
Easter, the Ascension, and Witsondaie. As for the feast of Pentecost was before
used of the Hebrews: Pentecost.
for.l. days after that the la^be was sacrificed in Egypt,, ye law written by
the hands of God was given by Moses in the Mount Oreb in the wilderness of
Sinay. And.l. days after the death of Christ, which like a lamb was offered
of the Jews for our Paschal, the Apostles received ye law of the spirit. The
feast of transfiguracion came also of the Jews: Tra^sfiguracion.
for like as Moses his face was transposed into a perfect brightness, after he
had commoned with GOD in the Mount, so now after the shadow and veil were
taken away by Christ his coming, it pleased God to show to his disciples his
transfiguracion, as a declaracion of the shadow past and a figure or
significacio^ of the immortalite to come. In consideracion whereof the holy
fathers perceiuyng the use of such holy days confirmed and ratified them by
a decree made in the cou^saill had at Lio^s in France and furthermore
commanded that such days, as either our holy saints departed this life,
orels wrought any miracle or did any notable deed to ye increase of our
religion should be kept holy, because christen people might have more
oportunitee too hear the word of God, and more deuoutely serve him in an
uniform order.

Festes instituted at the cou^saill of Lio^s.
THEN were instituted the feasts of saint Stephen, Inuocentes, Siluester,
Iho^ Baptist, the Apostles days. Conversion of Paul, our lady days,
Laurence, Michell, Martyne, and generally of all saints, Alhallowday
which was the constitucion of Bonifacius the fourth. For he caused that the
temple which Marcus Agrippa did edify in honor of all the Romans Idolles,
as the name Pantheon does pretend was by the license of Phocas then Emperor
turned into the church of all Hallowes, and consecrated the twelfe day of
May: Gregori changed Alholow day.
and Gregory the fourth afterward willed it too be kept the first day of
November.

Cross days. Corpus Christi day.
THE festes of the inuencion and exaltacion of the cross, and Corpus Christi
day were dedicated by Vrbane the fourth, and denounced for holy days. La^mas
day.
Siluester at the su^e and instance of the Emperou^^ Constantine assigned the
day of ad Vincula sancti Petri called commonly Lammas in memorial of Peter's
pains, persecucion, and punishment that he suffered for the religion. Felix ye
first of purpose to magnify the gloriouse commendacion of Martyrs, Memory of
Martyrs.
made a statute that yearly oblacio^ should be had in memorial of them: and
Gregory would that Mass should be sa^ed over their bodies, which thing
Vigilantius thought worthy to be rejected, and refused, albeit the report
goes that Anacletus was of this co^stitucion the first author. The same Felix
instituted first that the day whereon any temple was dedicated, Dedication
days.
should be hallowed of that village or town, and made also a law that such
churches, Reconsiliacion of Churches.
as men doubted of whether they were consecrated or no, should be hallowed
again. And Felix the fourth did ordain that bishops only should dedicate
them, and that the same dedicacion day should be kept holy yearly afterward.

THE fashion to deifie men that had dooen any benefits to the common wealth,
Deifiyng of ded men or women.
is one of the most ancient vsages, that I read of. For antiquitee even from
the beginning was accustomed to make gods of their kings, which either by
abounda^ce of benefits, or notable qualites, and prowes had wonnen the hearts
of their commons. And specially the Romans did that with great pomp of
circumstaunces: and many obseruaunces as I did declare before in the third
book out of Herodiane. Of them our bishops learned as by a pattern their
rite of canonisyng sanctes, Canonysyng of saints.
and the yearly sacrifices, that Gregory and Felix appoyncted, co^cerned
nothing else but too declare that those Martyrs were saints and of the
household of God. Last of all Alexander the third ordained that no such divine
solemnitee should be given to any man openly without he were canonised, The Pope
must allow saints,
and admitted to be a saint by the bishop of Rome his bulle, because no man should chose himself any private saint, or commit any peculiare
Idolatry.

The.vii. Chapter. Institucion of year days or Obites, and the manner of
Mournyng.
FUNERAL exequies, Diriges or exequies.
that be dooen over ded bodies, were the institucion of Pelagius albeeit
Isidorus ascribes the original of it to the Apostles, and he himself did
augmente the rites, that we use in this time. Ambrose supposes that it
proceaded of the custom of the Hebrews, which lamented Jacob forty days,
and Moses the space of thirty days, for that time is sufficient for the wise
to weep in. It was also ye usage of ancient Romans to mourn: Mournyng.
For Numa Pompilius assigned oblacions to the infernal gods for the ded, and
did inhibite that a child under the age of three years should be bewailed,
Laws of mournyng
and that the elder sort should be mourned no mo months then he had lived
years. But commonly the lo^gest time of a widows mournyng was but ten
months, Ten months was the common time of weddyng.
and if any were married within the space again, it was coumpted a great
reproach, wherefore NVMA ordaygned that such as had mourned up before the day
limited, Expiacion of hastye marriages.
should offer a cow, that was great with calfe for an expiacion.
Nevertheless if that rite were used now a days and namely in England, we
should have small store of veales, there be so many that mary within ye time
prescribed. Plutarch writes that the women in their mournyng laid a part all
purple, Apparel in mournyng.
gold, and sumpteous apparel, and were clothed both they and their kinsfolk in
white apparel, like as the^ the ded body was wrapped in white clothes The
white color was thought fittest for the dedde, White colors for mournyng.
because it is clear, pure, and syncer, and least defiled, and when the time
of their weeping was expired, they put on their other vestures. Of this
ceremony, (as I take it,) the French queen's took occasion, French queen's in
their widowehode wear white clothyng.
after the death of their housebandes the kings too wear only white
clothyng, and if there be any such widdowe, she is commonly called the white
queen. The Jews ended their mournyng after.xxx. days and English men keep
the same rite. Black garments of mournyng.
The mournyng garments for the most part be altogether of black color,
and they use to wear them a whole year continually, unless it be because of
a general triumph or reioysyng, or new magistrate chosyng orels when they
be toward marriage. But the custom of mournyng is no other thing then mere
supersticion, Mournyng is supersticio^ and Hypocrisy.
specially if women or men have a ^ouryng look, and a laughyng heart. For all
such lame^tacio^ helps nothing the dedde corpse or solle of the deceased, and
disquieteth sore the living.

THE manner of washyng ded bodies, and specially of noble men, Washyng dedde
bodies.
and anoyntyng the^, was received of our auncetrie, which used to wash the
bodies of the dedde, and it was the office of them, that were nerest of his
kyndred, to do it. Solle Mass day*
Solle Mass day that is the second day of November was begone by Odilo that
was Prouoste or Provincial of the Monks of Cluniacenses order, Odilo.
upon the occasion that he heard about Aetna the mou^tain of Sicilie oftentimes
great weeping lamentacion, and criyng: which he supposed to be the yellyng of
eiuill spirits, that bewailed because the solles of dedde men were taken from
them by the peticions, and sacrifices of well disposed christen people therefore
he persuaded his coue^te in the time of Ihon bishop of Rome to make a general
obite of all solles the day next after the feast of al saints. About the
year of our lord. M and two our fathers received it as a godly institucio^
full of pitiful charitee: and thus by process of this Monks supposicion,
sprung much vain supersticion.

The.viii. Chapter. Of the seventh day, thirty day, old manner of burial,
hallowyng chalices, priests garments with other things.
HORATIVS the Poet and Seruius write that the Romans used customably ye
nynth day after the burial to renew the sacryfices and solemn rites of the
funeral which they named in latyne Nouemdialis: Nouemdialis.
of this we in our religion have gathered the fashion of keeping the seventh
day with exequies and other ordinary oblacions. Seventh day.
And in England the custom is to keep the thirty day or month mind with
like Obites, Thirty day.
as were dooen on the burial days. Or else it might seem that this keeping of
the seventh day was brought up after the same sort among us, as in marriages
they used in old time to renew their vows the seventh day. Marriage vows
renewed.
For like as that day was the solemn beginning of encreasyng the issue of
mankind, so the same day of burial is or should be the complet finishyng and
end of every thing. Burial is an end of all things.

Massiliens usage at buryalles.


The Massiliens in France passed and spente the days of their burialles, with
private oblacions, and feastyng of their kinsefolke without any manner
lame^tacion or sorrow, which thing the English at this day use commonly to
do. In burials the old rite was that the ^ded corpse was borne before, Rite of
buryalles.
and the people followed after, as one should say, we shall dye and follow
after him, as their last words to the coarse did pretend. For they used too
say, when it was buried on this wise, fare well we come after thee, and of
the following of ye multitude they were called exequies. Fare well we shall come
after.
Albeeit they used at kings, and noble men's funeralles to goo before with
tapers* which custom we keep still.

Chalices of wood.
CHALICES, wherein the blood of Christ is consecrated, were at the first of
wood, and that was the institucio^ of the Apostles, which would prevent all
occasion of auarise in priests: but Zepherinus afterward commanded that they
should consecrate in a vessel of glass. Notwithstanding in process that
custom was broken. Chalices of Glass.
And Gratianus decreed yt they should say Mass and consecrate with chalices
of silver or gold, Chalices of silver or gold
orels if those might not be gotten, in chalices of tynne, albeit some
refer this to Vrbane the first. Sextus the first commanded that the
corporaces should be of linen clothe only and that of the finest, Corporaces.
and purest: and he forbade that any lay manne should handle the hallowed
vessels and namely women were inhibited. The hallowyng of priests vestures,
Hallowyng of clothes of priests.
and altar clothes, with other orname^tes of the church and the diuersitee of
vestures of sundry orders was taken out of the Hebrews priesthod, and used in
our church first by Steven bishop of Rome first of that name. For at the
beginning priests in their massyng used rather inward virtues of solle then
outward apparel of the body, which is rather a gloriouse gase, then any godly
edifiyng. Sabinianus decreed first that the people should be assembled together
to hear service at certain hours of the day by ringyng of belles: Ringyng to
service.
And John the.xxii. ordained that belles should be tolled every day thrice in
ye euenyng, and that then every man should say thrice the Aue maria. Tollyng
the Aue belle. Use of belles came of the Hebrews.


The use of belles came first of the Hebrews, where ye high priest or bishop had
in the skyrtes of his vppermoost vestures little belles to ryng, when he was in
the holy place within ye veil. And even the veil, hangynges, candelsteckes,
with other vessels that we use in the church came also of their ceremonies.
The baners that be hanged abroad in the easter time may be used to declare the
triumph of Christ over death, the devil, and hell, Baners.
and were taken of the heathen, which in their victories did bear baners to
declare and signifye ye conquest of their enemies.

The.ix. Chapter. Of vows, going barefoote, Letanies, praiyng for them that
neese, crossyng the mouth when men yawne.
WHen we be brought into any extreme calamytie, or dau^gerouse adventure, yt
can by no man's power or provision be releued, the urgent necessytie
co^strainyng us, we fall to prayers, and vows making, as when we promise to set
up ca^dels, Vows.
Images of wax, or silver, with other like, supposyng thereby to obtain remedy
of our grief. This custom was borrowed of the Hebrews, Vows came of ye Hebrews
which used to make such vows to God: and diverse other countries of the
Gentiles used ye ryte to their false gods. In like manner going barefoote was
taken up of the Jews fashion: Going barefoote.
which in their sickness and other misfortunes were wo^t to pray
continually.xxx. days, forbear wine, shave their hear, and after go
barefoote to the temple and make oblacion. This manner of vow was so ernestly
used in the time of ye emperor Nero, when Florus was president of Iurye,
Bernice sister of Agrippa.
ye Bernice sister to king Agrippa went her self barefote to the te^pte of
Jerusalem, to obtain some ge^tlenes for her cou^tremen at Florus his hands,
but al in vain, for his avarice was so insatiable yt no lowlines could pacify
it. Even so we in any of our afflictions, sickness or other heuines make vows
to God and his saints, and perform the^ going to ye place barefoote in
se^blable manner as ye Jews did. Supplications.
Supplicacions were ordained in a great earth quake by Mamercus bishop of
Vienne in the time of Leo the first. These be called of ye Greek word
Letanyes, Letanies.
and are commonly named processions, because the people proceed forth a long in
array.ii. and ii. together, and go from place to place praiyng loud. They be
called the less Letanyes. And Agapetus, as it is reported* first appointed
the^ to be song every so^day in or about the church: although it seem by
Tertulians word^s, yt they have be used from the beginning of ye church, and
therefore it may be supposed that Mamercus did only renew ye custom. Afterward
Gregory ordained the great Letanies called septiformis letania, Letania mayor.
ye same time that much people in R. perished through a great plage of
swellyng of the preuy me^bres, which came of a corrupt air, that was poisoned
with adders and snakes, that were cast out of Tyber at a merueilous high tide.

Nesyng.
There was another plage whereby many as they neesed dyed suddenly, whereof it
grew into a custom, that they, that were present when any man neesed should
say, Why we say Christ help.
God help you.

A like deadly plage was sometime in yawnyng, wherefore men used to fence them
selves with the sign of yt cross: Yawnyng.
crossyng of our mouth.
both which customs we reteyne still at this day. In all other extreme
affairs, that we go about we use to sign our selfs with the toke^ of the
cross. And this has been the usage from the beginning of ye church.

The.x. Chapter. Of Images, tithes, and who permitted the Clergy to have
possessions.
AT the first there was no Imagery nor pictures in the churches, but all
occasions of Idolatry were withdrawn according to the commandment of the
old law. Images.
Notwithstanding it crepte in among christans by little and little, and men made
Images of Christ on the cross after the example of Moses which set up yt
brazen serpent, Abagarus.
and Abagarus duke of Edissemans a nation beyond the river Euphrates sent a
Painter to draw the Image of our savior Jesus, but for somuche as he could
not behold the brightness of his face, Christ laid a napkyn on his face,
wherein he by his divine power prynted the rese^blau^ce of his visage, and sent
it by the painter to the duke. A little napkyn was given by him (as it is said)
to a woman, that had the blody flixe, whose name new writers say was Veronica,
Veronica.
and Luke the Evangelist had the Image of Mari the virgyn in a table painted.
And in the sixth counsel had at Constantinople by the commandment of
Constantine and Iustiniane, the second his son, Images were commanded to be
honored
it was decreed that Images should be received into the churches, and
worshypped with great reverence, as a thing whereby the laity might be
instructed, as in stead of scripture, and that encense might be burned, and
tapers lighted before the^. This was about the year of our lord vi.C.xxxii. or
as some take it about the.vii.C.iii. year of our lord, what time Agathus was
bishop of Rome. Afterward Constantine bishop there confirmed that decree, and
caused Images in the church of saint Peter and pronounced Philippe the
emperor an heretic, Philip emperor is proclaimed an heretic.
because he had shaven and scraped away y^ Imagery that was in saint Sophies
temple. Not long after they were ratified and established in the counsel of
Nice where were assembled by the procurement of Hyrene mother of Constantine
the sixth.CCC.l. bishops. Hyrene.
The great prophet of God Moses, and his successor Iosue divided the land of
Canaan among ye Israelites, assignyng no part thereof to the tribe of Leuye,
because they were the lords por^ion saving that he gave the^ habitacions in
every tribe, Tithes.
and a little pasture for their nee^e, sheep, and other cattle. Therefore,
because they m^nistred in the tabernacle of the lord, and executed such
ceremonies, as apperteined to their religion, he appointed for them the first
fruits and tenthes to live on. And after this sort began the paiyng of
tithes by the institucio^ of Moses.

And Origene on the book of Numery affyrmeth that this commandment is to be
observed of us after the letter, Origenes opinion of tithes Homelia.xi.
without any allegory or mistical interpretacion.

And it appears by Christ's words, Luke.ii. Christ allows tithes.
that he allows the litterall sense of the old law, where he says in ye
gospel, woe be unto you Scribes and Pharisees, ye that tithe Mynte and Rue, and
al manner of Herbs, and pass over judgment and ye law of God, these ought to
have been done, and not to leave the other undone, where you may perceive how
that as he commands one, so he would not have the other omitted, that be
signified there literally, Eutichianus, because in the old testament the
first fruits were offered to the lord, ordained that corn should be
consecrated on the alter: as Oil and encense was burned in the Hebrews
Synagoge, and that decree remains still in effect in some places. But so the
priests virtue is so old, and men's devotion waxes so cold, that in stead
of the first fruits, now a days the people use to bring on the sondaies a
few loaves of bread, in some places two or three as they be disposed, Holy
bread.
and those the priest consecrateth, and parts by pieces among the people,
that where as in time past they used to receive the sacrament on those days,
now they eat this bread hallowed in memorial of it. And this they do after the
pattern of Christ, which was ever wo^t to halowe bread before he either eat it
or gave it to his disciples. Other nations also used to offer their first
fruits and tithes, First fruits were offered of diverse countries.
as the Romans offered to Hercules, and Bacchus offered to Jupiter, Mars gave
to Jupiter the tenth of his pray of Lydia. Vrbanus a man of godly living, and
singular learning about the year of our lord.CC.xxii. decred that it was
lawful for priests to receive such rentes or lands, Possessions are
permitted (...) the clergy.
as were given the^: Albeit there was nothing private to any man, but common to
all. And thus by little and little the spiritual possessions were enlarged, and
bishops of Rome were greatly enriched. Lucina an holy maid of Rome made
Marcellus byshyp there, her heir and executour, and afterward Constantine did
largely endowe the same bishop.

Here ends the abrydgement of the syxt book.
The seventh book.
The first Chapter. The beginning of the solytary life of religiouse persons.
THE MATTER has been long in controversy who first began to enhabite
wilderness, for some (as s. Hierome witnesses) that have ransaked ye uttermost,
say that Helias and John Baptist were auctours of the life solytary, but as ye
one was more then a prophet, so the other was above the state and condition of
Monks.

Beginning of religions.
Some assign the original of it to Antony, other refer it to one Paul a
Thebane surnamed Heremite, because he laid the fou^dacion of ye manner of
living solytary. Nevertheless for so much as every man may speak his phantasye
in a thing doubtful, I think ye institucion of this monastical life to have
proceeded of ye Essees, Essees.
a religiouse brotherhod among ye Hebrews, that lived after a greater
perfection then the Monks did in their supersticiouse and pha^tastical
traditions as appears by the.viii. book of Eusebius de preparatione
euangelica.

Of their precedence Antonye, and Paul the Thebane took example of orderyng
the rules and precepts of their religiouse scolars. Albeit, Paul the hermit.
it shall agree of good right to ascribe the oryginal of it to Antony, which,
although he were not the first, yet he did specially encorage the endeavors of
al other to lead that life, and aucthorised the discipline of Monks in Egypt:
And afterward Basilius in Greece, and Hilarion in Syria did much augment and
amplify that purpose. Hilarion.
For this Hilarion a man of great virtue, by calling on the name of Jesus,
healed at the city of Gaza the sons of a noble woman, whereupon the brute of
him was so noysed that many out of Syria and Egypt repaired unto him, and he
founded abbeys in Palestine, and instructed the^ with rules of living. Antony^s
perfection.
As for Antony he lived in the wilderness of Thebais in Egypt, and builded there
an abbeye, where he him self, with Sarmatas, Amatas, and Macarius his disciples
lived in so ernest contemplacion and prayer* Disciples of Antony.
that they lived only with bread and water: his holiness was such, that
Helena, mother of Constantine did commend her self and her son to his
prayers, He dyed in the wyldernes, when he was an C.v. years old, Antony lived
an C.v. year.
the year of our salvation.CCC.lxi. his disciples Amatas and Macharius
increased much the religion after his death, and Sarmatas was slain by the
Saracenes. Religion has grown to supersticion.
The institucion of this state of living came I grant of a good zeele to
godlynes, but the devil peruerter of all good things did so empoysone the
hearts of them, that followed, that they had more trust in their works, then
faith in Christ's blod, and then every man began new rules of works to be
their own saviors, and went so supersticiousely to work, that al was out of
rule and abominable in the sight of God.

The.ii. Chapter. The division of monastical life into sundry sec^^s and
^actions.
Benet,
AN hundredth.lxvi. year after ye death of Antony, Benet an Italia^ borne at
Nursie in Vmbria, when he had lived long in solitarines, resorted to a city of
Italy named Sublaque a city of the Latins forty miles from Rome. And
forbecause he was greatly delited with wyldernes, and also the people preased
there much to see and hear his preachynges, he departed thence to Cassine.
And in ye time of John the first about ye year of our lord.CCCCC, Benet builded
an abbay at Cassinum.
xxiiii. he builded there an abbey and assembled the Monks that were dispersed
alone in diverse places, into one couente, and ordered them with instructions
of manners, and rules of living confyrmed with three vows, that is chastitee,
wylfull poverty, and obedience, because they should al together mortify their
own will and lusts.

These three forenamed vows Basilius bishop of Gesaria did first institute and
publishe in the year of our lord.CCC.lxxxiii. Three vows Basilius ordained.
And also assign the year of probacion or trial, that religiouse persons had
before they were professed. The year of probacion.


The order of Cluniace^ses were ordained by one Odon an abbotte at Masticense,
a village of Burgundy, Cluniace^ses*
And William duke of Aquitany gave them on house, the year of our lord.
ixC.xvi. in the time of Sergius the third. Not long after the religion of
Camaldimenses was bego^ne by Romoaldus of Rauenna in the mount Apenninus,
Camaldimenses.
the year of our lord.viii.C.l. they kept perpetual silence, every wednesday
and friday they fast bread and water, they go barefoote, and lie on the ground.
In a part of the same mountain called Vallis Vmbrosa or the shadowed valey in
ye year of Christ's incarnacion M lx. under Gregory ye vi. John Gualbert
began a new sect of Monks, Shadowed valle order.
and named the^ of the place where the abbey stood, the shadowed valie order.
The Monks of Oliuere sprung up as a fruit of discord the same year that the
variance was among the three bishops, Monks of Oliuere.
and were instituted by Barnardus Ptolomeus ye year of Christ M.cccc.vii. under
Gregory the.xii. The faction of Grandimontensers began by Steven of Auerne in
Aquitany or Guyen the year of our lord.M.lxxvi. under Alexander the second,
Grandimontensers.
and had their title of ye mountain where their abbey stood. A little after ye
same time Robert abbot of Molisme, in Cistercium a Forest of Burgundy did
institute ye order of Cistercians, Cistercians order.
albeit some ascrib this to one Ordingus a Monk, that persuaded Robert to the
same, above the year of our lord: M.xcviii. under Vrbane the second: Of this
religion was the great clerk s. Barnarde. Almost an.C. year after this in ye
year of our lord.M.C.lxvi. The order of Humiliates was divised by certain
persons exiled by Fredericus Barbarussa, which, Humiliates.
when they were restored to their country, apparelled the selfs in white, and
lived by a kind of vow, in prayers, penury, and workyng wulle, and were
admitted by Innocentius the third, and other his successors. Celestines were
founded by Celestinus the fyfte of that name bishop of Rome in the year of our
lord.M.C.xcviii. Celestines.
In England saint Gylbert at Tyrington, and Sempringham began an order called
after him Gylbertines in the time of Eugenius the fourth, Gilbertines.
the year of Christ's incarnacion. Mcxlviii.

The Iustinianes were invented by Justinians.
Jews Barbus a religiouse man of Venice. In the abbey of saint Iustine at
Padway, the year of our salvation.M.CCCC.xii. in the days of John the.xxiii.

There were also orders of Nu^nes divised after the same rules of supersticion,
Nuns.
as the other be.

The.iii. Chapter. Of the Hierominians, Chanons, Chatterhouse Monks, White
frears, Crouchefryes with other.
HIERONIMIANS had their beginning of s. Hierome, Hieronimians.
which leauyng his natyue country went into Jury, and there not far from
Bethlehem builded him an house where he lived very devoutly the latter end of
his life, in the time of Innocentius the.vii. The year of our lord.M.CCCC.v.
After his example other counterfetted a resemblant of perfeccion namyng the^
selves Hieronimians, wearyng their cloothes of white, and a coope playted above
over their coat girde with a leather gyrdel.

There were also certain Heremites called Hierominians of the foundation of
one Charles Grauel of Florence, Heremites Hicronimia^s
which made him self an Hermit of the same religion in the mountains of
Fessulus: other there be, yt say one Redo earl of mount Granel did institute
them in Fessulus in the time of Gregorye the.xii. Yet there be, that say that
the original of this brotherhod was instituted of Hierom in deserte, and that
Eusebius of Cremona with other devout and holy men, Eusebius Cremone^ris.
which kept conversation with him did enlarge and augment the family of that
profession.

As concerning the Channons reguler, there be two opinions: Cha^non reguler.
for some say that Austen by and by after he was created bishop brought his
Cha^nons in this rule and form of living, wherein they have been so long
trained and noseled up: other some brag and make their vaunt, that it was
devised of the Apostles, and of this opinion was Thomas of Aquine But howsoever
the matter go: Austen was doubtless either the inuentour of the sect, or renewer
of it, and therefore may be iustlye taken for an autoure of that faction, and
so was he likewise of Augustines Hermites. The Chanons clothyng was a white
cote, Chanons apparel.
and a linnyn rochet under a black coape with a scapuler to cover their head
and shoulders: Hermites Augustines.
The Hermites have a contrary vesture, a black coat with alike scapuler and
another coat of white, and a lether gyrdle. Of these there be diverse orders.
As ye order of s. Savior of the scopettines, The order of Chanons or Hermites.
Scopettines.
which were ordained by one Steven and James two men of Senes in the time of
Vrbane the.v. the year of Christ.M.ccc.lxx. and Gregory the.xi. by his consent
confirmed the^ in their hypocrisy

The Frisonaries is another brood which began among the Hetrurians in the
county of Luces, Frisonaries.
that is other wise called lateraneuse, by the divise of James Britiane in ye
time of Iho^ the.xxiiii. the year of Christ.M.cccc.xii. and they were amplified
and increased by Eugenius the.iiii. The.iii. order is titled ye brethred of s.
Gregory, Brethren of saint Gregory de Alga
de Alga, this was ordained at Venece by Laurence Justinian in the time of
Innocencius the.vii. ye year of our lord. M, cccc.vii. with diverse other orders
which forsomuche as they rise suddenly like toad stoles in a rain, I will omit
the^. Bruno of Colen, ye red sometime the philosophi lecture at Paris did
institute the Charterhouse monks in the diocese of Gracianopolis, Charterhous
monks.
at a place named Cartusia in the year of our lord.M.lxxx. under Gregorye
the.vii. their life was outwardly full of painted holiness, in forbering flesh
fasting bread and water eueri friday, full of solitarines, much silence, ever
pinned in, and women were banished out of the house, with other semblable
ceremonies. The Carmelites or white friars were, Carm^lites.
as some say begone in mount Carmelus after the example of Helias ye prophet,
which lived their long solitary, they were first assembled together by Almericus
B. of Antioch, ye year of our lord.M.clxx. in ye time of Alexander the.iii. and
they were so called our Lady friars of a chapel of our lady yt was in ye hill
Carmelus. Nevertheless upon.cccc. years after in the time of Innocentius the
third they were reformed by Albartus bishop of Jerusalem, Carm^lites clothyng
is changed.
according to the rule of Basilius, and the colowre of their coape was turned
into white by Honorius the third where before it was russet.

The order of Pemo^stratenses was instituted in the diocese of Laudune by
Northbergus a priest, Piemonstratenses.
and the precepts of that covent were gathered out of s. Austens rules, and
admitted for good by Calixtus the second, in the year of our lord.M.C.xx.

The Crouch or cross Friars began about the year of our lord.M.cc.xv. by the
divise of Cyriacus bishop of Jerusalem, Crochfriers.
which showed Helene mother of Constantine where ye cross lay hyd: And in
memorial of ye cross, he caused this brotherhod and college of Friars to
bear the cross, And yet they never knew what ye cross weied in their bodies
or in their hearts, and forsomuche as they were sore wasted Innocentius
the.iii. renewed the religion.

The.iiii. Chapter. Black, and Gray friars, the Trinite order, Brigidians,
Iesuates, new Hermites and Bonhomes.
ABOVTE the time of Innocentius the third arose two famous founders of two
supersticious sects, Dominicke. Fraunces.
I mean Dominicke the Spaniarde, and Frauncis the Italian, of the country of
Vmbria.

Dominicke at the first was a Chanon, Friars Dominickes.
but because he could not suffer to have a superior, and was also weary of the
cloister, he invented a new fraternite named Dominicans, black Friars, or
Friars preachers, because they had the charge to preach ye Gospel, without
mixture of any pharisaical leaven. The new guyse of their vesture made
innocente Innocentius to wonder.

But Honorius the.iii. by his bulle honorably admytted them, Dominicke is
canonised.
the year of our lord.M.CC.xx. and Gregory the ninth put the matter out of
all doubt canonised Dominicke, and by his bulle under lead allowed him for a
saint.

Frauncesse, Fraunces.
that was first of ye friars Austens, thinkyng that sect not to be
sufficiently furnished with hypocrisy, began a new trade of living in the
mount Appoeninus in a place named commonly Iauerna doubtless a ground worthy
for such a fou^dacion, as was beside the word of God, it was set up in the
time of Honorius aforesaid. They were named Minores of the humility and
lowlynes of heart that they should have, Minorites.
but that was smally regarded and furthest from their study. Two years after,
yt was the year of our Lord.M.CC.xxix. Frauncisse was sanctified by Gregory,
Frauncisse is made a saint
and made a saint, Fraunciscanes afterward fell at co^tencion for the rules of
their profession. They that failed somewhat of ye imperfect perfection of
them, retained the name of Minorites still, the other titled them selves
obseruauntes more worthy to be called obstinate.

Obserua^tes.
The latter fellows were brought into England by king Edward the iiii. and
were greatly enhaunced by the famous prince king Henry the.vii.

Clara.
At the same time was Clara the Vyrgyn, country woman to sayncte Frauncisse,
which was a great foundresse of Nuns of ye same rule that Frauncesse gave
his covent: of them spro^g the basterde penitencers in the days of John
the.xxii. and the year of our lord.M.CCC.xv. Penitencers.


The order of the Trinite under the said Innocentius was begone by John Marta,
Order of the Trinite.
and Felyx Anachorita in France, in the country of Meldine. Then also was
founded, or else not long after in the time of Martin the fourth the brotherhod
of Mayres servants by one Philip of Florencia a Phisician, and Benedicte
the.xi confirmed it in the year of our Lord M.CCC.lxxxv.

The order of Brigidians was instituted by Brigidia a wyddowe, Brigidians.
that was princess of Sueta under Vrbane the.v. in the year of our
Lord.M.ccc.lxx. it was as well of men as women, albeit they dwelled severally
by them selves. Jesuits.
The family of Jesuits was the inue^cion of Johannes Colu^binus in the city
of Senes in the time of the same Vrbane, the year of our lord.M.ccc.lxviii.
they were no priests nor consecrated persons, but were men of the lay sort
given and addicted to prayers, and had the name of Jesuits because the name of
Jesus should be often in their mouth, they be much like to our bedemen in
England.

New hermytes.
The sect of new Hermites began in Vrbine a city in Italy in the country of
Vmbria, where Polidor Vergile was borne, and was the devise of one Petrus an
Hetruriane, and they had in the same city a goodly hospital or guylde hal.

Bonhomes.
The Bonhomes were instituted in England by Edmunde son of Rychard earl of
Cornewel, which was brother to Henry the.iii. and was elected king of the
Romans, and heir apparent to the Empire by the princes electours about the
year of our Lord.M.CC.lvii. The special head place of that religion was
Astrige, where the noble king Henry the.viii. has now a goodly Palace. This
Edmund brought the blood of our savior, as it was said into the realm

The.v. Chapter. The original of sacred knights and white sect.
WHILST the city of Jerusalem, before our christenmen had conquered it in ye
year of our lord.M.xcix. was in subieccion to the Sarace^s, Grauekepers or
sepulcher knights.
the Latin christians, that lived there tributaries, purchased a license to
build nere unto the holy sepulcher dwelling houses, and among other they made
an hospital of our lady to receive the strange pilgrims, and appoincted a
provost to entertain the^ This was in Siluester the first his time, the year of
our Lord.ccc.xiiii. and renewed the year of Chrst.M.ccc xcvii. in the time of
Celestine the.iii. bishop of Rome.

After the pattern of this house was devised a like house of virgyns in me
mortal of Mari Magdalen, Magdalene systers.
to receive the women that resorted thither. It began in the.ii. Vrbanes
days, the year of our Lord.M.lxxxxix. Notwithstanding because the multitude
of latin pilgrims waxed very great they builded three hospitals of s. Iho^
Baptiste, as some say, albeit, some think it was of John Eleemosinarius, that
was the patriarch of Alexandria in the reign of the emperor Phoca. This sect
one Gerardus adourned with a white cross in a black vesture: grand captain of
these knights was Ramundus, Ramundus.
when Clement the.v. had the sea of Rome, about the year of our Lord.M.ccc.x.
yet some affirm that the beginning of them was in the.iii. Alexanders days,
the year of Christ.M.c.lxxix. and they be called of ye order of s. John,
Knights of the Rhodes.
or knights of the Rhodes, because they wa^ne the Rhodes from the Turks,
which afterward they lost again in January, in the year of our
salvation.M.CCCCC.xxiii. albeit, they did long defend it manfully.

The templers order was begone in Gelacius the.ii. his days, Templer knights.
in the year of Christ's incarnacion.M.C.xxviii. by Hugo Paganus, and Gaufradus
de sancto Alexandro: they were named templers, because they kept in a part of
the buyldynges near to the temple, they kept Barnardus rule in their living.
But Clement the.v. deposed the^ partly for that they renou^ced the faith, and
conspired with the Turks, and partly forother notable crimes

The order of Tentonickes or dutch Lords began in Jerusalem by a Dutche
manne whose name is not known: Duch lords.
Their office was to fight against the enemies of Christ's cross, it began in
the days of Clement the third, the year of Christ's incarnacion.M.C.xc. Petrus
Fardinandus a Spaniarde began the order of saint James knights, Knights of
saint James
that lived after s. Austens rule, under Alexander ye.iii. and in the year of
our lord.M.c.lx.iii the same bishops days.

Sa^ctius a king ordained the factions of Calatrauean knights, which professed
the rule of ye Cisterciences. Calatrauean knights.
Of the same profession be they of the order of Jesus Christ's knights,
Knights of Jesus Christ.
which were instituted by John the xxii. bishop of that name in Portingale to
resist the Saracens.

Alexandrians brotherhod of knights in the realm of Castle, Alcantarian
knights.
yt begone in Gregory's time the.ix. about the year of our salvation
M.CC.xl. but who was auctor of the^ is uncertain. James king of Aragonia did
found ii. sects of knights, one named of s. Mari, Knights of saint Mari de
Mercede Mountesia^s
de Mercede of those the office was to raunsom such as were taken prisoners in
wars against the Turks: The other sect is called Montasian knights, and
they were a red cross, both these orders Gregory the xi. did allow the year
of our lord.M.

Minimes.
The order of Minimes or lest brethren were founded by one Franciscus Paula a
Silician after the example of Frauncisse his Mmorites.

Apostolic br^thren.
The Apostolic brethren began in the year of our lord.M.cclx. by the
institucion of Gerardus Sagarelus in the town named Perma in Lo^bardie in the
time of Alexander the fourth.

White sect.
The whyt sect sprung up in the Alps, and descended into Italye having apriest
for their captayn. But Bonifacius perceiuyng they should do no good to his
honorable estate if they continued, caused their captain to be headed at
Viterbium, as attainted of some heresy, the year of our lord.M.cccc. They were
a great number, and did no other thing but lament the state of ma^kynd, and
bewail the sins of the people. Theren as of this fashion both men and women,
and were called the whit sect, because they wear white clothyng.

The.vi. Chapter. The Ninevites, Assirians, Antonians, and Ceretanes.
NO less supersticion is in the fraternite of the Ninevites, Ninevites.
although they auaunce the^ selves to have received their manner of living of ye
Apostles: for the end of their doings is to work their own salvation by
deeds satisfactory to God, where in deed they derogate the effect and power of
Christ's blod. The rites be specified with outward holiness: Rites of Ninevites.
as often asse^blyng to prayer hiryng of chauntry priests supportyng poverty,
and be clothed in sackcloth and scourge one another with whippes. Of this painted
penance they call them selves Ninevites, as though they appeaced Gods wrath
in the same wise, as they of Niniuie did, where in deed they had hearty
co^tricion for their offenses, these have but pretenced holiness and penitence:
they began under Clement the.iiii. the year of our lord a thousand two
hundredth threscore and five.

The manner of their whyppyng came of the Romayne sacrifices and Lupercalia,
Whippyng whence it came Lupercalia
whereof I spoke before, for they used the same custom of a supersticious
opinion: Or if a man would be curious in boultyng out the original of their
beatyng, it may appear to have proceeded of an obseruau^ce of the Egyptiens.
For ye usage was there, An usage of the Egiptia^s
that whilst they offered a cow with many ceremonies to their great Idol, as
Herodotus witnesses during ye burning thereof, they should, one beat another
miserably with wandes or rods. The title of their fraternity came of the
Romans, which had diverse felowshyppes as Sodales Titii, Fraternities.
and Fratres Aruales that sacrificed to Ceres Goddess of corn. Another sort
there is not only idle, but also theuishe, and they be called Assirians, the
same that we name commonly Egyptians: Assirians.
These, as all men have heard, Egyptians.
and many have by experience proved, be so light fyngered, and such rigbies
children, that they will find two things, before they lose one.

The men by such pyllery, theft, and plain stealyng, and women by
palmestrye, blessings, Crafts of ye Egytians.
with like other sorcery, and wytchecrafte furnished with lies, seduce and
deceive a great number of simple people in every country and region.

And because they should have more liberty to speed their purposes, The
Egyptians excuse.
they say, it is their vow, and penance is given them to go in continual
pilgremage. Fie on that pylgremage, that is mayntayned by pickyng, and
redoundeth to the profit of none, but to the extreme loss of many as well
countries as men.

The occasion that these vacabundes stray thus abroad came of an old Idol that
they worshypped in their Paganism named the goddess of Siria: Goddess of
Siria.

Libro.viii. de asmo aureo.


wherewith they used to gadde from place to place to beg monye, wine, milk,
chese, corn, and other stuff as Apuleius writes.

The same people now they be christened, play their parts in like manner with
sundry subtilties: and that they get by liyng, pickyng, stealyng, brybyng, they
make monye of, and so return home laughyng to scorn all those simple persons,
that they have thus deceived.

Seeing all other supersticions be abolished and roted up, it is pity that this
should take still effect, and be unpunished. The Antonians were a counterfect of
Antonies perfection, Antonians
but they differ as much from his holiness as white from black, they have a
The token of Antonians.
on their breast, that meneth Toll, teaching them to take what they can get be
it cow, ox, calfe, or pigge, for they offer swyne to him, as they did
sacrifice sheep to Bell in Babylon, they were instituted in the year of
Christ.CCC.xxiiii.

Ceretanes.
The Ceretanes began in Ceretum a city of Vmbria, and ever they used to go a
beggyng at the latter end of harvest when the barnes were stuffed with corn, and
so like drones devour that that other have gotten with the swet of their brows.

Of these valiant beggars there be in every place mo then a great meny:
Ceretanes play in somer and beg in winter.
but I cannot tell what time they were instituted, and how sone they be put
down it skylleth not.

The.vii. Chapter. The original of Mahometes sect^.
OF all these superstic^ouse sects before rehearsed there is not one so
diabolical, as the sect of Mahometanes as well for the filthiness of al
unlawful lusts, Mahometanes.
as other outrageouse naughtiness, that they occupy daily, to the great
endomagyng of christendom, and increase of their own infidelite

OF this vnreuerent religion, Mahomete.
Mahomete a noble manne, borne in Arabie, or as some report in Persie was
authoure: and his father was an Heathen Idolater, and his mother an Ismaelite,
wherefore she had more perceueraunce of ye Hebrews law. This wicked plant
brought up and fostered under his parents, and enstructed like a mungrel in
either of their laws: be came expert, and of a ready wit: And after the
death of his father and mother, he was in household with one Abdemonaples an
Ismaelite, Abdemonaples.
which put him in trust with his marchandice, and other affairs, and after
his decease he married his mastresse a widdowe. There he fell in acquaintance
with the Monk Sergius an heretic of Nestors sect, Sergius.
that fled from Byzans into Arabie: and by his counsel and advise this
Mahomete about the year of our Lord six hundred and twenty, and the.xii
year of the reign of the Emperor Heraclius began in Arabie to found a new
sect, Mahomete preached sediciously.
and by sedicious sermons seduced much people and many countries. He conquered
by help of the Arabians diverse lands, and subdued them as tributories, and
compelled them too live after the tradicion of his laws, that he gathered out
of the new, and old Testamentes, and diverse heresies of Nicolaires,
Maniches, and Sabellians. He died the forty year of his age, When Mahomete
died.
and his body was carried by the Saracenes into a city of Persia called Mecha,
Mecha. Caliphas.
and laid in a coffyne of Iron. Caliphas succeeded Mahomete but he was deposed
for his supersticio^, and another of the same name was substituted in his
room. Homar.
Homar was the third, Homar wan Jerusalem*
that reigned and he after the conquest of the Persians, wanne Jerusalem, and
all Siria, the year of our Lord fi^e hundred and fourscore in the time of
Agatho bishop of Rome and Constantyne the fourth Emperor. This sect waxes
daily bigger and bigger, partly through the discord of Christen princes, and
partly by reason of our sinful living, y^ daily grows to greater enormities,
that deserve the heavy hand of GOD over us.

Here ends the abridgemente of the seventh book.
The eight book.
The first Chapter. Of Relics, stacions, the year of Jubilee, Pardons.
NOT LONG after the martyrdom of Peter and Paul, Relics.
both many, and that of diverse sorts as well men as women (...) the example
of their consta^cie, were encoraged to suffer sundery kinds of torments in
several parts of ye world for the mainteignance of Christ his religion. Many
bishopes of Rome suffered mar^tyrdome.
But namely in Rome much murder of innocente bloudde was committed of
tyrants by many manner of punishementes, and a great number died in Chrstes
cause, among other certain bishops to the soume of thirty and two were slain
by extreme persecusion, unless it were seven of them, which by death were
prevented before they attaigned the croune of Martyrs. Therefore considering
that much martyrs blood was spente, and that specially in Rome and many from
other places were co^ueighed thither, Cletus and Anacletus bishops there did
seriously go about to reverence them. For the one appoin^ted a place, Martyrs
were severally buried.
where Martyrs should severally have their sepultures aparte from the lay
people, and the other by degree denounced him accursed as a sacrilege, that by
word or deed hyndered men's devotion from visityng the toumbes of the
Apostles. Upon this occasion Calistus the first builded beyond Tyber a
church in honor of our Lady, Churches of our Lady.
and Constanstyne Emperor edified to Peter, Paul, and Laurence temples This
matter was by Gregory the saint set forward to the increase of
supersticious devotion: Peter's church.
For he appoyncted these Letanies of saints with Ora pro nobis too be songen
with Masses on certain solemn days in the chief temples of the city
promisyng them* Letanies.
that repaired thither at such solemn feasts clean remission of sins by
his pardone. And he named the pompouse sacrifices stacio^s because they were
celebrated on certain days limited and prescribed by statute. Stacions
. Bonifacius the eight in the year of our Lord a thousand three hundred,
appoyncted the year of Iubile, or grace, to be kept every hundred year with
clean remission A pena and culpa to all them that visited the temples of the
Apostelles Peter and Paul. Iubile every hundred year.
And this was taken up of the example of the Hebrews, albeet they did keep it
every.l. years or else as some think be assigned the years according to the
old feasts of Apollo and Diana which the Romans Heathen solemnised every
hundred year, and of that they were called Ludiseculares. About fifty years
after. Ludiseculares.
Clemente the sixte decreed that it should be celebrated every fifty years as
the Hebrews rite was, Iubile at fifti years.
because no man was able to attain the old iubile of an hundred years. Last
of all Sextus the fourth restraygned the year of grace to the xxv. year, Iubile
at.xxv years.
and he himself kept it at that day, which was in the year of Gods grace
showed by his son Jesus Christ too the world a thousand four hundred
three score and fiftene. Pardons.
About the same time Pardons were very ^ief, and much used but who was the
first authoure of them I have not read in any writer, saving that saint
Gregory (as I said a fore) proclaimed Pardons as a reward for them, Pardons
were profitable to the purse.
that came too his Stacions. This seed sown by Gregory grew too a ripe
harvest in the time of Bonifacius the.ix. which reaped much money for ye
chafe. After this Alexander the sixte that was in the year of our Lord a
thousand five hundred assinged the Iubilee and Stacions to be had insundery
provinces and countrees, Iubylee was sent into all countrees for money.
to the intent that less thro^g of people and more thrifte of money might come
to Rome, and so the people should only lose their money and save their labor.
Moses was first author of the Iubilee
But Moses was the first authoure of the Iubilee, as appears by Josephus in
the old Testament.

The second Chapter. The bishop of Romes titles Collages of Scribes, sealyng
Bulls with Lead, Annates,
Titles of the Bishops of Rome.
FOR somuche as nothing is so decent for a priest as gentleness nothing so
fit as lolinesse, nothing more comely the^ humblenes according to ye saying of
our savior, learn of me for I am meke and loly in heart, nor nothing more
against their order then pride and arrogauncie: Diuus Gregorius.

Seruus seruoru^ dei.


Gregory the saint, bishop of Rome named himself seruus seruoru^ dei, which
thing he did not only usurp in title but also express in deed. This name
and preface was received and used of his successoures, but his hertie meekness
was refused, as a thing that diminished their pontifical estate. Cle^us added
to salute^ and Apostolicam benedictionem, Salutem and Apostolicam benedictionem.
as a salutacion condign and apperteinyng to the virtue and godliness and a
resembla^t to Christ's gretyng, which was peace be with you, Christ's
gretyng.
or of the Hebrews, that used too say in their metynges peace be with thee:
The Hebrews salutyng.
And this all our bishops have reserved to them selfs as a peculiar^
salutyng.

Scribes.
AS concerning the Scribes, that used to write the letters Apostolical where
before time they were wont to write for nothing, or else asked very little, Ihon
the.xxii. desirouse too increase and enlarge his substance founded a co^lage
of Scribes that should write and endite letters of their own devise, and do
other offices, Collage of Scribes.
but they must be chosen out of his own clearkes, and must pay and be
dismissed of money, before they could be admitted to ye room. He did also
institute the tax or subsidy, yt they pay, Taxes of ben^fites.
which have benefits of his gift and presentacion. All such things, as
belong to the Apostolical penetencers, Penitencers.
Benet the.xii. divised first, Price of all wryttes.
and determined the price of al writtes and bulls The custom of sealyng the
bishop of Romes bulls with led was taken up by Stephen the third and Hadrian
the first to the intent they should endure longer, Bulls sealed with lead.
where before time the usage was to sele in wax with a ring. And this was the
year of our Lord vii.c.lxxii. at which time Hadriane was bishop before those
days I find no mention of sealyng with lead, as before Carolus Magnus none of
the Roman Empiroures sealed letters with gold. Carolus magnus sealed first with
gold Breuiatours
Pius the second did create Breuiatours, and set the^ in an order, which Paul
deposed, but Sextus afterward renewed the room, as commodious for the purse:
and also instituted the new collage of Solicitours and proctors, Solicitours.
by whose counsel and advise all bulls and grauntes were made and ratified.
He also ordained i^. Notaries of the treasure Apostolical, Notaries.
and assigned to every of them certain fees and profettes, that he might have
spedy vtteraunce of the roumes Innocencius that succeeded next Sextus divised ye
collage of Secretaries, and Alexander the sixth increased the number of writers
of his Breefes to the sum of four score and above. Collage of secretaries.


Somoners.
THE Somoners, and catchpolles that were hangers on to those breuiators were by
Nicolaus the third put out of office, least all the poor sheep should be
^leied to the quick. But all this riffe raffe filled not so much the popes
cofers in seven years as his Annates did in one. Annates.
Annates he calls the yearly revenues or half part of the fruits of a
benefice or spiritual promocion, that he received of the new Incumbentes.
These began first at his own benefices whereof he was patron, and Clement
the.v. generally decreed it, A general decree of Annates.
in ye year of our lord.M.CCC and v. Bonifacius the ix. and Ihon the.xxii.
renewed the decree for fear of forgettyng because it helps much the purse.

The third Chapter. Of the sect of Symoniakes, Heretics, Schisms.
PHILIPPE the deacon, what time he had by his preaching converted them of
Samaria to Christ's religion, among many other he turned one Simon a Magicien
and incha^ter, and baptized him. Simon Magus.
In short space after, Peter and Ihon were sent thither to confirm the^ in the
faith by gyuyng them the holy Ghooste through laiyng on of hands, this
Simon perceiuyng the feat of Peter that he could by laiyng on of hands give
the holy ghost, Simo^ proffered monei for too have power too give the holy ghost
proffered to give a large sum of money too have that power taught him, whereas
he should rather have obtained it by faith and godliness. Peter moved at those
words, with anger said, the money shall turn to thy destruccio^, because thou
supposedest the gifts of God to be boughte with money, neither shalt thou
have one porcio^ or doale of this charge, for thy heart is not upright before
God. Thus rejected of his suit he became a great enemy to Peter, and in Rome
seduced by his magike much people in so much that he was taken, and proclaimed
by Nero his charter a god with this title, Simon was made a God.
Simon deus sanctus. But Peter with the sword of Gods word, after long
conflicte of words, and contencion of miracles, between the Capitoly or
counsel chamber and the Mount Auentine caused that, as he was by his
Magical exorcismes lifted up, and fliyng in the air, Simo^ did fly in the
air.

Symo^ brake his leg.


he had such a fall, that he brake his leg and it cost him his life in
Aretia, where he lay at surgery for the healyng of his leg. Of him al, that
buie or sell the gifts of the holy ghost, and say the world was not of the
creacion of God, but proceeded of a power above, were named Simoniakes,
Simoniakes
and so we call them that bie or sell benefices and spiritual promocions,
which thing (although it be often used) is plainly forboden by the
scriptures. Next Simon succeeded his disciple Menander a Samarytane borne,
Menander. Samaritanus
which called himself a savior sent from heaven to preserve and save men,
and promised them* (...) received his baptism should live immortally, he did
more harm, and perverted more then his master Simon had done. In the same time
the heresy of the Nicolayans began, Nicolaians.
which taught that wifes should be used in common as the Anabaptists do
now at this time. Then also Corinthus enterprised to mixte the new law with
the old, Corinthus.
affirmyng that circumcision ought too be observed and kept, and that after
the resurreccion men should live a thousand years in carnal lusts and
pleasures. Hebion. Iho^ did write his Gospel against Hebio^
At those days Hebion his heresy broke out, which said that Christ was
not before his mother, against this fellow Ihon wrote his Gospel last of all
the Evangelists. About that time were other diverse heretics, Basilides.
as Basilides that affirms there were two beginnings or principal causes of
things contrary, and his scholar Marchion a Stoicien, Marchion.
that denied Christ to be the son of GOD, Valencianus
and Valenciane, that said Christ took no flesh of the virgins body, but
passed through her, as it were through a pipe or condute, Montanus.
the^ also Montanus named him self, the comforter or holy ghost. Apelles was
then also, Apelles.
which said Christ was but a fantasy in the sight of men, Sabellius.
and Sabellius, that said the father, the son, and the holy ghost were but one
person, and Paulus Samosatenus, Paulus Samosatenus.
which denied the two natures to be in Christ, and that he began but of
his mother, and that she had after him mo children by Iosephe. And thus began
heretics first to spryng up. As for Schisms, which sprung of such heresies
and erroneous opinions, Schisms.
Nouatianus
Nouatianus a priest of Rome was authoure of the first in the year of our
Lord two hundred fifty and five in the time of Cornelius bishop of Rome:
Mundi.
he named his disciples Mundi that is pure and clean, and offe^ders he
affirmed that they ought not to be admitted, but rejected although they were
penitente for their sins: which openio^ the Anabaptists now maintain. He
was condemned ^i Cornelius bishop of Rome as an heretic with all his
adherentes. About four score years after in the reign of Constantine the
great Arrius a priest of Alexandria was the beginner of a sect and schism
that denied the son too be of the substance of GOD the father, Arrius.
but this was conuicte in the counsel of Nicene, albeet not extincted. A
Schism,


THE third Schism was when Damasus was bishop of Rome, where in they contended
not only with voices and words: but also with violence and weapons, by
reason of the ambicion of the bishops there assembled. Schism of a later
time.
Other Schisms have spro^gen in our time to the great disquietnes and
confusion of Christen religion, and destruction of common welthes, wh^che I
pray God may be redressed and stayed to the honor of him, to the
confirmacio^ of ye faithful, to the subuersio^ of hipocrisy, to the
auannceme^t of Gods word, too the mitigatyng of the trouble of poblike
weals, too the establishement of perpetual unity of heart, and continual
peace, all discencion and war extinguished.

The.iiii. Chapter. When the first general counsel was kept, and which
were allowed by the fathers.
Counsels.
THE custom of assembling cou^selles, to take deliberacio^ of things
doubtefull, or matters seriouse, is of a great ancientie as well among the
Hebrews, as other nations: And by such a manner counsel was Matthias
surrogated and substituted in the stead of Judas, Matthias elected by a
counsel.
into the number of the Apostelles. And by a counsel holden at Jerusalem the
Apostles discharged the Gentyles of Moses law. Cornelius called the first
counsel.
Cornelius was the first, as plainly appears, that called to gether any
counsel and that was in Rome of six hundred bishops, as many priests,
with a great multitude of deacons, In this counsel the heresy of the
Nouatianes was co^uicted, and at the same time satte also a counsel at Carthage
where saint Cypriane was bishop. Counsel of Cartage.
Eusebius writes also that once in the days of Dionisius, and likewise in ye
time of Felix, the fathers somoned another counsel at Antioche to condemn
Paul Samosatene, Counsel of Antioche.
which denied the two natures of Christ, as is aforesaid.

FIVE other counsels were celebrated in the reign of Constantine the
Emperor, Counsel of Nicea.
and al were in Greece one at Nicea a city of Bithine, where were gathered three
hundredth and.xviii. bishops to confu^e Arrius and his secre. This was the
year of Christ three hundredth twenty and four, the same time that Siluester ye
first was bishop of Rome.

THE second was at Constatinople, Counsel at Co^sta^tinople
when Damasus was bishop of Rome, wherein Macedonius and Eudoxus were
condemned because they did deny the holy ghost to be God.

HHE third was at Ephesus Celestyne the first, Counsel at Ephesus.
then occupiyng the sea of Rome. There was Nestor his heresy abholished, that
said Mari the virgyne was mother of Christ a man, but not as he was of God, and
that the person of the God head and his manhod were.ii. sundry persons.

Counsel at Chalcedonie.
THE fourth was at Chalcedonie under Leo the first, where Entiches an heretic
was improued: these.iiii. saint Gregorye thought worthy to be admitted and
allowed to the establishyng of our religion.

THE.v. was sole^nely kept at Byzance at the commandment of Vigilius bishop
of Rome: Counsel at Byzance.
and in this was Theodorus reasoned with, which affirmed that Marie did bear
only a man and not God and man: For that cause the counsel there, then
decreed that Christ's mother should be called Theotocos or Deipara that is
bearer of God, Deipara.
and the acts of this counsel were received by Gregorye.

THE sixte counsel, Constantine the fourth, at the request and suite of
Agathon, called also at Byzance, where two hundredth bishops condemned
Macarius of Antioche. Another cou^sail at Biza^ce
This counsel was accepted by Hadriane the first. No counsel may be called
without the popes consent
That no counsel might be legitimate, or lawfully assembled without the
bishop of Rome his consent and assente was the constitucion and decree of
Marcellus the first, and afterward, Julius, Damasus, and Gregory ratified the
same.

Martine the fifth made a law that every tenth year the bishop of Rome,
Counsels should be called every tenth year.
and al Christen princes should meet together to consulte of matters
concerning our religion, and christen faith. It was decreed at the counsel of
Nicene that every bishop should twice yearly have a sinode or senes general
within his diocese to correct and refourme such things as were out of order.
Senesin every diocese.
But now the matter is so handeled that senes be only courts to gather their
senage and proxy with a procession, and a sermon that the half understand not:
other correction I hear of none.

The.v. Chapter. Of the first persecutours of the christen, and first Martyrs.
CHRIST, Christ was a witness of the truth.
which came into this world, and was incarnate to bear witness unto the
truth, had for his true testimony great envy of the Jews, insomuche that
they persecuted him to the vile death of the cross for his earnest record and
report of the truth: and they did no less pursue ye Apostles and messengers
of the truth. For when they following the example of their maiester did openly
declare the word of truth, and namely Peter did sore rebuke the wickedness
of the Jews in puttyng to death Christ the authoure of life, aduertisyng them
to repent and amend: the Jews were so furiouse and wood, that first they
murdered Steven, as the Acts of the Apostles testify, because he was a
vehement witness of the truth. This Shephyn did two year continually after
Christ's death dispute with all the learned men of Alexandria, Stephyn
disputed with all the learned men of Jury.
Cirene, Cilicia, and Asia, and by heavenly wisdom confounded their worldely
reasons and humayne learning. Wherefore they were so sore vexed with heat and
malice against him, that they violently thrust him out of the city, Stephyn is
stoned to death.

Stephin first open defe^der of our faith.


and then cruelly stoned him to death: Thus Stephyn was the first open
mainteyner and defender of our christen religion Afterward, as Luke tells, so
bitter and sharp persecucion did brast out against the Christians that were in
Jerusalem, that they were enforsed to straye abroad, and were scattered
throughout all Iurye and Samarie, saving that the Apostles remaygned and
soiourned still at Jerusalem. Notwithstanding, this persecucion was the
occasion of great furtheraunce of the Gospel, by reason they seized not but
preached still the word every where with great increase, and augmentyng of
the faithful number.

Among the Heathen nations Nero was the first prince that persecuted our
religion universally: Nero first persecutour of all the heathen princes.
and put Peter and Paul to death, and consequently many other innocents
were slain cruelly. For when of a deuilishe mind that he had, he could not
spare even his country, but either for displeasure of the ruinouse houses
which grieved him to behold, or else desirouse to se a resemblant of the
burning of Troy, he set on fire the more part of the city of Rome, with so
houge a flame, Half Rome was burned by Nero*
that it burned six days and six nights continually, to the impouerishyng
of many thousand rich citezens. Then to mitigate the shameful and abominable
deed, and to stinte the brute and slau^derouse report that went on him for
that flagiciouse fact, there were forged false witnesses to say the christen
men did this act, and so many simple innocent smarted for that tirannes
pleasure: And to obdurate him self in mischief, he proclaimed an open
persecucion against all, that professed the name of Christ. Persecucion done by
the Emperor.
Not long after Domitiane renewed afreshe another affliction of the christians,
and Traianus raised the fourth, Marcus Antonius and Lucius Aurelius Commodus
stired up the v. persecucion. Aelius Pertinax moved the sixte. Maximinus
procured the seventh, Decius the eight, Valerianus the.ix. and Aurelianus
caused the.x. And Dioclesianus began the.xi. which was sorest, Dioclesiane
made the greatest persecution.
sharpest, and of longer continuance then any of all the rest: in such sort,
that scripture books were burned and churches plucked down, christen
magistrates that did bear any office, were deposed, soldiers were enforsed
to deny their faith, or else forgoo their goods and forbear their lives by a
general proclamacio^. Neither were the three cruel tyra^nes, Maxentius,
Licinius, Maxencius.
and Maximianus behind with their parts, but were as busy as the best, to
procure trouble to the christen people.

Constantinus borne in England, Consta^tinus first stayed the christen faith
was the first christen emperor, that auaunced and defended the causes of our
religion, and preserved christen men in peace and quietness. In all these
persecucions many did suffer martyredome, as diverse histories record, but
Stephyn was first martyr of ye new testament. Stephyn was the first martyr.
For John Baptist died before the co^summacion of the old law. After his example
many other ensued and sustained like crosses for the truth sake, which al now
reign with God, to whom alone be al glory, honor, and praise world without
end. Sobeit.

The end of the abridgement of the eight and last book of Polidore Vergile.
A Table by the which ye may lightly find every special matter or sentence
contained in this book.
AARON and Saul first anointed. C.iii. Abbeyes. C.xxxv. Abel. xii. and.lxvii.
Aborigines, vi. Abraham. xxvi. Abraham taught the contents of Geometry to
the Aegiptians xxix. Abraham is circumsited. lxxxv. Abraham ordained the first
place of burial. C.vii. Adam the first man. vi. Adam named beasts. lxvii.
Adam made the first coat of lether. lxix Aduent. C.xix. Aduoutrie* ix.lxxxi.
Aelas. xxv. A^olus observed the wyndes. xxvii. Aeromancia. xxxiiii. Aethiopus
despised oyntmentes. lvii. Age of priests* x^i. Air. iiii. Alhalow day.
C.xxiiii. Almose. C.xviii. Amber. lxi. Amphion. xxiii. Amphitheatres. lxxvii.
Anacletus forbad priests to have beardes. xci. An^xagoras. ii. Anaximander.
ii.vi. Ancors. lxx^. Andronicus. xxvii Annates. C.xii. Anoyntyng is the toke^
of kings. C.iiii. Anoyntyng of children. Ibidem Antioche. lxxxiiii. Antoninus
Enipho a schpie master. xv. Apollo. ii. Apollo God of medicines. xxx. Apostles
lxxxiiii and lxxxix Apparel. lxix.v.v. Apparel in mournyng. c.xxvi. April.
xlii. Apuleius de asino aurco* c.xvi. Arrabians. viii. Archadiens. xxii.
Archadie^s brought instruments into Italy, xxiiii. Archadiens manner. lxii.
Archagathus the first phisician in Rome. ^xx. Archebishoppes. xcv
Archedeacons. Ibidem Archelaus xix. Archilaus. xviii. Archilocus found Ia^bus.
xvii. Archimedes divised the spear. xxvii. Ariopagites judged in the night.
xxxix. Arrese cloth lxix. Aristocracie. xxxviii. Aristotle had the first
liberary. xlvi Arithmetike. xxix. Arc. c.vi. Art of memory. xlvii.
Artificial. xx^v. As^lepiades abbolished physic. xxxii. Assinius Pollo had
the first librarye at Rome. xlvi. Astrology. xxvi.xxvii. Athanasius. c.xvii
Athe^s made many books. xlvi* Atlas. xxv.xxvi. Atoms or motes. iiii. Authors
of the names of countries. vii. Augustus seal lxiii. Auriculer confession. xcv
Axe. lxxix.
B
Babylon. vii.lxxii. Bacchus. lv. Bakyng* lxv. Balm an herb. xxxii. Baners.
c.xxix Bank^ttes. lxviii Baptesme. lxxx^^^^. Barbours. lxxxii. Barchian league.
liiii. Barges. lxxx Barks. Ibidem. Baskettes. lxxviii Bathes. Ibidem. Battle
on the sea. lxxx. Beads. c.ix. Beasts that be badges lxviii. Bedel denou^ced
noone xliiii. Beholding the bowels of beasts. xxxv. Belles. c.xxix Belowes.
lix. Belus ii.xi. Bennettes use. c.xxvii. Bible. c.xxi. Biyng of wyfes. ix.
Birds. xxxv. Birth days. c.xxiii. Bissextus. xliii. Bishops. lxxxvi.xc.
Bishops of Rome may change their names. xciii. Bishops of Rome be borne.
Ibidem. Bishops married maids. c.v. Blod lettyng. xxxii. Boats. lx^ix. Boltes.
xlix. Bonefires. lxxxi.C iii. Bondage. xxxix. Books. xlv Bow and shaftes.
xlix Bowelles of beasts. xxxv. Brakes and slings. xlix. Brazen trumpe.
xxiiii. Brass. lviii. Brick work. lxx. Bridel bittes. l Brigantine. lxxx.
Broches. lxxv. Buildyng. lxx Bulls of lead. C.xlix. Burial is the end of al
things C.xxviii. Buriyng. lxxiii. Buriyng of an Emperor. lxxiiii Burning
dead bodies Ibidem.
C
CAdmus. xii.xiii. Cadmus wrote the first story of Cirus. xix Cadmus found
gold. lviii. Cain. xii.lxv. Cain and Abel sacrificed first. C.vii. Caius
Claudius. xvii. Calendes xliii. Camillus. lv. Cancer. xxxii. Candelles lix
Candelmas day C. Canis. lii. Canonisyng of sai^ctes c.xxv. Cappes. xcvii.
Cardinals. xcii. Carpe^ters art. lxxviii. Cartagens were first merchants
lxxx. Castyng lottes. xxxv. Castyng money abroad. C.ii. Cecrops. viii.xii.
Centaurie was found by Chiron. xxxii. Ceres. xxxvii. Ceres Image. lxiii.
Ceremonies why they were so named. C.xiii. Chaldees. xxi.xxvi. Chalices of
wood. C.xxviii. Chalices of silver and gold. Idem Chamberleines. xciii.
Chariotes l. Charms. xxxiii. Chances. lii. Chaunters. lxxxviii Chery trees.
lxvii. Chese making. lxvi. Chesse. li. Chippe are. lxxviii. Chiromancie.
xxxiiii. Chiron auctour of salues. xxxi. Chitteryng of birds. xxxv. Chius.
lii. Chrisippus ii. Chrisme c.iii. Christ author of our priesthod. lxxxviii.
Crystal. lxi. Christmas lords. c.ii. Christenyng of infantes. lxxxvi.
Churches and church yardes. xcii.c. Cicero xxi. Circenses. lii. Circumsion.
lxxxv. Civil croune. lvi Civil law* xxxvii. Cleanthes. ii. Cleophantus invented
colors. lxiiii. Clergy. lxxxvii. Clockes. xliiii. Cock boat. lxxx. Coynyng.
lix Collage of secretaries c.xlix. Comedies. xviii. Co^me^dacions to dead
bodies. lxxiiii Common wealth. xxxviii. Common women. lxxxi. Communion. c.xiii.
Compass. lxxviii. Confession. c.xv. Confirmacion. c.iiii. Coniurers. lxxxviii.
Constantine forbadde putting to death of the cross c.vii. Constantyne borne in
England, first christen emperor. c, lvi. Consuls of Rome. xl. Corax gave rules
of Rhethorike. xxi. Corn sowyng. lxv. Corona triumphalis. lvi. Corporaces.
c.xxviii Corpus Christi day. c.xxiiii. Covering of scaffoldes lxxvii.
Counsels. c.lii. Countyng by nails. xxix. Cranes or vernes. xlix. Cratus
taught grammar in Rome. xv Cries. liii. Cross bows. xlix. Cross days.
c.xxiiii. Cross forboden to be made. c.vii. Crounes of brazen plate. lvi.
Crounes of diverse sorts. lvii. Cups were crouned. lvii.
D
Days of every month. xliii. Days turned into feries. c.xxi. Days named of
ye planetes. Ibidem. Daily communion. c.xiiii. Daphis found the shepherdes
earolles. xvii. Dardanus Crezenius xxiiii. Darts. xlviii. David song in meter.
xxiii. Daunsyng. li.c.ii. Decking of churches. c Declamator. xxi. Decrees. xl.
Dead bodies. lxxiiii. and.c.xxv. Dedalus slew his neuewe.. lxxix. Dedicacio^
days. c.xxv. Dedicatyng of Churches. c.viii Degrees of kynred inhibited to
mary. C.vi. Deifiyng of the Emperor. lxxiiii. Deleyng of wines. lxvi Demaratus
taught the Hetruria^s letters. xiiii. Demaratus. lxiiii. Democratia began in
Rome. xli. Democracie. xxxviii. Democritus. vi. Demosthenes. xxi. Denou^cyng
the Dictator. xl. Deseases. xxxi. De^any. xxxii. Deuisio^ of nations. vii.
Deuorcement. x. Diagoras. ii. Dialles. xliiii. Dialoges. xxvi. Debutades.
lxiiii. Dyce. li. Dictatoures first in Rome. xl. Dictatours office. Ibi. Diyng
of wolle. lxix. Diyng of hear. lxxxii. Diocesses. xcii. Dioclesian a great
persecutour. C.lv. Diodorus. xii. Dionisius. lxv. Dirceus captain of ye
Lacedaemonians. xxiiii. Diriges or Exequies. C.xxvi. Disguisyng. C.iii. Diverse
deuisions of the year.. xlii. Diverse deuisions of the day. xlv. Diverse kinds
of meter. xvii. Diverse manners of paper. xlvii. Diuersitee of speches. vii.
Divisions of the night xlv. Dreams. xxxvi. Drinkyng on maundy thursday. C.i.
Druides. xxv. Drumslades in war xxiiii. Dulcymers. xxiiii Dungyng land. lxv.
E
EAster. C.xix. Easter appointed to be kept on the Sunday C.xxi. Easter
instituted by the Apostles. C.xxii. Easter is to be kept in March. C.xxii.
Earyng of flesh. lxvii. Eclipse of the Sun and moon. xxvii. Eggs. lxviii.
Egiptia^s. ii.xxvi.lxxii. Egyptians are superstitious lxxxiii. Egyptians
letters. xii. Egiptians found Geometry. ^xviii. Egyptians found the year.
xlii. Election of the bishop of Rome. xciiii. Electoures of the Emperor.
Ibidem. Eliazer drives out spirits. xxxiiii. Elymnete. lx. Embryng days.
C.xix. Embroderyng. lxvii Ennius called the Poets holy. xvi. Empedocles.
vi.xxi Endimion perceived ye course of the Moon. xxvii. Enos. xii.lxxiii.
Epicarmus. xiii. Epicurus. ii. Epicurus taught gra^mer first. xv. Epulones. C.
Ethiopians. xii. Ethiopians opinion of man. vi. Euander brought letters into
Ital. xiiii. Even and odd. lii Eumolphus xiii. E^comunicacion. x^vi. Exequies
or Diriges. C.xxvi. Exercises. l. Extreme unction. c.iiii.
F
FAmous Phisicians. xxxi. Fanes. xx^viii Fasting. C.xviii. Faunus. i. Feasts
instituted by ye Apostles. C.xxiii. Feasts instituted at ye counsel of Lions.
C.x iiii. February. xliii Fac^ales Sacerdotes. xcix. Fedyng of birds. xxxv
Fery boats. l^xx. Fetters. xli. F. was taken of ye Ay^lians. xiiii. F. for.v.
co^sonant. xiiii Fiddlers and pipers. xxiiii. Fightyng on horseback. l. Figures
of Arithemetike. xxix. Fire. iiii.lviii.c.viii. Fire and water given in token
of chastitee. x. First mass of priests c.i. First church of ye christians.
c.vi. First church in Rome c.vii. Fishyng. lxviii. Flesh was not eaten before
Noe. c xviii. Fliyng of birds. xxxv. Five parts of Philosophi. xxvi.
Foreheades lxxxii. Frederike Feltrius liberary. xlvi. Fullers craft. lxix.
Funeralles. lxxiiii. Funeral plays. li.
G
GAley. lxxx. Games. li Garlandes. lv lvi. Gates of marble. lxxi. Geomancie.
xxxiiii. Gymnosophistes. xxv. Glasses to look in. lix. Glass. lx. Glewe.
lxxviii. God his nature. iii. God made made. vi. God what he is. iiii. God was
the author of laws. xxxvii. God is made manne. lxxxiiii. Gods mercy. Ibidem.
Goddesses of favor. xxiii. God father and Godmother. lxxxvii. Godbrother and
godsister. c.vi. Gold. lvii.lix. Gonnes, and when they were first made. xlix.
Good angels. i. Goshauke. lxxvi. Grace at meat. c.xxi. Gra^mer.ii. parts.
xv. Grauers in marble. lxxi Grecians learned in Egypt. xxvii. Gregory stablished
the single life of priests. c.v. Greek stories. xx. Grindyng. lxv.
HAberion xlviii. Allowing of priests vestures Cxxviii. Hampers lxxviii.
Hangynges. lxix. Harneis xlviii. Harp lviii. Harp who found it. xxiii. Hebrew
letters xiii. Hebrews were authors of Poetry xvi. Hebrews were authors of
philosophi. xxv Hebrews after Josephus found Geometrye xxix. Hebrews ordaygned
Democracie xxxviii. Hechwall xxxi. Helene found the cross Cvii. Helmettes
xlviii. Herb called bali^. xxxi Herbs were created for manne. Ibidem.
Hercules basilicus. lii. Hercules lxi. Heretics. Cli. Heroical verse xvii.
Hiperbius. lxvii. Hippocrates xxx. Histories. xix. Hoye lxxx. Holy bread.
Cxxxii. Holy days. Cviii. and Cxxii. Holy water Cix. Honey lxvii. Horses xlix.
Hostanes wrote books of magike xxxiii Hours. xliii.liii. Houses lxx. Huntyng
lxviii. Huntyng staves xlix. Housbandry lxv.
I
Jacob made a league liiii. January. xliii. Ianus xii. Ianus coins of bras.
lix. Iauelyns. xlviii. Icarius lxvi. Idei dactili. lviii. Ides xliii. Idolatry
xi. Iehosuah liiii. Iginius made first orders xc. Ihon Baptist Cx. Ihon
Cuthenbergus found printyng. xlvi Images lxi.cxxxi. Images of kings. xi Images
of wax. C. Institucion of wedlock. viii. Instruments of husbandry. lxv.
Instruments of physic. xxx. Job. xvi. Joseph. lxxxii. Iron. lviii. Isaac
dug pittes. lxxii. Isis. i. Iubile. C.xlvii. Julius Caesar made the year
perfect. xliii. Jupiter. ii. Iustes i^ Rome. lxxii. Iustyng spears. xlix.
K
KEele. lxxx. Epyng ye secrame^t in churches. cxiiii Kingdom began in Egypt.
xxxviii. Kings how they behaved themselves. Ibi. Kings of Rome. xxxix Kings
and Queen's of England. xcviii. Kings and priests were anointed. C.iii. Kynred
inhibited too mary. C.vi. Kissyng the bishop of Romes feet. xcvii. Knights
wear rings for difference lx. Knights of the Rhodes. C.xli. Knights of
saint James C.xlii. Knights of Jesus Christ. Ibidem. Knitti^g nets.
lxviii.
L
LAborinthes. lxxii. Aborers pass the time with so^ges. xxii. Lacedaemonians
manner of war. xxiiii. Lacedaemonians offerynges lv. Layitee lxxxvii. Lamech
had two wives. C.vi. Lame me^ne may not be priests xci. Lammas day.
c.xxiiii. Lamps Ci. Latin stories. xx. Law. xxxvi. Law for drynkyng of wine
xcvii. Law makers. xxxvii. Laws of mournyng C.xxvi. Laws natural. xxxvi
Lead. lviii. Leagues. liii. Leap year xliii. Legendes C.xvii. Leg harneis.
xlviii. Lent C.xix. Leoncious Gorgias Image. lxiii. Letanies. C.xxx. Letters.
xii. Letters too coumpte with all xxix. Lettyng of blod. xxxii Lever lviii.
Levites lxxxviii. Liberty of ye old Satyrs xix. Libraries xlviii. Licinius
Caluus. xli. Lycurgus xxxvii. Lidians lix. Lighter lxxx. Line lxxviii. Lynnen
lxxii. Linus xvi. Liuius Andronicus xvi Lookyng glasses. lix. Lottes. xxxv.
Lucrecia lxxxvii Lupercalia. lii.
M
MAgiciens. xxv. MAgi. xxxiiii. Magike xxxiii. Mahometes sect. cxlv Maids of
Cipres. lxxi. Maids of Rome and Greece. x. Maiyng. C.ii. Maioram xxxii Malcolme
king of Scotts ix. Manners of diverse nations in marriages. viii. Manner of
rekenyng years. xxix. Mantill. lxix. Manumission. xxxix. Marble lxx.
Marchaundise. lxxx. March xli. Marcus Cato banished phisicians out of Rome.
xxxi. Marcus Tuditanus xvii. Marcus Valerius ordaigned a Dial in Rome xliiii.
Mary the Virgyn died. lxxxv. Marriage began in paradise viii. Marriage of
diverse nations. Ibidem Marriage of priests. Ciiii. Marius xli. Mars author of
cheualry xlviii. Martyrs Cxlvii. and C.liiii. Maskes lxxxi.Cii. Massagetes
viii. Mass ye parts thereof C.x.C.xiii* Mastes lxxx. Marches lix. Matyns,
Prime and Hours Cxxvi. Measures and weightes xxix. Meats forbidden on fasting
days Cxxi. Melissus xi. Meltyng brass. lviii. Memory. xlvii. Memory of
martyrs Cxxv. Menander xix. Men drified i. Men lived by acornes lxv. Men
of great memory xlvii. Men were first called christians in Antioche.
lxxxiiii. Men were sacrificed by the Gentyles Cviii. Men wrote in plates
xlvi. Menon xii. Mercury xxvi. Mercury found the concordes xxii. Mercury
found the Harp xxiii. Mercurius Trimegistus appoyncted twelfe hours in the
day. xiiii. Metalles lviii. Meter, diverse kinds thereof xvii. Mice engender
of the mudde v. Milk lxviii. Ministers lxxxviii. Minos. xxxvii. Minos had the
first rule on the sea lxxix. Mirre lxi. Moly xxxii. Monarchy xxxviii.
Months xliii. Months minds. Cxxviii. Money lix. Monks Cxxxv. Morispikes
xlix. Moses. xiii.xvi.lvi. and lxxii.lxxvi. Moses did prouulgate the first
laws. xxxvii. Moses did write the first story xx. Moses found the trompe
xxiiii. Moses ordaigned deuorcementes x. Mossolanus xxxv. Motleis lxix. Mouldes
lxiiii. Mournyng C.xxvi. Mournyng is supersticious Hypocrisy. Cxxvii. Mummius
destroyed Corinth lxiiii. Murall croune lvi. Music xxii. Music makes a man
effeminate. xxiii
N
NAbles xxiiii. Aked games. li. and lii. Nasamones ix. Natural xxxv. Nature
gave music to men xxii. Nature of oil Ciii. Nauall croune lvi. Necromancie
xxxiiii. Nemi li. Neptunus ^. Neptunus had the Empire of the sea. lxxix. Nero
first persecuter Clv. Nesyng Cxxx. Nets lxvii. New yerares gifts C.ii.
Night sacrifices are abholished Cxx. Nilus does ouerflowe Egypt xxviii. Ninus
did enlarge his Empire xxxviii. Noha made the first altar lxxxviii. and Cvii.
Noha planter of the vine lxvi. Noone xliiii Noones xliii. Notaries xcii. and
Cxlix. Numa added too the year. xiii. Numbers. xxix. Nuns. xcvi.
O.
OPelisti. lxxv, Obseruyng of days. xxvi.xxx. Obseruyng of dyete was beginning
of physic. xxx. Ob^idionall crown. lvi. Occasion of Idolatry. xi. Ochus xxv
Odd and even lii. Offering. C. Offices sold i^ Rome. xciii. Oil. C.iii.
Oyntementes. lvii. Olimpiades. l. Olive oil lxvi. One God. iii. Opinion of
philosophiers. ii. Opinion of the birth of man. v. Oracle lxii Oracles
doubtful. i. Oracles seized at Christ's coming. C.viii. Orator. xxi. Order
of Cardinals. xcii. Order of manumission. xxxix. Orest^us. lxvi. Organes.
lxxxii. Organie xxxiii. Orpheus. xii.xvi.xxi. and xxv. Original of Heathen
gods. i. Otho a Germayne made emperor. xciiii.
P
PAyntyng. lxii. Alamedes array. xlviii. Pallas. ii. Pamphilia. lxix. Panace.
xxxii. Panci^s lvi. Paper xlvii. Parchement. Ibide^. Pardons. C^lvii. Parishes
xcii. Parts of Rhethoricke. xxi. Parts of the night xlv Parthians. xxxii.
Paschall Candelles. C.xxiii. Pater patratus. C. Patriarchs. xcv. Paul is
converted. lxxxv. Pecocke. lxviii. Pelagius caused subdeacons to forsake their
wifes. C.v. Peniten^ers C.xlix Pensill. lxiiii. Pentecost. C.xxiii.
Persecutors. C.liiii. Peter and Philippe had wifes. C.v. Peter crucified. lxxxv
Peter converted three thousand. lxxxiiii. Phedon lix. Pherisides. xx. Phidias
lxiii. Philippe Emperor proclaimed an heretic. C.xxxi. Philosophy xxv.
Philosophy in three or five parts. xxvi. Phirrhus dance. li. Phisicions
famous. xxxi. Phisicians. lxxxii. Phisike xxx. Phoroneus. xxxvii. Pillars lx^.
Pipers and fiddlers. xxiiii Pirodes stroke fire out of flinte. lix. Piromancie
xxxiiii. Pisistraius made the first book. xlvi. Pithagoras called him self a
philosophier. xxv. Pithagoras observed the day sterre. x^vii. Pithagoras rule.
lxxix. Pittes who first dug them. lxxii. Plays or shows. l. and lii.
Plato v. Pliny xiii. Plough. lxv. Plucking out of teth xxx. Poets. vi. Poets
be called holy of Ennius xvi. Poetry xv. Polares. xlix. Polignotus. lxiii.
Ponishement for aduoutry. ix.lxxxi. Ponisheme^t for omittyng oblacio^s. cviii.
Pontifex Maximus xcix. Possessions permitted too the clergi. C. and xxxii.
Posthumous lv. Potters craft lxiiii Potters frame. Ibi. Prayer. Cix. Preaching
Cx. Price of writtes. C. and xlix. Priests xcv. Priests first Mass C.i.
Priests forbidden to mary Cv. Priests of Egypt. lxviii. Priests of Egypt.
wrote stories xx. Priesthode lxxxvii. and lxxxviii. Primative church. lxxxix.
Prime xliiii. Princes Electoures. xciiii. Printyng xlvi. Prisones xli.
Prognosticacions. xxviii. Promotheus. lx.lxii. Prophesiyng xxxv. Prose xx.
Protagoras ii. Psalter of David. xvi. Psammaricus v. Ptolomeus libraries xlvi.
Pultryes lxviii. Punishment for aduoutrie viii. Purificacion of women Cvi.
Purple color. lxix. Purple roabe. Ciii.
Q
Q Letter xiiii. Varelles xlix.
R
RAmmers xlix. Eaders lxxxviii. Readyng the bible at meat C.xxi. Reclaimyng of
horses xlix. Reconynges xxix. Reconsiliation of churches C.xxv. Regalles
xxiiii. Religion vii.lxxxiii. Religions from the Cxxxvii. too the. C. and xiv.
lefe. Relics C.xlvi. Repentance a remidy for sin Cl. Rewards, l. Rex
sacrificulus. C. Rhethorician. xxi. Rhethoricke xx. Right hand xcvii. Rings.
lx. Ryngyng to seruise. C.xxxi. Rites of buriyng. lxxiii. Rites of marriage. x.
Royal orname^tes. xli Romans burned their dedde bodies. lxxiiii. Romans
league. liiii. Rome made orders. xc Romulus xxxvii. Romulus ordered the year.
xlii. Rowyng in boats. lx.ix. Rudders lxxx. Rue xxxiii. Rulyng common wealth
xxxviii.
S.
SAbbothe days of the Jews. C.xxi. Sacrament of the altar Cx. Sacrifices
lxii. Sails lxxx Solomon. xvi.lxxii. Solomon made the first temple C.vi. Salt
lxviii. Salutyng with kysses. xcvii. Sanctuaries lxxv. Sand dial. xliiii.
Satyrs. xviii. Saturnalia games. liii. Saturnus father of the gods ii.
Sauery. xxxii. Saw. lxxviii. Scaffoldes lxxvii. Scarlet roabes xcii. Schisms.
C.lii. Scithians league. liii Scotland use. ix. Scribes Cxlviii. Secretaries.
C.xllx. Sects from the.C. and.xxxiiii. too the C.xlv. lefe. Selandyne xxxii.
Senio. lii. Seruius Tullius lix. Sethis posterite. xxvii Sextyns. lxxxviii.
Shaftes, xlix. Shalmes xxiii. Shaven crounes. xc. Shildes. xlviii. Ships
lxxx. Shomakers craft. lxix. Shroue^wesday. ciii, Sycles lix. Silk lxix.
Silla xli. Silver lviii. Silver coined in Egina. lix. Siluester commanded that
a priest should have but one wife. C.v. Simony. C.l. Simonides iii Singyng
psalms by course. C xix. Syngyng to the lute. ^xiiii. Syngle livers ix.
Sithes. xlix. Siues and sarces. lxvi. Slings xlix. Smiting fire with wood
lix. Smithes forge. lviii. Socrates xxiii. Solicitours. C.xlix. Soll. xliiii.
Solle mass day. C. and xxvii. Somners. C.xlix. Sons of Noha. vii. Sons of
Seth found the letters xiii. Sotheryng of Iron. lviii. Spears xlviii. Speaking
of the nature of God is dangerous. lii. Spyndelles. lxix. Spinnyng
lxviii.lxix. Spirits xxxiii. Spiritual priestehod lxxxviii. Spurius
Caruilius. x. Squire lxxviii. Stacions. C.xlvii. Stallyng a bishop. xci.
Sta^es. xlviii. Steples. lxxiii.lxxiiii. Stephen is martyred lxxxiiii. Sterres
of what power they be. xxvi. Stews lxxxi. Stithee lviii. Stocks xli. Storye
of a Kings daughter. ix. Strikyng of ye clock xliiii. Subdeaco^s. lxxxviii.
Subsydes and taxes xli. Succession in priestehoode lxxxviii. Sundery division
of the day. xlv. Supersticion turned into religion C.xix. Supplicacions.
C.xxx. Susanna. lxxxi. Swearyng xcvi. Swyne commended in sacrifices lxvii.
Swords. xlviii. Sword plaiers. liii.
T
TAbles. li. Akyng of housell at Easter C.xiiii. Talus li. Tapers C. Targettes.
xlviii. Taxes or Subsidye that they pay which have benefices. C.xlix. Taxes or
Subsidies xli. Telesphorus did appoyncte Lent to be kept before Easter. C.xix.
Tennis. li. Tents lxxii. Textes prouyng confession C.xvi. Thales ii.xlii.
Theaters lxxviii. Themistocles. xxiii. Theodosius commanded that no Cross
should be graven on the ground. C vii. Theseus first tyrante xxxix. Thessaly
used Magike. xxxiii. Thracia^s fashion of buriyng lxxiii. Three strings in the
harp. xxiii. Three parts of philosophy. xxv. Three masses on Christemasse
day. C.xiii. Three parts of phisike. xxx. Three kinds of laws. xxxvi. Three
powers of the stars. xxvi. Tyle and slate. lxx. Tyrians were connyng
Carpenters. lxxix. Tysias gave rules of Rhethorike. xxi. Tithes C.xxxii. Titles
of Bishops of Rome C.xlviii. Tongues. lviii. Towers lxxi. Tragidies. xvii.
Tragos. xvii. Transfiguracion. C. and xxiiii. Tribunes xl. Triumphs lv. Tryx.
xviii. True fast. C.xix. Truse for years. liii. Tubalcain. xxii xlviii and
lviii. Turnyng our faces Eastward C.ix. Two kinds of prophesiyng. xxxv. Two
parts of gra^mer. xiiii.
V.
VEnus lii. Enus a commen woman. lxxxi. Vermilion. lxi. Vigilles C.xx. Visers
were found by Echilus xviii. Voices. xxxix. Vows. C.xxix. and. C.xxxv. Use of
Scotland. ix. Uses in the service. C.xviii. Vulcanus. lviii. Vultursii. lii.
Vxor ab ungendo. x.
W
Wagons. l. Alles of houses. lxx. and.lxxi. Washing of feet on maundy
Thursday xcviii. Washyng dedde bodies. C xxvii. Watch words. xlviii.
Watches, Wards. xlviii.C.xx. Water is cause material. iiii. Water dial.
xliiii. Weightes and measures. xxix. Weuyng lxviii. Wethercockes. xxviii
Whitsondaie. lxxxvii What men were deified. i. Wymble lxxviii. Wyndes. xxvii.
Wine lxvi. Wine tauernes. Ivi. Winter garla^des. lvi. Wolle lxix. Women had
comme^dacio^s in Rome. lxxv. Women may not bare their heddes in the church
xcvii. Women of Inde lxxiiii. Works due on the holy days. C.xxii. World
made of naught. iiii. World was made by meter. xvi. Wrestlyng. li. Writing in
Egypt. lxxvi. Writing tables. C.i.
X.
X Letter. xiiii. Xamolxis. xxv. Xerxes. li.
Y
YAwnyng. C.xxx. Ere, who found it. xlii. Images. lxi. Images of the wyndes
xxviii. Images of wax. C. Yokyng oxen. lxv. Iron. lviii. Yuye. xxxii.
Z.
ZEno. vi. Oroastes found Magike. xxxiii.
The end of the Table.
IMPRINTED at London within the precinct of the late dissolved house of the
gray Friars, by Richard Grafton Printer to the princes grace, the.xvi. day of
April, the year of our Lord. 1546.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.




