The over throw of the justification of works and of the vain doctrine of the
merits of men, with the true assertion of the justification of faith and of the
good works that procead or come of the same, and in what respect our good
works are crouned or rewarded of God set forth dialoge wise by John Veron.

Ephe. 2. Ye are saved by grace, and that through faith, not of your selves,
it is the gift of God not of works, least any man should glory. Newlye set
forth and allowed according to the order appointed in the Queen's majesty's
injunctions. Ano. 1561.

TO THE RIGHT honorable, Sir James Blount knight, Lord Mont joy etc. John Veron
wishes grace, peace of conscience, and increase of Godly honor, from God
the father, through his son Jesus Christ our Lord.
HEre have I added, right honorable Lord, unto my treatises of
predestination, and of free will, a small book, which I have entitled: The
over throw of the justification of works, and of the vain doctrine of the
merits of men, with the true assertion of the justification of fayeth, and of
the good works that do proceade of the same, and in what respect our good
works are rewarded or crouned of God: because that these doctrines, do so
depend one of an other, that they can in no wise be separated, or put a
sunder, unless we will want the perfect understanding of them all, and so
be blind still in the cheyfest and most principal points of our relygion.
Of predestination, how fruitful and necessary the doctrine of it, is, what
so ever the swynishe gruntynge Epicures, and carnal worldelinges, does say to
the contrary, I will speak nothing now at this present, because that I am
fullye determined, by the healpe and assistaunce of the holy spirit of God,
shortly to set forth an Apologye or defense of my doctrine, touching that
point of our religion, being directed to the queen's majesty, unto whom the
treatise thereof is dedicated. Neither do I need greatly to speak of the
doctrine of free will sithe that in the settinge forth of it, I have so
tempered my style, that I kept my self always within the lymites and bounds
of Gods word, goinge neither on the right nor on the left hand, but
walkinge still in that most sure and plain high way, that the Patriarchs,
Prophettes, and Apostels, with the Godly aunciente writers of the primitive
church had already trodden or beaten unto us. Many objections of the
Popepelagians, and free wyllmen of our time, which never were touched before,
have I fully answered in it, as it shall plainly appear unto them, that will
with a syngle eye, and with an vprighte judgment, read the whole treatise.
The only mark that I shoot at in all these works, is that the grace of God,
may be throughlye magnified, and the vain gloryinge of men, in their own
strength, which all things being rightly considered, and diligently wayed, is
nothing at al) being taken away, the whole glory of our salvation should be
given only unto the mercy and goodness of our heavenly father* who as by the
death passion and bloudshedding of his son Jesus Christ, does fully save us, so
by his holy spirit he does regenerate us, and taking away our stony hearts
from us, he gives us fleshy hearts, that is obedyente and treatable: he makes
us of vnwyllinge, wyllinge* of the bound slaves of sin, the servants of
his son Jesus Christ, for to serve him in holiness and righteousness all the
days of our life, and so brynginge us in to the freedom of the children of
God (for where the spirit of the Lord is, there is fredome) he makes us to
walk in those good works, that he has prepared for us to walk in. Neither
can it justly be said, that either in my book of predestination, or in my
book of free will, I did minister to any man occasion, either to live
lycentiouslye, asthough it made no matter how they live, that are by the
immutable decree of God, ordained unto life everlasting, or to beslacke in
doing of those good works, that are required of us in Gods book. Which
all men shall most evidently see (except they will be wylfullye blind) by
this book, that now at this present, I have set forth, and dedicated unto
your honorable Lordship, whom I see of all men to be most earnestlye given
unto good letters, and most principally to the study of the holy and sacred
scriptures. Which, as it is a thing very rare among the greatest part of the
noble men of our time: so will it be a most precious ornamente, both to you,
and to to the honorable stock that ye come of. For, what greater co^mendacion
can there be to such as ye are, than to have a knowledge and understanding of
the liberal sciences, and of the tongues, that they be written in: and
specially to be so acquainted with the infallible word of God, the only
Antidotus or conterpoyson, against all venomous sects and heresies, that ye
shall at all times be able mightily to withstand all false and erroneous
doctrines, that by the procuremente of Sathane the devil the enemy of our
salvation, have heretofore risen and do daily rise in Christ's church? I do
here let pass, how much good ye will do by your good example, unto those
that are of the basseste sort, when they see your Lordship to be so seriously
given, to such virtuous excercises. it will be an wonderful encoragemente
unto them: and unto the other, that be of the same degree that ye are of, or of
an higher, a marvelous prickinge forrewardes. For, if there be any spark or
drop of Godly shamefastenes in them they will blushe and be ashamed, when they
shall hear you gravely and learnedly to reason of high matters of learning
and of the principal points of our religion, to stand like domme and painted
images, and able to say nothing. Therefore go on still, as ye have Godly
begone: being most sure, that he which has of his free mercy and goodness
begone this good work in you, by his holy spirit styrring up your heart to
such Godly studyes: will shortly perform it, and bring to such a perfect
end that it will be not only to your everlasting comfort, but also to the
unspeakable vtility vnd profit of your own natural country. I would have
declared brieflye, what be the chiefest points, that I do entreat of in this
my book, but because that the argument of it, is set forth before the
beginning of the whole work, I have thought it vnnecessarye. Here therefore,
will I make an end, most humblye besechinge your good Lordship too take this
my simple labor in good part, not so much consideringe the smallness of the
gift, as the heart, and pure good will or zeal of the geuer. Thus the eternal
and everlasting god preserve both your good Lordshippe, and my good lady
your wife, with all your Godly famylye and household.

The argument of the whole book.
First and foremoste we have declared, that we are freelye justified, that is
to say, delivered from sin, eternal dampnation and everlasting death, and
coumpted righteouse in the syghte of God, through faith only in our savior
Jesus Christ, without any merits or deservings, going before. Which thing
has been most strongly proved both by manifest and plain texts of the
scriptures, and also by the autoryties of the aunciente fathers of the
primitive church, contrary to the sklaunderous and most lyinge reports of
the enemies of the truth, which do, most ungodly blow abroad, that we have
of late days sucked out this doctrine of our fyngers ends, not one af the
old writers saying once: Sola fides iustificat: faith only or fayeh alone
does iustifye. But how false this their report is, ye shall be judges your
selves, after ye have read the whole work.

We did, almooste in the beginning of this disputation, least any impedimente
or let should be left unto the reader, concile Paul and James together, where,
unto the ignorant, they did seem to disagree, which (I trust) is so
substantiallye done, that any reasonable man, will hold him self satisfied.
Secondlye it has been showed, that as all the works, that we do before our
justification, I mean, before we be graffed in Christ, and through faith made
members of his body, although they seem never so glorious, so perfect and
excellent, yet are but mere sin, and abomination in the sight of God: so
after we be once justified, and made lively branches of that true vine, we
must not remain harein and unfruitful trees, but bring forth the fruits of
our faith, and abound or flow in all kind of good works that God has
prepared for us to walk in, remembering that we are thereunto created in Christ
Jesus, who has redeemed us, and cleansed from our syns, to the end that we should
be a peculiar people unto him, earnestlye given unto good works. Here have we
by the way, overthrown will works, that is such manner of works, as are set
forth by the mere inue^tion of man, with out any sure ground or foundation in
Gods book, or without any promysse contained in the same, prouinge, that all
such works, for as much, as they be done without fayeth, can in no wise
please god, but are an abominatio^ unto him, although they be done, as they
do commonly term it, of a good intent and so, upon occasion, we have
declared, and made manifest and plain, by the historyes of Nadab and Abihu, of
Saul, and of David in bringinge the Arc in to Jerusalem, otherwise than God
had ordained, how perilous a thing it is, to attempt any thing of good
intent, without a sure warant of gods word, in the religion, worshipping, and
service of God. Thyrdlye we teach what be those works that are to be taken for
good works, even such as God does expresselye comaunde us in his word. Which
are most lively set forth unto us in many places of the old and new
Testament. How be it, this lesson is also given, that al they that do those
good works (although they be never so good works in them selves) do not by
and by deserve, the comendation and praise of well doing in the sight of God,
either because that they do them, to the end that they may be glorified of
men, or for reward sake, the hope whereof being taken away they would not
as much, as give a cup of cold water, or for fear of punishemente after
this life, and not for the love only, that they bear to God, and to their
neighbor, or for to show their obedience, toward his will and
commandments. But for the better instruction to the ignorant, we have set
forth at large, all the chief and pryncipall causes that ought to move us,
to do good works, although we looked for no reward at all at Gods hand,
who notwithstanding will not leave our good works uncrowned or unrewarded,
first because that we have through says, fellowship with his son Jesus
Christ, whose perfect obedience, he imputes unto us for our own, therbye
most amplye and abundantly supplying, what soever is wantinge and lackinge in
us. Secondlye because, that he has made him self debtour unto us not by
receiving any thing of us, but by promissing all things, as saint Augustine
does witness. Here also are the causes showed, why our good works,
although in them selves, they be full of imperfection, do please God and are
acceptable unto him, which ought to be unto us a great encoragemente to live
Godly, and to exercise our selves in all manner of good works, that God has
commanded us in his word, being sure, that we can not but please him in so
doing. And as for merits it has been most strongly proved, that although we
were able to do what soever God has commanded us, yet we ought to reckenne
our selves unprofitable servants, and that we have done but our duty. But
for as much as no man is able to do the tenth part of Gods commandments,
with such a perfection as God does require, what do we merit or deserve (if our
works be examined after the straightness of Gods judgment,) but the
endelesse torments of hell fire? Last of all, concerning the degrees of
glory after this life, it has been sufficientelye declared and showed, that
there can be no such diversities or degrees of glory, by reason of any
merits, but that if therebe any, it comes of the mere mercy and goodness
of God, who does in us most liberally croune his own gifts. The chief scope
or mark yt we shote at in settinge forth of this doctrine, is: that we having
learned whence our salvation does come, should give the whole glory thereof,
to the only mercy and goodness of God declared unto us in his son Jesus
Christ, and most surely sealed up by his blood. To whom with the father, and
the holy ghost be all praise, glory, and honor, worlds without end. Amen.

The over throw of the justification of works, and of the vain and found
doctrine of the meryts of me^, with the true assertion of the justification of
faith, and of the good works, that do proceed and come of the same, and in what
respect they be crowned or rewarded of God, setsoorthe Dialogewise by Ihon
Veron,
The names of the speakers.
Dydimus. Eutrapelus Albion. Philalethes.
DYdimus: Sith ye we have already sufficiently spoken of the doctrine of
predestination, of the divine prouydence of God and of free will, I am of
opinion, that it were good to entreat somewhat of the justification of faith,
and of the good works that do spring and come of the same. For many there be
which when they hear that we be iustyfied by faith only, without the works
of the law, straight ways do cry out, that they need not to do good works,
yea that it makes no matter how they live, so that they believe only. The
blasphemers of the justification of faith.
I would feign, that by settinge forth this matter plainly, as ye have done
the other, the mouths of such blasphemours might ones be stopped.


EVTRAPELVS. That, which ye say, good neighbor, may rather be wyshed than
hoped or looked for.

The maliciousness of the enemies of the truth.
For, such is the wickedness of the enemies of the truth, that nothing can
be so well spoken, or so Godly set forth, but that they be always most
ready too calumnyate and blaspheme the same.

As for an example: our brother Philalethes, that the profyt of our last
talk and communication, that we have had touching predestination, the divine
providence of God, and of free will, might come to many, did cause it to be
published, and set forth in prynte. But, Lord God, how is he rayled against?
How is his Godly travail and labor taken of the most sort of men?

And yet in it, all things are made so plain, that the simplest manne in the
world, may have edifyinge by it:

And all the objections, that could be made, so pightelye, both by the
scryptures, and also by the authorytyes of the auncyente fathers, answered,
that any reasonable manne, would hold him self satisfied.


ALBION. Who be they, think ye, Who they be that storm at the doctrine of
predestination.
brother Eutrapelus, that thus so ungodly storm against this most
coumfortable doctrine of predestination and of the divine providence of God?
Even a sort of Atheistes and swinyshe Epicures, whose gruntinge, we ought not
to regard, or to care for. How be it, Atheistes are in English called Godless.
I do not doubt, but that there be many that now speak evil of the doctrine,
which if they had red the book throughoute with sober judgment, and with a
single eye, would like it well enough, yea, and receive unspeakable coumfort
by it.


PHILALETHES. I knew rightwel, when I took the matter in hand, that I should
stir up many enemies against me. But should I therefore, have kept close and
hidden from the faithful congregation that thing, which the holy ghost will
have to be reveled to al his elect and chosen people? God forfende, that for
fear of the dyspleasure of men, We ought not for fear of the displeasure of
men hyde the truth.
or of the hatered of ye wicked world, we should counceale or hyde any
truth. Ye shall see, that they will no less rage at this doctrine of the
justification of faith, when they shall hear that God without any works or
merits going before, does freely iustifye us, through faith only in his son
Jesus Christ, our lord and savior then they do at ye doctrine of
predestination. Will they not by and by cry out and say: that by this doctrine,
al manner of good works are clean taken away, and quite overthrown? For, who
being persuaded that faith only justifies, will give him self to do good
works, or to lead a Godly life and Christianlike conversation? But yet we
must not because of these blasphemies of the wicked enemies of the truth,
leave of therefore, to teach and set forth the truth of this doctrine, What
scope or mark we ought too shut at, in settinge forth the doctrine of the
iustifycation of faith.
that the holle glory of our salvation, in despite of the devil and of all
his Angels, may only and solelye be given unto the merits of the death,
passion and bloudesheddynge of the only begotten son of God, our savior
Jesus Christ.


ALBION. Therefore, brother Philalethes, that we may somewhat the better be
edifyed in this matter, and also edifye other, we do most earnestlye desire
you, that ye will (since that we are now at leisure, and have nothing else to do)
set forth at large this holle doctrine of justification. For, many are yet
very blind and ignoraunte in it.


DYDIMVS. Yea, ye shall find many, eue^ among the learned papists, that dare
boldly say, that this phrase or manner of speaking. Sola fides iustificat:
Faith only justifies, is but newly invented of the heresykes of our time, and
that none of all the aunciente writers of the primitive church did ever use it,
either in their sermons or wrytinges.


EVTRAPELVS. The popes kingdom, is a kingdom of lies.
This is not the first lie, that they have made. But as their kingdom, is a
kingdom of lies, so with lies, do they labor and study, for to maintain it.


PHILALETHES. And that, I trust, shall well appear, or ever we have made an
end of this our talk and communication. For, I will aleadge so many
autorities, and places out of the auneyente writers of the primytyue church,
where they do plainlye affirm with us, that faith only does justify, that al
me^, be they never so simple, shall easily perceive how shamefully they have
belied us and our doctrine and that of a malicious mind, they have most
traitorously hidden the truth from ye says full congregation of gods people.
But or ever we go any farther, I think it best too declare in what
signification this word to iustyfye, ought to be taken. As far as we ca^
learn this word: whence this word iusticare, to justify, has been borrowed and
what it signifies.
iustificare to justify, has been of the blessed Apostle saint Paul borrowed
of the common use of the law. For, in judgment, to iustifye a man, it is too
assoyle or quyte him of the crime, that is laid to his charge, or that he is
accused of, and to pronounce him righteous, just, innocente, and giltlesse.
After the same manner, when we say, that God does iustifye us, our meaning is
that God does assoile and quite us of all the crimes, offenses and trespasses
that ca^ be laid to our charge or that we can be accused of, and that he doethe
pronounce us just and righteous in his sight. That is to say: That first he
does pardon and forgive us our sins, he couerethe them, and doethe in no
wise impute the^ unto us, but imputes unto us righteousness, not our own,
which is none at all, but the righteousness of his son Jesus Christ, and so
through, or by imputinge unto us the righteousness of his only begotten
son, he does both save us and make us blessed. So does the holy Apostle
expound this our justification, saying: As David does set forth the
blessedfulnes of the man unto who^ God imputethe righteousness without works,
where he says: blessed are those, To. 4.
whose iniquities are forgeuen, whose sins are couered-Blessed is the man
unto whom the Lord imputes no sin. Psalm. 32.



EVTRAPELVS. By these few words that ye have now alleged, any man may
easelye learn, wherein our iustyfication does consiste.
that our justification consists in the forgiveness of sins and imputation
of the righteousenesse of Christ. Whereby the vain and found opinion of those,
that will have us to be justified by works is clean overthrown.


ALBION. I would sayn, that our brother Philalethes, should briefelye declare
unto us, What it is to be justified by works.
what it is to be justified by works, and again what it is too be justified
by faith. For, these things, being well and substantially understood, I do
not doubt, but that the test will be a great deal the playner.


PHILALETHES. To be justified by works, is by our own deeds, to deserve
remission and forgiveness, of sins, and too pourchase unto our selves
salvation. Or else thus: They are justified by works, in whose life, there is
found such cleanelinesse and holiness, as may deserve the testimonye of
righteousness before the judgment seat of God, or that with the vprightenesse
of their works be able to answer and satysfye Gods justice and judgment.


DYDIMVS. I believe that they are very thynne sown, that with the uprightness
of their works be able to answer and satisfy the justice and judgment of
God.


PHILALETHES. They are very thyn sown in deed. For non (Christ only excepted)
could ever do it. And therefore, Christ only has satisfied the justice of God.
all the children of Adam, being at defiaunce with their own righteousness,
ought to cry out with David, and sai: Enter not in to judgment with thy
servant, o lord, Psalm. 143.
for in thy sight shall no man liui^g be justified.


ALBI. And what is it to be justified by faith?


PHI. They are justified by faith, What it is to be iustyfied by faith.
that being excluded from the righteousenesse of works, do by faith take
hold one the righteousenesse of Christ, wherwyth when they are clothed and
appareylled, they appear in the syghte of God, not as sinners, but as
ryghteouse persons.


ALBION. Iam. 2.
where he says on this manner: was not our father Abraham justified through
works, when he offered Isaac his son upon the altar? And a little after: ye se
then, how that of works a man is justified, and not of faith only. Either
ye must (say they) make the holy Apostels to disagree or ye must grant
with James that of works man is justified and not of faith only.


PHILALETHES. God wotte, this is a poor help, that they do bring for them
selves. For first and formoste, let us mark the history, that James does
make mention of, and we shall soon perceive how ignorauntly they behave the^
selves in expoundinge the words of the Apostell. We read in the xv. chapter
of Genesis, Genesis 15.
that Abraham believed the Lord, and it was coumpted unto him for
righteousness. Which text is of Paul aleaged after this sort: If Abraham
were justified by works, Romans 4.
he has wherein to rejoice or glory, but not with God. For what says the
scripture: Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for righteousness?
Whereby the holy Apostle, Abraham was iustyfied.xxx. years before he offered
his son Isaac.
does prove most stronglye, that Abraham our father was justified by faith.
But this, that James does speak of, which is the offering of Isaac, was
done xxx. years after, that the scriptures did pronounce Abraham to be
justified, or yt his faith was coumpted unto him for righteousness. Verily,
fyth that.xv. years before that Isaac was borne, Gene. 22.
Abraham's faith was imputed unto him for righteousness, it was impossible,
that he should be justified by the offering of his son Isaac, which was as I
said before.xxx. years after. What if we say then, that the apostle does only
go about to show, What faith Abraham was justified by.
that the faith, which Abraham was justified by, was no idel or dead faith but
such a faith, as made him obedient unto God, as it is more playnelye set
forth in the.ii. to the Hebrews.


EV. This that ye have brought in now, is of great strength. And truly, I do
not see, which way they can wind the^ selves out of ye briers if the history
and the circumstaunces of the same be weighed a right.


PHI. We will yet go to work with them another way: and show how that there is no
repugnaunce at al in the doctrine of ye Apostels. For, what contrariety or
repugnaunce could there be in their doctrine, since that they were both lead by
one spirit? Therefore, we shall mark, that the holy Apostle. S. Paul in his
epistels to ye Romans and to the Galathians, did dispute and reason against
the^ that did atribute justification to works, but. Note this diligently.
S James did write against them, which did utterly contempne and despise good
works. And therefore Paul shows the causes of our justification James the
effects and fruits of the same. Paul declares how we are justified: James how
we are known to be justified. Paul excludes works, as not the cause of our
justification: James approves works as effects proceeding of ye same. Paul
denies that any good works ca^ be in the^ that be not iustyfied: James
affirms yt they which be justified ca^ in no wise be without good works. But
ye shall hear what. S Augustine has left unto us, by writing, touching ye
matter: Augu. 83. questionum questi. 76. Glossa ordinaria.
Quod Abraham per fidem sine operibus iustificatus est, de operibus qu^e
precedebant, intelligitur, quia per opera quae fecit, iustus non suit, sed sola
fide. Hic de operibus agitur, quae fidem sequntur, Heb. 11.
per quae amplius iustificabatur, cum tam per fidem fuisset iustus. Vnde Paulus
dicit: Fide obtulit Abraham Isaac, quum tentaretur. Haec oblatio est opus et
testimonium fidei et iustitiae. That is too say: That Abraham was justified by
faith without works, it is to be understood of the works that did goo
before: For, he was not righteouse through the works, which he had done, but
by faith only. Here it is spoken of the works that follow the faith, whereby
he was more justified, whereas he was already before made righteouse by
faith. Therefore, Paul says: The offeringe of Isaac is a testimony of the
faith and righteousness of Abraham.
Abraham did offer Isaac with faith, when he was tempted. This offeringe is a
work and testimonye of his faith and of his righteousness. These things, did
he write upon James epistell. If the offering of Isaac, is a testimony of the
faith and righteousness of Abraham: He could not be iustyfied by it, but
rather it was thereby declared that he was justified already. So that this
obedience of his, Romans 4.
which he showed unto the word of the Lord, did only manifest and show, that he
was when he believed Gods promises, made ryghteous before God, through the same
faith and believe, wherwyth he was so strengthened, that geuynge the glory unto
God, he persuaded him self fullye, that he which had promised, was also able
to do the thing, that he had promised though it seemed never so strange,
nor so much against the common course of nature. And therefore the Apostle
concludethe right well, that it was imputed unto him for righteousness.


EVTRAPELVS. As far as I do remember, I have heard you tell, that otherwhyles,
to be justified, is to be declared righteous and just. As when the prophette
David says: Psalm. 51.
That thou may be justified in thy words and overcome, when thou
art-iudged, that is to say: that thou may be declared just, and thy
goodness and truth appear, in performing thy promises, when man either of
curiosite, or of arroga^cie would judge thy works.


PHILA. This is well remembered. And therefore, this shall we note by the way,
This word to iustifye is other wise taken of Paul then of James.
that this word to justify, is not taken of Paul in that signification, that
saint James does take it in. For, of Paul it is taken for to deliver from
syn, and for to impute righteousness: but James does take it, for to declare
one just and righteous. Again Paul speaks of a lively faith, which can no
more be without good works, Faith is not taken of the Apostels in one
signyfication.
than the Sun can be without light, or fire with out heat: But James
speaks of an idell and deadde faith, which may be in the reprobate, yea,
in the devil him self, as the Apostell writteth in the same place. Moreover,
whether ought one text too give place to many: or many too give place to one?
One text must give place to many.



DYDI. It stands with reason that one text should rather give place too
many, than that many should give place to one.


PHILALE. For, this one text of James, that seems to attribute iustifycation
unto works, how many notable textes and sentences, shall ye find in the
other Canonical scriptures, that teach the contrary?


ALBION. And we do all pray you, brother Philalethes, that ye will aleadge the
chiefest and most principal of the^. For as touching that place, which they do
aleadge and bring out of the second chapter of James, ye have well satisfied
my mind, I thank god therefore.


PHI. That will I gladli do: yea I will be sides this ioigne unto ye autorities
of the scriptures and word of God, ye sayings of the aunciaunt fathers of the
primitive church, that so ye enemies of the truth, which do most lyengly
blow abroad, that we have no such stuff, may at length, seeing our great
richesse, utterly be shamed and confounded.


DIDIMVS. Forsothe in so doing, ye shall do us all a great pleasure.


PHILALETHES. I might here bring many notable sentences out of the old and new
Testament, wherein the excellencye of faith is highly setfoorth, but I will at
this present omit or leave the^ and aledge only those places, that do most
chiefly perteyne to justification.

Act. 13.
First in the Acts of the Apostles, we have these words written in the
sermon, that Paul made unto the Jews that were at Antiochia, a cytte of
Pisidia: Be it known unto you therefore, brethern that through this man is
preached unto you the forgiveness of sins. And that from all things, from
which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses, by him eueri one that
believes, is justified. These words are so plain, that they need no
exposition at al. For, all men, onelesse they will be wilfully blind still,
may easily see, that he takes away altogether justification from the law of
Moses, Justification is taken away all together from the law of Moses and
atributed unto faith
and does attribute it unto faith in our savior Jesus Christ. But in the
Epistel to the Romai^s the holy apostell makes the matter more plain, where
he says: They have all sinned, and are destituted or void of the glory of
God. But they are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption, that
is in Christ Jesus, Romans 3.
who^ God has setfoorthe too be a pourchasser of mercy, through faith in his
blood.

Let these words be diligentely considered and weighed, and then I do not
doubt, but that they, that be of an indifferente judgment, will sone agree
unto our doctrine. First, the Apostle says, that they have all sinned, and
that they are deprived of the glory of God. By which words he does most
liuelye put before our eyes the miserable estate, that whole mankind was in.
Secondly he does effectuouslye show, how and by what means we are delivered
from it, I mean: What be the means whereby we are justified, or delivered from
the (...) of dampnation.
from that dampnable estate, that we are in by our own nature, and first
birth, when he says: But they are justified frelye by his grace. Now, if we
be justified freely by the grace of God, where are our works, merits or
deseruings become? For if any works, deseruinges or merits, do go before our
justification, how can it be said, that we are justified freelye by the grace
of God our heavenly father?


EVTRAPELVS. In deed it might rather be said, that we are justified in
respect of our own works and merits. And so the saying of the Apostell
could not stand, where he says in an other place: By grace ye are saved
through faith, Epho. 2.
and that not of your selves: it is the gift of God, not of works, least
any man should boaste him self. Whereunto the saying of a most aunciente
writer seems well to agree: His words are these: Ambrosius de vocatione
gentium li. 1. capi. 5.


Sicut nulla sunt tam detestanda facinora, quae possunt gratiae arcere donum,
ita nulla possunt tam proeclara opera existere, quibus hoc quod gratis
tribuitur, perretributionis iudicium debeatur.

Vilesceret, enim, redemptio sanguinis Christi, ac miserecordia del humanorum
operum praerogatiuae succumberet, si iustificatio quae f^t pergratiam
praecedentibus meritis deberetur, vt non munus largientis, sed merces esset
operantis.

That is to say: As there be no sins so detestable, that can keep of, the
gift of grace, so there can be no works so excellent, that unto them, by the
judgment of retribution or recompense, the same should be due, which is freely
given and granted. For, the redemption of the blood of Christ should wax
vile, and the mercy of God, be feign to give place to the prerogative of men's
works, if justification, which is don or wrought by grace were due unto the
merits that go before, so that it should not be the free gift of the gyuer,
but the reward or hyre of the worker. What other thing, I beseech you, does
this holy father mean but that we are without any merits, going before,
justified freely by the mere goodness and grace of God, To attribute
justification unto any merits going before, is a derogation of the grace of
God.
through faith in the blood of his son Jesus Christ.

Yea, he does plainly affirm that it is a derogation of the grace of God,
and of the merits of the death, passion and bloudshedding^ of his son Jesus
Christ, to attribute our justification unto any merits, going before, and
also that it is to constrayne the glory of the free mercy of God to yield or
give place unto the dignity and worthiness of men's works.


DYDIMVS. This is a very godly saying and most worthy to be noted of all men.
quod sola fides iustificat, solifidians.
that faith only justifies, so that this word only, or alone has be^ newly
added by heretykes, Although we have not in the scripturs this word sola, only
or alone yet have we many words that be of like force.



PHILALETHES. Will ye that I tell you the truethe, neighbor Dydimus? These
stout champions of Antychriste, do nothing else but seek a knot in a russhe,
as the common laiyne proverb is, For, al^houghe we have not expresselye this
word, sola, only or alone, yet have we many other words, that are
equipollente, or equiualente, that is, of the same importance and force. For
when the holy ghost says: yt we are justified freli by ye grace of god through
the redemption, which is in Christ Jesus whom God has setfoorth to be a
purchasser of mercy, through faith in his blood: does he not exclude all
manner of works deseruinges or merits from our justification, attributinge it
unto faith only whereby we do apprehende and take hold on the grace and
mercy of God, so surely sealed up unto us with the blood of that immaculate
and unspotted lamb, our savior Jesus Christ? Romans 3.
In the same self chapter he says again: we conclude that a man is
justified by faith without the works of the law. Who does not see, that he
does here also put away all manner of things from our justification, faith
only excepted? What Paul understands by ye works of the law.
I am sure that by the works of the law, he vnderstandethe those works that
God doethe require of us in his word, and whether ye will refer them to the
ceremonies, or to the moral precepts and commandments, that be contained
in the same, it is all one thing to me. For the holy ghost does testifye
every where that the works of the law do not justify. Of the ceremonies,
rites, and sacrifices, we have this sufficient testimony of the prophette
David: Thou desire no sacrifice, psalm. 51,
though I would give it: thou delitest not in burnte offeringe. And therefore
being sore troubled in his conscience, for his heinous offense that he had
committed, he did cast ye eyes of his faith upon the blood and merit of the
savior promised, saying: wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity and cleanse me
from my syn. psalm. 51.
Purge me with Ysope and I shall be clean: wasshe me, and I shall be whyter then
snow. Deliver me from blood, o God, which art the God of my salvation. And
from thence saint Paul seems to have borrowed this his saying: Heb. 10.
The blood of Bulls and Goats cann not take away sins. Gala. 3.


And as for the works commanded in the moral precepts and commandments,
Deu. 28.
we are sure that they can not justify. Abac. 1. Romans 1. Heb. 10.
For why? who is able to do them with such a perfection as God does require?
And therefore hear what ye apostel says in his Epistel to the Galatians:
Gala. 2.
As many as are of the works of the law, are under ye curse. For, it is
written: Cursed is eueri man that continues not in all things, that are
written in the book of the law, for to do them. And that no man is justified
by the law in the sight of God, it is evident. For, the just shall live by
faith. Again in the same self Epistell thus does the apostel write: know
that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by ye faith of Jesus
Christ, and even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified
by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law. Because that by ye
works of the law no flesh can be justified.

All these sayings do sufficiently declare, that although, as I said before,
we have not expressly this word, sola, only or alon, yet we have many other
words that are of like importance, and force. The enemies of the truth are to
be likened unto the Arians.
So that in this point, we may likene the enemies of the truth unto the
wicked Arians, which because yt these words, homousios and consubstantialis,
be not found in ye scriptures, will in no wise admit nor allow them, although
the things signified by them, are most infallibly and certainly contained and
set out in the book of God.


EVTRAPELVS. There comes now in to my mind a certain saying of the
Apostle, which as I do suppose, will serve well for our purpose. In the Epistle
to the Philyppians, Phi. 3.
he writes on this manner: The things that were vantage unto me, the same I
counted loss for Christ's sake, and do judge them to be dounge, that I might
win Christ, and might be found in him, that is: not having mine own
righteousness, which is of the law, but that, which is through the fayeth
of Christ, even the righteousness, which is of God through faith. What they
must do that will enjoy the righteousness of Christ.
It is euydente and plain that saint Paul here in this place, makethe a
comparison betwixt things that are contrary, shewinge that they, which will
obtain or enjoy the righteousness of Christ must utterly forsake their own.
And therefore in the Epistle to ye Romai^s, Romans 10.
he does playnelye affirm, that the cause of the ruin and fall of ye Jews,
was because that they went about to establish their own righteousness, and
would in no wise submit them selves to the righteousenesse of God. Whereunto, to
make the matter the more plain, he does by and by ad these words For Christ is
the end of the law for righteousness unto every one yt believes.


DYDI. I do not very well understand this last sentence.


EV. The meaning of it is this: The end of the law is to iustlye them, that
do observe it. But who did ever observe it? Therefore, i. Cor. 1.
Christ having fulfilled it for us, is through faith, made unto us of god
wisdom, righteousness, holiness and redemption. So that what so ever is
lacking or wanting in us, it is by his perfect obedience, most aboundantlye
supplied, as far forth as we have felloweshyppe with him, through faith.


ALBION It reioiceth my very heart to hear such coumfortable sentences out of
the scriptures and word of God. But I would feign learn, whether the old
doctors do hold with us, that fayethe only does justify. For, that is one
of the things, which the enemies do stoutely deny.


PHILALETHES. Er I do satisfye your desire, I do intend to aledge yet two or
three golden sentences out of the Apostel: which can not well be omitted in
this case.

The first shall ye have in the Epistel to Titus, Titu. 3.
where he writteth on this wise: Not by the works of righteousness, which we
had done, but according to his mercy he saved us, that we being justified by
his grace should be made heyrs, according too the hope of eternal life.

The second is much like unto this, and is setfoorth in the second Epistell
to Timothee, after this manner: God has saved us, 2. Timo. 1.
and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, The
purpose of God does exclude al merits and deseruings from the justification of
man.
but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given unto us through
Christ Jesus, before the world was. Truly, whersoeuer this purpose of God is,
there works, merits, or deseruinges, can take no place in the justification or
salvation of man. Whereby, it must needs follow (as we can gather none other of
the sentences now aleadged) that by the free mercy and goodness of God,
apprehended and taken hold upon by faith, we are delivered from our sins and
from everlasting damnation, and made fellow heyers with his son Jesus Christ
whose righteousness he does impute unto us, of his eternal and everlasting
kingdom of heaven. All these things, I say, do we obtain, through fayeth
only, without any merits going before.


DIDIMVS. Say what ye will, the enemies do still whisper in to the ears of the
simple and ignorant persons, that this is, but a new sound doctrine, and
that none of all the ancient doctors did ever teach it?


PHILALETHES. Ye might have learned that this is plain fal^e in the authority,
that we have already brought out of saint Augustine, Aug. 83. questionu^
questione* 76, Glossa ordinaria.
whose words are these: Quod Abraham per fide^ sine operibus iustificatus est,
de operibus quae praecedebant, intelligitur, quia per opera, quae fecit, iustus
non fuit sed sola fide.

Which we have already englished thus: That Abraham was justified by faith
without works, it is to be understood of the works, that did go before.
For, he was not ryghteous through the works, which he had done before, sed
sola fide, but by faieth only. If it be an heresye to say that faith only
does iustifye, let me see, how they can excuse Saint Augustine of heresye.
Unto him, may we ioygne father Ambrose, who wrytinge upon the epistell to the
Romans, Amb. in episto. ad Romanos ca. 4.
speaks on this manner: Iustificari sunt gratis, quia nihil operantes neque
vicem reddentes sola fide iustificati sunt dono dei.

That is to say: They were iustyfied freelye, for, they worckynge nothing,
nor making any recompense, they were justified through faith only, by the
gift of God. Again, in the same place, these be his words: Sic decretum
dicit a deo, vt cessante lege, Ibidem.
solam fidem gratia dei poscere^ ad salutem.

Which may be englyshed thus: He sayethe, that it was so decreed of God, that
the law being at an end, the grace of God should require faith alone, or
faith only unto salvation. Ibidem.


These be also his words:

Hoc ipsum munit exemplo prophetae. Beatitudinem hominis di it, cui deus
acceptam fert iustitiam sine operibus. Beatos dicit quibus hoc sanxit deus, vt
sine labor et aliqua obseruatione, sola fide iustificentur apud deum. That is
to say: he does strengthene or fense this by the example of the prophette. He
says that the same man has blessedfulnes or that blessedfulnes pertained and
belongs to that man, unto whom God imputes righteousness without works,
he calls them blessed unto whom God had made this decree, that without
labor, and without any observation, they should, by faith only be
justified before God. And in an other place: Idem in. 9. ca. ciusdem epistol^e.
Sola fides ad salutem posita est. Faith only, says he, is appointed unto
salvation. Ye may see now, how many times, this old father does use this
word, sola, alone or only, which the adversaries or enemies do accuse of
heresye. But let us hear what the other ancient fathers do say concerning
this matter these are Ieroms words upon the Epistle to the Romans. Ieronimus
in 10. caput episto. ad To.


Ignorantes quod sola fide iustificat deus, et se ex operibus legis, quam
numqua^ custodierunt iustos esse putantes, noluerunt se subijcere remissioni
peccatorum, ne peccatores fuisse viderentur. That is to say: They not knowinge
that God justifies by faith only, and supposing them selves to be just by the
works of the law, which they never observed, they would not submit them selves
unto the remission of sins, least they should seem too have been sinners.


EVTRAPELVS. By this autoritye, that ye have aleadged out of Jerome, two
things may be learned. First and foremost we learn that God does iustifye
by faith only, which, of the enemies is coumpted plain heresye, whereupon we
may conclude that they be wrapped in the same most pestiferous ignorance
that the scribes and Pharisees were wrapped in, What credit ought to be given
unto the enemies of the truth and what s^a^full ignorance they be wrapped in.
and that therefore no credit ought to be given unto them, nor yet to their
doctrine. For why? they be altogether ignorant in the highest and most
principal point of our religion: causinge the people to seek for salvation,
where there is nothing else but desperation and shippewracke of conscience.
Secondlye, we see here most euidentlye the cause why the scribes and
Pharisees, Why the scribes and Pharisees were utter enemies unto the gospel.
Luc. 18.
were such extreme enemies unto the gospel, which offers unto all them that
will believe in our savior Jesus Christ, free pardone and remission of their
sins. Forsooth, they iustyfyed them selves that they were perfect and without
sin. Lest then they should lose any part of their estimation (for they, sought
their own glory more than the glory of God) they would in nowyse submit
them selves unto the doctrine of the remyssion of sins, nor yet receive the
general pardone, that was offered unto them of God. For, then they must
needs, to have acknowledged them selves with the other to have been sinners.
But they would none of that, being in this point most like unto our great
Rabbis, Why our great rabbis will not acknowledge their error.
which although their conscyences bear them record, that they be in a most
pernicious error, and have most shamefully deceived the people, yet because
they will not mynishe one jot of their reputation, that they have had among
simple and ignoraunte pesonnes, they have lyeffer too continue and remain in
their error, and to be stomblynge blocks still unto the people, than ones
too revoke their error, and to give the glory unto God.


DYDIMVS. And suppose ye, that this is the cause of their obstinacye?


PHILALETHES. It appears that is so, else would they revoke or recant their
error, and as our brother Eutrapelus said, give the glory unto God. But we
will leave them unto their judge, who at length will, by his righteous
judgment, God send him betymes.
send a Iehu, who shall make hauok of them all: and so proceade to the rest of
our matter. Hylarius in the.ix. Canon upon Mathewe, Hilarious canone nono in
Math.
and upon these words: Remittuntur tibi peccata tua. Thy sins are forgeuen
the: writes on this manner.

Mouet scribas, remissum ab honine peccatum. Hominem enim tantum, in Chiristo
Jesus contuebantur, et remissum ab eo, quod lex laxare non po^erat. Fides enim
sola iustificat. That is to wit: It moves the scribes, that sin was
forgeuen by man. For they did only behold man in Christ Jesus, and that to be
forgeuen of him, which the law could not release. For faith only does
iustifye. This text is very plain. For, first and foremost, he says that
the scribes were moved because that Christ forgave sin whom they judged to be
a nude and bare man, but specially that he took upon him to forgive and
pardon that, which the law, could neither releasse nor forgive. For these were
their words: Why does this man speak such blasphemies? Who can forgive
syns but God only? And finallye he does knyt up the matter with these
words: Fides enim sola iustificat: If it be an here^y to (...), that faith only
^u^^ify (...) the (...) Mat. 2
For, faith only does justify. If we for saying that faith only does iustifye,
do deserve to be called heretics: how shall, I beseech you. S. Augustine,
Ambrose, Jerome and Hylarius be excused, which do use the same phrase and manner
of speakinge, that we do use, and maintain the same doctrine, that we do
maintayn? Shall they not with us be called Solifidians?


ALBION. Now of a truth, I do understand and perceive, that I have been
shamefullye, beguyled by these bragginge merchants of the clergy.


PHILA. Ye will say so, by that time, that ye have heard all. I have already
aleadged.iiii. of the most aunciente of tha latin writers: now will I ioygne
unto them.iiii. of the greek doctors I will not cumber the reader with so
many as I could now bring in, for, I suppose these few to be sufficient,
for to satisfye any reasonable man's mind. First we will bring in, Origenes
in tertium caput epistole ad Romanos.
old father Orygene, who upon the epistell to the Romans writes on this
manner: Apostolus hisce verbis: Arbitramur igitur fide iustificati hominem
absque operibus legis dicit sufficere solius fidei ^ustificationem, ita vt
credens quis tantummodo, iustificetur etiam si nihil operis ab eo fue^it
expletum. Quod si exemplum requiramus, quis si^e operibus sola fide
iustificatus sit, sufficere arbitror illum latronem, qui cum Christo
crucifixus, clamauit ei de cruce: Domine Jesus, memento mei, cum veneris, in
regnum tuum, nec aliud quicquam describitur boni operis eius, in euangelijs,
sed pro hac sola fide, ait ei Jesus: Amen dico tibi: Hodie mecum eris in
paradiso. Per fidem ergo iustificatus est hic latro, absque operibus legis.
Quia super hoc dominus non requisiuit, quid prius operatus esset, nec
expectauit, quid operis cum credidisset expleret, sed sola confessione
iustificatum comitem sibi paradisum ingressurus assumpsit.

That is to say: Romans 3.
Paul by these words: We suppose therefore, that manne is justified by faith
with out the works of the law, affyrmethe that the iustifycation of faith
alone or of fayeth only is sufficyente, so that any manne beleauinge only,
can be justified, although no manner of work has been fulfilled or done by
him.

And if we require an example, who was justified by faith only without
works, Luc. 23,
I suppose that the same thief does suffice, who when he was crucified with
Christ, did cry unto him from the cross: Lord Jesus, remember me, when thou
come in to thy kingedome. Neither any good other work of his, is described
or set forth unto us in the gospelles. But for this fayeth only, Jesus
said unto him: Verily I say unto the, this day thou shall be with me in
paradyse. This thief then was justified by faith without the works of the
law. For the Lord did not upon this require, what he had wrought before,
neither did he look what work he should do after he did believe, but being
redye to enter in to paradise, he took him for his waitinge man, being
justified by that confession only. Besides this he does aleadge the example
of the synnefull woman and of the Publican, Luc. 7.18.
that be mentioned of in the Gospel of Luke, whom he does also affirm, too
have been justified by faith only, without any respect of works, merits,
or deseruinges.


DYDIMVS. I am affrayed lest some, hearing this doctrine so


PHILALETHES. We are not delivered from our syns to this end that we should
walowe in them again.
without doubt he has despised the grace of iustificaon. Neither does any
receive remission or forgiveness of sins to this end, that he should think
that license to sin again, is given unto him. For, a pardone not of the
sins to come, but of the sins passed is given or granted in justification.
But of this we will speak more amply hereafter, when we shall have occasyon
too talk of those good works, that do spring and proceade of the true
iustifyinge faith.


ALBION. Let us therefore hear what the other greecke doctors do say.


PHI. With a good will. Athanassius upon the third to the Galathians writes
briefli thus: Athanasius
Nunc pla ^e demo^strat fidem ipsam vel solam iustificandi virtutem habere Now
says he, does he plainly show that the same fai^he, yea being alone has
power to iustifye. Whereunto Chrysostom agrees saying: Chrisostomus in
epistolam ad Romans Homeli. 7.
Hic virtute^ dei ostendit, quod non solum saluauit, sed et iustificauit, nullis
ad hoc vsus operibus, sed fidem tantum exigens. That is to say: he shows the
virtue and power of God, how that he did not only save, Basilius Hemeli. de
humilitate.
but also iustifye using no works unto it, but requiring faith only. But among
all other, this saying of Basilius is most worthy to be noted: Ea demum
perfecta est et integra gloriatio in deo, quando neque de sua quisqua^ ipsius
iustitia suberbit, sed agnoscit. Vera destitutum iustitia sola se in Christum
fide iustificatum. Which golden words may be englyshed after this manner: That
at length, is a perfect, and sound reioycinge in God, when a man does not
brag or boaste of his own righteousness but does acknowledge, that being
void of true righteousness, he is justified through fayeth only in Christ.
Many such like things, are read in the wrytinges of the aunciente fathers,
whereby all men may see, that we are not the first, that have used this word
sola, alone or only, to express the meaning of the Apostell, and to set
forth the glory of the grace of God. For the fathers did use it a fore us,
whose writings they do make equal with the Canonycall scripture.

They say, that we have it not in the words of ye Apostel. Why do they not so
in this point.
Let the^ tell that to the fathers, whom they do take for the pilours of the
church. Let them contend and strive with the^ rather tha^ with us. To be short
if it be an heresy to say that faith only in Christ does justify, they must
accuse those ancient fathers of heresy, yea they must coumpt them to be the
captayns of al heretyks.


EVTRA. What shyfte do they make, when they feel them selves pressed with so
many autorities of the old fathers? With what face, can they reiecte or cast
of this word, solam, alone or only?


PHILA. There be some, which when they can not for shame refuse it, are wont
to fly to this startinge hole: The evasion of the enemies.
They grant that we are justified by faith only in Christ: but they add that
this is only done at the beginning of faith, when we begin first to
believe in Christ, and so they will have us to understand, this to be Paulles
meaning: that neither sins did hinder the gentilles, A very goodlye shift I
waraunt you
but that as soon as they began to believe in Christ, they were justified by
faith only: nor works farther the Jews, when they likewise came to Christ,
but unto them also was faith imputed for righteousness: And so at length,
they do conclude, that if they, which be ones justified by faith, do after
their justification, sin again, they can no more be justified by faith, that
is to say, freely, as affore, but by works, that is to say, by satisfaction.


EVTRAPELVS. After my judgment, this is but a homelye evasion or starting
hole. For, if they take this word, to be justified, for to be delivered from
sin: it is manyfeste and plain, that the same justification, that consists
in the gratuite and free remission of sins, Justification whereby we are
delivered from syn, is necessari unto us as long as we live. Math. 6. 1. Ioa.
2.
is necessary unto us, al our lives time, unless this were vayn, which,
according to the institution of the Lord, we do daily pray for, saying: And
foregeue us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us, John
said unto them that did believe and were justified, My little babes, if any man
does sin, we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the righteouse,
and he is the satisfaction for our sins. He says not: he was the
satisfaction for our sins, now therefore ye must be iustifified by your own
works, and make satisfaction, for your sins: but he does set forth unto
the church of God, the endless and everlasting satisfaction of Christ, that
is to say, the free remission and forgeuenes of sins or justification,
which we do obtain through faith in him. Or if they understand it of
righteousenesse, which is the effect of this justification, whereby our hearts
are purged and our life renewed. Yet it can not so be applied unto faith, that
it should only pertayne to the beginning of it, and all the rest of our life
require the righteousness of works, Similitude
whereby we should be saved. For, that were, as if a man should say, that the
soul does only quickene the body at the beginning, but not so afterward:
as though all the quickening or viuifying, should not come of the soul alone,
but of the operations of the body. Abac. 1. Romans 1. Gala. 3.
The righteouse, says the Apostell, lives by faith. I do not deny, but that
the life of the righteouse is adorned and beutyfyed with many virtues, but yet
it can be attributed too none of them, but too fayethe only, that our
hearts being cleansed, we live godly in the sight of God.


ALBION. I heard ones certain reason after this sort: If to be iustyfied, is
to be delivered from sin: Faith only does not iustifye, but love also. And
for the probation of their saying, they bring these words of Christ: Luc. 7.
Many sins are forgeuen her, because that she loved much. Lo, say they,
here remission of sins, is plainly attributed unto love. Again: are not
these Peter's words: 1. Pet. 4.
Love covers the multitude of sins? Who does not see now say they, that
love does as well iustifye as faith?


PHILALE. I answer that the love of this woman,

That it is so, it may be proved easelye by the words of our savior Jesus
Christ, which he spoke unto her saying: Fides tua te saluam fecit. Vade in
pace.

Thy faith has made thee safe, Christ is a sufficient expositoure of his own
word.
or has saved thee, go thy way in peace. How had fayeth saved her, but
because that through it, she had obtained remyssion of sins? In deed she
did afterward declare the same fayeth by the earnest love that she did bear
too Christ. And as for the other sentence, I maruayle that they be not ashamed
to aleadge it. For, ye shall find it thus written in the proverbs, Prou. 10.
cha.
from whence the Apostell borrowed it: Odium vitia detegit, charitas autem
operit multitudinem peccatorum:

That is to say: hatered doethe open, and dyscouer faults, but love doethe
cover the multitude of sins.

What other thing can we learn of this saying of the wise manne, but that
as hatered does move us, to cast our breethren in the tethe, and to vpbrayed
them with the offenses that they commit against us: so love hydeth and
pardons the faults, iniuryes and wrongs that are done unto us, be they never
so great? In the same sense did the holy Apostell take it, as it does
manifestlye appear by the cyrcumstaunces of the place. But the enemies of the
truth care not what they say, How the scriptures are aleaged of the enemies of
the truth
so that they seem to say some thing. They aleadge the scryptures, as the
blind man casts his staff.


DYDI. Ye teach that before a man be justified through faith in Christ he can do
no good works, yea that all that he does is sin, though it seems never so
good.

Now put the case that a Turk or heathen were desirous to hear this a good
work? Gardiners objection against doctoure Barnes.
And yet ye will not say, that he is already justified, for as much as he
doethe not yet beleaue in Christ.

Besides this, we have the example of Cornelius, of whom before he did believe
in Christ, Luke writes after this manner: And the Angel said unto him:
Act. 10.


Thy prayers and thine alms, are come up in too remembrance before God.

These words did the Angel speak unto Cornelius before that he heard Peter,
and consequently, before that he believed in Christ.

What can we gather of this but that a man may do good works, before he has
faith, and hither through justified?


EVTRAPELVS. By our brother Philalethes leave, has brought in now. I would
feign, neighbor Dydimus that ye should answer me to this question: Can a tree
bring forth good fruit, Math. 7.
before it be made good?


DYDI. As no good tree can bring forth evil fruit, so can no ill tree
bring forth good fruit.


EVTRAPE. Ephe. 2. Io. 15.
And what are we before we be graffed in Christ.


DYDI. As the holy Apostell does write: we are by our own nature the
children of wrath.


EVTRAPELVS. And how are we graffed in Christ? Or how are we made branches
of the true vine?


DYDIMVS. I grant that we are graffed in Christ, and made branches of the
true vine by faith.


EVTRAPE. Except then we have fayeth we can not be graffed in Christ, nor
made branches of the true vine. But onelesse we be graffed in Christ, we can
not be good trees, and if we be not good trees, we can bring forth no good
fruit. Again: are not these the Apostels words: Quicquid ex fide non est
peccatum est. To. 14.


What soever is not of faith, is sin: And without faith, Heb. 11.
it is impossible to please God


DYDI. What will ye say then of this turk or heathen, that has a desire to
hear the word of God, and to know the gospel of our savior Jesus Christ,
and paraduenture does therefore take upon him a long and parilous journey?


EV. I say, that the same Turk or heathen, may of a vain curiositye have a
desire to hear Gods word, and the gospel of Christ, Act. 17.
as the Athenians, why ye Athenians would hear Paulles doctrine.
and the strangers that were in their city, being moved with vain
curiosity, were desirous to hear the doctrine of Paul, and for the same cause
brought him to the street of Mars. Or as we our selves are desirous to know
strange histories that we never read before. We read in the histories that
mani of the aunciente Philophers, did take upon them long and perilous
iourneies that they might learn the wisdom of the Egiptians, and of the
Caldees. But let us by way of reasonninge, grant that he does it not of a
vain curiositye, yet before he be graffed in Christ, he remains still a
dampnable tree, and therefore, his fruit can not be good: how dare ye then
call it a good work? These be the words of Saint Augustyne: Li. ad boni fa.
3. cap. 5.
Religio nostra iustos ab iniustis non open rum, sed ipsa fidei lege disceruit,
sine qua etiam que videntur bona opera, in peccata conuertuntur.

Out religion, says he, does not discern the ryghteous from the
unrighteous by the law of works, but by the very law of faith, without
the which yea those works, that seem good works, are turned into sins.

And in an other place, he compares the study and endeavor of those men,
that be not in the way (but who is the way, save he only that says: I am
the way, the truth, and the life? Ioa, 14.
) unto agoynge a straye. For, the more earnestlye (says he) a man does run
being out of the way, prefa. in Psalm. 31.
the farther does he goo, from the scope or mark, and so is made more
miserable. Therefore, better it is to halte in the way, than to run out of
the way.


DYDIMVS. Ye can not say so of Cornelius. For, The history of Conelius.
the Angel says plainly, that his prayers and alms, are come up in too
remembrance before God. And this was before he heard the preachinge of the
gospel.


EVTRAPELVS. And I will have no better scriptures for too prove that Cornelius
had fayeth. For, since that his prayers and alms were acceptable in ye sight of
God, and that without faith it is impossible to please God: it is most sure
that Cornelius was not with out faith. But we will hear Saint Augustine
touching that matter. August. de predestinatione sancto rum. capi. 7
Nec tamen (says he) sine fide aliqua donabat, et orabat, quicquid et
antequam in Christum crederet, et cum crederet et quum credidisset operatus est
Cornelius, totum deo dandum est, ne quis extollatur.

That is to say: yet notwithstanding, he neither gave nor prayed without
some fayethe. What soever Cornelius did work before he believed in Christ, and
when he did believe, and after that he believed, all the whole must be given or
attributed unto God, lest any man swel, or be puffed up: what should we require
any more? By the words of the Angel, we do learn, that Cornelius both
prayed to God, and that his prayers were heard. But how could he have prayed
unto God, onelesse he had believed on him already? For, thus does the Apostle
write: Romans 10.
Quomodo inuocabunt, in quem non crediderunt?

How says he, shall they call upon him in who^ they do not believe?


ALBION. I hold my self well satysfyed in this point, I praise the living
God therefore. But I would feign hear of you, brother Philalethes, which he
the fruits of this our justification, which we obtain through faith only in
Christ, without any merits or deserving going before: and before which, all
that we do (semethe it never so gorgeouse in our sight) is but mere sin in
the sight of God.


PHILA. The fruits of this our justification, The fruits of our iustyfication.
are exceadinge great: Yea they are inestimable. For, god does not justify
us, nor yet deliver us from our sins to this end, that we being justified
should by our ill life dishonor his name, or blemishe his grace, asthoughe
he did not detest and abhor sin, but that we should serve to the glory of
him, that has wroughte our salvation. The first fruit of our iustyfication.
The first fruit then of our justification is that the glory of the
righteousness of God may be declared and set forth. This does the
Apostell mean, when he says: They are iustyfied frelye by his grace,
through the redemption, which is in Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth
to be apourchasser of mercy, through faith in his blood, too declare his
righteousness, Romans 3.
by the forgiveness of sins. Again: Abraham did not doubt of the promise of
God through unbelieve, but was strengthened in the faith and gave glory to God,
being fullye assured, Romans 4.
that he which had promissed, was able to do it. He therefore, that doethe
believe the promsies of god, does gloryfy him, giving him the glory of truth
and of power or might. And to this end, is he justified, The second fruit of
our justification. Romans 5.
that the glory of his goodness may be set forth. The second is the peace of
our consciences, whereof the Apostel speaks on this manner: We being justified
through faith, have peace toward God through our Lord Jesus Christ.


EV. Where this peace is, The peace of conscience does exclude wavering or
doubtfulnesse of mind.
there can be no place for wavering or doubtfulnes, which ye scole men of our
time, are wont to teach. For, doubtfulnes, and this peace of conscience, are
altogether repugnaunt one to an other.


PHI. We have not only by justification, peace of conscience but also a
reioycinge, which can in no wise stand with doubtfulnes. And thereby do we
rejoice under the hope of the glory of God, Romans 5.
and also in tribulations. It is so far of the^, that we ought to doubt of
the grace of god in Christ Jesus, that rather he will have us to be at peace
with him in our consciences, and to rejoice from our very hearts under the
hope of his glory, and therefore does he iustifye us freelye through faith
in Christ. The third fruit of our justification.
Thirdely this justification does tend also and pertayne to the glory of them
that be justified, as the Apostel him self does testifye, saying: Whom he
has ordained before, them has he called, and whom he has called, them has
he justified, Romans 8.
and whom he has justified, them has he glorified.


DIDI. make them like unto his glorious body:


EVTRA. Ye must understand, The certaynetye of Gods promise.
we may be as sure and certain of it, as if it were already performed and
fulfilled. Since then that God has promyssed to glorify them, whom he does
justify through faith in his son Jesus Christ: we must hold them for
glorified already, although we do yet through hope look for the glory of
the children of God.


PHILA. Ye have said very well. The.4. fruit of our justification.
Now the fourth fruit of our justification is this: God does freelye by his
grace iustifye us in Christ, to the end that we may be both saved and made
pertakers of eternal life. For, thus writes the Apostell in his epistell to
Titus. But when the bountefulnes and love of God our savior toward man
appeared. Not by the works of righteousness, which we had done, but
according to his merci he saved us, by the wasshinge of the new birth, and the
renewing of the holy ghost, which he shed on us abounda^tli, through Jesus
Christ our savior. That we being justified by his grace, should be made
heirs, according to the hope, of eternal life. Paull does call ye word of
this doctrine undoubted, because of the infallible truth and certaintye of it.
Therefore, I do greatly meruayl at the stupiditie or dullenesse of the enemies,
which will not see ye comfortable light of this doctrine, nor feel this
inestimable grace, which they do so sore impugn or fight against in the
elect and chosen of God. The fifte fruit of our iustyfication.
As for the fifth fruit of our justification, it does most chiefly pertayne,
to ye holiness of life, and to the study and exercise of righteousness.
Whereof the Apostle does warn us in the.vi. to the Romans, saying: Now being
made free from sin, and made servants unto God, ye have your fruit in
holiness. And in the first to ye Corinthians, these be his words: be not
deceived: 1. Cor. 6.
Neither whoremongers nor Idolaters, nor aduoutrers etc. shall inherit the
kyngedome of God. Why the spirit of Christ is given unto them that be justified.
And such were some of you but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye
are justified in ye name of the Lord Jesus: and by the spirit of our God. By
which words he does admonish them, that since they were justified, they ought
from thensfoorth to give them selves to godliness, to holiness of life and to
righteousness. And for this cause is the spirit of Christ given unto the^ that
be iustyfied, that through him they may be changed in too a newenesse of life.
Which newness, being received by the spirit of God, is not the justification
it self, but a fruit of the justification.


DYDIMVS. This doctrine lykethe me now better and better. And truly when I
hear you to soundly speak of justification and of the fruits thereof, I can
not but maruayle at the shameless reports of the enemies, which do still
blow abroad, that ye are utter enemies of good works, of holiness of life,
and of all Godly exercises of righteousness.


EVTRA. What is it, that they will be ashamed of, save only of well doing,
and of well saying? Whereof the enemies of the truth be ashamed.
They have put on whores faces: and therefore, although they be taken in a
manifestly, they be no more a shamed of it, than a common strompet is a shamed
of her filthye act.


PHI. That all the woorlde may know how shamefully they do misrep^rte us, I
will here declare and setfoorthe what we do teach commonly of good works, The
common doctrine of ye preachers touching good works.
and of the true uses of them. First we teach that as all things have been
created of God not to this end that they should be ydell and unprofitable, but
too the end that they should be profitable and good: so did he make and create
man, not for to be ydell here; Why man was created.
or for to be an unprofitable burden of the earth, but to this end, that every
one of us, should according to his vocation and calling, work those things
that be good and profitable. The devil in deed by bringing in sin, The
devil did pervert ye end of our creation, which Christ restored again.
did pervert this end of our creation, but Christ did restore it again,
being sent in too the world for to destroy the works of Satan. By him we
are regenerated or borne of new, that being made new creatures, we should
be profitable, and full of good works. And therefore, the Apostel in the
epistel to the Ephesians, writes on this manner: Ephe. 2.
we are the workemanshippe of God created in Christ Jesus, unto those good
works, that God has prepared for us, for to walk in. And in the epistell to
Titus: Who says he, gave him self for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquitye, Titus. 2.
and make us a peculyar people unto him self, being earnestlye given unto
good works. Math. 5.
Hereunto belong the exhortations of Christ and of the Apostels. Such as these
are: let your light so shine before men, Gala. 6.
that they may see your good woorks and glorify your father, which is in
heaven. And in the epistel to ye Galathians these are the Apostels words: 1,
Timo. 3.
Let us not cease to do good unto al me^ but most specialli to them, that are
of the household of faith. Are not ye scriptures given unto us for the same
purpose and use? The whole scripture says Paull, is given by inspiration of
God, and is profitable to teach, to improve, to correct and to instruct in
righteousness, that the man of God may be absolute or sound, being made
perfect unto all good works. It is euydent then, that we be not so justified
by fayeth, that after iustyfication, we should remayn, unprofitable, bareyne,
and unfruitful, but rather ye giving our selves without ceassing and
intermission to good works we should advance and farther the glory of the
grace of God, and set before all men's eyes, as it were a cetayn light of a
new creature. Similitude
Who does plant or set a tree or does dygge about the root of it, to the
end that it should only be a tree, and not rather to this end that it should
be a good tree, and bring forth good fruits. So, are we regenerated in
Christ, Why we be regenerated in Christ.
and justified, not to this end, that we should be only Christians in name, but
yt of evil trees we should be made good, and express that same goodness,
that we have received of Christ, by good works. When we teach these
things, we do neither give occasion to the enemies, to condemn iustelye
the doctrine of justification, as enemy of good works, nor yet ought we to be
blamed, although false gospelers do rather live like Epicures, than true
Christian men.


DYDI. Who having a crome or drop of godliness, can be offended at this
doctrine?


EVTRA. Who they be that are offended at the doctrine of the justification of
faith
They only are offended at this most true and wholesome doctrine which
partly do rather seek their own gaynes and lucre, than the salvation of the
people: And partlye, being erecated or blinded with vain superstition, do
embrace, and set forth unto other, men's dyuelish inventions for good works.
For, unto them, The good works of the papists.
to hear every day mass deuoutely, to lie prostrate before dead images, and
to mummell out a number of prayers unto certain Soyntes, to go on
pilgrimages, to buyld up chanteries, and to cause Trentalles of Masses with
diriges and other tromperye to be said for the dead. Item to give largelye of
their substance and gooddes unto ydell priests, mounkes, friars, and nonnes,
too say our ladies psalter, to pray on beads, too use, observe and keep
pharisaicall fastinges, with their popish holy days, and solemn feasts,
are the best works that can either be devised or done, and whosoever do speak
against those works, They yt are enemies of ye papystes good works are
enemies of sin, and of most detestable abomination. Romans 14.
they are by and by taken for utter ennemies of good works, whereas if the
thing were indifferentlye weighed in the eauen balaunce of Gods word, they
ought rather to be coumpted enemies of sin, and of most detestable
abomination. For, what soever is not of faith, is sin. But how ca^ these
their gai painted works be of faith, since that they have no ground at all in
Gods word? What gaye titles so ever then, they give unto them, it can not be
denied, but that they are most detestable sins in the sight of God, who will
allow none other kind of religion, worshippinge, and service, than he him
self, has prescribed and appointed in his holy scriptures.


DYDI.


EV. As concerning good intents, we have this lesson given unto us in the book
of God: Good intentes.
I am the Lord thy God, that thing only that I command the, see yt thou
do it. Ad nothing unto it, take nothing away from it. We must not do then
what soever seems unto us best, but what soever the lord our God does command
and wylleth us to do: so that by this one place of Deuteronomye, Deu. 12.
all good intentes that be not ruled by Gods word, are quite overthrown.


PHI. It does well appear by many histories of the Bible, how well God does
like our good intentes. Terrible and dreadful historyes.
In the.ix. and.x. chapters of Leuiticus, ye shall find this written: And
there came a fire out from the Lord, and consumed upon the altar, the
burnte offering and the fat. Which when all the people saw, they gave thanks
and fell on their faces.

But Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, took either of them his censor, and
put fire therein, and put incens thereuppon, and offered strange fire before
the Lord, which he had not commanded them.

How our good intents which have no waraunt in Gods word are rewarded
Therefore a fire went from the Lord and devoured them, so they dyed before
the Lord. Without all peradventure, they did this of a good intent. For,
unless they had thought, that God would have been pleased with it, they
would in no wise have done it, yet ye see how they were rewarded for it. Who,
I pray you, readinge this historye, will not be affrayed too serve God
otherwise than he does appoynte in his word? In the second book of Samuel, 2.
Samu. 6.
it is written that when David would bring the Arc to Jerusalem, he caused it
to be put upon a new cart (which doubtless was most gorgeouslye trymmed, and
drawn with the goodlyest and fairest cattle that could be gotten) David and
and the house of Israel playinge before the Lord on all instruments made of
fire, and on harpes, and on psalteries, and on tymberelles* and on cornetts,
and on cimballes. But now mark the end: when they came to Nachons threshinge
floor, Vzzah smitten of the Lord.
Vzzah did put his hand, too the Ark of God, and held it. For, the oxen did
shake it. And the Lord was very wroth with vzzah, and God smote him in the
same place for his faut, and there he dyed by the Ark of God. Let David
expound this matter, him self. In the first book of the chronicles, 1. Para.
13.
these be his words which he spoke unto the Levites: because ye were not there
at the first: the Lord our God made a breach or rent among us. For we sought
him not after due order. This was the due order, The order, that God had
appointed touching the Arc.
that should have been observed and kept. The Lord God has appointed, that the
Arc should have been carried upon the shoulders of the Levites. But what did
David? For a realtye, and to declare his great zeal, that he bare to Gods
religyon, would have it to be carried upon a goodlye chariot or wagon, nothing
being omitted or left of, that belonged to such glorious sole^nity, as ye
have learned before. Yet ye see how God did accept it. As for Vzzah, no man
can deny, but that he did of a good intent put forth his hand to have stayed
the Arc, Saul stands in defense of his disobedience.
least it should through the stronglinge of the cattle have fallen down in
to the mire. Who would not judge that this was well done? And yet was he
smitten of the Lord, that he dyed before the Arc. Whereby we learn what
danger it is too follow good intentes, or to do any thing in good service
without his express word.


ALBION. These are very terrible and dreadful examples, God grant that we
may have the grace always to remember them.


PHI. The historye of Saull, who was the first king of the Israelites, is yet
more terrible. God had given him a commandment, that he should smite Amaleke,
and destroy all that pertayned unto them, and have no compassion on them, but
slaye both man and woman, both infant and suckeling, both ox and sheep,
both camel and ass. The historye of^ Saul.
But Saul and the people spared the best of the sheep, and of the oxen, for to
sacrifice them unto the Lord, and destroyed all the rest. This did they of a
good intent, in so much that Saul stood in defense of the deed, saying: I
have obeid the voice of the Lord and have destroyed the Amalechites but the
people took of the spoil, sheep and oxen, and the chiefest of the things,
which should have been destroyed for to offer the^ unto the Lord. Unto who^ the
prophet Samuel answered: Has the Lord as great pleasyr in burnt offerings and
sacrifice, as when the voice of ye lord is obeid? Behold to obey is better than
sacrifice, and too harkene is better than the fat of rams: But rebellion is
as the sin of witchcrafte and disobedience is as the wickedness of ydolatry.
Therefore, because thou have cast away the word of the Lord the Lord has
also cast thee away from being king. Because then that Saul did rather follow
his good intent than the commandment, and word of the Lord, therefore his
kingedome, was not only rent from him, and given to his neighbor, that was
better than he, but also the spirit of the Lord departed from him, 1. Samu. 16
and an evil spiritte sent of the Lord vexed him.


ALBION. Are these the fruits of our good intents? From henceforth God
wylling, I will endeavor my self, to harken unto the voice of the Lord, to
obey his commandments, and too serve him as he will be served. For besides
those terrible and dreadeful historyes, I remember the sayynge of Christ, where
he says: They worship me in vain, teachinge the doctrines, Mat. 15.
and precepts of men. Whereby it is made most manifest and plain, that the
religion worshippinge and service of God, which is errected and set up after
the phancies and dreams of men's headdes, is both vain and abominable before
the majesty of God.


DYDIMVS. Sith that the good works of the popecacholikes do rather deserve
the name of sin and of detestable abhomynation before God, than of good
works, as it has been by you sufficientlye proved already: I would feign hear
which be the true good works, Which be the true good works, that God does
require of us.
that are required of the faithful.


PHI. The true good works, are void of all superstition, they are alligated
or bound neither to place, nor to the persons, nor to time. For, they are as
certain fruits of our whole life, testifying of the goodness of our heart,
and expressinge the nature of our heavenly father, which not only of the
faithful, but of the very infidelles are reckenned and taken for good works,
and minister occasion unto them, to glorifye our father, which is in heaven.
The works of faith, working through charity and love, are good works. For, God
does work them in us and by us. Them does our savior Jesus Christ set out
in the.xxv. chapter of Mathewe, Why the good works of mercy are most chieflye
set forth unto us.
saying: I was a hungerd and ye gave me meat, I was a thyrst, and ye gave me
drink, I was naked, and ye clothed me, I was harborlesse and ye harbored me,
I was sick and in prison, and ye visited me. The holy apostell likewise, in
the.v. and.vi. chapter of the Epistel to the Galatians does sufficiently teach
us, what be the good works, that God does require of us, But what should I
aleadge one text or two, sith that the whole scriptures, do every where,
exhort us still unto good works? Which be the good works, that God has
prepared for us too walk in.
What those good works be Paul does declare in the second to the Ephesyans,
when he says: We are the work manshyp of God created in Christ Jesus, unto
those good works, that God has prepared for us, for to walk in.

If onye now should ask, what be those good works, that he has prepared
for us for to walk in? I would answer, that all those works, that God
doethe bydde and command us in his holy and sacred word, are those good
works, that he has prepared for us, for to walk in.

And those, I say, ought only to be called good works and non other.


DYDI. And is there nothing else to be marked in this doctrine of good works.


PHILA. Besides that which has been said already, this ought to be considered:
that is, in what respect, those works, which in them selves are good, be
done of men. Why all they that do those good works that God has commanded in
his word do not deserve the praise of well doing.
For, they do not by and by deserve the praise and commendation of good works,
that do them: and that, becouse yt they do shote at a wrong mark in doing of
them. For many be wont to feade the hungrye, too give drink to the thyrsty,
to cloth the naked, and so forth: but do they it for any love that they bear
to god, and to their neighbor, and for to show their obedience toward his
commandments? Nay, they do it, for to be glorified of men. Some again do
these works of charity, that by them, thrustinge Christ out of his room,
they may merit and deserve heaven, as though eternal and everlasting life,
were not already fullye and most perfectlye pourchassed unto us, by the
merits of the death, passion and blood sheddynge of the only begotten son of
God, Heb. 7.
or as though Christ for all his everlasting priesthode, could not fully and to
the uttermost save them, that by him do come unto God. These last, Mercenaries
and hirelings
may be called mercenaryes or hyrlinges. For, as much as they do all, that
they do, in respect of reward: the hope of the which reward being taken away,
they would not give a cup of cold water. There be some again that do good
works, but wherefore? For fear lest they should, if they did nothing at al,
come in to purgatory, after their death. The untrue report of ye papists.



EVTRAPELVS. And verily there be many, which do openly affirm, that the
preaching against Purgatory, has been a plain overthrowing of good works.
For the fear (say they) of those bitter pains, that the poor sely souls, be
feign to suffer there, has caused many, to do that, that they would not have
done, if they had been without that fear.


PHILALETHES. Why do they not rather fear the unquenchable fire of hell, that
our savior Jesus Christ does speak of, Math. 25.
saying: Depart ye from me, ye cursed in to the fire everlasting, which is
prepared for the Devil and his Aungelles? Luc. 16.
For, I was a hungerd and ye gave me no meat, I was a thyrst and ye gave me no
drink. Psalm. 14.53.
etc.

Hereunto might be added, the hystory of the rich glutton, who for his
vnmercyfulnesse was thrown headlonge in too the bottomless pytte of hell.
These be they, that will be affrayed, where no fear is, but where there is a
just cause of fear, there they be never a whytte affrayed.

How be it, we may well lykene them, that work for fear of punithemente,
They ye work for fear are like unto lewd servants.
unto slaves or lewd servants, which, onelesse it were for fear of
stripes. would do nothing at all. But we must be children and not servants:
We must follow the example of our sauyoure Jesus Christ, who although he
was most sure of heaven, and did in no wise fear hell, yet did he never
cease too do good unto all men, In doing of good works we must follow the
example of Christ.
whiles he was here conuersaunte in the earth amongst them.


DYDIMVS. If, we ought to do good works, neither for hope of reward nor
for fear of the endelesse torments of hell fire, wherefore should we do
them?


PHILALE. There be five pryncypall causes why the children of God ought too
be earnestlye given unto good works. The first is, that the glory of our
heavenly father may be set forth, as Christ him self does teach us* Math. 5.
saying: L^s your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorifye your father which is in heaven.


EVTRA. If there were non other use or profyt of good works, than the same that
Christ did teach us: the teachers of good works, ought in no wise, to lay
to our charge the putting down of good works, because we deny that they
iustifye. For, as this is the chyefest desire of the fayethfull that they may
glorifye the name of the Lord their God, so do they coumpte it, to be the
greatest vantage unto them, if they can glorify him by their good works,
although they get none other profyt, by their Godly study and exercise.


PHILA. This is the mark, that our savior Jesus Christ did shoot at: whose
example, as I said before, we ought to follow in this thing. Now the second
cause that ought to move us to do good works, or the second use of them, is,
that by them, we may in our consciences be certifyed of our election, and
calling: not that our election and calling do depend or hang of good works
for, how could that be, sith that the Apostell writes on this manner: 2. Timo.
1.
Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our
works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given to us
through Christ Jesus, before the world was?) but because that by them, we do
daily more and more prove or feel the grace and virtue of Christ: Evil works
do declare the malitiousnesse of our hearts
as on the contrary side, evil works do daily more and more express, and
declare the malitiousenesse of our hearts. And to this pertains, the saying
of the holy Apostell Saint Peter: Wherefore, says he, give rather
dyligence, too make your calling and ellection sure.


ALBION. All be it then our election is sure enough in it self, for as much
as God can not change: Note.
yet we must confyrme it in our selves by the fruits of the spirit.


PHILA. Ye do well understand the meaning of the Apostell. I can you thank,
brother Albion, I judge now my labor well bestowed. The third use of good
works is, that by them our fayeth is excercised, nouryshed, increased and
strengthenned. And therefore, thus does the Apostell write unto his disciple
Timothee: Stir up the gift of God, 2. Timo. 1.
which is in thee. Here, faith is called the gift of God, Why faith is
lykened unto a spark
which is as a certain sparkle or flame, kyndeled in our hearts: Which Satan
and the flesh labor to quench, and therefore we must nourishe, and styr it
up, by continual exercises, of the deeds of charity. For, as fire by
castinge in of woodde, is augmented and made bygger: so in the Christians,
Similitude
both Godliness and faith, is by doing of good works, nourished and made
lively. Fourthly by our good works, our neighbors are provoked unto the like
study and love of godlynes, when they do see in us certain lively examples of
it, which they may follow. So Paul in his second Epistell to the Corinthians
says: 2. Cor. 9.
your zeal (speakinge of alms) has provoked very many. And in the epistel
to the Hebreues Let us, says he, Heb. 10.
consider one an other, to provoke unto love and unto good works.


EV. If this had been observed and kept among Christians, by this time, both
the Turks and the Jews with all the paynims in the world, would have been won
to Christ. But as long as we use our selves after this same sort, we shall
rather become Turks and Painims than they Christians. What causes the Turks
and paynims to abhor Christ's religion.
Such fylthinesse of life, such untrue dealinge, deceate, fraud and
periurye, such ydolatrye and superstition, they do see daily to raygne among
us, that it is no maruayle, if they do abhor altogether our religion. We go
about to conquer them by force of arms, but we see that through our sins,
they are grown so mighty that they be able, if God does not set his healpinge
hand, to over run all the whole world.


PHILA. This that ye say, is most true. And until a true reformation be
had, and better amendmente of life be seen in us, they will never embrace
Christ nor his Gospel. But to our purpose: this is the fifth use of good
works, that by them Christ is releaued in his poor and nedy members, yea the
common societi, and fellowship of men is mayntained. For have we not al need one
of an other? Therefore they be not men, but vain shadows of men, Vain
shadows of men.
which through out all their life time, are found to be ydell, so that they
seem to be borne for nothing else but for to consume the fruits of the earth.


ALBION. I would gladly learn, Whether our good works be acceptable unto God
or not.
whether these our good works do please God or not, and why they be
acceptable unto him, sith that the profyt of them does redounde unto us
altogether.


PHILA. That our good works do please God, it is euydente and plain by the
words of the Apostell, where he says: Colosse.
That ye might walk worthy of the Lord, and please him in all things, The
causes why our good works do please God.
being fruitful in all good works. They therefore, that be fruitful in all
kind of good works, do please God in all things. The causes are manifest
enough. It is so in deed, that the dyuine majesty of God has no need neither
of our good words, nor yet of our good works: yet those things, that are
well done of us, do please him. First because they be the fruits of faith. He
that aloweth the fayeth of his people, should not he also allow the fruytes
of their faith? As he does reprove all works that be done without faith, so
does he allow all manner of works, that do proceed of a sincere fayeth and true
belief. Secondly our good works do please him, because they be done and
wrought by his spirit. Phi. 2.
For, as the holy Apostell does testifye: he works in us both ye will and
the deed, according to his good will. And therefore saint Augustine says
right well, Augu.
that God does croune in us, his own works. We can not deny but that the
works that we do by the spiryt of god, are by reason of our imperfection,
vnperfectely good, yet for as much as they come of him, it can not be, but
that they must please him, as being the right author of them. Thyrdely that,
which the Godly do, they do it for Gods sake, being desirous to gratifye him
in all things. Will not he, think ye, accept this their good will, and desire
or mind, that they have to please him? We do not here speak of those, Note.
that neither of a pure fayeth, nor by the sprytte of God, but of mere
superstition, and of a general custom, do work many things, thynkinge
thereby to please God, whereas they do hyghly displease him. This saying of
Christ is not unknown: They worship me in vain teachinge the doctrynes and
precepts of men. Math. 15.


Herein both the Jews, and false Christyans do most shamefullye err.
Fourthelye, God our heavenly father doethe according to his righteousness
love al works that be good, righteouse and just: as on the contrary side, he
does not only detest and abhor the ungodliness and vnrighteousenesse of a
wicked heart, but also all the fruits of ungodliness, and of vnrighteousesse,
under what tytelles so ever they be advanced, and set forth. Thou do
hate, Psalm. 5.
says David, all that work iniquitye thou shall destroy them all that speak
leasinge. And in the Acts of the Apostelles thus does Peter say: Act. 10.
Emonge all nations whosoever does fear God is acceptable unto him. Fyftely,
because that God is most true, yea rather the truth it self, our good deeds
do therefore please him, be cause that they proceade of true godliness, and of
an vnfaygned says, which above all things, God is wont to regard and
accept. For, as all hipocrites are detestable both before God, and before
men: so contrariwise God loves truth, not only in those things that are
well done of the faithful, but also in them, that do truly and without al
dissimulation confess and acknowledge their sins.


EVTRA. Truly, sith that it is so manifest, How earnestly the causes above
rehearsed ought to move us to do good works.
that the good works of the faithful do please God, we ought with all our
whole endeavor to give our selves unto good works, for as much as they be not
only many and sondrye ways profitable unto the whole mystical body of
Christ, which is his church, but are also, for ye causes above rehearsed, most
pleasant and acceptable unto the lyuinge Lord our heavenly father. For, that
man has but small Godliness in him self whom these two causes, can not move
to do well. Again: he yt gapeth only in doing of good works, after a
recompense or reward, or reckeneth for a merit, whatsoever he does,
thinkinge that God is therefore bound unto him, has but a mercenaries heart.


DYDIMVS. Whether our good works shallbe rewarded or not.
And shall our good works be never a whytte rewarded?


PHILA. I will not say so. For although the living God be debtoure unto no
man, yet of his goodness, he does promysse and give a reward unto the good
works of the faithful. And therefore we have these sayings in the scriptures:
Math. 5.10.
Rejoice, and be glad, for, your reward is great in heaven, again: he that
gives to one of these my little ones a cup of could water in my name: Verily,
I say unto you, he shall not lose his reward. Heb. 6.
And in the Epistel to the Hebrews: God says he, is not unrighteous that he
should forgette our labor. Now we must not think that this reward is
promised unto our good works, because of the dignitye and worthiness of them
(for are not these our savior Jesus Christ his words. Luc. 17.
When ye have done what so ever I command you, say ye, we are unprofitable
servants? But because that through faith, we have fellowship, with the only
begotten son of God, Romans 10.
whereby it comes to pass, that his perfect obedience is imputed unto us for
our own, and al yt is wanting, and lacking in us and in our works is most
perfettly supplied by it. As the Apostell does testifye, saying: Christ is
the fulfyllinge of the law, for to iustifye all them that do believe. And in an
other place: Christ is made unto us of God, holiness wisdom, righteousness,
and redemption.

Secondely our good deeds shall be rewarded or crouned because that god of his
mere mercy has bound him self thereto by his promises, as it has been
declared before by the textes that we have aleadged. Whereunto does saint
Augustine agree, Augu. in psa. 32.109 and in many other places.
where he says: Fidelis dominus, qui se nobis debitorem fecit, non aliquid a
nobis accipiendo, sed omnia nobis promittendo.

That is to say: The Lord is faithful who has made him self a debtoure
unto us, not by receauinge any thing of us, but by promissinge unto us all
things. Here we learn, how god is become debtour unto us, 1. Cor. 4.
and has bound him self, to croune or reward our good works, not by
receiving any thing of us (for, what have we, that we have not received, Romans
11.
and if we have received, why do we boeste or glory, asthough we had not
received? Again: who gave him first, and he shall be recompensed?) but by his
faithful promises, which he has made unto his elect and chosen people.


DYDI. What so ever ye say of the reward, I mean: why and wherefore it is
given unto our good works, yet it can not sink in to my headde, but that we
may by them merit or deserve some part of our salvation.


PHI. How could that be, The causes why we can by our good works merit no
part of our salvation.
neighbor Dydimus, sith that we are not our own men, but are wholye the
Lords, of whom we have been created first, and afterward redeemed from
sin, and eternal death, by the price of his blood? Ye are bought, says.
S. Paul with a great price. And in an other place: We are the Lords, whether
we live or dye. None of us do live unto him self. What merit then can we
pretend, 1. Cor. 6.
or what reward can we claim of him, whose we are wholye or altogether?
Therefore, either let us take away this absolute power of God, which he has
over us all, as over his own peculiar good, Romans 14.
or let us acknowledge, that it is not meet for servants to boaste and
brag of their meryttes against their master, nor yet to ask for rewards.
If the master does accept the faithfulness and diligence of his servant,
and does impute it unto him for a meritte, iudginge him worthy to be made
free: that ought to be attributed unto his goodness, and not unto duty, as
though he were bound unto him therefore, We are all debtours unto God and when
we have don all that we can do we have but paid our debt.
because that he is faitfull, and serves fayethfully and truly. For, the
servant so doing, does but his duty, and unless he should do it, he were
worthy of punishment. No man, except he be of a singular good nature, will
give thanks to his debtour, because that he has paid him his debte. And the
debtour were very impudente or shameless, if he, as though he had well
merited, would therefore claim a reward, because that he had paid his
debte. He that being a servant or a debtour, does that thing, which he is
bound to do, can boaste of no merit. But such are we al; yea when we be
already made righteous, and do the things that we are commanded to do. Let
never this saying of Christ, go out of our minds. When ye have done, what
so ever I have commanded you, say ye we are unprofitable servant. But how
many of us, can do the tenthe part of that, which we are commanded, with
such a perfection, as God requires? What can we then meritte or deserve? Add
unto it, that we are not only servant and debtours to God in all things, but
also so void of al goodness, and Godly strength, that we can not as much as
think a good thing, 2. Cor. 3.
much less that of our selves we should be able too perform it in deed, so
yt we have need that al our sufficiency or ableness be ministered unto us, by
the divine grace of god. Therefore the Apostle does plainlye affirm, yt it is
God, Phi. 2.
that works in us both the will and the deed, according to his good will.
That then, we will any thing that good is, and do in deed perform it, it
comes not of our own will and strength, but it is both the will and work of
God, workynge in us according to his good pleasure. Whence then have we our
faith, love, hope, the fear of God, patience in aduersitye? Whence have we our
good will, and strength to do good? If we have these things of our selves, we
have wherein to glory or rejoice. But if we have al these things of the
gratuite and fre grace of God, what does it follow, but that we ought rather to
give thanks to the goodness of God, than to


EVTRAPE. I was once in a place, where they made this objection against me. Be
not these, say they, the words of the Apostell: 2. Timo. 4.
I have fought a good fight, and have fynished my course I have kept the
faith, from hence foorihe then is laid up for me the croune of righteousness
which the Lord the righteouse judge, shall give me at that day? What could
be spoken more playnelye than this? For, the Apostell does make mention, both
of the work that he had done, and also of the reward that he looked for at
Gods hands.


DYDI. I would feign hear, what answer ye made unto them. For this objection
is made many times against you, of them that be of a contrary judgment and
opinion.


EVTRA. I answered them out of saint Augustine, where he writes on this
manner: An non ipse dedit, vt bonum certamen certares: Sino^ ipse dedit: quid
est, Aug. in. 50. homelis. 14. home.
quod alio leco dicis: Plus illis omnibus laboraui. Non autem ego, sed gratia
dei mecum: Ecce iterum dicis: Cursum consummaui. Non et ipse dedit vt cursum
consu^mares? Si non ipse dedit, vt cursum consu^mares quid est, quod alto loco
dicis: no^ volentis ne que currentis, sed miserntis est dei: Fidem seruaui:
Seruasti: Agnosco, et probo, fateor seruasti. Sed nisedominus custodierit
ciuitatem, invanum vis gilat, qui custoditeam.

That is to say: did not he give, that thou myghtest fight a good fight? If
he himself did not give: What is it, that thou say in an other place: 1.
Cor. 15.
I labored more than all they, yet not I, but the grace of God with me?
Behold, thou say I have ended my course. Did not he also give unto the, that
thou should finishe thy course? If be^ give not unto the, Romans 9.
that thou should fynishe thy course, what is it, that thou say in an
other place: It lies no in the willer, nor in the tynner, but in God, that
shewethe mercy? I have kept the faith. Have thou kept the faith? I
acknowledge and allow it, I confess and grant, thou hasse kept the faieth.
But accept the Lord doethe keep the city, he watches in vain that does
keep it. Therefore, thou haste of his helpinge hand, and of his mere gift,
that thou hasse fought a good fight, that thou have finished thy course, and
kept thy faith.

De veniam, Apostole, propriatua non noui, nisi mala. De veniam Apostole.
Dicimus, quia tudo cuisti Cum ergo deus coronat merita tua, nihil coronat nisi
dona sua. Pardone us, O Apostell, says he, I know nothing of thine own,
but evil. Pardone us, O Apostell, we say so, because thou have taught us.

Therefore, when he crouneth thy merits, he crouneth nothing, but this own
gifts. By which words, he doethe so attribute the work of the Apostell,
unto the gift and grace of God, that in it there can not truly be the
merit of man, but the grace of God only, crouninge his gifts in the
Apostell.


PHI. I might here aleadge many other notable autorityes of the aunciente
fathers, which in all points do agree with this that ye have brought in even
now, but for auoydinge of tediousness. I will content my self with few. Non
dico domino (says this holy father saint Augustine:) Opera manuum mearum ne
dispicias. Exquisiui dominum, manibus meis, et no^sum deceptus. Sed opera
manuu^ mearum non co^mendo Timeo, enim, ne quum inspexeris, plura inuenias
peccata quam merita. Hocfold diec, hoc rogo, hoc cupio, opera manuu^ tuarum ne
despicias. Opus tuu^ in me vide, non meum. Nam si meuin videris da^nas. Si tuum
vieris coronas. Nam et quecumque mihi sunt opera bona abs te sunt.

That is: I say not unto the Lord: despise not the works of my hands I have
sought the Lord with my hands, Augu. in psalm. 107.
and I was not deceived. But I do no praise or commend the works of my
hands. For, I am affrayed, least when thou lokest upon them, thou find more
sins than merits. This only, I say, this I pray, this I covet. Despise not
the works of thy hands. See thine own work in me, and not mine. For if
thou see mine, thou do condemn. If thou see thine thou crounest. For,
all the good works that I have they are of thee. Here, this holy father does
plainelye confess that as God does only reward of croune in us that which
is his own, so be does condemn all that he finds to be our own. And
therefore, Bernardus super cantica fermo. 61
it is not without a cause that Bernarde does say: Meritum proin de meum
miseratio domini. Non sum plane meriti inops, quandiu non fuerit ille inops
miserationum. Quod si misericordie domini multe, multus ego pereque sum in
meritis. Nunquid iustitias meas cantabo? A golden saying of saint Bernard
domine meminero iustitie tue solius. Ipsa, enim, est mea.

Nempe factus est mihi iustitia a deo. That is to say: My merit therefore is
the mercy of the Lord. I am not altogether poor or void, of merit, as
long as he is not poor or void of mercies. Works of supererogation, are
blasphemously injurious to the merits of Christ and therefore they ought rather
to be called works of derogation.
And if the mercies of God be manifold, truly I am also very rich in
merits. Shall I set forth mine own righteousness? Lord let me remember thy
righteousness only. For, it is mine: for as much as he is made unto me of God,
righteousness. And in an other place: Hoc totum hominis meritum, si totam spem
ponat in eum, qui totum hominem saluum facit.

This, says he is the whole merit of man, if he does put his whole hope in
him, that saves the whole man.


EVTRA. If all mounks had spoken and written non other wise of the merits of
men, than this holy mounke Bernarde did: Idem in psalm. 91.
the grace of God, had not been so darkened these many hundredth years by vain
extollinge of merits, as it has been, nor yet the works of supererogation
could ever have been brought in, to the great derogation of Christ's
merits, and of the price of his death and bloudsheddinge.


DYDI. They shall then from henceforth, be no more called the works of
supererogation, but the works of derogation, since that by them the benefitte
of that most omnisufficient sacrifice, that Christ offered once for ever for
the redemption of mankind, is so blasphemouslye trodden under feet, and the
vale we thereof in a manner altogether annichilated, or turned to nothing.


PHI. That is a fete, name for such vain and arrogant works, which doubtless,
were brought in of ye enemy of salvation, Satan the devil, for to make men to
swel and be pufte up against the free grace of God, whereby only without
any merits or deseruings of ours we are all saved. But I would that men,
putting a side all wylfulnesse would ones consider with the^ selves that the
majesty of God has need of non of us, nor of any thing that we have but
rather does give us all things abounda^tly to enjoy them. 1. Timo. 6.
What good work then can we do, where by we may profitte him in any thing,
Psalm. 16.
or do him any good?

Bonorum meorum non eges. Thou have no need of my goods, says David. What
merit, I pray you, God has no profit by any good work, that we can do.
can be in that work, whereof no profit comes to God? or rather whereof the
whole profyt, if there be any, does redounde upon our selves? He that is
righteous, and does good works, he does it not for any commodity, that God
shall have thereby (for, what commoditye can God have by any thing, that we
can do?) But for his own commoditye as he which is wicked and does wickedly,
hurtethe him self, Similitude
and not God. He that has the health of his body, and does by good diet,
and moderate excercises study to keep and preserve it, doethe he therefore,
deserve any reward at the phisicions hand? I think not. For, he does it
not for the phisicions profyt, but for his own. After the same sort, he that
by the gift of God has obtained the health of his soul, and by his grace
doethe the things, that belong to the preservation of the same, shall we
say, that he does deserve any reward at Gods hands, because that he is
made such by his gift, and does now through his help, aid and assistaunce
keep the same grace, for his own profytte, and commoditye, either by earnest
belief, or by vnfaygned love, or by assured hope, or by well doing, and
patience in aduersitye and trouble?


DYDI. Yet God does crown such.


PHILA. God in deed does croune in them his gifts, things remain safe and
sound to the glory of the grace of God. Now, where all things ought to be
attributed unto the grace of God, what is left for the merits of men? For,
where grace is, there is no place left for merit, if we do consider a right
the nature and property of merit. But let our good works be examined after
ye streightnes of Gods judgment, who is so ignorant, The imperfection of our
works.
of man's imperfection, that will not acknowledge, yt we ought rather to fear
punishment, for the defautes that be in them, than look for any reward, or
boaste I can not tell of what merits? Is it for naught, think ye, ye the holy
Prophet does lykene our righteousness to so filthy a thing, Esa. 64.
that any man will abhor to look on it?


DYDI. But this, say they ought to be understood of ye righteousness of the
flesh, I mean of the man, that is not yet justified.


PHILA. Saint Augustine in his books of confessions, Nae vniuersae iustitie
nostre, Augu. li. 9. confessionu^
si remota misercordia iudicetur.

That is: Woe be to all our righteousness, if it be judged, mercy beainge taken
away, or set aside.

What manner of merit is that, which can not abide the censure of Gods
judgment, nor be delivered from condemnation, but thorough mercy only?
without all doubt, better it is for us to confess our sins with the
Publicane, Aug. de. S. virg. ca. 42.
than to glory, boast and brag of our merits with ye Pharisee. Such are our
merits, yt the confession, and acknowledging of our sins, ought to be
preferred before ye nu^bring of the^. Bernard does not in this point disagree
from saint Augustine. For, these are his words.

Sed quid potest esse o^nis iustitia nostra coram deo? None iuxta prophetam,
velut pa^nus menstruate reputabitur, Bernardus in sermon pefesto omnium
sanctorum. 1.
et si districte iudicetur, intusta inuenietur omnis iustitia nostra et minus
habens? Quid ergo depeccatis erit, quando (...) quidem per se poterit
respondere iustitia? Propterea enixe cum propheta clamantes non intres in
iudicium cum seruo tuo, o domine: nam non iustificabitur in conspectu tuo omnis
viuens, tota humilitate, ad misericordiam recurtamus, que fola potest saluare
animas nostras. That is to say: But what can al our righteousness be before
god? Shall it not, according to the prophette, Esa. 64.
be coumpted as a filthy bloudi cloute? And if it be streightlye judged, shall
not al our righteousness be sound vnryghteouse, and having less, than it
ought to have? What shall then become of our syns, if our righteousness,
Psalm. 143.
can not answer by it self? Therefore cryinge earnestlye with the prophet:
Enter not in to judgment, o Lord, with thy servant, for, in thy sight no
man living shall be justified, let us with all humility, have our recourse
unto mercy, which alone is able to save our souls. But go to, al these gold
sayings being laid a side, let us compare the inestimable glory of life
everlasting, The inestimable glory of life everlasting does cut of all
merits.
and of endelesse felicitye, not only with our good works, be they never so
glorious and exelent, but also with the afflictions, troubles persecutions and
adversities, that we do here suffer for Christ's sake, what shall we find in
them, that is able too counterpease the unspeakable joys that are laid up
for the elect and chosen of God? For, thus says saint Paul: Romans 8.
I coumpt, that the afflictions of this present time, are not worthy of the
glory, which shall be showed unto us.


EVTRA. Now one thing do I learn by that which has been spoken, of the
merits of our own works. And that is this: Since that God in giving us unto
life everlasting, does not respect or regard the dignity of our good works:
how can the doctrine of them stand, which do appoint degrees of joy and
felicity in heaven affirming that we shall there excel one an other in glory?
This is most sure that we obtayn heavenly felicitye by the mere mercy of god.
And therefore, this diuersitye or difference of rewards must depend or hang of
the mercy of God, and not of our own works. Whereupon they ground the^
selves that do appoynte diuersityes or degrees of glory in the life to come.



PHILA. We see that they which mayntaine the contrary, do ground them selves
upon this, that we do by our good works, deserve life everlasting, as they
say, ex condigno, or accordingely. Which thing, if we would grant, then
without all controuersye, God should seem unrighteous, if he should not
give greater rewards to those, that have, labored, merited and deserved more
than the other. But let us come to the scriptures. Math. 20.
First, a penye is equaly given to those, that labored in the vineyarde,
although some of them, came at three of the clock, some at nine, and some at
eleven, and when they began to murmr, the father of the houshoulde stopped
their mouths saying, that he did iustelye. Secondlye the Apostell affyrmeth,
1. Cor. 15.
that God shall be all in all. And when our savior Jesus Christ speaks of
the reward of the righteouse. The righteouse says he, shall shine as the
sun in the sight of God. Mat. 13.
But there is no greater light, than the light of the sun: and no man
shall enter in to the kingdom of heaven, except he be righteous. They shall
then have all the light or brightness of the sun, that is like or equal
glory. Again, our savior Jesus Christ reasoning with the Saducees of ye
resurrection, does say, Luc. 20.
yt we shall be like unto the Angels, neither goes he any farther or appoints
any degrees. Besides this, that there be diverse and sondrye differences
betwixt the Saints here in this life, that comes by the reason of the
flesh, that they carye about, and the more or less that they be addicted
unto it, the more or less they do profytte in the regeneration: but when in
the land of the living, all the corruption of our flesh shall be taken away,
we shall be perfect, neither shall there be any cause, why the one shall be
more let than the other from the receyuinge of the heavenly glory. Mat. 19.
Did not also our savior Jesus Christ promysse unto his Apostels, that they
should set upon.xii. seats, and judge the.xii. tribes of Israel? And did not
Paul make the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 6.
and with them all the faithful beleuers, partakers of this reward, when he
says: do ye not know, that the saints shall judge both the world, and also
the Angels? These places do plainly take away all diuersityes of rewards or
degrees in glory.


ALBION. Why then does the Apostel say: There is an other glory of the sun,
1. Cor. 15.
and an other glory of the moon, and an other glory of the stars. For, one
star differs from an other star in glory, so also is the resurrection of
the dead. Does not he show here a diuersitye of rewards, and that after the
blessed resurrection some shall be more glorious than the other?


PHI. Ye go clean from the meaning of the Apostel. For, there he does prove,
that as the sun and the moon being of one substance do differ in dignitye*
so in the resurrection, our bodies although they shall be the same in
substance, yt they be now, yet shall they have more excelent qualityes than
they have now at this present. And that the like must be understood of the
comparison of the stars, it is evident and plain by the conclusion that Paul
does infer or bring in saying: The body is sown in corruption, and is
raised in incorruption, it is sown in dishonor and is raised in glory, it is
sown in weakness, and is raised in power. Whereby it does most plainly
appear, that this diuersitye ought only to be taken for the diuersitye,
that is betwixt the body, which we shall put of at our death, and the body
that shall be restored again, neither can any thing be here concluded of
any difference or dyuersity, that shall be betwixt the blessed or glorified
bodies. Luc. 20.
Christ does only speak generallye of this thing, when he says, that we
shall all be like unto the Angels. Phi. 3.
Again, the holy Apostell says, that when our savior shall come down
from heaven, he will change and transform our vile bodies, and make them
like unto his glorious body, what diuersitye of glory (I pray you) can there
be, when all our bodies shall be made like unto the glorious body of Christ.
How be it, I will not be to precise in this matter least I should seem too
affirm any thing rashely. To attribute any part of ye heavenly felicity
and glory, unto the merits of me^ it is to be injurious unto the glory of the
grace of God.
Only this will I warn the Godly of, that although they do with some of the
fathers grant that there be degrees of glory in the life to come, yet let
them beware and take heed that they do in no wise attribute the same unto the
merits, and deseruinges of men. For, that were to do to much iniurye and
wrong unto the glory of the grace of God.


ALBION. Does not Paul write, that it shall be rendered unto every man
according unto his works? Again these, Romans 1.
I am sure are his words: we must al appear before ye judgment seat of Christ,
2. Cor. 5.
ye eueri man may receive ye things which are don in his body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or evil. These words do plainly
testifye, that every manne shall receive a reward according to his labor.


PHILALE. We do generallye understand this of the elect and reprobate, and of
their glory and dampnation. So does Paull expound it, in the Epistell to the
Romans. Romans 2.
And Christ him self, in the sentence that he shall give at his last
judgment, does sufficientlye declare, what this scripture meanethe: when he
callethe them that be at his right hand to his kyngedome, and sends those
that be at his left in to the fire everlasting that is prepared for the devil
and his Aungelles. Now, as touching the works of the elect ye have learned
already, that when God rewards them he crouneth in them his own gifts. Math.
25.
But as for the reprobate, they do according so the fruits of their wicked and
unbelieving hearts, receive eternal dampnation, which is the reward of
unbelief. Non other thing can we learn of those places that ye have aleadged.


ALBION. I am sure ye will not deny,

Qui alios docent, erunt vt splendour firmamenti, Dau. 12.
quique ad iustitiam alios instrunt, vt stelle fulgebunt. That is too say:
They that teach other, shall be as the brightness of the firmamente, and they
that instruct other unto righteousness, shall shine as the stars. Look what
difference there is betwixt the brightenes of the firmamente, and the
brightness of the stars, the same shall be even betwixt those that teach.
For, they, that by their dilgente teachinge shall win and bring many to
righteousenesse shall shine as the brightenesse of stars, the other that have
less labored in the lords vineyarde shyninge only as the bryghtenesse of
the fyrmamente.


PHILA. As touching Daniels words where he says: Many that sleep in the
duste of the earth shall awake, Tge exposition of Daniels words.
some to everlasting life, and some to shame and perpetual contempt. And they
that teach, shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that bring
many to righteousness, shall shine as the stars for ever and ever: Do make
little or nothing for this matter. For (as it hapeneth many times in the
scriptures) in one periodus or sentence, the same self things are repeted the
second time, which were spoken first. The difference that semethe here to be
assigned or appointed, is of the firmamente and of the stars. But sith that
they that teach, and they that instruct and bring other too righteousenesse,
be all one, and are contained under one degree: after the very judgment of
the adversaries, diverse rewards are not due unto them, sith that they labored
both in one thing. Therefore it is most manifest and plain, that the same is
repeted again, which was already spoken before, but more plainly.


AL. But why does Daniell make mention of the ministers or teachers, rather
than of the rest?


PHI. Because that above all other, Math. 13.
that the righteous shall shine as ye sun in the kingdom of god. Again, that
some win or bring more than some, unto righteousness, Note.
that ought not to be attributed to the conning, industrye or labor of men,
but unto him, that by openinge the hearts of the hearers, does give the
increase, the Apostell him self saying. Neither he that planteth, nor he that
watreth is any thing but the Lord, 1. Cor. 3.
which geuethe the increase.


ALBION. Hier. in. 12. ca. Dani.
and the godly learned shall have the like glory. answer may be made unto them
after the translation of Theodotio that the one shall be as the firmamente and
the other as the stars.


PHILALETHES. plainly these words: Porro doctores splendebunt vt splendour
firmamenti: et qui multos ad iustitiam ad ducunt, vt stellae sepiternis
temporibus. Which we may english after this manner: and the teachers shall shine
as the fyrmamente, and they that bring many to righteousenesse, shall shine
as the stars worlds without end. Who does not see, that all one thing is
meante in both closes, sauinge that in the last, the mattyer is made more
plain?


ALBION. Ye will grant, Math. 11.
where he says, that it shall be easier at the day of judgment for them of
Tire and Sydonne, than for them of Corozam and Bethsaida, and for them of
Sodom and Gomorre, than for them of Capernaum.


PHILA. Whither is a diversity in the punishements of the reprobate and non in
the rewards of the elect and chosen.
Well go to: I grant that there is adiuersity in the punishementes of the
reprobate. And why? Because, that they do by their unbelief and fruits of the
same, deserve those punishementes of hell fire: but it can not be truly said,
that the elect and chosen do by their works merit or deserve the endelesse
joy and felicitye of heaven. Therefore there is a very unlike reason in these
contraryes.


ALBION. What means Christ, when he says: Ioa. 14.
Does not he thereby signifye a difference or diuersitye of rewards?


PHILALE. If Christ had said: Ioa. 14.
we must not grosselye ymagyne that there be sondrye chambers or parloures in
heaven, some being more glorious than some, but that where so ever Christ our
headde shall be, there we ^halbe also with him. As he him self does testify
saying:

I will come again, and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there may
ye be also.


ALBION. Coloss. 1.
some, Thrones, some Dominions, Principalities, and powers. Sith then that we
shall be like angels, and among them, there be such diverse orders and degrees:
it can none other wise be gathered, but that there shall be a diuersitye or
difference of glory among the saints.


PHILA. miserye, they are appointed to be ministers and helpers unto us, Heb. 1.
as we read in the Epistell to the Hebrews. Yea they be also appointed too be
as it were rulers over common wealles, and kingdoms, Dan. 10.
as Daniell does testifye, they are also kepers of men, and commanded of God
to wait upon them, Psalm. 91.
whereof it comes, that our savior Jesus Christ does say of the children,
Math. 18.
that their Angels do always see the face of their father that is in heaven.
But when in the kingdom of Christ, 1. Cor. 15.
all things shall be pacifyed, The diuersitye yt now is among Angels shall
cease at the general resurrection of the righteous.
these services or ministeries, as vnnecessarye and superflue shall be
abolyshed. Read for that, the.xv. chapter of the first Epistell to the
Corinthians. If so be then that the diuersitye that is now among Angels by
reason of the sondrye offices and ministeries, that they be appointed unto, for
the preservation of the elect, and chosen, shall cease, at the resurrection
of all flesh, what should we dream of any dyfference or diuersitye, that
should be among us then, sith that Christ did with so plain words affirm,
that we shall then be like Angels?


ALBION. Math. 5.
and teach the commandments, the same shall be called great in the
kingedome of heaven. Mat. 13.
He says besides, that the corn that did fall in too good ground, did
bring forth fruit, Math. 25.
some an hundredth fold, some syxty fold, and some thyrty fold. And in the
parable of the talents, we read, that the servant were recompensed
according, 2. Cor. 9.
to the diuersitye of the gaynes. Again, are not these Paul's words: He that
sows sparingly shall reap, Math. 20.
also sparynglye, and he that sows liberallye shall reap also liberallye?
Christ said likewise to his disciples: he that will be greatest among you,
let him be least. These places, I trow, do sufficientelye teach, Luc. 22.
that there shall be a diuersitye, after the glorifying of the children of God.


PHILALETHES. To the first we do answer, Answer to the.5. of Math.
that by the kingdom of heaven, the church of God, is understood where they
ought to be in most estimation, that both teach syncerely, and do by their
life, and conversation, express that, which they do teach. And also in
ecclesiastycall elections, they ought to be preferred before the other, and
they to be rejected and put back, that do both break the commandments, and
teach other also to do so.

Unless, ye will say, that they that live wyckedlye, and teach other both by
their words and example too transgress the commandments of God, shall
enjoy eternal felicitye, which were against all reason.

And as for the parable of the sede, whereof part did fall in to good ground:
Answer to the parable of the sede. Mat. 13.
any manne can easelye perceive, that it pertayneth unto the state of this
prsente life, and that thereby it is signified that the word of God doethe not
bring forth fruit in like, in all the Godly. To the parable of the talentes.
Mat. 25.
Likewise the parable of the talentes, does certifye us, that they, that use
well the gifts of God, in them the grace of god shall daily increase, yea they
shall be made worthy too be rulers over much, that is to say, every day
they shall be made more able to receive spiritual gifts. Neither can the
place, To the place of ye second to the Corinthia^s. 2. Cor. 9.
that ye have alleged out of the second too the Corinthians be otherwise
understood. For, we do commonly see that they that be Godly liberal in
geuinge of alms, do not only abound in spiritual gifts, but have also by
the blessing of God, their temporal richesse wonderfullye increased and
augmented, that they may the better exercise their Godly liberalitye toward
the poor members of our savior Jesus Christ. Which is according to the
saying of the wise manne, Prove. 3.
where he says: Honor the Lord with thy richesse (but how can we honor
the Lord with our richesse, but by refreshinge his son Jesus Christ in his
lymmes?) so shall thy barnes be filled with abundance, and thy win presses
shall burste with new wine. And where Christ says to his Apostelles: To the
place of the.22. of Luc.
he that will be greatest among you, let him be least, the same can not be
applied, but to the church of God, where they ought too be coumpted greatest,
that being endued with most excellent gifts, and bestowinge the same to the
edifying of the faithful congregation, to behave them selves most humblye.


ALBION. I find this written in the Apocalipse or revelation of John: Apoca. 14.
I heard a voice from heaven, as the sound of many waters, and as the sound
of a great thunder, I hard the voice of harpers, harpinge upon their harps.
And they song, as it were a new song before the throne, and before the.iiii.
beasts, and the ealders, and no man can learn that song, but the hundredth
fortye and four thousand, which were boughte from the earth. These are
they, which are not defiled with women:

For, they are virgins, these follow the lamb, whether soever he goes. Here
we see, that only those hundredth fortye and four thousand, which
afterward he calls virgins, could sing the new sounge, and follow the
lamb, whether so ever he goes. whereby it does appear, that they have a
preeminence above all the rest, and that they do also excelle other in glory.


PHILALE. By this finit number of an hundredth forty and four thousand, is
understood, Who they be that can singe the new song.
which alone can sing the new sounge.

For, the elect only can praise and laud God, neither can any say, that
Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy ghost, whereof all the reprobate are void.
1. Cor. 12.


And it is said that they are vyrgines, Why the true elect are called
virgins. Heb. 13.
and have not defiled them selves with women, not because that they have lived
out of holy wedlock, which, as the Apostell sayethe, is honorable among
all men, but because that the church, 1. Cor. 11.
and fayethfull congregation, has been by the Apostelles, and now is by
their doctryn prepared for one husband, and presented as a pure virgin to
Christ.

They are therefore called virgins, because ye after they were brought to
Christ, and sanctified through faith in his blood, and also washed and
justified, they never defiled them selves with that strange woman, Prou. 4.
which the wise man does speak of, that is to say, with any strange doctrine
of stinkinge ydolatrye, and of other superstitious worshippings and services of
god, but have kept their minds pure and chaste virgynes unto Christ their
husband unto whom they were married with a sincere and pure faith. What it is
to follow the lamb whether so ever he goes.
These be they that follow the lamb whether so ever he goes. For, as whiles
they abide here in the world, Christ only is their treasure, their joy, and
coumforte: in him only they put their confidence, and trust: and whether
soever he calls them by his doctrine and example, they be be always ready
to follow him, though it be to a most cruel death, to glory him with all: so
in the other world, they be never separated from him. For, where soever
Christ is, Ioa. 12.
there shall his minister or servant be also. But all the elect and chosen of
god, are Christ's ministers and servant, therefore where so ever he is, there
shall they be also. Now may ye perceive, how little this place of ye
revelation, can help them, that maintayn this diuersitye of rewards in heaven.


AL. Are not all the fathers, I


PHI. As for the fathers we do confess and grant, testimonies and autorytyes
of the scriptures or not. Again, they do not speak of it, all after one sort.
For, Hierome, when in his Epistels he did commend wedowhode, Jerome.
and was come to that point, that he must needs make a comparyson, betwixt
the wedowe and the virgyne, he does playnelye say, that he will not gladlye
appoynte any diversity or difference betwyxt the Saints: and yet in other
places, be will seem to be an earnest mainetainer of these differences. And
whereas ye say, that men by this doctrine are made more remysse, neglygente,
and slack to do good works, I have answered you already, that the elect
and chosen of God, be wont at all times, to do good works for the love that
they bear to God, and to their neighbor, and for to show their obedyence
toward the sacredde word and holy commandments of their heavenly father,
without any respect of recompense or reward, and that they, that do
otherwise are but mercenaries and hyrelyngs.


DYDIMVS. And shall the blessed virgyne Mary,


PHILALETHES. That I leave to the unsearchable judgments of God, If any do
excel other in glory after this lif it is not by ^eo^on of their merits.
that (...) in the life to come any do excel other in glory, it is not by
reason of their works merits or deseruinges, but the same does altogether
come of the mere mercy, grace and goodness of God, who does most lyberallye
crown in them his own gifts, as it has been sufficientlye proved before.


ALBION. This have I learned of our talk and communication. First that we are
justified freely, The epilogus or conclusion.
that is to say, delivered from sin, from eternal dampnation and
everlasting death, and pronounced righteouse, before the judgment seat of
almighty god, through faith only in our savior Jesus Christ, without any
merits, or deseruinges going before, and that as all the works that we do,
before we be justified, I mean, before we be graffed in Christ through faieth
in him, and made lively members of his body, are nothing else in the sight
of God but sins: Ioa. 15.
so after we be once justified, and made through faith branches of that true
vine, we must not remain bareine and unfruitful trees, but we must bring
forth the fruits of our fayeth, Ephe 2.
we must abound, and as it were, flow in all kind of good works, that God
has prepared for us to walk in, whereby will works that is works, of man's
invention, having no sure ground or fundation, nor yet any promise in Gods
book, are clean overthrown. Secondly, it has been declared, that not all
they, that do those works, which in them selves are good, Three sorts of
people which although they do good works do not deserve ye praise of weldoing
do by and by deserve the praise and commendation of good worokes or of well
doing, for as much, as they do them, either for to be glorified of men, or
for hope of reward, or for fear of eternal punyshement, and not for the love
only that they bear to god and to their neighbor, or for to show their
obedience toward Gods holy comaundementes. Where through, occasion was
given, to show the causes, that should move us to do good works, although
there were no hope at all of reward: and also the causes why the works of
those that be graffed in Christ by fayeth (although in them selves they be
most imperfect) do please God and are acceptable in his syghte. Afterward, ye
spoke of merits, prouinge most stronglye, that although we were able to do
what so ever God has commanded us, yet we ought to coumpte our selves
unprofitable servants, and that we have done but our duetye, and yet
notwythstandynge, that our good works, which being members of Christ, we
do according to the prescripte and rule of Gods word, shall be crowned and
rewarded, not for their own dignitye and worthynesse, or for any perfection
that is in them, but because that the perfect obedyence of Christ, shall be
imputed unto us for our own, and thereby all things, that be wantinge and
lackinge in us, most aboundantlye supplied, by reason of the fellowship, that
we have through fayeth in the only begotten son df God: And also because of
the promises, whereby God is become debtoure unto us. Last of all, ye have
proved by manifest textes of the scriptures, and by answering all objections,
that could be made to the contrary, that we shall be al one, and receive al
one reward, in the resurrection of the righteouse, and if there shall be any
degrees of glory (which thing can not well be proved by the scriptures) that
ought in no wise too be attributed unto the merittes, and deseruinges of men,
but to the only mercy, goodness, and grace of God, declared unto us in his
son Jesus Christ and taken hold upon by faith in the merits of his death,
passion, and blood shedding.


PHILA. This in deed is the sum of our talk, that we have had at this
present. Ye have well remembered the pighte of the whole matter. Which is a
token of a pregnaunte wit, and good memory. God of his goodness, vouchafe
to increase in you these his excelente gifts, and too heap you with all
heavenly blessings, that ye may by embracinge the true religion, by
aduauncinge and fartheringe of it, be an example unto all the whole world.


DYDI. God of his mercy vouchesafe to grant it.


EVTRAPELVS. AMEN, amen.


HERE Begins a Table, whereby ye may find spedelye, all the principal
matters contained in this book.
ATheistes what they are. folio. 2. A principal note to whom the Apostell did
write. fo. 8. Although we have not in the scriptures this word sola, only or
alone, yet have we many words that be of like force. fo. 13. An evasion of the
enemies. fo. 24 A golden saying of saint Bernarde. fo. 55 Abraham was
justified. 30. years before the offeringe of his son Isaac. foli. 7. Answer
to the 5. of Math. fo. 68. Answer to the parable of the sede folio. eodem.
Christ only has satisfied to the justice of God. fo. 6. Christ is a
sufficient expositour. of his own words. fo. 27
E
Evil works do declare the maliciousnes of our hearts. fo. 45.
F.
From whence this word iustificare to iustifye has been borrowed and what it
signifies. fo. 4. Faith is not taken of the Apostels in one signification fo.
9. Gardiners objection against doctor Barnes. fo. 28. Good intentes. fo. 37.
God has no profit by any good work that we can do fo* 506.
H.
How the scriptures are aleaged by the enemies of the truth. fo. 27 How our
good intentes which have no waraunt in Gods word are rewarded. fo. 39 How
earnestlye the causes above rehearsed ought to move us to do good works. fo.
49.
I
Justification is taken away altogether from the law of Moses and attributed
unto faith fo. 11. If it be an heresy to say that faith only justifies all the
ancient fathers be heritikes. fo. 21. If any do excel other in glory after
this life, it is not be reason of their merits fo. 72. Justification whereby we
are delivered from sin is necessary unto us as long as we live. fo. 25. In
doing of good works we must follow the example of Christ folio. 44.
M.
Mercenaries and hierlinges. fo. 43.
O.
One text must give place to many folio. 10.
P.
Peace of conscience does exclude wavering or doubtfulnes of mind folio. 32.
S.
Saul standethe in defense of his disobedience. folio. 39. Similitude. fo. 56.
T.
The maliciousnes of the enemies of the truth. fol. 1. The Popes kingdom is a
kingedome of lies. folio. 4. They that are justified by works are able or must
be be able to answer fullye to the justice of God. folio. 5. The offeringe of
Isaac is a testymonye of the faith and righteousness of Abraham. fol. 8. This
word to justify is otherwise taken of Paul then of James. fo. 9. To attribute
justification unto any merits going before is a derogation of the grace of
God. fo. 12. The enemies of the truth are to be likened to the Arians. fol. 15.
The purpose of God does exclude all merits and deseruinges from the
justification of man. fo. 17 The fathers were to be blamed yt do affirm faith
only to justify if that doctrine were not true. fo. 24 The history of Cornelius
fo. 30 The fruits of justification. fo. 31 The first fruit of iustifycation.
folio. eodem. The 2. fruit of justification. fo. 32. The certaynety of Gods
promise. folio. 33. The.4 fruit of justification. fo. eode^ The.5. fruit of
justification. fo. eode^ The common doctrine of preachers touching good works.
fol. 35. The devil did peruerte the end of our creation which Christ restored
again. fo. eodem The works of the papists. fo. 36 They that are enemies of
the papists good works are enemies of sin, and of most detestable
abomination. fo. 37. Terrible and dreadefull histories. folio. 38. The order
that god had appointed touching the Arc. fo. 39. The historye of Saul. fol.
40 The untrue report of the papists folio. 43. They ye work for fear are
lewd servants. fol. 44. The causes why our good works do please God fo. 47.
The causes why we can by our good works merit no part of our salvation fo.
51. The imperfection of our works. folio. 57. The inestimable glory of life
everlasting does cut away all merits fo. 59. To attribute any part of
the heavenly felicitye and glory unto the merits, of men it is to be injurious
unto the glory of the grace of God folio. 62. The exposition of Daniels words
folio. 63. The diversity that now is among Angels shall cease at the general
resurrection of the righteous. fo. 67 To the parable of ye talents fo. eode^ To
ye place of the.2 to ye Cor. fo. eo. To the place of the.22 of Luc fo. 99 The
epilogus or conclusion. fo. eod. Three sorts of people although they do good
works do not deserve the praise of well doing fo. 73 The perfect obedience of
Christ is imputed unto us. foli. 73.
V.
Vzah smitten of the Lord fo. 39. Vayn shadows of men fo. 47
W.
Why there is a diversity in the punishementes of the reprobate and non in the
reward of the elect and chosen. foli. 65 Who they be that can sing the new
song. foli. 70. Why the true elect are called virgins foli. eodem. What it
is to follow the lamb whether soever he goes. fo. eodem Who the be that
storm at the doctrine of predestination. foli. 2. We ought not for the fear
of men to hyde the truth fol. 3 What scope or mark we ought to shote at in
settinge forth ye doctrine of justification of faith. fo. 3. What it is to be
justified by works. fo. eode^ What it is to be justified by faith. folio. 6.
What fayeth Abraham was justified by. fo. 7 What be the means whereby we are
justified or delivered from the state of dampnation. fol. 11. What Paul
understands by the works of the law. fo. 14. What they must do that will
enjoy the righteousness of Christ. folio 15. What credyt ought to be given
to the enemis of the truth and what shamful ignorance they be wrapped in. fo.
19. Why the scrybes and Pharisees were utter ennemies unto the gospel. fol.
eodem Why our great rabbis will not acknowledge their error. fo. 20 We are
not delivered from our sins to this end that we should walow in them again.
fo. 23. Why the Athenians would here Paul's doctrine. fo. 29. Why the spirit of
Christ is given unto them that be justified, fo. 34. Whereof the enemies of the
truth be ashamed. fo. eodem Why man was created. fo. 35. Why we be regenerate
in Christ. folio. 36. Who they be that are offended at the doctrine of
justification of faith folio. 36. Which be the true good works that God does
require of us. fo. 41 Why the good works of mercy are set most chieflye
forth unto us folio. eodem Which be the good works that god has prepared
for us to walk in. foli. 42. Why all they that do those good works that God
has commanded in his word do not deserve the praise of well doing. fo. eodem
Why faith is likened to a spark. folio. 45. Wherein our justification does
consyste. foli. 5. What causes Turks and Paynimes to abhor Christ's religion
folio. 46. Whether our good works be acceptable unto God or not. fo. 47.
Whether our good works shall be rewarded or not fo. 49. We are all debtors unto
god. fo. 51 Works of supererogation are blasphemous and injurious to the
merits of Christ and therefore they ought rather to be called works of
derogation. fol. 55. Whereupon they ground them selves that do appoynte
diversities or degrees of glory in the life to come. foli. 59.
Here ends the Table.
IMPRYNTED at London, by Ihon Cysdale, and are to be sold at his shop in the
upper end of Lombard street, in Allhallowes churchyard, nere unto grace
church. 1561.


