A most necessary treatise of free will, not only against the Papists, but
also against the Anabaptists, which in these our days, go about to renew the
detestable heresies of Pelagius, and of the Luciferians, which say and affirm,
that we be able by our own natural strength to fulfill the law and
commandments of God.

Made dialoge wise by Ihon Veron, in a manner word by word, as he did set it
forth in his lectures at Paul's.

To the right honorable Lord, my Lord Robert Dudly, master of the horses,
and knight of the most honorable order of the Garter. Ihon Veron wishes grace,
peace of conscience, with increase of honor, from God the father, through his
son Jesus christ our Lord.
FOr, as much, as I have all ready set fourth, the doctrine of predestination,
and of the divine providence of God, wherein I have strongly proved by manifest
textes of the scriptures, and sufficient authorities of the aunciente writers
of the primitive church, that God has from the beginning, ordained and
appointed some, for to be fellow heirs with his son Jesus Christ, of his
heavenly kingdom, and some again to be euerlastinglye dampened in hell fire:
and that whom he has ordained before, to enjoy and possess everlasting life,
them he has chosen in his son Jesus Christ, before the foundacions of the
world were laid, which thing he did of his free mercy and goodness, and
without any respect at all of their own deseruinges or merits, for to
setforthe ye glory of his grace, and to declare his mercy through out all the
whole world: but whom he has appointed to be the vessels of his wrath, them
he has according to his ryghteous and unsearchable judgment styrred up for
to be the examples of his justice, and for to be glorified by their dampnatyon,
wherein he does them no manner of wrong, sith that he rewards them,
according to their natural corruption, which they have of their parent Adam,
wherbi we are all in general, subject to everlasting damnation, so yt if he
should damn us all, he should do us but right, and no just occasyon at all,
could we have, to complain of him or of his most righteous judgment I have
thought it good and expedient, for to add unto it, the most necessary
doctrine of free will. Which as it does altogether depend of the other, and
is most surely grounded in it, so it can not be substantially understood,
without some sight and knowledge of the same, as it does euidentlye appear by
those, which plainly affirm that, unless we have free will, virtue shall not
be rewarded, nor the works of the saints crowned: which if they would consider
from what beginning, the doctrine of Predestination does fetch the glory of
the saints, they should sone espy out their own error. Whom (says the
Apostle) God has chosen, them did he call, who^ he has called, them did he
iustifye, and whom he has justified, them did he glorify. Wherefore the^, by
the saying of the Apostle, are the faithful crowned with eternal and
everlasting glory? Why the faithful are crowned with everlasting glory.
because forsothe, that by the fre mercy of God, and not by their own
industry, they be both chose^, called and justified. Hear do we learn, in
these few words, that all the hole glory of our salvation, ought only to be
given and attributed unto the free election of God, whereof does proceade, come
and spring, both the will and power, that we have, to do any thing, that is
good and acceptable before the majesty of our heavenly father. Yea before we
be renewed by the holy ghost, and made new creatures in our savior Jesus
Christ, we are the servants of sin. What fredome then can we iustlye
boaste or brag of? Vbi spiritus domini, says saint Paul, ii. Co. iii
ibi libertas: where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty and
fredome. Ioh. viii.
Again: Si vos filius liberauerit, vere liberi eritis, that is to say:

If the son does deliver you, ye shall be free in deed. What we are as long,
as we be void of the spirit of God.
These sayings, do sufficiently declare, that as long as we are void of the
spirit of God and are not yet set at liberty by the son, we are naught else
but the bond slaves of Satan the dyuell of syn and of death. Many other
places of ye scriptures, might I hear aleadge, which do teach that of our
selves, we be not able to think a good thought. But lest, I should be tedious
unto your honorable Lordship, I will omytte them, and show brieflye, what the
Council of Myluente did most godly and catholikely decree and determyne
touching this matter: Sinodus mileuentana.
If any man (say the holy fathers gathered in that Concyll) does affirm,
Note ye well those things ye free will men.
that we can by the virtue and strength of our own nature think or choose,
as it is expedyente, any good thing that pertayneth to our salvation, or
agree and consent to the wholesome preachinge of the gospel, without the
illuminating, and inspiration of the holy ghost, who gives us a pleasure or
swetnesse in consentinge, and the truth in beleuinge, he is deceived with an
heretical spirit, not understanding the voice of God, saying in the gospel:
without me, ye can do nothing, John. xv.
nor the saying of the Apostell, ii. Co. iii.
where he says: Not that we be able to think any thing of our selves, as
of our selves, But our suffiencye or ableness is of God. Again: If any man
does contentiouslye maintain, that God does tarry for our will, that we may
be purged from sin, and does not confess, that by the infusion and working
of the holy ghost it is wrought in us, that we be willing to be purged, he does
resist and withstand the holy ghost him self, saying by Solomon: The will, is
prepared of the lord. And also ye Apostle, Philip. ii
which preaches wholesomelye, that it is God, August. ad Simplici.
that works in us both the will, and the work, according to his good will.
Where the Apostell does sufficientlye show, that the will it self, is made good
in us, by the workinge of God. For, if we should ask, whether the good will, is
a gift of god, or not, I maruail, if any man dirst say nay. Here we do learn
that we can not pray unto god without the especial grace of God. Esa. lxv.
Romans x.
Moreover (say the fathers before reherced) If any man does say, that the
grace of God, can be given by human invocation, or man's calling upon god, and
not that the grace it self does work or bring to pass, that God is called
upon of us, he does gaynesaye Esaye the prophet, or the Apostell speaking the
same: I am found of them, that sought me not, and did appear plainly unto
them, that did not ask of me. What can be spoken more playnelye of the
unableness of man before he be regenerated or borne of new by the spyryte
of God?

All men may easily see by these sayings, which are most surely grounded in
the word of the lyuinge God, what will and strength we have of our selves, to
do any thing, that pertains either to the glory of God, or to our own
salvation. Therefore, I can not but marvel at our pope pelagians and at the
viperous brood of the fre will men which do still to the great iniurye of the
gratuite and free grace of God, The pope pelagians and the viperous brood of
the free will men.
so set out boast and advance the free will and strength of man, which (as
saint Augustyne says) is very sore hurt and wounded, which is all to
shaken, and lost, having more need of a true confession tha^ of a false
defense. Against the^ now at this present, being forced thereunto by the great
love and vehement zeal that I bear unto the truth, I have taken upon me for
to write, that so I may somewhat releue and help the poor simple and
ignoraunte, whom by their pestiferous doctrine they cause for to leave the
sure stai, To stay upon free will, is to lean up the broken read of Egipte.
that we have in the free mercy and grace of god and to lean upon the broken
read of their free will. Which is the next way, that Satan the deuell, the
enemy of our salvation can devise, for to throw them headlonge into the
bottomless pit of eternal dampnation. Their arguments, which they do so
gaily paynt out, with wrasted textes of the scryptures, I have diligently
confuted, not sticking, as occasion did serve, to borowe of other, which have
fought against that monstrous heresye before me, those things, which I
judged mete for my purpose. For, when we have an enemy to ouercom, it makes no
matter whether we overcome him, with s new weapon, that was never occupied
before, or with a weapon that has been all ready occupied of other. In
temporal wars, what does it skill, whether we beat down the common
ennemy, with our own weapon, or with our fellows weapon? So that he be beaten
down and ouercom, it is all one thing. We al ought to seek the glory of
God, and to fight against the common ennemy of it, let us not therefore envy
one at an other, but let us faithfully help, aid, chearishe and comfort one
an other in this pearyllous fight. As for my part, I am ready at all times, in
this so just a war against the ennemies of the grace of God, to retch forth
mine helpyng hand unto all my faithful brethren, trustinge that they will do
the like unto me. How much, I have farthered now the cause of the truth,
let the godly judge. Only this shall be to desire your honorable Lordshyppe
to accept this my rude labor, which withal due submiffion I offer unto your
honor, as unto the Mecenas and patron of all godly learning and true
religion, beseching almighty God the authoure of al goodness, to prosper al
your godly enterprises to his honor and glory, and to the common wealth of
this floryshynge realm.

The argument of this present book.
IN this disputatyon or dyscourse of free will, we do first speak of it, as
it was in man at his first creation, and before his fall, where it is showed,
that the place that is aleadged out of the.xv. chapter of Ecclesiasticus, for
the defense of free will, ought to be understood of man being in the
estate of innocencye. For, then as S. Augustine does declare, had he free
will, but by transgressing the law of God, he did lose it. Whereby he did
both bring him self, and all his posterity into a miserable bondage, and
thraldom. In the which we do still remain until the son of God, by his
holy spiritte has made us free. For till then we are so pressed down with
the seruytude of sin, and with the corruptyon of our own flesh, that we
cannot as much as think a good thought, ye we run headlonge into all
kinds of sins, being most prompte and ready to do what so ever the
flesh and the devil do move, and tempte us unto. But after that we be once by
the drawinge of the father, come unto our savior Jesus Christ, and have
fellowshyp with him, then do we by and through him, recover that, which we
lost in Adam, but yet not so, that we be always able to do the good, that we
would. As saint Paul him self does affirm, saying: Romans vii.
I do not the good thing, which I would, but the euel that I would not, that do
I. To be short, after long disputation, and many objections made by the
adversaries, and substantially answered by Gods word, and authorities of the
ancient fathers, it is in fine concluded that all the good that we do, comes
nether of our fre will nor of our own strength, but of the mercy and grace of
god, who worcketh the same in us by his holy spirit, and that all the evil
that is in us comes of the devil and of our selves. Last of all, mention is
made of the law, and of the fulfilling of the same. Where it is plainlye
proved, that no man is able to fulfill the law with such a perfection as God
does require of us, and yet that no unrighteousness can be laid to god,
although, he commands things, that be impossible for us to do. By ye way
the right use of the law, and the vtility and profit of it, is diligently
setforthe, and by what means we are delivered from the curse of the same. And
so an end.

A most necessary Treatise of free will, not only against the papists but
also against the Anabaptists, which in these our dais go about to renew the
detestable heresies of Pelagius, and of the Luciferians, which say and affirm,
that we be able by our own natural strength to fulfill the law and
commandments of God. Made dialoge wise by Ihon Veron, in a manner word by
word, as he did set it forth in his lectures at Paul's.
I will have mercy on him, to who^e I will show mercy, and will have compassion
on him, on whom I will have compassion.

Romans. ix. Ex. xxxiii. Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated. To. ix.
Mala. i.


Albion. Philalethes. Eutrapelus. Dydimus. ALBION. In the book which is called
the huntinge of purgatory unto death.
I thyncke, that it is not yet eleven of the clock, therefore, I think it best,
that according to the counsel, that our neyghbor Dydimus gave us yesterday, we
do sit here a while till the fervent heat of the sun be ouerpaste, and that
we do talcke and common of those things, that do yet somewhat troble my
conscience.


PHILALETHES. Ye may order us, as it pleases you, and specially, sith that ye
be so ready always to give place unto the truth. And therefore, let us hear
what those things be, that do yet trouble your conscience, that we may, as we
have done here to fore, mynister unto you, the salve of Gods word.


ALBION. I am much bound to you, brother Philalethes, for the great kindness
that ye show unto me, being so ready at al times, to healpe and succoure me in
this great perplexity of mind, that I am in God, I trust, who is the author of
all goodness, and who has inclyned your heart unto me, shall reward this your
paynfull labor that ye take about me.

O most merciful and bountious father, A thanks geuinge ioigned with a
faithful prayer.
geuinge thee most hartye thanks for these thy benefyttes, wherewith thou
have so graciously refreshed us, we do humbly beseech thee, to send thy holy
spyrit in to our hearts, that we may in this our communycation and talk,
setfourth thy glory only, to the utter confusion and overthrow of all the
shameful enemies of thy free mercy and grace.


EVTRAPELVS. God of his goodness vouchesafe to grant us all, The enemies of
gods. grace.
that we may so do. For, there be many in the world, which are such enemies
of the free mercy and grace of God, The papists.
that whosoever does according to the scriptures, affirm or say, that we are
saved only by his free mercy and grace, they are most ready to persecute them
with fire and sword, as most pernicious and abominable heretykes, and as
utter enemies of all truth.


DIDYMVS. The Anabaptists and free will men.
Ye shall not only find of them among the papystes, but also among them,
that will be coumpted most perfect christians, and most earnest favorers of
the gospel.


ALBION. Where so ever they he found, my faithful guydes did tell me, that we
have fre will: which thing ye do all deny. Therefore: I would feign hear, what
ye can say, concerning that matter.


PHILALEEHES. What do they understand by fre will? For, they are wont to
speak of it many and sundry ways. Some do by it understand one thing, and
some an other.


ALBION. They told me, What scole men understand by fre will.
that by free will they do understand a certain facultye or power, being in
seperably in the will of man, whereby he might do or leave undone any manner
of thing, as wit and reason did think or judge it expediente. For, say they,
manne by his wit and reason does consider, weyghe, and ponder a thing, and
does examyne and try whether it be good or not: and then by the virtue of his
free will, either he does it, or leaves it undone, even as it pleases him.


PHILALETHES. What meaned they, think ye, After the papists judgment we are
masters of our will.
by that defynition?


ALBI. As it appears both by that difynition, and also by other talk, that
they had afterward, their meaning was, that we are masters of our own
will and judgment, and that therefore, we can by our own strength turn
our selves which way we list, that is to say, that we be able by our own
virtue to do good or evil, how blasphemous popish doctrine is concerning free
will.
to save or damn our selves.


EVTRA. O what blasphemye is this against God and his word? If ye do well
mark this defynition, ye shall easily perceive, that it is rather the
difynition of profane and heathenyshe Philosophers than of Christen doctors.
Ye may well understand, that if this definition were true, we should not need
to pray unto God for his help and assistaunce, nor to call upon him for his
holy spirit. We should have no need to say: if it pleases God we will do this
thing or that thing. Do they not the^ by their definition place man in the
stead and room of god?


PH. If these faithful guids of yours, had any zeal to setforthe the grace of
God, and his free mercy and goodness, they would have given an other definition
unto free will.


AL. Which, I pray you?


PHI. They would at least have given the definition that s. Augustine does use.
Which is this: Liberum arbitrium, The defynition of free will after Saint
Augusti.
est facultas rationis et voluntatis, qua bonum eligitur gratia adsistente,
malum vero ea desistente. That is to say: free will is a virtue or power of
the reasonne and will, whereby the good is chosen, when the grace of God does
adsiste, and the evil when it is away or is wythdrawen. The meaning is: The
meaning of Augustines defynition.
that by free will, if we have the adsistaunce and healpe of the grace of God,
we are able to choose that, which is good, but if the grace of God be away, or
be withdrawn, we can no more but embrace that, which is evil, and hurtefull
to our own souls.


DIDY.


PHILALETHES. The master of sentences. Li ii. senten. distin. xxv.
Yea verelye. For, the master of Sentences, does write, that it is not said,
that man has free will, because that he is as able to think and do good, as
he is to think and do evil, but because that he is not subject unto
necessitye or compulsyon. Lombardus his meaning



DyDIMVS. What should he mean by that?


PHILALETHES. His meaning is, Scholemen.
that the evil, which man does, he does it freely, and without compulsion. And
therefore, the schole men say, that this fredome and liberty is not let,
though we be wicked, and servants of sin, and can no more but sin still
and offend. But truly this cannot be understood of a man, that is
regenerated or borne of new. For, the holy ghost, that is in him does
wythstande the evil, that he would do. And likewise by this definition or
determinatyon of the master of sentences, it might be said, that a man, which
is regenerated or borne of new has free will, How it may be said that a
man which is regenerated has free will Ecclesia. cus xv. chapi.
because that the same little good that he does, he does it freely, and frankly.


ALBION. They did bring in a place out of Ecclesiasticus, otherwise called
Jesus the son of Sirach, where it is thus written: God made man from the
beginning and left him in the hand of his counsel. He gave him his
commandments, and precepts. If thou wylt observe the commandments and
keep acceptable faythfulnesse for ever, they shall preserve the. He has set
fire and water before thee, reach out thine hand unto which thou will.
Before manne is life and death, good and evil, look what him likes, shall be
given him. Episto. ad ctesiphontem
They did also aleadge many doctors, as Jerome against the Pelagians, where he
says thus: In this do we dyffer from brute beasts, that we have been
created with free will. Li. ii contra martio. home ix. in gen Ei. xii. mora.
They did aleadge Tertulian, Chrysostom and Hilary. Which all do affirm that
man has such free will, as they did declare unto me before.


PHILALETHES. The place, that they aleadged out of Ecclesiasticus, makes
nothing for them. for, how the place of Ecclesiasticus ought to be
understood.
it ought to be understood of man being in the first estate of his creation,
and being in his original innocence and righteousness. And because that it
shall not be thought, that I bring any thing of mine own head, ye shall
hear what Saint Augustine sayethe, whose words, are these: free will before
the fall was an vprighte free will, De ca^ticonouo. ca. viii.
before which, fire and water was laid of God, and the first manne did
reatche his hand to which he would, he did choice fire, and forsook water.
See the ryghteous judge, the same, which manne being free did choice, he did
receive, he would have evil, and the same did follow him.

Contra fortu. Disputa. xi.
And in an other place, these be also his words: I say that fre will was in
that man, which was created first. For, he was so made, that nothing could
withstand his will, if he would have kept Gods commandments but after
that he had sinned through free will, he did cast us all that come of his
stock, into necessitye. And therefore, he writes in an other place, In
encherid ad lauren. Ca. xxx. De verbis aposer. ii.
that manne vsinge not well free will, did both lose it and him self. Again:
It is true (says he) that manne when he was made did receive great strength
of free will, but he did lose it through sin.

These autorityes of Saint Augustine do sufficientely declare, how the place
that they aleaged out of Ecclesiasticus ought to be understood.

For, there doubtelesse, the wise manne does speak of man, as he was first
created in the estate of innocence and righteousness, and not as he was with his
posteritye after his fall, De eccledogm. ca. xxxii.
whereby as Saint Augustine says, all men have lost their natural
possibilitye, or ableness, and their natural or original innocencye. And so
ought the doctoures, that they did bring in, for them selves, to be
understood, for they do all speak of man as he was before his fall. Which
thing appears to be most true by the saying of Saint Hierome, Iero in
xxiii. cap. Iere.
who wrytinge upon Jeremy says plainly these words: And therefore, the
heretykes be wont to promise felicity, and to open unto sinners the kingdom of
heaven, saying: Thou may follow the majesty of God, and be without sin,
sith that thou have received the power or strength of free will, and the
understanding of the law, whereby thou art able to obtain what so ever thou
will. And so the said Heretykes do deceive the poor, simple, and ignorant
persons, and specially women, which being laden with sins, are led to
and froe with every wind of doctrine, deceiuynge by their flattery al them
that give ears unto them. Hear ye see that saint Jerome does call them all
Heretics, that say, that men be able by their free will, to do both good
and evil. Wheruppon we may well conclude, that in his Epistle ad
Ctesiphon^em, Existo ad ctesiphon tem.
he does speak of the first estate of man, that he was in before his
transgressyon and fall. And as for Chrysostom, although he does exceade in
extollynge the natural strength of man, hom. i. in aduen.
yet does he confess plainelye, that every manne, is not only of his own
nature a sinner, but also that he is sin altogether.

Whereby he does overthrow, what so ever, he does write or say in any other
place, in the commendacyon of free will, and of our natural strength.


EVTRAPELVS. That must be most true. For, if according to his own saying,
we be not only sinners of our own nature, but also sin all together, where
is our gaye payncted free will become?

Ioh. viii.
Does not the truth him self say, that every man that sins, is a
servant of sin? Again, is it not written that of whom so ever a man is
overcome, ii. Pet. ii
unto the same he is in boundage? It appears then by this, that we are very
far from that liberty and fredome, that they do so much boaste of.


DYDIMVS. Wherefore did then these ancient fathers and writers of the Catholic
church extol so much the free will and natural strength of man? Home. lii
For, Chrysostom, has always in his mouth: Let us bring that, which is our
own, God will supply the residue. Where unto Jerome does agree, saying: Nostrum
est incipere, Dia. iii. con. Pelagianes.
dei autem perficere: Nostrum est, offerre quod possumus, illius implere quod
non possumus. That is to say: It is our part for to begin, and it is Gods
part for to perform. It is our part, to offer that, which we can, and it is
his part to supply or fulfill that, that we can not.


PHILALETHES. It is most plain, Why the aunciant fathers spoke so of fre will
that they did seem to allow it.
that they did it to this end, that they might drive away all slouggishnesse
from men. Which thing they that came after did not perceive. And therefore,
they did attribute so much to the free will and natural strength of man, that
the fre mercy and grace of God was in a manner utterly forgotten.


DyDIMVS. How can it be proved, that they did tt only for that purpose?


PHILALETHES. It is easy to be proved. For, if they should mean as they
write, they should directly be against the plain scriptures and word of God,
and also against them selves. First and foremost, the LORD him self says: I
will hencefourth curse the earth no more for man's sake. Genesis viii
For, the ymagination of man's heart is evil, even from the very youth of
him. And Moses for to declare, Deu. xxix
how unable we be of our selves to understand heavenly things, does say
plainlye these words: Ye have seen all that the Lord did before your eyes
in the land of Egipte, unto Pharao and unto and all his servant. Thine eyes
have seen these great tokens and wonders. And yet unto this day, has not the
Lord given you a heart, that understands, eyes that see and ears that hear.

What could he say more, except he should call us blocks and stones? And in
Ezechiel the Lord says: A new heart, Eze. xxvi.
will I give you, and a new spirit will I put in to you. As for that stony
heart, I will take it out of your body, and give you a fleshy heart. I will
give you my spirit among you, and cause you to walk in my commandments, to
keep my laws and to fulfill them. This place only does sufficientely teach
us, that except our stony hearts be taken away from us, and flesshy, that is
to say, obediente hearts given us instead of them, yea and a new spirit put
in to us (which should work in us an obedience toward the Lords
commandments) we are able to do nothing we can in no wise keep the laws of
God, nor yet fulfill them.


EVTRAPELVS. In deed these words are very plain. For, by them we do learn,
that all that we have of our own, must either be renewed, or taken away,
before that we can do any thing, that pertain to our salvation. Whereby any
man may easlye perceive, that the liberty and freedom that we have to do well,
is very small, or rather nothing at all.


PHILALETHES. John. iii.
Be not these the words of John zacharyes son: A man can receive nothing,
except it be given him from above? Where doubtless he speaks, not of the
common gifts of nature, but of the special gift of the holy ghost. For,
there does he complain; that his disciples were never the better for all his
preachinges, wherein he had set fourth Christ unto the^. As if he should have
said: I do see and perceive, that words are nothing available for to teach
and instruct men in heavenly things, except the holy ghost, woorkynge
inwardelye does give the understanding. Unto this does our sauyoure Jesus
Christ agree, John. vi.
when he sayethe: No man can come unto me, except it be given him of my
father. For this cause, when Peter had said: Thou art Christ the son of
the lyuinge God. This answer did our savior Jesus Christ make unto him
again: blessed art thou Simon the son of Jonas: For, flesh and blood has
not opened that unto thee, Mat. xvi.
but my father that is in heaven.

And in an other place: whosoever (says he) does hear and learn of the
father, comes unto me. John. vi.
But the blessed Apostell does most strongely heat down the vain pride of
our free will men, where he writes on this manner: The natural man perceaueth
nothing of the spirit of God. i. Cor. ii.
Whereby he does understand, that the natural man, which is not renewed in
Christ, can not perceive the things that be of ye spirit of god. For, why they
are but folyshenes unto him. And in his second Epistel to ye Corinthians, these
be also his words: ii. Cor. iii
Such trust have we through christ to God ward, not that we are sufficient of
our selves to think any thing, as it were of our selves, but our ableness
comes of God. Now if we be not able to think a good thought, except God
does put it in us: how much more unable be we, either to will or to do any
thing that good is, or acceptable in the sight of God? But let us grant unto
you by way of disputation and reasoninge, yt we have no such thing in the book
of God: what shall they win by it? For, I am able to bring now, four of the
most principal doctors against their two.


DyDIMVS. Which are they, I beseech you?


PHILA. First, the blessed martyr Saint Cyprian, Li. de predest. sanctorum ad
bonifaciu^ Li. iiii. et alibi. cyprianus.
who is a most aunciente doctor, has left this golden sentence unto us by
writing: De nullo nobis gloriandum est, quia nihil nostrum est, nisi vt homo
apud se prorsus exinanitus, a deo totus pendere discat. That is to say: we
ought to boste of nothing: For, nothing is our own, saving only that man
being of no reputation with him self, must learn to hang all to gether of
God.


EVTRA. As far, as I do remember, Saint Augustyne does many times rehearse
the same saying of Cyprian.


PHILA. Ye say true. For, he makes mention of it in his book of the
Predestination of saints, and in many other places besides. But he him self
does write much after the same manner, when he says. Nemo se palpet, Hom. in.
Iohanne^ xlix.
de suo Sathanas est: id vnde beatus est, a deo tantum habet. Quid N. de tuo
habes nisi peccatum?

Toll tibi peccatum quod tuum est. Nam iustitia detest. Which we may
English after this sort.

Let no man flatter him felfe: for, of his own he is a very Satan he has
that of God only, whereby he is blessed. For, what haste thou of thine own but
sin? Take away sin from thee, which is thine own: For, righteousness is
of God. Ye see how well he does setforthe manne in his own colors. But ye
shall hear also what Gregory says: Grego. li moraliu^. xxii. ca. x.
Sciunt sancti viri (says he) se post primi parentis lapsum, de corruptibili
stirpe editos, et non virtute propria, sed preueniente gratia superna, ad
meliora se vel vota, vel opera commutatos, et quicquid sibi mali inesse
cognoscunt de mortali propagine sentiunt meritum. Quicquid vero boni in se
inspiciunt, immortalis gratiae cognoscunt donum.

That is to say: holy men do know that after the fall of the first father,
they be borne of a corruptible stock, and that they be not by their own
virtue, but by the supernall grace, that does prevent them, turned unto better
desires or works: and what evil so ever they know to be in them selves, they
feale that it is deserved and come of their mortal kind. But what good so
ever they see to be in them selves, they acknowledge to be the gift of the
immortal grace. And for this gift that they have received, they be debtoures
unto him, which by preuentyng them, did give unto them, that they should will
that good thing, which they would not, and by followinge did grant that
they should be able to do that good thing that they would.


EVTRAPE. O that all faithful Christians, A godly wyshe.
would have always this saying of Gregorye before their eyes. For, they
learn thereby, that they that be sanctified by ye holy ghost, as they do
acknowledge that after the fall of the first man, they are both conceived and
born in sin, so do they unfeignedly confess, that all the good mind and
will, that they have to do those works, that God does require of us,
comes not of them selves, nor of their own natural virtue and strength, but
of the mere grace and goodness of God, wherewith he does prevent them, that
they may have such a good will and mind to do good, and wherwyth he, as
followinge, he does healpe and adsist them, that they may be able to fulfill
and perform that good thing, that he has moved them to will.

Again, the evil that they feel to be in them selves, they do not abscribe
it unto their creation, nor yet to their creatoure and maker, but to their
mortal generatyon, and corrupted nature: but all the goodness that they
perceive to be in the^ selves, they attribute it not unto their natural virtue
and strength but unto the grace and goodness of God, without which we can
not as much, as think a good thought.


PHILA. And therefore, Bernarde does write very well when he says on this
manner: Quid igitur? Hoc ergo totum liberi arbitrii opus, In tracta tu de gratia
and libero arbitrio.
hoc solum eius est meritum quod consentit? Est prorsus. Non quidem quod velcon
fensus, in quo omne meritum con sistit, ab ipso sit: cum nec cogitare, (quod
minus est quam conse^tire) a liquid a nobis, quasi ex nobis sufficientes simus.
Verba sunt non mea, sed Apostoli, qui omne, quod bonum esse potest, id est
cogitare, et velle and perficere, pro bona voluntate, attribuit deo, no^ suo
arbitrio. That is to say: what then? Is this therefore ye whole work of fre
will? Is this the only merit of it, that it does consent, and agree? Truly it
is. Not that the consent, wherein all the merit does consist, does come or is of
it: sith that we be not of our selves, as of our selves able to think any
thing, which is less than to consent or agree. These be not my words, but
the words of the Apostle, which does attribute unto God, and not unto his free
will, all that be good, that is to say: to thyncke, and to will, and to
perform according to his good will and pleasure.

Here do we learn that Bernard does adscribe al things unto god, and nothing
to fre will: wherein he does agree with S. Augustine, Li. de ecclesi. dogma. xxvii
saying: God does so work in the hearts of men, and in the fre will it
self, that every good thought, godly counsel, and al good motion of the will
or mind is of God.


ALBION. fall of the first man, we have free will still.


DYDIMVS. Yea I do remember, that these words are also aledged out of S.
Augustine: Let no man be slack and slouthful to serve God, nor trust so upon
grace, Li. iii. hy pogno co^ tra Pela.
as though God should not require the works of his fre will: yea rather, let
him shonne evil and do good. No man can deny but that these be S. Augustines
words. Whereby he does plainly declare, ye God does require the works of our
fre will. Which thing, he would not do, except we had it.


PHI. It is a wonder to se how craftye the devil is, The devils sophistry.
they do bring but a small piece god wot. For, all that does declare most
plainelye the right meaning of Saint Augustine, the same do they most
craftily leave of.

And because no man shall think, that I go about to sclander them, ye shall
hear all the hole sentence of that ancient doctor, The whole sentence of
August.
which is this: who of us will say, yt through the sin of the first man, fre
will is pearished from mankind? Truly, the fredome is pearished through
sin: but the same that was in Paradise, to have full or perfect righteousness
with immortality: Therefore man's nature has neade of the grace of God, as
our savior Jesus Christ does testify, saying: If the son of god does
deliver you, then are ye free in deed, to live well and justly. For, free will
is not so pearyshed unto sinners, but that they sin through it, specially al
those, that sin with pleasure, and through the love that they have unto
sin, which they do desire, and which pleases them. What things are to be
noted in saint Augustines words.
Mark well these words. First, he says that the same fredome is pearyshed
and gone, which was in paradise, to have perfect righteousness with
immortality: meaning thereby, that whereas man had in Paradise free liberty to
purchase unto him self, a full and perfect righteousness with immortality, ye
same is now pearished and lofte, through his disobedience and fall. Secondlye,
he says, that free will is not so perished unto sinners, but that they sin
through it, specially al those that sin with pleasure, whereby he does
understand, that for to do freely and frankly the thing that is good, we have
nead of the grace of God, and that the same manne which has not the holy
ghost, and which is not truly regenerated, does freely, and without compulsion
serve unto sin, in so much that he seems not to be the servant of sin,
because that the euel that he does, he does it voluntarily, freelye and
francklye. Who does not see now, that S. Augustine speaks nothing of such
a free will, as your faithful guides do most shamefully go about to maintain
and uphold. And therefore in an other place, he writes on this manner: why
dare miserable and wretched men be proud, Li. de spiritu et li. tera. ca. xxx.
or boaste them selves either of fre will, before that they be delivered, or of
their own strength, if they be already delivered? And do not marcke that in
the very name of free will, liberty or fredome is signified.

But where the spirit of the LORD is, there is freedom and liberty:
Therefore, if they be servants of sin: why do they boaste them selves of
free will? For, of whom so ever any manne is overcome, to him is he
delivered to be his bound manne.

And if they be delivered, why do they boaste them selves as of their own
work? Are they so free, that they refuse to be the servants of him: that
says: John. xv.
without me ye can do nothing? And in his book, which he did write of
grace and free will, these be his words: Our will is always free, capi. xv.
but it is not always good. For, either it is free from righteousness, when
it serves unto sin, and then it is evil, or it is free from sin, when it
serves unto righteousness, and then it is good.

Which sentence he does both repeat, and also expound in his other works,
saying plainly, Li. ad bonifa. cap. ii.
that manne is made free from righteousness, by his own free will, but that
he can not be made free from sin, saving only by the grace of our
Sauyoure.

Is not this, I pray you, to deryde and laughe to scorn, the vain Title and
name of Free will?


DYDIMVS. Yet, in the saying that I have aledged,


PHILALETHES. When I have rehearsed unto you the hole sentence, Augu. li.
contra pe lagi. hypo ge.
The Latin is this: Nemo sit remissus et segnis ad sermendum deo, nec sic de
gratia confidat, tanque deus liberi arbitrit eius, quod per morte^ filii sui
reparauit, et sibi preparauit, opera non requirat, imo declinet a malo et fa
ciat bonum. That is to say: Let no man be slack and slothful to serve God,
nor trust so upon grace, as though God should not require the woorckes of
that free will, which he has both restored and prepared unto him self by the
death of his son. Yea rather: let him fly from evil and do good. What free
will saint Au. does understand.
Any child may easily perceive and understand of what fre will Saint Augustine
does speak there: even of that same free will which God has already
restored again and prepared unto him self, by ye death of his son Jesus
Christ, who only is able to deliver us from the servitude and bondage of
sin, and by his holy spirit to make us to do freely those works, which GOD
has prepared for us, to walcke in. Therefore in an other place, he says
plainlye these words. Thinckinge diligently and faithfully on these and other
like things, let us not consent or agree unto them, Idem lib. l. home. xiiii.
which extollinge free will unto pride, do rather go about, to cast it down
than to set it up. But let us consider with all humilitye and lowlynesse the
saying of the Apostell, where he says: It is God that works in us both to
will and also to work: and so give thanks unto our Lord and savior, which
without any merytes going before, did heal us being wounded, and did
reconsyle us being enemies, did deliver us from captyuitye, did bring us from
darkness unto light, and from death did call us unto life again:

And confessyng humbly our infirmitye and weakness, let us call upon his
mercy, that sith he has prevented us (according to the Psalmistes saying)
with his grace he vouchaf not only to keep in us, but also to augmente and
increase his gifts or rather his benefits, which he did vouchaf to give us.
These words ar so plain, that any child is able to understand them.


ALBION. They did yet aledge an other place out of his treatise, upon the
first epistel of John. The words are these: And every man that has this hope
in him, pourgeth him self, even as he is pure. Se how he has not taken away
fre will, in so much that he did say: he purges him self.


PHILALETHES. The same fraud and deceate shall ye find in the aleaging of this
place, that ye have found already in ye above reherced autoryties. For, it
follows immediately after who does purge us but god? But God does not pourge
thee against thy will. Therefore because that thou doste ioygne thy good will
unto god, thou purgest thy self. Thou purgest thy self, not of thy self, but
of him that comes to dwell in thee.

yet because that thou doste there somewhat willinglye, therefore is some thing
attributed unto thee: that thou may say, as it is written in the xxvi.
Psalm. Thou art my healper, do not forsake me. If thou say: thou art my
healper, thou do somewhat, for if thou do nothing, how does he help thee.
First, and foremost we may easily perceive by the text that he goes upon,
Here. S. August. speaks of the man that is al ready renewed.
that he does speak of him that is already renewed in Christ: else how could
he have any hope of life everlasting? And for this cause he says by and by:
who does purge us but God? But it is not unknown unto you, that GOD does only
pourge us through faith in our savior Jesus Christ, which faith, is the mother
of hope. Therefore, er we can have this hoope of life everlasting, which the
blessed Evangelist Saint Ihon does speak of there, we must be purged
through faith. It is plain then, that there he speaks of him, that is
already made a new creature in Christ, by whose spirit, which comes to
dwell in us, we are purged and made clean, and not of our selves.


ALBION. What means he then, when he says:


DIDYMVS. Truly that was well marcked of you, brother Albion, I thought mi
self to have made the same objection, except ye had prevented me.


PHILALETHES. Phi. ii.
both the will, and also the deed, even of his own good will. Where (as Saint
Austine does write) he does sufficiently declare, Ad simpli ci. li. i. Questi.
xi
that it is God that works in us, the good will. For, if we should ask,
whether the good will be a gift of GOD or not, it is maruayle if any man dares
say nay.

Where unto Fulgentius does agree, saying: Every good work then, which we
do work in god, the same does god work in us. For, all things are of
him, through him, and in him. Both our good will then, and also our good
works be of him.

Which thing, the doctor of the gentyles does affyrm with these words.

It is God that woorketh in us, both the will and the deed, even of his good
will and pleasure. Ye see then of whom we have this good will, that we must
bring unto God, even of him self and not of us.

For, it is he and none other that does work it in us, by his holy spirit.

And therefore, where he says: that GOD saves or purges no man against
his will, the same is most true: Home. ix. Ezechielem.
but as Gregorye writes, he does preuente us, with his grace that we may be
willinge, and with his healpynge hand he does follow us, least we should will
in vain. And therefore the church prays saying: Et nostras rebels ad te
compelle voluntates. That is to say: And compel or drive our rebellious wyls
unto thee. Behold (says he) except our rebellious will be driven unto God,
it is not healed. So says our savior: No man is able to come unto me, except
my father does draw him. We are drawn against our wills, but we are lead
willinglye or with our wills. It appeareath by this, How of un wyllnge we are
made willing.
that of unwilling persons, we must, by the inward drawing of our heavenly
father, be made wylling: else our wills cannot be healed from their natural
rebelliousnesse, which we have of our first parents Adam and Eve. Thus then
we may right well say, that God saves no man against his will: For, why? He
makes them all wyllinge before, whom he does save. How this ought to be
understood, that God saves no man against his will.
And whom he made wyllinge, them does he also healpe, aid, and adsist, that
they may do the thing, that he has made them wyllinge to do. And so may
we affirm boldly, that God is our healper. because that being throughlye
regenerated or renewed in Christ, we do through the assistaunce and help of
his holy spirit, work with his grace.


EVTRAPELVS. Now may ye perceive and see, The faith fulness that the
papists do use in aleaging the ancient writers.
what truth and faithfulness, your spiritual gentle men do use, in
aleadginge the old writers of the ancient Catholyke church. And that all
that they go about, is by hook and by crook, to bring men, from the true
and right understanding of of Gods word: and to pluck them from the trust,
that they ought to have in the meare mercy and goodness of God, and in his
gratuite and free grace, in to a vain confidence of their own natural virtue
and strength. I would wyshe, that at the least they would always have before
their eyes, this goodly saying of Eucherius bishop of Lions: Christ says he,
is the tree of life, who so ever does retch forth his hand unto him, shall live:
but free will, is the tree of knowledge of good and evil: whosoever forsaking
the grace of God, will taste of it, shall dye the death.


ALBION. Now will I tell you, what objections I made against them. First, I did
ask them why Jeremy did say: Iere. x.
Now I know, O Lord, that it is not in man's power, to order his own ways,
or to rule his own steps and goinges?


PHILA. Ye did go out of your matter. For, your communication was of
heavenly and spyrituall things, that is to say, of the knowledge of God, and
of his blessed will, and whether we can rule our selves according unto it.
Which to do, it lies not in the power or fre will of man. But there Ieremye
does speak of earthlye things, and which do pertain unto this present life.
In deed, God has yet left in man a certain natural light, whereby he may know
what is good for this present life of the body and for the government of his
house, Nothing can be brought to pass by the industrye of man with out the
help of God. Pro. xvi.
but yet nothing can be bring to pass, without the aid and healpe of God. So
must the saying of the wise manne be understood, where he says: A man
deuiseth in his heart, but the Lord ordreth his goynges. Where unto the common
Proverb does agree, that is to say: Man does purpose, but God does dispose.
How be it, I would feign know, what answer, they made unto you.


ALBION. They did answer me, that in deed manne was not able many times to
bring that thing to pass, that he would without the grace of God: and that
it lies not in the power of man to walk uprightly in the way of
righteousness without thassista^ce and healpe of the holy ghost. And for the
probation of it, they did bring in certain places, which ye have aleadged
alreadi, as these: A man can receive nothing at all, John. iii.
except it be given him from above. Again: ii. Cor. iii
we are not able of our selves to think a good thought, but all our ableness
comes of God. Also the saying of Saint James, Iam. i.
where he says: Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and
comes down from the father of light.


EVTRA. I chanced once to reason with a great doctor of divinity who did
affirm, that it did lie in our power to receive the grace of God when it is
offered unto us, making a great brag, that he was able to prove it by manifest
textes of the scripture. Then did I ask the gentle manne whether it was not a
good gift to receive the grace of God, when it is offered? which thing he did
grant by and by. Then did I make mine argument after this manner: Every good
gift is from above, and comes down from the father of light. But to receive
the grace of GOD when it is offered, is a good gift, ergo it comes of God,
that we do receive his grace, and not of our selves.


DYDIMVS. What answer did he make?


EVTRA. The substantial Answer of a popish doctoure.
What answer he made me? I warrante you, a doctor like answer. For, by and by
he took his gloves from under his girdle, and did cast them unto me, saying:
Lo, I give you these gloves, be they not yours, when I have given you them?
can it be said, that they be mine still?


PHILA. That was aunsweared like a doctoure. But go on still brother Albion, I
pray you did they aleadge any more?


ALBION. Yes. For, they did aleadge Gregory, who wrytinge upon these words of
the Psalmist: Gregorius in psalmos.
My soul thyrsteth for thee in a barren and dry land, where no water is:
says plainly these words: Since that fre will has been corrupted in our
first father, we are not able to will a good thing, except we be healped with
the grace of God.


PHILALETHES. I knew right well, that your faithful guydes, should be fayn
at length to cry peccaui, and to recante their dyuelyshe and erroneous opinyon.

The enemies of the truth are against them selves.
For, if ye marcke well the definition, that they gave unto free will: ye shall
find, that they did attrybute nothing at all unto the grace of God, yea no
mention at all, was made of it. Ye se now that they say against their own
selves: wherein, they do show their ignorance and beastishnesse. They had
spoken so largelye without the book, that they were feign to go back, and to
vnsaye again that which they had said before. But upon this text of Jeremy I
might make mine argument after this manner: If man can not without the
healpe of God, A minori ad maius
bring earthlye things to pass: how much less shall he be able without
the grace of God, to come to the knowledge of heavenly things?


EVTRAPE. Herein may we see the beastishnesse of these bragging merchants of
the clergy. For, they do as soon aleadge that, which makes against them, as
that which seems to make for them. For, if all things be well considered
and marcked, the last authorities of the scripture, which they did aledge with
the saying of Gregory, do make for us all together.


ALBION. I do confess that it so. How be it, they always harped upon this
stringe, that manne has free will, and that such sentences and sayings do not
take away fre will from us.


PHILA. It is hard to take ought from a naked man.
I know well enough, that such sayings can not take away free will from us. For
why? we have it not. And how could that thing be, taken away from us, that
we have not? How so ever the matter goes, such sentences do plainly declare,
that man has not such fre will, as they do most lyingly affirm.


ALBION. Therefore, I asked them, why our savior Jesus Christ did say: No
man comes unto me, John. vi.
except my father does draw him. For, it appears by these words, that
man has no fre will at al to do well.


PHILA. What could they say to you again?


ALBION. They aleadged Chrysostom against me, where he writes in this manner.
The Manicheans did go about to prove by this place, that we are able to do
nothing of our own selves: But they do not understand it well. For, by this
saying free will is not abolyshed and put down, but it is showed and
declared, that it has always need of the healpe of God, and that God draws
no man against his will, but such, as do, to the uttermost of their power
endeavor them selves to come unto him. And in an other place he says, Home de
conuer Pauli.
that God compels no man to come unto him against his will: but that he
does draw them, that be wyllinge or that retche their hands unto him, for to
be drawn of him.


PHILALETHES. How the saying of Chrysostom ought to be taken.
The exposition and saying of Chrysostom is partly true. For, I do grant
that God shall never save them, that be obstinate in their wickedness, or that
do obstinately persevere and continue in their unbelief. To be short, I do
confess, that God will save no man, except he does consent and agree first,
and have a will to be saved. But in this does lie all the matter, whether we
have this will of our selves or not. But we have alredye sufficientlye proved
both by the scriptures, and also by many autorities of the ancient fathers,
that it is God only that works in us both the will, Phi. ii.
and also the deed, according to his good pleasure. We must then understand,
that God saves no man that is vnwyllinge to be saved, or that does withstand
and resist always his blessed will and pleasure: but before that he saves any
man, he makes that same manne by his grace, to consent and agree unto his
blessed will and pleasure: yea, he does reatch fourth his hand unto him, for so
pluck him up.


ALBION. They did say unto me in deed, that by the same drawinge, Mark the
unstableness of the enemies of God.
we must understand the grace of God which does prevent us: or his inward
admonytion and calling, whereby we are moved to do good, and to be obediente
unto the law and commandments of God.


PHILALE. I knew right well that they should be feign at length maugry their
smothe shaue^ faces to attribute al unto the grace of God, whereby he does move,
styr up, and wake out of sleep the will of man, geuinge it strength to rise up,
and to come unto him, whereby also he does reuele and open unto him, the
miserye and wretchedness, that he was in, and which was hydden from him, and
whereby he does strengthen him to walk in his laws and commandments, and
to do the thing that is acceptable before him.


ALBION. I did also, as occasion gave me, aleadge unto them this saying of
Paul: I know that in me (that is to say, To. vii.
in my flesh) dwells no good thing. To will is present with me but to
perform that, which is good, I find not. For, the good that I will, do I not,
but the evil, which I will not that do I.


PHI. I would feign hear what answer they made unto you.


ALBION. They did by and by bring in Chrysostom, An objection out of
Chrisostom.
who expounding this place, does say that by these words the Apostell does not
take away free will, nor yet bring in any necessity or conpulsion. For else instead that he did say, nolo, I will not, he should have said cogor, I am
constreygned. Which thing he did not.


PHI. Answer
If the exposition of Chrysostom were true, then must we confess, that. S. Paul
did voluntarely and of his free will ye thing that was evil, and that he did
willinglye, and of a set mind forsake the good that he might have done. But
to say so, were to blaspheme, not only the Apostle, but also the holy ghost,
that was in him. For, who would say, that after Saint Paul was once converted
and renewed in Christ, he did sin voluntarelye, or that he did for the nonce,
and of a set mind, forsake the good thing, that he might have done? I ask
you: if ye should do that thing, which ye would not do, were it not by
compulsion, that ye should do it.


ALBION. Yes verily.


PHILALE. Know ye then, A gloss of Orleans. Chrisost. makes no dyffere^ce
betwixt the carnal man and the man that is regenerated.
that this is a gloss of Orleans, which destroys the text. For, Chrysostom
makes there no dyfference, betwyxt the carnal manne, and the manne that is
renewed in Christ.

Where as Saint Paul does speak there of the manne that is regenerated or
borne of new, which thing he does under his own person, that we might be the
surer that it is so. For, ye shall understand that as the carnal and fleshly men
do give them selves freely to be the bound servants of sin, so in them that
be renewed in Christ, In them that are borne of new there is a contynuall
battle betwixt the spirit and the flesh.
and made new creatures by his holy spirit, there is always a continual
battle betwixt the spirit and the flesh, so that the evil that they do, they
do it, being ouercom by the flesh, which does always lust against the
spirit: And if they leave any good thing undone, which they would do, it is
because that the rebelliousnes of the flesh will not let them, nor yet suffer
them to do it.


ALBION. They said moreover that if I would well marcke, The fond objection
of the enemies.
to what purpose, Saint Paul did speak that, wayghinge the words that go
before, and the words that come after, I should find, that Saint Paul does
speak there of the sensuality of man, which is always repugnant unto reason,
because of our corrupted nature, and not of fre will. For, he says by and by
after: It is not I that do it, but sin that dwells in me.


PHILALETHES. Answer
Although this be the distinccion of a Philosopher, going about to defend man's
strength, and to prove that reason is perfect in him, I mean, in man, yet if
ye will mark diligently the words and sayings of your faithful guydes, ye
shall find that there was a certain repugnance in Saint Paul.

It follows then, that there was in him no such Free will, as they do
boaste of. For, it was not the will of Saint Paul, that did the same evil,
but his sensuality.

Therefore, the will ought to have resysted this sensualitye, if it be so
strong, that it is able to do what soever it will. Nevertheless S. Paul,
before he spoke thus, had said: we know that the law is spiritual, but I am
carnal, sold under sin. Ye se how he says. Ego, I. Whereby he does
understand all that was in him of his corrupted nature, as is both man's reason
and will: he says not my sensuality is sold under sin, but he says: I am
carnal and sold under sin. And afterward he called all his corrupted nature,
sin, saying: It is not I that do it, but sin that dwells in me:
understanding by sin, the natural corruption that was in him. The holy
scripture does put no difference betwixt sensuality and reason, In things that
pertain to salvation man is altogether sensualitye.
making reason more perfect than the sensuality is in heavenly things, or in
things that pertayne to salvation.

For, man him self being not yet renewed, is altogether fleshly and carnal,
he is nothing else, I say, but sensuality. Therefore, brother Albion, beware of
such doctors, as your bragging faithful guides be, which have lieuer to
follow heathenish philosophers, than the spirit of God. For, such doctoures do
all that they can to cast manne headlong into hell, being like unto the
serpent, which said unto Eve: ye shall be as God, gene. iii.
knowing both good and evil. For, to set man upon his fre will, is to set
man upon a reed, and upon vanishing smoke.


DYDIMVS. What if I should reason thus with you? men for the thing, that they
be driven unto die necessitye, or that we have free will to do what we list.
Which thing seems to be most true, by the words, that God does speak unto
Cain, gene. iiii
saying: if thou do evil, thy sin lies open in the door. Let it be
subdued unto thee, and rule thou it.


PHILALETHES.

First and foremost I say, that sin ought nevertheless to be imputed,
though it be of necessytye. For, if any manne would dyspute with GOD, or
would under this pretense escape his judgment, because that he could do none
otherwise, he has this answer ready.

Thy destruction comes of thee, O Israel, Osee. iii.
but in me only is thy healpe. For, whence comes this unableness or
necessitye, that manne goes about to excuse him self by, but of the
corruption of his nature? And whence comes this corruptyon, but that manne
did rebel against God his creator? If all men be giltye of this disobedience
and rebellyon, let them not thyncke, that they shall be excused by necessity,
wherein they have a most evident cause of their damnation.

Saint Augustine does expound it none otherwise than I do, Contra fortunat
dispu. xi.
when he says: I do boldlye affirm, that free will was in that manne, that
was created first, for he was so made, that nothing could wythstand his will, if
he would have kept the commandments. But after that he has sinned through
his fre will, he did cast us all that be come of his stock into necessitye.
This necessity then, that we be in, comes of the disobedience and rebellion
of our first pare^t Adam. Therefore no unrighteousness can be imputed unto God,
though he punishes us for those sins that we be driven unto by the same
necessitye, that we have of the original corruption of our own nature.
Secondlye where they say, that if sin lies in the will of man, it may be
shonned and avoided, Man is not master of his
that is to say. We may choose whether we sin or not, that same were most
true, if man were master of his own will. But we have already proved, that the
will of man, before he be renewed in Christ, and restored again by his holy
spirit, ss in the thraldom and bondage of sin, and can in no wise be
delivered from it, till the son of God has made it fre by his holy spirit.
In the mean season, I mean, John. viii
while it is free from righteousness, and servant unto syn, it can do no more
but sin still, according to his corrupted nature. Yea, we do learn by the
words of Paul, Romans vii
which were rehearsed even now, what strife and battle there is in the will
of man, being already renewed in Christ, so that many times he cannot do the
good thing that he would, and the euel that he would not, the same is he feign
to do, so violente is the remnaunte of sin, that contynueth in manne always
unto his lives end.


DYDIMVS. But what say ye to the place, gene. iiii.
thy sin lies open in the door. Let it be subdued unto thee, and rule thou
it? do not these words declare plainly that sin lies in the power of man,
and that he may rule it, as it pleases him?


PHI. Ye shall understand that this place has been evil translated out of
the Hebrewe. The place of genesis being objected by the enemies has been
perverted.
For, where they should have said interrogatiuely, and in the masculine gender:
Shall he then be subdued unto thee, and will thou rule him? They did put away
the interrogatiue point, and did setfourth the se^te^ce with tharticle of neuter
ge^der as though it ought to be referred unto sin whereof he spoke before.


DIDyMVS. I would feign hear what ye can make of it.


PHILALETHES. It is not unknown unto you, How the place of genesis ought to be
understood.
that both Abell and Cain had offered sacrifices unto the LORD, Cain of the
fruit of the earth, and Abell of the fyrstlynges of his sheep and of the
fat of them, and that the Lord had a respect unto Abell and his offering, but
not unto Cain nor yet to his sacryfice. Wherefore he was exceadinge wroth, so
that his countenance changed.

Now we must consider the causes, Why Abels sacrifice was accepted before god,
and Cains sacrifice rejected. Heb. xi. To xiiii.
why Abell and his offering did please God, and why again God had no pleasure
in Cain nor yet in his offringe. Forsooth because that Abell did offer with
faith, and the other without faith. What soever then Cain did, was sin.
For, without faith it is impossible to please God? and what soever is not of
faith, is sin. Therefore, Caine had more just occasyon to be angrye with
him self, and with his unbelief, than with his brother Abell, who was both
innocent, and did walcke vprightlye before God, doing all that he did with a
synceare and pure faith. That therefore Cain might the better perceive his own
saut the LORD doothe plainly declare unto him, that all that he did, was
sin. Elsse if he had done well should not he have been as well regarded, as
his brother Abell.

But his unfaithfulness, that did lie in his heart, did witness that he did
not walk uprightly before god. Which thing he understood, when he said: if
thou doste evil, does not thy sin lie open in the door? That is to say: if
thou doste the thing that thou do vnfaithfullye, does not thy conscience
bear record of the same, and is always ready to condemn thee? What cause
haste thou then to be angrye with thy brother, In things that pertain to the
true worshippinge of god we must be subject unto noman but unto the word of god
only.
because that he does walk uprightly before me, and with a pure and sincere
faith: shall he be subject unto thee in such things, or shall he be ruled by
the in things that pertain to the true worshippynge of me?

Some do read it without an interrogatife point on this wise: he shall be
subject unto thee, and thou shall rule him. Whereby they do understand, that
when Caine did see that his brother Abell was in such favor with God, he was
affrayed least he should lose the right of the first borne, and that Abell
should be his Lord and master. And for this cause he did conceive a deadly
hatred against him, seekinge all manner of means to rydde him out of the way.
The Lord therefore, for to put him out of that foolyshe fear, that he was in,
did certifye him, that notwithstanding the favor that he did bear unto
Abel, he should not lose one jot of his dignity and honor but that Abell
should according to the right and order of his birth be subject and obedient
unto him still.

Thus does Chrysostom expound this place of Genesis. Chrsost. in genesim.
Whose words but for tediousness I would have here aleadged, as they do lie in
his exposition upon the first book of Moses.


DIDY. If both virtue and vice do not come of the free election of the mind:
Why should man be punished for vice, or rewarded for virtue?


PHILALETHES. This argument did the Pelagians use also, as Saint Jerome does
write rehercinge their very words which are these: Episto. ad ctesiphontem and
dialo. i.
Quod si gratia dei in nobis agit, illa ergo, non nos qui non laboramus
coronabitur. That is to say: If the grace of God does work in us, therefore
it shall be crowned, and not we that labor not. As touching punishementes, I
say, that we do deseruingly suffer the^, What we ought to judge of the
punishment for sin
sithe that sin comes of our selves. For, what does it skyll whether we
sin through free will or other wise, sith that of our own nature we be sin
altogether, yea and the bound slaves of fynne? does not Saint Paul say that
of our own nature we are the children of wrath? Ephe. ii.
If we be the children of wrath, what are we else but children of damnation,
and fire brondes of hell? And as touching the rewards of righteousness, what
absurditye were it to say that they come of the free mercy of God, What we
ought to judge of the toward of righteousness. Romans vi.
rather than of our own merytes and deseruinges? Does not Saint Paul say,
that life everlasting is the gift of God? How could life everlasting, which
is the most sure reward of good works, be the gift of God, except it were
freelye given? But if they would hear of what beginning the holy Apostell
does fetch the glory of the Saints, they should easily espy out their own
error: Whom (says he) he has chosen, To. viii.
them did he call, whom he has called, them did he iustifye, and whom he
has justified them did he gloryfye.

Wherefore then, by the saying of the Apostell are the faithful crowned with
eternal and everlasting glory?

because forsouth that by the free mercy of God, and not by their own
industrye, they be both chosen, called and justified. Why should any man fear
then, yt there should be no more merits if free will were overthrown? Or why
should any manne fly from that thing, that the srcipture does call us to?
What haste thou (says saint Paul) that thou have not received? i. Cor. iiii
And if thou have received, why do thou boast, as though thou had not
received? Ye see that he does therefore take away all things from free will,
because that he would leave no place unto merits. But God as he is rych in
doing good unto all men, so the gifts that he gives unto us, l e makes them
our own, and so rewards them as our own.

And therefore Saint Augustine says: Epist. lii
Nihil es per te. Peccata tua sunt, merita autem dei.

Supplicium tibi debetur: et cum premium venerit, sua d^na coronabit non
meritae tua: that is to say: Thou art nothing by thy self. The sins are
thine own, but the merits are of God. Punishment is due unto the and when the
reward does come, he shall crown his gifts, In Psalm. lxx.
and not thy merits. And in an other place these be also his words: Si
reddetur tibi quod debetur puniendus es. Quid ergo fit? Non tibi reddit deus
deb^tam penam, sed donat indeb^tam gratiam. Si vis esse alienus a gratia ^acta
merita tua. Which we may English after this manner: if that be rendered or
paid unto thee, that is due, thou must be punyshed. What is done then? God
does not render or pay unto thee the punishment that is due or deserved: but
he gives unto thee, the grace that is neither due nor deserved. If thou will
be put from the grace, boste forth thine own merits. But what need I: to
aledge any more sayings of his, sith that all his works, be full of such
sentences? Whereby it does appear, that he does adscribe nothing at all
unto the merits of men, but all together unto the free mercy and goodness of
God. And therefore the argument that ye did bring, may rather be called the
argument of an heathenish philosopher, than the argument of a Christian
doctoure.


ALBION.

Wherefore, say they, should any exhortations be made unto the people, or
wherefore should they be rebuked for their sins, if it lies not in them to
obey, or if it lies not in their power to shon vice and to embrace virtue?


PHILALETHES. Such objections were made unto S. Augustine, Answer made out of
saint August.
wherefore he was compelled to make a book de correptione et gratia, that is to
say: of rebukynge and of grace. Where he does stoutly confute all the objections
and arguments that the adversaries can make, In his decorreptione and gratia.
which may be reduced and brought to this short and compendious sum: O man,
know in the commandment, what thou art bound to do. In the rebuking, learn
that through thine own faut thou have it not, and in prayer learn whence thou
must receive ye thing yt thou will have. First, we are not alone in this cause,
but Christ and al his apostles. Let them se how they can shift, having to do
with such adversaries. Because ye Christ says yt we can do nothing without
him, John. xv.
does he less rebuke them therefore that without him did evil? or did he
less exhort all men to give the^ selves unto good works? How sharpelye
does Saint Paul inueighe against the Corinthians for the neglecting of
christian love and charity? and yet at length he desires of God, that he
vouchsafe to give them christian love and charity. i. Cor. xvi
Wrytinge to the Romans, he does testify that it lies not in the will and
renning of man, but in the mercy of God: yet afterward he does not cease to
admonish, Romans ix.
to exhort and to rebuke. Why do they not therefore warn the Lord, or give
him counsel, that he do not lose his labor, requiring those things of men
which he alone is able to give? Or rebuking them for those things, which only
through the lack of his grace are committed? Why do they not warn Paul to
spare them in whose power it lies not to will nor to run, without the mercy
of God, whereof they be al together destituted? As though the Lord is not able
to show a sufficient reason or cause of his doctrine, which in deed does offer
it self unto them that do godly and reverently seek for it. Verily S. Paul
does well declare and show how much, i. Cor. i.
both exhorting, and rebukinge are able by them selves to change the minds of
the hearers, when he writes, that neither he that planteth is any thing, nor
he that watreth, but that it is the Lord that gives the increase, which only
works effectuously. what are they able to say, since that they can impute the
same hardness of their own hearts, but only to the^ selves? but the chief vtility
is to be considered in the faithful: For, as the Lord does work in them, all
things by his holy spirit, so does he not neglect ye instrument of his word,
nor yet occupy it, without efficacy or effect. Let therefore the truth stand,
that is to say, let all men be sure of this, that all the hole strength and
virtue of the godly does lie only in the grace of God. An other question.
Why be they warned of their duetye, and not rather permitted all together
unto the guyding or government of the spirit? Why are they stirred and moved
with exhortations, sithe that they can make no more haste, than the spirit
does prick them forwards: why are they rebuked, if they go at any time out
of the way: since that they fall through the weakness of their flesh? O man
what art thou, that dare prescrybe a law unto God? Answer
If by exhortatyon he will have us to be prepared to receive the same self
grace, where by we are made obedient unto his word: is there any thing that
thou can justly reprove in this divine policye of his? If exhortations and
rebukings should serve for nothing else among the godly, but for to rebuke
sin, they ought not to be co^pted unprofitable. But now, The profytte of
exhortatio^s unto the godly.
since that the spirit workynge inwardlye, they do profit much for to kyndle
in men a desire of goodness, to shake of slouggishnesse, to take away the
pleasure of wickedness, and the poysonned sweetness of it: and contrariwise
for to engender in them a hatred and tediousness of vice, and of this wicked
and synnefull world, who dares say that they be superflue or unprofitable?


EVTRAPELVS Here in deed S. Augustine does answer thoroughly the vain objections
of the Pelagians, so that any reasonable man ought to content him self with
his answer. How be it, me think that they were sufficiently answered already
in our first communication, that we have had this morning of the divine
predestinatyon of God.


ALBION. This have I gathered out of the words of S. Augustine: What may be
gathered of Saint Augustines works.
that God does two manner of ways work in his elect and chosen: Inwardly with
his holy spirit, and outwardly with his word with his spirit he makes them
new creatures, lightenynge their minds, and kindeling their hearts with the
love of righteousness. With his word, he does move and stir them to desire
the same renewing, to seek for it, and to embrace it. And to both of them does
he retch forth his hand effectuously, according as he has appointed and
ordained. Why god does send his word unto the reprate.
And when he does send his word unto the reprobate, though it be not for their
amendment, yet it is to this end, that they may in this preset world be
confounded with the testimony and witness of their own conscience, and also
be made inexcusable against the day of judgment. But what can ye say to these
places of the scripture,


PHILA. I say, that is altogether carnal and fleshly. For, the man that is not
regenerated or borne of new, will speak no such words as David did. For,
they are the words of a man, that is already made a new creature by the
Spirit of God. This will then that was in David did not come of his own self
nor of his fre will that he had of his own nature: but it did com of the
spirit of God, who did give this will unto David. For, Jesus Christ him self
does say: Verily, verelye I say unto you: John. iii
except a man be borne from above, he can not see the kingdom of God. Where
by he does mean, that manne is able to do nothing that is pleasant or
acceptable unto GOD. Nor yet taste the sweetness of the heavenly kingdom,
except it be given unto him.


ALBION. If (said they unto me) we have no free will, God so many times call
sinners unto repentance? were it not labor lost so to do? How many times
does he by his Prophets cry out and say: Turn ye unto me, al ye ends of the
earth, Esaias. xlv
and so shall ye be saved? Again: Turn unto me and repent. Eze. xviii
If men have not fre will to do these things the prophets do labor in vain.


PHILALETHES. If ye mark well the talk and communication of your faithful
guides,


DIDyMVS. How be ye able to prove that?


PHILALETHES.. First, where Esaias says: Esaias. xlv
in the persons of the Lord: Turn ye unto me, and ye shall be healed: by and
by Ieremye does cry out and say: O Lord, turn me, and I shall be turned.
For, thou art the Lord my God. Yea, as soon, as thou turnest me, I shall
reform my self. Again: the Lord does command, that we should circumcise
our own hearts: Iere. iiii.
yet by Moses he does declare, that the same circumcision is made with his
own hand. Deuteronomy. xxx
He does also require the renewing of our hearts: but in an other place, he
does plainly testify, that it is he him self that gives it. Look therefore,
what God does promise, that do we not by our free will or nature (as S.
Augustine says) but GOD does it, by his grace. And this is the fifth thing,
The rule of Tironius.
that he does bid us to mark among the rules of Tironius, that is to say,
that we should note diligently the dyfference that is betwixt the law and the
promises or betwixt the commandments and the grace. I may here bring in,
many other like places: Act. xv.
Paul and Barnabas do exhort the faithful to abide and persevere in the grace
of God. But Paul in an other place does show, whence, that virtue of
constancye and perseueraunce does come: Ephe. vi.
finally my brethren (says he) be strong in the Lord. Again: for this cause
do I bow my knees unto the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he would
grant you according to the richesse of his glory, that ye may be strengthed
with might, by the spirit of ye inner man, that Christ may dwell in your hearts
by faith.

Moreover he says: Grieve not the holy spyrit of God, Ephe. iiii
by whom ye are sealed unto redemption.

But the thing that he does require there, because that it can not be
performed by men, he does desire God to grant it unto the Thessalonians,
saying: i. These. i.
wherefore, we pray always for you, that your god make you worthy of your
calling, and fulfill al good purpose of his goodness and the work of faith
with power, that the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, may be glorified in you,
and ye in him through the grace of our God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ. These
places do sufficiently declare, that what so ever God does require of us, the
same he must work in us by his holy spirit. For, of our selves we are able
to do no manner of thing, ye good is?


DIDY.


PHI. strength to turn unto him. And although this doctrine of conuersyon or
turning is directed unto all me^ generally, yet does it most chieflye pertain
unto the elect and chosen, unto whom by this mean, God illuminating them, does
give power and strength to convert or turn. Again: Why God causes obstinate
sinners to be warned.
God causes obstynate sinners to be thus warned by his Prophets, because that
they should not pretend ignorance, nor excuse them selves by it in the judgment
of God. And also for to show yt he loves virtue, and rightousnesse, and that
he is not author of evil. When God did send Moses unto Pharao, Exo. vii.
God knew right well that Pharao would not turn. Yet we must not say that God
did send him in vain.


ALBI. Thus they said unto me: Amos. v
yea the lord god of hosts shall be with you according to your own desires.
Again: If ye be louinge and obedient, ye shall enjoy the best thing that
grows in the land: but if ye be obstinate and rebellious, ye shall be
devoured with the sword. For the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Iere.
iiii.
Item: if thou wylt put away thy abominations out of my sight thou shall not
be driven out. If thou shall harken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to
observe and do all his commandments, Deuteronomy. xxv Le. xxviii
which I command the this day, then shall the Lord thy God set the above all
nations upon earth. And such other like: except we have free will, or except
it lies in our power to fulfill and perform the condytions, that are
annexed unto them? we may say in deed that they be goodlye promyses, if the
conditions, that be annexed unto them, can not be performed by our own
strength and power: and that God does play mock holy day with us, if he
promysethe things, that it lies not in us to obtain.


PHILALE. And I say that it is a plain blasphemye, The effect of Gods
promises both in the godly and in the ungodly.
they have their effect and working in them both. For, as God does by his
commandments prick the consciences of the ungodly, lest putting away
altogether the remembrance of his judgments, they should have to much
pleasure in sin: so by his promises he does testify and declare unto them,
how unworthy they are of his liberality, and goodness. For, who would say
that it is not mete and conueniente, Mark this diligentely.
that the Lord should do good unto them, that do worship him? And that
again, he should according to his seueritye and justice, take vengaunce of
them that are despisers of his majesty? Therefore it ca^ not be said, but that
God does iustlye, when in his promises, he does prescribe and give such a law
and condition unto the ungodly, which be wrapped in sin, that they shall
receive and enjoy his benefits, if they do forsake their wickedness,
although he should do it only for this cause, that they may understand
that they are iustlye and deseruinglye put from those things, yt are due unto
ye true worshippers of God. Again: since that God, does by all means provoke
the faithful to call for his grace, why should not he as well attempt the same by
his promises, as by his law and ce^maundements? being taught the will of God by
his commandments, we are warned of our own miserye, because that of our own
nature, we do all together dissent and disagre from it: and also we are moved
to call upon the spirit of god, for to bring us into the right way. But because
that our sluggyshnesse is such, Why promises are made unto us.
that it can not be put away nor shaken of, by the law and commandments of
god: promises are added, that so by some sweetness we might be provoked and
allured to the love of heavenly things. Now, the more desirous that we are of
the true ryghteousnes, the more fervent are we to call for the grace of God.
These things being well considered, who would say, that such promises be
unprofitable, though we be not able to fulfill the conditions, that are annered
unto them?


EVTRAPELVS. No man, I trow, What the reprobate do learn by the promises of
god
that has any cromme of godly understanding in his bellye. For, by them
the reprobate and ungodly do learn how unworthy they are of the bounteous
liberality and goodness of almighty God: and the godly, What the godly do
learn by the condition annexed unto the promyses.
when they see in the conditions, that be annexed unto them, their own misery,
weakness, infirmitye and unableness, are stirred and moved by the same to
call more earnestly, for the grace of God, and for the assistaunce and help of
his holy spirit.


ALBION. numbers xiiii. Iere. vii.
with whose swords ye shall be destroyed, because ye would not obey the Lord.
Because I have called you, and ye have not answered nor obeyed: therefore, will
I do unto this house, as I have don un to Silo. Again: This people has not
harkened unto the voice of the Lord their God, nor received his doctrine:
Therefore, the Lord has cast them of. Item. Because that ye have hardened your
hearts, Ier. xxxii
and would not be obedient unto the Lord: All these plages have happened unto
you. How could the Israelites be cast in the tethe with such things, except
it had lain in them to shonne and avoid those things, that be there laid to
their charge? For they might have answered by and by: We had a mind to
prosperity, How the ungodly do always go about to excuse them selves.
and did fear trouble and adversity: but that we did not obey the Lord, nor
harcken unto his voice, that we might obtain the one, and eschew the other, it
was because that we are under ye bondage of sin, and can not do freely the
things, that we would. Those things then are not justly laid to our charge
which it lies not in our power for to shonne or avoid.


PHILALETHES. As for the pretense of necessity, it has been al ready declared,
what pore healpe can be had in it, sithe that the cause Original, and of
spring of it, is in our own selves, by our natural corruption, that we have
of our first parent Adam. Therefore, I do ask whether they can prove them
selves to be without faut or not? For, if there be any faut in them: it is not
without a cause, that God did cast them in the teethe, that it was through
their own wickedness, that they did not feel the fruit of his goodness and
mercy. Can they say nay but that their wicked and corrupted will is the cause
of their rebellyous contumacye and stubburnenesse? If they find that the
fountain and well spring of their own evil and miserye is within them
selves: what do they trauail to find out outward causes, and all because that
they will not seem to be the authoures of their own destruction? If it be true
then, that sinners through their own faut are both deprived of the benefits
of God, and also punished and plaged: there is a good cause, why they should
hear such vpbraydynges and reproaches at the mouth of the Lord. That if they
do obstinately persevere and continue in sin, they may learn in their
miseries and calamities, to accuse and detest their own wickedness, rather than
to lay any unjust and cruel seueritye unto God: or if they be not utterly
given over, they may, being wearye of their sins, wherefore they see them
selves thus extreamelye plaged, come into the way again, acknowledginge the
same with earnest confession, that the Lord does lay to their charge. Note this
This effect have the chidinges and rebukinges of ye prophets among the
godly: as it does appear by the solemn prayer of Daniell, Dani. vi.
which is written in ye ninthe chapter of his prophecye. But how such sharp
rebukinges of the prophets of God, take place among the obstinate sinners, we
have an example of it in ye Jews, unto whom Ieremye was commanded to show
the cause of their miseries and calamities, Iere. vii.
although it should be none otherwise than God had appointed, and told before.
Thou shall, says the Lord, speak unto the^ al these words, and they shall not
hear, thou shall call them, and they shall not answer.


DYDIMVS.


PHILALETHES. may easily rid him self from many authorities, which the
enemies of the grace of God, are wo^t to heap together for to erect, and
set up the Idol of their free will.


ALBION. This is most sure, that the Lord does speak these words by his
prophet Oseas: Osee. v.
till they wax faint, and seek me. It were a folish thing (said my gentle men
unto me) if the LORD should tarry til Israel should turn and seek him, except
it did lie in their power to tourn which way they listed.


PHILA. The enemies can win nothing upon us by the threatenings of god.
As though the Lord does not commonly in the prophets make as though he should
forsake and cast of, his people, till they amend and turn unto him: but what
are our enemies able to gather of such threatenings? If they go about to
gather by them, that men being forsaken of God, are of their own selves able
to turn again, then have they all the scriptures against them: If they say
that they have need of the garce of God, that they may turn again: what
need they to contend or strive with us?


DIDYMVS. They do not deny but that the grace of God is necessary: if ye will
grant that there is also in manne a certain strength.


PHILALETHES. How shall they be able to prone that. Truly they can not prove
it by this place nor by such like. For, it is an other thing to go away from
man and to look, what being permitted and left unto him self he is able to
do, and an other thing to healpe his small strength, as his imbecilitye and
weakness does require.


DYDIMVS.


PHILALETHES. It is even as if he should say: What it is meant when the
scripture says that God does withdraw him self from this people.
when the scripture says, that God does wythdraw him self, the meaning of it
is, yt God does take away his prophecye and word, where in he declares a
certain presence of his. And to look what men will do, it signifies that God
will hold him self still, and as he were a sleep, suffer them to be many
and sondrye ways plaged.

And both these things, is he wont to do, for to make us to humble our
selves.

For we should rather by aduersitye be driven unto desperatyon, than unto any
amendment of life, except he should by his spirit make us meet to receive
his chastisement. Wherefore, to go about by such places, for to prove that
there is any such strength in us, or that we have free will to do what we
list, it is a plain madness. For, such things be spoken in the scriptures for
none other purpose, but for to make us to know our own infirmity and
weakness.


ALBION. I did ask them, whether they could bring any authorities of the
scripture, The objection of the papists.
whereby they might prove expreslye that a man has such free will, as they
went about to maintain and uphold. They did then answer me that Moses was so
sure of it, that he did not doubt to say these words unto the children of
Israel. Deuteronomy. xxx
I take heaven and earth this day to record over you, that I have laid before
you, life and death, blessing and cursing. Choose life therefore, that thou
may live thou and thy feed, and that ye may love the Lord your God, and
harken unto his voice, and cleave unto him. Iosu. xxiiii.
Joshua also did say unto the people: Choose ye this day, whom ye will serve:
The God whom your fathers served beyond the water, or the Gods of ye
Amorites in whose land ye dwell. Think ye that these true servant of God
Moses and Joshua, would have spoken thus unto the people, except it had lain in
their power to choose which they would? It is plain then that they had free
will? else such things, had been spoken unto them in vain.


PHILALETHES. Answer
Such sentences and autoryties of the scripture, do not prove that man has
free will to do what he list, or that he can at his own pleasure choose both
good and evil. For, although Moses does say unto the people: I do lay before
you both life and death: yet it follows not, yt they were able of their own
selves to choose life, without the spirit and grace of God. Deu. xxix
Which thing he does sufficientely declare in an other place when he says:
Thine eyes have seen these great tokens and wonders. Yet the Lord has not
given. thee a heart to understand, nor ears to hear, nor eyes to see. As
then it did profytte the people nothing to have seen the great tokens and
wonders, that the Lord did work in Egypt even in their own sight, except he
did give them a heart to understand, ears to hear and eyes to see, that is
to say, except the Lord did by his holy spirit lyghten their hearts unstop
their ears, and clear the eyes of their minds: even so, although Moses,
Joshua, and all the prophets of God do say a thousand time: Behold, we lay
before you life and death, choose which ye will: yet all this, will profytte us
nothing, except God does work inwardely with his holy spirit. Which thing
Saint Paul does neither dyssemble nor hid, when he writes on this manner.
i. Cor. i.
I have planted and Apollo has watered, But it is the Lord that gives the
encreace. But that ye may the better perceive the whole matter, ye shall
understand that God does by the preachinge of his prophets and Apostles: Mat.
ix.
as when our savior Jesus Christ did say unto the manne that was sick of
the palsye: arise, take up thy bed, and go home.

It did not follow, that he had strength to arise, except our sauyoure
Jesus Christ had given it him.

But when Christ did say unto him, arise: He did straight with it, give him
strength to arise. Even so, when God does by his preachers speak unto them,
whom he has chosen already; and does command them to arise out of the bdde
of sin, straight with, he gives them strength to do it.


DIDYMVS. luc. x.
by whom he understood al mankind, was by the thieves left half dead, and not
dead altogether. Whereby any man would judge, that there is yet some parcel
of life in man, and that he has yet some sparkles of right understanding
and Godly will remayninge in him. For, wherein else should consist that half
of his life, that was left unto him by the thieves, that had so sore wounded
him?


PHILALETHES. What mark that our savior Jesus Christ does shute at in the
parable of the Samaritane How far parables ought to take place.
who is our neighbor, and not to magnifye any natural strength that was
left in man. Let any manne, that will, read the place, and he shall find that
it is so as I say. Moreover allegories ought to go no farther, than they have
the rule of Gods word for their warrant: It is so far of, that they should
suffice by them selves to ground any doctrine. How be it let us see what they
shall get by their allegory. We did all in our first parent Adam fall into
the hands of the thieves, What ought to be understood by the allegorye of the
wounded man.
I mean, of our enemy Satan the devil, by whom we were striped out of our
clothes, wounded and left half dead. First, we were striped out of our clothes
and left naked: what is mente by this, but that we were by our enemy spoiled
of our natural innocence and righteousness, yea and of all other heavenly
gifts that we had received in our first creacion? And not only this, but also
we were wounded and left half dead. That is to say: we were left a live unto
our selves, unto the world, and unto sin, but we were left all together dead
unto God, and unto heavenly things. Therefore, Ephe. ii.
Saint Paul speaking of our redemption, does not say, that we were healed
being half a live, but that when we were dead through sin, God did quycken
us again with his son Jesus Christ. And unto this, does our sauyoure him
self agree, Ioh. vi.
when he says: Verily, verily I say unto you: the hour will come, and is
now already, that the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of man, and
they that hear it shall live. Who durst set an allegorye invented by men
against so many plain textes of the scriptures?


ALBION. In deed when I do consider the circumstaunces of the text, I do
perceive that their allegory is far from the meaning of our savior Jesus
Christ. Again: we do plainelye learn by the authorityes that ye aledged
even now, that we are all to gether dead unto GOD, and unto heavenly
things, being spoiled of al those excellent gifts that we had received in
our first creatyon, as Dauyd does testifye saying: Psalm. xli.
Manne when he was in honor, he did not understand it, and therefore he was
made like unto brute beasts. How be it there be yet certain places behind,
which by your patience, I intend now to bring fourth, that I may be delivered
from all doubt.

Apo. iii. Objection
The one is in the Revelation of Ihon, where the Lord speaks on this manner:
Behold, I stand at the door and knock. If any man hear my voice, and open
the door I will come in unto him, and will suppe with him, and he with me. This
place they have always in their mouths, goinge about to prove thereby that
we have free will. Elsse why should the Lord say that he stands at the door
and knock, and that if any man hear his voice and open, he will come in unto
him? It were in vain so to say, except it did lie in man to hear the voice
of the Lord, and to open when so ever he does knock at the door.


PHILALETHES. Answer
First and foremost: what do they understand by the door, that the Lord does
knock at?


ALBION. By the door, they do understand the heart of man. What it is to be
understood by the door that the lord does knock at
And they say that the lord does knock at our hearts by his word, when he
does by it call us unto repentance and amendment of life, and that we do open
unto him, when we do receive his word, and bring forth the fruits thereof.


PHILALE. When our savior Jesus Christ,


ALBION. I think nay. For the truth him self says: the same chapter:
Ioh. vi.
Every manne (says he) that has hard and learned of my father, comes unto
me. Whereby we do learn, that except God does teach us inwardly, and give us
grace to receive his word, when it is preached unto us, all the preaching in
the world can profit us nothing.


PHI. Then ye may se, how well ye same text of the revelation of Ihon, dyth
serve for their purpose.


EV. It serves for their purpose, as al other authorityes and textes do, that
they do aledge. For, in all this matter, they work by likelihodes. For why? in all the canonical books of ye scripture, they have not one express word,
whereby they can prove that manne has free will, or that he is able of his
own strength, to think or do any thing that good is.


DIDY. Mat. xix.
No? why does Christ say then, if thou will enter into life, keep the
commandments?


PHI. Ye have never don. Nothing as I perceive, can content you. gala. ii.
as Saint Paul does testify, saying: If rightousnes comes by the law, then
Christ dyed in vain. But because that ye shall not thinck, that I will go about
the bush with you: ye shall understand, that Christ did attemperat and order his
answers according to the persons yt he did talk withal. How the answer of
Christ made vnthe young man ought to be taken and understood
A young man had asked him, by what mean he might obtain life everlasting, and
what good he should do for to come by it? This young person was puffed up with a
vain perswasyon of the righteousness of the law, and also blineded with a
folishe confydence and trust, that he had in his own works. Again, he did
ask which were the deeds of righteousness whereby eternal felicity, and
salvation might be obtained? Therefore, he is by good right sent unto the law,
which is a perfect loking glass or mirroure of righteousness, and also
which must be fulfilled, if we will obtayn the reward of life everlasting.
But who is able to fulfill it? No man living, Christ only being excepted.
Whereby it follows that all they, that go about to be saved by the works of
the law, are farthest of from salvation. The meaning then of our savior Jesus
Christ is that who so ever will be saved by works, he must observe and keep
the commandments, with such a perfection as God does require, elsse he can
not enter into life ever lasting, so that the young man perceiving his lack and
unableness, and how far of he was from the perfection that he thought him
self to be in, might take an occasyon to seek for the true and only remeady,
that our most merciful father has appointed for us, to be saved by, and for
to be delivered from the malediction and curse of the law, that al men,
Gala. iii.
for lack of fulfyllynge of the same, are subject unto by their own nature.


ALBION. Say what ye will, my faithful guydes did tell me, it lies not in
our power to fulfill. Li. ii. de peccato et merit. et remi. cap. vi.
Saint Augustine does also testify, that no man does sin in that thing, that
he is not able to shonne or avoid. Again, he writes thus: I can not think,
that god did command any thing that is impossyble, Iero. ad damasu^ papam de
simbobo fidei.
or that it is impossible unto God to help to do that thing, which he has
commanded. Moreover they have alleged s. Jerome unto me, saying we do curse
and detest the blasphemy of the^ that say, that God has commanded man to do
any thing that is impossible, and that the commandments of god can not be
kept. They did also bring in Chrisosto^, where he says: let us not think yt
the commandments of God be impossyble. Hom. viii in mat.
For, truly they be both profitable unto us and also very easy, if we will
be dilygente or take good heed. And unto this do the scryptures agree. For,
after that Moses had publyshed the law, he did say unto the children of Israel:
the commandment, Deu. xxx.
which I command thee this day, is not hydden from the, neither to far,
nor yet in heaven: but it is very nygh unto thee, even in thy mouth, and in
thine heart that thou may do it.

Again, Christ him self does say: Mat. xi.
My yoke is easy, and my burden is light. Moreover these be the words of the
blessed Euangeliste S. Ihon: for, this is the love of God, that we keep his
commandments: i. Epi. v.
and his commandments are not grievous or heavy. These places do sufficiently
declare, that man is able to fulfill the commandments of God.


PHILALETHES. As touching the first sayings of your faithful guydes, uphold
and maintain the veritye and truth of Gods word. For, if they understand it
of a man, that is graffed, or that has fellowshyp with Christ, I say, that
the same manne does observe and keep the hole law of God, How the man being
regenerated does keep the whole law of God.
not really in him self, but because that he is conducted and led by the
spirit of God. And also we may right well say, yt he does keep the hole law of
god, by the virtue of the fellowshyppe that he has with Christ, whereby he is
made partaker, or rather put in full possession of the perfect and consummate
obedience, Romans x.
and that our savior Jesus Christ did show and yield unto God his father:
Retract. xix.
so that his fautes shall not be imputed unto him. For, Jesus Christ does
supply whatsoever is lacking or wanting in such a man. And so it may be true,
that a man is able to keep the law of God, in Jesus Christ, and by Jesus
Christ, but not of him self. For, as Saint Augustine says: all the
commandments of god be fulfilled, when the sins and fawtes be not imputed.
But if they will say, that a man being separated from christ, is able to
keep ye law of god they are in a great eror. For, christ him self says, that
a tree can bring fourth no good fruit, Mat. vii.
except it be made good first. But no man is good of his own self, as it
has been declared alredye: Therefore, he can not bring fourth good fruit.
Again, these be the words of our savior Jesus Christ Bide in me, and I in
you. Ioh. xv.
As the branch can not bear fruit of it self, except it bide in the vine:
no more can ye, except ye abide in me, Ye see that our savior Jesus
Christ does show by this simylitude, that it lyethe not in man's power, to
bring any good fruit of him self, except he be graffed in Christ.

If ye have well marked, what has been said before of fre will, ye shall well
perceive that it is so far of, that manne of him self, and by his own
strength is able to fulfill the law perfectely, that he ca^ not well
understand, one only point of it, as it ought to be understood. For, ye must
note that the law must be thoroughly observed and kept with a pure and clean
heart, To. vii.
as Saint Paul says: The law is spiritual, but manne of him self is
polluted, and carnal, which thing he confesses of him self, saying: And I
am carnal, sold under sin. How can the law then, that is spiritual, and
man which is carnal and fleshely, agree? Moreover, the law will be kept,
even from the conception of man, unto the last day and hour of of his life,
without any manner of transgressyon or offense. For, Iam. ii.
as Saint James says: he that fawtethe or offends in one, is gylty of the
whole. Item, the Lord him self says, that cursed are all men, De. xxvii
that do not abide in all things, that be written in the book of this law, for
to do them. How is manne able then to keep ye hole law of God, as it ought to
be kept, and with such a perfection as God does require, sith that he is a
transgressour of it, before he come in to this world, and a sinner from his
conception? does not Dauyd write thus: My mother has conceaned me in sin?
Psalm. ii.
I say unto you, that except manne be conceived of the holy ghost, he shall
never be able to keep the whole law of God, as he does will and require.


ALBION. Now truly I do perceive in deed, that it is a great blasphemye
against Christ, to say that man is able to fulfill the hole law of God, of
his own self and by his own strength, and to do it with such a perfection
as god doothe require. For that were to say, that man is conceived of the holy
ghost. But I pray you, now tell me,


PHILALETHES. Similitude
if a man were bound unto you in a hundredth pound, and did owe you them in
deed: though the same manne were not able to pai you, should ye do unjustly to
ask him your C. pound?


ALBION. No man, I trow, would say, that I did him wrong in asking him my
duty.


PHILALETHES. When the king did ask of his servant the ten thousand
talentes, Mat. xviii
that he did owe unto him, did he unjustly or wrongfullye?


ALBION. I will not say so.


PHILALE. Know ye then, that all the hole law of God, is nothing else but a
commandment, whereby we are commanded and bidde^ to pay that unto god, that
we owe unto him. For man is bound of duetye to love God with all his heart,
with all his soul, and with all his strength: and his neighbor as his own
self.

Therefore, Saint Paul says: To. viii.
brethren, we are debtours, but not unto the flesh. Shall we say then that God
is unrighteous, or that he does unjustly, asking that thing of us, that we do
owe unto him of bound duty? It is so far of, that he should do unjustly in
asking us of his duty, Why god does demand of us his duty.
that rather he does most justly, godly, and ryghteously to demand such
things of us for the causes that I will now rehearse and aledge.

First and foremoste, he does it for to declare unto men his righteousness,
holiness, and bountuousnesse. For, in this that God does command us nothing
in his law but that, which is just and good, he does declare thereby that he
him self is righteous, holy and good. Secondly, least men should seek and go
about to excuse them selves by ignorance, before the judgment seat of God,
saying that they knew not his will and pleasure, therefore did he setforthe
his law and commandments, for to declare unto men, what he will have them to
do, and what he will have them to leave undone. For, we are such, yt we would
still played ignorance before God except we were convicted by his plain and
manifest law and express commandments, that he has left unto us.
Thirdlye, the law was given because of transgression, gala. iii.
to the intent that they, that would not for the fear of God, and love of
heavenly things, refrain from doing of evil, should at least for fear of
the punishment of the law, be driven to keep a good order, and to live
quietlye among them selves. Else they would have killed one an other, no man
had been able to have kept his own, but all should have gone to hauock.
Forthly, God did setforth his law, that by it man should be brought into the
knowledge of his own self. That is to say, The law is a mirror or lookinge
glass.
the law was given and setforthe to this end, yt it might be a lokinge glass
or mirror, wherein man should behold his own weakness, imbecilitye and
unableness to fulfill and perform the things that God does require of him,
that so he may have an occasion to humble and submit him self.

For, if it were not for the law, that doothe dyscouer, open and show, yea and
set before our eyes our own filthynesse and abomination, we would never
acknowledge our selves to be sinners, nor yet thyncke, that we have nead of
the grace and mercy of God. God therefore, least men should swel against him,
does demand and ask the same of them, that they owe unto him of duty. As if
he should say by his law:

O man, thou see how much bound thou art unto me, Mark this diligentely
and how that thou art not able to pay the tenth part of that, which thou do
owe unto me, therefore, submit thy self and acknowledge thine own imbecility
and weakness, and so fly unto my mercy, which is always prepared for them,
that being of no reputation with them selves, do hang al together of me. And
here may be gathered the fifth cause, Gala. iii.
why the law was given: which is, that it might serve us for a schole
master, for to bring us unto Christ, Romans x.
who is the end or perfourming of the law, for to justify al them, that do
believe.

For, when we have once learned by the Doctrine of the law, that of our
selves we be not able to escape the da^pnation, that we do deserve by the
breakyng of the commandments of God, then are we feign to put away all
vain confydence and trust, that we had in our own strength, and in our own
merytes, and to fly unto Christ, who was made accursed for us, that is to
say, was punyshed and slain most oppropryouslye for our sakes, that we
might be delivered from the curse of the law, and so receive the blessing of
Abraham, and the promise of the spirit through faith.


EVTRAPE. I perceive that god does by his law, Similitude.
as a good scholemaster is wont to do, when he has a scholar, that for a
little learning that he has, thincketh him self to know as much, as his master
does. And therefore does swell against his master, and begins to despise him.
Now, when the master sees that, he gives unto the same scholar, some
difficult and hard lesson, wherein he understands nothing, or wherein he is as
blind as a beatell, and this does he, that the scholar may acknowledge the
ignorance that is hydden in him, under such vain arrogance and pride. Even so
is it of man. For, except God, should give him Commandments, which he is
not hable to fulfill, he would compte him self as holy and as perfect as God
is: yea, he would say playnelye, that he had no neade of God, nor of his
healpe.

But God, for to stop all men's mouths, he gives them a lesson, wherein they
be as blind as beatles, that so they may be driven to know them selves, and
to acknowledge their own infirmity and weakness.


PHILALETHES. Saint Augustine speaks of this matter very godly, saying: ad
hilarirp^s^o. lxxxix.
Iubet lex vt iussa facere conati, et in nostra infirmitate sub lege fatigati,
adiutorium gratiae poscere nouerimus: that is to say: The law does command,
that going about to keep those things that be commanded and being wearied
under the law in our infirmity and weakness, we may learn to call for the
help of grace. And writing unto Asellius, he says plainelye these words:
Vtilitas legis est, vt hominem de sua infirmitate conuincat, et gratiae
medicinam, ad aselliu^ episto. C.
quae in Christo est implorare compellat. This is (says he) ye vtility and
profit of the law, that it may make man to know his infirmity, or co^uict him
of his weakness, and so compel him to seek for the salve and medicin of
grace, which is in Christ. And in an other place he says: Iubet deus, ad
valentinum. epi. xcix.
quae non possumus, vt nouerimus quid ab illo petere debeamus.

God does command those things that we be not able to do, that we may
learn, what we ought to ask of him. Again: The law was given, Psalm. lxx.
to condempn you, and that being condemned, ye should feat and that being
afraid, ye should crave for mercy, having no trust in your own strength.
Moreover upon the hundredth and eightene Psalm, Ps, exviii
and two and twenty sermon he writes thus: The law was given for this
purpose, that it should make thee of a high minded person, lowlye and humble,
and that it should show unto thee, that thou have not of thine own, strength
unto righteousness: that so being poor, bare, and naked thou should fly
unto grace. And then turning him self unto god, he says So do, O Lord, so do,
O mercyful Lord, command that thing that can not be fulfilled: yea commau^d
that thing, that can not be fulfilled but through thy grace, that when men
shall not be able to fulfill it by their own strength, all mouths may be
stopped, and no man should seem unto him self to be high. Let all men be little
ones, humble and lowli: let all the world be subject unto God. Many other
places might I aledge out of the same doctoure, but these shall now suffice.


ALBION. These be goodly sayings, and worthy to be marcked. I could hear no
such things of my faithful guides.


EVTRAPELVS. No I warrant you. For all that they go about, Why the enemies of
the truth got about to urge the doctrine of the law.
is by the doctrine of the law, either to drive men unto desperation, or
elsse to pufte them up with a vayn confidence and trust of their own
strength and merits.


ALBION. Now do I perceive that it is so. And I am ashamed that I did give so
sone creadyte unto them.

But I pray you, brother Philalethes, tell me, how the same sentence of saint
Augustine ought to be understood,


PHILALE. Ye shall understand that there Saint Augustine does speak of those
things, How. S. Augustine ought to be understood.
that man is naturally subject unto from his own birth, as is: cold, heat,
hunger, thirst, and sleep with such other like, which we may well call humayne
infirmyties. His meaning then is, that man does not syn in doing those
thingss for the sustynaunce and preservation of his life, which he is not able
to forbear. As, if a man does warm him self, when he is a cold, or does
eat when he is a hungered and so fourth. If a man then does, eat, drink, warm
him self and sleep, when need does require, he sins not. For, why? he can
not live without such things. So both Saint Augustine does understand it.
Who does also proceed and go farther, understanding the same of Adam before
his fall. For, if it had not lien in him to wythstand the temptation of the
woman he should not have sinned. But sith that he could have resisted, if he
had would, and did not, therefore is he with all his sede, found gylty. And
because that he did not use well the strength, that was given him, therefore,
was it iustlye taken away from him, and from all his posterity. No man then
ought to say, that Adam and his sede do not sin, in doing against the law
of God, sithe that they their selves are cause of their unableness.


ALBION. This I do well understand. Deu. xxx.
which I command thee this day, is not hydden from thee, neither far of, nor
yet in heaven, but it is nyghe unto thee, even in thy mouth, and in thine heart
that thou may do it. Christ him self who is the true expositoure of the
law and of Moses says also?

Mat. xi.
My yoke is easy, and my burden is light. And the holy ghost by the blessed
Euangeliste S. Ihon, does plainly speak these words. This is the love of God,
that we keep his commandments: 1. Epist. v
and his commandments are not heavy. Who would not judge by this that it
lyethe in man's power to keep the commandments of God?


DIDYMVS. I cunne you thank, brother Albion, I thought, that ye would have
forgotten those places how be it I would not suffered them to be past over so
lyghtlye. For, there be many, The free will men.
even among them that be favorers, or at lest, will seem to be favorers of
the gospel, that have always these autoryties in their mouths.


PHILALETHES. That is not unknown unto me, and therefore, How the place of
Moses ought to be understood.
that Moses does not speak there of the bare commandments, nor yet of any
easynesse, that is in the keeping of them (Some in deed do understand it of
the facillity and easynes that is in the knowing and learning of the^) but of
the couenaunte of mercy, which he had both comprehended and publyshed with the
law. For, he had taught a little before, that our hearts must be
circumcised with the hand of God, else we could not love him, he does not then,
put the same facility and easiness, which which he does speak of there, in
the virtue and strength of man, but in the help and aid of the holy ghost,
which works mightelye his work, in our infyrmitye and weakness* For if
Moses, had spoken there of the bare commandments only he should have puffed
up the people with a most hurtful and pernicious confydence, whereby they must
needs to have cast them selves headlonge in to utter destruction, if they had
attempted to observe and keep the law, by their own strength.

For, when they had felt them selves unable to do it, would they not have
taken to plain desperation: if they had known none other way or mean for
to obtain salvation, and to escape death, but by the perfect kepinge of the
law? Saint Paul then having then a perfect understanding of this place, does
apply it altogether unto the doctrine of faith. For, having spoken of the
righteousness that comes by the law, and how that they that observe and keep
the commandments shall live by them, he does add immediatelye these words:
But the righteousness that comes of faith speaks on this wise: Romans x.
Say not in thy heart: Who shall ascend in to heaven? For that were to fetch
Christ down: Or who shall go down in to the deep? For that were to fetch up
Christ from death. But what sayethe the scripture? The word is nyghe thee,
even in thy mouth, and in thy heart.

This is the word of faith, which we preach.

If thou shall confess or knowledge with thy mouth that Jesus is the Lord:
and shall believe with thy heart, that God raised him up from death, thou shall
be safe. For, the belyef of the heart iustifyeth, and the confession of the
mouth makes man safe. Who would require a more sound exposition of Moses
words than this is?


ALBION. This exposition can in no wise mislyke me, sith that it comes from
the same self spirit, that Moses did writ by. Now, therefore, come to the
sayings of Christ, and of John the evangelist.


PHILALE. Such sayings are most true, as it does appear by that, How the
sayings of Christ and John the evangelist ought to be understood
which has been said before. For, the commandments of god, of them selves
are easy, and if there be any dyfficultye or hardness in them: it comes not
of the nature and propertye of the commandments of God, but of the
corruption of man. Hear, what Saint Paul sayethe: what so ever the law
could not fulfill, To. viii.
in as much as it was weak because of the flesh, that same did God perform,
sendinge his son in the similitude of synneful flesh, and by sin damned
sin. Two things to be learned in Paul's saying.
Two things do we learn in this saying of the Apostle: First, that it comes
not of the law, that men are not able to fulfill it, but of the imbecility and
weakness of the flesh. The law then, and the commandments be easy, and if
there be any difficultye or hardness in the fulfilling of them, it comes of
our naughty and corrupted nature.

Secondly we do learn, that God does by his son Jesus Christ, supply the
same, that by reason of the weakness of our flesh, we be not able to fulfill.
Again: the commandments of god are easy and light unto him, that is graffed
in Christ, and that has fellowshyp with him. For, those things that before
were hard unto manne, are made easy unto him by faith, where by he is graffed
in Christ, as saint Paul does testify, saying: I am able to do all things
through him, that does comfort me. And so the saying of S. Augustine shall be
true where he says: I can not think, that God has commanded any thing
that is impossible. Phi. iiii.
Elsse S. Augustine does grant in many other places, that God has
commanded things, that it is impossible for man to fulfill, as in the book of
the spirit, and of the letter, and in his third treatise upon Ihon. And so
ought al to be understood, How Chrisosto^ and Jerome ought to be understood.
that they aleadge, both out of Chrysostom, and of Jerome, that is to say,
that the commandments of God, were easy to keep. For, the faithful man is
persuaded and does believe, that whatsoever is wanting or lacking in him, the
same is supplied by christ with whom he has felowshyppe through faith. Which
working through chariti and love, causes the commandments of god to be easy
unto the inner man, which is borne of new, or which is renewed by the holy
ghost, God having a chief respect unto the will and desire, that such a man
has to keep them actually, if it did lie in his power, and whereby he does
endeavor him self daily to fulfill them. For, it is the duty of him that is
renewed, What is the duty of him that is renewed.
to study daily and hourly to keep the commandments of god, though he be not
able by him self, and of his own strength, to attain to the perfect keeping of
the^. For we must not, because that we are not able to keep the law of god as
it ought to be kept, be slack therefore to do that, which lies in us, being
sure that our obedience, though it be imperfect, shall be accepted before God,
as long as we be true members of his son Jesus Christ. Why the ancient
fathers spoke as they did.
For this cause did the ancient doctors speak as they did, that so they
might take away from men, the vain excuses, which they be wont to make
because of the impossibility of the law.


DIDyMVS. The foolish and found objection of the enemies.
I was once in a place where I hard a stout champion of the Romish church say,
that there have been, not one nor two, but many, that did besides Christ,
fulfill the law of God, with a most consummate perfection, as Joshua, and
zachary Ihons father, saying that this is written of Joshua: As the Lord
commanded his servant Moses, and as Moses commanded Joshua, Iosu. xi.
even so did Joshua so that there was nothing undone at al of those things that
god commanded Moses.


PHILALETHES. I ask you: whether was Joshua a man, that was conceived after the
common sort of other men or not?


DIDyMVS. I believe that he was a man, and that he was conceived betwixt man and
woman as other men are.


PHILALETHES. Ye believe well: for, it is so in deed. We must then confess and
grant that Joshua did go a stray from the law of God, that he was a liar, and
that he was filled with many myseryes. For, it is said of all men, To. iii.
that be borne of man and woman, that they have all gone out of the way, and
that they be also al liars: Psalm. cxvi
how dare then your bragginge merchants, be so bold to affirm, that Joshua
has kept the hole law of God. For, these be two contrary things: to be a liar,
and to have kept the law of God perfectlye. Again: I would feign know of
you, whether Ihon Baptyste, or Ihon the Evangelist, was not as perfect as
Joshua? Or whether Joshua was more perfect, than any of those two, that I named
even now?


DYDIMVS. I believe, that Joshua was not more perfect, than they were.


PHILALE. Mat. iii.
Hear then, what Ihon Baptist did say unto our savior Jesus Christ, when he
came unto him for to be baptized: I have nead to be baptized of thee, and doste
thou come unto me? Sithe then, that S. Ihon does confess that he had neade to
be baptized, it was a token, that he was infected with sin. And whereof does
come the same infection of sin, but of the transgression of the law? We can
not deny then, but that Ihon was a transgressor of the law, and that therefore
(if their opinion be true) Joshua was more perfect than he.


DyDIMVS. I cannot believe that Joshua was more perfect than Iho^ Baptist. For,
it is said of him, that among all those, Mat. xi.
that be borne of a woman, there arose no greater than he was.


PHILALETHES. Ye must then confess that Joshua was a sinner: if he was a
sinner, then did he offend against the law.


DIDyMVS. I can not say against it.


PHILALETHES. Hear also what the blessed Evangelist saint Ihon does say: if we
say, i. epi. i.
that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. I
am sure that Joshua, was not more perfect than the blessed Evangelist Saint
Ihon was, who, as ye see, does put him self in the number of sinners.


DIDyMVS. I would fain learn, how the same that is written of Joshua, must be
understood. For, it is said plainelye, that he left none of those things
undone, that Moses commanded him.


PHILALETHES. Ye must mark, How that which was said of Joshua ought to be
understood.
that the same place must be understood of the Commandments, that Moses
did give unto Joshua, touching the government of the people, and also touching
the brynginge of the children of Israel into the land of Canaam, and not of ye
moral law, that is written in the two tables of stone. For, the same law was
not given particularlye unto Joshua, but unto all the people in general. That
same place the^, must be understood of the commandments, that Moses did
give unto Joshua, concerning the government and guidinge of the people, which
he did fulfill to the vttermoste.


DyDIMVS. And what say ye of zachary the father of Ihon Baptist, Luc. i.
and of his mother? For, it is written of them, that they were both ryghteous
before God, and that they walked in all the commandments and statutes of the
Lord, unreprovable.


PHILA. What say ye, neighbor Dydimus, was not zachary a priest, which did
execute his office before God, when his curse came, according to the custom
of the priesthode?


DIDyMVS. Yes verily.


PHILALETHES. Then was he a sinner, and was feign to offer sacrifyce first for
his own sins, Heb. vii.
and then for the sins of the people. For, thus it is written: It became us
to have such an hie priest, as is holy, innocent, undefiled, separated from
sinners, and made higher then heaven, which neadeth not daily, as yonder high
priests, to offer up sacrifyce, first for his own sins, and then for the
sins of the people. For that did he once for all, when he offered up him
self. Here have we a notable difference betwixt Christ our souerain priest,
and the high priests of the law. First and fore most the high priests of the
law, were fain to offer sacrifyces often because that ye sacrifices that they
offered continually every year, could not make them, that came there unto
perfect. But Christ with one only sacrifyce, Heb. x.
did make them perfect for ever that are sanctified. Again, the high priests
of the law, were feign to offer sacryfices. First for their own sins, and
then for the sins of the people. For, thus said Moses unto Aaron: Leui. xvi.
go unto the aultare, and offer thy sin offrynge, and thy burnt offrynge,
and make an atonement for thee, and for ye people. Then offer the peoples
offringe, and reconcile them also, as the Lord has commanded. But our savior
Jesus Christ, who is our sovereign and everlasting priest, is holy,
innocente, undefiled, separated from sinners, andmade higher then heaven, so
that he neaded not to offer for his own sins, as the priests of the old law
did. i. epi. ii.
For, why? he never committed sin, nor gile was found in his mouth: I am
sure that ye will not say, that Zachary Ihon Baptistes father, was such a one.


DYDIMVS. I will not say so. For there is no man that synneth not. i. king.
viii. Romans iii.
Again: All men have sinned, and lack the praise that is of valewe before
God. Moreover, we do read that zachari was punished, because that he doubted of
the promise of God, Luc. i.
which was reveled unto him by the angel.


PHILALE. Ye may perceive then that he was called righteous not because that
he had fulfilled the law with such a perfectyon as GOD does require of us,
Why zachary was called righteous.
but because that by the meare mercy and goodness of almightye GOD, taken
hold upon by faith, his sins were not imputed unto him, but was compted
ryghteous before GOD, Romans iiii
as Abraham was, unto whom his faith was imputed for righteousness.

And of this faith did it come, that both he and his wife Elizabeth did
endeavor them selves to walk so uprightly in the commaundeme^ts and statutes
of the Lord, that no man should be able to reprove them, or to lay any
thing to their charge. In the mean while, they cried both unto God, and
said: Enter not into judgment with thy servants, Psalm. cxlii
O Lord, for in thy syghte no man shall be justified.


DYDIMVS. iiii. kings xxiii. Objection
He did also bring in the example of Josias, of whom it is written after this
manner: There was no king before, like unto him which so converted unto the
Lord wythall his heart, wythall his soul, and with all his strength: according
to all ye law of Moses.


PHILA. Answer
I will have none other but the words that ye have aleadged for to prove that
Josias was a transgressoure of the law? For, it is written of him, that there
was no king before, which so converted or turned him self unto the Lord, as
he did. But how could he convert or return unto the Lord, except he had gone
away from him? And we go away from God through or by sin, which is a
plain transgression or breakinge of the law: Therefore Josias was a
transgressour of the law.


DIDYMVS. Yet it is written of him, that there was not his like that did so
convert unto the Lord with all his heart, according to all the law.


PHILALE. It follows not therefore, because it is said that Josias observed
and kept the law more diligentely than all the other kings that he did keep it
perfectlye. For, neither he, How yt which is spoken of Josias ought to be
taken.
nor any other besides did ever keep it perfectlye.

It is to be thought that Iosyas has been a greater zelatoure of the law of
God than all the other were, yet it follows not therefore, that he kept the
law with such a perfection, as God does require.


DIDyMVS. What say ye, to these words of David:


PHILALETHSE. A declaration of David's words.
that he did bear unto the law and commandments of God, and the good
estimation, that he had of them. For, if he should say and boaste, that he
had kept the law and commandments of God perfectlye: the scripture should
prove him as liar. For, it testifyeth and witnesses of him, that he was both
an aduouterer and a murderer. But to say that an aduouterer or murderer
has kept the law of God with such a perfection, ii. Samu. xi.xii.
as God does require that were a blasphemye against God and against his law.
Moreover, after that he had committed such detestable and enorme crimes, and
had obtained forgiveness and pardone for the same, did he not sin again
most greauouslye against God, ii. Samu. xxiiii.
when he did rekynne his people? Ye see then, how Dauyd did many and sondrye
times offend against the law.

Therefore, Psa. cxxx
does he cry out saying: If thou, Lord, will be extreme to mark what is
done amysse, oh Lord, who may abide it?


DI. By our brother Albions leave I will bring fourth all the sayings of that
most valyaunte champyon of the Romish church, sith that they serve so well
for our purpose.


ALBION. Ye shall have good leave of me, neighbor Didymus. For, through the
occasion of them, many goodly matters are discussed which (as ye said before)
serve very well for this our communication, that we have now in hand.
Therefore, go on in ye name of God.


DIDyMVS. He did in his great heat affirm most stoutely that a man was able
to fulfill these two commandments: The proud assercion of the papists.
Thou shall love the Lord thy god, with all thine heart, with al thy soul,
and with all thy strength. And thou shall not covet.


PHILALETHES. If ye will mark diligentely all, that has been said before,
Answer unto it.
ye shall soon perceive, that it is impossible for any manne to do it.

For, this commandment: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine
heart, with all thy soul, and wythall thy strength, does require a most pure
and clean heart, which should be without spot or blemish. Pro. xx.
But who in all the hole world can truly say: I have a clean heart?


DIDyMVS. I do well understand all this hole matter, God be praised, and thanked
for it. But I will only rehearse unto you, the communication and talcke of this
noble and valiaunte knighte of the Romish beast.


EVTRA. I pray you, brother Philalethes, that ye will give me leave to answer
a while, that so ye may have some brething time. For, sense ye came, ye never
reasted:


PHILALETHES. I am well content.


EVTRAPELVS. Now then, neighbor Dydimus, let us hear all the wise talcke and
communication of this noble knighte, and valiant champion of the Romish church.


DIDYMVS. He did say, that by this Commandment. (Thou shall love the Lord
thy God withal thine heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy strength) is
not required an actual love or motion of the heart toward God, but that it is
enough, if it be not interrupted by some deadlye sin: so that, he is compted
to keep this commandment, which prefers nothing before God, nor would for
all the goods and richesse in the world, break one of his comcommaundements.


EVTRAPELVS. Truly this is a very substantial divinity, and worthy of such
an excellent divine, as he thinks him self to be. How could it be, I pray
you, that a man should keep him self from offending God, except he should
love him actually, that is to say, in very deed. For, all that is done, If
the heart of man be void of the love of god he ca^ do no good.
without the love of God, is sin. If the heart of man then, be void of the
love of God, what good can he do? I say unto you, that all the sins that a
man commits, do come of this, that he loves not God actually. Consider and
mark, what the Lord him self says, speakinge of his law. And this shall
be a sign unto thee in thine hand, and a token to think upon before thine
eyes, Exo. xiii.
how that the Lord brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand. And when the
true and faithful servant of God Moses, had said: Deu. vi.
Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart. etc. He did add by
and by: These words, which I command thee this day, shall thou lay up
in thine heart, thou shall rehearse them unto thy Children, and shall talcke of
them, when thou sit in thine house? when thou walckest by the way, when
thou lie down, and when thou rysest up. And in an other place, he writes
on this manner: Take heed to thy self now, Deu. iiii.
and keep well thy soul, that thou forget not the things, which thine eyes
have seen, and that they depart not out of thine heart, all the days of thy
life. Ye see that God does require both an actual remembrance of his
wondrous works, and also an actual love toward him. Ioh. xiiii.
Jesus Christ also says: if ye love me keep my commaundeme^ts. Again: This
is the love of God (says the blessed Evangelist s. Iho^) that we keep his
commandments. i. Ioh. v.
It follows then that we must have first, an actual love of God in our
hearts, if we will keep his law, or keep our selves from falling into sin.


DyDIMVS. Now do I perceive, yt the opinion of this master doctor is
abhomynable, and diuelyshe. Therefore, I do utterly forsake it, as most
erroneous and heretical. But now, tell me, I pray you, how this commandment:
Thou shall not covet, ought to be understood. For, this galant doctoure did
say, that God does not forbid the concupiscence, but that he does only forbid
and condemn the agreinge unto it, affirming stiffly, The opinion of the scole
men touching concupisence
that concupiscence is no sin, except we do consent and agree unto it. For
says he, the concupiscences and lusts of the flesh, after baptism, be left
unto us for an exercise of virtue, and for an occasion to merit and deserve,
that after we have manfully foughten in this world, we may in the other
receive the crown of glory, and of righteousness.


EV. By what authorityes of the scripture did he prove his saying?


DYDIMVS. By the saying of S. Augustine, where he writes, that concupiscence is
no sin in them that be regenerated or borne of new, except we consent unto
the same wicked and naughtye works.


EVTRA. This galant doctor of yours, does great wrong to s. Augustine. For, he
says not only, that concupiscence is no sin, but that it is no sin in them,
that are born of new, as ye your self do well perceive by his words that ye
have aleadged. For, god says not: thou shall not go after thy concupiscences:
Thou shall not bring them to effect, nor consent unto them: but he says
plainlye: Thou shall not covet. And that concupiscence in them, that are born
of new, is co^pted for no sin, it comes not of the concupiscence, but of
the new birth or regeneration, which brings to pass that God does not
unto him that is borne of new impute his concupyscence for sin. For, it is
written: he that is born of God, i. Ioh. iii.
sins not, that is to say: his sin is not imputed unto him. Again, it is
said, that be synneth not: because that he suffers not sin to reign in
him. Moreover I will prove by liuelye reasons, that concupiscence, that is to
say, all evil motions of the heart are sin. First and foremoste I ask of
you: whereof comes concupiscence? of the flesh or of the spirit?


DyDIMVS. I grant, that it comes of the flesh.


EV. It follows then that concupiscence is fleshlye. For, as Christ says.
That which is born of flesh, Ioh. iii.
is flesh.


DIDyMVS. I do confess that to.


EV. It follows then that concupiscence is sin. For, the flesh in it self
is nothing elsse but sin, ever repugnynge against the spirit, as it is
written: The flesh coueteth against the spirit. And in an other place, Saint
Paul says also: gala. v.
The works of the flesh are manifest, which are whoredo^e, envy, Idolatry.
etc.

I ask this of you: he that gives occasion of sin, is not he partaker of
the sin? He that bids to steal, and he that steals, be they not both
thieves? Now, it is so, that every euel motion of the heart, does stir up man for
to sin, and if man does not assent nor agree unto it, ye faut and lack, is
not in the concupiscence, that does all that in it does lie to cast man
headlong into sin, but it is the holy ghost that does mortifye the same
concupiscence in them, that be regenerated or borne of new. Seeing then that
all sins do come and proceade of the concupiscence, and evil motions of the
heart, we must neades confess that such concupiscence and evil motions of the
heart, are evil. If they be evil, then are they forbidden of God. For, God
does not only command to avoid sin, but also the occasion of sin. Since
then that we do retein and keep in us, such evil motions of the heart, we do
evil. For, understand ye, that God by this commandment. (Thou shall not
covet) does condemn and forbid al evil concupiscence and naughty motions of
the heart, and not only the fruits that spring thereof. That is to say: because
that God will have all our whole soul to be filled and possessed with the
affectyon of love and charity, his will and pleasure is, that we should banish
and cast out of our hearts al manner of things, that be contrary unto charity
and brotherly love, so that no thought should rise in our minds, for to
kindle our hearts with any concupiscence, that might be hurtful and noisome
unto our neighbor. For, it is the concupiscence, that prycketh and tickeleth
the heart, for to in tice him to sin.


DIDyMVS. It may be that man shall not consent to it.


EV. If man should consent unto it, then the same consent, should no more be
called concupiscence only, but a deliberate purpose. And truly, it is no
meruel that God does require such a perfection, Why god does require such a
perfection and vprightuee in man.
and uprightness in man. For, who will say the contrary, but that it is
most right, that all the powers of the soul ought to be applied and given
to charity? And if any part of the soul does shrincke or swerve from it, I
mean, from the love, that we owe unto God, and our neighbor, al men must nead
confess that it is fauty and naught. For, whereof does it come, that any
desire to hurt our neighbor, enters into our heart, but only because that
despisinge other, we do only seek our own profit? For, if our whole heart were
fully possessed with charity and brotherlye love, no such imaginations should
have entrance into it. Therefore, we must conclude, that the heart is void of
charity, for as much as it does conceive such concupiscence.


DYDIMVS. But me thyncketh, that it is not meet and conuenyent, that such
vain fantasyes, as do come into a man's brayn, and afterward do vanish away,
should be taken and condemned for concupiscences, which properly have their of
spring in the heart.


EV. I say, that God by this commandment. Thou shall not covet, forbids
not only those imaginations, that rise in man's heart, but also, al vain
thoughts, yt may by any mean move and stir up the heart unto concupiscence.
For, we can never so sone lust or desire any thing in our mind, but that ye
heart is straightwais therewith touched and enflamed, whether it be little or
much. But the lord does require of us a most perfect charity, which should be
farthest from all fleshlye concupiscence.


PHILA. Since that this matter, has been suffycyentlye debated, I thyncke
it good, that hear we make an end, praying most earnestly unto our heavenly
father, to send his holy spirit into our hearts, and to endue us abou^dantly
with the same, that our corrupted and poysened flesh, being through it, tamed
and mortified, we may wholly give our selves to serve him, in holiness and
righteousness, all the days of our lives.


DyDIMVS. God grant it.


Imprinted at London by Ihon Tisdale, and are to be sold at his shop in Lombard
streate.

Cum priuilegio, ad imprimendum solum.


