THE BATHS OF BATHE: OR, A NECESSARY COMPENDIOUS TREATISE CONCERNING THE
Nature, use and efficacy of those famous hot waters: PVBLISHED FOR THE BENEFIT
OF all such, as yearly for their health, resort to those Baths: With an
Advertisement of the great utility that comes to man's body, by the taking of
Physic in the Spring, inferred upon a question moved, concerning the
frequencie of sickness, and death of people more in that season, then in any
other.

Whereunto is also annexed a censure, concerning the Water of Saint Vincents
Rocks near Bristoll, which begins to grow in great request and use against the
Stone.

By To. Venner, Doctor of Physic in Bathe.

LONDON, Printed by Felix Kyngston for Richard Moore, and are to be sold at his
shop in Saint Dunstans Churchyard in Fleet-streete. 1628.

Effigies Tobiae Venner Med. Dr. Anno Dom: 1660. Aetatis suae 85.


SERENISSIMAE PRINCIPI MARIAE, ANGLIAE, SCOTIAE, FRANCIAE, ET HIBERNIAE REGINAE,
HOC DE THERMIS BATHONIENSIBVS OPVSCVLVM HVMILlime dedicat and consecrat

THO. VENERVS Med. Dr.

TO THE READER.
GOod Reader, seeing in the few years that I have exercised Physic at the
Baths, the yearly concourse in the Spring, and Fall, of people of all sorts,
and from all parts of this Kingdom, to those famous Waters, and the little
benefit that many after great expense and trouble receive thereby: I was
induced to publish this ensuing Treatise, wherein I have very briefly showed
the nature and efficacy of those Waters, touched the causes that many find
not comfort, but oftentimes rather hurt, that resort to them; with such
aduertisements concerning the use of the said Waters: which if they be rightly
observed, I am persuaded, few will hereafter complain that they have been at
the Baths in vain, and so the Waters regaine that esteem which in respect of
their singular Virtues they are worthy of. But here you must take from me this
one advertisement, which is, That Sickness is a Symptom of Sin: And
therefore first, Poenitentiam agendo, before your departure from home, make
peace betwixt God and your conscience, and then repair to the Baths, quo te
faustum ducat, atque sanum reducat, qui solus id potest. Vale.

THE BATHS OF BATHE.
BAthe, so called from the Baths in it, is a little well-compacted City, and
beautified with very fair and goodly buildings for receipt of strangers.
Although the site thereof, by reason of the vicinity of Hills, seem not
pleasant, being almost environed with them; yet for goodness of air, neerenes
of a sweet and delectable River, and fertility of soil, it is pleasant and
happy enough; but for the hot waters that boil up even in the midst thereof,
it is more delectable and happier, then any other of the Kingdom.

There are in it four public Baths, so fairly built, and fitted with such
conueniencie for bathing, as the like (I suppose) is not elsewhere to be
found; besides a little Bath for Lepers, called The Lepers Bath.

They all have the original of their heat from one matter, namely, Sulphur,
burning in the cauities of the earth, through which the waters flowing receive
their heat. They partake of no other mineral that I can find: what may lie
hid in visceribus terrae, I know not: of this I am sure, that such diseases as
cannot receive cure elsewhere, here do.

These Baths as they differ in their heat, Kings Bath.
so in their operations and effects. The Kings Bath is the hottest, and it is
for beauty, largeness, and efficacy of heat, a Kingly Bath indeed, being so
hot as can be well suffered. This Bath is of strong-heating, opening,
resolving, attracting, and exiccating faculty, and therefore only convenient
for cold and moist bodies, and for cold and moist diseases.

Hot Bath.
Next to the Kings Bath for efficacy of heat, is the Hot Bath, and the
difference in their heat is so little, that it is scarcely to be discerned.
This Bath is good for the same infirmities that the Kings Bath is, and for the
effects which it works, I cannot find it to be inferior unto it. They are
two excellent Baths for cold and moist diseases, and for very cold and moist
bodies.

Queens Bath.
The Queens Bath is a member of the Kings Bath, a wall only going between
them, with a passage therein to go from one to the other. This Bath is not
altogether so hot as that, and therefore the use of it is convenient for them
that cannot well endure the heat of the Kings Bath.

Cross Bath.
The Cross Bath is for heat the mildest, being very temperately warm: it is
a dainty Bath for young, weak, and tender bodies, that cannot endure the heat
of the hotter Baths, or for whom the hotter Baths may not be convenient. It is
an excellent Bath for temperate bodies, by way of preservation, because such
the hotter Baths may soon distemper, and occasion hurt: Neither is this Bath
good only for such as are of a temperate state and constitution of body by way
of preservation; but for them and others also by way of curation, in some
cases, where the hotter Baths are not fit to be used. This Bath, by reason of
the mildness of its heat, is of a notable mollifying and relaxing faculty:
good therefore in contractions of any member, in obstructions of the breast,
spleen, liver, and kidneys; and effectual also for Aches, when it is in its
prime and vigor of heat, especially for such, whose temper or habit of body
shall prohibit the use of the hotter Baths. This Bath attaines not to its
perfection of heat, till the weather grow to be constantly hot, and when the
other Baths, by reason of the feruor thereof, cannot be used, but by such whose
diseases, and state of body are impensiuely cold.

I cannot, in regard of the diversity of bodies, insist upon every particular
in the use of these Baths: wherefore I will only for your better instruction
and direction herein, give you some special aduertisements, and thereupon
leave you to some Learned Physician, that can accordingly guide you in the use
of them.

These famous hot Waters are of singular force, The virtue of the Baths in
general.
not only against diseases gotten by cold, or proceeding from a cold and moist
cause, but also bring, in time of health, exceeding comfort and profit to all
cold, moist, and corpulent bodies: for they open the pores, resolve, attenuate,
digest, consume, and draw forth superfluities, and withal strongly heal and
dry the whole habit of the body.

They are of excellent efficacy against all diseases of the head and sinews,
proceeding of a cold and moist cause, as Rheumes, Palsies, Epilepsies,
Lethargies, Apoplexies, Cramps, Deafness, Forgetfulness, Trembling, or
weakness of any member, Aches, and swellings of the joints, etc.

They also greatly profit windy and hydropicke bodies, the pain and swelling
of any part of the body, so that it proceed not from an hot cause, the
sluggish and lumpish heaviness of the body, numnesse of any member, pain in
the loins, the gout, especially the Sciatica, cold tumors of the Milt and
Liver, the Yellow Iaundies in a body plethoricke or phlegmatic.

They are also very profitable for them that have their lungs annoyed with much
moisture; and to make slender such bodies as are too gross, there is nothing
more effectual, then the often use of these waters. Wherefore let those that
fear obesitie, that is, would not wax gross; be careful to come often to
our Baths: for by the use of them, according as the learned Physician shall
direct; they may not only preserve their health, but also keep their bodies
from being vnseemingly corpulent.

They are also singularly profitable to women; for they help them of
barrenness, and of all diseases and imperfections of the Matrix, proceeding of
a cold and moist They also cure all diseases of the skin, as Scabs, Itch, old
Sores, etc. All which to be true, we daily find with admiration, to the
exceeding great comfort of many, who with deplored diseases, and most miserable
bodies, resort to these Baths, and are there, by the help of wholesome
Physic, and virtue of the Baths, through the blessing of Almighty God,
recovered to their former health.

Hot Baths hurtful to hot and dry bodies.
But Baths naturally hot (as these our Baths are) to bodies naturally hot and
dry, are generally hurtful; and so much the more, as the body is drier, and
the Bath hotter, because it distempereth and consumes the very habit of the
body, and makes it carrion-like lean.

Wherefore seeing that these our Baths are not indifferently agreeable to every
constitution and state of body, I do advise, that not any one go into them
rashly, or upon a preposterous judgment; but that he be first advised by some
faithful, judicious, and expert Physician; and to him expose the state of his
body, whereby he may understand, whether or no it may be expedient for him to
attempt the same. And whereas there are in Bathe diverse Baths, as I have
showed; and they differing in their heat, and accordingly in their effects, he
must also from the learned Physician be directed in which to bathe: neither
must he only understand which Bath to use, as most convenient for his state of
body; but also when and how often to use the same, and how long to abide
therein at a time. Besides this, he must take special care, not to go into
the Bath without fit preparation, (which is a gross error of many) but must be
first purged, as his state of body shall require; and be also directed in other
things how to order himself, before he go into the Bath, As not to go
thereinto upon a full stomach, etc.
while he is in the Bath, and after that he is come out of the Bath, and when
he leaves the Bath: and must also with his bathings and sweating use such
physick-helpes, as may work with the Baths, according as his disease and
present state of body shall require; not relying wholly upon the use of the
water for his cure, as many ignorantly, and some basely do, to save their
purse. The neglect of all these, or of some of them, either through ignorance,
or voluntary wilfulnes, is the cause, that some that take great pains to come
to the Baths, are not by them healed of their infirmities, but oftentimes never
return to their homes again; or if they do, it is most commonly with new
diseases, and the old worse then ever they were: whereas of a generous and
religious understanding, using the true helps of physic with the Baths, are
of their diseases perfectly cured.

Here I may not omit a special reason, why many receive little benefit by the
Baths, but oftentimes much hurt; and that is, because they take not the aid
and directions of a Physician present, in the use of the Bath; but bring their
physic and directions with them from some Physician in the Country where
they abode; perhaps, one that well understands not their state of body, much
less the nature and true use of the Baths. But admit that they have their
directions from an understanding Physician, yet I must tell them, that many
accidences fall out oftentimes in bathing, that require the help of a present
Physician.

Another special reason why many find little good by the Baths, is, because
they make not such stay at them, as in regard of their infirmities, or state of
body, is meet: for some go away before the Bath (in regard of a dense habit
of body) has wrought any manner of effect at all on them: others even then
when the Bath begins to show its force and efficacy on their bodies: and some
too soon upon much benefit received: by means whereof they easily incur a
relapse. Wherefore my counsel herein unto you is this, that you limit not your
stay at the Baths, before you depart from your homes; but in that be advised
and ruled by your Physician, when you are at the Baths, according as he shall
find to be meet for your infirmities, and state of body: and think not to
receive in four, five, or six weeks an absolute cure for an infirmity, which
perhaps you have borne two or three years, notwithstanding all the helps and
means you have used for the same in your own Country. Wherefore let your
abode at the Baths be, as it shall be requisite for your state of body, and
limit not the time, no, not to a Spring, or a Fall; for it may be needful for
you to reside there the whole year, it may be more: for otherwise by your
untimely departure, you may lose the good that you have gotten by the Bath,
before the time come that you shall think to be fit for the use of the Baths
again.

But here I know you will object against me, saying, Is it good to make use of
your Baths in the Summer and Winter? Are not those times by all learned and
judicious Physicians prohibited for bathing in hot Baths? Whereupon grew the
custom of frequenting them in the temperate seasons of the year, namely, in
the Spring and Fall?

Whereunto I answer, and first, that bathing in our Baths in Summer* taking the
cool of the morning for it, if the season shall be hot and Summer-like,
brings much more benefit to the body, the disease being of a cold nature, and
proceeding from a cold and moist cause (for so you must conceive me) then in
the Spring or Fall, when oftentimes the coldness and variablenes of the air
takes away the benefit of your bathing: for cold, or vaporous air entering into
your body after bathing, the pores being open, does not only very greatly
annoy the spirits, and principal parts, occasion wind and tortures in the
bowels, but also induce oftentimes irrecouerable effects to the sinews and
joints. But if seasons that are constantly warm, be best for bathing in our
Baths, and cold times hurtful, why should any reside at them in the Winter? I
answer, That it is good for the^ that are in the way of cure, by reason of
their former bathings; and that the waters are in their nature as effectually
hot in the winter, as in any other time of the year; only the superficies, or
upper part of the Bath is cooled by the winds. But in the Winter there are
some calm days, in which the diseased body lying near to the Baths, may well
and safely bathe, without any offense or danger in taking of cold after: for
he may keep himself in a warm chamber, having nothing else to do, or take
care for, but for his health.

And here I cannot but reprehend the error of most people, that at the end of
May depart from our Baths, and after that month, I know not out of what
preiudicate opinion, altogether refrain to come to them, till the Fall:
perhaps they do this, supposing, that after the Spring, till the Fall come
again, the Baths lose their virtue. I must tell them, if this be their
conceit, that they are in a great error; for the waters lose not their virtue
at any time, only the disposition of the ambientaire may make them less fit to
be used at one time then at another. But I would have you to know, and as I
have afore-shewed, that our Baths, may as profitably be used in Summer, as in
the Spring, and most commonly with far better success in the whole month of
June, then in any of the former months, and that in regard of the constant
temperature of this month, and the variable disposition of the months
preceding. I am persuaded, that this untimely going from the Baths at the very
approach of Summer, hurts many, and overthrows the good they have received by
them. Wherefore my advertisement herein is this, that they which resort to the
Baths for prevention of sickness, or such hereditarie diseases, as they fear
will befall them, depart from the Baths about the end of the Spring: but such
as go to them for diseases already fixed, abide there the whole Summer, and
longer too, if there shall be occasion.

And admit that after the month of June the weather be too fervently hot to
bathe in the hotter Baths; yet the Cross bath, which for heat is the mildest,
being, as I have said, in its nature temperately hot, attaines not to its
efficacy and perfection, till the weather be constantly warm, which for the
most part happens not till toward the end of May, or the beginning of June.
The use of which Bath is of excellent efficacy, not only in the month of
June, but after also, yea, all the Summer, according as the state of the body,
and disposition of the season shall permit: wherein I leave you to the counsel
and direction of some learned Physician resident at the Baths.

And now also I must advertise such, as in the declining, or Fall of the year,
which we call the Autumn, shall for the health of their bodies repair to our
Baths, that they defer not their coming till the middle of September, or
after, as many ignorantly do; but that they rather be there shortly after the
middle of August, that they may have time sufficient for bathing, before the
air grow to be too cold, as commonly it is in October, especially toward the
end thereof. But, perhaps, some out of an ignorant timorousnes will object;
That to come to the Baths before the Dogge-dayes are gone, or too soon upon
them, is hurtful? Herein they are more scrupulous, then judicious: but to
yield them some satisfaction, I answer; Besides the alteration of seasons from
their ancient temperature, in this decrepit age of the world, that though the
middle part of the day in the latter part of August shall be hot, yet the
mornings and euenings (which are the times for bathing) begin then to be cold,
and decline to a temperature; and the heat of the day growing on upon the
bathing, is that which we specially respect for the health of our patients, for
whom we approve the use of the Baths. Wherefore such as for the health of their
bodies repair to our Baths, shall (if they be there in the latter part of
August) receive a double commodity: for first, they shall have the whole month
of September very convenient for bathing, and Physic also, as shall be
occasion; yea, and part of October, as the disposition of the season shall
permit: next, sufficient time for their return to their homes, before the air
grow too cold, or the weather distempered: for to take cold betwixt the
bathings, or to expose the body to travel in foul and intemperate weather,
upon the use of the Baths, induces (the pores being open) besides Feuerous
distemperatures and ventosities, oftentimes very great and dolorous affects of
the Brain, Breast, Sinews and Joints.

I may not let pass how certain accidences now and then befall some in their
bathing; as weakness and subversion of the stomach, faintnes, and sometimes
swounings; and these the Physician must take special care to prevent, which
maybe occasioned by means of the Sulphurous vapors of the Bath: yet I must
tell you, that these, or the like accidences our Baths do seldom occasion,
especially the cross Bath, but in them that are weak by Nature, that are
subject to swouning, or go into the^ preposterously, without fit preparation
and direction. And the reason is, because our Baths being large, and having not
sulphur in them, not in the cauities near adjoining, the vapors are the less
noisome, not so gross and adusted; and therefore not quickly offensive, but to
them that are very weak by nature, or as I have said, go into them without
fit preparation, or make longer stay in them then is meet.

And here I cannot but lay open Baths Technologie, Baths Technologie with them
that resort to those Baths.
with such as for the health of their bodies resort to those Baths, wherein I
am sure to gain little thank. But I pass not for it, my purpose being to
discharge a good conscience, and to do my Country good. The thing therefore
that I would have you to take notice of, is, how the people of that place that
keep houses of receipt, Bathe being a place, in regard of the Baths, that many
resort unto for cure of infirmities, that cannot receive help elsewhere; it
were to be wished, that Empericks, and all other whatsoever they be, being not
Graduates in the faculty of Physic, were utterly prohibited to practice in the
City, or near to the consines thereof, idque sub poena grauissima.
and their Agents (for such they have in every corner of the streets, and also
before you come to the Gates) press upon you, importuning you to take your
lodging at such and such an house, near to such and such a Bath, extolling the
Baths near which they dwell, above the rest, respecting altogether their own
gain, not your good or welfare. And when they have gotten you into their
houses, they will be ready to fit you with a Physician (perhaps an Emprick or
vpstart Apothecary, magnifying him for the best Physician in the Town) that
will not cross them in removing you to another Bath, though the Bath near
which you are placed, be altogether contrary to your infirmities and state of
body, or at least, not so convenient as some other. And this is also a special
reason, why many oftentimes receive rather hurt then good by the use of the
Baths.

My counsel therefore to the learned Physicians shall be this, that they so
tender the good of their Patients, and their own worth and reputation, as that
for base gain they subject not themselves to these kind of people, in hope to
get Patients by their means; and to the Patients, that they fall not by any
means into the hands of Empericks, who, by their ill qualified Physic, will
spoil their bodies, and by reason of their pragmaticall nature, persuade and
put them to unnecessary and preposterous courses, which cannot but produce
disastrous effects.

But seeing that no calling is more disgraced, then by the men of the same
calling, I wish all professors of Physic to carry themselves worthy of their
calling, to be faithful and honest in their courses, not to insinuate with
any, or after the manner of our Bath-guides, press upon them to be retained.
If an Empericke or Mountibanke seek about for work, I blame them not; let them
deceive those who will be deceived; but for such as are graduated in the noble
faculty of Physic to do so, it is Fiddler-like: a note, if not of some
unworthiness in them, I am sure, of a base mind. Let those therefore that are
Physicians indeed, strive to maintain the reputation of their Art, and not by
a base insinuating carriage, or Mountibank-like tricks, to get a note and
repute, vilify their own worth, or disgrace so noble a faculty.

But to draw to an end, when you shall for your health repair to the Baths, be
cautelous, and suffer not your self to be taken up by such as will press upon
you; but rest your self at your Inn, and be well advised by a Physician that
knows the nature and use of the Baths, and can well judge of your infirmities
and state of body, what Bath shall be fitting for your use, and then up your
lodging accordingly: which course if it were observed, and the Physician
carefully and learnedly perform his part, I am persuaded that many mo then now
do, would, for their infirmities, find remedy at the Baths, to the great
honor of the place, and that scarcely any would depart thence, but much eased
and bettered in their state of body.

Thus much I thought fitting to advise and publish, concerning the nature and
use of our Baths, and the rather, that such as preposterously use them, as the
greater part, I suppose, do, that resort unto them, may not erroniously
detract from the admirable virtues of them: for unto us it does yearly
appear, by the miraculous effects they work, of what excellent efficacy they
are, if they be rightly and iudiciously used. And seeing that in the true use
of them, there are many things to be considered; I do therefore again advise
all such as are respective of their health, that they enterprise not the use of
them, without the counsel and direction of some honest and learned Physician
resident at the Baths: which if they do, the incommodum may be maius commodo.
And so I conclude this Treatise.

AN ADVERTISEMENT OF THE GREAT UTILITY THAT COMES to man's body, by the
taking of Physic in the Spring, inferred upon the ensuing Question.
The Spring being the most reviving, flourishing, and temperate season of the
year; whence is it, that sicknesses are more frequent in the same, and people
sooner dye therein, then in any other season?

THere may be two reasons yielded for the same: the one taken from the Winter
preceding, which, by reason of its moisture, fills the body with crude and
excrementall humors, and by its coldness, thickning, and compacting the same,
quieteth them from fluxion. But the heat of the Spring approaching, and
working on those humors, rarifieth and dissolueth them; which thereupon
fluctuating and putrefying in the body, are the cause of sickness, unless
they are expulsed by the force of nature, or timely help of Physic.

The other reason may be taken from the inconstancy of the Spring it self,
which sometimes is cold, sometimes hot, sometimes moist, and sometimes dry:
which sudden alterations cannot but produce feuerous distemperatures, and other
infirmities, according to the disposition of the matter congested in the body,
the Winter preceding. From which it may be concluded, that the sicknesses and
death of people, which happen more frequently in the Spring, then in any other
season of the year, are not so much to be attributed to the Spring, as to the
Winter which has filled the body with superfluities, and prepared it for
sickness.

Wherefore whosoever will be so provident, The utility of Physic taken in
the Spring.
as by the timely help of Physic, to free his body, as his state and
constitution shall require, of the superfluities congested in it by means of
the winter going before, he shall be sure to be far more lively, healthy, and
free from sickness in the Spring, then in any other season of the year, so as
he err not overmuch in other things. And this purging of the body, and
purifying of the blood in the Spring, will not only preserve from sicknesses
that commonly reign in the Spring; but also be a means to keep the body in a
perfect integrity the whole year after: and therefore I commend the taking of
Physic in the Spring to all generous people, to them that lead a geniall
sedentary kind of life, especially to such as are subject to obstructions or
any yearly disease.

You may here demand of me, What time of the Springbest for Physic.
what time of the Spring is fittest for Physic by way of prevention? I
answer, that for them that are wont to be affected with sickness in the
Spring, and whose humors are too choleric and thin, and consequently
subject to fluxion, it is best to take Physic at the very beginning thereof;
but for others, about the middle, or after, especially if the precedent time
shall be cold, and not Spring-like.

You may also here demand of me, Whether it be so requisite to take Physic in
the Fall, as in the Spring.
whether it be not so necessary to take Physic in the Autumn, which we
commonly call the Fall, as in the Spring? Whereunto, in regard of a generality,
I must answer no: because the Summer prepares not the body for sickness,
filling it with superfluities, as does the Winter; yet for some bodies it is,
as for them that naturally abound with crude and phlegmatic humors, that are
subject to obstructions, to cold winterly diseases, or any melancholicke
affects, as necessary to take Physic by way of prevention in the Fall, as in
the Spring; and that for avoiding the superfluities before the Winter, for
opening the obstructions, and freeing the body of superfluous melancholy, which
then, by reason of the season increases. And the fittest time for the doing
thereof, for such as are subject to melancholy and Autumnall diseases, is soon
after the beginning of the Fall; but for others, toward the middle thereof.

Advertisement to beware of Empericks.
But here I must advertise you that you expose not your body to the unlearned
Empericke, that can neither find out the peccant humors, nor parts affected;
but to such as are learned in that Art, that can well judge of your state of
body, and accordingly prescribe you remedies, as your constitution and affected
parts shall require. Many men think, yea some of a generous note, wherein they
bewray their carelessness, if not their stupiditie to, that whilst they are in
health, they may for prevention, take Physic from any one, it matters not
from whom it be, nor what Physic it be, so it work with them. I must tell
you that many overthrow their bodies hereby, and that there is no less art and
judgment required for preserving the body in health, then for curing of it
being sick, if they did but know how the four humors are or ought to be
proportioned in their bodies, for enjoying according to their constitutions a
sound and healthy state, they would, I am persuaded, be more cautelous then to
commit themselves into the hands of the unlearned, who, by their inconsiderate
courses, take humors from them at an adventure, so well those which are not
offensive, as those which are, to the utter subversion of the Oeconomie of the
body: whereof though, perhaps, in regard of their strengths, they are not by
and by sensible, which is that which only cloaketh the errors of Empericks,
and as a veil, masketh many men's eyes and understanding herein: yet they will,
as I have in diverse observed to their peril, by little and little incur a
lapsed state of body.

It is strange to see the ignorance of most people, how backward they are to
give to the learned Professors of Physic their due, ready to lay scandals
upon them; but forward to magnify Empericks, their Physic, their honesty,
their care, willing to excuse and pass over their gross slips and
absurdities. O mira hominum stupiditas! But proceeds this altogether out of
ignorance? I suppose no: for doubtless many seek unto them, and magnify
their Physic, because it is cheap: but such are fools and Gulles indeed,
for they wrong, and even poison their bodies with gross and ill-qualified
Physic, to save their purse.

But to answer the reasons, or rather the words which they produce and allege
in the favor and behalf of Empericks: To what purpose is the working of that
Physic which respects not the peccant humors nor parts affected, but to the
overthrow of the body? What is a supposed honesty in a Physicion without
learning, but a snare wherein the ignorant do voluntarily entrap themselves? I
say supposed: for I cannot think that man to be honest, that vsurps a calling,
which with a good conscience he is not able to discharge. Or to what purpose is
the care that Empericks take about their preposterous and ill-composed
medicines, but to the utter ruin of the patients body, as it too too vnluckely
happened of late to a Gentleman of good worth and note, who taking Physic by
way of prevention of a Pil-boasting Surgeon, in a short space, by his
ill-qualified and preposterous Physic, incurred an incureable and mortal
lapse of his stomach and Liver, being in his constant age and perfect strength
of body. Vain therefore and very absurd is that conceit, which many have in
favor of Empericks, viz. If they do no good, they will do no harm. Admit
that sometimes by their triuiall petty medicines, they do no harm; yet
nevertheless for that, I must tell you that they do much harm: for the sick
body relying upon their skill, and they being not able to direct and execute
such courses as shall be fitting and effectual to impugn the disease, while
there is time fitting for the same, the sickness gets the masterie, and then
(perhaps) when the strengths are too much weakened, and the disease become
incureable, they seek help of the learned Physician. So basely verily are
most of our people affected to their health, that until some practical
Minister, Parish Clarke, Apothecary, Surgeon or the like, have done their
utmost hurt, they seek not to the Physician.

And here to vindicate our Art from calumny, I cannot but tax the most sort
of people, that being affected with any great or difficult disease, which by
reason of the nature thereof, or contumacy of the peccant humors, will have
such progress, as that it cannot in a short time, by the medicines and best
endeavors of the learned Physician, how forceable so ever, be euicted, will
reject their Physician, and betake themselves, which is an absurdity, super
omnem absurditatem, to some ignorant sottish Empericke, and every good wives
medicine, to their great hurt, and oftentimes utter overthrow. But if it
happen, that they recover thereupon, they lay an imputation upon the Physician,
and grace their Emperick with the cure; whereas in very deed the matter of
their disease was wholly, or at least the greatest part thereof, eradicated by
such fit and powerful remedies, as the learned Physician had formerly
administered unto them: whereupon the residue of the cure was effected by the
force of Nature, not by the weak endeavors of the Empericke, or triuiall
medicines of any other whatsoever.

I have of purpose enlarged this Advertisement, and do leave it for a
memorial and Caveat to all posterity, especially to the Gentlemen of this our
age, who, for the most part of them, very greatly wrong their judgments and
understanding, in taking Physic of the unlearned; and wherein they do not
only wrong themselves, but also give occasion of hurt unto others: for the
meaner sort of people following their example, do the like, whereby it comes to
pass, that in all likelihood, more untimely perish (which I believe to be
true in the Western parts of this kingdom) under the hands of Empericks, then
die otherwise* Such as will not take notice hereof, in Empericorum manus
incidant. And if any Asinus Cumanus, or Terra filius shall object, that diverse
recover under the hands of Empericks; I answer in a word, that the recovery is
not to be attributed to their Physic, but to the strengths of Nature, that
bears up, both against the disease, and their preposterous courses.

A CENSVRE CONCERNING THE WATER OF SAINT Vincents Rocks near Bristoll, Vrbs
pulchra, and Emporium celebre.
which begins to grow in great request and use against the Stone.
The substance and temperature of the Water.
THis water of Saint Vincents Rock, is of a very pure, clear cristalline
substance, answering to those cristalline Diamonds and transparent stones that
are plentifully found in those Clifts. It is no less commendable for smell and
taste, then delectable for color and substance, and for its temperature,
excels any other of this kingdom, being almost of a mean between heat and
cold: I say almost, because it is a little more inclined to cold, then to hear,
which makes it the more effectual for allaying the burning heat of the
bowels, and yet by reason of its good temperature, not quickly offensive to the
stomach, if it be not lapsed by cold.

But before I deliver my censure and opinion concerning the nature and use of
this water, From what Minerals it receives its medicinable faculties.
it is fitting that I declare unto you the matter from whence it receives its
medicinable faculties, and that is (for I have twice made probation thereof)
from Sulphur and Niter, and from both but in a small measure: for the water at
its issuing forth, carries with it but an obscure heat, being scarcely
lukewarm, and the reason thereof is, because the heat of the water, and
strength of the sulphurous vapors are qualified and abated in the passages
through the earth; or else it is, because this water issues but from a small
vein of sulphur. And the note that it has but little Niter in it, besides the
probation thereof, is, because it can hardly, or not at all in the taste be
discerned, but by a curious and skillful palate for the purpose, I suppose
that this water partakes of other good minerals: but I leave that for a farther
search, or to such, as shall hereafter live more conveniently for that purpose,
then I do. But whatsoever minerals shall lie hid in the passages of this
water, it is sufficient, that it partakes of two so good as Sulphur and Niter,
and that in such a mixture, as it makes it to be of an excellent temper, and
medicinable faculty in potable uses for diverse cases, as shall be hereafter
showed. It were to be wished, that the water issued forth in a more convenient
place, as well for access unto it, as for conseruing the heat thereof.

This water is frequented for no other use, but for the drinking of it against
the Stone: it has also other excellent faculties; but I suppose (such is the
vanity of our time) that the fame thereof will not long hold, but will in a short
time have an end, as some other waters of good force and efficacy against
sundry infirmities, in diverse places of this kingdom have had, and that by
reason of the absurdand preposterous use of it: for upon notice and experience
that this water has done some good against the Stone, people of all sorts
repair unto it, so well such as have not the stone, as those that have, or
stand in fear thereof, and abundantly glut and fill themselves therewith, till
they vomit and strout again, scarcely one of fifty, I dare say, having the
opinion of a judicious Physician for the taking of the same, or preparing their
bodies for it as is meet; which cannot but bring a disgrace to the water: for
admit that a few chance to receive benefit thereby, some will not, The hurst
that are occasioned by the unadvised use of the Water.
but many much hurt. Neither can the water be good for all bodies that are
troubled with the Stone, or subject thereunto: and therefore I would have you
to know, that the ill and preposterous use thereof will weaken the stomach,
subvert the liver, annoy the head and breast, occasion Cramps, pain in the
joints, breed crudities, rheumes, Coughs, Cachexies, the Dropsy it self and
Consumption.

But I will proceed to show you the faculties and true use of the water. It
notably cools the inflammations of all the inward parts, and yet, as I have
said, not quickly offending the stomach, as other Waters do; and it is
withal of a gentle mundifying faculty. The Virtue and Faculties of the Water.
It is therefore very effectual against the burning heat of the stomach,
inflammations of the liver and reins, and adustion of the humors, being taken
with fine Sugar in this proportion, as half an ounce of Sugar or thereabout to
a pint of the Water. In such as have had hot livers, red pimpling faces, and
adusted humors, I have caused a Tincture of Roses and Violets to be taken
therewith, and that with singular success. It may be given with other good
convenient Adjuncts, which will not only make it the more grateful to the
stomach, but also more effectual for the cases aforesaid, which I leave to
the Physician to find out, and direct as shall be best fitting for his
patients body. In inflammation and siccity of the intestines, it is good to
give with this Water, syrrup or mel Viol. Sol. In inflammation of the kidneys
with obstruction also in them, I have given it to such as had withal hot
livers, with Chrystallo minerali, with wished effect: for the distemper of the
kidneys was not only quickly allayed therewith, but also abundance of sand and
other drossie matter stopping in them purged forth.

That this Water is good against the Stone, Strangury, and purulent ulcers of
the kidneys and bladder, it is evident, by reason of its mundifying and
clensing faculty, to be taken with Sugar as aforesaid, or with some good and
effectual Adiunct, for the speedier carriage of it to the affected places,
etc. which by reason of the diversity of bodies, I cannot here describe, but
must leave you therein to the advice and counsel, not of a vulgar, but of some
learned judicious expert Physician, and that with this Caution, that if you be
not sure of the accurate judgment and skill of your Physician, that you take
the Water only with Sugar, without any other mixture with it. This Water is
also good in the vlcerations of the intestines, with this Prouiso, that it be
taken with some convenient Adiunct, as Mel Rosat. etc. to occasion the passage
thereof through the belly, diuerting it from the veins.

As concerning the use of this Water, The use of the Water for inward
inflammations.
and first, for inward inflammations: The time of the year best for taking
thereof by way of cure or prevention, is in the months of April, May, and
June, and that in the morning fasting, the body being first prepared thereunto,
that is, gently purged, according as the constitution thereof shall require;
but in case of necessity, it may be taken at any other time, respect being had
of the season, age, and present state of the body. As for the quantity that is
to be taken every morning, and how long to be continued, in that, because of
the diversity of bodies, I must leave you to the discretion and judgment of
your Physician.

As for the taking of this Water against the Stone, Ten Rules to be observed
in taking of the Water against the Stone.
ten Rules are to be observed in the use thereof. The first is the
preparation of the body, that is, that it be exquisitely purged, before you
attempt the use thereof: for the passages being cleared, and the ill matter
diuerted by Stool, the Water will the more freely, and with greater force
penetrate unto the reins. The second is, that it be taken in the morning
fasting, the excrements of the belly being first deposed, and that at diverse
draughts, allowing betwixt every draught or two draughts taken the one after
the other, the space of a quarter of an hour, or some what more, till you have
taken the whole portion of Water that is intended to be taken each morning,
walking and stirring gently your body between every taking: for that will
cause the Water to be the sooner distributed through your body, refraining to
go abroad in the air between and upon the takings thereof, if the weather
shall be any thing cold; for cold will hinder the distribution of the Water.

The third is, the quantity of the Water that is to be taken every morning,
which must be directed by your Physician that knows your age and state of
body. The fourth is, how many mornings together it is to be taken, as eight or
ten more or less, according to the ability of the stomach, strenghts and
state of body, wherein you must likewise be directed by your Physician.

The fifth thing to be observed in the taking of the Water, is, to take it so
near as you can, in the same temper of heat as it issues forth, or else so
hot as you shall be well able to drink it: and herein every one may gratify
his own stomach. But seeing that the place is unfit for the taking of it, and
that the Water seems, by reason of the rawishnesse of the place, to be colder
at its issuing forth then it is otherwise: for being taken into a stone Judge,
it warmeth the same; I advise that the water be taken into stone Iugges, or
other convenient bottles, and the Iugges or bottles to be immediately stopped,
to keep in the vapors, and so the water to be taken while it reserueth its
heat; but if the water shall wax cold before you take it, you may heat the
Judge in a kettle of hot water, till it shall be so hot as you shall like to
take it, keeping the Judge close stopped all the while: and so you may do such
mornings when you cannot have the water, it being all ouercouered by that part
of the Seuerne that flows to the City. If you demand of me, whether the
water loses any thing of its virtue, being so kept? I must answer you, that it
is likely that it loses somewhat, of its sulphurous, but not any thing of its
introus quality, and therefore it may be well referued, and used in manner as
aforesaid.

The sixth is the time of the year that is best for the taking of this Water,
and that is, in a season that is not cold, or rainy; but hot, or inclining
thereunto, as from the beginning of May, to the middle of September; but after
that, in regard of the alterations of the air, and Winter approaching, this
Water is not good to be taken, because it will weaken the stomach and liver,
annoy the breast, breed crudities, Coughs, etc, as I have already showed.

The seventh is the diet, that is to be observed all the time of the taking of
the Water, which is, that it must be but slender, and that of meats of good
juice, and easy digestion, the dinner not to be taken, till the greater part
of the Water be avoided, and the supper must be always less then the dinner,
that the Stomach may be the next morning empty for receiving of the Water
again.

The eight is, that the body be purged immediately after the taking of the
Water, that is, when an end is made of taking it, for avoiding some relics
thereof, which perhaps may abide in the body after the use of it, which the
Physician must be careful to do with a fit medicine. Afterward a moderation
in diet and all other things is to be observed.

The ninth is, that it be not given to children that are subject to the Stone,
under twelve years of age, unless they shall be naturally of a very hot
constitution, and that, to them in quantities proportionable to their age.
Neither is it to be admitted to them, that are entered within the limits of old
age, because it will abbreuiate their life, calorem innatum extinguendo.

The tenth and last thing to be considered in the use of this Water, For what
bodies the use of the Water not convenient, but hurtful.
is, that it be not given to such, as by reason of the smalnesse and
straightness of their veins, cannot extreate and pass it away by urine,
though the infirmities of the Stone, Stranguries, etc. may otherwise require
the use thereof. Neither is to be given to such, as have cold stomachs, weak
livers, feeble brains, and subject unto Rheumes; in a word, not to
phlegmatic, not to any that abound with crudities, or have a cold and moist
habit of body: for in all such it will soon infringe the natural heat, breed
Rheumes, annoy the breast, occasion Cramps, and diverse other infirmities, as I
have before showed.

The same observations must be kept in taking of this Water against the
Strangurie and vlcerations of the bladder and kidneys, as is directed in taking
thereof against the Stone. In which affects it is good to give therewith some
lubrifying, cleansing extract, or the like. And here note, that if the Water
in all the aforesaid cases be given with a fit and convenient Adiunct, it will
not only be the more effectual, and sooner conveyed to the affected parts,
but less quantities also may serve to be taken; and then the stomach will not
be so ouerprest and charged therewith, as it is in the common manner of taking
it. But if it be at any time fit to ouercharge and press the stomach
therewith, it is in cases of the Strangurie and purulent-vlcers of the bladder
and kidneys.

I may not omit to give you notice, that diverse symptoms or perilous
accidences may happen oftentimes in the use of this Water, which, because they
cannot be well rectified or prevented without the presence of a Physician, I
here omit to nominate or treat of, and in stead thereof, as also for diverse
reasons before nominated, do advise you not to adventure the drinking thereof,
without the advice and presence of a judicious Physician; which if you do, you
may happily in stead of the good you expect thereby, receive much hurt. As for
outward uses, this Water may sometime assuage the Itch, mundifie and palliat
old Sores; but no matter of moment is to be expected from it this way. And thus
much concerning the nature and use of this Water, whose Virtues will be better
known, if people make a right and good use thereof.

FINIS.

