Concerning the Excommunication of the Venetians A DISCOVRSE Against CAESAR
BARONIVS Cardinal of the Church of ROME.

In which the true nature and use of Excommunication is briefly and clearly
demonstrated, both by Testimonies of Holy Scripture, and from the old Records
of Christ's Church.

Written in Latin by NICOLAS VIGNIER, and translated into English after the
Copy printed at Samur 1606.

Whereunto is added the Bull of Pope PAVLVS the Fifth, against the Duke, Senate
and Commonwealth of VENICE: With the protestation of the said Duke and Senate.

As also an Apology of Friar PAVL of the Order of Serus in VENICE.

LONDON Printed by M. B. for C. B. and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at
the sign of the White-swan. 1607.

CAESAR BARONIVS his advice unto Pope PAVL the Fifth, to excommunicate the
Venetians.
Peter's office (Holy Father) is twofold; To Feed and to Kill: for the Lord said
unto him Ioh. 21.15.
Feed my sheep: and he heard a voice from heaven, Act. 10.13.
Kill and Eat. To Feed the sheep, is with care to watch over the faithful
and obedient Christians, resembling Sheep and Lambs in all humility and
religious piety. When he has to do, not with Sheep and Lambs, but Lions and
like beasts of fierce natures, refractary, stubborn, and disobedient, then
Peter has charge to Kill: that is, to resist, fight against and root out such:
and that such killing should ever be in Charity, he is willed to Eat that which
he had slain in effect, through that Love which he bears to them in Christ,
to lay them up within him, even in his own bowels, that In Christ we may be
Galat. 3.28.
one, which is the Apostles own saying: Philip. 1.8.
I long after you in the bowels of Christ. And so, this killing is not Cruelty
but Piety and sincere Charity: When, so by killing, he saves that which by
being suffered so to live, had otherwise perished for ever. And therefore, as
Pope Nicolas the first shows, Excommunication is not a poison to kill, but
rather a Potion
Receipt to recure. And we see, that a Father thinks well of those bands
wherewith the Physician has bound his frantic son, because he hops it
will do him good. Go on then, on Gods name, most holy Father in your course
begun, and suppose not that any man can justly tax your too great hastines in
these proceedings. That which S. Paul has written to his brethren 2. Cor. 10 6.
the Corinthians, that the Church is ready to revenge all disobedience, is a
Command, that the Church should be forward to do it. Your Holiness happily
has been too backward, as yet not proceeding farther then to write. For my
own part, I profess I am glad and rejoice in my spirit, nay I will say with
the Apostle, I do 2. Cor. 7.4.
Ouer-abound in joy, seeing I see now, in my The man is about 68. years old.
Gregory 7. Hilachrand. Alexander 3. Vide Plat.
decrepit age, to sit on Peter's seat, Gregory or Alexander (the first two
lively roots from whence the dead Church-liberty began to revive) both called
from Siena, (the place from whence Being named before his Papacy Camillo
Borghese of Siena.
your Holiness is extract) to the Chair of Peter. Of which two, the one gat
the better of the Emperor Henry the 4.
Henry, a most wilful and perverse man, and the other by his incredible
strange constancy utterly vanquished Frederick Barboross;a.
Frederick. Your Holiness has the like cause now in hand. In your hands (to
borow the Esaias 3.6.
Prophets words) these ruins lie to reedifie the Liberty of the Church fallen
down, dejected, and laid low on the Earth. Advance, with victory that attends
you. For God is with us, Matthew. 16.18.
The gates of hell (they be Christ's words) shall not prevail against you. You
are placed in the Church Peter's successor, and have the promise, made to him.
Let corn be given them out of the rock, and as it is in the Prophecy of
Jeremy, I have made thee a Ier. 1.28.
pillar of iron and a wall of brass. Remember, you are placed as Esaias 8
a rock in the Church, on which all that stumble shall be dashed in pieces.
But you shall continue without hurt, joined close and united unto Christ, who
shall fight for you and overcome.

THE ANSWER OF NICOLAS VIGNIER unto Caesar Baronius.
Nicolaus de Clamengis libro de ruina and reparatione ecclae.
IT is an ancient speech used by one, who was not unacquainted with the dealings
of Rome; That were a Painter desirous to draw the picture of Pride, his best
course were to represent a Cardinal. If a modest man, and inwardly familiar
with some Popes themselves, had just cause thus to write two hundred years
since, how much more justly does it suit these times, in which they want,
neither high-swelling words, nor detestable impieties, to effect and bring
about their wicked designs? Very lately there flew abroad into the world, a
certain writing from Cardinal Baronius, concerning the excommunicating the
State of Venice, directed unto Pope Paul the fifth. In which the truth is so
clearly euidenced, that though a man would deny the Sun to shine at noone,
yet could he not at all deny it. So lively and in such a plain sort does the
man paint out himself and his Colleagues, that in them you would swear you
saw Pride herself. What leaves he undone or unattempted, to set up his
Iuppiter Capitoline, an Idol to be adorned in the place of Christ? And what, I
pray you, be his means? Surely the same and no other whereby that Angel of
darkness deceives the simple, counterfeiting himself an Angel of light. For
so crafty is that blood-sucker Satan, that he never appears in his native
shape, but puts on the person of another. So he assaied and deceived Saul,
1. Sam. 28.14.
in apparition of grave and holy Samuel. So seduced he Abab, by the mouth of
his Prophets. 1. Reg. 22.22.
So he drowned many of the Jews in the Sea, taking upon him to lead them in
the likeness of Moses. So in like sort at this day he exciteth and eggeth
forward Paul the fifth, chief Bishop on earth, Vicar of Christ, Successor of
Peter, Prince of Prelates, King of Kings, Lord of Lords, Father of Fathers,
head of the Church, the essential form of Justice, the Spouse of Christ, the
Christ of God, as they instile him, to commit murders, wage wars, become an
Incendiarie, be the subuertor and ruiner of the state of Venice, the most noble
and ancient Commonwealth of the world, and that in the person of a reverend
old man clad in scarlet robes, a Cardinal of mark, famous for learning,
pretending nothing but alone the word of God.

Peter's office (as you say Holy Father) is twofold, to Feed, and to Kill:
Divinity not drempt of by our Predecessors. Peter's office is to Feed, and to
Kill. By what right? by what authority? Certes Christ did constitute his
Apostles, Pastors, to feed that Church which himself had acquired by his
blood, which also is the duty of all and every one which have any charge in
the church, whereunto Peter himself gives witness, when he says, 1. Pet.
5.1.2.3.
The Elders which are among you I beseech, which am also an Elder etc. Feed the
flock of God which depends upon you, caring for it, not by constraint, but
willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; not as though you were
Lords over the heritage of God, but that you may be ensamples unto the flock:
and when the chief shepherd shall appear, (not that Arch Flamn of Rome, but
Christ) you shall receive an incorruptible crown of glory. But as for that
office of Killing, not any the least mention in the book of God, unless it
may be in these places, where such Pastors be deciphered, as in conditions
resemble your scarlet College so well, that milk cannot be more like to milk
than you to them. Concerning whom we read that God of old spoke in this sort
unto Ezechiel: Ezech 34.2.3.
Thus says the Lord God unto the shepherds, Woe unto the shepherds of Israel
that feed themselves. Should not the shepherds feed the flocks? You eat the
milk and cloth yourselues with the fat, you kill the best, but feed not my
flock. The weak have you not strengthened, the sick have you not healed,
neither have you bound up the broken, nor brought that again which was driven
away, neither have you sought that which was lost, but with cruelty and with
rigor have you ruled them. And they were scattered without a shepherd etc.
Therefore o shepherds hear the word of Iehoua. Thus says the Lord God,
Behold I am against the shepherds, and will require my sheep at their hands;
and cause them to cease from feeding the flock, that these shepherds may no
longer feed themselves: for I will deliver my sheep from their mouths and
they shall no more devour them. Which Prophecy you see is fulfilled in your
selves, that have lost England, Sweland Denmark; Norway and the greater part
of Germany delivered from your devouring mouths, and you can no more obtrude
your merchandise upon them, your Lambs of wax, Agnos Dei.
your hallowed beads, your Bulls, your Iubiles. But come we to the grounds
whereon this paradox is built, and to those pillars that bear it up. B
The Lord said unto him, Feed my sheep; and he heard a voice from Heaven, Kill
and Eat. I marvel you deduce not your office of killing, out of the first word,
Lib. 1. de Romans Pontifice c. 15.
Feed, seeing Bellarmine not the least among these scarlet Worthies has found
your Popes Regal authority therein. For Homer (says the man) in his second
Ilias (from whom Christ no doubt did borrow this phrase) calls Agamemnon once
and again Pastor of the people, (...).
who (it is certain) slew and sent many packing away to Pluto, and therefore
shared it should seem this office of killing with you. But pass we from
these bables, and come unto the oracles more renowned than the Delphian.

Peter heard a voice from heaven, Kill and eat. What if he did? B Matthew. 26 52.
John. 18.13.
He heard also from * Christ's own mouth, Put up thy sword into thy sheath; for
he that strikes with the sword shall perish with the sword. Whether voice of
the two, did most amate Peter? that which bid him, or that which did forbid him
to kill? Either was this his voice uttered by him whom it is high impiety to
disobey, whom all religion tieth to yield obedience unto, who cannot lie, nor
cannot deceive. And Peter was obedient unto both. He did not cast away the
keys, which Christ had committed to him jointly with the other * Apostles,
Math. 16.19.
and take him unto his sword, as * one of the Popes of Rome is reported to have
cast Peter's keys into the Tiber, and laid hold, Pope Iulv the second that
Butifeu of Italy.
as he called it, upon Paul's swords; but subjected himself unto Neroes sword;
and as well by example taught others so to do, as by this his express precept:
1. Peter 2.1^.
Submit your selves unto all manner ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether
it be unto the King, as unto the superioror, unto governors, as unto them that
are sent of him for the punishment of evil doers and for the praise of them
that do well. Neither having received that message Kill and eat, did he
withdraw himself from the society of the Gentiles, which was the scope and end
both of this voice and heavenly vision. For being ignorant as then, that the
ceremonies of Moses law were to be abolished, and the Gentiles to be aggregated
into the people of God, without receiving the seal of circumcision, or
observing of other legal rites, Christ by this vision would teach him the
truth: for that sheet and vessel which Peter beheld, is a resemblance of the
Church of Christ, which is said to be let down from heaven, because it is on
Gods providence more strongly suspended than if it were fastened unto Jupiters
golden chain, whereof Homer speaks. There be within the continent of the
Church, living creatures of every kind under heaven: foure-footed, flying,
creeping things, clean and unclean (that is to say, which as yet Peter did
not know) Jews and Gentile. That is, the mystery which in former times was not
disclosed unto men, but now is made manifest to his Apostles and Prophets in
the Spirit: that the Gentiles are to be made one body coheires and copartners
of the promise in Christ by the Gospel, as Paul speaks Ephesians. 3. Which vision
because of some obscurity in it, is farther illustrated in course of Scripture:
Kill, says he, and Eat, without difference, clean and unclean beasts. Leuit.
11. per totum.
For howsoever it was hitherto by the law forbidden, it is now permitted by
grace in Christ: which to be the intendment and scope of that vision, Peter
himself does contest in these words of his unto Cornelius: You know it is
unlawful for a man that is a Jew to company or converse with one of another
nation. Act. 10.
But God has showed me, that I must not call any man defiled or impure. And
this is the general exposition of the Fathers, agreeing thereupon with one
consent, out of whose Commentings and large enarrations Oecumenius collected
those his summary notes which he has left upon the Acts of the Apostles. His
words be these: Oecumenius in Act. Aposto^^rum.
The vessel which he saw designeth the world made of gross substance. The
beasts of diverse kinds are types of the different degrees of man. And to speak
more plainly. The sheet is the Church. The living creatures in it be the
Gentiles. Peter saw the Church tied and knit unto the four Evangelists, and
all nations contained therein. It was said unto him, Kill and Eat, because it
was necessary that even they should come unto the Church.

What is here, Baronius, that concerns that Office of killing? By this
voice, and this vision Peter is commanded to go unto the Gentiles and feed them
with the wholesome and lively food of the Gospel. This is with you to kill and
slay. And happily for this cause you take that good course, not to preach the
Gospel, lest thereby you might become murderers, or rather indeed, lest the
people hating the poison of your traditions do hunger after the bread of life.
But this is your manner to interpret Scriptures, upon which you stand so much,
which you learned of the great professor of your school and Doctor of the
chair, he I mean who in the desert, detorted and wrested (as you are wont to
do) the Scriptures, Matthew. 4.
in his disputation with our Savior. Such one was Boniface the 8. (of whom the
saying goes, He entered as a fox, De Mayor. and obedien. Vnam sanctam.
reigned as a lion, and died as a dog) who would prove that the Pope had right
to both the swords Spiritual and Temporal, out of the Evangelical writings
forsooth. Because when the Apostles said, Here are two swords, the Lord did not
answer his Apostles, (speaking in the Church (Here) it is too much, but it is
enough. Certainly, whosoever shall deny that the temporal sword is in the
power of Peter, he regards but little Gods word, which says: Put up thy
sword into thy sheath. Genesis 1.16. De Maiorit. and Obed. C. solitae.
And Innocent the 3. by a place of Genesis does as soundly prove that the
Imperial majesty is in subordination to the Pontifical. You should (says
he) have considered that God made two great lights in the firmament of Heaven,
the greater light to rule the day, the smaller light to govern the night, both
great, but one greater than the other. In the firmament of heaven, that is, the
universal Church, God made two great lights, that is, appointed two estates
royal, the Pontifical authority and Regal power, but that is the greater of
the twain which is appointed over the day, that is, over spiriall things, that
the less which has jurisdiction in carnal: that we may know there is as
great difference between Kings and Popes as there is betwixt the Sun and
Moon. Distinct. 22. sacrosancta.
In like sort Anacletus, if * Gratian say true, proved the Primacie of Saint
Peter out of that place where he is called Cephas, that is, an Head and
Beginning, which Etymology even * Bellarmine applaudeth, Lib. 1. de Roma.
Pontif. c. 17.
who affirms that Cephas is an head in Greek, (...).
whereas Cephas is not a Greek but a Syriak word, which as himself auerreth,
signifies a Rock. And the same Bellarmine that Captain Jesuit, out of the
self same place which you produce, Kill and Eat, concludes that Peter is Head
of the Church, drawing his argument, not as you do from the word Kill, but from
the Commandment Eat. For says he, It is the heads duty to eat, Bella. lib.
1. de Romans Pontific. c. 22. Barom. Tom. 1. Annal. Eccles.
and so by eating to transmit the meat into the stomach, and so to incorporate
it to it self. And your * self elsewhere do bring this proof to make the use
of shrining the relics of Saints within the Altars, Apostolical, because in
the sixth chapter of the Revelation, the souls of such as were slain for the
Gospel, are said to cry from under the Altar. But who is not acquainted with
such Iuglers tricks? what man will take their counterfeit glass for true
pearl? Remember Baronius, that I may return upon your self an allegory, that
the Chamelion a beast, which (as they say) lives by the air is numbered with
such * as be unclean; Leuit. 11. Allusion to the speech that Emperor. Fumum
habet qui fumum vendidit. B
and that vain man, blown up with wind, who sells nothing but smoke is
semblably unclean in the eyes of God. But to proceed: To feed the sheep is
with care to watch over the faithful etc. And is it true indeed, Baronius, is
the office of feeding to be confined only to the faithful and obedient
Christians, and is this your will to have all refractarie and stubborn ones led
into the slaughter, whom happily you instile Lions, for that you fear the Lion
the arms of Venice? Esaias 11.6.
But Esaias prophesied otherwise of Christ's Kingdom. The Wolf shall dwell with
the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie with the Kid; and the Calfe, and the Lion,
and the fat beast together, and a little child shall lead them. The Cow and the
Bear shall feed, their young ones shall lie together, and the Lion shall eat
straw like the Bullock, the sucking child shall play upon the hole of the
Aspe, and the weined child shall thrust his hand into the Cockatrice hole. Then
none shall hurt nor destroy in all the mountain of mine holiness.

We deny not but Pastors are to stand against the refractarie and the
disobedient, but with what arms? Spiritual not Carnal. For as Hierome once
said of heresy: Ieron. in prooe^. lib. 4. in Ieremiam.
Heresy is to be cut off with the sword of the Spirit; let us strike through
with the arrows of the Spirit, all sons and disciples of misled Heretics,
that is, with Testimonies of holy Scripture. The slaughter of Heretics is by
the word of God. So we say and judge of all other vices. For the Church has
no such warrant as to use the sword of the Civil Magistrate, or bring in
within her liberties politic punishments, the offices of the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Magistrate being, as Christ teaches Matt. 20. things of diverse
natures: You know, That kings of Nations rule over them, but with you it shall
not be so. And the reason is, for that the Church is the servant of Christ no
otherwise, then as Christ is the Savior of the faithful: But Christ to
procure the salvation of them, never used himself, nor permitted his Church to
use, the sword of the civil Magistrate. And this is that, if I mistake not,
which your self in prosecution of your allegories add, That such killing must
not be but with great charity etc. For all that we do or can conclude from
hence, is this and no more, that this killing of the stubborn and disobedient
is done by Excommunication, which is a spiritual and wholesome remedy. Which
to grant, we must first consider, lest we err in ambiguitie of words, What
excommunication is, 2. By whom it may be executed. 3. Upon whom to be
inflicted. 4. For what causes it is just. 5. From what communion they be
barred. 6. Which be the ends of Excommunication: that any man by these grounds
may determine what is to be judged of the Excommunication of the State of
Venice, of which you entreat.

Excommunication, one of the parts of Church discipline, the other being
brotherly Correction, is of two kinds; The Lesser and the Greater: The Less
is that whereby such as grievously offend against any point of faith, or
manners, or good established order, are excommunicate; not so that absolutely
they cease to be the members of Christ, but be only for a time restrained from
communion of the Sacraments, so long as, until either their Repentance, or
Faith, or Duty be judged sufficient, and public scandal be taken away. And
such the * Ancients called Restrained. Abstenti. Cyprian. in epistolis.
Excommunication the Greater, is an holy action of Priesthood, by which,
agreably to the rule of Christ, a brother become obstinate in his sins, is cut
off from the fellowship of the faithful, cast out of the Church, delivered to
Satan, that upon correction he may repent, and upon true repentance be again
received, which was under the law, a casting forth out from the Synagogue.

So by authority and warrant of Christ, to excommunicate is a power belonging
unto all, Math. 18.
and none but the True Church: to be executed by the whole Presbytery lawfully
elected, to be denounced in the open face of the assembly, with their either
tacit or express consent. This is proved by the words of Christ, If he will
not hear the Church, that is, the Presbytery and conuention of Elders, let him
be to thee as an Ethnicke and a Publicane. The Apostle is yet more clear in
this point 1. Cor. 5. When you are gathered together, and my spirit in the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ; let such a one be delivered unto Satan. In which
place he speaks unto the whole Church as again he does 2. Cor. 2. It is
sufficient that this man has been censured by many. And therefore he
entreats that with one consent they receive again him who had been
excommunicate. And this is the doctrine and * consent of all fathers, What,
This if he mean by the Presbytery, as he calls it. The Church practice and
doctrine of the fathers is to the contrary.
as in Cyprians epistles any man may read. Whereof the reason is very evident,
that matters of greatest consequence in the church are not to be proceeded in
without consent and approbation of the Either tacit or express as before.
whole Church, as the practice is in civil states and affairs. For that
wherein every one is interessed, (it was the saying of Pope Leo) must have the
general consent of all. And what of more consequence? wherein can the whole
body be more interessed, than in the cutting of one member from the body? The
conclusion therefore is: No man ought to be excommunicate, without the
general assent of the whole Church in which he lives. And that Austen was of
this mind, it is evident by this, that he thinks that man should not be
excommunicated, who has many abetters and bearers out in his offense, with
whom many do partake and are associate in sin, rejoicing in their follies,
insulting on the godly, despising the sword of Excommunication, lest it prove
the original of a Schism; and of this mind, says he, the Apostle was. His
words are: To this purpose the Apostle speaks: If any one be named: August.
Contra epistolam Parmen. lib. 3.
In that he says: If any one, it seems his meaning was that such a man might
safely be put under censure, and for his good, who is a sinner among such as be
none, that is, as be not infected with the taint of like enormity. And where he
says, be named he lets us thereby understand it is not enough that a man be
so, unless withal he be named to be so, that is, notoriously known and
diffamed, that all men may prove and give their consent to the sentence of
excommunication thrown forth against him. For thus the bond of peace may be
kept, correction be done upon him, he be stricken, not to kill him, be seared,
but to cure him. To this end he says of that man whom by such receipt he
would have to be cured: The Rebuke of many is sufficient for him. Because such
rebuke cannot be available, but where one is rebuked, who has not a
multitude, his fellows in sin: but if the infection be gone over many, the
godly can do nothing but sorrow and grieve.

Now for the persons liable to this censure, All, and Only they, who being in
the list of brethren, continue in sin with contumacy. Only brethren, because
that, Of forreiners God does judge, and not the Church, as the Apostle
speaks, 1. Cor. 5. and such as never had any co^miunion, cannot be cut off
from communion with the Church which they never had. Again, add the stubbornly
wilful, not others for them, or with them. Because every man must bear his
own burden. And Austen does in this point deservedly blame Auxilius a young
man, Aug. Epist. 75. If by his own judgment and allegation out of Austen for
peril of schism excommunication must not be inflicted on a multitude: if for
nothing else, yet in that regard the censuring of great ones, gods on earth
should not so easily have passed his lips. Azarias did not excommunicate
Vsziah, but told him his duty, as the minister of God. Neither did they compel
him to hasten out, but God did it; and had they done it, this was no
excommunication. 2. Paral. 26. Theodoret. lib. 5. Hist. Eccles. ca. 18. S.
Ambrose is the only example that can with probability be alleged. But there
is very much difference between his manner of proceeding and the Popes in his
consistory, and the Ministers with their elders. Read the story in Theodoret.
Hist. Eccles. ca. 17. ex interpr. Christophorsani.
and somewhat elderly Bishop, as he speaks, because that for the sole offense
of Classianus, he did excommunicate his whole family. And it is against All,
that No man of whatsoever state or condition, Ecclesiastical or Civil,
Superior or Inferior, may think himself exempted from that censure. The truth
hereof is certain by practice in Scripture, as for instance. Azarias the high
Priest cast forth king Ozias out of the Temple: by practice, in the prime age
of the Christian Church, when as Ambrose excommunicated Theodosius: an act
allowed of by all Churches, and so well liked by Theodosius himself, that he
professed to have met with but one Bishop in deed, Ambrose, at Millane.

The causes which procure it, are sins of Commission, done without amendment,
against either First or Second Table. That appears by Christ his words Mat.
18. where he mentions Ethnicks, Transgressors of the First; and then
Publicanes, delinquents against the Second table. To which there in the 12. of
Exodus, where there is charge given, that no Uncircumcised person, and in that,
an offender against the first Table, be admitted to the Passover: and
secondly, 1 Cor. 5.8.
no Jew who had Leven in his house, which leaven the Apostle does interpret, of
mal tiousnesse and unclean life. Where he says. Therefore let us keep the
feast, not in the leaven of malice and iniquity, but with the unleavened loves
of syncerity and truth.

The communion is twofold wherefrom the Excommunicate are excluded, Internal,
External. The Inward is that, by which every faithful man, in faith and
charity is first knit unto God, then to all the Saints and the whole body of
the Church, with the bond of the spirit, which is in the Creed called the
Communion of Saints, of which that place of John is meant, 1. Ioh. 1. That
which we haueseene, that which we have heard, do we preach unto you, that
you (the faithful) might have communion with us: and that our communion might
be with the Father, and with his son Christ Jesus. From this communion, it is
not the Excommunication of the Presbytery, but their own sins which
excludes offenders. For the Prophet, as the mouth of God says, Your sins
have divided me and you. Esaias 45.
But Excommunication does declare, and confirm by the Churches authority, that
the irrepentant sinner is excluded and cut off from this communion. The saying
of the School to that purpose is, The Church does not damnifie any man, but
points him out that is damnified. Even as, when in the Law, the Priest did
forbid the infected with the leprosy to enter within the Congregation. This
act of the Priest, did not bring the sore upon him, but only declared that he
was infected: and hence it is, the if the key go not right, as the saying is,
but hit upon such as be innocent, the sentence pronounced is void. External
communion is of two kinds, either in Church or Common wealth. This latter
concerns negotiating, trading and commerce in matters of civil course
belonging unto this present life. Excommunication does not actually deprive a
man from the benefit of this, but it remains lawful for any, in civil
affairs, to negotiate with him, to do him all duties and bounden offices,
such as the son should do the father, the wife her husband, the subjects
their magistrate: for even to Ethnickes and Pagans such natural services be
returnable. Ecclesiastical communion is that, wherein we communicate together
in those things which in the Church of God concern his service, as public
prayer, preaching of the Word, participation of the Sacraments. This last is
clearly and wholly forbidden the Excommunicare, both upon warrant of Christ his
precept, Matthew. 7.6.
Give not holy things unto dogs. Cast not pearls before swine: as also in
regard of their fruit and effects: lest happily they turn unto their
condemnation, because they receive unworthily, it being the nature of the
Sacrament to profit only the worthy receiver. Concerning the preaching of the
word, although the unfaithful and unbelievers by warrant of the Scripture
should have access thereto, He uses this word so often as being the practice
where he lived.
that so they may the sooner be reclamed by repentance; yet their case is
otherwise who by the Presbytery are given up to Satan. And although that in
former time, they were not wholly excluded, yet neither were they licenced but
respectively, as having need of rather correction than instruction, conscience
than science.

Concerning the end you allege very fitly Pope Nicolas saying; That
Excommunication, is not poison to destroy, but Physic to recure. Which is true
indeed and clean cuts the throat of your killing office: unless perdy with
you to kill and to heal are two words of one signification. For without all
question Excommunication and brotherly correction have both but one end; which
end is this, that A brother may be gained, if it be possible, the Church
edified, the glory of God thereby adua^ced. So says the apostle in express
words: 1 Cor. 5. First it is his purpose, to deliver up to Satan the
incestuous person for the mortifying of his flesh, that his spirit may be
saved. And secondly, the wicked man is rejected from Communion with the
faithful; Jest the Church might happily partake in his infection. His words be
these: 1. Cor. 5.8.
Cast you out therefore the old leaven that you may be a new lump. Know you not
that a little leaven leaueneth the whole mass? Hereout the third Gods glory,
will easily be advanced, for when mis believing Infidels shall behold that
wicked and notorious offenders be in no case tolerated in the Church, it
cannot be but they will greatly commend the founder thereof Jesus Christ our
Lord. These things premised, so pregnant that they stand without contradiction;
let us see their agreement and coherence with the practiced excommunication in
the Papacy, which will appear void and a mere nullity, Brutum fulmen rather
than a censure of the Church, or an holy and sacred action.

First, it is a right resting in the whole Church. But the Pope claims it
absolutely for his own peculiar, so far as he may absolve and excommunicate
at his pleasure, yea actually does both bind and loose, Francis. Vargas in R^sp
de iurisdict. Episcop.
in the most remote places from him. The power (says Franciscus Vargas)
rests only in his hands, to Excommunicate, Absolve, Dispense, Reserve cases,
Confer Indulgences, Benefices and such like, to make Laws, enact Statutes,
punish, reward, rule and moderate the Hier archie of the Church. All which
power, and if there be any other of like nature hereto, is thought to be
derived upon Inferior Bishops from the chief Bishop alone. And not only so,
but to rest in him as in the Original and sure head; from whom al other do
receive that whasoeuer which they have. As though Christ the springing Well of
life, or those Fountains from whence we are willed by Esaias to draw forth
salvation with rejoicing, Esaias 12.
were dried up, and no hope to attain eternal life, but by recoursing to the
Cesterns of Rome. Thus never did the ancient Councels decree, it was not their
intent that all power in the Church should be confined upon this proud
Tarquine. Read and observe but these Canons: The 6. of the Nicene Council: Let
ancient Customs be retained. Council. Tom. 1.
The Churches in Lybia, Egypt and Pentapolis, let them obey the Bishop of
Alexandria, seeing this is the usage in the Church of Rome. In like manner
throughout all other provinces, let the Metropolitanes of Antioch and Jerusalem
retain their rights and privileges without impeachment. What singular
privilege or prerogative has the Bishop of Rome bestowed on him here, beyond
the other his equal Patriarchs? The 13. Canon of the Council of Antioch.
Council. Tom. 1.
Let no Bishop dare to pass from Province to Province, and give orders in
Churches there, unless he be sent for by the Metrapolitane and the Bishops
that be with him. But if not being sent for, or called at all, he shall
inordinately and insolently presume to go and give Orders, make
Ecclesiastical constitutions, whereto he has no right, let there be a
Nullitie of all his acts, himself be put under censure for his insolency, and
punished for his unreasonable attempts as condemned by this synod for such his
presumption. What more can we say unto the Bish. of Rome, who violently
intrudes himself without being sent for into all causes in all Churches,
taking every occasion to intermeddle so insolently and impudently as he does?
Of the same argument be the 15.21. and 22. Canons, which expressly forbid all
Bishops to enter upon or meddle with ought in any Diocese beside their own.
What need we more? Can. 6.
In the Aphrican Council there is a Prohibition that the Bishop of the first
Sea be not called Prince of Priests or chief Priest, or by any such like title
as these, but only Bishop of the first Sea. And the 92. Canon of that Council
prouides that no appeals do stand good which are made unto places beyond the
Sea, (that is to the seat of Rome) and if any man shall appeal, he is to be
excluded from communion with any within the bounds of Africa. And hereof there
were letters written unto Caelestinus the then Bishop of Rome, wherein the
Africans entreat him, that he would forbear from thence forward to receive
into Communion with him, any man excommunicated by them: which should be
derogatorie to the authority of the Churches of Africa, and the Canons of the
Nicene Council. For, say these Fathers, very wisely and equally have they
provided, that matters be determined there, and not else, but there where first
they had beginning. That it was not to be doubted, but that the spirit of grace
would be in such sort present in every province, as to enable the Priest of
Christ wisely to see the truth, and constantly to follow it being seen,
especially seeing it was denied none, if he were aggrieued with the sentence of
his Ordinary to appeal from him to a provincial or to a general Council,
unless perhaps a man can imagine that God can give several men discerning
judgment, and deny it, or not give it unto many conuening together in a
Council. And so the first Nullitie in Excommunication Papal is, the
Incompetencie (as they term it) of the Judge, therefore Incompetent, because
he usurps on an others right, which the Scholemen themselves agnise as
sufficient, to annihilate the sentence of Excommunication: upon the 4. book of
Sentences, and 18. Distinct.

A second Nullity is, that Excommunication is by the Popes denounced against
Innocents, as well as Nocents. For they use to punish not them alone against
whom their quarrels lie, but for some one, or few men's sake they rage against
Cities, Provinces, whole Kingdoms, as is to be seen in their Bulls, where
Excommunicating Kings, Princes, or Magistrates; they ensnare together all their
Subjects; which wickedness the Lord does condemn by his prophet: (...) Ezech.
18.20.
The son shall not bear the fathers sin, but the soul which has sinned,
that soul shall die. But this destroyer curses down to Hell and deuoureth to
perdition, not only the son for the fathers fault, but only whole families, *
which Augustine condemned, Epist. 75.
but populous cities, whole kingdoms, for the offense, if yet offense, of
their governors. Wherein there is some ods between Christ and him, whose Vicar
nevertheless he needs will be. ^uk 19 10.
For * Christ says, he came to seek, and to save that which was lost: but the
Pope little priseth myriads of souls bought and redeemed with Christ's blood,
so be, he may reign, and Lord it alone. Christ proclaims himself The
anointed of Iehoua, Esaias 61.1.
to comfort such as mourn in Sion, to give unto them beauty for ashes; the oil
of joy, for mourning; the garment of gladness for the spirit of heaviness,
that they might build the old waste places, and raise up the former
desolations, and repair the cities that were abandoned and waste through many
generations. But the Pope turns vpside down Commonwealths settled well and
in peace, changing mattockes into spears, sithes into swords, and sheathing
swords in the bowels of men, Leo the 10. in whose time lived his like, and was
a retainer unto that house, I mean Angelus Poli who used to say merrily unto
his fellows, Let us go ad audiendam fabulam de Jesus Christo. In effect, Let go
to Church.
forcing kings to quit their kingdoms; altering states, laws, times at his
pleasure; treading under foot the crowns of Emperors, by pretext of
excommunication, forcing them to leave their seat royal, and lay their necks
under his feet to tread upon.

The third nullity is from the causes of Excommunication. For tell me, whom
ever for Idolatry, or for Atheism did he excommunicate? These impieties pass
without controlement even at Rome in the Popes Court, which every man knows
that has read their stories. For to say nothing of Idolatry, which by
prescription in the Roman use, is now received for Religion; was not that Pope
a flat Atheist who in a passage of speech with Cardinal Bembo, called the
Gospel of Jesus Christ a fable? And what, I pray you, cause was there at all
why Henry the 111. the most Christian King of France, should so be censured,
unless for his too great zeal and forwardness, in the superstitions of Rome?
For as one said very truly:

At Rome you may be what you will,
So that you be a rakehell still.
But lest happily I seem over severe, against transgressions in the first
Table; hearken what some ages since, an ey-witnesse did write:

I took a journey to see Rome, and since I did it see
I have enough, Then farewell Rome, I Will come again to thee
When Pandar, Brothel, Buffon, or a Cynede I shall be.
And lest I be said to produce namelesse authors; do but mark, what Baptista
Mantuan, a Carmelite Friar, has written of the manners and customs of Rome.

S. Peter's lust worn family, in riot wast their days,
Exiling far all honesty, when buffons rents do raise
Upon Gods own inheritance, when hallowed altars feed
Lewd losels, and loose Catamites, within his Church do breed.
What marvel though they rise in wealth, and houses build on high,
If Tyrus sends them scarlet gowns, The Arabian spicery
And frankincense? they vent out much, temples are set to sale,
Priests, altars, prayers, crowns are sold, yea heaven, nay God and all.
But what do I insist in this, when as Johannes Casa Archbishop of Beneuento
and legate Apostolic with the Venetians in the days of July the 111. wrote and
published a book in Print in Italian rhythmes, Taxa Cancellariae Apostolicae
Luter^e apud Toss. Dionysian. ^520.
therein extolling the sin of Sodomy. And to conclude, The taxing of the
chancery of Rome, may witness without all contradiction, in what low account
be at Rome the most grievous and capital offenses. The words of that book are
these: The Absolution for him who has carnally known a woman in the church,
Grossus, is the 8. part of an ounce, a small fine for such a fault.
gross. 6. The Absolution for him that has had carnally to do with his own
mother, sister, gossip or kinswoman, gross. 5. Absolution for him that has
killed his father, mother, sister, brother, or other of his kin, if he be a lay
man (for were any of them a Clergy man the murderer must be tied to visit in
person the Apostolic sea, gross.) 6. or 7. at most. Absolution for a woman
which has taken down any potion whereby to destroy the Infant conceived
within her, gross. 5. Not to run upon particulars, no sin so enormous, but
with money may be wiped out, without money no remission. For as the old rhythme
has it:

The Court of Rome but for the fleece
Seeks not the sheep at all:
Opening the door to all that give,
But the empty stand and call.
Or if you had rather hear the Taxing of the Apostolic Chancery, thus says
that book: Note you diligently that such graces and indulgences be never
granted unto poor men, who because they are not, cannot be comforted. These
are not those times, you shall know, wherein it was easier for a Camel to
pass through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of Heaven: But these are golden days indeed, in which Heaven is
purchased by gold, and shut against the poor man, because he has no gold to
buy it.

To the purpose. Papal Excommunication, is commonly grounded upon these or
such like causes: Private Hatred, The Popes Credulity, or else Ambition.
Paschall the Second Pope of that name, when Henry the Fifth Emperor Elect came
(as the manner was) to Rome to receive the Imperial Crown of the Popes hand,
raised such hurlies against his Prince, as put him to stand upon the guard of
his life, and brought him to the hazard of his State. When matters were taken
up and pacified, and the Emperor and Pope agreed together, the Pope gave his
word not to assay to do ought which any way might prejudice the Imperial
Majesty; secondly to return back again the right which they had in
bestowing of Bishoprics. For farther confirmation of which protestation, when
he received the Sacrament with the Emperor, he is said to have used this
execration. Let him so be divided from the Kingdom of Christ, that shall go
about to break this agreement, as this part of that life-giuing body is
divided. And yet for all this, scarce had the Emperor gone out at the City
gates, when as the faithless and treacherous Pope, reuersed whatsoever he did
before, cast Excommunication out against the Emperor, and set new work in
hand against him. A^bas Vrsperg. in P^^lippo.
Innocent the 111. dealt as sluttishly with the Emperor Philip, denouncing him
Excommunicate for no cause else, but for pretense of his Predecessors cruelty.
And when the news was brought him of the man's election to the Empire, he
brake out into these frantic and bedlome speeches: Either shall the Pope take
Crown and Kingdom from Philip, or Philip from the Pope his Apostolical
honor. It is impossible to sum up into a breuiarie the froward and
tyrannical Popish designs and practice against Emperors and Kings, Princes,
and Magistrates; only two examples shall be all I will touch, which both euince
his great abuse of Excommunication, and touch the Venetians more near than any
else, discovering the long since practiced tyranny of the Popes against them.

At Auinion, where it was for 70. years and more.
Pope Clement the fifth, who kept his Court * in France, understanding the
Venetians had taken in Ferrara, presently upon the news became stark mad, and
without delay thundered out his Excommunication against them; giving leave unto
any man by fair means or soul to kill as many as he could, Pabel. Lib. 7.
Decad. 9.
being now judged enemies of the Roman church, and cast forth from the
communion of the faithful, Supplementum Chronichorum.
giving liberty unto all Christians whosoever, to arrest the Venetians
wheresoever they met them, to confiscate their goods, sell their bodies as
slaves in the markets: which turned so far unto their loss and detriment,
that the State could not trade nor negotiate with any strangers at all, till at
length Francis Dandalo being sent unto France, from the Senate unto the Pope,
and with much ado admitted unto his presence, putting an iron chain upon his
neck, lay under his table, as a suppliant so long till he got this ungentle
Clement to yield to let fall his moodinesse and restore the Venetians to their
former state. For which he was after that called the Dog, because as a dog
he lay chained under the Popes dining table. The second example is of Pope
Sixtus the Fourth, who proclaimed wars against the King of Naples, for
helping Hercules of Este, Duke of Ferrara against the Venetians, whom the Pope
did abet in that quarrel with his spiritual and temporal forces. Platina in
vita Sixti. 4.
But after their agreement with King Ferdinand, the same man with the power of
Appulia set upon the same Venetians, whom he before had favored: and not
content, stirred up against them the Princes of Italy, as many as he could,
Supplementum Chronicorum.
sentenced them with his Spiritual curse, deprived them of all their,
whatsoever Dominions, to the utmost extent of his power: Neither in his life
time could they obtain to be released, having not any cause or pretext for his
doings more than that he feared their growing too great, would put himself
and other Italian Princes to have cause to look near unto themselves. This
was in his time a most holy Father, Petro a Ruuiere Joan Textor. Wessel. Gron
de Indulgent.
whose base borne son, a worthy Impe of such a Sire, Peter Cardinal Priest
of Rome, Patriarch of Constantinople, Legate a Latere for the Pope, prodigally
stantinople, Legate a Latere for the Pope, prodigally lauished in two years
space 300000. ducats in luxury and vain expenses, who also together with the
Cardinal Saint Lucy, interceded with his Father for themselves, and their
families, to have male stews permitted them the three hottest months of the
year, and had a grant from that most holy Father Sixtus, with this clause: Be
it unto you as you desire.

But it will be replied: It is a new world now, and other manners are now in
use. And this new world begun and hallowed with their Iubilies, not at Rome
alone, but every Hamlet and Village under Roman obeisance has brought us new
causes of Excommunication. But pardon me. The grounds upon which the Venetians
be excommunicate, are not any whit better than those we have rehearsed. For
neither is (I trow) the State of the Romish religion in hazard there, whereto
the Venetians are most zealously inclined, nor yet that obedience due, as they
call it, to the Apostolic Sea: from which they profess and protest unto the
world they detract not any thing, which is theirs by divine right. Neither is
it any question of manners, after which though never so corruptly depraved, the
Pope makes no inquisition at al. But it is a question merely political, with
which the Popes should not intermeddle, if they do lust to give ear unto
Christ his Commandment, Math. 20.26.
or were disposed to follow his example, who though invited, would not have any
thing to do with civil cases and legal controversies* Luc. 12.

A fourth Nullitie is, in that Papal Excommunication, does not only forbid the
parties censured, all Ecclesiastical Communion, but over and above, all
Politic and Civil: See the Bulls of Paul the iii ag. Henry the viii. of
England. of Sixtus 5. against King of Nauar, and Prince of Conde. and of Pius
5. against Queen Elizabeth.
as namely that in Marriage, expressly against the Apostles decrees, 1. Cor. 7.8.
and lawful subjection unto Magistrates. For it is their manner in their Bulls
Excommunicatorie, to absolve the subjects from their Oath of Obedience, and any
other bond or duty in which they be tied: to expose the possessions and goods
of Princes as a pray and a spoil to any that will seek them, so as it shall
be lawful without denouncing war, proclaiming hostility, by secret
practices, or open force for any man to pursue, to apprehend or murder them,
to deprive their issue of al right to succeed, and make them infamous and
incapable: to Incite the Nobility and Comminaltie to arms, Interdict the
suspended from any commerce or negotiation with other nations: to determine the
leagues and articulations of Princes, and States made with them, to be void and
of no validity; and lastly, to forbid them Christian burial. Which, what is
it else but in detestable sort to violate the law of Nature and Nations, to set
up injustice every where, to teach children to hate their parents, subjects to
be perjured, perfidious, rebellious, disoobedient, and practice such Papal
virtues as these? And therefore it was not without cause that Laurentius Valla
a Putritian of Rome, said: That Rome was a school wherein men learned to lie,
to deceive, swear, forswear. Christ taught no such lesson, Matthew. 22.21.
when he bad; Give unto Caesar the things that be Caesar's, and unto God that
which belongs unto him. It is not the doctrine of Saint Paul, Romans 13.1.
who wills every soul to be subject unto higher Powers. Whether Apostle, or
Evangelist, or Prophet, or whosoever he be, says Chrysostom; for this
subjection does not in any case cross our piety. Peter gave no such command,
when he wills servants to be subject in all fear unto their Lords, not
unto the good and gentle alone, 1. Pet. 2
but even the froward and perverse. Happily it will be said, but not
Excommunicated. Surely yes, if the person which stands Excommunicate, be not
any otherwise to be accounted of, then as an Ethnicke, and a Publicane: with
whom in civil negotiations the Jews did not refrain to communicate. For
living in and under an * Ethnicke state, The Romans by deputies.
they yielded obedience unto they positive laws, and to the Publicans (Farmers
of the common revenues) they paid Customs and tribute money, trading also with
them in other things. Which right whenever the Popes of Rome went about to
infringe by thundering curses and Excommunications, God from Heaven has
disclosed the fearfulness of his vengeance against the forsworn Traitors: as
is plain in that miserable end of Ralfe Duke of Sweland, Antoninus vita Henr.
4. Abbas V^sperg Hen. 4. and alij.
whom Gregory the Seventh did set up in place of the Emperor Henry the
Fourth. Which Ralph, being at the will of the Pope crowned by the Archbishop
of Mentz, wretched man that he was, for in lieu of a vain crown which stood
not long upon his head, he underwent an unfortunate cross: being vanquished
in fight by his Prince, who when he yielded up the ghost, showed his right
hand cut off in fight, as a memorial of his treachery unto the Bishops his
Instigators, using withal these words: See you here that hand with which I
bound my self by solemn oath never to injury, never to contriue against my
Lord Henry: which oath to break, your persuasion, and the Apostolical
commandment has induced me. Behold and consider, in how right a course ye
have led him that was content to be ruled by you.

The fifth Nullitie of papal Excommunication remains behind, to be drawn
from the end of that Censure, which is the saving of his Soul, in setting
forth the glory of God, procuring the good of the Church. These ends how
little root they have ever taken (time out of mind) in the Popes of Rome, all
good men have well noted, and many, not the worst have deplored. Roderico
bishop of Zamora, Roder. Zamor. lib. 2 spei vitae hum ca* 3. Castellane that
is, keeper of the Castle Saint Angelo.
* Castellane and Referendary to Pope Paul the 2. in his book entitled, The
glass of man's life, where he speaks of the anxieties and cares which do
accompany al Popes, has these words: Their first let and hinderance are
domestical cares, then their unjust desire, or to speak plain, greedy
greediness, to advance their kindred, and which flesh and blood does reveal
unto them, to perpetuate their lineage, kindred and name. The house of Parma at
this day from Paul the third a Farnescan.
For so have some Popes been resolved to make themselves the roots and raisers
not of one but many noble and famous houses, the first progenitors of mighty
Princes. Such aspiring desires, want not the Presidents of ancient Popes, much
less shall they want fautors and furtherers. Learned and unlearned will
persuade them to it, some will cite fables, some allege Scriptures and
detorted authorities, to tickle the Popes itching ears. (Hear him what he
says (good Baronius) and learn of him what counsel to give your Pope Paul.)
Lo, will they say, What man ever hated his own flesh? For Christ himself
whose actions every Pope his Vicar should follow, when he loved his own, loved
them unto the end. He exalted those that were allied unto him. But whether did
he exalt them unto the cross. Caesar Borgia. Guicciard. lib. 4. Hist. Ital.
And this mind doubt had Pope Alexander the sixth, when he raised his son
Caesar, from a Cardinals hat, to the royal dignity of Duke of Valentia, by
profane chaffare of holy things. For (says Nicolaus de Clamengijs, speaking
of Popes) when exceeding great abundance of worldly plenty and insatiable
avarice, associated with ambition, had seated themselves in Clergymen, treading
down the virtuous branches of ancient better days, as it could not but fall
out, so it came to pass, Pride made themswel, desire of great place puffed
them up, they wasted their days and bodies in wantonness. Three Lords they
had cruel exactors to content, Luxury first, which exacted upon them, the
pleasures of wine, of sleep, of feastings, of music, of Iugles, of pandars,
of whores. Secondly Pride, which would have the pompous pageantly shows of
high storied houses, Castles, Towers, Palaces, royal and gorgeous furniture,
gay apparel, horses retinue. Thirdly, Avarice insatiable, which provided and
stored up heaps of coin, to maintain the premised bravery; or at least if
that needed not, to feed their eyes, and give them content in viewing the
stamp of their come. To fulfill the behest of these Lords, and accomplish all
their desires, the golden age of Saturn (whereof the Poets fable) would uneath
suffice, if again the world might behold such times. And because not any
though never so fat a Bishopric, is able sufficiently to content these
three Harpyes, they have bethought them of other helps and furtherances in the
case. For the Popes perceiving, how that the profits and revenues of the Roman
Bishopric, the Patrimony of Saint Peter greater than kingdoms, though none
indeed very much impaired, by their negligence would not be enough to
maintain the credit and height of that State, which they as Emperors and kings
of Nations were determined to exalt: therefore they have intruded upon other
men's flocks which brought forth young in multitudes, yielded plenty of wool and
milk. Thus you see the causes which moved the Popes to try so many ways to
bring them in treasure, abusing their office and pastoral charge in every
particular point thereof: as if Christ had commanded them not to feed the
flock, but to fleece them, to flea them, to bowell them, to eat them. For to
begin with their encroachments: they have not only seized the creation of
Bishops, and collations of all Ecclesiastical dignities into their own hands,
abolishing the ancient right of elections; but (to speak in the phrase of Nic.
de Clamengijs) that the golden currents might flow more abundantly from all
parts of the world into their Court, they have debard and deprived all
Diocesans and Patrons of their right of prese^tation, or any way disposing of
their benefices; forbidding upon pain of their curse (see what use they make of
excommunication) that they be not so presumptuously bold (for in such terms
their rescripts do run) as to institute any man unto any benefice under their
charge, until those were provided for, every man, or did refuse to accept that
benefice, unto whom they had given any aduousins themselves in reuersion. Since
which time, good God, what swarms have there been in all places, at all times,
of those that have gaped for such presentations! Men taken not from the study
or from the schools, but from the plough and manuary trades, to have charge of
souls and pastoral cares committed unto them. Men that understood the Arabian
tongue as well as they did the Latin (a perfect pattern of our times) that could
hardly read, nay more, I am ashamed to speak it, not able to know A from B.

And these exactions not yet sufficing to satiate the raven of the Romish Popes
and Cardinals, The words at creation of a Cardinal be: Esto Princeps mundi and
frater noster.
ten thousand shifts were yet further invented to get and heap money unto
their cofers, whereof this is no place to speak. For the College of Cardinals
growing daily greater, the burden grew greater upon all countries, Because it
it was held an absurd thing, that such as were advanced to that place in the
Church, as to be fellows unto kings, should not be provided in answerable
sort, but stand as hungry and starueling mercenaries. So that to maintain and
bear out this pride, all States both Temporal and Ecclesiastical were
oppressed. From hence came the retaining of so many benefices and preferments,
in nature repugnant one to another, while the same man is, both a Moncke and a
Canon, Regular and Secular, under one several hab it, having and enjoying the
Rights, Degrees, Offices, Benefices, of all Religions, Orders, Professions.
Insomuch as that speech spoken of the Jesuits, A Jesuit is a man of all
professions, may better be fitted unto the Cardinals. Peter of Aliaco Cardinal
of Cambray in his book of Reforming the state of the Church which he wrote and
presented to the Council of Constance, is very earnest to have these abuses
taken away, where he calls those Pluralities of Church-liuings, a monstrous,
and many ways scandalous offense. This is the cause why Iubilies and
Indulgences be so dearly bought, See the hundred grieuances of Germany. grieu
3.
that they draw forth the gold and godly life of whole kingdoms, as the
Princes and States of Germany complained at the Diet at Norimberge in the year
1522. Their gold is purloined, being by the impious Collectors of Rome
transported out of the country into Rome, godliness is banished and clean
extinct, while men presuming upon absolution, let loose the reins of liberty
unto all impiety.

To conclude, this bottomless pit of greedy desire has sent forth
excommunications and cursings against Princes and Magistrates, as may plainly
be euicted by these examples. Gregory the ninth charged Frederic the Emperor,
that upon pain of the churches censure, he should with all expedition and
possible speed, Platina in the life of Gregory the ninth.
pass into Asia against the Infidels. And because he was thought to make no
very great haste, as he had threatened, he accursed him indeed. Frederic
appalled at this proceeding, besought the Pope that he might be assoiled, but
could in no case obtain it, till he had paid in, to the vie of the Church of
Rome 120000. ounces of gold. King John of England, standing excommunicate by
Pope Innocent the 3. Paulus Aemilius. Platina in the life of Innocent the 3.
fearing the French King would get his kingdom from him, whom the Pope had
incited to war against him; that he might be received into grace with his
fatherhood, was constrained to make England and Ireland his tributarie States,
and for them to pay yearly unto Rome 100. marks of gold: which Peter (whose
successor he vaunteth to be) I think would never have done, who so
constantly refused Simon Magus money: Thy money be together with thee to
perdition, that supposest Gods gifts can be bought with money. Their chaffaring
of holy things so as they do, is proof they succeed Simon, not Peter, but
Magus. And to draw all unto an issue, By a statute of (...) as it were.
what other cause in truth is there now of this their contending with, and
excommunicating the State of Venice, but this, that the careful wise
Magistrate would restrain in some small measure that Romish rauin and
insatiable rapine?

And so your Popes censure, o Baronius, being clearly proved so many ways
void, ought not in any sort to be feared, especially now in these days of
ours, in which the light of the Gospel has certainly disclosed what is the
true use of Excommunication, which for so many ages past, the Popes have, by
exceeding strange illusions, changed into a most impious tyranny. Plinius lib.
8. ca. 16.
They write, that the Lion a fierce and cruel beast, is exceedingly afraid of
the running of cart wheels, and empty coatches, but especially trembles at the
sight of fire. These Lions of Venice are not so, who often heretofore being
deluded with the vain rumbling of the Papal cursings, have termed now at
last, Galli, alluding to the French in the ambiguitie of words who heertofore
sided with the Popes against Venice. The Arms of France. Saint Antonies fire.
Lib. 22. cap. 19. Mushromes much eaten in Italy, and have a poisonous quality
in them says Atheneus. But he means the pride and vanity, the word being
fungus. In fasciculo rerum expetendarum.
that your fire is no better than a painted flame, and the thunder-cracks of
your terrible Salmoneus, no more to be feared then childrens rattles. For so
long as the Cocks set not up their combs, not affright with their crowing, the
howling of these night birds are but toies. Or what cause is there why the
Lions of Venice should be afraid of your fire who carry about them Lilies, an
excellent remedy, as Physicians write, against the disease called Ignis sacer;
and not so alone, but as Pliny writes, against the stinging of serpents and
poison of mushromes?

Indeed I confess the lightning of Gods servants is not rashly to be
vilepended, and yet there is no cause to stand in fear thereof always,
especially when, as Vdalrichus Huttenus a knight of Germany writes it
proceeds from Humane passion. I tremble at the indignation of Christ; I fear
not the displeasure of the Pope; and this is not Christ's cause, but the Popes
quarrel. These nets are not cast to catch souls, but to draw in gold and
silver: for seeing that the late Censure of Clement the Eight against the state
of Ferrara, thriued so well, as to enlarge Peter's patrimony with an access,
of not a sew towns these Scarlet Fathers have made them selves a promise, that
this against Venice shall speed as well. But I wish them take heed, lest Ill
counsel fall heauiest on the giuers. Johan de Mandeuilla lib. 1
Venetians by their long continued trade with the Grecians, may happily have
learned to answer Paul 5. to the same purpose as the Greeks sometimes did
John the two and twentieth: We believe thy authority is within thy own
dominions supreme: we can not endure thy pride, which is extreamen: we are not
able to satiate thy Avarice. The Devil be with thee, because God is with us.

Now therefore to return from whence we have digressed: by the premises
(Baronius) you may perceive, the vanity and folly of that your exhortation
which you annex unto your Pope. B
Go on then a Gods name holy Father, as you have begun, and suppose not that no
man can justly tax your too much hastiness, etc. For it had been your part
first to have proved the thing right and honest, whereto you would lead him,
which failing to do, you shall have no thanks for your idle attempt in seeking
to match Paul your Pope in equal terms with Paul the Apostle of the Gentiles,
much less to prefer him before, and incite him as you do, to proceed. There
is no delay can excuse, much less commend that which originally was unjust:
nay rather, the longer debated and demurred, the greater the fault in
execution. But this palpable flattery makes me remember a worthy saying of
Roderigo Bishop of Zamora: In spec^ritae hum. lib. 2. c. 3.
The Pope though he has all things a yet evermore stands in need of one thing,
viz. a faithful Counselor to tell him the truth: For from the highest unto
the lowest, every one is given to sooth him up, they tell him smooth tales,
but all to deceive him: Cunningly they advise him, for their own advantage:
Fraudulently they supplicate to attain their own wishes; and for that
flattery is associate with guile, as every man can tell, they combine among
themselves like crafty companions as they be, not to cross or thwart the one
the other. And as the scope of an Orator is to persuade, the end of Physic is
to recure; so the intent of a flatterer is to color and deceive. The fowlers
call is a pleasing note, but the end is to deceive the bird: And as Jerome said
once; Poisons are given mixed with honey. These are the men that make God and the
Pope fellows, ascribing some Deity unto him. But and if I mistake not the
truth, the Popes should indeed herein show themselves like God, if they would
command such Varlets to the halter; but out of all doubt, true seruers of God,
if such coosining deceivers were well punished for their pains. So far that
Bishop. But that which I marvel at most of all, is, that Baronius, a man who
knows all things, the skilfullest antiquarie in the Church stories that
lives, the man, who when first he gave his mind to write, Genesed out of
Terence.
set it down as his principal intent and purpose, that the lies he committed
to the press, might find acceptance with the vulgar sort, that he should set
down so barsh a comparison of Paul the fifth, with Gregory the Seventh, and
Alexander the third; whereof the first was the vilest Varlet that ever sat in
that sea, and the latter to be detested for his intolerable pride. B
I for my part, (so you say) do profess ingenuously that I rejoice in my
Spirit, I will say with the Apostle, I do ouerabound in joy. And let me also
speak in the Apostles words: Act. 23.
God shall smite thee thou painted wall, that dare belch forth of thy
unsanctified throat the words of so great an Apostle, who as truly can say
with a pure conscience which he once spoke, I use great boldness of speech
toward you, 2. Cor. 7.4.
I glory greatly in you, I am filled with comfort, and am exceedingly joyous
in all our tribulation, as thou can those former words of the same Apostle, I
have wronged no man, I have corrupted no man, I have defrauded no man: when the
words thou speak, these very words, are only to wrong, to defraud, to
corrupt. B
But let us hear the just cause of this so supera bounding joy. * When I
behold in my decrepit age Gregory or Alexander in Peter's chair. Hear o you
Kings, hearken o Princes, give ear o Potentates of the Christian world; by the
testimony of Caesar Baronius, a Reverend old man, a sincere Cardinal, an eye
witness, a man of credit, Gregory sits in Peter's chair, not (you must
know) Saint Gregory the first, whose Christian speech this is; I speak it with
confidence, Greg. in epist. lib. 4 epist. 30.
whosoever he be, that names himself, or would be named, universal Bishop, in
that his pride, he shows himself the forerunner of Antichrist, that
aduaunceth himself beyond all equals: who calls the Title of Universal
Bishop, wherein the now Popes do so much glory, a Swelling, a new name, a word
of rashness, See the 2. and 24. episties of the 4. and 6. book.
Proud, Pompaticall, Perverse, Superstitious, Profane, Impious, a Name of
Error, of Singularity, Vanitte, Hypocrisy, Blasphemy. That Gregory, I say,
the first of his name, who wrote with such reverence of Arian Princes: Lib. 7.
epist. 1.
Whereof I would have you inform your gracious sovereigns, Lib. 7. Ep. ^.
That servant, would have made my self a party in contriuing the destruction of
the Lumbards, there had not been any nation at this day of that name to have
had either King, or Duke, or Earie. But because I fear God, I dare not make a
party to destroy any man. This is not the man who sits in Peter's chair, but,
at which my heart trembles, that Gregory, who first was called Hildebrand, as
much as, see Antonin. p. 2. Benno the Cardinal, of the life, and acts of
Gregory the VII. otherwise called Hildebrand the life of Henry iiii. Sigebert,
and others.
A fire brand of hell, Gregory, I say, that Coniurer, the Monk, who cursed the
Emperor Henry iiii. and made him come unto him so far as Canusium, without
his robes royal, in woollen cloth, bare footed and bare legged, in a sharp
winter, and there for all the means he could make by himself, by mediators,
in most base sort submitting himself, yet made him dance attendance three
whole days. Who having at last received him to grace, upon another forged
quarrel, did accurse him again, deprived him of his ancient hereditary right
in collation of Ecclesiastical preferments, and made that most unequal and
intolerable constitution, which princes should in no case suffer: If hereafter
any man do receive the inuesture into a Bishopric or an Abbey, at the hand of
any lay persons, let him in no case be held as an Abbat or Bishop, nor have
audience, as an Abbat or Bishop: and moreover we deny him the grace of S.
Peter and forbid him to come within the Church. That Gregory who absolved the
Princes of Germany from the oath of allegiance which they have taken, causing
them to take the field against their sovereign and lawful Prince by him
deposed: setting up Ralph Duke of Sweueland in his room, unto whom he sent a
crown of gold with this motto:

The rock to Peter gave the crown
Peter to Radolph sends it down.
That Gregory sat in Peter's chair, who at length was abandoned of his own
men, saw the city of Rome surprised, himself laid prisoner in Crescentius or
Angels Castle, after that exiled to Selerno, where he confessed his capital
treason against Saint Peter, Gods Church, his Lord the Emperor, which by the
Devils persuasion he put in practice, and so in horrible anguish and torment
of mind miserably ended his wretched days; having formerly in the Councels of
Brixia and Mentz, been deprived of all Papal dignity, condemned as a breaker
of good orders in the Church, as a disturber of the Empire, a sower of
scandals, a church-robber, a magitian, a relapse from the says, given to
diuinations and to sorcery, one that had a familiar spirit with him.

And as for Alexander the third, his pride intolerable appears hence.
Frederick the second of that name, being by him formerly excommunicate, came
unto Venice to make his peace with him, promising to under go any penance; the
agreement passed between them so, Alexander the Pope standing in the door of
S. Marks Church, in the view and sight of all people, bad the Emperor cast
himself down upon the ground, and there in open audience desire absolution,
which he accomplishing, the Pope setting his foot upon the Emperors neck, said
these words: It is written, Psalm. 91.
Thou shall walk upon the Aspe and the Basiliske, thou shall tread the Lion
and the Dragon under foot. The Emperor heereat protesting he did it not To him
but to Peter, the Pope replied, Both to me and Peter: putting himself not
only above the Emperor, but before S. Peter also.

And these are the men, Gregory the VII. and Alexander the III. whom Baronius
calls, the Principal roots of the decayed liberty of the Church. And with
whom he dares match Paul the Fifth, present Pope. Surely it bodeth no good to
Kings, to Princes, to the Christian world, unless he missed happily in his
parallels, which I rather think the man did, than that the Christian world
should fear any such vain coniecturall opinion. And he had almost been in
the Conclaue of Leo the eleventh, wanting but 5. or 6. voices.
But so the case stands, Baronius, if he will be some body, I had almost
said, if he will be Pope, must resolve upon somewhat worthy the halter, or the
hangman.

But happily here he will except and say, The Emperor Henry was a most
froward and perverse man, and so worthy to be handled as he was by Hildebrand.
But sure both are false: For neither was he such as you defame him, nor if he
had been, was he so to be used of Christ his Vicar, who ought to have hearkened
unto his Masters words; Matthew. 11. Infasciculo rerum expetendarum.
Learn of me, for and humble minded. That the Prince was not so, appears by
his life, written by one that lined in those days, not very long after his
death: where he gives him high commendations, for his love to God, liberality
to the poor, just carriage toward all. I have not, says the writer, any
private cause of grief, piety compels me to bewail the public loss; when he
left us, justice left the earth, peace went away, treachery succeeded in place
of faithfulness, the Quire of Gods servants held their peace, etc. Monasteries
lost their patron, Cloisters their Father, etc. Alas, what a loss had thou o
Mentz, in so worthy a workemaster, to repair the ruins of thy Monastery! Had
he lived to consummate the work begun in thee, he had made it answer able to
that famous pile at Spire, where he raised the Monastery from the ground, and
brought it to perfection, so huge a piece of building, so beautified
exceedingly with excellent ingrauerie, equal, nay exceeding the praise and
commendation of all the antic monuments of kings etc. As for you poor people,
you have cause to grieve, for now you are become poor indeed, having lost your
comforter in your poverty: he fed you with his own hands, he washed you, he
clothed all your nakedness; Lazarus lay not before his gate, but was set down
at his table. But with you, Baronius, as to Kill and Feed is all one, so is
there no difference between piety and perverseness: or to speak in plain
terms, Those are the Peruersest men alive with you, who take a way knowledge
of your perverseness. But it is no marvel this good Emperor is so styled by
you, who durst sharpen your railing pen against Henry the iiii. the presently
most Christian French King, by the hand of God preserved hitherto, to survive
all murdering emissaries subornd against him, and worthy to line Nestors
years. For if you remember, in the Epistle to Panigarolla prefixed before the
first Tome of your Annals, speaking there of the siege of Paris, 1. Tem. An.
ex editione Mogunt. 1601.
a a town that stood against the King, thus you write: But yet at length,
though somewhat late, wicked Benadad, so you term his most Christian Majesty,
in vain assaulting that City, wherein Eliseus you mean Panigarola, the
firebrand of war and Doctor of treason, seeing all his hopes dashed and come to
naught, has left the siege and is dislodged: which words, lest they might
incense the King, are, I know not by whose advise rased one of that copy, which
is in the Kings library at Paris, the leaf being taken out of the book, as by
the letters in the Register appears, but may be found and seen, in all other
copies whatsoever that go abroad in men's hands. Thus you make no bones to call
the Lords anointed most Impious, Wilful, Benadads Nay you prefer the
butchering of them, for so have some of your Popes done, before the work of
our Redemption, as is evident by the speech of Sixtus the fifth, which he made
unto the Cardinals in the Consistory at Rome the xj of September in the year
1589. upon the murder of Henry the Third.

Come we now to that conclusion which you deduce from the such worthy premises
before specified. You have the same trial, B
you say, to try. Against whom good Sir? What, against the Venetians? See how
fitly your proof does fit the purpose. These ruins lie, B
that I may say with Esaias, in your hands. I acknowledge Esaies words, Esaias 3.
and withal confess that he foresheweth the State of the people of the Jews
shall be so full of trouble, of misery, so far past hope of al recovery,
that it shall be impossible to find a man, who upon any entreaty will take upon
him the government, and ordering of that State, for fear of dangers and
despair of doing good. One shall take a friend of his own kindred by the
bosom and say: Esaias 3 6.
Thou have clothing, thou shall be our head, and stay this mine with thy
hand. Then what follows? But he shall swear and say I can not help you. I will
not be your Lord, there is neither meat nor clothing in my house, make me
therefore no ruler of the people. The Venetians, I dare say, will use no such
speech unto your Pope, neither if they should, would the Pope make them the
Prophets answer, unless peradventure in some such sort as he uses in the day
of his Consecration, when rising up from his dirty seat, after the Cardinals
uttered these speeches; He raises the lowly out of the dust, and the poor out
of the mire, that he may set him with Princes, Lib. 1. Ceremon. sect. 7.
and possess the seat of glory, to take out of the Chamberlains lap sitting
by him, as much money as he can graspe in his hand, (and yet there is neither
silver or gold in his lap, nor does he take any out) and cast it unto the
people, with these words, Silver and gold have I none: Act. 4
Or else when he is bereft of all power, usurped (as one day he must needs be,
according to that Prophecy Revel. 17.16.) then he shall be enforced to say: In
my house is neither bread nor clothing. Whereto, that you have any reference, or
that it is your purpose to forspeak that, I do not, nor I can not say it.

It is not my purpose to insist upon that which follows in Baronius his
writing, lest I might ouercloy the reader. For that which he has touching
succession to Peter, and the promise made unto him, has been so often alleged
and refuted, that to shape an answer thereto, were again to do which is
already done, and to have my labor for my pains. For as that ungracious
Julian being beside his right wits, would have it be believed, Socrates in
Histor. Eccles.
that the soul of Great Alexander was in him; so the Popes of Rome, out of the
same frenzy, do persuade themselves that Saint Peter's soul by right of
Succession dwells in them. And thereupon whatsoever honor or right Saint
Peter had, they claim it as hereditarie unto themselves, and make it their
own: And so instile themselves Peter's Successors. For though we should grant
that this promise alleged, And the gates of hell shall not prevail, did
belong to Peter alone, which yet is false and not granted, what has the pope
to do therewith? or what has he to do with Saint Peter? what one thing is
there wherein he does partake with him? In preaching the Gospel? but the Pope
preaches not. In feeding the Flock? neither does he feed any flock. In
exalting himself above Kings and Princes? Peter did not so, he never so much
as drempt thereof. What then? In succession unto and sitting in Peter's chair
at Rome? But Peter when that privilege was conferred on him by Christ, was in
Palestina, not at Rome, and should have enioied it, although he never had seen
Rome. Away then with this Pythagoricall Transanimation, by which the soul of
Peter, the Indowments of Peter, the Sanctity of Peter, are transfused and go
unto all Siluesters, all Hildebrandes, all Sergiusses, or Hogs snouts, all
Iulies, Sixties, Gregory's the Successors of Peter.

That which you allege, Baronius, out of Jeremy; I have made the a Pillar of
iron, and a wall of brass, Ier. 1. B
deserves to be laughed at and contemned. As if that good man Jeremy, who
subjected himself unto the state of Kings, and by them was cast in prison,
against whom the Princes, and people, men and women, great and small, did
bark and exclaim, were masked in robes royal, and led along with princely
pomp, his Papal triple diadem on his head, to rule the rulers of the earth,
and reign over them with plenary power? or as if a man might imagine, not be
held a mad man for his such imagination, that long before the birth of Christ
the first stone of the Papacy was laid in Jeremy. Such like franticks be
those fellows who conceit that the original of Monckerie was from Elias, or
yet more ancient from Adam, (a Gods name) before Eve was made out of his side.

This is ridiculous, but that which follows, blasphemous; and what Christian
ear can endure to hear it, that this Parasite claweth his Pope withal?
Remember you stand as a rock in the church, B Esaias 8.
against which which who so dasheth, shall be dashed in pieces; which even by
the witness of Saint Peter, is nothing else, then to cast Christ Jesus, to
whom alone this does agree, 1. Pet 2.
from his high Throne of Majesty. Yet this is that smooth eloquence of Rome,
not misliked by the Popes: from whence these flowers of the Canonists came; The
Pope is in Primacie Abel, in Zeal Elias, in Mildness David, in Power Peter,
in Unction Christ. From whence that acclamation came, directed once unto the
Pope: Thou art all, and over all. In the last laterane Council.
All power is given thee in Heaven and Earth. But lie and flatter as fast as
you can, Christ at length will win the day. And that seducer Satan, together
with the beast and false prophet shall be cast into the lake of fire and
brimstone, Apoc. 20.
and be tormented day and night for ever and ever.

Even so Lord Jesus come: Apoc. 22.
Amen.

THE BVLL OF POPE PAVLVS the Fifth, against the Common wealth and Senate of
Venice: With the Protestation of the said Duke and senate.
PAVL Bishops, Servant of the Servants of God. To our most dear and venerable
brethren the Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, and our beloved Sons, Vicars,
Abbats, Priors, and other Prelates as well Secular as Regular, and other persons
Ecclesiastical, appointed and ordained throughout the whole Common wealth and
Seigniory of Venice, Salutations and Apostolic benediction. We have been
given to understand that the Duke and Senate of the Common wealth and Seigniory
of Venice have for certain years made in their Councels many and diverse
Decrees and Statutes, contrary, not only to the authority of the Sea
Apostolic, liberty and immunity of the Church, to general Councels and Sacred
Canons: but also to the constitutions and decrees of the Bishops of Rome. And
amongst others that about the 23. of May in the year 1602. taking occasion of
certain process and difference moved between Doctor F. Zabarella, on the one
part, and the Monks of the Monastery of Praxilia of the order of S. Bennet,
otherwise S. Justin in the Diocese of Padoua on the other part: They had
ordained that the foresaid Monks from thencefoorth, and for always after
should have no action for, under any title or color whatsoever, to be
preferred upon the goods Ecclesiastical possessed by lay persons under title
of Emphiteuse, and cannot by right of preference or reunion of the propriety
with the vsufruit, or of extinction of the persons comprised in the
inuestiture, or for any other cause challenge unto themselves the propriety of
the foresaid goods, but only the right of the direct dominion: declaring that
this shall take place, Doresnauant, hereafter, as well for the other persons
Ecclesiastical, Monasteries and other religions places being in their
Seigniory and territory of their obedience. And about the sixteenth of January
1603. renewing (as they say) certain Statutes and Decrees made by their
predecessors, to this effect, That any, be he Lay or Ecclesiastical, may not
build Churches, Monasteries, Hospitals and other places of piety and devotion
without special permission of the Seigniory; they had again ordained in their
Council that the same should take place in all places under their subjection,
upon pain to all transgressors of banishment, or perpetual imprisonment, and
confiscation of the ground and sale of the edifices. And moreover the said Duke
and Senate the 26. of March 1605. following an other decree, made by the same
Senate in the year 1536. by the which (as they affirm) it was expressly
forbidden, that any, under certain penalties contained in the foresaid decree,
might net alienate in the same City and Duchy of Venice, nor leave by will
and testament, or donation between the living any goods immovable, for pious
and religious causes, nor bind over or pawn to such intent, but only for a
certain time there expressed; a thing never before received or put in
practice: had again not only made the lame inhibition, but also expressly
prohited the alienations of the foresaid immovable goods made in favor of the
Ecclesiastical persons without the permission of the said Senate: had moreover
extended the foresaid decree and penalties therein contained to all lands under
their obedience, and had caused it to be published throughout all places and
towns of their Seigniory: ordaining that all the foresaid immovable goods
which were sound to have been sold or otherways aliened, besides the pain of
nullity, should be confiscate and sold, and the price thereof divided between
the Magistrate executing the tenor of the foresaid decree, his officers, and
the informer and others, as has been reported unto us to be at large set out
in the said decree, and mandates of the said Duke and Senate. Moreover that the
said Duke and Senate had caused to be imprisoned Scipio Sarracino Canon of
Vicenza, and Brandelino Valdemariuo of Fornoue Abbat of the Monastery or Abbey
of Neruesa in the Diocese of Tarrase, persons placed in dignity
Ecclesiasticke, and this for certain crimes, which are pretended to have been
committed by them in the town of Vicenza, and other places, under pretense
that the connisance thereof belonged unto them, and that it is of their
Jurisdiction, grounding themselves upon certain privileges granted, (as they
pretend) to the said Duke and Senate, by certain of our predecessors, Popes:
wherein they prejudice the right of the Church, and impugn the liberty and
immunity Ecclesiastical, and authority of the holy Sea Apostolic. And because
this turns to the great scandale of the Church, and the perdition of the
souls of the said Duke and Senate: insomuch as having dared to publish the
forsaid Decrees and Statutes, they have thereby incurred the Ecclesiastical
censures ordained by the sacred Canons of general Councels, and by the decrees
and constitutions of the Bishops of Rome, and the penalty of goods and lands
which they hold of the Church, of the which penalties and censures they cannot
be absolved nor discharged but by us, or our successor the Pope for the time
being: and that moreover they are unable and incapable to enjoy the benefit of
the foresaid absolution, until they have actually revoked the said Statutes
and Decrees by them published, and returned all again that thereof has ensued
to his former estate. For that also the said Duke and Senate, after many
fatherly admonitions, which to them have been made on our part, they have made
no account to revoke the said Decrees and Statutes, and that they still keep
prisoners the said Canon Saracino, and Abbat Brandelino, and that they have
taken no order to put them (as they ought) into the hands of our Nuntio, and
of the holy Sea Apostolic.

We, who must in no case suffer that the liberty and immunitie of the Church,
and our authority, and of the holy Sea Apostolic be violated, and despised,
following the Decrees of many general councels, and the examples of our
predecessors, Innocentius the Third, Honorius the Third, Gregory the Ninth,
Alexander the Fourth, Clement the Fourth, Martin the Fourth, Boniface the
Eight, Boniface the Ninth, Martin the Fifth, Nicolas the Fifth, and other Bishops
of Rome, which have held this holy Sea before us, some whereof have revoked the
like statures as void of themselves, and declared them void, and of no force or
virtue, being made against the liberty and immunitie of the Church, and
others have yet gone further, even to excommunicate the authors of such
statutes and ordinances; having duly consulted with our most venerable
brethren the Cardinals of the holy Roman Church, with their counsel and
consent (albeit the said decrees, edicts, and mandates be of themselves void,
and of none effect) we have notwithstanding anew declared them void and of no
force and virtue, and being such, declare that no man is bound to the
observation of them. And moreover is the said Duke and Senate within 24. days
(reckoning from the day of the publication of these presents in this City,
whereof we appoint unto them eight days for the first, eight for the second,
and the other eight for the third and last delay and for monition Canonical)
do not revoke publicly the foresaid Decrees, and all that is therein
contained, and which is thereof insued, laying aside all excuse and exception;
and do not cashire and deface the Records and Registers, and places where they
shall be kept, and cause to be published by them, and publicly declared in
all the lands and territories under their obedience, that no man is bound to
the observation of them, and do not return all that is thereon ensued to it
first estate; and if they do not promise, never more to enterprise to make the
like Decrees and Statutes against the liberty, immunitie and jurisdiction of
the Church, against our authority, and the holy Sea Apostolic, and certify
us of the said reuocation, cassation, restitution and promise; and if presently
they do not put the foresaid Canon and Abbat into the hands of our said
Nuntio: In the authority of God Almighty, and of the thrise-blessed Apostles,
Saint Peter and Saint Paul, having for the present, and for heereafrer
excommunicated, we pronounce and declare excommunicated the Duke and Senate of
the Commonwealth of Venice, which at this present are or hereafter shall be
there, their favorers, Counselors and adherents, and every one of them,
albeit they be not named in these presents, as well as if the names of them and
every one of them had there been specially expressed; and so that they can not
obtain absolution, nor be discharged of the said sentence of excommunication
but only at point of death, and by none other than our self, or the Pope, for
time being, without all possibility of helping themselves by any faculty to
them granted or to be granted in general, or to any of the^ in particular. And
if it happen that in extremity of death any of them be absolved from the said
sentence of Excommunication, who afterward recouers his health, he shall
thereupon fall again into the ^^me excommunication, until, as much as in him
lies, he has obeyed. And nevertheless, if he die after the obtaining of the
said absolution, that he be deprived of the burial of the Church, till that
our commandment be obeyed. And if the foresaid Duke and Senate three days
after the foresaid 24. days be expired, harden their hearts (which God forbid)
enduring the said sentence of excommunication, not obeying the same, for the
present, as also for hereafter, we have and do put to the Interdict of the
Church the City of Venice, and the other towns, burrowes, castles,
seigniories, and all places whatsoever, and generally all the temporal
demaines of the said Commonwealth; during which interdict, none may in the
foresaid City of Venice, the burrowes, Castles, and Seigniories of the said
Commonwealth, say in the Churches and places of devotion, oratories private,
and houshod Chapels, neither in public, nor in private, any masses solemn,
or not solemn, nor celebrate divine service; except in cases to us permitted
and reserved, and then only in the Churches, and no where else; as also the
doors shut, without sound of bell, and without the assistance of any the
foresaid excommunicate and interdicted, and nor otherwise, whatsoever
dispensations and privileges Apostolic, which have been granted to any
Churches as well secular as regular, and whatsoever exemptions that they have,
and that they are immediately subject to the sea Apostolic; and although they
depend on the patronage or foundation and dotation of the foresaid Duke and
Senate, not in general only, and under the name of the Commonwealth, but each
one in particular of the Citizens and Subjects of the same, of all the fees,
and goods which they hold of the Church, under what title soever, and declare
them deprived of the said fees and goods, and of all privileges which have
been granted and given unto them by any of our Predecessors, as namely to take
cognizance of the crimes and defaults of Ecclesiastical persons. And
nevertheless if the said Duke and Senate too opinatiue shall any longer harden
themselves in their contumacie, we reserve especially to our selves, and our
successors the Popes, the power to aggrauate, and reaggrauate the censures and
penalties Ecclesiastical against them and their adherents, and those that
shall any way aid, counsel, or abet them, and to recover them by other
remedies in time convenient, and to proceed against them according to the
disposition of the holy Canons: notwithstanding any constitutions and
ordinances Apostolic, privileges, dispensations, grants and other letters
Apostolic in favor of the said Duke and Senate in general, or any other
persons in particular: Namely those by virtue whereof they pretend that they
cannot be interdicted, suspended, nor excommunicated, although the said
letters do not make express mention, word for word: and with Derogatorie of
Derogatories, and other clauses, as also all other Decrees, and specially all
faculties of absoluing in cases reserved to us, and the sea Apostolic, and to
them granted on the contrary by our predecessors, and approved and confirmed
by us, and the holy sea Apostolic; all which and every one of them, we have
repealed, and do repeal, and all things heereto contrary. And to the end that
these presents may come to the knowledge of all, we appoint unto you and to
every one of you most expressly enioine and command, that by virtue of the holy
obedience which you ow to the holy Sea, and apprehension of the last judgment
of interdict from the entry of the Church, of suspension of your charges, and
perception of the fruits and reuenews of your houses Patriarchall,
Archiepiscopall, Episcopal, as much as to you belongs our brethren the
Patriarchs, Archbishops, and Bishops, and of privation of dignities, offices,
and benefices Ecclesiastical whatsoever by you possessed at this present, and
in hability to possess them hereafter; and forasmuch as our Sons the Vicars
and other forenamed, depend upon you, that upon pain of incurring the
penalties which in case of disobedience we shall think necessary, and whereof
you shall receive these presents, or that otherwise they shall come unto your
knowledge; you by your selves, or others cause to be published solemnly, every
one in his Church, when there shall be greatest number and concourse of people:
and cause these to be fixed and set upon the doors of your Churches. And
moreover we will that in every respect like credit be given to the doubles and
copies of these in like manner printed, so be it they be signed with the hand
of some public Notarie, and sealed with the seal of some persons being in
dignity Ecclesiastical, as to the original it self, if it were exhibited and
showed, and that these presents, or the double and copy of them so printed, as
has been said, being affixed to the doors of the Church of Lateran, and
palace of the Prince of the Apostles, and of our Chancery Apostolic, and
published in Campo de Flore, as it has been accustomed; have as great force,
against the foresaid Duke and Senate, and all other, and you all in general,
and every one respectively, as if they had been personally addressed,
intimated and presented to every one of them, and you. Given at Rome at S.
Peter's Sous l'aneau du pescheur, the seventeenth of April 1606. and the first
year of our Popedom.

M. Vestrius Barbianus.
THE PROTESTATION OF the Duke and Senate of Venice against the Bull of Pope PAVL
the Fifth.
LEONARD DONAT by the grace of God Duke of Venice, to the most Honorable
Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Rectors of parish Churches,
and other Prelates Ecclesiastical throughout our Common wealth and Seigniory
of Venice, Salutations. We are given to understand that by commandment of our
most holy Father Paul the Fifth, a certain Brief has been thundered and
published at Rome the 17. of April last past against our person, the Senate and
Seigniory, and sent to you to be published in our towns and territories of
our obedience and subjection. And because we who are bound to preserve the
tranquillity and peace of the State and government to the which we are ordained
and appointed by God, and to maintain the authority of our Common wealth,
which besides the Majesty Divine acknowledges no Superior in matters
Temporal: we protest by these presents, before God and the whole world, that
we have omitted nothing of that which belonged to us to make known to his
holiness, the justice and equity of our laws, as well by our Ambassador
ordinary at Rome, and by letters, by the which we have sufficiently answered
to the former Briefes to us directed: as also by another Ambassador
extraordinary sent by us of purpose for this business. But having understood
that his holiness has from time to time set light by our remonstrances, and
without giving audience unto our most just reasons has decreed this brief
against all right, against that which holy Scripture, the doctrine of the holy
Fathers, and sacred Canons do teach, in prejudice of that power secular which
God has given into our hands, and of the liberty of our commonwealth, to the
end to molest and trouble, not without great scandal, the life, the goods, and
honors which our faithful subjects do peaceably and quietly enjoy under our
authority: we make no doubt to esteem the said Brief as unlawful, and in it
self void as well in fact and deed, as in law: and therefore have thought it
necessary to take those remedies, which our predecessors and other Princes of
Christendom have used against the Popes, when they have exceeded their power:
assuring our selves that you, and other our faithful subjects, and all the
world will so judge thereof: And as hitherto you have diligently looked to the
cure of the souls of our subjects, and carefully traveled to keep the
service of God in his integrity, that hereafter you will continue in the same
duty of true and good pastors: considering that our intention is to persist in
the holy Catholic and Apostolic faith, and evermore to continue in the
reverence accustomed toward the holy Church of Rome: so we command you that
you cause to be affixed these presents in the most open places of this town,
and others of our obedience, to the end they may come to the knowledge of all
our subjects, and of all those that have heard of the foresaid brief, so that
it may come to the ears of our holy Father, whose understanding we desire God
by his holy Spirit so to illighten, that he may see the nullitie of all that he
has done against us, and that having understood the justice and equity of our
cause, he give us cause to continue in the observance and respect which our
predecessors and all the commonwealth have hitherto rendered to the Sea
Apostolic, whereto they have always showed themselves most affectionate.
Given in our Palace the 16. of May, Indiction the fourth the year of our Lord
1606.

FATHER PAVLS Apology for his not appearing at Rome, being called thither by
citation.
To the right Honorable Lords, and most reverend Fathers, Pinello, Ascalano,
S. Cecilie de Ciury, Blanchetto, Arigonio, Bellarmino, Sappata de Bubalis,
Monopolitano, Cardinals of the most holy Church of Rome, named Inquisitors
General.
Most Noble and Reverend Lords:
I Friar Paul, a Venetian, of the order of Servants appear before you by these
letters, and most humbly and submissiuely entreat that ye would (reuoking those
things that are inacted against me in your congregations) daine to accept, and
admit unto due examination those my exceptions against them. For, about the
twentieth day of September, it was decreed in your congregation, that a
certain book composed by me in Italian thus entitled: Considerations upon
the censure of the holiness of Pope Paul the Fifth against the renowned Common
wealth of Venice, should not be diuulged abroad, or read, or yet retained by
any one which had it. Neither also one other book entitled, An Apology for
the oppositions of the renowned and reverend Lord Cardinal Bellarmine, to the
treatises and resolutions of John Gerson touching the validity of
excommunication. Neither yet one other book composed by me, with six other
bearing this inscription: A tractate of the interdict of the holiness of Pope
Paul the Fifth, with some other books of the same Argument composed by others,
with all other which should afterward be published of that argument, for that
many things were found in them very rashly delivered, calumnious, scandalous,
seditious, scismaticall, erroneous and heretical respectively.

In the next place, the thirtieth day of the month of October, a Citation was
decreed against me, with Commandment that it should be hanged in the Court at
Rome, with the penalty of Excommunication, the sentence being denounced against
me, as also of perpetual infamy and deprivation from all and singular offices
and dignities, and other penalties inflicted by the Canoicall constitutions and
to be imposed at your pleasure, that I should within the space of twenty and
four days appear in mine own person and not by a proctor, to give an
account of my faith, and to purge my self from all crimes objected against me,
for that it was objected by and under the lawful oath of men of credit, and
manifest by other proofs, that there was no safe access to be made unto me,
as it is reported to be contained more fully and more at large in the foresaid
decrees and edicts imprinted, to which etc.

Truly most Reverend Lords, I am ready, according to the commandment of
Saint Peter, to render an account of that faith and hope whereby I live, to
every one which demands it: and do constantly affirm that a public
examination of our faith is most profitable and necessary in the Church; to
the intent that we may not be carried about with every wind of doctrine, and
that we may not be deceived at vnawarres by them who use godliness as a trade
to gain by. But as the use of this sacred and holy work is very sovereign,
so the abuse of it is most pestilent and pernicious, when under pretense
thereof envy is sometimes stirred up, contrary to all divine and humane
laws, and they which are not well backed are laden and oppressed with the
hatred of others, and wholesome doctrine is abandoned: by which according to
the instruction of the Evangelists and Apostles, both the world, and
Commonwealths are governed, and do endure. Surely I wish and desire nothing
more, than to perform all subjection and obedience unto you, and to render an
account of my faith: neither do I flee the light, who being grounded upon the
Catholic faith (according to the Commandment of the Lord) have given to
Caesar those things which are Caesar's, and to God those things which are Gods.
But such is the estate of times, and many things have come to this pass, that
all men may plainly see, that I am to be exempted from your citation and
command.

For when as without observance of any lawful order, the books are
interdicted and forbidden before the authors of them are heard to speak for
themselves, neither any sentences or propositions chosen out, marked and noted
with special censures, that it might be made manifest in every particular of
what sort they either were or might be esteemed to be; as the custom has
been in former times, and especially observed in the Council holden at
Constance: but the matter delivered after a new fashion, and unheard of, in an
elaborate oration, namely that many things in those books contained were very
rash, calumnious, scandalous, seditious, scismaticall and heretical
respectively; so that by reason of the obscu the oration, and the undetermined
limitation of that aduerbe, it can not appear, whether by all those words,
all the foresaid books be condemned, or what esteem we are to make of every
one of them in particular, and this done to this end, that men might reserve
free liberty unto themselves to speak when and what they would, as the
occasions of the future business might move them, and that the authors of the
books might have their answers to seek for the defending of their books. And
since all books that might afterward be written of that argument, which might
contain in them the right and cause of the Commonwealth of Venice, are
already condemned, an end is put to any intended controversy in respect of
any one which would be a publisher or defender of their laws and rights.
Wherefore most renouned Lords, since sentence (though ambiguous and needing a
manifold explication) is already denounced against me concerning those books
which were composed by me, after so great a prejudice brought upon me, before
I was heard speak, it is not now lawful by any right, that any other judgment
should be pronounced against me, as if the matter were entire, or that I should
be called to mine answer and cited to appear after sentence denounced against
me.

Neither besides all this can I look for upright judgment, when as (among the
rest) that worthy Lord Cardinal Bellarmine, sits as Judge, who in a book
thus in Italian entitled An answer of Cardinal Bellarmine to a Treatise of
seven Divines of Venice, concerning the Interdict of the holiness of our Lord
Pope Paul the Fifth, and to the oppositions of Friar Paul of the order of
Servants against the first writing of the said Cardinal, does plainly affirm
that he had been exceedingly injured by the foresaid Apology, and whereas he
does not answer that which was objected against him, he heapeth up a multitude
of taunts against me, and on every side breaths out revenge, and therefore
he ought to have absteined from denouncing sentence against me, or else from
interposing himself as a judge in this matter, either for fear of God or his
own conscience terrifying him, or at least for the avoiding of scandal.

Furthermore this may be added that sentences and censures have been
published against our renowned Prince, the Senate, and Common wealth of Venice,
and against their favorers, adherents, and counselors, whom I of duty and
with blessing from the Reverend Father Prior general of my order of Servants
do serve in place of a Divine and an Ecclesiastical civil Lawyer; as others
can not dissemble their angry mind against me, so I can not but be in great
fear: which things seeing they be manifest to all men, needed not any longer
discourse.

But seeing that (as it is auerred) it is manifest unto you by the testimony
of men of credit and other arguments, that there is no safe access unto me,
to serve a personal citation, it should be far more apparent unto the same
men, that I should have far less safe, yea most dangerous passage unto you:
wherefore ye have saved me a labor of proving that which I purposed to have
done: for if ye being mighty men, be not able to serve one citation on me,
shall I the meanest of all, being now absent from the Communion of you and
yours, look for safe conducts, shall I have safe access unto you?

Neither is this to be last and least regarded, that by the Edict of our
renouned Prince, Ecclesiastical persons are prohibited to depart out of this
dominion, whom I ought in duty especially to obey both in regard of respects
common (...) me with all others, as also for that the spiritual service being
adioined with the regular and lawful obedience unto the Commonwealth, it is
not only unlawful to depart out of the kingdom, but even out of the City
without leave obtained.

As for my self (Reverend Lords) I am ready to render an account of my faith
unto any man, and to answer any not suspected Judges: and for that purpose to
take a journey to any safe places.

Wherefore the case thus standing, I beseech you, by the coming of that great
and fearful Judge (with whom there shall be no respect of persons) that ye
would not persecute a worm, and dead dog, but (as right requires) ye would
admit of my exceptions, against the judgments, the judges, and the place of
trial; and pronounce them justly made. If ye do otherwise, I pronounce a
nullity in the sight of God and his holy Church of your decrees, and all
further proceedings; and commend my self to the protection of the almighty,
and cast the care of my self upon his Majesty. And if I be separated from
your community (as you threaten to deal with me) without all order of divine
or humane laws, God assisting me I am ready to bear it with a patient mind,
being certain with Gelasius, that an unjust sentence can hurt no man, in the
sight of God and his Church. I am less moved with the threatened penalty of
perpetual infamy; I will speak according to the saying of that most holy
man: Think of Austen what you will, only let not my conscience accuse me in
the sight of God. S. Peter has long since admonished us, that none should
suffer as a man slaier, or a thief, or an evil speaker, or a desirer of other
men's goods, but if he suffers as a Christian let him not be ashamed. I
shall exceedingly rejoice with the holy Apostles, if I suffer reproach for the
doctrine of Christ, and the holy Apostle Paul. But I am not ashamed that I am
defamed for expounding and defending the right of a Catholic, most mighty and
renowned Common wealth through the whole earth. I will also most willingly bear
the infamy which I shall suffer for defending the memory and credit of John
Gerson, a most Christian Doctor, and a man of admirable learning and piety,
and exceeding good desert of the Church of Rome: Trusting that through the
purity of the Evangelical and Apostolical doctrine, and the renown of so
great a Commonwealth, and the renown and fame of that most holy Doctor, the
mark of unjust and undeserved infamy shall be taken away. I nothing respect the
punishment of being deprived from offices and dignities which ye threaten
beside excommunication: I neither desire any offices or dignities, neither
would I receive any if they were offered. I am fully determined to apply my
self to the service of God in that calling in which he has placed me. Let
those be moved with such scarrecrowes, who do account them punishments. I
esteem it an especial office and dignity to live all my life in this most
base and low degree.

But in the mean time since I can not come unto you to render by lively voice
an account of my faith for reasons above mentioned, and others in their due
place and time to be alleged: by my works already published, and those which
I shall hereafter perform, I have and will render you a full account of it,
and I will keep entire that duty, obedience, and faith, which I have
heretofore borne toward you, (especially so many years as I was conversant
at Rome) hoping that God will give me opportunity, time, and occasion to
approve my innocence unto you, and the whole world, and hear me in his due
time, and in the mean while give me such success with my tentation, that I
shall be able to bear it. But I do earnestly entreat and beseech you by the
coming of Christ our Lord, and your duty and place in the Church of God, if
ye have thought any sentences and propositions in my writing worthy
reprehension, (since it can not be coniectured from the doubtful words of
the former edict, what they are) that ye would command that they be selected
out, and noted with fit marks, that I, agreeing to your judgment, to which I
will always attribute much, may either expound them if they be not clear
enough, or else fortify them with more strong reasons and arguments. For in
the mean time whilst they are condemned together with other writings of other
men without any special exception, with an amhiguous aduerb, I protest that
there can be nothing found in them worthy reprehension. At Venice from the
Convent of Servants. November 29. 1606.


