The names of the Commenters.
Beatus Rhenanus. Albertus Ruberius. Aldus Manurius. Fulvius Vrsinus. Iustus
Lipsius. Raphelengius. Iacobus Schegkius. Valentinus Acidelius. Ianus Gruterus.
Velleius Paterculus HIS ROMAN HISTORY:

In two BOOKS.

Exactly translated out of the Latin Edition supervised by Ianus Gruterus.
According to the reformations in such parts of him, in which the Latin has
suffered either by time, or negligence in the transcribers of the ablest
Commenters upon him.

And rendered English BY Sr. ROBERT LE GRYS Knt.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for R. SWAIN, in Britaines-Burse at the sign of the
Bible. MDCXXXII.

REcensui hunc librum, cui Titulus est, [ VELLEIVS PATERCVLVS his Roman
History, exactly translated out of the Latin, and rendered English: etc.] una
cum Epistola nuncupatoria ad Honoratissimum virum, Dnum Thomam Iermyn, et
Praefatione ad Lectorem: qui quidem liber continet folia nonaginta and septem,
in quibus omnibus nihil reperio quod non cum publica utilitate Imprimatur, modo
intra septem menses proxime sequentes typis mandetur.

Exaed (...) Londinensibus, Maij. 8. 1632. Guillelmus ^ray Episcopo Londinensi
Capellanus Domesticus.


TO THE RIGHT Honorable Sr THOMAS IERMYN Knight, Vice-Chamberlaine of his
Majesty's household, Governor of the I Will of Iarsey, and one of his Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council.
SIR,
WHen I had finished the last (and the same the first) work of this kind, that
I ever took in hand, I did not believe there had been any power, besides that
transcendent authority, which imposed that task upon me, of force to make me a
second time expose my self to the view of the world, and under-lye the censure
of this Critical age: For I did not apprehend that your self, who as well by
the rights of nature, as also (but infinitely beyond them) by your so many
merits, may with justice claim in me what interest you please, would ever have
required at my hands, any thing of that nature, which your own abilities
standing in no need of, cannot in your particular be useful to you. But you
were pleased, which with me shall ever have the force of a law, to command it:
In obedience whereunto I here present you with your grave and sententious
Velleius Paterculus, dressed after my fashion in English robes. The benefit that
such, as making their acquaintance with him, now that after so many ages he is
taught to speak our Ilanders language, they shall reap by the familiarity with
him, which before they wanted; they must (if friends to equity) wholly and freely
acknowledge themselves to have received from you. Since without your
injunction, I had never adventured upon a piece of such difficulty, as I, now
it is done, do make a question, whether my desire to observe you in all, did
not more enable me to go through with it, then any faculty of mine own. nor,
when I had brought it to an end, had suffered it to be published: but that I
would not permit you to want the honor of a good work, whereof you were the
immediate author, I dare with confidence give it that Epithete, for that among
so many histories as I have read, I have met with none (and in this I believe
every judicious Reader will be of my opinion) that does in so few, and yet
those so elegant words, involve so much strength of wit and understanding. By
that which remains of him so full of excellency, I am taught to deplore the
loss, which all lovers of knowledge do suffer in the mutilation of so dainty
a piece in many places: but especially by that vast Hiatus in the first book,
in which all the glorious actions of the Romans from the foundation of the city
till the ruin of the Macedonian kingdom by Emilius, during the space of five
hundred years, or more, are swallowed up: what is now extant of him, though
much short of his native beauty, and the luster of his original language: I
humbly, desire you will accept as an eternal testimony of the respect and
devotion of him, who is only sorry that he has neither occasion nor means in
sort more suitable to your worth, to express how much he is

Your faithful, and perpetually vowed servant TO. LE GRYS.

To the understanding Reader.
I Here once again (if the prefixed Epithets do properly belong to thee do
^ith the ingenuity of a hear^ friend salute thee. If thou ^est not such, follow
my counsel, ^^d lose no more time upon ^elleius Paterculus, then will ^ve for
reading the title: for ^leeve me, if as the French ^ech is, thou have not thy
(En^dment bien far) thou will profit but little by him. If the prefixed title
be duly thine, let me entreat thee not to censure me upon the first view of
the original, before thou have perused the observations of Lipsius, Manutius,
Schegkius, Acidelius, Rhenanus, and those others who have commented upon him,
and if thou there find that I have been guided by their opinions in the
understanding the meaning of my author who was in so many parts ma^gled, in so
many mistaken: t^^ worst thou can say, is, that ^ I have erred, I have erred
wi^^ learned company: if thou find ^ the sixty eight chapter of the ^^cond
book, that I have passed ov^^ these words (Neque enim persona umbram actae rei
capit) make I pray thee sense of it thy selse if thou can, and that is more
then I am able to do with the help of Lipsius; if thou observest that in some
places I ingeminate a word of the same sense with the author that is not found
in the Latin, know that as I once said in my translation of Argenis, I never
was a Grammar School boy, and therefore thought not my self obliged to a
literal and grammatical construction. And that as I do not allow either to my
self, or any other translator the liberty of a paraphraster, so I think it
not only lawful, but also necessary for him, retaining the sense of the
author to fit it the best he can possibly to the Idiome of the language in
which he is to render it. To conclude, that I may not make my port bigger then
my town, now thou have it, if thou be pleased I am co^te^ted; if not, I shall
not like a mercenary play wright stand, with a panting heart behind the
curtain harkening how loud the plaudit rattles. For I am not like a horse
ignorant of my own strength, but know that where one of those that may
disapprove of it, can mend it, there would be ten that would be puzzeled with
it. So judge as thou find reason and

Farewell.

Velleius Paterculus HIS ROMAN HISTORY. LIB. I.
CHAP. I. The founding of diverse Cities, by the returners from Troy, with the
murder of Agamemnon revenged by his son Orestes.
* * * * being by tempest separated from his Commander Nestor, he founded
Metapont. Teucer not admitted to the presence of his father Telamon, for his
negligence or lazines, shown in not revenging his brothers injury, falling
with Cyprus, did build, and by the name of his Country styled it, Salamina,
Pirrh^s the son of Achilles possessed himself of Epyrus: Philippus of Ephyra
in Thesprotia. But the king of kings Agamemnon being drive^ by foul weather
into the I Will of Crete, did there build three Cities: two of which he called by
his own Country names; the third, to keep his victory in memory, Micenae,
Tegea, and Pergamus; And not long after falling under the treachery of his Wives
son Aegistus (who bare him an hereditarie hate) and the villainy of his wife,
was slain: Aegistus held the kingdom seven years. Him Orestes, together with
his mother having his sister Electra a Woman of a masculine spirit the partner
of all his designs, did put to the sword: That this his fact was by the gods
approved of, did appear both by his long life and the happiness of his state;
for he lived nintie years reigned seventie. He also by his bravery did quit
himself of Pirrhus the son of Achilles, whom for that he had seized upon the
marriage of Hermione the daughter of Menelaus, and Hellene who was contracted
to him, he slew at Delphos. In these times, when Lydus and Tirrhenus brethren
reigned in Lydia, being straightned with famine, they cast lotts whether of
them should with part of the multitude quitte the land. The lot fell upon
Tirrhenus; he being come into Italy did both to the place, to the Inhabitants,
and to the Sea give a Noble and perpetual name derived from his own. After
the death of Orestes, his sons, Penthelus and Tisamenus reigned three years.

CHAP. 2. The race of Pelops dispossessed of Peloponesus by the Heraclidae. The
glorious death of Codrus the Athenian King.
THen about the eightieth year after the taking of Tro^ and the hundredth and
twentieth from Hercules his being received among the gods, the offspring of
Pelops (who all thi^ time having expelled the descendants of Hercules, had held
the dominion of Peloponesus) by those of Hercules his race were deprived of it.
The Commanders in this recoverie of their estate, were Teminus, Ctesiphontes,
and Pristodemas, to whom h^ was the great great Gra^dfathe^ Almost in the same
time. Athe^ ^eased to be any longer governed by Kings: the last of whom was
Codrus the son of Melan^hus, a man not slightly to be pas^ed over. For when
the Lacede^onians did with a sharp war ^resse upon Attica, and the Pythi^n
god had by his Oracle let the^ ^now [that the Army whose General should happen
to be ^ain by the Enemy, should be the ^onqueror] he devesting him^^lfe of his
royal acoutrements ^^d clothed like a peasant, put ^^mself into the Enemies
camp; ^here, as if by acident, raising a ^ntention, he was by those which
knew him not slain. ^^drus with his death was fol^^wed by an eternal glory,
the ^thenians with the ensuing vi^^rie. Who would not admire (...) that with
such cunning did ^^ke his death as Cowards use to practice for the saving o^
their lives. His son Medon wa^ the first Governor of Athens (which office
they styled Archon.) His posterity were by the Attiques called Medontidae, bu^
they and their Successors t^^ Char^pe, did still hold that honor in their
hands. The Peloponesians also quitting the Country of Attica, did build Mega^
in the middle way between Corinth and Athens. About tha^ time the navy of Tire
which then was most powerful at Se^ did upon the uttermost point o^ Spain in
the farthest end of ou^ world possess themselves of a^ Island divided from the
Cont^nent with a very narrow inlet o^ the Sea and therein built the Town of
Gades. And within ^ few years by the same men w^ Vticu in Africa founded, the
D^scendents from Orestes being by those of Hercules thrust out, and vexed long
as well with various misfortunes, as with foul weather at Sea, at the end of
fifteen years did seat themselves upon the I Will of Lesbos.

CHAP. 3. Combustions in Greece: planting in Thessaly, and the founding of
Corinth by Haletes.
THen was all Greece shaken with most bitter Contentions. The Achaians being
driven out of Laconia did possess the^^selves of the la^d they now hold. The
Pelasgi marched up to Athens and a brave young soldier by name Thessalus, by
his nation ^ Thesprotian, with a great army of his Countrymen did seize upon
the Country, which to this day from him is named Thessalia: the City before
that time being called of the Mirmidons. Concerning which name we may with
reason wonder at those who writing of the times of the Troyan war do mention
that Country by the title of Thessaly: which as others do fault in, the
Tragedians do most commonly. To whom that liberty is not to be granted, for
that the Poets have not spoken any thing in their own person, but all under
their names that lived in those times. And if any of them will maintain that
they were named Thessalians from Thessalus the son of Hercules; it were fit
he should show some reason why before the time of this later Thessalus they
never were so styled. A little before this Haletes the sixth from Hercules and
son of Hippotes, founded Corinth, which before was called Ephyra in the
Isthmus, making it the enclosure of Peloponnesus; Nor is there any cause why we
should wonder that Homer does mention Corinth, for in the person of a Poet, he
both does name this City, and certain other Colonies of the Ionians, as in
his days long after the taking of Troy they were called.

CHAP. 4. Chalcide in Euboea founded by the Athenians, and Cumae in Italy with
Naples some while after, and Magnesia in Asia by the Spartans, with many other
Colonies of Greeks, both in the Continent and in the Islands.
THe Athenians in Euboea Chalcida dispossessed the Inhabitants of the Colony of
Erethria; the Lacedaemonians in Asia seized upon that of Magnesia. Not long
after the Chalcidians being as is before related, descended from the Attickes
did under the conduct of Hipocles and Megasthenes their leaders found the
city of Cumae in Italy. The course of that their way was directed as some
report, by a dove siying before them as others by a tin^kling found of brazen
pannes, such as in the night-sacrifices of Ceres, is usually heard. A part of
these men did a long time after build Naples. Both these Cities their excellent
and perpetual faithfullnes to the Romans, does render much worthy of the
repute they hold, and the delicacie of their situation. But some others have
with more diligent care preserved their Country Ceremonies: the neighborhood
of Osca, wrought a change in those of Cumae. What power those Cities have been
of in times long since past, the extent and strength of their walls does even
at this day demonstrate. In the age following a great multitude of Grecian
youth whose mighty power emboldened them to seek where they might settle,
powered themselves upon Asia; for both the Ionians under the leading of Jones
going from Athens, planted themselves upon a most noble part of the Sea coast
which to this day is called Ionia, and built there these Cities, Ephesus,
Miletum, Colophone, Priene, Lebedua, Myu^ta, Erythra Clazomenae and Phocaea:
and also possessed many Islands in the Aegean and Icarian seas, as Samos, Chios,
Andrus, Tenus, Pharus, Delus, besides others of less account, And presently
the Eolians setting sail from the same Greece, after they had bin vexed with
extreme long wandering, did fasten upon places of no mean account, and built
famous Cities, Smyrna, Cymen, Larissa, Myrina, and Mitylene, with other Cities,
which are in the Isle of Lesbos.

CHAP. 5. The time of Homers flourishing.
THen also in his full brightness, shined the most noble, and without
comparison, the matchless wit of Homer; who both for the greatness of his
works, and the clearnes of his verses, did alone deserve to be called a Poet.
In whom this is most glorious, that neither was there before him any one for
him to imitate, nor after him any found that could imitate him. Nor shall we
find any other besides Homer and Archilochus, who was the first Author of his
own work, that did therein reach to an absolute perfection. He was longer
after the Trojan war, of which he wrote, than some suppose: for he
flourished almost nine hundred and fifty years since, was borne within these
thousand years, for which cause it is not to be wondered at that he often
uses that ***, for by this is discerned the difference of times, as well as of
men, whom if any man do believe to be borne blind, he is himself deprived
of all his senses.

CHAP. 6. The Assyrian Empire of 1700. years standing from Sardanapalus
translated to the Medes by Pharnaces, in the time of Lycurgus the law maker of
Sparta.
IN the succeding times the Empire of Asia was from the Assyrians, who had held
the same for the space of seventeene hundred years, translated to the Medes
about seven hundred and seventy years after these things last related: for
Pharnaces the Mede, deprived Sardanapalus their King, melted with ease full
delicacies* and to his own misfortune over-happie (who was the three and
thirtieth in descent from Ninus and Semiramis the founders of Babylon, so as
still the son had succeeded to the father) both of his Empire and life. In
that age the most illustrious of the Greeks, Lycurgus the Lacedemonian
descended from the Kings, was the Author of most strict, and withal of the
justest Laws; of which so long as Sparta was a diligent observer, it did
flourish with all felicity. About this time, and sixty five years before the
building of Rome, was Carthage founded by Eliza the Tyrian Lady, whom some have
also called Did^, Near to the same time Caranus, a man royally borne, and the
sixteenth in descent from Hercules, invested himself in the Kingdom of
Macedonia, from whom Alexander the great, being the seventeenth of his race,
and in his mothers right extracted from Achilles, made it one of his glories
that he was also by his father derived from Hercules. Aemilius Sura, in his
Annalls of the people of Rome, shows that first the Assyrians being Lords of
all nations, held the Empire of the world; then the Medes; after them the
Persians, from whom the Macedonians got it, and last of all, not long after
Carthage was mastered, Philip and Intiochus, two kings extracted from the
Macedons, being overthrown and conquered, the supreme command did devolve to
the Romans.

CHAP. 7. Hesiodus 120 years after Homer. A controversy cleared about the
time of the building of Capua.
Between these times, and that of Nine^, who was the first great Monarch, did
pass nineteen hundred ninety and five years. Hesiodus was of this age, and
about one hundred and twenty years after Homer. A man both for the
cleerenesse of his wit, and dainty smoothness of his verse, worthy of
memory infinitely desirous of rest and quiet. And as he was in time, so also
was he in esteem the next to a man of so high repute as Homer was: who avoided
falling upon that error which Homer had lighted upon and avowded both his
country and parents: but his country, because he had been evil used by it,
most scornefully, While I am employed about foreign matters, I have lighted
upon a Domestique business, and that very erroneous and far from agreeing with
the opinions of the most approved Authors. For some there are that affirm that
about these times Capua and Nola were founded by the Tuscans, almost eight
hundred and thirty years since. To whose opinion I should indeed subscribe:
but how far does Marcus Cato differ from them? who affirms that Capua was
founded by the Tuscans and after that Nola. That Capua stood entire about two
hundred and thirty years before it was taken by the Romans: which if it be
so it being since the taking of Capua two hundred and forty years: since it
was founded, must be only about five hundred years. My self (with pardon of
Catos diligence) would say that I can hardly believe that so great a City did
grow to that height, flourish, was ruined and raised again, and all in so
short a space of time.

CHAP. 8. The instituting the Olympic games by Iphitus the Elean, 904. years
before the Consulship of Vinicius. In the sixth Olympade Rome fonnded by Romulus.
AFter this the noblest tryal^ of mastery in sports, and the most effectual
for the exercising the faculties of the mind and the body, the Olympicke games
were begun: having for their Author Iphitus the Elean. He is reported to have
first instituted those games, and a fair with them, nine hundred and four
years before thou Marcus Vinicius did enter upon thy Consulship; Almost one
thousand two hundred and fifty years before that, when Atreus did celebrate
the funerals of his father Pelops, Hercules at the trialls of exercises which
were there presented, was in every one of them the Conqueror. At that time the
Archo^tes of Athens did cease to hold their places perpetually, of which the
last was Alcmaeon, and began to be created every tenth year: which order did
last about seventie years, and then the affairs of the common wealth were
committed to Magistrates chosen every year. Of those which were created every
tenth year, the first was Charops, the last Eryx. Of the yearly Officers, the
first was called Creon. In the sixth Olympiad, two and twenty years after the
first that was instituted. Romulus the son of Mars having taken revenge of
the wrongs done to his Grandfather, did found the City of Rome upon mount
Palatine* in the days of the feast, held in honor of the Goddess Palles:
from whence to the times of your Consulships, it is seven hundred seventy and
two years. Romulus effected this, being aided by the Legions of his
Grandfather Latinus (for I very willingly do subscribe to the opinion of those
which have in that sort delivered) whereas otherwise with an unwarlike company
of Shepherds, he would scarce have been able to settle his new City, the
Veians being so near, and other Etruscans and Sabines; although he had now
enlarged it with a Sanctuary between the two Groves: He held about him an
hundred elected and called fathers instead of a Counecll, and this was the
original of the name of Patricians. The rape of the Sabine virgins, which
***************

CHAP. 9. The ruin of Perseus King of Macedon, by Paulus Emilius. His truimph
and those of Octavius victorious by sea, and Amicius over Gentius the Illyrian
King.
Here is a vast breach in the History.

He reached what the Enemy most feared: for by the space of two years, he
had fought with the Consulls, with so variable fortune, as for the most part he
had the better of them, and had drawn a great part of Greece to allye
themselves with him. Nay, even the Rhodians also, who were before that, most
faithful to the Romans, expecting the event, did then seem, with a
faithfulness to be doubted, more enclinable to the Kings part. And King
Eumenes stood in that war as a newtrall, neither answering his brothers
beginnings, nor the fashion which himself had formerly carried. The Senate
then, and the people of Rome, did create Lucius Emilius Paulas Consul, who had
before triumphed both as Praetor and Consul. A man to be praised as far as
virtue can be understood and valued; the son of that Paulus, who at Canna
did as unwillingly fight that battle, so ruinous to the Common wealth, as
bravely lose his life in it. He in a great battle near Cydna, a City of
Macedonia, overthrew Perseus, and having chased him and turned him out of his
Camp, with the ruin of all his Army, compelled him, quitting all his hopes to
fly out of Macedonia; which he forsaking, fled into the Island of
Samothracia, and there as Suppliant, betook himself to the Sanctuary of the
Temple. To him Cneius Octavius the Praetor who commanded the fleet, did come,
and more with reason than force persuaded him to entrust himself to the
fidelity of the Romans. So did Paulus lead in triumph one of the greatest and
noblest Kings of that time, the same year in which the triu^phes of Octavius,
the Praetor of the Navy, and of Anicius carrying Gentius, King of the
Illyrians before his Chariot, were so conspicuous. How perpetual a companion
of a high and eminent fortune envy is, out of this may be collected, that
where no man off^ed to oppose the triumphs of Octavius, and Anicius, there
wanted not some that labored hard, to hinder that of Paulus, whose glory did
so far outgo the others as well by the greatness of king Perseus, by the
show of Images, and Statues, as by the quantity of money, that he brought into
the Treasury two hundred millions of Sesterces, and in the magnificence of it,
did far outstrippe all triumphs whatsoever had gone before him.

CHAP. 10. The proud commanding of Antiochus to have Egypt in quiet by Popilius
Laenas the Roman Ambassador. Emilius his loss of both his sons about the
time of his triumph.
AT the same time when Antiochus Epiphanes, who had at Athens begun to set up
the Olympic games, being King of Syria did besige in Alexandria the infant
King Ptolome, Marcus Popilius Laena was sent Ambassador to him to command him
to desist from his attempt, who delivering his message, and the King answering
that he would think of it, made a circle with his staff in the sand about the
King, and charged him to giv^ him an answer before he wen^ out of the same: So
did the Roman constancy put an end to the Kings Consultations, and the command
was obeyed. But Lucius Paulus who had gotten a great and glorious victory, was
father of four sons: Two of them, being the eldest, he had given to be
adopted, the one to Publius Scipio, son to Publius the Africane, who of his
fathers greatness and bravery held nothing but the glory of the name, and a
forcible eloquence; the other to Fabius Maximus. The other two being the
younger, who had not yet put on the habit accustomed to be worn by me, at the
time that he obtained the ^oremetioned victory, he retained to himself. When
according to the ancient custom, before he entered the City, he made a
relation, before his triumph of his carriage in his affairs (He besought the
immortal gods that if any of them did malign his actions, and envy his
fortune, that they rather would show their spleen upon him then upon the
Common wealth, which words as delivered by an oracle, did ere long draw a great
deal of his blood from him. For one of his two sons whom he had retained in
his house, with him, he lost a few days before his triumph, and the other
within fewer days after it. About this time there was a sharp Censure
pronounced by Fulvius Flaccus and Posthumus Albinus For Cnaeus Fulvius brother
to the Censor Fulvius, and also his partner in all things was by the sam^
Censors put out of the Senate.

CHAP. 11. A counterfeit Philip in Macedonia overthrown by Metellus
Macedonicus. Metellus his fortunate life and death.
AFter the defeat and taking of Perseus, who at the end of four years,
deceased in a free restraint at Alba, a counterfeit Philip, so termed, by
reason of his fiction, in pretending a fabulous descent, when he gave out
himself to be Philip, and of the royal blood, being full of extremest
boldness, and having with armed hand seized upon Macedon, and usurped the
ensigns of majesty: within a short time received for the same his due payment.
For the Praetor Quintus Metellus, who for his valor was surnamed the Macedonian
gaining a noble victory, overthrew him and the whole Nation: and also defeated
the Achaians who were beginning to rebel, in a great and bloody battle. This
is that Metellus the Macedonian that built the Galleries which did compass
about the two Temples, which were founded without any title of dedication, and
are now surrounded with the Galleries of Octavia: and who brought out of
Macedon that troop of Horsemens Statues, which stand in the front of the
Temples, and are at this day the principal ornament of that place. The cause
of the making that company of Statues is reported to be, that Alexander the
great did desire of Lysippus a principal Arts-master in those works, that he
would make the Statues of those horsemen o^ his which were slain, out of his
own troop at the river of Granicke, to the life, and place his own among
them. He also was the first, who building an house at Rome of the marble taken
out of ancient Monuments, did give a beginning there, either to their
magnificence or excess. Hardly can thou find a man of any Nation, Age, or
quality, whose felicity thou may compare with the fortune of Metellus: For
besides his glorious triumphs, his honors of the highest degrees, and his
eminent place in the Common wealth, his life prolonged to old age, his sharp
yet guiltless Contentions with his enemies for the Commonwealths cause: He
had four sons, saw them all men grown, left them all behind him alive and
full of honors; when he was dead, his four sons took up his bed with his
body before the Rostra; one of them a man of Consular degree, and that had bin
Censor; the second that had also been Consul; the next at the same time
Consul; and the last then stood Canditate for the Consulship, which honor he
also obtained. This is indeed rather happily to depart this life then to dye.

CHAP. 12. Corinth rebelling, raced by Mummius, and Carthage by Scipio
Emilianus. The death of Cato, the perpetual urger of the racing of Carthage.
AFter this, as we have before related, when all Achaia was bent to wars,
whereof a great part was by the Arms and valor of Metelius Macedonicus
reduced, the Corinthians furiously and with foul indignities against the
Romans, flying to Arms, Mummius the Consul was appointed to command in that
war. And about the same time, (rather for that the Romans were willing to
believe whatsoever was reported of the Carthaginians, then for that the reports
that were brought them were worthy credit) the Senate resolved, utterly to
demolish Carthage. And then it was that Publius Scipio Emilianus, a man wholly
resembling in his virtues his Grandfather Publius Africanus, and his father
Lucius Paulus and in all endowments, both of war and peace, and as well for
his Judgment, as Knowledge, the most eminent of his time, who in his life, did
never either do, or speak, or think, any thing, but what was praiseworthy,
whom we have before delivered to be the son of Paulus, but adopted by Scipio
the son of Africanus, when he sought for the Ediles place, was created
Consul. That war against Carthage, which had bin by other Consulls managed
two years before, he followed with greater eagernes. Having before that, in
Spain, been honored with a murall crown, and in Africa, with one given to
him, that by seige had mastered any place: and had also in Spain, being
challenged, slain an Enemy, of a vast both strength and body, himself being
but of ordinary ability and forces. So that City more disliked by the
Romans, for the competition of Command, then for any fault it had committed in
those times, he rased to the foundations: and rendered that a monument of his
valor, which it was before of his Grandfathers clemency. Carthage was
destroyed about one hundred seventy seven years since, after it had stood six
hundred sixty seven years, in the Consulship of Cnaeus Cornelius Lentulus and
Lucius Mummius. This end befell to Carthage the emulator of the Romans greatness
and command, with whom our Ancestors began the war, when Claudius and
Fuluius were Consulls, two hundred nintie and six years, before thou Marcus
Vinicius did enter the Consulship. So that for the space of one hundred and
fifteen years, there was between these two Nations, either wars, or
preparations for it or any uncertain peace: and not to be trusted. Neither did
Rome who now had mastered the whole world, esteem her self and hope to be in
security, if the name of Carthage still resting on foot were in any place
extant. So does the hate grown out of contention, outlive the fear of the
concurrent, nor is it at an end when he is conquered: neither yet does he cease
to be maligned, till he cease to have a being.

CHAP. 13. The difference in disposition, between Scipio and Mummius, the
first neat and gentle, the second, ignorant and rude, yet the one called from
his victory the African, the other Achaian.
THree years before Carthage was ruined, Marcus Cato, the perpetual urger of
the destruction thereof, when Lucius Censerinus and Marcus Manlius were
Consulls, ended his life. In the same year that Carthage fell, Lucius Mummius,
eight hundred fifty two years, after it was founded by Haletes the son of
Hippotes, did race Corinth to the ground. Both the Commanders were honored
with a s^^name from that of the Nation conquered by them, the one being called
the African the other the Acha^an. Neither was any man of those of the first
head entitled to a name before Mummius that was acquired by his virtue. The
disposition of these Commanders, was much different: their studies also were
nothing like. For Scipio was so curious, both an Arts-man and an Admirer of the
liberal arts and all kind of learning, as he kept both in the wars and at
home, Polibius and Panetius men of excellent knowledge, perpetually about him.
For never did any man more daintily put away the vacations that he had from
business, then this Scipio when he was at leisure, and continually was he
employed either in the Art of war, or that of peace, being always in Arms,
or at his studies, he either enured his body to labor and dangers, or his mind
with profitable studies. Mummius was so clownish, as after the taking of
Corinth, when he hired certain men to carry some pictures and, statues the
choicest and perfectest works of the greatest Artists, into Italy, he
commanded them that had the charge of them, to be told that if they spoiled
the, they should make the new. But I do not think ( Vinicius) that thou art
in doubt whether it had been better for the Common wealth that this art of the
Corinthians had still remained in the first rudeness rather then to have binne
so perfectly understood: or whether this wisdom or that ignorance would have
been a more convenient ornament for the Republique.

CHAP. 14. A Catalogue of all the Roman Colonies, that were planted any where
before the coming of Hannibal into Italy.
NOw since the presentment of diverse things contracted into one, does more
easily make an impression into our eyes and minds than that which is divided
into several times; I have determined to distinguish the first part of this
work from the last, with no unusefull delivery of things done, compendiously
drawn together: And to insert in this place what Colonies, and in what time by
decree of the Senate, were after the taking of Rome by the Gauls, carried and
planted abroad: for of those which were settled by occasion of the wars, both
the causes, and the Authors, and the names of the places themselves, are very
glorious. To this end we shall not seem unseasonably to weave in our
discourse, the times wherein Cities had their beginning, and the Roman name an
increase by the Communication of their privileges. Seven years after Rome was
taken by the Gauls, a Colonie was planted at Satrium, and the year following,
another at Setina. After nine years more, one at Nepe, and then at the end of
thirty two years, the Aricynes were received into, and made free of the
City. But about six hundred and fifty years since Spurius Posthumous, and
Veturius Calvinus being Consulls, the freedom of the City was granted to the
Campanians, and part of the Samnites, without power of giving their voices, and
the same year a Colonie was led to Cales; within three years after, were the
Fundanes and Formians received into the City, in the same year that
Alexandria was founded. In the next Consulls time, was the freedom of the
City granted by Spurius Posthumous, and Philo Publius then Censors, to the
Acerranes. Three years after that was a Colonie carried to Taracina, and four
years more being past, one to Luceria, and the third year after that to
Suessa, Aurunca, and Saticula, then within two years, one to Interamnis: from
thence for ten years space, nothing of this nature was done: then were two
Colonies placed at Sura and Alba, and two years after, one at Confinium: but
when Quintus Fa^ius was Consul the fifth time, and Decius Mus the fourth time,
in which year Pirrhus began his reign, Colonies were sent to Sinuessa and
Minternae; and four years after to Venusia, within two years after which
without liberty of giving their voices, when Marcus Curious and Rufinus
Corneli^s were Consulls, the Sabines were made free of the City. This was
about three hundred and twenty years since, but the Cossan and Pestum were
received almo^t three hundred years past. In the Consulship of ^abius Dor^^,
and Claudi^s Car^^u^: five years being elapsed, Semp^^^ius So^^^us, and App^^s
the son of the blind man being Consulls, Colonies were sent to Ariminum, and
Beneventum, and also the freedom of voice in election, was granted to the
Sabines. But in the beginning of the first Punique wars, Firmum and Catum
were planted with Colonies a year after, so was Aesernia, and two and twenty
years after that Aesulum, Alfium, and Fregellae; then two years after, and
the year following, Torquatus and Sempre^ius Consulls, Brundusium; and at the
end of three years more, Spoletum. In which year was the beginning of the
celebration of the plays in honor of the Goddesie Flora. After two years
Valentia was made a Colony, and upon the coming of Hanibal into Italy,
Cremona, and Placentia.

CHAP. 15. Another Register of such as were planted after that, till the time
of Caius Marius his sixth Consulship.
FRom that time while Hannibal remained in Italy, the Romans were not at
leisure to think of founding Colonies. The next ensuing years after his
quitting it, when as during the wars* soldiers were rather to be provided
than discharged; and after the end of it, their forces had need of being
cherished, and held united together, more than of being scattered and
dispersed. But when Cneius M^^lius Volso and Marcus Fulvius Nobilior were
Consulls, a Colony was planted at Bononia, almost two hundred and seventeene
years since; and four years after, two others at Pisaurum and Potentia; then
three years being past at Aquileia and Gravisca; and after four years more,
one at ^uca. In the same times (although some there are that doubt thereof)
there were Colonies sent to Puteoli, Salernum* and Buxentum; but to Auxinum in
the Picene country almost one hundred eighty seven years since; three years
before that Cassius the Censor at the turning from the Iupercall to Mount
Palatine, erected a Theater, in the demolishing whereof the strict severitie of
the City, and the Consuil Capio, did most nobly appear, which their act I
should willingly reckon among the bravest arguments of the public inclination
in those days. When Cassius Longinus and Sextius Calvinus (who overthrew the
Salves by the waters which of his name are called Sextian) almost a hundred
fifty and seven years since was one carried to Fabrateria, and a year after
these, other were planted at Scylacium, Minervium, Tarentum, Neptunia, and
Carthage in Aff^ica, the first (as we have have said before) that was settled by
them out of Italy. Of Derto^a there is some doubt. But when Marcus Porcius, and
Quintus Marius were Consulls, a Colony was planted in Narbo Marcius in Gallia,
about a hundred and fifty years since; and thirty three years after, when
Marius was the sixth time Consul, and Valerius Flaccus, another was settled at
Ephoredia in the Country of Vagienna. Nor can I commit to memory after that
time any Colony that was planted, but of soldiers.

CHAP. 16. A kind of master roll of excellent men in several professions that
flourished about one age: In the Tragic Comicke veins; in Philosophy,
Oratory, and the like, among the Graecians.
THough this parcel of my work has in a sort outgone the proportion that I
had designed for it: and that I understand that in this so over speedy a
poasting, which, like a wheel, an overfall of water, or a down right
precipice, does not give me leave to rest any where; more necessary ones are
almost rather to be permitted, than superfluous ones to be entertained: I
cannot yet contain my self, but I must observe and mark out a matter which I
have often had in agitation in my mind, and whereof the reason has not
h^therto been sufficiently cleared. For who can too much wonder, that the most
remarkable spirits in every kind of profession, in the same manner, the same
confined space of a little, and strengthened time, and as creatures of a
different kind, out of a closed cage or a several division, are never the
less distinguished from those of another fort, though kept together in one
body. So those wits that were capable of any worthy work to have varied from
one another in all resemblances as if they had been of other times and
abilities in proficiencie. For one age, and that not consisting of many years,
did enoble the Tragic Bu^kin by the means of the divinely spirited men
Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides. One age and within a very few years did
the same honor to the first and ancient Comicke vein under Cratinus,
Arislophanes, and Eupolis; and inventing the newer strain of Menander, and
those that were rather his equals in time than in his works. Philemon and
D^philus left behind them pieces not to be imitated. As for the Philosophers
excellencies deduced from the instructions of Socrates (of all whom we have a
little before made mention) how small a time did they flourish after the death
of Aristotle and Plato? What was there worth regard among the Orators before
Isocrates? what after his auditors and their disciples? So were they shut up
within a little compass of time, that there was none of them worth the
remembering, who might not have seen one another.

CHAP. 17. The like and about the same time among the Romans.
NEither did this befall the Greeks more then the Romans; for except thou will
remember things harsh and unpolished, the invention of Roman tragedies is to be
ascribed, and commended in Attius with the times about his days, and the
dainty witty conceit of the Latin about the same age, were by Caecilius,
Terence, and Afranius rendered worthy of an high esteem. The Historians (if
thou will add to the number of those before him, L^vius) besides Cato and some
others as ancient as obscure: were included within the compass of eighty
years: so neither did the plenty of Poets either show it self before that
time, or much come after it. But for the Art of Oratorie and the ability of
pleading in open court with the perfection of Eloquence in prose, excepting the
forenamed Cato, (let me speak with favor of Publius Crassus, Scopio,
Laelius, the Gracchi, Fannius and Sergius Galba) did so totally glitter under
the Prince thereof Tully, that thou can not observe more then a very few to
have been taken with it before him: but none to have admired it who either was
not known to him or had the good fortune to know him. Whosoever shall be
curious in the searching the times past, shall find, that the same has been
the fate of Grammarians, Potters, Painters, and Carvers. The eminence of all
manner of Sciences I find to be circumscribed within the compass of a very
short time. But when I seek for the cause that wrought both for curiosity and
profit, such a similitude between the wits of that age, and that which
preceded it; I find none of the truth of which I may be confident: yet perhaps
I have met with some that are probable. Among which these are the principal.
Emulation does nourish the wit, and one while Envy, another while Admiration
does heat the contention, as also nature does climb to the top of that which
is with extremest ardencie desired and hardly can he stop that strives to
reach to perfection. Again, in nature that which cannot go forward, retires
back: and as at first we are on fire to reach them that we esteem before us;
so when as we despair of out-going and over-taking them, our desire together
with our hope, does grow faint and old, and what cannot be compassed, cease
to be followed, and the pursuer, as a place already possessed, quits it and
seeks a new one: and letting that pass, in which we ca^ be of no high
esteem, we seek^ some other subject, to which to bend our endeavors: from
whence it follows that a frequent and changing passing from one study to
another is the greatest hindrance to the arriving at perfection in any thing.

CHAP. 18. Of Athens, the sole City of Greece, famous for arts, Thebes excepted
by breeding of Pindarus.
MY admiration now passes to consider of the times and Cities. One only City
of Attica did flourish longer in eloquence, and those kind of works than all
Greece besides. So that thou would think, that the bodies of that nation
were divided into other Cities, their wits shut up within the walls of Athens
alone. Nor do I more wonder at this than that there was no Orator among the
Argives, the Thebans or the Lacedaemonians thought worthy of Authority whiles
he lived, or of memory after his death; which Cities were barren of those
knowledges, except that the eloquence of Pindarus did give a luster to Thebes:
for Alcmon, the Lacedaemonians do with no just title challenge to be theirs.

Velleius Paterculus His ROMAN HISTORY. The second Book.
CHAP. I. The declining of the Roman virtue after the ruin of Carthage, the
war with Viriatus ended by the cunning of Caepio: and the base conditions
made first by Pompeius, and then by Mancinus with the Numantines.
THe former Scipio laid open the way to the Roman power; the later to their
excess and riot: for the fear of Carthage being removed, and the Competitor
of the Empire taken out of the way, not by degrees, but by a precipitate course
we fell from virtue, and gave our selves to vices. Our old discipline was
quitted, a new one brought in; the City turned from watching to sleep; from
Arms to pleasure; from business to idleness. Then did Scipio Nasica build in
the Capitol his Galleries; then Metellus his that we before have mentioned:
then in the Circus did Cnaus Octavius build his, far the more beautiful. And
this public magnificence was followed with private riot. An unlucky and
shameful war then ensued in Spain, Viriatus commanding and leading the
thieves, which was managed with so various fortune, as it was oftnest
unfortunate to the Romans. But Viriatus being brought to his end, more by the
devices of Servilius, Caepio, than by his valor: the war of Numantia much
more troublesome was kindled. This City could never arm above ten thousand of
her own youth, but either by the fierce bravery of the people, or by the
ignorance of our Commanders, or by the favor of fortune: she forced both
other leaders, and Pompey himself also, a man of a high repute, to accept of
most basely dishonorable conditions (this man was of the Pompeian family, the
first Consul.) Nor less foul and detestable were those they extorted from
Mancinus Hostilius the Consul. But Pompey escaped unpunished by the favor
that was borne him. Mancinus by his humble shamefastness for not refusing it,
he brought it to this, that with his hands bound behind him, he was delivered
by our Heralds to the Enemy, who denied to receive him, as sometimes the
Samnites at Caudium did, affirming that the violation of the public faith was
not to be expiated with the blood of one man.

CHAP. 2. The sedition raised upon the deliverie up of Mancinus to the enemy by
Tiberius Gracchus: His character and his intendments.
THe rendering up of Mancinus did raise a most dangerous sedition in the City:
For Tiberius Gracchus the son of Tiberius Gracchus (a man most noble and of
highest esteem) Grandchild by his daughter to Publius Africanus, who for the
time being Questor, when that agreement was made, and besides the Author and
contriver of it; One while taking it in the worst part, that any act of his
should be disvalewed, another while doubting the hazard of the like censure or
punishment, being created Tribune of the people, a man otherwise of a life most
unblameable, for his judgment most excellent, in his intentions most just;
finally, adorned with as great virtues as both nature and industry being in
their perfection, the condition of mortal man is capeable of: When Publius
Mutius Scaevola and Lucius Calphurnius were Consulls, about one hundred sixty
two years since, fell off from the best and honestest sort of the City, and
promising freedom of the City to all Italy, and withal publishing certain
laws for the distributing of lands, while all men coveted to have power in the
State, he confounded all things, and brought the Common wealth into a craggie
and redoubtable danger, and Octavius his fellow in office, for that he stood
for the Common wealth, he deprived of his command. He created Triumvirs for
the division of lands, and the leading out of Colonies; himself, his father in
law Appius who had been Consul, and his brother Gracchus, who then was but a
very youth.

CHAP. 3. The ruin of Gracchus by Scipio Nasica: the death of Gracchus which
was the first blood drawn in Rome in civil contentions.
THen Publius Scipio Nasica, Grandchild to him that by the Senate was judged
the best man in the City, son to him that being Censor built the Galleries
in the Capitol, and great Grandchild to Cnaeus Scipio, a man most honorable,
uncle to Publius the African, being both a private man, and of the gown,
though he were a near kinsman of Tiberius Gracchus, yet preferring his
country before his kindred, and thinking whatsoever was not for the welfare of
the public in his own particular, was a stranger to him; for these his
virtues, in his absence he was first of all men created chief and Sovereign
Bishop. When wrapping the skirt of his gown about his left arm from the
highest part of the Capitol, standing at the top of the stairs, he exhorted
as many as desired the preservation of the State to follow him. Then the
Noblemen, the Senate, and both the better part and greater of the Knights,
together with so many of the Plebeians as were untainted with these pernicious
devices, charged upon Gracchus, standing with his troops, and laboring to
draw almost all Italy to a head together: He flying and running down the
cliffe of the Capitol, was stricken with the frame of a form, and so with an
untimely death ended his life, which he might have passed with all glory and
honor. This was the beginning of shedding blood in civil contentions in the
City of Rome, and of swords used without punishment; from thence grew all
right to be trodden under foot by force; And the more powerful and former
custom, with the differences between the Citizens, which before were wont to
be cured by treaties and conditions, were after decided by the sword. Neither
were wars taken in hand for just causes and reasons, but as it were their way
of traffic and merchandising, which to speak truth, is no wonder, for
examples do not rest upon the grounds from which they had their first
beginning: but having made their way through any narrow and straight passage,
they afterward take to themselves a course of free and open liberty, and when
once men have swarved from that which is right, they run headlong to all
injustice. Nor does any man think that base and dishonorable to him, which
another has found beneficial.

CHAP. 4. Aristonicus pretending falsely to the blood Royal of Asia, which
left by Attalus his will to the Romans, as after Bithynia was by Nicomedes, he
had seized upon, overthrown by Mar. Perperna. And Numantia rased by the same
Emilianus who before had done as much for Carthage: His death much suspected,
but never questioned.
IN the mean time, while these passages are on foot in Italy. Aristonicus
after the death of King Attalus, by whom Asia was bequeathed as an inheritance
to the people of Rome (as inlike sort afterward Bithynia was also left by
Nicomedes) false^y pretending himself to be of the blood Royal, possessed
himself thereof by force. He by Marcus Perperna, was overthrown and led in
triumph: but Manius with the loss of his head, did from Aquilius receive his
payment, for that in the beginning of the war he had slain Crassus Muciarus,
a man most learned in the laws, as he was in quality of Proconsull upon his
departure out of Asia. And Publius Scipio the African, son of Emilius, who
had rased Carthage: after so many disasters about Numantia, being created
Consul the second time, and sent into Spain, did there make good the fortune
and valor of which he had before given proof in Africa; And within a year
and three months after his coming thither, having compassed Numantia round
about with his works, did level it with the ground. Neither did any man of
what Nation soever before his time leave his name recommended to perpetual
memory, by a more glorious destruction of any places: For by the rasing of
Carthage, and Numantia, he freed us of fear from the one, and of scorn and
reproach from the other. He when the Tribune Carbo enquired of him what he
thought of the killing of Tiberius Gracchus, answered; That if he had in his
thoughts to possess himself of the state, he was worthily punished. And when
all the assembly cried out, I (said he) that have so often remained
unterrified, with the shouts of the armed enemy, how can I be moved with
yours, to whom Italy is a stepmother. Being re^urned to the City, within a
while after when Mareus Aquilius and Caius Sempronius were Consulls, an hundred
and fifty years since; after his two Consulships, and two Triumphs, when he
twice had quitted the Common wealth of her fears, he was in the morning found
dead in his bed; so that certain marks of his being strangled, were found upon
his neck. Neither was there ever any inquiry made of the cause of a man's
death, of so great eminence: and his body was carried out to funeral with his
head covered, by whose means the city of Rome had lifted up her head above
all the inhabited world. So dyed he either a natural, as the most part
supposed, or a death procured by practice, as many have delivered. How ever, he
certainly past his course of life most nobly, and was in glory inferior to no
man that before that time had been, except his Grandfather. He departed this
life, almost at the end of his six and fiftieth year: whereof if any man make
a question let him look back to his former Consulship, to which he was
elected in his six and thirtieth year, and he will cease to doubt.

CHAP. 5. Anlus Brutus, his severity of command in Spain, cause of his
victory at Controbia.
BEfore the destruction of Numantia, the command of Aulus Brutus in Spain was
very glorious: who making his way through all the nations of Spain, having
taken an infinite number of men and Cities, and reached to those people, which
were scarce known, by hearsay, did worthily obtain the surname of the
Gallician. And before him but a few years, the government of that Quintus
termed the Maudonian was so severe, that when he assaulted a City called
Contrabia, five legionarie Cohorts being beaten down from a clifty place, he
immediately commanded them to give upon the same again. And all his soldiers
making their wills as they stood in their ranks, as if they were to run upon
certain death: the Constancy of the Co^mander, not frighted from his purpose,
received the soldiers back with victory, whom he had sent to die. Such was
the effect of fear mingled with shame, and a hope sprung out of despair. This
man by the valor and severity of his action: but Paulus Emilianus, following
the example of the former Paulus, by his discipline in Spain, did grow very
famous.

CHAP. 6. The stirs raised by Caius Gracchus, brother to Tiberius, intending
the same or worse then his brother had attempted: His character and overthrow
by Opimius.
TEn years then being elapsed, the same fury which had possessed Tiberius
Gracchus, did also seize upon his brother Caius, who did as well resemble him in
all his virtues, as in this error, but in his wit and eloquence far more
excellent. Who when with all tranquillity of mind, he might have been a
principal man in the City, either for revenge of his brothers death or to
invest himself in a regal power, taking him for his pattern, and entered upon
the Tribuneship, attempting things far greater and more insupportable: granted
the freedom of the City to all Italians, did extend it almost to the Alps,
divided lands, forbad any Citizen to possess above five hundred acres (which
was also provided for by the law Licinia) imposed new customs upon
Merchandise, filled the Provinces wit^ new Colonies, transferred the power of
hearing and determ^ning from the Senate to the o^der of Knights, purposed to
d^stribute Corn to the Common people; left nothing unstirred, nothing at
peace, finally, not any thing that was at quiet in the same estate. And further
prorogued his Tribuneship for another year. Him Lucius Opimius then Consul,
who when he was Praetor, had rased Fregelae, pursued with force, and together
with Fuluius Flaccus a man of Consular quality, and that had triumphed, whom
as badly affected as himself, Caius Gracchus had made Triumvir in the room of
his brother Tiberius, and his Consort in his royal power, deprived of his
life. That alone is reported to have been wickedly done by Opimius; That he
set a price and proclaimed that he would in ready gold pay it upon the head
(that I may not say of Gracchus) of a Citize^ of Rome. Flaccus when upon Mount
Aventine he drew on and encouraged his armed troops to fight was with his
eldest son there slain. Gracchus as he was flying when now he was at the
point of being apprehended by those that Opimius for that purpose had sent,
presented his neck to his servant Euporus: who no more faintly slew himself,
after he had done, then he did assist and free his lord. That day the
faithfulness of Pomponius a Roman Knight to Gracchus, was very notable; who
like Coeles making a stand upon the bridge against all the force of the enemy
at the last fell upon his sword; As before the body of Tiberius Gracchus, so
now also that of Caius with a strange cruelty of the Conqueror, was thrown
into the Tiber.

CHAP. 7. The cruelty of Opimius to a delicate youth, son to Flaccus one of
Gracchus his associates, and others of that faction, detested by the Romans
who were of his side.
THis was both in life and death, the fortune of the sons of Tiberius
Gracchus, and the Grandchildren of Publius Scipio the Affrican, in the life
time of their Mother Cornelia daughter to the Affrican. Men that made ill use
of most excel^ent abilities of spirit, who if ^hey had desired any proportion
of honors within the compass of a Civil estate, whatsoever ^hey in a
tumultuous manner ^ought to reach the Commonwealth to them if quiet would have
presented. To this sharpness was added a transcending villainy: for a youth of
excellent beauty not as yet full eighteen years old, and not guilty of his
fathers faults, the son of Fulvius Flaccus, who^ his father had sent as a
messenger to propound a treaty, was by Opimius put to death. Whom when a
Tuscan sooth-sayer his friend observed to be dragged weeping to prison, why do
thou not rather (said he) thus: and withal running his head against the stone
bridge, at the prison gate, with his brains beaten out, fell down dead.
Presently were there cruel inquisitions set on foot against the friends and
followers of the Gracchi. But for Opimius a man in other things upright and
grave, when he was afterward condemned by the Judgment of all the people: the
memory of that his cruelty would not suffer him to be with any humanity
pitied. The same spite also of a public censure did not unadvisedly ruin
within a while after Rutilius and Popilius who when they were Consulls had
been most bittterly eager upon the friends of the Gracchi. Let me intermingle
with affairs of so great consequence, a thing scarce worth the being known.
This is that Opimius from whose Consullship, the wine called Opimian, took its
name, and was most highly esteemed, which that it is not now to be met with,
the distance of time it self will declare it, being from him to the Consular of
thee Marcus Vinicius one hundred fifty and one years. An authority of less
power did succeed this act of Opimius, because they sought to satisfy their
particular spleenes, and the revenge was rather ascribed to private hate the^
to the vindicating of the public right. In the next ensuing year Porcius and
Marcius being Consuls, a Colony was planted at Narbo Marcius.

CHAP. 8. Caius Cato condemned of extortion for a petty sum. The two Metelli
near kinsmen, triumph in one day, as also the two brothers of the Flacci. And
Minutius upon the Scordisci.
LEt now the severitie of the Cities Censures be recommended to memory: For
Caius Cato a man of Consular quality, grandchild of Marcus Cato, and son to
the sister of the Affrican, was condemned upon information out of Macedonia of
extortion, when the question was but of four thousand Sesterces. Thus did they
rather bend their eyes upon the disposition to offend, then the measure of the
crime, squaring the fact by the rule of the intention, and weigh what, not how
far men did offend.

About the same time, the brothers of Marcus Metellus did triumph in one day.
Now was the fortune less remarkable, as hitherto the sole one of that kind
of the sons of Fulvius Flaccus (his I mean, who had taken Capua) in the
College of Consulls, whereof the one was given in adoption, and he so received
into the family of Acidianus Manlius. For the Censureship of the Metelli, was
of Cozen-germans, not of brothers, which happiness had only befallen to the
two Scipios. Then did the Cimbri and the Teutones pass over the Rhine who
presently as well by our many losses as by their own became famous. At the same
time that Minutius who built the Galleries, which even to this day are highly
esteemed, did bravely triumph over the Scordisci.

CHAP. 9. A register of Romans in that time famous for poesy, History, and
other arts of the like kind.
IN the the same age were Scipio Emilianus, and Laelius, Sergius Galba, the two
Gracchi, Caius Fannius, and Cerbo Papirius, famous for eloquence. Neither is
Metellus Numidicus, or Severus to be forgotten, but above all Lucius Crassus
and Marcus Antonius* to whom both in time and abilities succeeded Caius Caesar,
Strabo and Publius Sulpicius. For Mucius was more famous for his skill in the
law then for any eloquence that he was owner of.

About the same time were highly prized the ingeniousnesse for Comedyes of
Afranius, for Tragedies, of Pacuvius and Attius, who were honored even to the
being paralleld with the Grecian wits, who did not refuse to their works
prime rank among themselves. So as indeed it seemed there was in these more
daintines; in them more substantial blood. The name also of Lucilius, was at
that time of high esteem, who served on horseback under Publius the African
in the war of Numantia; When lugurth also being a young man, and Merius
serving under the Command of the same General, did in the same army learn
what they afterward should execute in arms of an opposite quallite. The
Historiographer Sisenna was then young: but his work of Silla's civil war,
he wrote some years after, when he was old. Caelius was more ancient then
Sisenna, but Rutilius, Claudius, Quadrigarius and Valerius Anti^s, were in the
same age with him. Yet let us not be ignorant, that in that age was Pompouius
notable for his conceit of a harsh style, and for the new Invention of his
work praise worthy.

CHAP. 10. Lepidus Aelius censured for hiring a house at 6^0. sesterces^a mean
rate in succeeding times. Domitius victorious over the Arverni, and Fabius, for
his, surnamed Allobrogian. The sat of the Domitian family to have but one
Son of a Father, yet all arive at the highest honors.
ANd here let us observe the famous severity of the Ce^sors, Cassius, Longinus
and Caepio who one hundred fifty and seven years since, did call in question,
Lepidus Aelius the Augur, for that he had hired a house of six thousand Assis
rent. If now any man should dwell in one of that value, he should scarce be
acknowledged for a Senator. So easily do men fall from what i^ fit, to errors,
from errors to crimes, and from crimes to the bottom of all wickedness. In
the same tract of time, the victory of Domitius over the Arverni and that of
Fabius, of the Allobroges were glorious. To Fabius the Grandchild of Paulus,
for that his victory, the surname of the Allobrogian was added; where is to be
observed, that in the Domitian family there was a peculiar, and as it was most
noble, so was it a felicity bounded within the number of a very few men. As
before this Cneus Domitius a young man of a most worthy and clear roundnesse:
there were of the same house but all the sole sons of their Fathers: yet all of
them attained Consullships and priesthoods, and almost all of them the honor
of Triumphs.

CHAP. 11. The war of Iugurth managed first by Metellus, ended by Caius
Marius: His character: 12 Metelli or more, within twelve years, of the
Caecilian family either Consulls or triumph.
THen followed the war with Iugurth, managed by Quintus Metellus a man
inferior to no one of his time: His Lieutenant was Caius Marius, of whom we
spoke before: borne of a family of Knights, rugged and stern, of a course
life, as the fittest for the wars, so the worst for peace, knowing no mean,
insatiably greedy of glory, in his passions ungoverned, and always unquiet. He
by the Customers and others that traded in Africa, accusing Metelius of
slowenesse, as who had drawn the wars out into a length of three years, and
the innate pride of the Nobility, with their greedy desire of prolonging their
Command: did bring to pass, that when having gotten leave, he was come to
Rome, and created Consul: the whole charge of the war, now almost brought to
an end by Metellus, as who had twice overthrown Iugurth in open field, was
committed to him. Yet notwithstanding was the triumph of Metellus, as glorious
as well deserved, and for his worth and valor, the surname of Numidian
bestowed upon him. As before we remembered the Nobleness of the Domitian, so
here we must observe that of the Cecilian family, in which almost within the
compass of twelve years, at this time there were above twelve Metelli that
either were Consulls or Censors, or did triumph. So that it appears, that as
the fortune of Cities and States, so also that of races or families does now
flourish, now grow old, now perish and come to an end.

CHAP. 12. Marius by Silla his Questor, had Iugurth delivered up from Bocchus:
Overthrowes the Te^tones with slaughter in two days of 150000 men. And after
with his colleague, Catulus, the Cimbres, with the loss of above 10000 s^aine
or taken.
But Caius Marius had associated to him for his treasurer Lucius Silla, the
destinies as it were making way for him: and by him whom he had sent to King
Bochus, near one hund^ed and thirty years since received King Iugurth
delivered to him: and being again chosen Consul at his return to the City,
in the Calends of January, and the beginning of his second Consulship, ^ed him
in truimph Then a^ before we have related when a vast multitude of the German
Nations, who were called the Cymbres and Teutones, had powered themselves out
upon us, and had overthrown Capio and M^^lius the Consul, and before that in
Gallia, Carbo and ^elan^s, and turned them out of their army, and slain
Scaurus Aurelius the Consul, with others of principal mark and quality: the
people of Rome to repel so potent an enemy* did think no man more fit to
command in chief than Marius. The third year then of his redoubled Consulship
was spent in the preparation for the war; in which year Cnaeus Domitius,
Tribune of the people, did prefer a law, that the Priests, whom before that
their fellows in office did institute, should be created by the people. In
his fourth Consulship, he fought with the Teutones beyond the Alps, near the
Sextian waters: and having put to the sword in that day and the next, above one
hundred and fifty thousand men, he did extirpate the whole Nation. In his
fifth on this side the Alps in the fields which are called Raudij, himself
being Consul and Quintus Luctatius Catulus Proconsull, in a most fortunate
encounter, there were of the enemies slain or taken prisoners, more than one
hundred thousand men. With this victory Marius did seem to have deserved of
the Common wealth that it should not be sorry that he was borne in it, and
with his good service to have made amends for the ills that he was author of:
his sixth Consulship was conferred upon him as a reward of his merits: yet
notwithstanding let him not be unjustly deprived of the glory of this
Consulship, in which he being Consul, did with force of arms, tame the
madness of Servilius Glaucia, and Saturni^us Apulcius, whom borne and bent
only to do mischief, with their unintermitted honors* tearing the
Commonwealth in pe^ces, and with the sword and slaughter, disordering, and
scattering the assemblies of the people: in the Hostilian Court he punished
with death.

CHAP. 13. Marcus Livius Drusus intending well to the Senate, but mistaken by
them.
AFter this a few years being interposed, Marcus Livius Drusus entered his
Tribuneship, a man most noble and excelling both in eloquence and goodness:
who with far better intentions than fortune undertook the affairs that
presented themselves, who when he endeavored to restore to the Senate their
anciently former honor, and to draw to that order from the Knights the power
of judging and determining: for the Knights having by the power of the
Gracchian l^^es gotten that authority, when they had raged against many of
most eminent mark, and those also most innocent, and also had condemned with
the infinite lamentation of the whole City Publius Rutilius of extortion; (A
man not of that age alone, but of any whatsoever equal to the most virtuous)
did even in those things, which for their behoof he contrived find the
Senate opposite to him. They not understanding t^^^ if he proposed any thing
for the advantage or benefit of the Plebeians, that it was done to the end as
with a bait to draw the multitude to his favor, that having obtained petty
things and trifles, they might give way to matters of greater import. Finally,
such was the fortune of Drusus, that the Senate did better approve the
miscariage of his fellow Tribunes, than his excellent intendments and scorning
the honors which were by him presented to them, did with an equal temper
brook the injuries of others, envying him that height of glory, and enduring
the poor and mean repute of the rest.

CHAP. 14. The same man by some of their precurement^, murdered with ^ knife,
in a crowd at his own house.
THe mind of Drusus then (since his fair intentions succeeded ill) being
turned to granting freedom of the City to all Italy, which when he had been
laboring for, and returned out of the Market place, attended with the vast and
innumerable multitude, which did always follow him, being in the court of his
own house, stricken with a knife, which was left sticking in his side, within
a few hours breathed his last. But being at the last gasp, looking upon a
number that stood about him, and lamented for him, he let fall one word most
suitable to the integrity of his conscience, Will ever (sa^d he) [my kinsmen
and friends] our Common wealth find a Citizen affected to her good, like my
self. This was the end of that most noble young man* of whose disposition it
should be amiss to forbear giving one argument. When he built his house upon
Mount Palatine, in that place, which once was Cicero's, after that Censorinus
his, and now belongs to Statilius Sisenna, and the Architect promised him that
he would so order it, that having an open prospect abroad, it should be free
from all view of any man without, nor should any look into, or supervise it:
nay, rather (said he) if thou have any skill at all, so frame my house, as
whatsoever I do in it may be seen by all the world.

CHAP. 15. Carthage the first Colonie planted out of Italy: that plantations
out of the native continent, have bin pernicious. The death of Drusus cause of
the Italian war. Metellus Numidicus banished by Saturninus the Tribune, and
recalled by the means of his son.
I Would reckon among the ^ most pernicious points of the laws of Gracchus
that he planted Colonies in other countries beyond the bounds of Italy. That
error our Ancestors had so carefully avoided (when they observed Carthage to
be grown so much more powerful than Tire, Massilia, then Phocaea, Si^acusa,
then Corinth, Cizicum, and Bizantium, then Miletum, which were their original
and Mother countries) that out of the provinces, they still recalled the
Citizens to Rome to be taxed. The death of Drusius raised the war of Italy,
which already and before his death was boiling: For when Lucius Caesar and
Publius Rutilius were Consulls, now one hundred and twenty years since when
that disease being as by contagio^ spread from the Aesculans over all Italy
(for they had slain the Praetor Servius, and Fonteius the Legate) and having
infused it self among the Marsians, was run through the whole country, had
armed them against the Romans, whose fortune as i^ was bitter, so was their
caus^ most just; for they required t^ be members of that City, who^^ Empire
and command they d^^ maintain with their swords. That at all times, and in all
wars, they did furnish double the number, both of horse and Foot, that the
Romans themselves brought to the field: and yet might not be admitted to the
privileges of that City, which by their means and valor was arrived at that
height that ^he should loath and scorn men of both the same blood and Na^ion,
as Forrainers and Aliens. That war consumed more ^han three hundred thousand
of the youth of Italy. The prin^pall Commanders of the Roman side in that
war, were Cnaeus Pompeius, father to Cnaeus Pompeius, the great, Cai^s Marius
of whom we spoke before, Lucius Sylla, who the ^eare last past had been
Prae^or, and Quintus Metellus, son to him that was surnamed Numidian, who
deservedly purchased the surname of Pious For by his piety to his parent, by
the authority of the Senate, and with the consent of the whole Common wealth
he restored his father to his country, being expelled by Lucius Saturninus
the Tribune of the people, because he alone refused to swear the observation
of the laws propounded by him. Nor was that Metellus the Numidian more enobled
by his triumphs, or the honors which he had attained, than he was by the
cause of his banishment the exile it self, or his return from it.

CHAP. 16. The Italian Captains in that war, the fortune various, the end
advantageous for the Romans.
OF the Italian party, the most remarkable Captains were, Silo Poppedius,
Herius Asinius, Iusterus Cato, Caius Pontidius, Telusius Pontius, Marius
Egnatius, and Papius Mutilius. Nor will I by my bashfulnesse lessen at all the
glory of my own blood and family, so long as I but relate the truth: For not a
little honor is due to the memory of Minutius Magius my great Grandfather,
who being Nephew to Docius Magius the noblest of all the Campanians, and a man
of most unspotted fidelity, did serve the Romans in this war, with so much
loyalty, that with a legion which himself had raised among the Hirpines, he
took Herculaneum, and in it Titus Didius, and consorted with Lucius Silla,
besieged the Pompeies, and forced Cosa. Of whose worth both diverse other, and
especially, as well as most clearly Quintus Hortensius in his Annalls, has
made relation: And whose deservings the people of Rome did afterward amply, and
fully remunerate, both in endowing him (and that not among others, but) singly
and by himself with the privileges of the City; and in creating his two
sons Praetors, when the old man was not yet past begetting of other children,
but had some borne to him after that time. So variable and mischievous was the
fortune of that war, that in two years, one after the other, two Roman
Consulls were slain by the enemy, Rutilius first, and then Cato Porcius: The
armies of the Romans in sundry places were defeated, and they compelled to
wear only their Cassocks, and remain a long time in that habit: they chose
for the seat of their Empire Corfinium, and called it Italicum. After that by
degrees, and incorporating into the City, such as had either not taken arms at
all, or quickly laid them down, and made their peace, our forces were
repaired, and the common wealth sinking and ready to perish, was restored by
Pompey, Sylla and Marius.

CHAP. 17. The Italians made free of the City, the refusal whereof before was
cause of the war: Sylla made Consul.
THe Italian war being for the greatest part ended except only those
relics thereof which remained about Nola, (which settled, the Romans having
sheathed their swords, did rather choose to grant the liberty of the City to
those which were conquered and deprest, then before when they were sound and
entire) Quintus Pompeius entered his Consulship, together with Lucius Cornelius
Sylla, a man that neither can be sutably to his merit commended for his
carriage before his victory, nor yet in the same proportion dispraised for his
actions, after he was Conqueror. He being descended of a noble family, as
the sixth from Cornelius Rufinus, who in the war of Pyrrhus was reckoned one
of the most eminent Captains of that time, when the honors of his family had
been intermitted, did so carry himself for a long time, as it seemed he had
no thought of standing for the Consulship. Afterward growing to reputation in
the Italian war, and before that in his Lievetenancie under Marius in France,
where he had routed some of the enemies most esteemed Captains; he took
heart from his good fortune, and requiring the Consulship, was so declared by
almost all the voices of the City. Yet was he in the nine and fortieth year
of his age, when he attained to that honor.

CHAP. 18. War with Mithridates committed to Sylla: Mithridates his character
and acts: the fidelity of the Rhodians, and perfidiousnesse of the Muylenians:
Sulpitius his character with the charges in his carriage.
AT that time, Mithridates King of Pontus, a man (of whom we may neither be
silent nor yet speak slightly) in war most eagerly fierce, of notable
valor, sometimes in his fortune, always in his courage of the highest rank,
in direction a great Captain, in execution a brave soldier, in his hatred to
the Romans another Hanibal, having possessed himself of Asia, and out the
throats of all the Romans that were in it, whom in one day and hour, by his
letters to the Cities, with infinite promises of rewards, he had procured to
be massacred. At that time there was not any who either in faithfulness
toward the Romans, or in valor against Mithridates did parallel the Rhodians.
Their fidelity was by the perfidiousnesse of them of Mytelene, rendered the
more illustrious, who delivered to Mithridates bound and captive Marcus
Aquilius, and other Romans with him: although afterward they were by Pompey
restored to their liberty, only in favor of Theophanes. When Mithridates did
seem in a fearful manner to threaten Italy: Asia by the lots fell to Sylla
for his Province. He being gone out of the City when he stayed before Nola,
(for that City did most obstinately continue in arms, and was then beleagured
with the Roman forces, as if it had been sorry for the faithfulness which
above all other (Subjects or confederates) it had most religiously observed in
the Punique war) Publius Sulpitius Tribune of the people, a man eloquent,
eager, by his wealth, favor, friendships, and the vigor of his wits and
spirit, made most eminent, having with all secrecy of his intentions procured
himself a vaste authority with the Common people: As if he were grown to be
weary of his virtues, and that his well laid designs were unsuccessefull to
him: upon a sudden becoming ill disposed and headily rash, decreed all
commands, all provinces to Caius Marius, who greedily affected them after he
was seventy years old: and preferred a law to the people, by which the command
of Sylla should be abrogated, the war of Mithridates decreed to Marius, with
other pernicious and balefull laws not to be endured in a free Common wealth.
And besides, by certain assasines of his own faction, he caused to be
murdered, the son of Quintus Pompeius, then Consul; who also was son in law
to Sylla.

CHAP. 19. Sylla his return to Rome from Nola, and expelling the opposite
faction: Marius his danger at Mintura, and Sulpitius his death.
SYlla then drawing his army together returned to the City, and by force
possessed himself thereof, threw out of it the twelve authors of those
mischievous novelties, in which number were comprehended Marius with his son,
and Publius Sulpitius, and by a law which then was passed, did condemn them to
banishment. As for Sulpitius the horsemen that overtooke him in the fennes of
Laurentum slew him, and his head being set up to show over the pleading place,
was as a presaging Omen of the proscription that ensued. Marius also after his
sixth Consulship, and in the seventieth year of his age, was with a leather
thong cast about his neck, dragged naked, and covered all over with mire out
of a plot of reeds about the Marsh of Murica, in which, flying from Sylla his
Cavallery which pursued him, he had hidden himself, by the command of the
Decemvirs to the common prison of Minturna: to make an end of whom, when a
common slave of the Town, by birth a German, who by chance was taken in the
Cymbrian war where Marius commanded in chief, was sent with a sword: he as
soon as he knew Marius, with a hideous outcry, discovering his indignation
at the hard fortune of so great a personage, casting away his sword, run out
of the prison. The Townsmen then being by an enemy taught to have compassion
upon one that but a little before was a man of highest eminence, having
furnished him with provision, put him aboard a ship, and dismissed him in safety.
But he having met with his son about Aenaria, stood for Africa: and in a shed
among the ruins of Carthage, passed for a time a life full of necessity:
while Marius beholding Carthage, and it on the other side holding him, one of
them might in a sort serve for a comfort to the other.

CHAP. 20. Pompey the Consul slain by the soldiers. Cinna for his
sedititious devices, deposed from his Consulls place, his recalling Marius out
of exile.
THis year was the first that ever the Roman soldiers embrewed their hand in
the blood of a Consul: for Pompey Syllas colleague was by the army of Cnaeus
Pompeius, slain in a mutiny, but whereof the Commander himself was the
Author. Neither was Cinna of better temper than Marius or Snipitius, so that
whereas the freedom of the City was so granted to the Italians, that the newly
incorporate Citizens should be distributed into eight tribes, left by their
power and multitude, the dignity of the ancient Citizens should be abased,
and they to whom the courtesy was done, have more Authority than the
conferrers thereof. Cinna promised that he would divide them among all the
Tribes, with the fame of which benefit he drew a mighty number of them into
the City. Out of which being forced by the power of his fellow in office, and
of the chief Citizens, when he bent himself for Campania by the authority
of Senate, he was deprived of his Consulship, and in his place was subrogated
Lucius Cornelius Merula, the high priest of Jupiter. This injury was better
suited to the person of the man, than fit to serve for a president. Cinna then
having first corrupted the chief Centurions and Tribunes, and within a while
the soldiers also with hope of a donative, was received by the army which lay
about Nola. And when they had all sworn obedience to him, he retaining the
marks and ensigns of the Consulship, declared war against his country:
relying upon the multitude of the new Citizens, of whom he had enrolled more
than three hundred Cohorts, and had filled up about thirty legions. Yet did
that side stand in need of authority and favor: to give it that addition, he
recalled out of banishment Caius Marius with his son, and those which were
driven into exile with them.

CHAP. 21. The battle fought near Rome, between Cinna and Pompey, Father to
the great Pompey, who after dyed of the plague.
But while Cinna makes war upon his Country Cnaeus Pompeius, father to Pompey
the great (of whose noble endeavors as we have before delivered, the
Republique had made good use in the Marsian war, and especially about the
Country of Picenum, and who had taken Asculum, about which Town, when the
Armies were dispersed in diverse other Countries, seventie and five thousand
Roman Citizens, and more then threescore thousand Italians fought in one day)
being hopeless of holding the Consullship any longer, did so doubtfully and
indifferently carry himself between the factions, that he seemed to direct all
his actions to his own ends, and to lie in wait for the time, wavering to and
fro, as ready when the fairer hope of power and greatness, presented it self,
to render both himself and his army. Yet at the last, in a great and a sharp
battle he encountered with Cinna. The issue whereof being fought and
determined under the very walls, and the Allies of the Romans both fighting in
it, and being also spectators thereof: how mischievously balefull it was, can
scarce be expressed in words. After this when the pestilence raged in both the
Armies as if the ^word had not sufficiently wa^ted the^, Cnaeus Pompeius
depar^ed this life. The rejoicing for whose death was almost a counterpoize for
the loss of so many Citizens as either the sword or sickness had deprived of
life, and the people of Rome upon his dead body vented the ill will which they
ought him in his life. Whether there were two or three families of the Pompeies
or no, certain it is that the first of that name Quintus Pompeius was Consul
with Cnaeus Servilius, about one hundred sixty eight years since. Cinna and
Marius not without bloody skirmishes on both sides, recovered the City. But
Cinna entering first, passed a law for the recalling of Marius from exile.

CHAP. 22. Marius his return to Rome: the first proscription.
PResently Marius also to the common plague of his Country men came into the
town. Nothing could have been more bloody then that victory: if that of Sylla
had not followed it. Neither did they rage with an unrestrained
licentiousness, but the noblest and most eminent men of the City, were with
sundrey kinds of death removed out of the way. Amongst them the Consul
Octavius, a man of a most harmless dis^osition by the command of Cinna was
put to the sword. But Merula who upon the coming of Cinna had disclamed the
Consulship, cutting his veins, and sprinkling the alter with his blood, did
call upon the same Gods whom he often had, as high Priest to Jupiter, invoked
for the welfare of the Republique, with curses for Cinna and his faction, and
in that sort rendered up his spirit, which had so superabundantly deserved well
of the common wealth Marcus Antonius a man most eminent, both for his rank in
the City, and for eloquence, was by the swords of the soldiers whom for a
time he had with the daintiness of his Oratory caused to pause upon the
command of Marius and Cinna, cruelly slaughtered. Quintus Catolus who both for
his other virtues and by the glory of the Cymbrian war, wherein he wa^ an
equal sharer with Marius was of highest repute; when h^ was hunted for to be
put t^ death, shut himself up in a place ^ately pergetted with lime and ^and;
and causing fire to be brought unto if to give the more force to ^he savor of
drawing an air ^ernicious and deadly, and with^ll suffocating his own breath,
^ied rather as his enemies wi^hed, then as they intended. Thus ^ll things in
the Republique, ran ^ headlong course of mischief: and yet did not any man
declare ^imselfe that he had the daring ^ give away the goods of a ^ittizen of
Rome to another, ^or any that was so affronted as ^ demand them. That also
after^ard was added, that Avarice ^ecame the motive of cruelty: ^^d the
proportion of the fault ^as rated according to the ^orth of the estate: so as
he that ^as rich was held a guilty per^^n, and every man was made the price of
his own danger. Neither did any thing seem^ base, so as it were gainefull.

CHAP. 23 Marius his seventh Consulship and death, Sylla his acts against
Mithridates: his resolution against the Marians, but after the foreign enemeis
nayle^ were pared.
CInna then entered his secon^ Consulship, and Marius hi^ seventh, to the
disgrace of hi^ former ones; in the beginnin^ whereof, falling into a fickr^^
he deceased: a man in the warre^ as superlatively bitter to the enemy, as in
peace to his Country men, and of quiet most impatient. In his room was
su^rogated Valerius Flaccus, the au^hor of a most base and unjust ^aw: that
Creditors should be ^aied but the fourth part of their ^ebt. Of which his fact
within ^wo years he received ^he reward which he had ^o well deserved. White
Cinna ^id thus dominiere in Italy. ^he greater part of the Nobili^^e fled to
Sylla in Achaia, and from thence into Asia. In the ^ean time, Sylla did in such
sort ^ncounter with the General im^loied by Mithridates against ^im about
Athens in Baeotia and Macedonia, as he both re^overed Athens, and having
be^^owed much labor about the ^everall fortifications, which ^hey had made
upon the port of ^iraeus, he put to the sword about ^wo hundred thousand men,
and ^^oke prisoners not many fewer ^ any man shall impute this time of
rebellion to the Athenians he is certainly ignorant both of the truth and all
antiquity. For the fidelity of the Athenians to the state of Rome was still
so inviolate, that always and in every occasion whatsoever was performed with
all sincerity and integrity, they used to say it was done with an Atticke
faithfulness. But at that time being oppressed with the force of Mithridates
his arms, they in a most wretched estate being subject to their enemies, held
under with their garrisons, and beseiged by their friends, had their hearts
without the Rampires, and their bodies within the walls, obeying the
necessity which they could not avoid. From thence Sylla passing over into
Asia, found Mithridates an humble suppliant and obedient to all hi^ commands.
Upon whom imposing a fine of money, and part of his ships, he constrained him
to quit Asia, and those Provinces which by force he had seized upon: he
received back from him all those which were prisoners, did justice upon
fugitives and offenders, and enjoined him to be content with his estate
descended to him from his Fathers, that is, with the Kingdom of Pontus.

CHAP. 24. Fimbria his boldness, and end: Laenas the Tribune executes Lucilius
the last years tribune, and banisheth the rest of Sylla his party.
Caius Flavius Fimbria who being General of the horse before Sylla his
coming, had stain Valevius Flascus a man of Consular quality, and possessing
himself of his army, and saluted by the title of General, had as it happened in
a battle routed Mithridates: Upon Sylla his passing over, slew himself. A
young man he was who what he most unlawfully durst attempt did with courage put
in execution. The same year, Publius Lanas, Tribune of the people, did throw
down from the Tarpeyan rock Sexius Lucilius who had been Tribune of the
people, the year before: and when his fellows in office, whom he had cited
and appointed a day for their trial, did for fear fly to Sylla: he by
proclamation declared them Rebels, forbidding them the use of fire and water.
Sylla, then having settled the affairs beyond the Sea, when to him first of any
Roman, the Ambassadors of the Parthians had presented themselves: and among
them certain of their soothsayers, had upon observation of some marks in his
body, foretold that he should pass a most glorious life, and that the memory
of him should be long lived, returning into Italy, he at Brundusium landed with
only thirty thousand men against forces of his enemies, consisting of above
two hundred thousand. Hardly can I esteem any action of Syllaes more noble
then that when the faction of Cinna and Marius tyrannized over al Italy, he
neither forbear to declare, that he would make war upon them, nor yet quitted
the business that he had in hand: And thought that the public enemy of the
State was first to be represt, before he thought of private revenge: and that
when the fear of a foreign force was removed, and he had mastered his enemy
abroad, he would also take order with those at home. Before coming of Lucius
Sylla in a mutiny of the Army, Cinna was by them slain; A man better meriting
to have been executed at the pleasure of the Conqueror, then slaughtered by
the rage of the soldier, of whom it may be truly said: that he dared give
attempt upon those things which no honest man ever durst think; and effected
that which was not to be done by any, but those that were of the most
dauntlesse courage: and that in consultation and advice, he was headily rash;
in execution, a gallant man. Carbo having no colleague subrogated in Cinna's
place, was, for the rest of the whole year the sole Consul.

CHAP. 25. Sylla his return into Italy: the overthrow of Scipio and Norbanus
near Capua, Sylla after the victory, not like Sylla before it.
THou would have thought that Sylla had not come into Italy to make a part
in the war: but to negotiate for and procure a peace. With such quietness and
so great care of the provisions and fruits of the earth, of the country, the
people, and the Towns, did he lead his army through all Calabria and Apulia,
into Campania: and did seek to end the war with just, and equal conditions.
But they whose greedy desires were both extremely wicked and unbounded, could
not away with peace. In the mean time Sylla his army did daily increase, every
one that was of the honestest ^ort, and the most discreet flocking to him.
After that not far from Capua he prosperously defeated Scipio and Norbanus
the Consuls, of whom Norbanus was overthrown in fight. Scipio forsaken by his
army and betrayed by them, was by Sylla dismissed untoucht. So unlike was Sylla
the soldier to Sylla the Conqueror, that while he overcomes he was more mild
then the gentlest spirit: after the victory, more cruel then can be spoken.
For both when he was Consul, as we have already told, he dismissed in safety
Quintus Sertorius, only disarming him; a firebrand soon after, (of oh how
great a war) with many others whom he had in his power: I think that in the
same man there might be seen an instance of a mind double, and most different
from it self. After the victory, in the descent from the mountain Tifata,
where Sylla had encountered with Caius Norbanus, he rendered thanks to Diana,
to whose Deity all that country is consecrated: and also dedicated to the
goddess, the Bathes for their virtue in curing diseases very famous, with all
the fields about them: of which his grateful devotion the brazen table fixed
upon a post of the temple, with the inscriptio^ thereof does to this day bear
witness and keep the memory in being.

CHAP. 26. Carbo, and Marius the son, Consulls: Marius beaten at Sacriportum
by Sylla, and besieged in Preneste, Murders in Rome, and the brave death of
Calphurnia.
IN the mean while, the Consuls for the time being, Carbo the third time, and
Caius Marius son to him that was seven times Consul, who then was six and
twenty years old, and one rather of his fathers courage, then fitted for that
age, having, and that bravely made many attempts, being at last beaten by Sylla
about Sacriportum, retired with his army to Preneste, which being by nature
fortified, he had before strengthened with a garrison. When, lest there should
be any thing wanting to the public calamities; In that City where the
emulation was always wont to be about virtuous actions, the contention was now
only for the height of mischief: and he thought himself the best man, who did
most transcend in villainy. For while they were in arms, and disputing the
fortune of the wars at Sacriportum, Damasippus the Praetor in the market
place of Hostillius did cause to be murdered, as favorers of Sylla his
faction, Domitius Scaevola, who also was the sovereign Bishop, and a most
famous sage of all laws both devine and humane: together with Caius Carbo of
the Praetorian rank, and brother to the Consul, and Antistius who had binne
Aedile. Nor let Calpurnia the daughter of Bactia and wife of Antistius, lose
the glory of her most noble resolution; who when her husband, as we have
related, was slain with a sword, ran her self through: how great an addition
to her fame and glory; her virtue makes her eminent, her country is unknown.

CHAP. 27. Pontius Telesinus the Samnite, his braverie and endangering Sylla in
fight at the gates of Rome a Menius seeking to escape under ground from
Preneste, surprised and slain.
But Pontius Telesinus, Captain of the Samnites, one both at home and in the
wars of an invincible spirit, and of the Roman name, a most irreconcilable
enemy: having gathered together about forty thousand of the bravest and the
most eager of wars, that were to be found among the youth of his nation. When
Carbo and Marius were Consults about forty years since, upon the Kallends of
November, did so rudely encounter with Sylla before the gate Collina, as he
brought both him and the Common wealth into the extremity of danger: which was
not in greater hazard when Hannibal his tents were pitched within three miles
of the walls, than that day when Telesinus flying about the ranks of his army,
and proclaiming that the Romans last day was come; cried out that the City
must be destroyed and rased; adding thereunto that those Wolves, the ruiners
of the liberty of Italy, would never fail to be troublesome, except the wood
in which they used to harbor, were stubbed up by the roots. At length above an
hour within night, both the Romans army gat some time to breath, and the
enemy fell off; Telesinus was found the next day half a live, and with a
speech rather of a conquering, than a dying man, whose head being cut from his
shoulders, Sylla commanded to be carried about the walls of Preneste. Then at
length the younger Caius Marius despairing of the success of his affairs,
attempting to escape by certain Mines which with wonderful Art being cut
under ground, did open themselves into several fields, when now he had gotten
out of the earth, was by some that were set there for that work, deprived of
life. There are some that report, he dyed by his own hand: some that say,
that he and his younger brother Telesinus beleagured, and attemting to escape
with him, finding themselves past all hope, engaged ran together, and with
interchanged wounds, dispatched one another. How ever he dyed, and that to
this day, his memory is nothing obscured by so great glory of his father: in
what repute Sy^^a did hold that young man, it is easily to be discerned in
this; that when he was slain, he assumed the name of fortunate, which indeed
he should have withal justice taken upon him, if his victory and his life had
ended together. Offella Lucretius commanded in chief at the siege of Marius
and Praneste, who having been before of the Marian faction when he was
Praetor, fled over to Sylla. The fortune of that day in which the army of the
Samnites, and Telesinus was mated, Sylla did honor with a perpetual memorial
of play, in the Circus, in which without naming it, the victory of Sylla is
glorified.

CHAP. 28. Diverse battles fought and worn by Sylla his Captains, the
Servilij, Metellus and Lucullus: the secona proscription.
A Little before that Sylla fought at Sacriportum, diverse Commanders of his
party had in brave and important encounters, routed several armies of the
enemies. As the two Servilij at Clusium, Metellus Pius at Faventia, and Marcus
Lucullus at Fidentia. The miseries of the civil war did seem to be ended,
when by the cruelty of Sylla, they were both renewed and augmented: for he
being created Dictator (the assuming of which honor by any man had now by the
space of one hundred and twenty years been intermitted, ever since the next
year after Hannibal his quitting of Italy, so as it seemed the people of Rome
did not so much desire to make use of the Dictatorship, as they stood in fear
of the power of so absolute a command which their Ancestors had employed to
relieve and settle the State in the greatest exigent) did abuse it with a
licentious and unbounded cruelty. He was the first (and would to God he had
been the last) that invented and raised a president for proscriptions. That in
that City, in which an overworne stage player was censured for saucy abusing
of others, in the same there should be an authorizing from the State of the
massacring of a subject, and he thrive best, who had slain most men, nor the
reward for killing an enemy be more full and bounteous, than for murdering a
Citizen, and every man be made the play master of his own hangman. Neither was
this rage bent only against those who had borne arms against him: but many
innocent men also fell under it. To which was added, that the goods of those
that were proscribed, were set to sale, and their children being disinherited,
were also barred and excluded from standing for any honors or offices in the
State: and withal, which was of all the most unworthie piece, the sons of
Senators, must bear the burdens of that order, and yet lose the rights
thereof.

CHAP. 29. Cnaeus Pompeius his bringing an army to Sylla: His character and the
esteem be held with his enemy.
Upon the coming of Lucius Sylla into Italy, Cnaus Pompeius, the son of that
Pompey, of whose most glorious exploits in his Consulship in the Marsian war,
we have before made relation, being three and twenty years old, about one
hundred years since, undertaking with the means of a private fortune, great
matters, and gallantly putting in action what he had so projected; to
vindicate and restore the honor of his country, did raise a full and just
army in the Picene territory, which was in every place stuffed with the
followers and dependants of his father, whose greatness would, to describe it
fully, require many volumes, but the proportion of the work I have in hand
compells me to deliver it in few words. His mother was called Lucilia,
descended of a race of the degree of the Senate, for his shape it was of the
best, not such as inlovely youths is counted for dainty, but for the
gracefulness and Majesty suited to such a height of greatness which did so
attend upon his fortunes to the last period of his life. Of authority and power
(that it might for his honor be tendered to him, not seized upon by him) he
was most eagerly desirous. In war a most able Captain, in peace a Citizen,
(except where he stood in fear of a concurrent equal) full of all modesty,
of his friends a most constant observer; oftended, he was not hard to be
entreated; once reconciled, he most faithfully kept his word; in receiving
satisfaction, no man so easy. His power he never or seldom abused, to commit
any insolence: he scarce was discerned to wish any thing, except it should be
counted among the highest of his aims, that he thought scorn in a free
City, and Lady of so many Nations, where by right all men were of his own
rank, to see any one his equal in honor. He from the time that he came to
man's estate, being trained up in service under his father, a most able
Captain, did so inform his judgment, which of it self was clear and
capable of knowledge, with an excellent understanding of the Arts of war,
that by Sertorius, Metellus was indeed more commended, but Pompey more
cordially redoubted.

CHAP. 30. Sertorius betrayed at supper by Perperna and slain: Metellus and
Pompeius their triumph, before Pompeius was a Senator. The wars with the
staves, and Spartacus their Captain.
IN the end Marcus Perperna, a man of Praetorian quality, and of the
proscribed, by his race and descent more noble than his disposition, at Exosca
murdered Sertorius, when they were at supper, and by that his basest
treachery, procured to the rest of the people of Rome an assured victory, to
his own party ruinous destruction, and to himself a most ignominious death.
Metellus then and Pompey triumphed for their conquest of both the Spaines. But
Pompey in this same triumph being as yet but a Knight of Rome, before the time
that he was, or might be elected Consul, entered the City in a triumphall
Chariot: who can forbear to wonder at this man? that being by extraordinary
commands, raised to the highest type of honor, did yet with impatience brook
the Senate and people of Rome their showing that they took into their
consideration, and had regard to Caius Caesar when he pretended to a second
Consul^hip. So familiar it is with men ^o allow any thing to themselves, but
excuse nothing in others, and to bend their envy ^red by occasions, not as the
^ause, but as their humor and ^he persons direct them. In his Consulship did
Pompey re^tore the power of the Tri^unes, whereof Sylla had only left the
shadow or image in use. While the war of Sertorius was on foot, sixty four
fugitive slaves breaking out of a fencing school, where they were kept at
Capua, led by Spartacus, and getting swords in the City, at the first withdrew
themselves to Mount Vesuvius, and presently their multitude daily increasing,
with various and grievous calamities they afflicted all Italy, whose number did
grow to such an excess, a^ in the last battle that they fought, they opposed
the Roman army with forty thousand armed men. The glory of ending this war,
was due to Marcus Crassus, who was ere long a principal man among all the
Romans.

CHAP. 31. The piraeticall war with amplest authority committed to Pompey,
though against the will of the Nobility.
NOw had the quality of Pompey turned the eyes of the world upon him, and he
was in every place and respect, the more fixedly regarded, when being Consul,
he had solemnly sworn that his time being expired, he would not accept of,
or seek the government of any Province, and had kept his oath. Two years
after, A^lus Gabinius the Tribune preferred a law that since the Pirates did
now in the manner of a just war, not of the every and surprising attempts,
with whole navies affright the world, and had also sacked certain Cities in
Italy: that, I say, Cnaeus Pompey should be employed to repress them: and that
his command should extend through all the Provinces of equal power with the
Proconsulls, and every way fifty miles from the sea side; by which decree of
the Senate, the Empire of almost the whole world was conferred upon one man.
Yet was the same also decreed two years before in the Praetorship of Mark
Anthony. But sometimes the consideration of the person, as by president it does
mischief, so it either augments or lessens the envy that i^ borne them: for
seldom are the honors envied of such men whose power is not redoubted; and on
the contrary, men do stand in fear of extraordinary greatness in those whom
they suppose likely either to quit or retain them at their pleasures, and to
have no limits or terms set them but by heir own will. This determination was
opposed by the prime of the Nobility: but their prudent advice was overruled
and mastered by the violence of others. The esteem of Quintus Catulus, and
This modesty also are worthy of memory, who when, in opposing of this law,
he had said in the assembly, that Cnaeus Pompeius was indeed a very excellent
man, but yet in a free Republique, neither all, nor yet too much was to be
committed to the hand of any one man, and then added; But if any thing
disasterous betide him: whom have you to substitute in his room? the whole
assembly cried out, Thy self Quintus Catulus: He then vanquished by the
uniforme consent of them all, and so honorable a testification of the whole
City concerning himself, departed out of the assembly. Let me here admire
both the honesty of the man, and the equity of the people. Him, that he
would not any further contend, and of their part, that though dissuading and
declaring himself adverse to their desires, they yet would not defraud him of
the attestation justly due to him.

CHAP. 32. That war in short time ended, and the seas cleared of Pirates, who
were planted in a Colonie within land.
ABout the same time Cotta did equally divide the power of judging between the
two orders of the Senate and Knights; which Caius Gracchus having bereft the
Senate of, had transferred to the Knights, and Sylla had after restored to
them. And Otho Roscius also by a law of his propounding, rendered again to the
Knights their places in the Theater. But Cnaeus Pompeius having taken with him
to assist him in that war, many and worthy men, and appointed guards of
ships for all the bays and sea coasts, in a short time with an invincible
power did free the world of fear. And having in many encounters and diverse
places beaten the Pirates: at length falling upon them about Cilicia with his
whole fleet, and totally routing them, that he might with the more celeritie
make an end of the war, so dilated over the earth, he recollecting the
remnants of them, settled them in Cities, apart remoted from the Sea upon
certain habitations. There are that carpe at this act of his: but though such
an Author be reason enough for the fact, yet reason it self does make any
author of great authority. For giving them means to live without rapine, he
shut them up far from Sea, so barring them from that way of spoiling others.

CHAP. 33. Manlius Tribune of the people, preferres a law to commit the war
of Mithridates to Pompey, taking it from Lucullus, who had done great things in
it: Lucullus his character, comparative with the disposition of Pompey.
When the Pyraticall war was upon the point of concluding, and Lutius
Lucullus (who seven years before in his Consulship, had by lot Asia asigned
unto him as his province, and had there performed both great and memorable
services, had often in many places routed Mithridates, had with a glorious
victory freed Cizicu^ from siege, and had overthrown in Armenia Tigranes the
greatest King of those Pirates, and rather would not, then was unable to give
the last blow to that war, he (who in all other respects was worthy of
praise, and in war invincible) was yet vanquished with the love of money) did
still command in that war. Manilius then Tribune of the people, a man always
mercenarie, and a busy advancer of the power of another, preferred a law, that
the war with Mithridates should be committed to Cnaeus Pompeius. The bill
did pass, and thereupon was there great and bitter brawling between the
Generals, while Pompey objected to Lucullus his base love of gain, and
Lucullus to him his unlimited desire of command, and neither of them in that
which he imputed to the other, could be charged with belying him: For neither
did Pompey after he once had put his hand to the affairs of state in his
mind, ever brook any equal, and in those things in which by due right, he
should have been the prime, he desired to be the sole man. Nor did ever any
man less covet all other things, or more greedily glory than he. In seeking
honors without moderation, in enjoying and using them most modest: as who
whereas he most desirously entered them, did yet with an equal temper lay them
down, and what he desired to assume at his own pleasure, was content to
divest himself of it at the will of another. Lucullus on the other side, a man
in all other regard of highest excellencies, was the first beginner of the
excessive riot of our times in building, feasts and furniture of houses: whom
for his forcing out the sea in some places, by masses of earth thrown into it,
and letting it into other by undermining of mountains, Pompey the great did
not without a smartnesse of wit, use to call the gowned Xerxes.

CHAP. 34. Creet conquered and made a Province by Metellus: The Temple of Ianus
shut the secona time, which was done but thrice in all the time of Rome: First
by the King, secondly by Metellus, thirdly by Augustus. Cicero his suppressing
of Catiline, his conspiracy.
ABout the same time the Isle of Creet was by Quintus Metellus brought under
the command of the people of Rome, which by the leading of Panares and
Lasthenes, with twenty four thousand young men of incredible swiftness,
unweariable with their arms and travail, and most excellent Archers, had for
three whole years vexed the Roman armies. Neither from encroaching upon the
glory of this man also, did Cnaeus Pompeius restrain his desires, but
endeavored to claim a part of his victory. But for the triumphs of Lucullus
and Metellus both their own singular virtue and the envy of Pompey did with
all the best sort of men render them the more favored. In these times it was,
that Marcus Cicero, who was indebted only to himself for all his additions, a
man of a most illustrious newness, and as he was noble in his life, so for
his understanding of the greatest: whose work it was that we should not be
inferior to them in wit, whom with arms we had mastered: being Consul, with
his singular virtue, constancy, vigilancie, and carfulness overthrew the
conspiracy of Sergius Catiline, Lentulus, Cethegus, and diverse others of both
the degrees of Senators and Knights. Catiline by fear of the Consulls command
was forced out of the City, Lentulus of Consular quality, and that had been
twice Praetor, and Cethegus with others of noble families, by authority of the
Senate, and direction from the Consul, were put to death in prison.

CHAP. 35. Cicero his character: the execution of the conspirators and the
death of Catiline in fight.
THat day of the Senates sitting, in which these things were acted, did render
most gloriously glistering, the virtue of Marcus Cato, which was before in
other things conspicuous and clearly shining. He being the great grand child
of Marcus Cato, the head of the Portian family, was a man most like to virtue
it self, and every way more nearly aproaching in his disposition to the Gods
then man: who never did just things that he might appear so, but because he
could do no other, and to who^ that only did seem reasonable which had equity
in it, and being clearly free of all human maine vices had always fortune
in his own power. He being chosen (as yet a very youth) Tribune of the people,
when others did opine that Lentulus and the rest of the Conspirators should be
held under guard in the free towns, when, almost one of the last, his suffrage
was called for, did with such power both of spirit, and wit, inveigh against
the Conspiracy, that with his ardencie he rendered the opinions of those who
had persuaded the way of lenity, suspected of being privy to the plot: so
laid open the dangers hanging over their heads, of the ruin and firing of the
City and altering of the State, so magnified the virtue of the Consul, that
the whole body of the Senate sided with his opinion, censured them to die whom
we spak of before, and the major part of the order of Senators accompanied Cato
by way of honor home to his house. But Catiline did no more faintly put in
execution his designs of mischief when they were discovered, then he had
before undertaken them; for fighting with infinite valor He paid the life to
the sword of the soldier, which was due to that of Justice.

CHAP. 36. The birth of August. Caesar, in Cicero his Consulship: An
enumeration men, in that age famous for learning.
NO mean addition of honor to the year of Cicero his Consulship, was the
birth of Sacred Augustus, who then was borne now eighty two years since with
his greatness to obscure all men of what nation soever. It may almost seem
superfluous to reckon up the ages of the men of eminency for their wits of
those days: for who knows not that about that time though somewhat differing
in years did flourish, Cicero, Hortensius, and indeed Crassus, also Cato
Sulpitius and within a while Brutus, Calidius, Coelius, Calvus, and in the next
rank to Cicero Casar, and as a fosterchild of theirs Corvinus with Asinius
Polio, and the emulator of Thucidides Salust, and the Poets Varro, Lucretius
and Catullus second to none in verifying of the work which he took in hand.
The tallying up of the names of these able wits, who are in a sort still in our
eyes, is a kind of folly, among whom in our age are most eminent the prince of
Poets Virgilius and Rabirius and Livie who succeeded to Salust, with Tibullus
and Naso most excellent in the manner of their work. For of men of eminency as
the admiration is great so is the censure full of difficulty.

CHAP. 27. Pompey his acts against Mithridates and Tigranes. Tigranes his
yielding himself and estate.
While these affairs are on foot in the City and in Italy, Cnaeus Pompeius
did manage the war of a remarke^ble nature against Mithridates: who after the
departure of Lu^ullus, had raised a brave body of ^ new army. But that King
being overthrown, routed and stripped out of al his means, retired himself to
Armenia, and Tigranes (his father in law) a king in that time, but that he had
before bi^ shaken by Lucullus, of all other the most puissant. Pompey therefore
pursuing the^ jointly, entered Armenia, and first Tigranes hi^ son, but at
odds with his father, presented himself to Pompey, and ere long he himself
also in person, and as suppliant rendered himself and his estate, to his
disposure, professing tha^ there was no other, either Roman, or of any other
nation, besides Cnaeus Pompeius, to whos^ consortship he would adjoyn^^
himself. And therefore that any fortune either prosperous or adverse which he
should alot him he should repute easy to be su^fered. That it was not dishon^^
to be conquered by him whom it were a crime to overcome. Neither was it
inglorious to Pompey that he submitted himself to him whom fortune had raised
above all other men. The royal estate was by him reserved for the king, but
for him fined in a mighty sum of money, which Pompey, as he always ased to
do, did deliver into the power of the Questor, and so was it accounted for, to
the pub^ique Treasury. Syria and other provinces which he had seized upon,
being rerest him, were part ^estored to the people of Rome, part then
appropriated to them, as Syria, which was then first made ^ributary to Rome.
Armenia was ^ppointed for the bounds of the Kings Empire.

CHAP. 38, 39. A catalogue of all the Roman Provinces: when and by whom they
were made so.
IT does not seem to hold any great discrepance from the rule of my intended
work, i^ few words to deliver cursorily what countries and by what Commanders
mastered, have been reduced into the form o^ Provinces, and submitted to the
payment of tribute, which we have noted, that the more easil^ of the whole
together there man be a view taken in the severa^ parts. Claudius being Consu^^
did first pass an army over into Sicilie, and almost fifty two years after
Claudius Marcell^ having taken Siracusa made it ^rovince. Regulus first entered
A^rica about the ninth year of the ^^rst Punicke war, but two ^undred and
four years after ^^ipso Emilianus racing of Car^^age, about one hundred
eighty ^^d two years since reduced it ^^to a Province: Upon Sardinia ^etweene
the first and second ^^^ique war, by the conduct ^ Titus Manlius the yoke of
^^r command was settled. A vast ^roofe of a warlike City it is, ^at once only
under the Kings, ^e second time in the Consul^^ip of this Titus Manlius, and
^^e third in the principality of ^ugustus, the Temple of the bi^onted, Ianus
being shut up did ^ure us of an universal peace. ^ Spain about the beginning
of ^^e second Punicke war, Cnaeus ^^d Publius Scipio led our armies ^^out two
hundred and fifty years since. After that it being with various fortune
possessed and often by parcels lost, by the command of Augustus it wa^ made
tributarie. Macedonia b^ Paulus, Achaia by Mummiu^ Aetolia by Fulvius Nobilior
we^^ subdued, Asia by Publius Scip^^ brother to the African, was taken from
Antiochus, but by favo^^ of the Senate and people o^ Rome, being a while
enjoyed b^ the kings of the family of Att^lus, in the end Marcus Perpern^
having taken Aristonicus prisoner, made it subject to Tribut^ The glory of
having conquer^ Cyprus is not to be ascribed ^ any. For by a decree of the
S^nate, the administration of Ca^^ and the Kings death which ^ by the impulsion
of a guilt^ Conscience did procure to himself, it became a tributarie
P^^^ince. Creta by the direction of Metellus was amerced at the ex^iration of
her most ancient li^ertie. Syria and Pontus remain ^^e monuments of Cnaeus
Pompe^ his valor.

CHAP. 39.
THe Gauls (first entered with an army by Domitius Fabius ^^e nephew Paulus,
who was ^^lled the Allobrogian,) with our ^reat loss we often both cove^^d and
lost. But the most clear^^ glorious workmanship of ^^ius Caesar is to be now
view^^ in them: by whose command ^^d fortune they utterly broken ^^e brought to
almost the same ^^at the whole world is, to con^^^bute a dull and servile
pension. ^ the same manner Servilius ^^^uricus subjugated Cilicia, and ^^^lso
Manlius Gasto-gracia when it had revolted after the warre^ with Antio^hus
Bithynia, as we^ have already said, was by the las^ testament of Nicomedes left
a^^ inheritance to the people o^ Rome. Sacred Augustus, beside^ all the Spaines
and other nation^ with the titles of whom hi^ marketplace is adorned, rendering
in almost the same fashion Egypt tributary, did bring to the Exchequer as large
a revenew as his father had done from Gallia. But Tiberius Caesar when had
enforced out of Spain, a direct confession of their subjection did also wring
the like o^^ of the Illyrians and Dalmatian^ He also did ad new provinces t^
our Empire Rhaetia the Vindilicians and the Noricians with Pa^nonia and the
Scordisci. But le^ us return unto our forme^ course.

CHAP. 40. Pompey his Conquests in Asia, his civil return to Rome, and his
triumph.
In the next place succeeded the war that Cn. Pomp. managed, wherein whether
the glory or the labor were the greater, does rest uncertain. Media, Albanis,
and Hiberia were victoriously passed through, and from thence winding in his
course, he turned upon those Nations which inhabit on the right hand, and the
innermost part of Pontus, the Colchians, Heniochians with the Achaeans. And by
the fortune of Pompey, and the traynes of his son Pharnaches, in the end
Mi^hridates himself was ruined, ^he last of all the Kings, of such power and
absoluteness besides the Parthians. And now Pompey conqueror of all nations
that he had reached, and greater then either himself or any of his
Countrymen did wish, and in every respect praised beyond the condition of a
mortal man, returns into Italy: whose coming back opinion did render very
gracious. For many did affirm that he would not come home, but with his army,
and by that means to determine at his own pleasure what proportion the
public liberty should hold. The more men had apprehended this fear, so much
the more with honor, was the fair and civil return of so great a Commander.
For cashiering his army at Brundusium and retaining nothing but the name of
General with his private followers, whom it was always his custom to
converse withal (when out of business) he returned into the City: And there
in most magnificent manner did two whole days together triumph of so many
Kings, bringing into the treasury a far greater mass of money of his
spoils, then any had done before him, but one Paulus. In the absence of Cnaeus
Pompeius, Titus Ampius and Titus Labienus, Tribunes of the people, preferred
and past a law, that in the games in the Circus he should wear a crown of
gold, and al his triumphall ornaments, and at the stage plays only the
ordinary young men's gown and a golden crown: That yet only once (and so much
indeed was more then enough) he made use o. This man's greatness Fortune did
raise with so vast additions, as he first triumphed of Africa, the second time
of Europe, and the third of Asia: and of how many parts the world does consist,
so many monuments did she make them of his glory. Never did the highest
eminencies want envic. Both Lucullus therefore (but yet remembering the wrong
done him) and Metellus the Cretan, not complaining without cause, (For Pompey
had drawn from him the ornaments of his triumph, his captived Captains) and
with them part of the Noblemen did oppose, and would not give way that the
rewards promised by Pompey either to the Cities or to well deservers, should be
paid by his direction.

CHAP. 41. Caius Caesar his Consulship: His character.
THen followed the consullship of Caius Caesar, who, as I am writing, lays his
hand upon me, and whatsoever haste I have, constraines me to pause upon him. He
being extracted of the most noble Julian family, and (which with all of
greatest antiquity is held for certain) deriving his descent from Aluchises
and Venus: Of person the most lovely of all the Citizens of Rome; in vivacitie
of spirit, most sharp; in bounty most profusely liberal; of courage above
either the nature or the belief of any man; In greatness of his designs,
celerity in execution, patience in dangers, most nearly resembling that great
Alexander (but him sober and not transported withanger) Finally a man that used
both sleep and meat to live, and not for voluptuousness, when he was in blood
most nearly tied to Caius Marius and also son in law to Cinna, whose
daughter he could by no means be compelled to repudiate, at that time that
Marcus Piso a man of Consular quality, had, to gain Sylla his favor put away
Annia who once had been Cinna's wife, and to whom himself had benne married
eighteen years, when Sylla was master of all: the instruments of Sylla and
the upholders of the faction rather then he himself seekking for his life,
changing his garments, and disguising himself in a habit not suited to his
fortune, by night slipped out of the City. And when afterward he being yet a
very youth was taken by the Pirates, he so carried himself all the time that
he was detayned by them, that he was of them both respected and feared; Neither
did he ever in all that time, either by day or night (for why should that which
is most worthy observation be omitted, if it cannot be with any flourishing
phrase delivered) put off his shoes or ungirt himself, for this reason, lest,
if he should in any thing change his fashion, he might be suspected by them who
only with their eyes held a guard upon him.

CHAP. 42. Caesar's taking the pirates that held him prisoner, and nailing them
upon the cross.
IT would be too long to tell how much and how often he showed his daring;
with how great power of his, the authority of the people of Rome, upon his
motion refused to second the intentions of him, that then had Asia in his
possession. This one thing let me relate to serve for instance of the
greatness to which he was ere long to rise. The night following that day in
which he was by the common purse of the Cities ransomed (yet so as he made the
pirates give hostages to the Cities) he both being a private man, and doing it
on the sudden in a disordred manner, setting out a fleet he sailed to the
place where the pirates were: and part of their Navy he forced to fly, part he
sunk, some ships and with them many prisoners he took. And glad of this his
victory gotten, by night returned to his friends, when clapping them in prison
whom he had taken, he went into Bithynia to the Proconsull Iunius (who then
governed that part of Asia) desiring that he might have power to punish them as
they deserved, which when he refused, and said that he would sell the^ for
slaves, (for a dull cowardice is ever waited on by envy) he with incredible
speed returning to the sea side, before any letters of direction could be
brought from die Proconsull, nailed upon the cross every one of them whom he
had taken.

CHAP. 43. Caesar his return into Italy, to stand for the high place of high
priest, carrying it from Catulus, reestablishing the statues of Marina, and
restoring the children of such as had been proscribed.
HE also making haste into Italy to enter upon the Priesthood (for when he was
absent he was by Marius and Cinna though he the^ was almost a child created the
high Priest of Jupiter in the room of Cotta, a man of Consular quality,
though afterward when Sylla was Conqueror who made void all that they had done
he had lost that place) that he might not be discovered by the pirates (who
then filled al those Seas, and were not without cause bitterly enraged against
him) he went aboard a ship of four oars, and with two friends and ten
servants, crossed over the broadest part of the Hadriatique gulf: And when in
that course he kenned, as he thought, the Pirates ships, stripping himself
out of his clothes, and tying his dager to his thigh, he prepared himself to
either fortune. But within a while perceived, that his sight was mistaken, and
that they were certain trees, which in a long row appeared like the Masts of
ships. The rest of his actions in the City, with his most noble accusation of
Dolobella, and the favor of the people showed him in a larger measure then is
usually afforded to delinquents and his most glorious yet civil competitions
with Quintus Catulus and other men of principal quality; and the carrying the
question against Quintus Catulus, who by the confession of all men was the
prime man of the Senate, in their concurrency for the place of the Sovereign
Bishop, his reestablishing, when he was Edile, the Images of Caius Marius when
all the Nobility opposed it, restoring to their honors the Children of those
that had bin proscribed; His Praetorship and Questorship passed in Spain with
admirable bravery and industry, when he was Questor under Vetus Antistius the
grandfather of this Vetus, a man of quality Consular, and high priest, father
of two of the same rank of Consul, and high priest, and as good a man as can
be expected of any humane innocence, these things (I say) the more they are
known, the less they need my pen.

CHAP. 44. The confederacy between Pompey, Caesar, and Crassus for
establishment of their power in Rome, confirmed by alliance, Pompey marrying
Caesar's daughter Iulia: Caesar's Consulship and d^vision of lands in Campania.
WHile he therefore was Consul, there was contracted between him, Cnaeus
Pompeius, and Marcus Crassus, a society for the instauration of their power;
which was to the City to the whole world, and though in different times no
less to themselves ruinous and balefull. This device Pompey was induced to
pursue, to the end that at length his Constitutions made in the Provinces
beyond the Seas (to which as we before have delivered, many were opposite)
might be by Caesar confirmed. By Caesar this course was taken, for that he
saw that he should, by giving way to Pompey his glory, increase his own, and
that the envy of their common greatnrsse being confined to him alone, he
should fortify his own strength. And by Crassus, that the principality and
prime place, which otherwise alone and by himself he could not, he thus might
hold supported by the authority of Pompey, and forces of Caesar. There was
also an alliance agreed upon between Pompey and Caesar; for Pompey the great
took to wife the daughter of Caius Caesar: while he was Consul, Caesar passed
a law, that the lands in Campania should be divided among the Plebeians. So
were planted thereabout twenty thousand Citizens: and that country restored
to their freedom about one hundred fifty and two years, after that Capua in
the Punique war was by the Romans reduced into the form of a government
under a Prefect. Bibulus the fellow Consul to Caesar, while he rather had
will than power to cross Caesar in his designs, did for the most part of the
year keep himself in his house: whereby thinking to augment the envy bent
upon him, he increased his power. Then were the Gallias decreed to Caesar's
government for five years.

CHAP. 45. Publius Clodius his character and his banishment of Cicero, with his
glorious repealing: Cato his bringing a vast treasure out of Cyprus.
AT the same time Publius Clodius, a man nobly borne, eloquent, and bold, who
neither for his words nor actions did ever know any limits, but those of his
own will, the smartest executioner of mischievous intendments, being also
infamous for whoring of his sister, and accused of incest for committing of
adultery in the midst of the most religiously sacred Ceremonies of the people
of Rome: when there was bitter hatred between him and Marcus Cicero (For what
friendships could there be between spirits so directly opposite) and had of a
Patrician rendered himself Plebian, being created Tribune of the people, passed
a law, that whosever had killed a Roman Citizen uncondemned, should be
interdicted the use of fire and water. ^n which words though Cicero were not
named, yet he alone was levelled at: So that man who had deserved infinitely
of he common wealth for preser^ing his country from ruin, was ^ewarded with
the calamity of ^eing exiled. Neither were Caesar and Pompey free from being
suspected of lending their ^ands to the oppressing of Ci^^ro. And Cicero
himself did ^eeme to have procured it to his ^wne michiefe, by refusing to ^ee
one of the twenty men ap^ointed for the distributing the ^^nds in Campania.
He was within two years, by the tardie care of Pompeius with a most desired
return, to the wishes of Italy, and upon a decree of the Senate, assisted by
the virtue and act of Anniu^ Milo Tribune of the people, restored to his
honors and hi^ country. Nor was there any, after the banishment and the
repeal of the Numidian, that was either expelled with more envy, or recalled
with more gladness; whose house being maliciously rased by Clodius, was so
beautifully reedified by the Senate. The same Publius Clodi^^ in the Senate,
under the title o^ a most honorable employment sequestered Marcus Cato from the
Republique, for he passe^ a law, that he should be sen^ Questor with
Praetorian power with a Questor also under hi^ unto Cyprus, to deprive the King
Ptolomy of his estate, who ^y all foulness of life had well merited that
disgrace: But he upon the coming of Cato laid ^iolent hands upon himself:
whereby Cato returned to Rome ^ sum of treasure, far be^ond what was hoped
for, whose integrity it were a crime ^o commend: his insolence might be almost
blamed, for that ^he City being emptied, and ^he Senate with the Consulls ^one
to meet him, when he ^ame up the Tiber by ship, he ^id not set his foot on
shore till ^e came where the money was to ^e landed.

CHAP. 46. Caesar's acts in Gaul and Britain Crassus Consul with Pompey,
^^pointed to the Parthian war: H^^ character and defeat.
When after these passages ^ Caesa^ had in Gallia perfo^med stupe^dious acts,
hardly to b^ expressed in many volumes, an^ not satisfied with very many ^ most
happy victories, not wi^^ innumerable thousands of the ^nemies slain and taken
prisoners had also passed his army over i^ to Britain, seeking as it were a^
other world to be subject to o^ Empire and his own, an invincib^^ pair of
Consuls Cn. Pompeius ^ M. Crassus entered their seco^^ Consulship, which neither
w^ sincerely sought nor laudably a^ministred by them. To Caesar ^ by a law which
Pompey preferred ^ the people, the command of ^ province was prorogued for t^^
^ime of the former grant. To ^r^^ssus who was the^ in his mind lotting of the
Parthia^ war Syria was decreed. This man in other things most upright and free
from ^ voluptuousnes, did yet neither ^now any mean, nor set any bound ^o his
covetous desire of money or ^ory. Him, as he was departing ^or Syria, the
Tribuns of the people with ill boding presages labor ^ut in vain to retain:
whose exe^ations if they had bin of effica^^e against his life only, the loss
^f the General, so the army had ^eene safe, would have been ^ gain to the
Common weath. When Crassus had passed over ^uphrates, and was marching ^owards
Seleucia, the King Oro^^ whirling about him with in^^it forces of horse, slew
him together with the greater part ^f his army. The remainder of the legions
Caius Crassus wh^ then was Questor (and not lon^ after the author of a most
execrble fact) preserved, and did in su^^ sort keep Syria in the power ^ the
people of Rome, as with ^ happy change of the event he ^verthrew and routed the
Parthia^ when they entered it with force^

CHAP. 47. Continuation of Caesar's acts ^ Gaul, about Alexia: Iu^^ and her
son by Pompey dea^ whose life only hindered a ci^^ war. Clodius slain by
Mi^^
IN those times, those which we have before spoken of, an^ the succeeding
days, abo^^ four hundred thousand en^mies were slain, and more ^^ken
prisoners by Caius Caesar^ he fought oftentimes in set and orderly battle,
often in troops, and often upon sallies and sudden attempts, twice he
entered Britanie: finally, in nine whole years scarce any one did pass him,
wherein he did not most just^y deserve a triumph. But about Alexia, he did so
great things as ^re scarce within compass of any mortal to dare attempt, and
^lmost only in the power of a God to perform them. And ^ow had Caesar been
almost se^en years in Gallia, when Iulia ^he wife of Pompey, and the
inter^osed pledge of the concord; which by the envy of Pompey was ill cimented
between Cnae^s Pompeius and Caius Caesar, depar^ed this life. And fortune
remo^ing all bars from between ^he Captains preordained to so great a
trial, within a short while after the little son of Pompey borne of Iulia
also died. Then the canvasing for voices, raging with the sword and the
slaughter of the Citizens, whereof there was neither mean not end to be
discerned: the third Consulship was bestowed upon Cnaeus Pompeius alone, by the
approbation even of those who had before used to be adverse to his honor, with
the glory of which dignity, as a testimony of the noble men's being reconciled
to him, he was totally estranged from Caius Caesar. But the whole power of
that his Consulship he spent in repressing the enormities of plotting and
procuring voices at elections. At that time Publius Clodius by Milo who then
stood candidate for the Consulship (a president of no good use in it self, yet
beneficial being done for the public) was upon a meeting and brawles, rising
between them slain upon the place. Milo called in question for it, was
condemned not more for the dislike of the fact, than because such was Pompeies
pleasure, whom yet Cato by his suffrage delivered publicly did acquit, which
if he had pronounced somewhat sooner, there would not have wanted those that
would have followed that pattern, and have proved that a Citizen was slain
then whom there had none lived more pernicious to the Common wealth, nor more
infestious to honest men.

CHAP. 48. Civil war beginning between Caesar and Pompey: Peace treated of,
hindered by Curio: His character.
THen within a little space of time, the exordiums of the civil war began to
kindle, when every one that stood most for the right, were of opinion that both
Caesar and Pompey should east off their armies. For Pompey in his second
Consulship, had proeured the Sp^^^^^ to be appointed to him, and th^^ for three
years space himself being from thence absent, and sitting at the helm of
affairs in the City, might by his Lievtenants Afranius and Petraus whereof
the one had been Consul, the other Praetor, govern^^ the same. And those that
opined that Caesar should dismiss his army, he sided with; but such as thought
himself also should do the same, he opposed: who if two years before that
they fell to arms, he had dyed in Campania, being oppressed with a grievous
sickness, when he had finished all those his intendments of his Theater, and
the other works which he made about it, (At what time ^ll Italy did decree
public supplications for his recovery, and that the first that ever were for
any private Citizen) Fortune might have saved her labor in reviving him, and
the greatness which he had held among the living, he had carried with him are
in paired to the lower world. But neither did any other man furnish the civil
war, nor those so many mischiefs, which for twenty years together did
succeed to it, with a greater or a more furious firebrand than Caius Curio, a
Tribune of the people, a man noble, eloquent, bold, and of his own and other
men's also, both fortune and honor profusely lavish: a man most wittily wicked,
and to the mischief of the common wealth, a dainty speaker; whose mind,
pleasure and lusts, neither any wealth, nor any desires would satisfy. This
man was at first for Pompey, that is, as it then was accounted, for the Common
wealth; and presently in show against both Caesar and Pompey, but in his heart
for Caesar. Whether that for mere good will, or for a bribe of a hundred
thousand Sesterces as we have recived it, we leave uncertain* At the last
those most healthful conditions of the then springing peace (which Caesar with
a mind repleate with all justice did require, and Pompey not unwillingly did
admit) he brake and scattered in pieces. Cicero above all things laboring and
carting from the public quiet: the order of those things as well as hose that
went before, is both delivered in the complete writings of others, and shall, I
hope, be expressed also in these of mine.

CHAP. 49. Catulus, two Luculli, Metellus and Hortensiu^ dead are the war:
conditions of reason tendered by Caesar, refused by the other. The war begun.
NOw let us restore to our intended work its own form; yet first let me
congratulate with Quintus Catulus, the 2 Luculli, Metellus and Hortensius, who
when without envy they had flourished in the Common wealth, and been eminent
without danger, did exchange this life before the beginning of the civil
wars, with a quiet, or at least with a death not hastened before the due
time. When Lentulus and Marcellus were Consulls, seven hundred and three years
after the building of the City, and the eighty and eight year before thou
Marcus Vimcius did enter thy Consulship, the civil war began to flame. The
cause of the one Captain did seem the better, but that of the other the
firmer. The authority of the Senate did put arms into Pompeies hand, into
Caesar's the confidence of his soldiers. The Consulls and the Senate did yield
the Sovereign command of all to the respect of the cause, not to Pompeies
person. Nothing was left unattempted by Caesar, that might conduce to the
preservation of peace, nor any thing accepted by the Pompeious: when one of the
Consulls was more furious than reason; but Lentulus if the Republique were
safe, could by no means be preserved from ruin. And Marcus Cato maintained
that death was to be preferred before the admission of any conditions offered to
the state by a private Citizen. A man indeed grave, and of the antique stamp,
might more commend Pompeies part; but a prudent would follow that of Caesar:
reputing things on that side more glorious, on this more dreadful. Thus in the
end all Caesar's requests being with scorn rejected, they decreed: That
contented with one only legion to retain the title of the Province, he
should come a private man into the City, and in demanding the Consulship,
submit himself to the suffrages of Rome.

CHAP. 50. Pompey quits the city and Italy: Caesar takes Domitius at
Corfinium, and dismisses him: comes to Rome, thence passes into Spain, and
masters Afranius and Petreius.
Caesar perceiving that they must come to arms, passed over Rubicon; Cnaeus
Pompeius, the Consulls, the greater part of the Senate quitting the City, and
afterward Italy, put over sea to Dyrrhachium. But Caesar having in his power
Domitius, and the legions which were with him at Corfinium, dismissing without
delay their Commander, and others that had a mind to go to Pompey, followed
him to Brundusium; so that it appeared, that he had rather while all things
stood entire and unhurt, make an end of the war by treaty, than oppress
those that fled from him. When he found the Consulls were passed over the Sea,
he returned to the City, and there in the Senate, and in a full assembly
rendered an account of his intentions, and his most miserable necessity, who
was by the injurious arms of other men compelled to draw his sword. Then he
resolved to go for Spain: but the haste of his journey, Massilia did a while
retarde, with a faithfulness more entire than wisdom in Counsel,
unseasonably taking upon them to judge of the principal forces of the side:
which they only ought to take in their hand, who have power to compel such as
will not obey. The army then which was commanded by Afranius of Consular, and
Patreius of Praetorian quality, being mated with his coming, his vigor and
his glory rendered it self to him. Both the Lievtenants, and as many of every
condition as would not follow them, were dismissed and sent to Pompey.

CHAP. 51. Caesar goes into Greece after Pompey, and besieges him in his camp.
The boldness of Balbus in going into the enemies army. Caesar shrewdly shaken
in one encounter.
THe next year when Dyrrhachium, and the country near about it, were possessed
by Pompeies camp, who having sent for out of all the provinces beyond the
seas, the legions, the auxiliaries both of horse and foot; the forces of the
Kings, the Tetrarchs, and also of the princes, had gathered together a mighty
army, and held, as he supposed, the seas so guarded with his fleets, that
Caesar could not put over his legions; Caesar using his own, both celeritie
and fortune removed all obstacles that were in his way, both of passing when he
pleased, and that his army might be drawn down to his fleet, and also at the
first came and encamped close by Pompey, and within a while besieged him in his
trenches, and compast him in with his works. Yet did the besiegers suffer more
by want of necessaries than they that were besieged. Then did Balbus Cornelius
(with a rashness beyond belief of any man,) go into the enemies quarter, and
diverse times confer with the Consul Lentulus, who was in doubt what price
he should set himself at, and by that addition make himself a way, by which
not as borne for his own country of Spain, but yet a Spaniard, he reached to
triumph, and the high Priesthood, and of a private man, might be raised to be
of Consular quality. The fortune after this of their encounters was various,
but one far more prosperous to the Pompeians, in which the soldiers of
Caesar were shrewdly beaten.

CHAP. 52. The battle of Pharsalia decidi^^ the question, and Caesar's
clemency to the vanquished.
THen Caesar with his army drew to Thessaly the place that was predestined for
his victory: Pompey though diverse advised him to take a far differing course
(of whom some persuaded him to pass over into Italy, (nor by Hercules could he
have done any thing more beneficial for his party) others tha^ he should draw
the war out a^ length, which by the dignity o^ his side would daily be made
more advantageous for him) following the eagernes of his own mind, pursued his
enemy. As for the battle of Pharsalia and th^^ most bloody day, to the name
o^ Rome: the blood that on both ^ides was there shed, and the two heads of the
Commonwealth dashed together, the one eye of the Empire put out, so many and
such men of the Pompeian party as there did lose their lives this manner of
writing is not capable of. That yet is to be observed, that as soon as Caius
Caesar saw the Pompeian faction declined, he bent himself to nothing either
more readily or more desirously then (that I may use both a phrase and fashion
military) to cast and dismise them freely into every? quarter. Oh the immortal
gods what a reward of this his disposition did so gentle a man reap afterward
at Brutus his hand. Nothing was more miraculous, more magnificent, more noble
then that victory, when their Country wanted not any Citizen but those that
dyed in the battle: yet did the obstinacy of some disgrace the beauty o^
his clemency, when the Conqueror did now more willingly give them life the^
they received it.

CHAP. 53. Pompey flying into Egypt is murdered by order of the boy, King
Ptolomy, in his eight and fiftieth year.
POmpey flying from the battle with the two Lentul^ who had been Consulls,
his son Sextus and Favonius of Pretorian quality, fortune did gather to him
such consorts as the Conquerors afforded him: Of them part persuading him to
retire to the Parthians, others into Africa where he had King Iuba a most
faithful partisan of his; he resolved to stand for Egypt. Remembering the
favors which at Alexandria he had conferred upon the father of that Ptolomy
who then (more a boy then a young man) there reigned: But who when he sees a
man in adversity retains the memory of any former benefit? who does think any
thanks due to men in calamity? or when fortune changes does not also change
^is faith? From the King therefore ^here were some sent that should receive
Cnaeus Pompeius ^omming to him (who had a little before at Mitylene taken
aboard his ship, his wife Cornelia ^or a companion to him in his ^light) by the
advice of Theode^us and Achillas: and persuade him to go out of the ship of
burden in which he came, into that in which they came to meet him. Which when
he had done, the prime man of all that were called Romans by the command and
direction of an Egyptian slave, when Caius Caesar and Publius Servilius were
Consulls, wa^ butchered. This was the end after three Consulships, as many
Triumphs, and the whole inhabitable world conquered, of a most pious and most
excellent man, who had been raised to that pitch beyond which there was no
further height, being ther^ in the seventieth and second year, one only day
before his birthday, in whom fortune did seem so far to differ from her
self, that for him who of late wanted earth for him to conquer, there now
wanted for his sepulture: (...) can I call them but over-busie who in the age
of so great a man, and one almost of our own time have mistake^ five whole
years? when from the Consulship of Caius Atilius and Quintus Ser^ilius the
account of the years was so easy to be computed, which I have added, not to
ex^ept against others, but that no exception may be taken against me.

CHAP. 54. Their attempting as much upon Caesar deservedly punished. The war
revived in Africa by Iuba and Scipio, to whom Cato join: his forces.
NEither was the fidelity of the King, and those by whose direction he was
governed greater toward Caesar then that they had showed to Pompey. Who when
they first had attempted upon him by treachery and after that had the boldness
with open war to provoke him, did with a well deserved punishment make
satisfaction to both these great Commanders, whereof the one only was
surviving, Pompey that now was not in any place corporally, was yet every where
under the name of Iuba, for the favor of his party had raised up a mighty
war in Africa. In which King Iuba, and Scipio, a man of Consular rank, two
years before Pompey was slain, by him made his father in law, did command:
whose forces Marcus Cato had much augmented, bringing with infinite difficulty
both for want of necessaries and for the passages of places in the journey, his
Legions to them. This man when the Command in chief was presented to him by
the soldiers, did yet rather choose to obey him that was of more honorable
quality.

CHAP. 55. Caesar follows into Africa, where Curio of his party had bin slain
and there was victorious, as after with much a do in Spain against Cnaeus
Pompeius the son of Pompey the great.
THe care of keeping my credit in my promise of brevitie does put me in mind
how cursorily all these passages are to be handled. Caesar then following his
good fortune passed into Africa which the armies o^ the Pompeians possessed,
havin^ slain Curio the General then o^ the Julian faction. At first with
variable success within a while he there also was fortunate i^ fight, and the
enemies force were defeated. Neither was the^ the clemency of Caesar to the^
that were conquered unsuitable to that which he had shown before. But the war
of Spain of greater difficulty did entertain Caesar though victorious in
that of Africa, (for Pharmaces overthrown by him was scarce to be counted an
addition to his glory) which mighty and full of terror Cnaeus Pompeius son of
Pompey the great, a young man, and of infinite spirit in matter of war, had
raised, aids flocking to him on every side from all parts of the world of
those that were yet still the followers of the greatness of his fathers name.
The fortunes of Caesar did ac^ompany him into Spain, yet ^id he never fight
any battle ^ore cruel or fuller of danger, ^o as when the event was more
^hen doubtful, he alighted from ^is horse, and standing firm, in the head of
his shrinking army having first expostulated with fortune for reserving him to
such an end, he professed to his soldiers that he would not move one step
back, and that therefore they should consider what a General and in what place
they were to abandon, and by that means with shame more then with courage, the
fight was renewed with more bravery o^ the Captain then the soldier.

CHAP. 56. Pompeius slain after ( Labienus and Varus in) the fight. Caesar
returns to Rome, pardons all his enemies, triumphs five times, and within five
months, is slain by Brutus and Cassius.
CNaeus Pompeius being found sore wounded in a wild desert was there slain:
Labienus and Varus died in the fight. Caesar being absolute victor of all his
enemies, returning to the City (which no mortal man could believe) granted a
general pardon to all that had borne arms against him, and with most
magnificent shows of fencers at the sharp, representations of Sea fights, of
horse and foot, with fight of Elephants, and feasts many days together, did
give it full content. He entrd in five Triumphs; the setting out of that of
Ca^^a was of Lymon wood; that of Pontus, of Brasile; that of Africa, of Ivory;
that of Alexandria of Tortoyses; and that of Spain, of Silver polished. The
money brought in of the spoils was somewhat more then sixe-hundred Millions of
Sesterces. Yet could not this man, so great, and who with so much clemency to
all men had carried himself in his victory, enjoy himself in perfect quiet,
above five months. For having made his return to the City in the month of
October, in the Ides of March following by conspiracy, of which Brutu and
Cassius were the Authors, one of who^ by promising him the Consulship, he had
not obliged, and on the other side, by putting him off he had offended Cassius:
they having also joined to their design accomplices in the murder, the nearest
of all his friends and who by the support of his party were raised to the
highest honors, Decius Brutus, and Ca^us Trobonius, with other men of noble
quality, he was slain. To whom indeed Marcus Antonius, a man that was most
ready to dare any thing, had procured much dislike being his fellow Consul, by
putting upon his head a Royal diadem, as in the Lupercalian games he sat in
the pleading place, which Caesar refused, but so as it appeared he was not
offended with it.

CHAP. 57. Hirtius his advice to Caesar of holaing by force what he had got by
his sword rejected, and the presages of his death despised.
Experience makes it appear that the advice of Pansa and Hirtius was to be
commended, who always had persuaded Caesar, that the command which by force he
had obtained, he should in the same sort retain. To whom he replying, that he
had rather dye then live in fear while he expects to find the same
gentleness in his own case which he had showed to others; he was seized upon
by those ungrateful men: when indeed the immortal gods had given him very many
presages, and tokens of the future danger; for both the Soothsayers had fore
warned him, that he should most carefully take heed of the Ides of March; and
his wise Calphurnia, aftrighted with a vision in the night, had earnestly
entreated him, that day not to go out of his house: And besides certain
writings which were delivered to him, discovering the whole plot of the
conspiracy, he did not presently read. But truly the force of the destinies is
unresistable, the fortune whereof while he resolved to change, he spoiled the
intendments thereof.

CHAP. 58. The killers of Caesar ungrateful, Dolobella gives them his sons
as hostages for their safety in coming down from the Capitol which they had
seized.
THe year that they executed this horrid fact, Brutus and Caius Cassius were
Pretors, Decius Brutus was designed Consul, who guarded with a troop of
fencers belonging to Decius Brutus seized upon the Capitol where Marcus Anton^s
then being Consul (whom as Cassius opined that he should together with Caesar
be together slain, and Caesar's last will be suppressed, Brutus opposed it:
affirming that besides the Tyrants (for so considering their action it was
expedient to term him) there was no other blood to be drawn) convoking the
Senate, when now also D^labell^, whom Caesar had appointed to substitute
Consul in his own place, had taken the Rods and ensigns of a Consul, as a
Mediator for peace had delivered his children for hostages into the Capitol,
did give his faith to the killers of Caesar for their safety in coming down
from the Capitol. There was in imitation of that famous decree of the
Athenians a proposition of a general oblivion of things past presented by
Cicero, and passed with approbation of the Senate.

CHAP. 59. By motion of Cicero, a law of forgetting things past is enacted,
Caesar's will adopting Octavius, opened. His discen^, the character of his
father, and his coming to Rome.
AFter which was Caesar's will opened, in which he did adopt Caius Octavius the
grandchild of his sister Iulia. Of whose original though others have prevented
me, I yet hold it fit to say somewhat. Caius Octavius was, as not of a
Patrician, so yet, of a family of the rank of Knights very nobly esteemed. He
being created Praetor among others of the noblest quality, a man grave, pious,
harmless and rich, where in the first place that dignity had procured him in
marriage Attia the daughter of Iulia, by means of that honor was awarded
Macedonia for his province. And in that being styled Imperator (or sovereign
co^mander) when he came back to stand for the Consulship, departed this life.
Leaving his son not yet a man, whom Caius Caesar his great uncle, when he was
brought up with Philippus his father in law, loved as his own. And when he was
but eighteen years old, he coming to him, in the Spanish war, he ever
after kept in his company, never making him comrade to any but himself, nor to
be carried in any litter but his own, and did confer the honor of the high
priesthood upon him a Child. The civil wars then being quieted to inform
the disposition of that singular youngman, in the liberal sciences he sent him
to Apollonia to study, intending ere long to have him his fellow soldier in
the war against the Getes, and then against the Parthians. To whom when the
news was brought of the death of his Uncle, and presently the Centurions of
the Legions about him made offer to him of the assistance of themselves and
their soldiers, which Salvidienus and Agrippa thought was not to be slighted,
he making have to come to the City, did at Brundusium receive full
advertisement of the whole course both of the slaughter and of the will. Whom,
when he came to Rome, a vast multitude of his friends did meet him: and the
globe of the sun was seen over his head, equally bent round like a bow, and of
those colors as it were placing a crown upon the head of him that was shortly
to be a man of such eminency.

CHAP. 60. Octavius takes upon him as Caesar's heir: Division between him and
Marcus Antonius.
ATtia and his father in law Philippus were not of the mind that he should
assume the name of a fortune so envied as that of Caesar: but approved of that
of the contriver of profitable fortunes for the world, the preserver of the
Roman name. But his caelestiall spirit scorned humane advices, and did rather
choose with danger to aim at the highest, then with safety to reach poor
things and ignoble: and was more willing to believe concerning himself; his
Uncle, and Caesar then his stepfather: Affirming that it was a wickedness for
him to think himself unworthy of that name, whereof Caesar was esteemed
worthy. Him did Antonius presently entertain with much pride (yet was not that
contempt in him, but fear) and having hardly admitted him into Pompeyes
gardens, afforded him audience. Ere long as if he had bin endangered by some
treachery of his, he basely raised a slander of him, in which his vain
falsehood was shamefully discovered. In the end the madness of Antonius and
Dolobella reaching at a most impious soveraigntie, did openly break out. Seven
hundred millions of Sesterces, by Caesar deposited for the Temple of Opes,
Antonius had seized upon: the decrees of Caesar changed, and false ones
inserted in his corrupted Commentaries, And all things set at a certain price,
while the Consul made open sale of the Commonwealth. He also resolved to
possess himself of Gallia, the province that was designed for Decius Brutus:
Dolobella had marked out for himself the provinces beyond the Seas. Between
men that naturally had no resemblance, and desired things different, hatred
began to grow, and by that the young Caius Caesar was aimed at, in the daily
trecheries of Autonius.

CHAP. 61. Antonius his tyranny bravely r^prest by Octavius, who beatin^ him
at Mutina, forces hi^ shamefully out of Italy.
THe City oppressed by the Sovereignty of Antonius, grew dully languishing.
Indignation and grief all men were furnished with: but with power to resist,
not any. When Caius Caesar now entered the ninteenth year of his age, daring
wonders, but attaining things beyond it, upon his own private advice, showed
greater courage in the cause of the Commonwealth, than the whole Senate. And
first from Calatia, next from Casilinum drew to him his fathers old soldiers,
whose example* others having followed, in short time they grew to the
proportion of a full army. When Antonius went to meet the army, which out of
the Provinces beyond the seas, he had commanded to come to Brundusium: the two
legions called Martial, and the fourth, knowing both the pleasure of the
Senate, and the excellent spirit of that brave young man, plucking up their
ensigns, went and rendered themselves to Caesar. The Senate then honored him
with a statue on horseback, which to this day standing in the pleading place
does with the inscription point out his age (an honor that by the space of
three hundred years, had befalne to no man besides Lucius Sylla, Cnaeus
Pompeius and Caius Caesar) and creating him Propraetor together with the
Consulls Hirtius and Pansa, appointed him to make war upon Antonius. By him
being now in his twentieth year, the business was most bravely managed about
Mutina, and Decius Brutus who was besieged, being relieved, Antonius with a
base flight, and naked, was compelled to quit Italy: one of the Consulls being
slain, and the other within a few days dying of his wounds.

CHAP. 62. The fear of Antonius being removed, the affections to the Pompeian
party declare themselves. Brutus and Cassius being fled out of Italy, have
provinces and command decreed to them, Caesar's soldiers not so ungrateful to
him as the Senate.
BEfore Anthony was routed, all things honorable were by the Senate decreed
for Caesar and his army: Cicero being chiefly the author of it; but as their
fears ceased, their inclination showed it self, and the faction of the
Pompeians recovered heart. Brutus and Cassius had the provinces decreed to
them, which they before, without any order of the Senate, had seized upon:
those armies whatsoever which had adjoined themselves to them were commended:
and all commands i^ the provinces beyond the sea were committed to their
disposure. For Marcus Brutus and Caius Cassius, redoubting one while the forces
of Antonius* another pretending that they feared, to the end they might cast
more envy upon him; had by their Proclamations declared, That they would be
content to live if it were in perpetual exile, so as the Common wealth might
be settled in peace: neither would they minister occasion of a civil war.
That the (...) had honor in abundance out o^ the conscience of their fact, who
being departed from the City and out of Italy, with a settled and equal mind,
without public commission, had possessed themselves of provinces and armies,
and declaring that it was the Republique wheresoever they were, they had also
received the treasures, which cut of the Transmarine provinces was carried by
the Quaestors to Rome from those that were willing to deliver it to them. All
which things were included in the decree of the Senate, and by it approved of.
And to Decius Brutus, because he lived by the favor of another, was a triumph
decreed: the bodies, of Hirtius and Pansa were honored with a public
funeral. Of Caesar there was no mention at all, and the Ambassadors that were
sent to his army, were commanded to deliver their charge to the soldiers, but
not in his presence. Yet was not the army so ungrateful as the Senate; for
when Caesar did bear dissembling that injury, the soldiers denied that they
would hear any direction in the absence of their General; it was at that time
that Cicero swayed with an inbred love of the Pompeian party, opined that
Caesar was to be praised and elevated, when he spoke in one sense, and meant
to be understood in another.

CHAP. 63. Antonius passing over the Alps to Lepidus, draws his army from
him, leaving him only the title of General. Plancus his juggling, and Pollio
his sincerity.
IN the mean time Antonius in his flight having passed the Alps, at first in
their parlies being rejected by Lepidus, who was surreptitiously created high
priest in the room of Caius Caesar, and had Spain assigned to him for his
province, but as yet ^arried in Gallia: ere long coming after in sight of the
soldiers, when both all the Generals were abler than Lepidus, and Antonius
then many of them, so long as he was sober, by ^he back side of the Camp the
^ampire being thrown down, ^ee was by the soldiers admit^ed, who in the name
of the ^ommand did indeed give the ^recedence to Lepidus, when all ^he power
was in his own ^ands. When Antonius entered ^he quarter, Inventius Laterensis,
^ man both in life and death ^he same, when he had most ^arnestly dissuaded
Lepidus from joining himself with Antonius, who was declared an enemy of the
state: his advice being rejected, ran himself through with his sword. Then
Plancus with uncertain fidelity (that is, with his own) having a long time
disputed with himself, and scarce yielding to his own opinion, and one while
an assistant of Decius Brutus his fellow in office, as designed Consul with
him, setting also himself to sale by his letters to the Senate, and presently
the betrayer of hi^ Companion; and Asinius Polli^^ that stood firm to his
first intentions, faithful to the Iulia^ faction, averse from the Pompeian,
did both of them deliver up their armies to Marcus Antonius.

CHAP. 64. Decius Brutus one of Caesar's killers, slain by command of
Antotonius: And Ciceros orations against Antonius, the cause of his being
proscribed and slain.
DEcius Brutus being first forsaken by Plancus, and afterward attempted by his
treacheries, his army by degrees falling off from him in his flight, and in the
house of a Nobleman, with whom he had a league of hospitality (his name
Cornelius) by those that Antonius had sent for that purpose, had his throat
cut: and so made a most just satisfaction, and a speedy, with his punishment to
Caius Caesar that had of him deserved the best offices, of whom he was the
murderer when he had been the inwardest of all his friends, and of the
fortune whereof he had reaped the fruit, was content to tranferre the envy
upon the author thereof; holding it just for him to retain what he had
received from Caesar, and that Caesar who gave it should be destroyed* It was
at this time that Marcus Tullius with continual declamations against him, did
sear into the memory of Antonius eternal brands of hatred to him: yet he
with most glorious and heavenly eloquence, but the Tribune Canutius with a
perpetuated rage did fly out upon Antonius: both of them with their deaths
paid for their vindicating the Common liberty: but with the Tribunes blood the
proscription began, with the death of Cicero, Antonius being then in a sort
glutted, it ended.

CHAP. 65. The instituting the Triumvirate between Octavius, Antonius, and
Lepdius. Ventidius, who had once a Captive been led in triumph, that year in
Consular robes, who had been formerly honored with Praetorian, and afterward
triumphed.
LEpidus was then by the Senate declared an enemy to the state, as before
Antonius had bin. Afterward there began an intercourse of letters between
Caesar, Antonius and Lepidus: and overtures made of agreement when both
Antonius did now and then put Caesar in mind how infestious the Pompeian party
was to him, to what a height it was grown, and also with how great care and
industry of Cicero, Brutus and Cassius were advanced: and withal professed
that he would join his forces with Brutus and Cassius, who were now
seventeene legions strong, if Caesar did scorn his consortship; adding
withal, that Caesar was more engaged in the revenge of his father, than
himself of his friend. Then was there a society of their power agreed upon
between them, and, their armies persuading and entreating it, affinity
concluded between Caesar and Antonius, the daughter in law of Antonius being
betroathed to Caesar. Caesar then entered his Consulship (with Quintus Pedius
his colleague) the day before he was twenty years old, and the tenth of the
Kalends of October, seven hundred and nine years after the building of the
City, and seventy two years before thou Marcus Vinicius were created Consul.
This year saw Ventidius in that City, into which he once had among the
captive Picentines been led in triumph, coupling the young man's gown with the
Consular robes, and the Praetors. The same man also did here afterward triumph.

CHAP 66. The third proscription, in which Caesar overruled by his two
companions: the death of Cicero and his Eulogium.
ANtonius then full of rage, and equally with him Lepidus, both of whom as we
have said before had been adjudged enemies to the State, when each of them did
more willingly hear what they had suffered, than what they had merited: Caesar
opposing it, but in vain, having two against him: the proscription, a
mischief after Sylla his pattern, was set on foot. Not any thing was there in
that time so unworthie as that either Caesar should be compelled to proscribe
any man, or that Antonius should proscribe Cicero: And by the villainy of him
(It is the common saying or the people) his head was cut off; No man protecting
and keeping him safe, who for so many years together had defended both the
publiqu^ safety of the State, and that also of many private Citizens. Yet have
thou done nothing to purpose ( Marcus Antonius) for indignation which my breast
is not able to keep from breaking out, does force me to quit the form of my
intended work; thou do (i say) nothing to purpose, in telling out the
reward for the cutting of that most caelestiall and noblest head, or with
authorizing the slaughter of him, that was once the preserver of the
Republique, and of a Consul so famous procuring the death. Thou have indeed
deprived Marcus Cicero of the light of the sun, which made him full of cares,
shortened his old age, and berest him of life to be valued under thy
principality at far lower price than death, in thy Triumvirate. But his fame
and the glory of his actions, and speeches, thou art so far from taking from
him that thou have increased it. It lives, and shall live in the memory of all
future ages. And while this body of things existent in nature, which whether by
chance, or by providence, or how ever is settled, shall stand, which he almost:
solely with the spirit of a Roman apprehended with his understanding, did
comprehend, and with his eloquence did illuminate, it shall carry with it the
praise of a Cicero, as the companion of that age: and all posterity shall both
admire his writings against thee, as well as with execrations detest thy fact;
for sooner shall mankind fail in the earth, than the glory of him, and the
horror of thee.

CHAP. 67. The carriage of wives, freedmen, servants, and children toward
those that were proscribed: the foulness of the proscription of their nearest
friends.
THe calamity of those times, so impossible it is for any man in words to
express, as it is hard for any sufficiently to lament it. This yet is to be
observed, that toward those which were proscribed, there was found of some
wives, a singular faithfulness, in freedmen an indifferent one, in slaves now
and then some: but in their children none all. So troublesome to men is any
delay of their hopes, howsoever conceived. And that there might be nothing
sacred left, which might not serve to reward or provoke man to mischief,
Antonius proscribed his Uncle Lucius Caesar, and Lepidus his brother Paulus.
Neither was Plancus refused the favor of obtaining that his brother Plancus
Plotius should be proscribed. From whence it was that among the jests of the
soldiers, as they followed the triumphall Chariot of Lepidus and Plancus, and
among the curses of the Citizens these words were used; The Consulls triumph
over the Germans ( id est, the brothers) and not of the Gauls.

CHAP. 68. Marcus Caelius his character, attempts, and end, with that of Milo
the exile, for killing Clodius. Caesar's moderation in punishing such as had
abused him.
LEt this which treats of a thing past, be referred to a proper place: neither
is the person, of whom we are to speak, fit to be veyled in darkness and
shadows: while Caesar in the battle of Pharsalia, and in Africa disputes
with his sword, the maine of the business; Marcus Caelius a man most nearly
resembling Curio in eloquence and boldness, but in either of them beyond him,
and no less than he wittily mischievous, when in no moderate course he could
subsist, his private fortunes being much narrower than his mind, in his
Praetorship made himself the Author of new laws: neither could he by the
authority of the Senate and the Consulls be deterred from his design. And
sending for Ainnus Milo (who being refused, his repeal from exile, was an
enemy to the Julian party,) stirred up a sedition in the City: and not now
covertly beginning a war, was first sequestered from all charge in the Common
wealth, and not long after by the forces of the Consulls, and by the order of
the Senate, in the Thurians country was ruined. The fortune of Milo was suitable
to his intendments, who assaulting Compsa of the Hirpines, was strooken with a
stone, and so made satisfaction both to Publius Clodius, whom he had slain,
and to his country which he invaded. A man thou may say rash beyond the
name of valiant. Now to take somewhat of many that may be omitted, let it yet
be observed that Merulus Effordius and Flavius Caesetius Tribune of the
people, having used immoderate licentiousness against Caius Caesar, while they
charge him with aiming at the Crown, had welneere felt upon themselves the
weight of the scepter. Yet to this height only did the anger of the often
provoked Prince rise, that contenting himself with a censoriall censure,
rather than with a punishment corporal, like a Dictator, he sequestered them
from their places, and the public affairs, and professed that it was to him
the greatest misery that either he must go beyond the bounds of his own
nature, or suffer his honor to be empaired. But let us return to our course.

CHAP. 69. The death of Trebonius another of the killers of Caesar, by
Dolabella at Smyrna, who besieged by Cassius in Laodicaea, made his servant cut
off his head.
NOw both had Dolobella in Asia slain Caius Trebonius, a man of Consular rank
at Smirna (to whom he succeeded) having overreached him with a trick, who had
been most ungrateful to Caesar's merits, by whom he had been raised to the
degree of Consul, and yet had a share in his murder: and Caius Cassius having
received from Staius Murcus and Crispus Maruns men of the Praetorian rank, the
brave legions which they commanded in Syria, besieged and took Laodicaea, and
therein Dolabella, who had put himself into it; (yet so as Dolobella did not
time^ously present his neck to the edge of his servants sword) and with that
one draught made himself master often legions. And Marcus Brutus had wrung
from Caius Antonius the brother to Marcus Antonius in Macedonia, and from
Vatinius at Dyrrhachium their legions which were willing to change their
Commander. But A^tonius he mastred by force, Vatinius by his reputation,
Brutus being thought worthy to be preferrd before any other General
whatsoever, and Vatinus inferior to none that had a name. In whom the
deformity of his body did strive for the superiority with the baseness of his
mind: so as it seemed it was bestowed in a lodging of all others the most
worthiest of it. Yet was he seven legions strong. Then by the law Pedia, which
Pedius fellow, Consul to Caesar preferred, all they who were the killers of
Caesar, the elder being condemned were interdicted the use of fire and water,
at which time Capito my fathers brother of the Senators order, did subscribe
upon Agrippas motion against Caius Cassius.

CHAP. 70. Cassius takes Rhodes, Brutus conquers Lycia, they pass into
Macedonia, the battle of Philippi, where Cassius being beaten, dies by the
hand of his servant, and few days after, Brutus totally routed runs upon his
sword.
While these passages are on foot in Italy, Cassius with a sharp and very
fortunate war had (an action of mighty import) taken Rhodes, and Brutus had
conquered the Lycians: from whence they had passed their armies over into
Macedonia: when Cassius in every thing running a contrary course to the nature
of Brutus, had in the end also mastered his clemency. Neither do I find, any
upon whom a more indulgent fortune did once attend; or whom, as if she had
been tried, she did with more speed abandon, then Brutus and Cassius. Caesar
then and Antonius, passing their armies into Macedonia, near the City of
Philippi, came to fight a battle with Marcus Brutus and Cassius. The wing
that Brutus commanded, having beaten their opposites, did take Caesar's camp;
For he himself, though extremely sick, did yet discharge all the duties of a
General, and was also earnestly entreated by his Physician Artorius, that he
should not tarry in his quarter, he being frighted in his sleep with a
manifest threatening of danger toward him. The wing in which Cassius commanded,
was on the other side forced to fall off, and shrewdly plagued, had retired to
a higher ground. Cassius then by his own fortune guessing at the success of
his comfort, when he had sent one whom he had called out, for that purpose, and
commanded him to bring him word what the number and force of those men was
which were coming toward him: he returning an account thereof somewhat slowly
and they being now near him, and upon their full speed, and for the dust
neither their faces nor their ensigns could be discerned, believing that they
were enemies that were rushing upon him, he wrapped his coat about his head,
and fearelesse yielded his neck to his freed man. The head of Cassius was but
fallen to the ground, when he that was sent came and brought word, that Brutus
was Victor, who seeing his General lying dead, I will, said he, follow him,
whom my dullness has slain, and with that fell upon his sword. A few days
after Brutus fought another battle, and in that being overthrown, when he
had fled to a knolle by night he entreated Strato the Aegeatian his nearest
friend to lend him a hand in his death: and lifting his left arm up to his
head when he held the hilts in his right hand, he guided the point to his left
pappe where the heart does pant, and pressing on the same, with one blow ended
his life.

CHAP. 71. Messalla and Corvinus saved by Caesar: eminent Romans slain in
that fight.
PResently Mesalla a most noble young man, and next in authority to Brutus and
Cassius in that army, when there were some that did desire to choose him for
their General, did rather make election of being preserved by the favor of
Caesar, then to commit himself any more to the hazard of arms. Neither was
there in that victory to Caesar, any thing more pleasing, then that he could by
it save save Corvinus, nor at any time an instance more clear of a man
grateful and pious, then Corvinus was ever after to Caesar. Nor was there ever
any civil war more polluted with the blood of men of the noblest quality.
Therein dyed the son of C^to: In the same also fell Lucullus and Hortensius
the sons of two Citizens most eminent. For V^ro when he was amidest the
scorns of Antonius to be put to death, he with a free liberty did prophecy
truly, and of him that which was worthy to befall him. Drusus Livius the father
of Iulia Augusta, and Varus Quintilius not so much as making trial of the
enemies courtesy, the one of them slew himself in his tent, and the other
when he had put on the marks of his honors and offices, by the hand of his
freed man whom he compelled to do it, had his throat cut.

CHAP. 72. The parallel of Brutus and Cassius, Cnaeus Domitius with a Navy
retires into Sicile to Sextus Pompeius son to Pompey the great.
THis end was fortune pleased to appoint to the faction of Marcus Brutus, when
he was thirty seven years old; His mind being depraved in that day which with
his rashness of his fact, did blot out all his other virtues. As for Cassius
he was as much a better Captain then Brutus, as Brutus was a better man then
he: of whom thou would rather love Brutus for a friend, and more redoubt
Cassius if thy enemy: in the one there was more violence, in the other more
virtue. Who if they had been Conquerours, as much as it was better to have
Caesar for our Prince then Antonius so much had it been to have had Brutus
then Cassius: Cnaeus D^mitius the father of Lucius D^mitius a man whom we of
late have seen, and one of a most noble and eminent sincerity, the grandfather
of this Lucius D^mitius, an excellent young man, being possessed of a fleet,
did then with a great train of such as would follow his advice, contented to
make himself the party, commit himself to fortune. Staius Marcus to whose
charge the Navy and the guard of the Sea was entrusted, with his fleet, and
that part of the army which was under his Command, went over to Sextus Pompeius
the son of Pompey the great, who returning out of Spain had now possessed
himself of Sicilia; and both out of Ita^y and from diverse other parts of ^he
world so many as fortune ^ad withdrawn and freed from ^he present danger,
together with many who had bin pro^cribed, flocked to him. To them which
possessed no certain state any general was convenient e^ough; and when
fortune left them no liberty of election, but only showed them a retreat to
fly to, and when they sought to escape from a balefull tempest, any road was a
harbor for the^.

CHAP. 73. Sextus Pompeius his character a^ he maintains himself and hi^
army in Sicily by Piracy.
THis young man was in learning ignorant, in his speech barbarous, in his
courage daring of body able, in his resolutions speedy, for fidelity most
unlike his father, the freedman o^ his freedman, and servant of hi^ slaves,
envious to those of any worth, that he might be subject to the basest men:
whom the Senate, as then almost wholly consisting of the Pompeias faction,
after Antonius his flight from Mutina, had recalled out of Spain (where
Asinius Pollio of Praetorian quality, made a very brave war upon him) had
restored him to his fathers estate and given him the command of the Sea coast.
He then as we before have said, having seized upon Sicily, did enroll in his
army slaves and fugitives, and so made up a great body of legions. And by Menes
and Menecrates, his fathers freedmen, whom he had made his Admiralls infesting
the seas, made use of spoiling, and robberies to maintain himself and his
army: nor was he ashamed to make with piraticall villainies, those seas, unsafe
and troublesome, which by the arms and conduct of his father, had been
cleared and freed from Pirates.

CHAP. 74. Antonius after the defeat of Brutus, stays in these parts: Caesar,
returning into Italy, finds at troubled by Lucius Antonius, Marcus his
brother, and Fulvia, the wife of Marcus Lucius, forced in Perusia, dismissed
unhurt, and Perusia burnt by one of their own, who set it on fire, by name
Macedonicus.
THe party of Brutus and Cassius being ruined, Antonius to take possession of
the Provinces beyond the sea, tarired there, and Caesar returning into Italy
found it much more troublesome then he hoped to have done. For Lucius Antonius
the Consul, sharer with his brother in his vices, but wanting the virtues
which were sometimes found in him: one while with complaining of Caesar to the
old soldiers, another provoking them to arms that had justly in the division
of lands, and appointing of inhabitants to them, lost those lands which they
held before, had raised a great army. On the other side, Fulvia the wife of
Antonius who had nothing feminine about her, but her body, did fill all things
with arms and garboyle. She for the seat of the war, made choice of
Praeneste; Antonius being chased from every place, by the forces of Caesar, had
retired himself to Perusia; Caesar following his own fortune and virtue
assaulted and carried Perusia. Antonius he dismissed without harm: the
Perusians, more by the rage of the soldiers then by the will or direction of
the General were cruelly handled. The Town was burnt, the beginning of the
fire was caused by the principal man thereof, Macedonicus, who setting fire of
his own house, and his goods, ran himself through with his sword, and threw
himself into the flame.

CHAP. 75. Another war raised in Campania, by Tiberius Claudius Nero, Father
to Tiberius Caesar, and husband of Livia, after wife of Augustus. Her character.
AT the same time, there was on foot in Campania, a furious war, which
Tiberius Claudius Nero, of the Praetorian rank, and the high priest, a man of a
great spirit, and of infinite learning, the father of Tiberius Caesar (openly
avowing himself the patron of those which had lost their lands) had raised:
But that also by the coming of Caesar was buried and determined. Who can
sufficiently admire these charges of fortune? who these uncertain accidents of
human Condition? who would either hope or fear things distering from the
present, or contrary to that which was expected? Livia the daughter of Drusus
Claudianus, a most noble and most valiant man, by her descent, her goodness
her, her beauty of all the dames of Rome, the most eminent: whom we since have
seen the wife of Augustus, and when he was translated to the gods, have also
seen her high priest and Flamen to him. Then flying from the sword of Caesar
(that afterward was her own Caesar) whose son of two years old, this our
Tiberius Caesar the restorer of the Roman Empire, and who was predestined to
be in the end the son of Caesar also, she carrying in her bosom with one
only attendant that her flight might the better concealed, by unfrequented
ways to avoid the arms of the soldiers got to the sea side, and with her
husband Nero passed over into Sicily.

CHAP. 76. Caius Velleius grandfather of the Author, not able to follow
Antonius in his flight, kills himself. Fulvia and Plancus permitted to retire
to Antonius. Pollio with Domitius join a fleet to Antonius his forces,
Antonius returns into Italy: Peace as made between them at Brund^^sum.
Salvidienus his treachery discovered.
THe testimony that I would give to a stranger, I must not defraud my
grandfather of. For Caius Ve^^eiu^, who was by Cna^u^ Pompeius chosen into a
very honorable place among those three hundred and sixty ^udges, and both to
him, to Marcus Brutu^, and to Tiro the Prefect of their workmen, a man
inferior to none: oppressed with age, and infirm of body upon the departure of
Nero from Naples, whose part for the singular friendship between them he in
all he was able assisted; when he could not bear him company, with his sword
in Campania, he ran himself through. Caesar then permitted Fulvia freely
without any wrong to depart out of Italy, and Plancus to bear the woman
company in her flight. For Assinius Pollio with seven legions having long
retained Venutia in the devotion of Antonius, and done great and brave things
about Altinum and other Cities in that Country, going to Antenius in his way
having with his persuasions, and giving him his faith for assurance, prevailed
with Domitius of whom we have before spoken, that escaping our of Brutus his
camp, and after his death having made himself Admiral of a Fleet of his
own, he drew him to Antonius. By which fact whosoever will judge equally may
know that Pollio did not co^ferre a meaner benefit upon Antonius then Antonius
did afterward upon Pollio. The return then of Antonius into Italy, and the
preparations of Caesar against him presented indeed a fear of war, but quickly
was there a peace concluded between them at Brundusium. At which time the
villainous devices of Rufus Salvidinus came to light, who being borne of
obscurest parentage, did prize at a low rate his being raised to the highest
honors, and that next after Cneus Pompeius and Caesar himself of the Order of
KNIGHTS, was created Consul, except he might rise to that height from whence
he might see both Caesar and the Common wealth beneath himself.

CHAP. 77. Peace at Misendu^, made with Sextus Pompeius, by which all that were
proscribed were freed. Staius Marcus but to death by Sextus Pompeius, upon the
false imputations of his Admiral: Maenas and Menecrates.
THen, the unanimous voice of the people complaining, who^ a sharp famine did
press, the sea not being free; there was a peace concluded also with Sextus
Pompeius, at Misenum. Who not incongruously when he entertained Caesar and
Antonius at supper aboard his ship, told them that he would feast them in his
keele, alluding to the name of the place where his fathers house stood (as then
possessed by Antonius,) By the Articles of this peace it was agreed that
Sicilia and Achaia should be allotted to Pompeius in which notwithstanding his
unquiet mind could not settle. That only one thing he by his coming brought of
benefit to his country, that for all that were, proscribed and as many others
as for several causes had fled to him, he did contract they should be safe and
peaceably returned to their Country. Which article besides others of the most
eminent men did restore to the Republique both Nero Claudius, Marcus Silanus,
Sentius Sturninus, Arantius and Titius. But Staius Murcus who by his coming to
him, and that of a Fleet royal had doubled his forces, being charged with
forged crimes, because that Menas and Menecrates were not pleased to have a man
of that sort their fellow in office, Pompeius had put to death in Sicily.

CHAP. 78. Antonius marries Octavia, Caesar's sister. Labienus leading the
Parthians with Pacorus, the son of Parthia, by Ventidius slain: Caesar
leads his army into Illyria and Dalmatia. Sharp justice done by Domitius in
Spain upon a runne-away Centurion.
ABout this time it was that Marcus Antonius took to wife Octavia the sister
of Caesar. Pompey was returned into Sicily; Antonius into the provinces beyond
the seas, which Labienus retiring from the camp of Brutus to the Parthians,
and leading their army into Syria, having slain Antonius his Lieutenant had
extremely shaken. But he by the valor and conduct of Ventidius, together with
the forces of the Parthians, and the Kings son Pacorus, that noblest young
man was utterly ruined. In the Interim of these times, lest idleness the most
capital foe to discipline should corrupt the soldier, Caesar with frequent
expeditions into Illyricum and Dalmatia, by patience in dangers and practice of
the Art of war, made his army able to endure. Then also it was that Ca^v^^^s
Domitius, who in his Consulship had Spain for his Province, was the author of
an example of greatest consequence, and one comparable to those of ancient
times; for he commanded to be slain with a club a Centurion of the first
rank, by name Vibilliu^, for base and cowardly running away from the fight.

CHAP. 79. War resolved upon with Sextus Pompeius: Caesar mary's Livia, wife
of Tiberius Nero, her husband surrendering her. The character of Marcus Agrippa:
part of the fleet lost by tempest: Pompey ruined, flies to Antonius, and is by
his command shire.
POmpeies fleet, and the report and fame of him, growing every day greater,
Caesar determined to go through with that war. And committing the care of
building of ships, of pressing soldiers and mariners, and of excercising them,
and training them for the sea service to Marcus Agrippa, a man of most
excellent parts, unconquerable by labor, watching or danger one that knew (no
man better) how to obey, but that only referred to one sole man: ambitious
indeed of commanding others, in all things hating delays, and coupling the
execution with his resolving. He having built in the Lakes of Avernus and
Lucrinum, a most gallant fleet, with daily excercising, made both the soldier
and the Saylor absolutely perfect in both the arts of soldiery, and sea
service. With this fleet Ceasar (having first upon the resignation of Nero, to
whom she had before been married, taken Livia to wife, with all the
ceremonies usual in the common wealth) began the war upon Sicily and
Pompeius. But him that was invincible to all humane force, fortune did at that
time grievously aflict: for about Velia and the Promontory of Palinurus, a
storm at the South falling upon him, did miserably tear and scatter far the
greater part of his whole fleet. That caused some delay in that war, which
afterward was managed with doubtful and sometimes variable fortune. For both
the fleet in the same place was torn with a tempest, and as near Mylae,
under the leading of Agrippa, the success was prosperous; so by the unexpected
coming in of a fleet, even in the sight of Caesar himself, not far from
Tauromenium, there was a great blow received by him. Neither was the danger
very far from his own person: and the legions which were with Cornisicius,
Caesar's Lieutenant being landed, were almost defeated by Pompeius. But the
dou^tfull fortune of that time was by a seasonable valor corrected: for they
having opned at large the squadrons of the fleetes of both sides. Pompeius
being stripped of almost all his ships, fled into Asia, and by the command of
Marcus Antonius, whose assistance he craved, while he was troublesome with a
fashion, between a Commander, and a suppliant, and one while would stand upon
his greatness, another even beg his life; he had his throat cut by Titius.
Against whom the hatred which by that misdeed he had procured himself, did so
long endure, that some time after he presenting plays in Pompey his Theater,
was by the curses of the people driven from the spectacle, which himself was
bestowed, and was at the change of.

CHAP. 80. Lepidus called to the war with Sextus Pompeius: Pompeius turnea
out of all by Caesar his strange daring.
WHen Caesar made that war against Pompey, he had sent for Lepidus out of
Africa with twelve legions, but half complete. He the vainest of all men
living, and who had not with any virtue of his own merited so long an
indulgence of fortune, had joined to his own troops the soldiers of Pompey,
because he was nearer to them, who followed not his, but Caesar's fortune. And
now puffed up with the number of above twenty legions, his madness grew to
that height, that being an useless companion in the victory of another, as
long as he stayed there suspecting Caesar's designs; and ever differing from
that which gave satisfaction to others, he construed the whole victory as his
own, and took the boldness upon him to enjoyne Caesar to get him out of
Sycily. Not the Scipios or any other of the ancient Roman Captains did ever
dare, and execute a braver thing than Caesar at that time did. For when he was
both disarmed, and in his cloak carrying nothing but his name about him, he
entered into Lepidus his camp, and avoiding those darts which by order of that
most mischievous man, were thrown at him, his cloak being thrust through with
a pike, he durst seize the Eagle of the legion. Then might thou know what
difference there was between the Generals. Those which were armed followed
him that was disarmed: and Lepidus in the tenth year, after he had attained to
a potentie most unsuitable to his life, being abandoned both by fortune and his
soldiers, wrapped in a mourning garment, and concealed in the dragge of the
multitude that flocked about Caesar, he fell prostrate at his knees. His life
and his private estate were granted him: his honor which he could not
support, he was bereaved of.

CHAP. 81. A mutiny among the soldiers, appeased by the seventy, and as well
by the bounty of Caesar.
A S^dden mutiny of the soldiers then risen, who by often considering their
own strength, were fallen from regarding the discipline of the war: and what
they thought themselves able to enforce, would not deigne to have by request,
was partly by the severitie, partly by the bounty of the Prince repressed. And
upon them was at the same time bestowed a fair addition of the Colonie in
Campania: the rents thereof did belong to the State, instead of which there was
appropriated to the common treasury, a much larger revenue of twelve hundred
thousand Sesterces out of the Island of Creete, and the water work promised,
which at this day is both a singular one, conducing to the health of the City,
and an ornament fitted for delicacie and pleasure. Agrippa in this did deserve,
and had conferred upon him the honor of a Navall Crown, which before him was
never bestowed upon any Roman. After this Caesar returning a Conqueror to the
City, did declare that he did design for the public use diverse houses which
his factors had by seve^all purchases drawn into one, that he might be seated
more at ^arge; And promised that he would build the Temple of Apollo, and the
galleries about ^t, which also he afterward with singular magnificence
performed.

CHAP. 82. Antonius with thirteen legions, enters Parthia, but with much ado,
and great loss, goes off. He resolves upon a war with Caesar.
THat summer in which Caesar was so happy in Sicily against Lepidus fortune,
also fought successful on Caesar part, and the Republickes in the East. For
Marcus Antonius passing through Armenia, and then Media, to invade the
Parthians, was encountered by their King. And that at the first having lost two
legions, with the Lieutenant Statianus, and their baggage and his Engines,
presently fell into those dangers with extreme hazard of hi^ whole army, as
out of them he despaired ever to be delivered. And having lost not less than
the fourth part of his forces, he was preserved by the advice and
faithfulness of a certain man, but a Roman; who being taken prisoner in the
defeat of Crassus his army, had changed his fortune, but not his disposition:
and coming in the night to the Roman guards, forewarned him that he should not
go^ the way that he intended, but pass another through the woods. Marcus
Antonius his doing so, was the preservation of the legions; of which yet, as we
said before, at least a fourth part of his whole army; and of the followers of
the camp, and slaves were lost, and of his baggage scarce any at all was left
him. Yet this his flight because he came off alive, Antonius called a victory;
who the third summer after returning into Armenia, overreaching Artavasdes the
King thereof, with a trick bound him in chains: but, that he might not want
of his due honor, with golden ones. The fire then both of his love to
Cleopatra, and the greatness of his vice (which are ever fomented by wealth,
liberty, and flatteries) increasing, he determined to make war upon his own
country: when he had before that commanded himself to be styled a new
Bacchus; when with a Garland of Ivy crowned with a crown of gold, with the
Thirsus in his hand, and buskins buckled on his legs, in a Chariot like Liber
pater, he had ridden about Alexandria.

CHAP. 83. Plancus falls off from Antonius to Caesar. His character and
carriage after his revolt.
While these preparations for war are one foot, Plancus, not out of
judgment to make election of the better part, neither out of love of Caesar,
or the State (for to all these he was perpetually adverse) but infected (as
with a disease) with treachery, when he had been the basest flatterer of the
Queen, and an observer, beneath the degree of her slaves, when he had been
Antonius his Register, and both the author and minister of the fithiest
actions, when he had to all men, nd in every thing been mercenary, wsten naked
and dyed of a sea-blew color, with his head crowned with reeds, and dragging a
long tail behind him, he had crept upon his knees, and danced as Glaccus:
being checked by Antonius at a banquet for his manifest extortions, fled unto
Caesar. And afterward iputing the clemency of the conqueror to his own
virtue, used to say that Caesar when he had pardoned, had well tried it; Titius
did within a while immitate him who was his Uncle* Wittily did Caponius, a man
of Praetorian rank, who to his children was a father, most precise careful of
their breeding, the father in law of Silius, answer Plancus, when in the Senate
he imputed many, and those vile things to Antonius from whom he was lately
fled: upon my faith (said he) Antonius did many foul things the day before
thou leftest him.

CHAP. 84. The sea preparation at Actium, with the order of the Navies.
When Caesar then, and Messalla Corvin^s were Consulls, the victory at Actium
was gained: where long before they came to fight, the advantage of the day, and
the success thereof was apparent on the Julian side. On this part both the
soldier and the Commander were full of vigor and spirit; on that all things
languished: on this were Kings most firm to the cause; on that with their
wants much disaffected. There were ships great indeed, but that could not move
with any competent speed Here were others of a more dreadful aspect: From this
side not one fled to Antonius: from that to Caesar daily some went over:
Finally, in the sight of Antoniu^, and as it were at his very beard, by Marcus
Agrippa was Leucas assaulted and carried. Patros taken, Corinth seized upon,
and twice before the last and general trial, his fleet was beaten. The King
Amyntas followed the better and more commodious course; for Dellius, in this
war also firm to his old fashion, as he had before from Dolobella, turned
to Caesar: and Cnaeus Demitius a most eminent man, (who only of all that sided
with Antonius did never though with his great and most desperate hazard salute
Cleopatra by the title of Queen, but only by her name) came over to Caesar.

CHAP. 85. Caesar's victory, and the flight of Antonius after Cleopatra: the
rendering of the land forces to Caesar.
AT length the day of the maine trial came on, in which Caesar and Antonius
drawing out both their Navies, fought, the one for the preservation of the
world, the other for the ruin thereof. The right wing of the Julian Navy was
governed by Marcus Latius, the last by Arruntius, the command in chief of the
whole sea fight rested upon Agrippa: Caesar designing to himself the place to
which fortune should call him, was in every part present. Antonius his fleet
was commanded by Publicola and Sosius. As for the forces at land, those of
Caesar's part were commanded by Taurus, and Antonies by Candius: when the fight
began there was on the one side all things necessary: the General, Saylors, or
Rowers and soldiers: on the other nothing but the soldiers. Cleopatra began
first of all to fly, and Antonius did choose rather to bear the Queen
company in her flight, than his soldiers in fighting for him. And being
General, who ought to punish runawayes severely, did himself run away from
his own soldiers. Their constancy in fighting most bravely, even when they
had lost their head that should have directed them, did long continue, and when
they dispaired of victory, they fought to dye. But Caesar desiring to reduce
them to quiet thoughts by words, whom he might have ruined with the sword,
calling to them, and showing them that Antonius was fled: asked them for whom
and with whom they would now fight. But they, when they had fought a long time
for their General that was absent, with much a do, and hardly laying down
their arms yielded the victory: and Caesar did more readily promise them
pardon and life, than they could be persuaded to crave it. And by all men it
was acknowledged that the soldiers had done the duty of the bravest General,
and the General behaved himself as the most cowardly soldier. So that thou
may make a doubt whether he would have governed the victory by his own, or
Cleopatra's discretion, that was by her pleasure directed in his flight.

CHAP. 86. Caesar's clemency after the victory: Pollio his fair respect to
Caesar as his Prince; to Antonius as his benefactor.
THe same course also was taken by the army at land, after Canidius with an
inconsiderate flight, had whirled after Antonius: who is he that in the
cursitory way of this so contracted a work, dares take upon him to express
what that day did beneficial for the whole world, out of what, and into what
an estate the fortune of the Common wealth did remove. But the victory was used
with all clemency, very few were they who were put to death, and those indeed
which durst not so much as crave their lives. Out of which lenity of the
General, it may well be collected what he would have made the effect of his
victory, either in the beginning of his Triumvirate, or in the Philippian
fields if it had been in his own power ******* at length with much wrestling
for it, the clemency of Caesar preserved him. Let me not over-passe the
memorable both fact, and deed of Asinius Pollio. For when after the peace of
Brundusium, he had still remained in Italy, and had neither seen the Queen,
nor after the mind of Antonius, was by her love enfeebled, had meddled with his
faction, Caesar requiring him to go with him to the bataile of Actium, My
merits (said he) toward Antonius are greater, but his favors to me better
known. I therefore will withdraw my self from your hazards, and rest here a
prey for the Conqueror.

CHAP. 87. Antonius his death at Alexandria, and presently after Cleopatra's.
None put to death by Caesar after the victory.
THe next year Caesar pursuing the Queen and Antonius to Alexandria, did put
the last hand to the civil war: Antonius did, and that not timerously, kill
himself. So as by his death he did seem to wipe of many spots of his former
faintness. But Cleopatra abusing her gardians, having an Aspick brought into
her did by the biing thereof, free from all womanish fear, put an end to her
life. A thing it was, worthy of both the fortune and the clemency of Caesar,
that of all those which had borne arms against him there was not any one that
by him, or upon his command was put to death. ^ecius Brutus was by the cruelty
of Antonius slaughtered: Sextus Pompeius being defeated by Caesar, by Antonius
likewise (when he had given him his faith to preserve for him his honors also
entire) was deprived of life. Brutus and Cassius before that they had made
trial how the Conqueror would be inclined toward them, with a voluntary death
ended, their days. Canidius died more cowardly then did suit with the
profession of which he had ever been. The last of the Murderers of Caesar,
Parmensis Cassius received his payment by death, as Tribenius before had done.

CHAP. 88. Lepidus son to the Triumvir conspiring against Caesar's life,
without trouble or noise oppressed by Caius Marcellus provost of the City.
Marcellus his Character.
While Caesar was putting an end to the Actian and Alexandrian war, Marcus
Lepidus, a young man, of a better shape then disposition of mind, son to that
Lepidus who had been the Triumvir in the settling the state, and of Iunia the
sister of Brutus, entered into a conspiracy of killing Caesar, upon his first
return to the City. Then Marcus Marcellus, Captain of the Guard of the City,
borne of a noble family, and order of the Knights: A man whenever the
affairs required vigilance, that never slept, provident, and who knew how to
drive a business to the head: but when once the affairs gave him any time of
remission, melting in ease and daintiness more then women would desire, not
less dear to Caesar then Agrippa, but these preferred: For he lived almost
contented with narrow studdes of purple upon his gown, neither was he unable
to reach greater matters, but did not desire them: He with infinite stillness
and cunning sented out the devices of that rash headed young man, and with
wonderful speed, without all trouble of men or affairs herein, having ruined
Lepidus, did extinguish a fearful origiginall of a new civil war, and
which was likely to have sprung up again. So her received his due punishment,
for his ill contrived plots. Let Servilia the wife of Lepidus be matched with
Antistius his before mentioned Calphurnia, who throwing her self alive into
the funeral flame, received in recompense of her untimely end, the never dying
memory of her brave action.

CHAP. 89. Caesar his return to Rome, his triumph and the model of his
government.
But of Caesar's return into Italy, and to the City, how he was met, with what
applause of all men, of all ages, and all degrees he was received; what the
magnificence of his triumphs was, what that of his bounties, not a full and
just volume, much less this so concise a work, is able to make a fit and just
relation. Nothing from thence forth could men desire of the gods, nothing could
the gods bestow upon men, nothing be craved in prayer, nor any thing in a
perfect felicity be found, which Augustus, after his return to the City, did
not endow the republique, the people of Rome, and in sum, the whole world
with all. The civil wars that had lasted now twenty years were ended,
foraigne wars buried, peace repealed, the rage of arms quieted in evrey
part, to the laws their power, to the seats of Justice their authority, and
to the Senate their majesty restored, the command of the Magistrates restored
to the ancient measure, only two Praeton more added to the former eight, and
the first most ancient form of the Common wealth revived. Husbandry returned
into the Country, to things sacred their due honor, to men security, to every
man a certainty of enjoying his own. Some laws commodiously amended, others
with the public good enacted Senators chosen without harshnesse, though not
without strictness, men of principal quality and who had borne offices of
honor and triumphed, by the persuasion of the prince drawn to the City for
the ornament of the common wealth. Consul he was only eleven times, which
that it might not be continued upon him, Caesar having often pressed and stood
against it with much ado obtained. For the Dictatorship, as the people had
obstinately urged it upon him, he as constantly rejected. The war made under
his command, and by victories, peace established through the world, and so many
works perfected, both at home and out of Italy, would require an Historian
that upon that sole work should bestow the whole term of his life. We
remembering what we have professed, will present to your eyes and mind the whole
picture of his government.

CHAP. 90. Dalmatia and Spain by Caesar and (employed by his command) Agrippa,
after ages of trouble brought to a perfect peace.
THe Civil war, as we have said, thus interred, and the members of the
Common wealth, now knitting together, and he taking care of such things as so
long a course of war had rent in sunder, Dalmatia which for two hundred and
twenty years had bin rebellious, was brought quietly to a plain confession of
subjection to our Empire. The Alps famous both for wild beasts and diverse
nations subdued, all the Spaines one while by himself in preson, another by the
ministration of Agrippa, whom the favor of the Prince had raised to the third
Consulship, and after to the Consortship with him of the Tribuniciall power,
with a sharp and variable war at last was settled. Into which provinces when
at the beginning Scipio and Sempronius Longus being Consulls our armies were
sent, and after in the first year of the second Punicke war, again under
the Command of Cnaeus Scipio uncle to the African, about one hundred and fifty
years since: the war was there so bloody and so doubtful, as our Armies and
Generals being lost, we often went away with dishonor, and sometimes not
without danger to the Roman Empire. For those provinces made an end of the
Scipios they also with a dishonorable war of twenty years, Viriatus being
general of that side held our Ancestors play. In them made was the base
stipulation of Quintus Pompeius, and that more base of Mancinus, which the
Senate with the ignominy of the General yielded up to the enemy, did cancel;
the same also consumed us, so many Generals of Consular quality, so many of
Praetorian, and in our fathers days, did with her arms raise Sertorious to
that height that in five whole years it could not be judged whether the
Romans or the Spaniards were the braver warriors, nor which people of them two,
should obey the other. These provinces then so large, so populous, so stout,
almost fifty years since, Caesar Augustus reduced to such tranquillity, as
they who never were before free from most furious wars, were under Caius
Antistius, and after that under Publius Silius the Leiutenant and others, free
from so much as robberies.

CHAP. 91. The ensigns lost at Crassus his defeat returned to Caesar by the
Parthian Conspiracies of Caepio and Muraena, as also of Egnatius against him
discovered and punished.
While the west was thus quieted from the East, the Roman ensigns which upon
the overthrow of Crassus, Orodes and at the repulsing of Antonius his son
Pharnaces had taken, were rendered and sent back to Augustus. Which by the
propounding of Plancus and the universal consent of the Senate and people of
Rome bestowed upon him the surname of Parthian. Yet were there not wanting some
that could hate even his happiest state of things. For Lucius Muraena, and
Fannius Caepio, of far differing dispositions (for Muraena without this
guiltine^ might have passed for a good man: but Caepio even before he was
tainted with this crime, the worst that might be) having conspired together
about the killing of Caesar, seized upon by public authority, what by
violence they would have acted they by Justice suffered. Neithe^ long after was
it that Egnati^^ Rufus a man in every respect more like a Fencer, then a
Senator, having in his Edileship gotten the favor of the people (which he had
daily increased by quenching of fires with his own private family) so highly
as they were content to join, for his sake, the office of Praetor, to take of
Edile, and presently also was bold to stand for the Consulship: being
overwhelmed with the guilt of all manner of foulness and wickedness, having
drawn into his design others that were likest to himself, determined to kill
Caesar. That since he could not subsist if Caesar were safe, at least he might
yet dye when he were taken away. For such is the disposition of men, that every
one had rather sink with the public ruin, then be oppressed with his own,
and though he suffer the same yet be less remarked. Nor was this man more
fortunate in being concealed, then those that went before him, and being clapped
in prison, he died a death, of which his life was most worthy.

CHAP. 92. A brave act of Sentius Saturninus punishing the Customers, fraud,
and stopping Egnatius in his demand of the Consullship.
LEt not a brave fact of an excellent man be defrauded of a due remembrance,
Caius Sentius Saturninus, who about that time was Consul. Caesar was then
absent about ordering the affairs of Asia, and the East carrying about with his
person, the benefits of his peace. When Sentius (as it fell out being at that
time both sole Consul and Caesar absent) had both done other things with the
strictness of former times, and with admirable constancy: had after the old
fashion and severity of the Consuls, discovered the frauds of the farmours of
Customs, punished their avarice, and brought the revenues of the state into
the public treasury. And also sitting principal Consul at the assembly for
elections, those that stood for the quaestorship, if he judged them unworthy of
it, he forbade to declare themselves: threatening them when they remained firm
to their intentions, that he would by his Consular power punish them, and
Egntaius who flourishing in the favor of the people did hope to couple the
Consulship, to the Praetorship as he before had done that to the Edileship, he
forbade to profess himself for a Candidate, and when he prevailed not with
him, he swore that though the people by their suffrages did choose him, yet
that he would not declare him for elected. Which fact of his I should reckon
worthy to be compared with any of the ancient Co^suls whatsoever, but that we
do more willingly commend the things that we hear of then those that we see,
that we wait upon the present with envy, but things past with reverence, and
do believe that those do overload us, these instruct us.

CHAP. 93. The death of M. Marcellus son to Octavia, Caesar's sister. Agrippa
returned to Rome, marries Iulia Caesar's daughter, late wife to Marcellus.
ALmost three years, before the villainy of Egnatius brake out, and about the
time of Muraena's and Caepio's conspiracy, now fifty years since Marcus
Marcellus the son of Octavia, Augustus his sister who^ all men did so reekon,
for his successor in his power, if ought should happen to Caesar, as they
thought it could not yet descend upon him securely by reason of Marcus Agrippa
his greatness, (having when he was Edile presented most magnificient shows to
the people) departed this life, a very young man, and truly as they say of free
and open virtues, of a cheerful disposition, and wit, and capable of the
fortune for which he was bred. After whose decease, Agrippa, who under color
of important service of the state was gone into Asia, but as report speaks it,
for some secret distates with Marcellus had withdrawn himself, from the
present time returning thence took to wife Iulia the daughter of Augustus who
had before been married to Marcellus. A woman whose womb was neither
fortunate for her self nor for the Common wealth.

CHAP. 94. Tiberius Caesar son to Livia, called to affairs: His character
sent into the East, quiets Armenia and receives pledges of the Parthian.
AT this time Tiberius Claudius Nero, who when he was three years old, as we
before have said, Livia the daughter of Drusus Claudius (Nero to whom she had
before been married affiancing her) had married Augustus: Being trained up in
the discipline of heavenly knowledge, a young man admirably furnished by his
Nobility, shape, stature, the best kinds of learning, and an infinite wit:
Who from the beginning might hope for any greatness that he since has arrived
at, and at the first view appeared a Prince, being Quaestor at the nineteenth
year of his age, began to deal in affairs of state. And did at Ostia and in
the City by the direction of his father in law, so order the businesses of a
pressing dearth and want of corn that by what he then did it clearly appeared
how great a man for employments he would one day prove. Neither long after
being sent by the same his father in law, to survey and put in order the
Oriental provinces, he having in that expedition given many singular proofs
of all kinds of virtues; with his Legions entered Armenia. And having brought
it under the command of the people of Rome, did deliver the Crown thereof to
Artavasdes, with the fame of which so great name of his the King of the
Parthians also affrighted, sent his son to Caesar for Ostages.

CHAP. 95. Tiberius returned with his brother Drusus, sent against the
Rhaetians and Vindelicians, with fortunate event.
When Nero was returned, Caesar determined to make experience of him in a
war of no mean consequence giving him for an assistant his brother Drusus
Claudius, of whom Livia was delivered in Caesar's house. They both dividing
their charge invaded the Rhaetians and the Vindelicians, and forcing many
Cities and Castles, as also by some happy success in open fights, with much
loss of the blood of the conquered nations, and more danger then damage of the
Roman army; did master them that were most strongly seated, the access to
them extremely difficult, in number multitudinous, and in the fierce bravery
of their courage redoubtable, before which time the Censorship of Plancus and
Paulus being transpassed in wrangling and braules was neither honorable to
them, nor useful to the state, when the one wanted the respect and vigor that
should be in a Censor, and the others course of life would not agree with that
title. For Paulus was not able to fill the room, and Plancus could reprehend
nothing in youngmen, or hear objected to them which he must not be enforced
to acknowledge to be in himself.

CHAP. 96. Agrippa surrenders his wife Iulia to Tiberius. The Pannonian war
ended by Tiberius, who entered the City for it in an ovant triumph.
AGrippa, within a while after who had by many deservings enable his late
raising, and had brought it so far as he was both the father in law of Nero
(whose children his Nephews, sacred Augustus giving them the names of Caius
and Lucius had adopted) did now tie Nero in stricter and nearer bonds to Caesar
for his daughter Iulia, which had been married to Agrippa, Nero took to wife.
Then followed the Pannonian war, which being begun by Agrippa and Marcus
Vinicius thy grandfather, then Consulls, and which being great, cruel, and
also nearly hanging over Italy, was by Nero ended. The Natives of the
Pannonians and Dalmatians, the scituations of the Countries and rivers, the
number and equipage of their forces, the most glorious, and many victories of
so great a General in that war we will in some other place describe. Let
this work now keep its own form. Nero having obtained this victory entered
the City in Ovant triumph.

CHAP. 97. Marcus Lollius receives a blow, and loses the Eagle of the legion
in Germany. That war committed to Drusus, by him happily managed: his
character: his death. The rest finished by Tiberius.
But while in this part of the Empire all things succeed most prosperously; a
blow received in Germany under the Lieutenant Marcus Lollius, (a man in every
thing more greedily desiring money than to do bravely: and with the wariest
dissembling of his vices, most vicious, together with the loss of the Eagle of
the fifth legion) did call Caesar from the City into Gallia. The care and
burden then of the German war was transferd to Drusus Claudius, Nero's
brother; a young man of so many so eminent virtues, as either the nature of
mortal man is capable of, or industry can acquire, whose disposition whether
it were more able for affairs of the war, or the acts of peace it is
uncertain. Certainly his gentleness and swetnesse in his conversation, and
his respect to his friends fair, and like himself is said to be inimitable:
As for the beauty of his person, it was in the next rank to his brothers. But
him now the Conqueror of a great part of Germany, and having drawn very much
blood of that people in many places; the injustice of the destinies when he was
Consul in the thirtieth year of his age, ravished from us. The charge then of
that war was delivered to Nero, which he underwent with both his own virtue
and fortune. And having past victorious through all the parts of Germany without
any damage of the army committed to him which ever was the care of that
General, he so mastered it, as he almost brought it into the form of a
tributary Province. Than was a second triumph with a second Consulship
presented to him.

CHAP. 98. War in Thracia ended by Lucius Piso: a brief character of him.
While these things of which we have treated do pass in Pannonia and
Germany, a bitter war risen in Thracia; all the Nations of that country
flying to arms, was by the virtue of Lucius Piso, whom even at this day we
see still a most diligent and most mild guardian of the Cities quiet,
suppressed: for being Caesar's Lieutenant, he made war with them three years
together, and partly in fight, partly by forcing of places, he brought those
most fierce Nations with their extreme loss and destruction into their former
fashion of living in peace: and by his actions restored to Asia their security,
and to Macedonia their quiet. Of whom all men must both think and say that his
conditions were most equally tempred between smartnesse and lenity, nor that
easily can be found any man who either was more fervently in love with ease and
quiet; or did more ably bear the weight of affairs, and that did take more
care for that which was to be done, without any ostentation of doing it
himself.

CHAP. 99. Tiberius out of respect to Caius and Lucius nephews to Octavius,
quits all his greatness in Rome, and retires to study at Rhodes.
WIthin a little while after, having past two Consulships, and as often
triumphed, and in the Consortship of the Tribunitiall power made equal to
Augustus, of all the City except one (and that because he would have it so)
the most eminent, the greatest of Captains, and both by his fame and by his
fortune the most illustrious, and indeed the second eye and head of the State:
with a strange, a wondrous, and an unspeakeable piety (whereof the reasons
within a while were discovered) when Caius Caesar had now put on his virile
robe, and Lucius also began to be ripe for the conversation of men; Lest his
glittering should hinder the beginnings of those rising young men, he
concealing the cause of that his resolution, did crave leave of him that was
both his wives father, and his mothers husband, that he might take some rest
from his continued labors. What the carriage of the City in that time and
occasion was, what the thoughts of particular men, what tears were shed by
those that took their leaves of a man of that greatness, how his country did
almost lay hold upon him to stay him; we hold best to reserve the narration
for a full and complete work; That yet in this our running strain, we must
speak that he so past his seven years at Rhodes, as all both Proconsulls and
Lievtenants, passing into the provinces beyond the seas, and coming to visit
him did ever stoop their fasces to him a private man (if such a Majesty may
be termed private,) and confessed that his retirement was more full of honor
than their Command.

CHAP. 100. The Parthian falls off from his league with Rome, and Germany also
rebels. Iulia her foul life punished in her with exile, in but favorites
with death.
THe whole world did feel that Nero had quieted the tuition of the City: For
both the Parthian falling off from the friendship of Rome, laid hold of
Armenia: and Germany perceiving the eye of him that had mastered her, not beat
upon her, rebelled against us. But in the City the same year that sacred
Augustus, now thirty years past, when himself and Gallus Caninius were
Consulls, had with most magnificent shows of Fencers at the sharp, and
representation of Sea Fights, dedicated Mars his Temple, and satisfied both the
eyes and minds of the people of Rome; a storm and mischief, foul to be
related, and horrid to be remembered broke out in his own house. For Iulia his
daughter totaly forgetting the greatness of both her father and her husband,
did leave nothing unassaied either in riot or lusts, that a woman might or do
or suffer filthily; And measured the greatness of her fortune by her liberty
of sinning, accounting all lawful that she had a mind to. Julius Antonius a
singular instance of Caesar's clemency, being then the polluter of his house,
was also the revenger himself of the villainy committed by him: whom, when his
father was vanquished, he had not only estated in a full security of his
life, but had also conferred upon him the Priesthood, Praetorship, the
Consulship, provinces and honors, and more had in the strictest bonds of
affinity received him into his bosom by the honor of marying him to his
sisters daughter. And Quintus Crispinus vayling his crime with the austeritie
of a sour brow, Appius Claudius, Sempronius Gracchus, Scipio, with other of
lesser note, and of both the orders of Knights and Senators, as if they had but
corrupted the wife of any private man, when they had defiled the daughter of
Augustus, and the wife of Nero, suffered according to law. Iulia being banished
into an Island, was removed out of the eye of her father and her country, whom
yet her mother Scribonia accompanied, and remained with her as her fellow
exile, though voluntary.

CHAP. 101. Caius Caesar sent into the East-parlies with the Parthian in an
Island in the midst of Euphrates: Feasts, and is feasted by him.
WIthin a little time after this when Caius Caesar, having before had the
charge of quieting other provinces, was sent into Syria, first visiting
Tiberius Nero, to whom as his superior he yielded all respect, he there in
such various fashion carried himself, as there was not wanting occasion and
reason to praise him very highly, nor yet some cause to discommend him. He
came to an interview with the Parthian King, a most stately young man in an
Island which the river Euphrates compassed about, their number on both sides
being equal. Which show being very brave and memorable of the Roman army
standing on this, the Parthian on that side, when the two most eminent chiefes
of Empires, and men in the world did meet together, it was my chance to see in
the beginning of my souldiership, being then a Tribune o^ the soldiers: which
place having held before under Marcus Vinitius thy father, and under Publius
Sillius in Thracia and Macedonia and since in Achaia, Asia, and all the
Eastern provinces with the mouth, and both the sides of the Ponticke sea.
(...) now do enjoy no unpleasing rem^^bra^ce of so many affairs, places ^
Nations, and Cities. The Parthian first feasted with us on our side. And
afterward Caius was entertained by the King on the enemies shore.

CHAP. 102. Marcus Lollius sent by Augustus, supervisor to young Caius;
discovered in his treacheries, kills himself. Caius wounded by Abduus at a
treaty: enfeebled both in mind and body, and upon his return dies at Limira;
his brother being before dead at Massilia.
AT which time the treacherous devices (and such as were to be found only in
a crafty and mischievous soul) of Marcus Lollius, who was appointed by
Augustus as the Moderator of his sons youth, being first discovered by the
Parthian, were afterward by Caesar's displeasure made known. His death which
within a few days afterward followed, whether it were accidental or
voluntary, I cannot tell. But as much as men rejoiced at his death, so much did
the City grievously lament within a little after the loss of Censorinus, who
dyed in the same parts: a man that seemed borne to purchase the good will of
all man kind. Caius then entering Armenia, at the first beginning carried his
business fortunately enough: but within a while coming to a party; in which
he in considerately had engaged himself, he near Artagena was sore wounded by
one Abdius. Upon which hurt as his body was the weaker, so his mind began to
be less able for affairs of State. Nor was there wanting the conversation of
men, that fed his vices with their assentation (for flattery does perpetually
attend upon the greatest fortunes.) By which means he was brought to that
pass, that in the uttermost and remotest corner of the world, he would rather
have drawn out his days to old age, than return to Rome. Having long
strugled against it, and unwillingly returning toward Italy, he in a City of
Lycia called Limira, died of sickness, when his brother Caesar now almost
three years before being bound for Spain, was dead at Massilia.

CHAP. 103. Tiberius Caesar adopted by Augustus.
But fortune which had taken away the hope of a mighty name, did now at length
restore to the Republique her own guardes and safety: for when Publius
Vinicius thy father was Consul, before the death of these two brothers,
Tiberius Nero returning from Rhodes, had filled his country with incredible
joy. Neither did Augustus Caesar long demurre upon it, for it was not to be
enquired who was to be chosen, but he was to be chosen that was most eminent;
what therefore after the death of Lucius, when Caius was yet living, he would
have done, but was hindered the rein by Nero his stiffenesse in refusing it,
after the decease of both the young men, he put in execution. That he both
took him into the fellowship of the Tribunitiall power with himself, and
being Consul with Elius Catus Sentius, the fifth of the Kalends of July, seven
hundred fifty and four years after the building of the City, now twenty and
seven years since he adopted him for his son. The rejoicing of that day,
the concourse of the Citizens, the prayers of those which did almost with their
hands lay hold upon the gods, and the hope of perpetual tranquillity, and the
eternity of the Roman empire, we can scarce fully express in that complete
work which we do intend: let us not then go about to do it to the life in
this. One only thing I am content now to deliver: that, then there appeared
clearly to fathers, a hope of enjoying their children, to husbands their
wives, to owners of their patrimony, to all men of safety, quiet, peace and
tranquillity: so that neither could any hope expect more, nor be more happily
answered.

CHAP. 104. Agrippa also the son of Iulia adopted by Augustus the same day.
Tiberius sent to command in the German war; by the soldiers received with
all joy.
THe same day also was adopted Marcus Agrippa, the son of Iulia, whom she
bare after the death of Agrippa: but in the adoption of Nero, this was added by
Caesar himself, that he did it for the Common wealths sake. Not long did his
country hold him in the City, the Protector and guardian of the Empire; but
presently sent him into Germany: where three years before under Marcus
Vinicius thy Grandfather, a most worthy man, a furious war had broken out,
and by him was happily managed, in some places invading, in others standing
upon the defensive: and for that respect were decreed to him triumphall
ornaments, with a right glorious inscription upon the works; that time made
me, who before had been Tribune military, the soldier of Tiberius Caesar: for
being presently after his adoption sent with him in quality of General of the
horse into Germany, the successor of my fathers places. I was for nine whole
years (either General, as I said, or his Lieutenant) the spectator of his
heavenly actions, and, as far as the meanest of my faculties could reach, an
assister of them. Neither does the condition of mortal man afford in my
opinion any thing like that fight which I then enjoyed; when in the noblest
part of Italy and all the tract of the Gallian Provinces, every man seeing
their old General, and who by his merits and virtues was truly Caesar before
he was so by name, did rather congratulate with themselves than with him for
his advancement. But the tears of the soldiers by their Joy wrung out their
cheerfulness, and their new fashioned exultations in saluting him, their
striving to kiss his hand, and not forbearing presently to add, We see thee
General, we have thee again in safety. And then; I was with thee in Armenia,
I in Rhaetia, I was rewarded by thee in Vindelicia, I in Pannonia, I in
Germany: can neither be expressed in words, nor hardly be thought to deserve the
being believed.

CHAP. 105. Diverse Nations of Germany mastered by him: He returns to Rome,
leaving the remnant of the war to the charge of Sentius Saturninus: his
character.
He then presently entering Germany, subduing the Canine fates, the Atteari,
the Bructeri, and reducing the people of the Cherusci, and passing over the
river (which within a while was ennobled by our loss there received) of
Visurgis; having pierced into the heart of the country, when Caesar had freed
all parts of a sharp and most dangerous war, the rest which was of less
hazard, he committed to Sentius Saturninus, who had been his fathers
Lieutenant in Germany. A man of manifold virtues, industrious active, provident
and in all military duties as well framed 1 to endure them, as to understand
them: yet one, that when his affairs did give him room to take his ease, that
did with delicacie and freeness abuse it. But notwithstanding even that in
such sort, as thou would rather term him magnificent, and joviall, than
riotous and lazy: of whose brave and noble Consulship, we have before
treated. The summer expeditions of that year being prolonged even till
December, did eonduce profitably in the highest degree to the victory. Caesar's
piety did hale him* when the Alps were almost barracadoed up with snow, into
the City for the safety of the Empire: but in the beginning of the spring, the
same returned him into Germany, in whose middle marches he had at his going
away by the river Iulia, about the head thereof, placed his winter garrisons.

CHAP. 106. All Germany the next year subdued by Tiberius, both with land and
sea forces.
OH the good gods, what works able to fill the greatest volumes, did we the
next summer under the command of Tiberius Caesar. All Germany passed through and
surveied by our armies, Nations conquered which were by name almost unknown,
the people of the Cauchi reduced to subjection, all their youth infinite in
number, of a prodigious vastenesse of body, and by the situation of their
places most free from danger; rendering up their arms, and empalled with the
squadrons of our glittering and armed soldiery, together with their
Commanders, fell prostrate before the Tribunal of our General. The Longobards
overcome, a people also of Germany more fierce than fierceness it self:
Finaly, what never was before by any hope conceived, much less at any time
attempted, The Roman army was with flying colors led four hundred miles, from
the Rhyne to the river of Elbe, which runs by the confines of the Senones and
the Hermondurians* and in the same place the Roman fleet (with an admirable
felicity, and care of the General, and a due observing withal of the times)
having sailed through the Ocean, by an unheard of, and till then an unknown
sea, passing up the river of Elbe with the conquest of many Nations, and
infinite provision of all things joined with Caesar and his army.

CHAP. 107. A passage of an old Barbarian desiring to see Tiberius, after which
he returns to the city.
I Cannot forbear but among the greatness of these occurrents, I must insert
this, such as it is: when we had possessed the hithermost bank of the
foresaid river, and that of the other side did glister with the armed youth of
the enemy, who at every motion of our navy was in much disorder: one of the
Barbarians, ancient in years, comely of personage, and of quality, as much
as might by his habit be conjectured, of the best sort; getting aboard a hollow
piece of timber (after which fashion their boats are made) and guiding that
vessel alone, without other help he came into the midst of the river, and
enquired if it might be free for him without danger to land on that bank where
we stood in arms, and to see Caesar. The leave that he desired being given
him, he rowed to land, and when he had a long time beheld Caesar: Our young
men (said he) are mad, who while they do adore your deity when it is
absent, do rather choose, when you are present to stand in fear of your arms,
then to trust your fidelity, but I by thy favor and permission, Caesar, have
now seen the gods, of which I before had but heard. Neither have I found or
wished in my life a day to me more fortunate then this: having then gotten
leave to kiss his hand, returning to his boat, and without ceasing his eye
fixed upon Caesar, he passed over to the bank where his own people stood.
Caesar then victorious over all the nations which he had reached, with his
army safe, and unempaired, and only once by a stratagem of the enemies with
their extreme loss attempted brought his legions back to their winter
stations, and with the same speed that he had used the year before, returned
to the city.

CHAP. 108. Maroboduus, king of the Marcemanni, has character and seat of his
kingdom.
THere was now nothing in Germany that might be conquered but only the Nation
of the Marcomannes, which under the conduct of Maroboduus, quitting their own
habitations, had set down upon those lands which are surrounded with the
Hercinian wood. No making haste can excuse the forbearing to make mention of
this man. Maroboduus then, by his birth noble, of body able, of courage stout,
rather accounted a Barbarian, for his countries sake, then for his
understanding, had possessed himself of a principality among his countrymen,
not in a tumult, by chance, or changable and only settled at the pleasure of
those that did underlie it: but aiming in his mind at a stable command, and a
regal power, he determined, drawing fair from the Romans all his nation, to
go thither, where while he fled from very powerful arms he might make his
own the most potent. Seizing therefore upon the places of which we spoke
before, he either by war made all his neighbors yield to him, or by
treaties made them one body with him*

CHAP. 109. His policy and form of government preparing for a war with the
Romans. Tiberius his intention to invade first.
HIs body carefully guarded, his Empire with perpetual exercising almost
brought to the Roman discipline, he in short time raised to an eminent
height, and even to our Empire fearful. And toward the Romans he so
carried himself, that as he did not provoke them with war, so he made it
appear, that if he were injured he would want neither will nor means to
resist. His Ambassadors whom he sent to Caesar, did sometimes commend him to
him, as a suppliant, sometimes treated for him as an equal. What nations or
men whatsoever would fall from us, found with him a certain retreat, and
perfectly dissembling it he was in su^me the emulator of the Empire. And his
army which he had raised to seventy thousand foot, and four thousand horse,
with continual employing it against his borderers, he fitted for a greater
business then that he had then in hand. And so much the more was he to be
redoubted, for that when he had Germany before him, and upon his left hand;
Pannonia upon his right hand; the Noricitans at the back of his inhabiants, as
being ready at any time to fall upon any of them, he was equally feared of
all; Nor did he suffer Italy it self to rest secure and fearelesse of his
growing greatness, it being but two hundred miles from the tops of the Alps
the borders of Italy, to his frontire. This man, and that country Tiberius
Caesar resolved the next summer to attacque several ways: and commanded
Sentius Saturninus, that by the country of the Catti cutting a way through the
Hercinian forest, he should lead the legions into Boiohaemum (so is the
country called which Maroboduus possessed) himself began to draw the army
which served in Illirium against the Marcomanni by Carnuntum a place that of
the kingdom of Noricia is on that side next to them.

CHAP. 110. That resolution hindered by the rebellion of Dalmatia, and all their
neigbours to the number of eight hundred thousand men of war.
FOrtune does sometimes break off, and hinder the determinations of men.
Caesar had now prepared his winter stations upon the Danubius, and drawing his
army toward them, was not above five days journey from the nearest of the
enemy, had commanded Saturninus, who almost equally distant from him to march
on within a few days to join his Legions with Caesar in the forenamed place,
when all Pannonia dista^ced with the benefits of a long peace, and Dalmatia
grown in strength, having drawn into their society all the nations about them
as was among them, agreed flew to arms. Then were things necessary preferred
before matter of glory. Nor was it thought safe to leave Italy naked the enemy
being so near and the army shut up in the remotest parts of Germany. The whole
number of the people and Nations which had rebelled, was full eight hundred
thousand men. Two hundred thousand foot and nine thousand horse, they had
selected, of which vaste multitude under the command of most brave and most
understanding Captains they had decreed that part should stand for Italy,
which confined at the confluence of Nauportium and Tergestis; part had broken
into Macedonia, part was left at home for the guard of their own. The
principal command was in Baro and Pinetus their Generals. But in all the
Pannonians, there was not only an ordinary exercising of their minds, and in
discipline, but also an acquaintance with the Roman language, and in many of
them knowledge of learning. No Nation certainly therefore did ever so suddenly
couple the determination of making war with the war it self, and put in
execution what they had resolved to do. The Roman Citizens were oppressed
with it, the Merchants butchered, a great number of Ensigne-bearers
s;laughtered in that part of the Country which was furthest from the General;
all Macedonia seized upon by their forces, all things, and in every place
wasted with the sword and with fire. How great was the fear of this war when
it did shake and terrify the constant, and the mind settled by experience in so
great wars of Augustus Caesar.

CHAP. 111. Preparation to resist them, made by Augustus, and Tiberius the
General.
LEvies therefore were made, all the old soldiers were from every quarter
recalled, and both men and women that were within the tax of freedmen
compelled to find a soldier. This word of the Prince himself was heard in
the Senate; That except they took good heed, within ten days the enemy might
be before the walls of Rome. In vain had we made all this preparation except
there had been one to govern it. The republique therefore as it did desire a
guard of forces, so did it also crave of Augustus, Tiberius for General. Our
meandness had also in this war a place of honorable employment. For my
charge of horse being expired, and my self designed Questor, when I as yet was
not a Senator, I was made equal to Senators, and those which were appointed
Tribunes of the people: and brought a part of the army delivered me by Augustus
to his son. In my Quaestorship then not making use of the lot of my Province,
and being sent a messenger, from the one of them to the other, what armies of
the enemies did we not see in the first year? with how brave opportunities by
the prudence of our General, did we by peece-meale catch some parts of their
forces, which altogether were madly enraged? with how great temper and with all
commodity did we see things done by the authority of the prince? with how
vaste works was the enemy so block't up with the guardes of our army, that
he might not break out any way? and being needy of means and raging within
himself, his forces might decay and languish?

CHAP. 112. Messalinus his brave actions who with a half complete Legion in
Illiricum, quenched the rebellion and routed above 20000. of the enemy.
Tiberius had every where the better of the war: Caecina and Silvanus with
five legions endangered, by the valor of the soldier freed. Agrippa the
adopted lost the favor of Augustus by his want of temper.
THe act of Messalinus so fortunate in the event, so brave in the attempt, must
be commended to memory, who being a man more noble in his disposition then in
his extraction, and that most worthily had Corvinus for his father, and left
his surname to his brother Cotta, being governor of Illyrium, with the
twentieth Legion that was but half the just number, having subdued the
rebels, when he was compassed about with above twenty thousand of the
enemies forces, overthrew and routed them, and for that action was honored
with triumphall ornaments. So were the enemies delighted with their numbers,
such was their confidence of their strength, that wheresoever Caesar was, they
did trust in themselves nothing at all. Part of them being opposed to the
General himself, and macerated at our pleasure, as well as with our profit,
brought to a starving famine, when they neither dared make head against him
that pressed the^ nor yet fight with the^ that offered it, and did draw
themselves into battaglia, seizing upon the Mount Claudius with the strength,
of the place defended themselves. But an other part which marched against our
army which Aulus Caecina, and Silvanus Plautius of Consular quality, brought
out of the Provinces beyond the Sea, having compassed in our five legions with
their aides and the Kings horsemen (for Rheme^alus the King of Thrace, with a
great power of Thracians drew to our aid in that war) did almost power a
ruinous destruction upon them all. The Kings horse were routed, the wings
beaten, the Cohorts turned their backs: and even about the ensigns of the
legions, was fear and trembling. But the Roman virtue did at that time
challenge more glory for the soldiers, then it left for the Commanders: who
bursting with exceeding love of their General did fall upon the enemy before
by any intelligence they knew where the Enemy was. Now therefore matters being
doubtful the Legions encouraging themselves, some Tribunes of the soldiers
being slain by the enemy, the Campmaster killed, the Com^^^ders of the
Cohorts slain, the Centurions not unbloudied, of whom the first rank were
lost, they charged the Enemy. And not contented, withstanding their fury they
brake through their, battle and so beyond al hope recovered the victory. Almost
at this same time Agrippa, who that day that Tiberius, was so, by his own
grandfather was adopted, and had now two years before begun to demonstrate
what manner of man he was, with a strange depravednesse of his mind and wit,
bent to headlong courses did estrange the mind of his father, who was also his
grandfather, from him. And ere long his vices daily growing more foul made an
end fit for his madness.

CHAP. 113. Tiberius finding his armies bulk too great, disperses it. He goes
back to Siscia.
REceive now Marcus Vinicius the description of a Captain in war as great as
thou at this day see him a prince in peace. The armies being joined together,
both those which were before with Caesar and those which came to him, and ten
legions being drawn into one Camp, with above seaventie Cohorts, fourteen
wings, and above ten thousand old soldiers, and besides these, a great number
of Voluntaries and a strong body of the Kings Cavallery: finally so great an
army as since the Civil wars had not in any place been drawn together, all
men were in that respect glad thereof, reposing their principal confidence of
the victory in their number. But the excellent General who well understood
what he went about, and preferred things profitable before such as showed
fair, (whom I ever observed in all his wars to follow those courses which
were indeed approvable, rather then such as were by most commended,) for a few
days sat still to refresh his army tired with their journey. And perceiving
it greater then could be well ordered, and that it was not easily to be
governed, determined to dismiss it. And passing with a long and very laborious
journey, the difficulty whereof can hardly be expressed he so directed it, that
neither any durst attacque them in gross, nor all of them for fear of those
which were next them, make any attempt upon any part of his men that departed
from him, returned them to the quarters from whence they came. Himself in the
beginning of a most sharp winter, coming back to Sciscia did appoint
Livtenants, in which number we all were, to the government of the divided
winter stations.

CHAP. 114. His care for the sick or wounded, his moderate government.
Pannonia seeks a peace: their Generals Baro and Pinetus yield themselves: the
relics of the war are only in Dalmatia.
O What an act (must I now relate) not glorious in the relation but of highest
rank in a solid and real virtue, as also for benefit most commodious, in the
experience of it most pleasing, and for humanity singular. There was not all
the time of the Germane and Pannonian war, any one of us, or that were in
quality before or behind us that was sick, whose recovery of health Caesar
did not with such care provide for as if his mind infinitely distracted with so
ma^y other affairs had only bent it self to that one business. Those that
wanted it had ever a chariot ready to carry them: his own litter was common,
the ease whereof I among others felt. One while Physicians, another meat
carfully dressed, another means to bathe, which only for that purpose were
carried about with him, were ready to help the infirmity of any man, only his
house and those of his family were wanting to the sick man; for the rest there
was no lack of any thing that by the one could be desired, or by the other be
performed. And now to this that (which every one who was there will
acknowledge) as well as the rest which I have related: that he alone ever rode
on horse back: he only and always in the summer expedition expedition did
suppe sitting with those which he had invited: To those that offended against
the discipline of the war, as often as the president was not pernicious, he
easily granted a pardon; Admonitions were frequent, chastisements sometimes;
but punishment by death very rare: so he held a mean between winking at many
things, and restraining of some. That winter the war went on prosperously:
But the summer following, all Pannonia, the remainder of the war resting in
Dalmatia, supplicated for war. That Nation proudly brave with so many thousands
of able youth which but a little before threatened to bring Italy into
servitude, bringing their arms which they used to wear, upon the rivers side
that is called Bathinus, and all of them in general prostrating themselves at
the foot of the General. Baro and Pinetus their two most famous Leaders; the
one taken, the other yielding himself; we shall, as I hope, relate in order,
and in a complete history. In Autumn the victorious army was again bestowed
in their winter stations, the command of all in chief was by Caesar laid upon
Marcus Lepidus, a man both by birth and fortune next to the Caesar's themselves,
whom as far as any man did know or understand, so much he would both admire
and love, and reckon him the ornament of those so great families, from which he
was descended.

CHAP. 115. Tiberius Ceasar turns upon the Dalmatians. Lepidus with much
bravery, bringing his legions through diverse Nations: comes to Tiberius, and is
for that service rewarded with triumphall ornaments: Dalmatia then quieted,
when almost ruined.
CAesar then turnded both his mind and arms to the other charge of the
Dalmatian war. In which country what a Lieutenant he found for his use, of my
brother Magius Celer Velleius, both his own and his fathers professing it, did
well testify, and the most princely rewards which Caesar when he triumphed,
bestowed upon him, do print in memory of all men. In the beginning of summer
Lepidus having drawn the army out of their winter garrisons, and marching
toward his General Tiberius, through Nations that were as yet entire, not
having felt the plague of war, and for that cause both stout and fierce,
contending as well with the difficulties of nature, as the force of the enemy,
with mighty loss of his opposers; wasting the country, burning the houses,
killing the men, jolly with his victory, and laden with booty, came to Caesar:
which act if he had done when the Sovereign command had been in himself, he
by right ought to have triumphed. Now for the same by the vote of the Senate
agreeing with the judgment of the Princes, he was honored with triumphall
ornaments. That summer made an end of a most important war. For Dantisi and
Desidates, the Dalmatians, being almost invincible as well by the situation of
the places and mountains, as by the fierceness of their nature, and a
wondrous ability in matter of the war, by the straights of the forests,
were not now by the direction, but by the hand and sword of Caesar himself
then brought to be quiet, when they were almost totally ruined. Nothing could
I in that so great a war, nothing in Germany could I either see or admire
more, than that the occasion of victory did never seem to the General so
convenient as he would purchase it with the loss of his soldiers. And that
what appeared to him most safe, he ever did repute fullest of glory, taking
care of his conscience still before his fame, nor ever were the determinations
of the Captain, governed by the opinion of the army, but the army by the
prov^dence of the Captain.

CHAP. 116. A catalogue of diverse eminent men, and of highest merit in these
wars.
IN the Dalmatian war Germanicus being sent before into diverse places and
those full of difficulty, did give many and great proofs of his valor.
Quintus Julius Posthumus also also of Consular quality, of high esteem for his
diligent endeavors, and Governor of Dalmatia, was thought worthy of
triumphall ornaments: which honor a Few y years before, Passienus and Cassus,
men accounted of for some several virtues, had obtained in Africa. But Cossus
transmitted the evidence of his victory with his surname to his son; A young
man borne for a pattern of all kind of virtue: And Lucius Apronius being
partner with Posthumus in all his actions, did in that service with excellent
virtue merit those honors which within a while after he had obtained. I would
that in matters of more consequence it did not appear how great the power of
fortune is in every thing; but in this kind also it may be fully discerned
what force she has. For Sejenus, a man of disposition most like the ancient
times, and one who always did temper the gravity of former days with
humanity, in Germany, in Illiricum, and after a while in Africa, having had
charge of principal account, wanted not merit but matter to procure him a
triumph. And Aulus Licinius, Nerva Silianus, the son of Publius Silius, whom
he that did not indeed understand him, did abundantly admire, (lest he that
was the best of Citizens, and the most ingenious Captain should suffer no
loss, being untimely snatched from him) was bereft of the fruit of the Princes
dearest friendship, and of having his honor perfected, and raised to the
highest type of the glory of his ancestors. If any man shall say that I have
sought an occasion of making mention of these men, he shall charge one that
does willingly confess it; for a just cleernesse without falsehood among good
men will never be called a crime.

CHAP. 117. News of Varus Quinctilius his defeature with three legions, three
wings, and six Cohorts brought immediately after the end of the Dalmatian
war: his character.
CAesar had but now put an end to the Pannonian and Dalmatian war, when
within five days after the perfecting so great a work, there came fatal
letters out of Germany of Varus his being slain, three legions, as many wings
and six Cohorts put to the sword, only in this fortune favoring us, that the
General was not at that instant otherwise engaged. Both the business and the
person enjoyne us here to pause a while. Varus Quinctilius descended rather of
a famous than a noble family, was a man of a gentle disposition, in his
carriage quiet, neither in mind nor body stirring, more inured to the
idleness of standing camps, than to the toil and labor of the war* And
that he was no despiser of money, Syria showed, which he when he was poor
entering when it was rich, he left poor, himself returning wealthy. He
commanding the army in Germany, conceived them to be such as had nothing of
men, but language, and the parts of the body, and that they which could not be
tamed with the sword, might by the Law be reduced to quietness: with which
inenttention passing into the heart of Germany, as if he had been among men
that delighted in the sweetes of peace, he spent the summer in hearing causes,
and sitting in his Tribunal.

CHAP. 118. The manner of the plot, and means of his overthrow by Arminius:
the character of him. Has intents discovered to Varus by Segestes, but not
believed.
BVut they (which till he had found by proof he hardly believed) in their
height of barbarism, most subtle, and a race of men borne for lying,
counter-feiting pretended suites one after another, and one while provoking one
another with injuries another giving him thanks for that he had ended them
according to the Roman justice, and that their wildness did by the discipline
before unknown to them, grow more civil, and those questions which were wont
to be disputed by arms, were now decided by sentence, did bring Quinctilius
into the deepest stupiditie of negligence; So far as that he believed that
he sat as the City Praetor in the market place, judging of causes, and not
that he commanded an army in the midst of Germany. A young man then, noble
by birth, valiant of his person, quick of apprehension, beyond the rate of a
Barbarian of a nimble wit, by name Arminius, son to Sigim^rus, Prince of that
Nation, whose aspect and eyes did denote the fervency of his spirit, being a
continual follower of our colors in the former wars, and having obtained
the freedom of the City of Rome, and to be made of the order of Knights, made
use of the dullness of the Commander to his mischievous end: not absurdly
concluding, that no man can be more easily overthrown than he that fears not
at all, and that security is most commonly the forerunner of calamity. At the
first therefore he drew a few, afterward more into the fellowship of his
design. That the Romans might be ruined, he both affirms and persuades them
to believe: with their determination he couples action, and sets down a time
for the treachery. This was discovered to Varus by a faithful man of that
Nation, and one of high esteem, called Segestes. But the destinies were more
potent than any counsel, and had wholly dulled the edge of his understanding;
for so it is, that for the most part he that is preordained to fall into a
worse fortune, does spoil all good advice, and, which is the most miserable
thing that can be, causes that to be thought worthily inflicted upon him what
ever it be that befalls him, and chance becomes accounted to him for his
fault. He therefore refuses to give credit to that relation. And professes
that he rates the hope of the good will borne him by his deserving of them.
Neither did the Conspirators after the first discoverer, leave any room for a
second.

CHAP. 119. The execution with the loss of the whole army: Varus kills
himself. Eggius bravely dies, Cetonius basely having yielded. Voluminous
shamefully run away with the horse, yet so escaped not.
THe manner of this bitterest calamity, then which besides the loss of
Crassus in Parthia, the Romans never felt out of their own country any more
grievous, as others in their complete works have done, so we shall also
endeavor to express: now we must only summarily lament it, an army of the
bravest, and for discipline, valor and experience, the prime one among the
Romans, by the laziness of the Commander, the perfidiousnesse of the enemy,
and the inequality of fortune being circumvented, when neither occasion was
afforded to those wretched men of fighting bravely as they would have done, and
some being sharply punished for that they used both Roman courages and arms,
hemmed in on every side with woods, with bogges, and with ambuscadoes, was
totally cut in pieces by that enemy, whom they had always so killed like
sheep, as one while their anger, another their pity did prescribe. Their
Captain had more courage to die then to fight. For following the example of
his father, and grandfather, he run himself through with his sword. Of the
two Campe-masters, as noble a president as Lucius Eggius did set to other,
Catonius did yield as base a one: who when the execution had slaughtered the
far greatest part of the army, being the propounder of yielding had rather
chose to die by the hands of the hangman, then in the fight. Bur Voluminous
Lieutenantto Varus, in other things a quiet and good man, was the author of the
vilest example; for leaving the foot without the assistance of the horse, he
with the wings fled toward the Rhine. Of which fact of his, fortune took
revenge, for he did not over-live those whom he had forsaken, but dyed a
betrayer of his country. The rage of the enemy had torn the half burnt body
of Varus, and his head, being cut off and carried to Maroboduns from whom it
was sent to Caesar, was at length honorably buried in the sepulcher of his
ancestors.

CHAP. 120. Tiberius takes the war in hand, and with happy success and no
loss having plagued the enemies, returns to his winter stations. Lucius
Asprena his brave acts with two legions, and of Lucius Ceditius who sallied out
of Alisone, and by force saved himself and his men through a multitude of
enemies.
THese news being reported Caesar flies back to his father, and as the
perpetual defender of the Roman Empire assumes the business. He is sent
into Germany, settles Gallia, disposes of the armies, fortifies the gards of
the standing camps. And valuing himself by his own greatness, and not by
the rule of the enemies confidence (which did threaten Italy with a war of
the Cimbres and Teutones,) with his army he passed over the Rhine. Arminius
being frighted (upon whom his father and his country was content to lay the
blame,) he yet pierces farther into the country, makes his way through the
frontiers, wastes their possessions, fires their houses, routes those which he
encountered: and with infinite glory, and all those in safety which he carried
over with him, returns to his winter stations. Let us here give a true
testimonial of Lucius Asprenas his worth; who with the active and manly work
of two legions which he commanded, serving as Lieutenant under his Uncle
Varus, did preserve his forces free from so great a calamity. And by coming
down in seasonable time to the lower wintering Camps did settle the then
wavering minds of the Nations on this side of the Rhine Yet notwithstanding
there are some that do believe, that as those which were living were by him
secured, so the patrimonies of those which were slain under Varus, were by him
possessed, and the estates of the ruined army (as far as he had a mind to)
seized upon. The valor also of the Campe-master Lucius Ceditius, and those
which being shut up with him in Alisone were by the innumerable forces of
Germany besieged, is to be commended, who overcomming all difficulties, which
by the want of necessaries being intolerable, the power of the enemy made
unresistable, neither rashly resolving it, nor faintly putting it in execution,
watching a fit opportunity, did with their swords make themselves a way, to
return to their own party. By which it appears that Varus, a man indeed grave
and meaning well, did rather ruin his army for want of the judgment that
should be in a General, than for lack of courage, and bravery in his
soldiers: when by the Germans there was all manner of cruelty used to the
prisoners, Caldus Caelius, most worthy of his ancient family, performed a very
brave act; who did so strain the foldes of the chains, with which he was
bound, about his head, as with the effusion of his blood and brains together,
he breathed his last.

CHAP. 121. Tiberius prospering in the next years war equalled in command
with Augustus, and triumphs over Pannonia and Dalmatia.
THe same both virtue and fortune in the subsequent times did possess the
soul of the General Tiberius, which at the beginning it was endowed with, all
who having shaken the enemies forces, by invasions of Sea and land forces; when
he had quieted the affairs of Gallia, which were of greatest moment, and the
enraged dissentions of the common people of Vienna, more by reprehensions than
punishments, and the Senate and people of Rome, his father requiring that he
might-have over all the provinces and armies an equal authority with himself,
had in the same decree comprehended him: for it had been absurd that they
should not have been under his command, who were by him rescued, or that he
that was the first in aiding them, should not be judged equally capable of the
honor resulting from it: being returned to the City, did then enter in triumph
(due indeed to him long before, but by the continuance of the wars till then
delayed) over the Pannonians and Dalmatians. The magnificence whereof who will
admire in Caesar, but the favor of fortune, who can but admire? For report had
delivered, that all the principal Captains of the enemy were slain, but his
triumph presented them to the people bound in chains. At which time it was my
hap and my brothers to accompany him among the principal men and those which
were honored with rewards of special esteem. Or who among the other things
in which the singular moderation of Tiberius Caesar does clearly shine, will
not wonder at this, that having without all question deserved seven triumphs,
he was yet contented with three.

CHAP. 122. Tiberius that had deserved seven triumphs, contented with three.
FOr who can doubt but that for reducing of Armenia, and placing a King over
it, upon whose head with his own hand, he put the Diadem, and for settling the
affairs of the East, he ought to have entered the City in a triumph Ovant. And
having conquered the Rhaetians, and the Vindelicians, to have entered in a
Chariot. After his adoption then, with a continual war of three years
standing, the forces of Germany being shattered, the same honor was both to
have bin presented to him, and by him accepted. And after the loss received
under Varus, the same Germany being quickly with a most prosperous success of
affairs laid flat upon the earth, ought to have adorned the triumph of this
greatest Captain. But in this man thou can not well tell whether to wonder
more at his observing no mean in undergoing labors and hazards, or that he
was so moderate in taking honors upon him.

CHAP. 123. The death of Augustus at Nola in his 76. year.
WE are now come to the time in which there was most cause of fear. For
Caesar Augustus, when he had sent his Nephew Germanicus into Germany to make an
end of the remnants of the war, and was about to send his son Tiberius into
Illyricum, to settle with peace what he had subdued by arms, intending to
follow him, and with all to be present at a show of wrestlers, which in his
honor was by the Neapolitans dedicated to him, went into Campania. Although he
had before felt some grudging of weakness, and the beginnings of a
declination to the worse in his health, yet the strength of his mind laboring
against it, he followed his son, and parting from him at Beneventum, himself
went to Nola, where his malady growing daily upon him, when he knew (whom he
must send for, if he desired that all should stand safe after him) he with all
haste recalled his son to him. He with more celeritie than was expected, flew
back to the father of his country. Augustus then proclaiming himself secure,
and wrapped in the embracements of his Tiberius, commending to his care, his,
and his own works, nor now at al repining at his end, the fates did so
appoint, being a little refreshed with the first sight and conference of him
that was most dear to him, within a while his spirit being resolved into the
first originalls thereof, when Pompeius and Apuleius were Consulls in his
seventieth and sixth year of his life, rendered his caelestiall soul back
again to heaven.

CHAP. 124. The fears of the people, upon his death wholly causeless,
Tiberius refuses, and at length assumes the State.
What men then did redoubt, what trembling there was in the Senate what
confusion among the people, what the whole world feared in how narrow confines
either of preservation or destruction we were placed, I that make so much
haste have no leisure: and he that has leisure cannot express. This alone I
have to deliver from the common mouth of the people; That the City whose ruin
we feared, we did not so much as find to be moved: and so great was the
Majesty of one man, as neither for good men nor against bad, there was any
need of arms; one only struggling (as it were) there was in the City, the
Senate and people of Rome contending with Caesar, that he should succeed in his
fathers place, and he that he might rather live a private Citizen equal with
the rest, then a prince in so eminent place. At length he was overcome more
with reason then with the honor presented to him: when he saw, that what he
took not upon him, would infallibly perish. To him only has it befallen to
refuse the Principality well near a longer time then others have borne arms
to get it. After the returning of his father to the Gods, and the funerals of
his body, solemnized with all humane honors, his name consecrated with divine
ones, the first of his works as Prince, was to order the election of officers,
as sacred Augustus had left written with his own hand. At which time my
brother and my self being put in the list of those that stood Candidates for
the Praetorship next after the noblest men, and such as had been high priests
we gained this in it, that neither sacred Augustus commended any after, nor
Tiberius Caesar any before us.

CHAP. 125. A mutiny in Germany and Illiricum of the Legions there (the first
governed by Germanicus) quieted by the direction of Tiberius.
THe Republique did immediately receive the reward of both their advice and
desire. Neither was it long concealed what he had suffered if we had not
prevailed, or what we gained by obtaining of our wishes. For the army that
served in Germany, and which was governed by Germanicus in person, as also the
Legions which were in Illiricum with a certain rage and a vast greediness of
co^founding all things, sought a new General, a new state and in sum, would
have also a new Commonwealth They were bold also to threaten that they would
give the law to the Prince. They were about to determine what their
entertainment should be, what the term of their service. From this they
proceed to arms, their swords are in their hands, and almost did they rise to
the height of lawless using them, only there wanted one to lead against the
Comon-wealth, not who should follow. But all these the readiness of their old
Commander, forbidding many things with gravity, promising some others, and
amidst the severe punishing of the authors, a gentle chastizing of the rest, in
a short time laid on sleep and quite removed. At which time truly as
Germanicus did things for the most part faintly, so Drusus being sent by his
father against this fury of the Soldiers which was all of a light flame, using
the former and ancient severity, with a course hazardous to himself in the
act, and of pernicious president, with the same swords of the soldiers by
which he was beseiged, he punished those that beleaguered him, wherein he used
principally the assistance of Iunius Blaesus; A man who^ thou could not say
whether he were of more use in the Camp, then disarmed in the City, who within
a few years being Proconsul in Africa deserved and obtained triumphall
ornaments, and the surname of Imperator (that is, sovereign Commander) and
when he governed Spain and the army with his virtues, and in Illyicum with
very brave discipline, as we said before, he kept them quietly in a most settled
peace. Being abundantly furnished with the fairest goodness to intend that
which was just, and with authority to perform what he intended. Whose care and
fidelity, Dolabella also a man of a most generous singleness of heart did in
all things imitate.

CHAP. 126. A description of Tiberius his government for 16. years.
THe business of these sixteen years seeing they are fixed in the sight and
minds of all men, who would go about by parcells in words to deliver? Caesar
had now consecrated his father, not by his command, but by religious devotion,
and had not called him a god, but made him one. Fidelity was recalled into the
pleading place, sedition turned out of the Market place, ambition from Mars his
field, discord from the Senate, Justice, equity, and industry, which were
buried, and their place of residence not to be found, restored to the City. To
the Magistrates was added authority; to the Senate, Majestrie; to the seats
of Justice, gravity; into all men was either infused a will to do well, or a
necessity of doing so, imposed upon them; virtuous actions were honored, bad
ones punished; The mean man does respect the great man, not fear him: the
great one precedes the mean, but contemnes him not. When was there ever a
greater rarity of death? when ever a peace more delightful. Sacred peace being
spread from the East through all the Clymates of the West, and what ever place
is bounded by the South, and the North, over all the corners of the whole
world, does in every place free them from the fear of robberies. The casual
losses not of private men alone, but of Cities also, was by the munificence of
the Prince, repaired; Cities of Asia reedified; the provinces freed from the
injuries of officers; For good men honor was very ready, for delinquents
punishment was slow indeed, but yet some there was: favor is mastered by
equity, ambition by virtue, for the excellent Prince, by doing well himself,
does teach his Subjects, and being greatest in power, yet by his example
greater.

CHAP. 127. Tiberius his taking into his inwardest favor Aelius Sejanus
following the president of Scipio and Augustus, Sejanus his character.
IT is seldom that men of highest Condition do not use great assistances for
the governing of their fortune, as the two Scipio's, the two Laelij whom in
every regard they made equal to themselves, as sacred Augustus did Marcus
Agrippa, and next after him Statilius Taurus: the meandness of their births
being no impediment to their rising to diverse Consullships and triumphs, and
to very many Priesthoods, For it is true that great affairs do need great
helpers, where in petty things scarcity does not much empaire them. And it
conduces to the public good that what is necessary for use, should also be
eminent in honor, and that the benefit of the State be backed with authority.
According to which examples Tiberius Caesar took, and still retains as his
especial helper in all his principal charges Aelius Sejanus, whose father was
a prime man of the order of Knights, but by his mother descended from families
of the noblest quality, ancient and remarkable for many honors, as who had
brothers, Cosins, and an Uncle of Consular rank: But himself a man most
capable of fidelity and laboriousnesse, the fabrike of his body well fitted to
the vigor of his mind. A man of a most pleasing severity, and the ancient
cheerfulness, in his fashion most like to those that do little: Chalenging
nothing to himself, and by that means obtaining all things, ever valewing
himself beneath the rate put upon him by others, in his aspect and carriage
quiet, and of a vigilant spirit. In the prizing the virtues of him the opinions
of the City do this good while conted with the judgment of the Prince.

CHAP. 128. The favor of Tiberius to Sejanus confirmed by the judgment of the
people, with instances of the like formerly.
NEither is this a new fashion of the Senate and people of Rome, to account
that the noblest which is best: for even those of former ages, before the first
Punique war, now three hundred years since, did raise Titus Cornucanius, a
man of the first head, to the highest pitch, as, well by all other honors as by
that also of the high Bishop, and Spurius Catullus by descent of the order of
Knights, and presently Marcus Cato, and that new inmate of Tusculum, and
Mummius the Achaian, they also promoted to Consulls places, Censorships and
triumphs. They then that advanced Caius Marius, whose original is not known
but by fix Consullships, so that he was without question the chief of the
Roman name, they that did attribute to Marcus Fulvius so much as almost with
but giving way to it he could make whom he would the chief man in the City:
they that denied nothing to Asinius Pollio, which the noblest Romans must
purchase with much sweat, did certainly think that greatest honor was to be
bestowed upon him in whose mind was lodged the greatest virtue. The imitation
of these our own Country examples did move Caesar to make experience of
Sejanus: Sejanus to ease the Prince of part of his burden, and brought the
Senate and people of Rome to this, that what they judged to be best, the same
they would require for their safety.

CHAP. 129. A summarie of the carriage of Tiberius in many affairs toward
Rhascupolis, Libo, Maroboduus, to Germanicus, the people, and in diverse
occasions.
But having set forth, as it were in gross, the form of Tiberius his
government, let us now reckon up the particulars. With what prudence did he
call to him Rhascupolis the killer of Cotys his brothers son? using in that
affair especially the industry of Flaccus Pomponius of Consular quality, a
man borne for all things that were to be justly done, and rather with purest
virtue deserving glory, then hunting after it? With what a gravity, as a
Senator and judge, not as a Prince and President, did he hear, and expedite
causes? with what celerity did he ruin Libo, that ungrateful man, and one that
did labor for innovations? with what principles did he instruct his
Germanicus, and having seasoned him with the rudiments of his souldiourship,
received him back the subduer of Germany; With what honors did he glorify his
youth? the adornements of his triumph being correspondent to the greatness of
the acts which he had performed? How often did he show respect to the people in
a Congiary or Dole, and when by the Senates appointment he might do it, how
willingly did he perfect the tax of the Senate, so as he neither willingly
did give any provocations to riot, nor did suffer an honest poverty to be
deprived of honors. With how great honor did he send his Germanicus into the
provinces beyond the Seas: with what power of his directions, employing as his
Minister and assistant his son Drusus, did he compel Maroboduus that hung
upon the frontires of his Kingdom, (let me speak with pardon of his royal
estate) like a serpent thrust out of the earth, with the wholesome medicaments
of his advices to get him home again? How does he hold him in, honorably but
yet not securely? Of what importance was that war which being commenced by
Sacrovir and Julius Florus, he with a strange celeritie and speed did suppress
So that the people of Rome did know that they had conquered before they knew
they were entered into a war, and the Messenger that brought word of the
victory, came before him that told of the danger. The war also of Africa that
was full of terror, and still greater by the daily additions to it, by his
direction and advice was in a short time buried.

CHAP. 130. A reckoning up of his workers and edifices: a complaint against
those that conspired his ruin; as also for the death of his sons and nephew,
for the frowardnes of his daughter in law, and the loss of his mother.
WHat works has he founded in his own name, and in that of his family and
kindred? with how religious a magnificence, and beyond the faith of any mortal
man, does he now build a Temple for his father? with how magnificent an equal
temper of mind has he repaired the work of Pompey which was consumed by
fire? As he that, whatsoever is eminent in glory, does as if it were of his
blood think himself bound to maintain? with what bounty, both at other
times, and now last of all, Mount Caelius being set on fire, did he out of his
own estate repair the damages of all sorts of men by that accident? with how
great quiet of men, does he, without the fear of a press, a thing of
perpetual and principal terror, provide for the supplies of his armies? If
either the nature of men may bear it, or their meannesse stretch so far as
to complain to the Gods of themselves: what has this man deserved, first that
Drusus Libo should enter into treacherous purposes; then Silius and Piso, of
the one of whom he settled the honors, and those of the other he increased?
That I may pass to greater things, although he reckoned even these for the
greatest, what he had demerited to make him lose his sons in their youth?
what that his nephew by his son Drusus? we yet have spoken only of things to
cause sorrow, we now must come to such as will procure blushing: with how many
anguishes have these three last years (good Marcus Vinicius) rent his soul in
pieces? how long has his breast burnt (and which is a most miserable thing)
with a concealed fire: that by his daughter in law, by his nephew, he is
compelled to grieve, to be angry and to be ashamed. The sadness of which time
was augmented by the loss of his Mother, a woman superlatively eminent, and in
every thing liker the gods than men, whose power no man ever felt, but either
by the ease of his danger, or the augmentation of his honor.

CHAP. 131. The conclusion, with a prayer for the preservation of the Prince
and State.
I Now must close up this work with a prayer. Thou Jupiter Capitolinus, the
Author and parent of the name of Roman; thou father Mars, thou Vesta the
preserver of the perpetual fires, and what ever other Deity it be that has
raised this mass of the Roman Empire to this highest point of the worlds
greatness: You all, I do with the voice of all the people entreat, pray, and
beseech, that you will keep, conserve, and defend this State, this peace, this
Prince, and when he has the longest age been resident among mortal men,
appoint him successors, though with the latest, yet such as their necks may
be able to bear the weight of the worlds Empire, as bravely as we have found
his to be; and let all the intentions of the people, be either pious *

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by Miles Flesher, for ROBERT SVVAYNE, in Britaines-Burse at
the sign of the Bible: 1632.

Errata.
PAge 51. line 18. for strengthened, read stre^ghtned. P. 74. l. 12. for
clifty, r. clifty. P. 86. l. 22. for qualite, r. quallitie. P. 125. l. 16. for
affronted, r. effronted. P. 127. l. 13. for General, r. Generals. P. 159. l.
24. for Pirates, r. parts. P. 179. l. 10. for one Paulus r. only Paulus* P.
198. l. 1. for Caius Crassus, r. Caius Cassius. P. 202. l 7. for cast off, r.
cash. P. 203. l. 19. for reviving, r. ruining. P. 205. l. 8. for carting, r.
caring. P. 264. l. 5. for tried r. tired. P. 274. l. 4. for tarired, r. tarried.
P. 296. l. 4. for successful, r. successefully. P. 300. l. 18, for precise,
r. precisely. P. 311. l. 17. for these, r. less. P. 320. l. 10. for his, r.
this. P. 321. l. 10. for take, r. than. P. 331. l. 3. for enable, r. enobled.
P. 364. l. 18. for his inhabitants, r. his habitation.

Faults of false pointing, or want of parentheses in due place, the
understanding Reader will amend in reading.


