A discourse or traictise of Petur Martyr Uermilla Flore^tine, the publyque
reader of diuinitee in the Uniuersitee of Oxford wherein he openly declared his
whole and determinate judgment concerning the Sacrament of the Lords supper
in the said Uniuersitee.

The Right Honble Charles Viscount Bruce of Ampthill (Son and Heir Apparent of
Thomas Earl of Ailesbury) and Baron Bruce of Whorleton 1712


To the right honorable Sir Wylliam Parre knight, Lord Parre, Earl of Essex,
Marquess of Northampton, Lord great Chamberlain of England, and Knight of
the most noble order of y^^ Garter, Nicolas Udall wishes grace and peace in
Christ, with health honor and long prosperitee.
PErusyng of late right honorable and my synguler good Lord, a certain
discourse of the right excellent Clerk Petur Martyr written in Latin
concerning the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, which is of the
Gr^kes called Eucha^istia, because it pertayneth to the remembrance of his
most tender goodness in redemyng the world, and to rendreyng of perpetual
thanks unto him therefore: I confess I was with the said treatise
woondrefully ravished. For first and foremost whereas by reason of innumerable
abuses, detestable erroures and foul abominacions through the crafty
conueighau^ce of the purpurate whore of Babylon by litel and litell conueyghed
into the Church, there is no poynet concerning our religion, so far
entrieked or darkened as the mist^rie of this ^acrament: this writer through
his singular gift of grace, his right profounde learning, and his high
judgment as well in the scriptures, as also in the doctors, and in the
general council wadeth so depein searchyng and boultyng out the truth of
this mat^er, that he makes it so clear so plain and so eu^dent to all men's
y^es which either can or will see that neither there can now be any ferther
doubtyng of the veritee, and truth of this sacrament. What it is nor any more
be said for the right institucion and order thereof how it should be used.
Wherefore me thought I could not better employ or bestow my trauaill then in
translatynge this tractise into the English tongue, to thentente that so
profitable a thing might not be hiddden from the people, which having both
an earnest zele to enbrace the truth: and a ready will to follow the kings
maiestees most godly procedynges, are much hindered, and kept back from their
desire, partelye through ignorance because they are not duly enstructed and
taught th^rin, and partly through the malice of the most perverse Papistycall
leaueners of Chystes doctrine which to mainteyne their own luc^e and glory,
cease not as Antechrystes own trusty knights to weorke as much as in them
lies, that the simple people may still continue in blyndenesse and error.
But all praise, all thanks, all laud and glory be unto our most loving
heavenly father and to his only begotten son Jesus Christ our lord, with
the holy ghost proceeding from them both, who have i^ these our days so
opened the yies of the world, that not only the iugleyng sleyghtes of the
Romysh Babylon be so thoroughly espied that they can no longer deceive: and her
most cruel tyranny so vanquyshed, that she may now no longer reygne in
Christen peoples consciences as she has by gods sufferaunce for our
sinfulness many long years dooen. Neither is it possible that the exceeding
mercy and favor of god toward this royalme of England may more evidently
appear, then it is by these two tokens folowinge declared, the one that it has
pleased him by his most puissaunt and mightefull arm to deliver us out of
the bondage of this Romish Egipte, far passinge the yoke and servitude
which the children of Isarel suffered under Pharao, and the other, that of his
espiciall grace he has vouchesalued to open the yies of our hertes that we
may see the truth, and to give unto this royalme the right knowelege
concerning this most holy sacrament which the subtille and crafty illusyon
of Satan by the instrumente of the said purpurate whore of Babylon had made
of a most pure fountain of water springinge up into everlasting life, a
foul stynking puddle of idolatry and supersticyon to endelesse damnacyon: of
a most precious and heaven jewel, a most vile and deyulyshe abominacyon: of a
most comfortable medycyne, a most deadly, and present poison. Blissed therefore
be the name of the lord our god for ever and ever, who of his infynite mercy
and botomlesse goodness has cast his most favorable yie upon this royalme of
England, illumining the hertes of the same most gladly and cherefully to
enbrace his gospel, and giving us to ou^e King such a Godly Iosyas as in
his tender years of childehoode neither forgeateth ne ceasseth with the most
feythfull advise and trusty assistence of his most noble and sapient
Counsaylours to travail as well that the word of God may be syncerely and
purelye set forth and taught unto all his most derely beloved subjects, as
also that this sacrament of the Lords body and blood may be reduced to the
right use according to the first institucion thereof in the primative Church.
And forasmuch as the whole process of this discourse is both consonaunt unto
the word of God that it cannot be doubted of, but that it is true, and also so
justly agreynge with the kings Maiestees most godly procedinges that the
people may by readyng or hearing hereof be thoroughly satisfied and persuaded
universally to enbrace and follow the other. I think it (as I have said) a
weorke right expedient and necessary to be had in the English toungue as well
for the instruction of such as can read, as also for the help of some good
persons and curates, which though they have a good zele and forwardnes to set
forth ye kings majesty's most christian procedynges: yet for defaulte of
sufficient learning (the more is the pietee) are not of themselves hable
neither thoroughly to enstructe their flock of all the truth, nor to satisfy
the ignorant in such doubtful cases or questions, as may haplye arise
about this matier, nor finally to stop the mouths of sedicious Papists, or
of such as are malicious and indurate enemies against the pure doctrine of
Christ's gospel. And although in treactynge of such high matiers it can not
be avoided but that by reason of some school terms or arguments there must
needs be many things, that may seem to pass the capacitee and understanding
of the unlettered sort: yet is not such a notable good weorke as this
discourse of Petur Martyr or as his disputacions upon the same matier therefore
to be suppressed or kept (as it were) hidden under the bushel. For if no book
should be set forth but such as every body yea even of the unlearned and
gross multitude might be hable to understand when they hear it or read
it: than what should Chauncer, Goore, Lidgate and others do abroad, whom some
even of the learned sort do in some places scarcely take? than were it vain
to set forth Chronicles or statutes in which is both a great noumbre of
words, and also much matier not easy to be perceived of every body: than were
it labor lost to set forth in English books of service and homelies
unto the gross and rusticall multitude, whose capacite is not hable to
conceive that is in them contained than were it vayn to have translated and
set forth the bible in English to the vulgar people, and most vain to
read it in the Churches, forasmuch as a great noumbre of things which the
simple ignorant people read and hear thereout, are far above the ^eache of
their gross understanding. But all such good and godly books as well of holy
write as of other profane arguments, are to this entente set forth and
published, that every body may be edifyed as far forth as his capacyte
will serve. And like as without any reading or hearing at all, they should
continue evermore blind and ignorant: so by continual reading and hearing
the unlearned and simple may take enstructio^s and from dai to day proceed and
grow in knowelage till at last they shall by due use and exercise, be hable
to understand as much as shall be necessary or expedient for the^. Now this
book I have labored to make as plain as I could do, and therefore in some places
I have either altered or leaft ye scoole terms which otherwise would have made
the thing more derke, and brought it as nere I could to the familiar phrase of
English speaking, or else have added such circumstaunce of other words, as
might declare it and make it plain. Wherefore though for the cause abouesaide I
may seem in some places to have somewhat swerued from the precise words of
the latin book: Yet I trust it shall to the favorable and indifferent reader
appear that I have not any thing degressed from the autours mind. Now as we
commonly see that men where they think themselves endoubted or bounde^, though
they can not fully requitte or deserve the manifold benefices that they have
received yet (as the nature and duty of thankfulness byndeth them) they will
not be negligent ^o gratifye their beneficial patrones or fre^des with such
simple tokens of their good minds as lies in their power, (as the fermer to
present his landlorde with some portion of the fruictes that god sends him,
and the poor widow her patron with a dishe of apples cheries or such like:)
so can not I but think my self most bounden with some of the simple fruictes
of mi pore studies to present your lordship my singular and espiciall good
patron, trusting that forasmuch as there is as Cicero says a certain
kind of lyberalitee even in taking, ye will with no less cherfulnesse accept
these my simple labors dedicated unto you, then ye have been accustomed to
give the manifold benifites which I have at your lordeshipes hands received.
And thus I shall commend the same my labors unto your lordshippes patronage
and proteccion and your self unto the lords tuicion as soon as I shall have
advertised you of the process that Martyr follows in this weorke, which is
that first he brings in the school Doctoures and all that ever may be
said for transubstantiation as strongly as is possible to be reasoned, and as
much as can be alleged for it. Than brings he in the reasons such as he
thinks good, both out of the first Scriptures, and general Counceile, and
also out of the Doctoures to confirm his own opinion against
transubstantiacion. Thirdely he confuteth and soilleth all the arguments and
reasons of the schoolmen and Popish writers one by one, in order as they were
propouned and this does he so clearkely, so profoundly, and so pitthilye, that
no man can say more Beseching therefore your Lordeship if any default or lack
be, to impute it rather to mine insufficiency in translatinge it, then to the
authoure in wrytinge it, I will no longer with hold the same from the hearing
of Martyr himself speak, who shall more delighte and edify you then my pen
may do.

A discourse upon the Sacrament of the Lords Supper solemnly handled at the
University of Oxforde by Doctor Peter Martyr Uermila Florentine, and in the
said Uniuersite, placed by the Kings maiest^e, Edward ye syxte to read open
Lectures in Divinity, who discoursed thereof as hereafter follows when he had
finished the declaracion of the leuenthe Chapter of the first Epistle of S.
Paul to the Chorinthyans.
THe cont^ncions y^ have arisen concerning the sacrament of ye lords Supper
have undoubtedly this only intent and purpose, that the manier and way may be
understood, how the body and blood of the Lord are joined and coupled with
the similitudes of bread and wine: or (as other Scholeme^ term it) with the
matiers Sacramental. And forasmuch as it is well known to all men that
thissame is called the Sacrament of the Lords body and blood, therefore
r^quisite it is, that these things be by same manier of way contained in this
Sacrament. But we in the searching out hereof shall not rehearse all things
that are in this mattier tossed to and fro, lest the thing which of it self is
dark enough, may be made more entriked and doubtful, and least the
discoursyng of it may grow to an endless mattier and botomlesse. The order
therefore and dispo^icion of the doctrine of this present traictise shall be
reduced to four principal poinctes.







transubstanciacion, partlye because it is of the grosser sort, and partlye
because it is but of a late time c^m up, and finally, because the other two
sentences do perfectly consent and do with egual endeavor defeact it
substancially.

Of this sentence of transubstanciacion it is written by the Moister of the
sentences in the eight, ^^e opinion that avouches transubstanciacion.
the ninthe, the tenthe, and the leuenth distinctions of his fourth book. And
(in a brief sum to speak it), thus in effect says the book. While the
minister thereunto deputed and ordained, pronounces the words of the Lords
institucion over matier and stuff due and conueniente for the purpose, that is
to wete, over bread and wine, so that he have an intencio^ (as they term it)
so to do: the substance of bread and wine is converted and changed into the
substance of ye body and blood of Christ, and is in such wise changed, that
the accidents of ye substance as well that it is turned into, as also that it
is turned out of, do still remain without a subi^cte: which accidents
nevertheless many writers have determined to rest in ye body of Christ that
the bread is tu^ned into. But in deed that supposicio^ is for this reason a
false supposicion, because that Christ's body does not recraue any such
accidents. Some others have labored to constitute and appoynte the air as
the natural fundamente and subject of the said accidents: which thing
likewise because it can not be proved, al those for the most part that are
maynteyners and defendours of this sentence, do agree that they are but as
byhangers, and do remain without a subject.

Than ferther they will these accidents which are seen, felt, and tasted, to
signify unto us the very true body of Christ, which they conteyne within
them covered and hidden. From this they proceed ferther, and affirm this body
of Christ ye lies hyd under the said accidents to be a sign as well of the
very self body of Christ that hanged on the cross, as also of his body
mystical, that is to say, of the congregation and fellowship of the elect
sort and predestinate. Whereupon the May^^er of the sentences affirms some
thing here to be that is only a sign, and that same does he put to be the
likenesses and matiers visible: and some other thing again, that is both the
thing and the sign too, that is to wete, ye body of Christ that is hidden
under the accidents. For the said body, if it be referred to the visible
lykenesses of bread and wine, is the thing self: and in case ye have respect
to his body mystical, it is a sign. Another thing also there is (says he)
which a man can by no m^anes say to be a sign, but to be the thing only,
that is to weete, the body mystical, because it is so signified, that it is a
thing present and no more a sign of any other or ferther thing to come. The
rest of the words which are set before or after in the executing of these
mysteries he affirms to be not of any n^ce^sitie of the Sacrament, but to
be only thanks geuynge and prayers enterlaced. And if ye demand of them
how s^ great a body may possibly be contained in such a little piece of
bread, they answer that it is no^ by the way of quantity, nor yet as other
things that do fill up a room or a place, or (as they term it)
definiti^ely, that is to say, by circumscription of place, but by the way of
substance, and sacramentally as they call it. Neither do they take it for
things contrary to reason that in this Sacrament two distinct bodies should
be contained in one self place. For they are constreined to take that for one
of their posions and conclusions. For emiddes the accidents of the bread
there is a thing of qua^tite^, yea and the same of quantitee corporal. Again
they think it nothing against reason, that one self body be verily in dinerse
and so^dry places at once. And grant they do, that a man of full grows and
statu^e, (as Christ was on the cross and as he shall come to judge the world)
is in very true deed (though inuisibly) contained not only in a litell cake
of bread, but also in the very least piece thereof. Many things mothere might
yet be here brought in concerning this sentence, but thus much I think to be
sufficient for our discoursyng at this time.

Who so requires any ferther to know of this mattier may seek it in the
Master of the sentences in the places above cited with his expositours
innumerable.

Now the Arguments that they bring for this conversion or transubstanciacion,
The Arguments for tra^substanciacio^.
are these.

First and foremost. The holy scripture does enforce it. For in ye sixth of John
ye lord promised yt he would give Except a man eat my fleashe and drink, my
blood, he shall not have life.

He moreover affirmed himself to be the bread from heaven, yea and the lively
bread, which the father had given, in which place he promised in plain
words that he would give himself to be eat^n after the likeness of bread:
and the thing that he promised he did truly and uprightly perform, as the
Evangelists do bear witness that it was done at his last supper. And that ye
thing which is given to eat, is the lords body, Paul does plainly show wha^
he says: Whosoever eats and drinks it vnworthilye, shall be guilty of the
body and blood of the Lord. And again: He eats and drinks judgment
against himself in that he makes not a difference of the Lords body. But
all the strength and pith of this argument they auouche to consist in these
words, in which it is said: This is my body: which words they will i^ any wise
to be clear and to have no need of any ferther exposicion or declaracion. And
to us (say they) for the reverence yt we oughe to the word of God, it is
behouable to believe the words. For the Euangeliste Matthew Mark, and Luke do
with a full consent agree upon those words, yea and the Apostle Paul also in
his former Epistle to the Corinthians. And unless it were a mattier of great
weight and importance, and so to be taken as it souneth without any ferther or
other circu^staunce, the Apostles would never with so great concord have
agreed among themselves. That if it were a thing lawful with tropes, that is to
say, with figurate manners of speakynges to defeact or avoid it: than shall
nothing (say they) be safe ne sure for the Heretics but that they will
corrupt it with counterfaicte exposicions.

Identica, that is to say, of such sort, that one and the same thing is meant
and signified by both parts of it, except there be some thing found coming
either before or after in the process of it, that must drive us to some trope
or allegory, whereas in this place is found no such thing. Yea and in case a
man vieu rightly as he should do the process that follows: it rather
calls us back to the simple and plain understanding of the words as they
lie. For thus goes the text forth: Which is delivered for you. And manifest
it is, that the very true and self body of Christ it was, that was delivered
for us.

Thirdly such things as by nature and kind disparata, that is to say, so
disseuered, that their natures disagree, and have some contrariety one to the
other, as (for example) a man, a horse, and a stone: al such things (I say)
are of such rate yt it cannot by any means be truly said, that the one is
the other. For it cannot in any manner of speaking be truly said that a man
is a stone, or a stone is a man. And that bread and Christ's body are of this
rate, that is to say, are things of two distinct and contrary natures, no
man needs to doubt. Wherefore it shall never be true to say of bread, that

Another reason also that is made, is this: In saying This is my body, Christ
did not without a due co^sideracion use this word, is, which is in gra^mer a
verb substantive, that is to say, it plainly signifies being, and it is of
ye present te^se, yt is to say it signifies y^ time that is no we present.
For else he might even as well have said: This signifies or betokens my body,
or, this repr^se^teth my body, or, this is a figure of my body, or, this is a
sign and toke^ of my body, or he might have said: This bread is my body.
etc. all which maniers and phrases of speaking forasmuch as he did eschew,
the saying is to be plainly taken as he pronounced it without any ferther
addi^ion, circumstaunce, or menyng.







of Christ be offered up by the mynister: it is necessary that he have it
there, and that he there present it unto the sight of God, except we will
say that he offers no more but a thing only signified and betokened or a
thing represented under a shadow.

After all this they roar with an open mouth the fathers are cited for
transubstanciacio^.


And before al others they cite Irenaeus, Ir^neus.
who in his.v. book says thus: When the cup being mingled and the bread
being broken does receive of the word of God, there is made the Sacrament
of Christ's blood and body. And before in his fourth book he said in a manier
the self same thing. Tertullianus Tertullia.
also says in the fowerth book that Christ of the bread taken into his
hands, and distributed unto his disciples, made his own body. And Origines
Origines.
upon Matthew in the twenty sixth chapitur, says: This bread which God the
soonne confesses to be his own body. etc. Cyprian in his Sermon of the
Lords supper, Cyprianus.
says: This common bread being cha^nged into fleashe and blood, procures
life. And eftsons in the same Sermon: This bread which the Lord gave unto
his disciples being not in form and similitude but in nature changed by the
almightifulnesse of the wor^e, became fleashe. Ambrose in his fowerth book of
the sacraments. Ambrosius.
Bread it is before the words of Consecracion: but as soon as consecracion
is come to it, it is of bread made the fleashe of Christ. And many things mo
of like sort he has in his litell traictises of the Sacraments. Chrisostomus
also in the sixtienth Homely of the Sacrament of Eucharistie, Chrisostomus.
which Homely is to be found in the sixth tome of his weorkes as they be
now set forth, aff^rm^th this Sacrament to beelyke unto a piece of wax put
into the fire, where no part of the substance of wax remains, but is all
together made like to the nature of fire. And even so (^aieth he) by this
substance of Christ's body, the bread and the wine is consumed clean away.
Augustine also in the prologue of the twentye.iii. Psalm says, Augustine.
that Christ bore and held up himself in his ow^e hands when he did at his
last supper institute and ordein this Sacrament. And in the.xc. and eight
Psalm, expouninge the words, worship ye the stoo^e of his feet, he avouches
that the ^eash of Christ is to be worshipped in the Sacrament. Which were not
a thing of ce^gruence, if th^re were bread still remainyng in the Sacrament.
Also in the third book of the Tr^ni^ie he affirms that there can not any
Sacrament be made, but by virtue of the spirit weorkyng together with the
word. Hilarious also in h^s sixth book of the Trinity, ^ilarius.
affirms Christ to be in us after the verity of nature, and not only
through the agr^eablenesse of will: and aduoucheth us at the Lords bourd
truly and veraily to ^^ceyue the word being become f^^ashe. Leo Bishop of
Rome in his two and twentieth Epistle to the Clergy and people of
Constantinople wry^eth in this manier: Leo.
R^ceyuyng (says he) the virtue and strength of heavenly meat, leat us pass
and be turned into the fleash of him, who became our fleash. They aduouche
furthermore that Damascenus is full and whole on their side. Theophilactus also
is brought in of them, Throphilactus.
who does in most plain terms make mention of transubstanciacion. Now as
for A^selmus and hugo de Sancto Victore, who have been writers of a later time,
there is no doubt, but that they both are aduouchers of transubstanciation,
wherefore they allege as well the ancient fathers as the new to make all on
their side.

They cite ferthermore general councels, The council Ephesine.
that is to wete, the council that was holden at Ephesus against the
Heretic Nestorius, where Cyrellus Cirillus.
an ancient father of the church was present and chief president of the
council. And the same Cyrillus has many things concerning this matier. And
among all other things he chiefly affirms that we being made partakers of
the holy body, and of the precious blood of Christ, do not now receive
common fleashe, nor the fleashe as it were of a sanctified man, but fleashe that
does veraily sanctify and make holy, and that is now become the verai
propre fleashe of the verai soonne self. They allege morouer the council of
Vercels holden under Leo Bishop of Rome the nynth of yt name, The council of
Uercels.
where the Archedeacon Berengarius was condemned, of whose recantacion it is
also mentioned in the decrees, in the title de consecratione, that is, of
consecracion in the second distinccion, and in the fowerth of the sentences.
Besides this they bring in for the^ the Romain council Lateranense, The
counsel la^erane^se
holden under Innocentius Bishop of Rome the third of y^ name, who
makes:plain mention of tra^substa^ciacio^ in the Decretalles, in the title de
Trinitate in the chapitur that begins thus, Firmiter. etc. and also in the
title de celebratione Missarum, that is, of the celebracio^ of Masses, in the
chapitur thus beginning, Cum Martha. etc. The council also holden at
Constance, The counsel of Consta^ce
where Wi^^lief was condemned because he denied this transubstanciacion.

Duns was so throughely moved and persuaded in the fowerth of the sentences,
Du^s.
that a though transubstancion could not by any scriptures or arguments be
firmly and evidently proved yet he gave over and granted it, because he would
not be against the consent of the church.







alone, but thus, (...), as if ye should say in English, the body of me. And
the Greeks do ever commonly use to add such articles, when they will
properly and effectually signify or express the thing that they speak of,
which phrase of speaking by articles, the Latin men have not, but our English
tongue, and the most part of other toungues have them.

They go yet ferther, and allege, that Christ made

Besides the premises, in case transubstanciacion should and the blood of
the same was^hed forth, whereas in bread and wine there does no manier such
thing happen.





transubstanciacion remain. Ambrose in his treactise of the sacraments,
Amb^ose.
affirms the word of God, to be a word of such operacion and weorkyng
that the bread and wine both remain still the same that they be, and yet be
changed into another thing. Which words one Algerius a writer of late time
enterpreteth and expouneth in the seventh chapitur of the first book of his
weorke that he wrote of this sacrament: saying, that the bread and the wine
remain still as touching their accidents, and are changed into an other
thing, or into a bett^r thing, as touching their substance.

But now it behooves us to see by what arguments and reasons on the contrary
part, Reasons against tra^subs^anciacion.
this sentence is clearly defeacted and utterly made void. First and formoste
the holy scripture purporteth that here is bread: The first a^gumente.
Ergo it is not true, that the substance thereof is changed into another thing.

The Evangelists auouche and affirm that Christ took bread, and brake it,
Paul does ^iue s^nd^^e times call it b^ead.
and gave it to his disciples^ and Paul does five soondrie times make
expressemencio^ of it calling it every where by the name of bread. First he
says: i. Corin. x.
Is not the bread which we break a Communion or participacion of Christ's
body? And in the same place. All we are one bread, and one body, which
communicate of one bread. i. Cor. xi.
In another place. As often as ye shall eat this bread, ye shall show the
Lords death until he come. Also, whosoever shall eat this bread and drink
this cup of the Lord vnworthilye, shall be guilty of the body and blood of
the Lord. Lastly. Leat a man examine himself, and so leat him eat of that
bread, and drink of that cup. Forasmuch as these words and sayings of
Paul are clear and open: therefore if an Aungel from heaven shall preach other
doctrine, accursed be he.

In deed I could here have brought in, that is often and in soondrie places of
Scripture mentioned of breakyng bread: To break bread a common ph^ase of the
Hebrews.
but yet because I se that such phrase of speaking may be taken in another
sense, as it were spoken of the vulgar and common food of people, as for
example, in the fifty ninth chapitur of the prophet Esai: Break thy bread
unto the houngry: and in the fowerth chapitur of the Lamentacions of Hieremie.
Their litel babes craved bread and there was none to break it unto the^:
therefore I leave out all such places, and will allege for this purpose none
but strong reasons and substanciall. Forasmuch therefore as the places of Paul
above cited are plain and evident, they ought to be taken according to the
plain words without any ferther gloses A sophistical obieccio^.
or addicions But some make a sophistical cauillacion that it is called by the
name of bread because of the natures which are changed, and (to use the same
phrase of speaking that such sophisters do) they affirm the same to be a
denominacion a termino a quo that is from the point that it came fro: that is
to say, it has the name of bread because it was once bread, and now
changed from bread or out of bread. And for confirmacion hereof they allege
other like places out of Scripture: As when the Serpent that was made of Aarons
rod devoured the Serpents of Pharao his Magians or wisemen, which they also
had made of their rods, it is said in the Scriptures, that Aarons rod
devoured the Serpents of the Magia^s Also man is in diverse and many places of
Scripture called earth, because that man's body was first made thereof, Also the
woman was called of Adam, a bone, of his bones, and fleashe of his fleashe,
because God fourmed and shaped her therout. A^ answer to the obieccio^ before
going.
But these and all other like obieccions are made in vain. For in the holy
scriptures is contained open and plain mention of these conuersions, so that
the necessity of the story and of the words enforces and drives us to
such tropes that is to say, to such phrases of speaking, and therefore we
admit and receive them. But now leat these fellows likewise on their part
first declare and prove out of the holy scriptures such a conversion or
change to be made, that is to wete of bread and wine into the body and blood
of Christ: and than will we grant and yield unto them the abouesaid tropes
also, which is, that it is called bread not because it is bread still, but
because it was bread before. And to the same effect and purpose it is, that they
ferther allege. If a man had given me wine, which wine did immediately weaxe
sour, I having in my punch^on or vessel the same being now turned into
vineagre, might verai well say: This is your wine not for that it is wine at
this present, but because it had been wine to fore. But there of the conversion
of wine into vine agree the sense of tastyng does judge, which thing in the
sacrament does not happen, where neither any of the five senses nor any
reason, Another sophis^ical obieccion
nor yet the holy Scripture enforces us to confess or grant any such
conversion or change to be made. They object also another place out of the
second chapitur of S. Ihons gospel. When the master of the feast had tasted
the water that was now made wine. etc. Whereby they well declare and prove the
wine newely made of Christ by miracle to keep yet still the name of water. But
the Euangeliste did not say water and there leave, The au^swer
but he said, water now made wine. But in all the holy scriptur^s they shall
not find any such declaracion concerning the Sacrament, that the bread is
said to be converted or changed into the body of Christ. They take also
their refuge sometimes unto the sixth chapitur of Ihon, Another obieccio^.
so that they affirm the Apostle in the places above cited to name it bread,
not wheaten bread, nor any other common bread, but the Lords body, which in
the sixth chapitur of Ihon is called by the name of bread, where Christ said:
I am the bread of life. The answer
But against the^ it makes that Paul says: The bread which we break, is
it not a participacion of Christys body? The m^teriall b^eade of the Sacrament.
Which cannot conveniently agree with Christ's body, that it should be
broken, forasmuch as it is written: a bone of him shall ye not break. But
these so few and high witted men, although they have found in the sixth
chapitur of Ihon that Christ called himself bread, yet where will they find
(I beseech you) that he has at any time called himself wine? For in this
supper the one part of the Sacrament is called wine, although by a strange
manier of speaking, as appears in those words in the gospel expressed: I
will not from hensefoorth drink of this frui^te of the vynetree. cand. And it
is a thing out of doubt to all men living that o^te of the vine trees is
produced and brought forth, not accidents, but the substance of wine.
Morouer by this reason it should be utterly mad^ frustrate and void that is
with a great and general agreemente spoken of the aunciente fathers which is, A
confirm^cion of the au^swer before going.
that by these outward and material tokens of this Sacrament, is signified
and represented the mystical body of Christian by like reason as bread is
made of the mele of many corns of wheat, and wine is made of the juice of many
grapes together, which things in the accidents have no such veritee. For
the accidents of wheat or grapes do^ not yield bread or wine, but the
substance of them. Now do we not a little marvel at such manier of men,
who if at any time they hear us bring in for our part any such like places,
as for exaumple. The son was Christ: The lamb or the host is the passover.
Circumcision is the couenaunte: with other like plac^s: by and by they cry
with an open mouth yt such manier allegories serve nothing for this place:
and now th^imself^s do on every side bring both tropes and allegories even
by whole heaps. Another obieccio^.
They ferther allege that bread is here taken for every such thing as may
conveniently be eaten, as in the Hebrewe toungue. LEHEM is taken for all kind
of meat. LEHEM.
But clear against them make the Evangelists, who restreygne this kind of
meat, The answer
and refer it to bread only. An other sort do imagine that by the word
bread are signified only the accidents and figure or form of bread. But
these men harp altogether upon one stryng that they first begone withal:
and ye verai same point that is yet in controversy and not agr^ed upon, they
take as a thing fully granted unto them: which is, that the accidents are
there without a subject, which point their part had been first to prove. And
as for miracles are not to be heaped up together without a necessity.

The second argument.
An other argument is. The old fathers had the same Sacraments that we have,
and yet among the^ there neded not any such transubstanciacion, that either
the stone, or the water that flowed out of the stone, or ye Manna should
suffer any transubstanciacion, which thing at that could not be dooen.
Wherefore such transubstanciation is not requisite to our Sacraments neither.
The first proposicion and part of this argument we read in Paul, which is,
that the fathers of the old law and we had one and the self same meat. But
our adversaries say nay, Another obieccion
and will yt our Sacraments be utterly and many soondrie ways distinct and
differyng from the mysteries of the old fathers: Which thing we also grant
unto them, as well for the diuersitee of the outward and material signs,
The au^swer
as also for the difference of the times, and for certain other propertees.
Nevertheless as touching the matier or substance of the Sacraments,
Sac^amentes of the fathers under the old law and our Sacraments to be all one.
which were received of the holy patriarchs, we say, that it was utterly one
and the verai same meat, and the veraie self drink, with the matier or
substance of our Sacrament. Austen writes unto Marcellinus of the diuersitee
and diff^rence of these Sacraments, that to a man, having any spark of
fine wit in his head it may suffice that it was conueniente that Christ
were with one sort of Sacraments foreshewed when he was yet to come, and with
another sort of Sacraments to be declared after he was come.

In which place Austen seems only to have regard to the difference of the
times. Also the same Austen in his litell traictise of the utility and profit
of dooynge true penance, writes in verai plain words, that the old
fathers when they had Manna, did eat the self same thing that we do now
eat. For (says he) they did eat the self same spiritual meat. And what
is it to say the self same, but that it is the same which we also do eat?
And for that it might to some person appear and seem a thing inconvenient,
that we should have no more now then the Jews than had, he still beats upon
the testimony of Paul above alleged, to whom (says Austen) it was not
enoughe to say, that the old fathers had a spiritual meat, but he thought
it good to add moreover and say, they had the same self meat that we do
rece^ue, to the end we should understand that the said old fathers in their
Manna did eat the same thing, that we do eat, and therefore he added this
term, the self same meat. etc. Neither does it make any thing against us
that certain affirm him to speak of a spiritual eating, because that the
Patriarchs did believe in Christ to come.

First because these fellows ca^ not upon any sure foundation es^ablishe their
carnal eating of Christ.

And Secondarily for that the old fathers did not only believe in their
heart in Christ to come, but did also receive a token and sign of the thing
which they believed, that is to wete, Manna or Water. Wherefore the thing did
not pass by feythe only: and so Austens sentence and saying stands still
in his force, that the meat of the old fathers was not only spiritual as
ours is, but also the self same that we eat, Neither is it of any great force
or effect if thou obiecte out of the same Augustine upon the thirty seventh
Psalm, in the Prologue, where he puts difference between the new and old
Sacraments: where he seems to assign three points of difference. First,
that in the one a Salueour is promised, and in the other he is given. And
afterward he says that our Sacraments are more easy, fewer in number, more
full of maiestee, and more blisseful. And at last he adds, that the others
were as toys or iapes in childrens hands: but in our Sacraments to be
contained some thing of more vtilitee and substancialnesse. And these
circumstaunces are to be understood as touching the first point concerning
the promissio^ of Christ to come. But not withsta^dyng that they had not yet in
verai deed received him i^ ^^eashe: yet nevertheless to the fathers beleuyng
in the said promission, he was spiritually given to meat. But our Sacraments
are said to give Christ, even because they testify that he is come already,
and is no more to be looked for as though he were not come. Now that our
Sacraments are fewer in noumbre, it is a thing certain, and also, that they
are more easy then the old Sacraments. They also signify and represe^t a
more majesty, because the words that are spoken be more open and plain, then
they were in the old Testamente. Now as for ye happiness of ours is a great deal
more, so that we are in a great deal better case with our Sacram^ntes, then the
old fathers were with theirs. For we are free from the yoke of the ceremonies:
and we live altogether growyng to the last hour and end of the world, and are
undoubted more nere unto the kingdom of Christ. The holy ghost also does now
in this later time more plentefully abound, and the Church or holy
congregation is in this time larger then it was than, whereof Christ said in
the gospel to his disciples. Many kings and Prophets have desired to see
the things that ye see. etc. The Sacraments morouer of the law, were as a man
might say, as to yes or iapes in the childre^s hands: because it behooved the
rude time of the old fathers to be exercised and trained under a greater
nou^bre of ceremonies, under soondrie elements, and under manifold ways of
nourturing and framing, even as children have commonly much more business in
breakyng and trainyng, then elders have. But by all these circumstaunces it is
not concluded ne proved that the Sacraments of the old fathers (at the least
wise as touching the thing and substance of the mystery) had not the same
things contained in them, that our Sacraments now have.

For Cyprian in the third Epistle of the second book has these words
following: Cyprian.
Our Lord Jesus Christ offered the self same thing, that Melchisedech had
offered, that is to wete, bread and wine, that is to say, his body and
blood. Augustine Augustine.
also in the sixtenth chaptur of the ninetienth book against Fausins thus
says: Oh in how great an error they ierre and swerne, which think that
because the signs and sacraments are changed, therefore the things selfs
are diverse and not all one. And in the one and twe^tieth chapitur of the
twentieth book of the same weorke. The fleashe and blood of this sacrifice
before the coming of Christ was promised by Hosts and sacrifices of
likenesses: at the time of Christ's passion it was given in verai truth: and
ever sens the asc^ndyng of Christ into heaven, it is celebrated by the
Sacrament of his memorial. The same Austen in the twentye sixthe trai^tise
upon Ihon says: Those Sacraments were diverse and not al one in the sign:
but in the thing that is signified, they are eguall and even all one. The Same
Austen a litell after: The Same meat than (says he, and the same drink: but
that was to such as understood and believed it: but to them that understood it
not, that same was than only Manna, and that same was than only bare Water
and nothing else, but to the believing and feithfull, it was even the veraisame
that it now is. For at that time was Christ yet to come, but now he is come:
To come, and comed already are distinct words: but Christ is both than and
now, all one: And Bertram Bertram
one of the writers in these later times thus writes. Yet nevertheless that
our aunciente fathers of the old law did eat the self same spiritual meat
that we do, and drank the self same spiritual drink that we now do,
Saint Paul does earnestly affirm. But thou will peradventure ask this
question: which self same meat and drink? Ueraily ye veraiself same which
the people of the believing sort do at this day eat and drink in the Church
or congregation. For it is not leefull in any wise to understand that they
should be diverse or distinct meats and drinks, seeing that one and the
self same Christ it is which did both than feed with his fleashe, and give
drink of his blood to the people in the wilderness, and baptized in the
cloud and in the sea; and does now at this present in the Church and
congregation of the believing sort feed the people with the bread of his body,
and gives the^ drink of ye water of his blood. And the same Bertram not many
lines ^nsuing says in this wise: A wondrefull matier truly, and a thing
above the reach of man's capacitee reason or estimacion. He had not yet taken
the nature of man upon him: he had not yet tasted death for the salvation of
the world: he had not yet redeemed us with his blood: and yet the old fathers
in the wilderness did through spiritual meat, and drink invisible, eat
his body, and drink his blood, as the Apostle Paul witnesses where he
cries. The self same spiritual meat. etc. And the same Bertram anon after
says in this manier: For the self same Christ which at this day does in
the feithfull congregation through his almightifull power spirituallye turn
bread and wine into the fleashe of his body and into the liquour of his own
blood: the self same Christ did at that time inuisibly weorke Manna that was
given from heaven to be his body, and the water powered down from heaven to
be his own blood.

We se ferthermore that in the sacrament of baptism is given the holy ghost,
and the remission of sins: The third argument against transubsta^ciacion.
and yet can we not say that the holy ghost and the remission of sins lie
secretly hid in the waters. Yea and in baptism we put on Christ upon us: and
yet does no man say that the water suffers any transubstanciacion. But the
adversaries allege Christ to be after one sort in the Sacrament of his
supper, Another ob^ccio^.
and after another way in baptism, which point I will not deny, so that
they grant him to be in baptism too. As touching the manier of Christ's
being in the Sacraments, my plain mind is, that Christ in baptism is given
to us, as a mediator, and a reconciler and (to speak in a more apt time) a
regeneratour, that is to say, as o^e that begeatteth us of new: and in the
Sacrament of his supper he is distributed unto us, as a meat and a food.

The fourth argum^nte.
Moreover these transubstancioners do with their transubstanciation crepe verai
nere to the trope and manier of speaking of the Heretics of Marcions sect.
For they say: It seems bread and looks like bread, and yet is none, which
self same thing Marcion the Heretic did say of the fleashe and body of
Christ, that it was not a body and fleashe in verai true deed, but did only
appear to be a body and fleashe, and yet was none.

The fifthe a^gument against transubstanciacio^.
Christ is no iugler, neither does he mock or daly with our senses. But when he
was arise again from death to life, he proved and declared his resurreccion by
our se^ses. Feel my body (said he) and look well upon it. For a spirit has
not any fleashe and bones, his Apostles might have said: We feel it, and we se
it, it appears fleashe, and it is like a body: but yet it is not fleash in
deed. And so Christ's proof had been nothing worth, with the which he would have
it tried yt his body was not a fantastical body, but a verai body in deed.
And that he had resumed and taken again his verai own body, and not any other
manier body he declared by a plain proof showed to ye yie by printes and holes
of the nailles, and by y^ open hole in his side. The which argument and proof
of Christ's making should be of no strength at al nor effect, if there were yet a
place left for such iugling castes, as ye adversaries would have here in this
matier of y^ sacrament.

The fathers also and old writers do hold yt Christ was very man, The sixthe
argument.
because he had ye properties and accide^tes of man's nature: as for example,
because he hu^gred, slept wou^dred, was sorry, wept, and suffered; which
arguments were nothing worth at al, if such accidents be not sufficient
profes, yt where such accide^tes be, there is al so a substance to who^
the same be accide^tes: as if a man cannot argue thus: the same form or fashion
which was wo^t to be in bread: does yet remain, the same taste, and the same
color: ergo it is bread. For the Heretics will not d^nie, but grant, yt
Christ was hungry, yt he slept yt he wo^dred, yt he wept, and yt he suffered:
but when you will thereupon conclude, yt he was verai man: they will deny your
argument. For they will say yt these properties might be found in Christ,
though a substance to which they should appertain (I mean man's nature) were
not there present in him.

They say unto ye fourth argument concerning Marcion yt he might take occasion
of his error out of ye ghospel, In obieccio^ of the adversaries.
where it is written of Christ yt he walked upon water as well as it had been upon
land and never weat his foot, he was lifted up into heaven, and escaped from ye
Jews hands yt they could not se him: and yet ought not those places ^saie
they) to be blotted out of the gospel for the dangerous understanding of
the said Marcionites.

To who^ we make au^swer, The au^swe^
yt it is described in ye gospels yt Christ did work these kind of miracles
once or twyse and no more: but ye hold yt these miracles be wrought
continually without any intermission. And the things y^ are written in ye holy
scriptures we have not imagined nor inverted of our own head, and therefore
ought we not to be blamed or accused as geuers of yt or any other like
occasion. But in such as we inuente of our own brain, in such things as
we expound after our own fancy, and such things set forth to be holden
for a doctrine not having Gods word expressly for us: then had we need to
be well aware, lest we open a gappe, and minister occasion to Heretics.

The seventh argument against transubstanciacion.
Morouer by this mean of transubstanciacion the nature or property of a
Sacrame^te is clean destroyed for Austen writynge upon John says thus of it:
The word of God comes and is to the elemente and so becomes it a
Sacrament. It is the nature of a Sacrament to be made of these two things.
But after these men's minds, the el^mental things (as bread and wine) be
gone: and than ought Austen not to have said. The words come to the elemente:
but he should rather have said the words take away the elemente.

The eighte argument.
And when they put away the natures of the elementes^ the analogy that is to
say proporcio^ and reason of their significacion is clean destroyed and
comes to nothing. What proporcion and reason there is of the signs and the
things in this Sacrament.
Bread does therefore signify the body of Christ, because it fedeth and
makes strong and is a great sustenaunce to man's life, which propertee and
operacion we can not attribute or apply the accidents of breade^ as to
witness of it, or to the taste of it. Again in that that many corns or
graynes be put together and so bread made of them: there may be a
significacion in it to represent or signify a body mystical and such
significacion can not be contained in the whytenesse or the taste, or the
other accidents of bread. Whereupon it was that Paul said: we being many
folk are one lofe or one bread and one body: because we be partakers of one
loffe or bread.

In baptism, water is called lauachre or founteine of regeneracion or (as ye
might say) of a second birth: The propo^^cion of the outward signs to the
thing in baptism.
and because the substance of the water does still remain: it agrees verai
well, which thing would not so well agree with the accidents of water.

Now where Christ said This is my body, The nynthe argument.
the adversaries taking away the substance of bread and wine, do much abuse
the latin verb substantife, Est, and much contrary to the propre
significacion that would have est, to signify transubstanciatur is changed in
substance, or to stand for conuertitur, which is in English it is converted,
or for transmutatur, it is changed for whiles they are in pronouncing those
words of the Lord: This is my body: the bread is not yet all this while
Christ's body. Wherefore if they should take est, in his true and propre
significacio^: they should speak that thing, which is false and not true.
Which consideracion have moved and driven some of ^he school men to hold and
affirm that the verb, est, should be taken for one of these verbes: fieri,
to be made mutari, to be changed, or conuerti, to be turned.

Morouer, The tenthe argument.
this power and strength and efficacy to change the substance of bread in
to fleashe they attribute to those few words of the Lord: so that as often
as the said words be repeted or rehearsed, so often is the same change of
transubstanciacion made. And yet have they not any one word in all the holy
Scriptures of any such thing to be dooen, or that it may so be dooen. That
if any other man should pronounce the same words which Paul, Matthewe,
Mark, or Luke do recite: yet would they not think yt there were any
consecracion made. For they bind all the strength and force of the mat^er to
the words of their Canon, that is to say, of their rule of their massyng. But
this we do certainly know, that the Sacrament is than had, when we do those
things which Christ did and commanded to be dooen. But Christ did not
only speak the said words: but he also gave thanks he brake bread, he did
eat bread, and gave bread unto others to eat. And where we bring in now
many circumstaunces that were dooen: al these points every one of them do
concur and run together to make ye veritee of the Sacrament: neither
ought any one point or jot of the premises to be omitted or leafte undone.

I leat pass here to say that they know not whether the consecracion, is
accomplished and made perfeicte with the words of Christ, or by prayers.

Theuleue^th argument.
Morouer, they put theimselfes forth, to a great daungier. For an evil priest
and such an one as were a deceiptefull merchaunte, might pass over those
words of consecracion and recite never a one of them, or might change
them, or else might turn them a contrary way.

The twelft argument.
Farthermore where these words require that the Minister which should
consecrate must have (as they be wont to speak or to call it) a certain
intencio^ or purpose to make the body of Christ of it: he might yet have his
mind rennyng upon some other matiers, and think nothing at all upon any
consecracion whiles his mind w^r so wandering. He might also perchance be
of the mind, that he would not have any such consecracion to be made, or to
come to pass.

Th^i do also by puttyng this transubstanciacion, The.xiiii argume^te against
tra^^substanciacion.
fall into many unreasonable inconveniences and such as they can by no means
wind out of. For they hold that one same self body may be in infinite and
innumerable places to gethers and all at one time.

But to help save all thing vprighte, The euas^o^ of the
s^ra^substan^iacio^ers.
they allege for themselves that this makes nothing against them nor is any
disauauntage unto the^. For (say they) though Christ's body be there: yet it
is not there per modum quanti, that is to say after the manner of bodies having
their ^ull quantitee of bigness and stature. And this must needs be a
woonderous matier, how they can hold and maintain that a body it is, and a
body having a quantitee and bygnesse, and that it is veraily and really there
present, and yet not after the manier of bodies having quantitee. And
forasmuch as they put and hold it as a doctrine that Christ's body is
there veraily and really present, and corporally present, and carnally
present (as their te^mes be) but not present locally (that is to say,
occupiing such full room and place as other bodies of quantitee do:) what is
he that can not perceive and understand, that all those gloses are things
imagined and invented only for to be euasions and stertynge holes from good
arguments and reasons that are to the contratie?

They make an obieccion, An obieccio^ of the aduersa^i^s.
yt this is not a thing so impossible. For y^ human and mortal body of s.
Ambrose, A miracle of S. Ambrose body.
^^ god does create in the bealies of the eaters and drinkers of those holy
cakes either fleagme or some other natural humor, such as may be turned into
blood: wherewith the parties may be fed and nourished in their bodies.

The fifte^th argument.
If it should so chance, that this Sacrament should be burned, (as in the time
when Hesichius lived, Hesychius.
it was) as himself writynge commentaries upon the third book of Moses called
Leuiticus witnesses, (and the self same thing has Origenes also writing upon
the same book: Origenes
) than will the^e undoubtedly some ashes be^ left of the burning of it, and so
should a certain substance be produced and made of accidents, which have no
substance theimselfes.

The sexte^th arg^mente.
It may also chance yt worms or some kind of vermin may be egendred of this
consecrated bread: and tha^ also they will say yt such substance was
pro^u^ed or brought forth and made of accidents. How beit some of the^ (as
they be bold and aduent^rous) do feign and devise that the former substance
of bread which was therein before the consecracion, does in such ca^e^ return
again by miracle: and so may the said vermyn (say they) happen to come of
it. But if it belefull in this sort to multiply and to feign miracles: tha^
every man that lusts, may easily become a profunde clerk in scripture. For
he will have a miracle in store for ^uery strong argument that shall be made
against him, so that he will have an evasion and stertyng hole, from al such
reas^ns as s^all be brought against him.

The.xvii. argument.
Besides this, they are not only busy with miracles: but also th^i dele with
captious and deceipt^ful subtilties of sophistry: as namely Duns Duns.
being driven to a narowe straight to answer concerning the pronouncyng of
those words, This is my body, and to tell what thing it is, that is mente, and
limited, or specified, by this word this, and whereunto this word this, is in
that saying referred, or what it does importe: at last after much a do he
answers, The words of Du^s are these. Aliquod si^gulare i^diuiduum general^
oris substantiae, quod cum praedicaro idem r^ferr, aut pro eodem (vt loquuntur)
supponit: neq differunt inter se quae significantur per subiect^^ and
praedicatu^, nisiper var^ as concipiendi rations.
that it is a particular thing or portion of a substance yt co^teineth in it a
certain generality of a good large exte^t, and that the thing that is imported
by this word, this, is the verai same thing in effect and in menyng, yt
follows after: so that ye thing signified, imported, and limited, by this
word, this, and these words, my body, are (says Duns) all one thing, and
have no manier of difference between them, saving that the words are placed
the one before the other, and so in that behalf, are soondrily conceived in
our reason. etc.

But see I pray you, into what things, and how far they ieoperde, and yet
for all that, they can not so escape. For they have not told yet, what is
limited and imported by the word, this, when it is said: This is my body,
Fisher late Bishop of Rochester wrote, that in this and such like proposicions
or sentences, when one thing is turned and changed into another thing, it is
not vnconuen^ente or any thing against reason, Fisher Bishop of Rochester.
that by the word, this, there be limited, signified, and imported the thing
that it was before the change. And after that sort he admits this clause,
This is my body, that by the word, this, there is signified and imported the
bread that it was before the consecracion, and yt the same bread is changed
into Christ's body, while the residue of ye words, that is to wete, is my
body, are in pronouncing. But ^han say I again, that the proposicio^ or
sentence, this is my body, is not set forth in his due form yt it ought to
be. For in yt case, it ought to have been said, ^his is made my body, or this
is changed into my body: For else it is not (say I) a right nor an apt manier
of speaking, to say: this is my body, seeing that by their own confession and
grauntyng, it is not his body, until ye resid^e of the words be all
spoken, and perfeictlye pronounced even to the last syllable.

Some men hold that Christ's body is reallye joined with the signs and the
material stuff of the Sacrament, The.xviii. ar^umen^e^ aga^^^^
tra^subs^anciacion.
that is to wete: with the substaunces of bread and wine remaining still in the
Sacrament. And that sort of men do thus argue against transubstanciacion^
What excellency (say they) or privilege has the accidents of bread, that
is to say, the whiteness, the roundenesse, or the taste. etc. that they can
be joined with Christ's dodye, and the substance and nature of bread may
not so? Or what dignitee and privilege have the accidents of the bread, which
same priuelege may not or ought not^ even as well be attributed and granted to
the substance and nature of the breade^ And if it so be, that the accidents
may remain still, why than may not also the substance of bread remain
as well? Yea, and many of the old fathers and writers do suppose, that the
bread does remain in deed, yea and they do thereof take a similitude to
show that both the natures, that is to were, the nature of man, and the
nature of god, do verailye and truly remain in Christ, and so remain,
that the one passes not into the other. The minds and verdites of which
aunciente writers w^ shall here ^nsuynge bring in, as shall apperteine, ^che in
their due places.

They fall also into another inconvenience, The. xix. argume^te. what thing it
is that is broken i^ the Sacrament
in which is neither rhyme nor reason (as the prouer^e says.) For when they
break the Sacrament, I demand of the^, what thing it is that is broken there?
In this point they stand in great doubt, and some there be, that has
said (as the Master of the sentences witnesses in the fourth book) that the
substance of Christ's body it is that is broken there, but this opinion is
disproued and overthrown of the said Master of the sentences, Christ's body
is now past being subject to any breaki^g or other casualtees.
in that yt Christ's body is immortal, and therefore it can not now any more be
subject to any such things as breaking, or to any other new casualtees Some
others again there have been, which have affirmed that same breakyng not to be
a true breakyng in verai deed: but only to appear so to be, and to seem so to
our sight. But this saying also may go emongst the refuse, because we may
not of congruence appoynte or make in this matier a perpetual and an endless
fashion of mocking and deludyng Christen people. But at last they say, that it
is nothing but the accidents only that are broken. And whereas they put and
hold the quantitee that is in the Sacrament to be a quantitee in manier only
Mathematical, that is to say, not real nor material in deed, but separated
and divided from all material substance, that may be seen or felt, and
consisting in our imaginacion only and in our understanding, which quantitee
if it be divided or broken in pieces, it is only so conceived in our reason,
and by virtue of our understanding: these breakers of the Sacrament, do so
break the said quantitee that the parts and pieces there of may most
manifestly and most euidentlye be seen to be veraily and truly broken in
deed, and soondred one from another.

The.xx. reason.
It is read in the Prophet Hieremy: Leat us put woodde into his bread, which
place is cited and rehearsed both of Tertullian and also of Lactanci^s:
Tertullian.

Lactantius.


and they make this exposicion upon it, that it was spoken of the wood of ye
cross, which was put to Christ's body, and these two writers do hold, that
the mention which is there made of bread, is for because that with bread or
through the use of a certain bread, Christ would give himself unto us
Christian people.

The transubstanciatours take the figures of the old Testamente clean awai^
And the same two writers do hold that in the Prophet Hieremies wordesis
contained a figure, a sign, or a token of the bread of the sacrament, which
bread when these transubstanciatours do take away, and leave behynd unto
us, only the figure or shape and fashion of bread, and not bread self: than
they make one figure to be a significacio^ of an other figure: and so no
substanciallnesse at al can be found to appear in the mat^er. And ye selfsame
thing may there be gathered out of that place, which is oftentimes alleged
and cited of old writers concerning Melchisedech who brought forth bread
and wine, whose figure is not accordingly observed nor kept of these men, when
they put away the bread and the wine, and say there is none such there
present in the Sacrament. And the same self thing follows ^e panibus
propositionis, that is to say, of the Show bread that was commanded in the
old testament, in the.xx^iii. chapitur of Leuiticus. The.xxi. ^rgumente.


We will now eftsons bring in for our purpose another reason taken of
baptism. We did a litel before argue, that to make baptism a true sacrament,
it was not r^quisite that the substance of the water should be changed: what
change here is i^ us at our baptism.
and now we will make a reason by the verai pa^ti^s selfs, which are
baptized: of whom the scripture plai^ly says, that they do cast of, and
put away the old man, and are regenerate, that is to say, new borne again:
and yet is there not conceived or imagined in the^m any manier
transubstanciacion, that any of them are changed into an ^ther substance of
body. And yet if ye ask a natural Philosophier, how generation is diffin^d,
Generacio^ what it is.
that is to say, what manier of thing generation is: he will au^swer and say yt
it is a kind of natural moving whereby a new substance is gotten and brought
forth. Wherefore it is nothing to be meruailled, that Nicodemus tripped and
stumbled by misu^derstandyng Christ's words, Nicodemus
in which words it was told him, yt he must be newborn again. For wha^ he
considered and thought in his mind, that there was a new generacio^ me^cioned
and talked of, for one that was a man of perfect generation and substance
already, and so far stricken in years ^he staggr^d at the matier and began to
be in a great doubt^ That if we interpret or expoune the said regeneracion and
new birth, to be none other but a spiritual birthe and natiuitee: why can
we not abide to do the same in this Sacrament of th^nkes giving? and why
do we not apply it all to a spiritual eating?

The agreable^^s of baptis^e and the sacrament of thanks giving
I have a great fancy in this behalf to join together these two Sacraments
of baptism and of thanks giving because that ye apostle Paul in the x^i.
chaptur of this Epis^le knitteth them both together when he says: We all are
baptized into one body, and all we have drounke into one spirit: Neither
does it make your part any thing the stronger, if ye will say, that we are
baptized into one body, meaning a body mystical: For Christ is not absent from
the mystical body neither, forasmuch as he is the head thereof. And Paul
in another place in most plain woord^s says, that in baptism we put on
Christ upon us.

Furthermore we see that all such men as write upon S^ripture do bring in
many things out of the sixth chapitur of Ihon concerning this Sacrament of
thanks giving, The.xxii. a^gumente.
yea, there is none of the old wryt^rs, which in declaryng the said sixth
chapitur of Ihon does not write largely of the Sacrament of thanks geuyng:
Whereupon we frame and make this reason: Such things as are there in the said
sixth chapitur spoken either do belong to this sacrament, or else do not
pertain to it. If it do noth^ng pertayne unto it: to what purpose is it to
cite the words of John therefore, or to make any discourse of the Sacrament
upon those places? But if on the other side it do^ pertayne to the Sacrament of
thanks geuyng: than forasmuch as the eating that is there spoken of, is
only a spiritual eating, that is to were^ through feith, and in feith only,
by which faith ye verai true body and blood of Christ is r^ceiued and ^aten:
why should any manne bring up any other new fashion of receiving it, and
im^gin a carnal eating, where with the same body should be^ taken again? For
if we grant that some godly and f^ithfull man does come to the sacrament:
than shall these men be constreined and driven to say, that he eats Chris^es
body twice, first with a spiritual eating in feith, and afterward with
their carnal eating, which carnal eating they have not yet hitherto proved.
And thus ye se that they lay such blocks in their own way, that they
cannot in any true sense cite or allege the said sentences which are
contained in the vi. chapi. of Ihons gospel concerning the Sacrament.

And besides the premises whiles th^i set up a transubstanciacion, The.xxiii.
reason against transubs^anciacio^.
they have no less but eue^ the same check for their error, the^ y^
Capernaites had. For the said Capernaites also do devise in their mind upon,
The error of the Cape^naites concer^ing the eat^ng of Ch^is^es fl^as^e.
I can not tell what manier a corporal or bodily eating of Christ's fleashe,
from the which opinion and imaginacion Christ called them back by and by,
when he said, that his words were spirit and life, and that the fleashe
profited nothing. Yea and ferther he did cast forth unto them an express
mention of his ascending up into heaven, saying: what if ye shall se the son
of man ascendinge up into heaven, where he was before? but these men say
that they are nothing of the opinion that the Capernaites were of. In obieccio^
of the adversaries.
For the Capernaites (say these men) did think that Chistes fleashe should
be cut and mynced in pieces, and should be toren with men's teeth: and
therefore it stood against their stomakes, The answ^^
and they did abhor the thing. But of the special imaginacion of the
Capernaites (whatsoever it were) our men cannot have any perfect knowlage: but
a verai lykely matier it is, that the Capernaites did carnally understand the
matier. And therefore they were admonished with mention of Christ's ascendinge up
into heaven. Why do not these men than take such lessons for their
instruccion out of that place, which dare affirm and say, that they eat
Christ both carnally and corporally? what does it skill or what difference is
it, whether one take Christ's body by piece meal; or whether he swalowe it
down al whole, if he mean the thing carnally and fleashly, as ye Capernaites
did?

The.xxiiii. argument against transubstanciac^on.
This also comes now in place to be considered, that Christ said unto his
Apostles, a litell before his passion, that he would leave the world, and would
depart a way from them: which words of Christ should be safe, if he were
still remaining here emonge us by chaungyng of the breades substance into the
substance of his own fleashe, Christ leaf^ the world. An obieccio^.
as th^se men would have it. They have customably used to answer, that
Christ leafte the world as concerning the state or propeties of mortalitee,
and of familiaritee with mortal men, and of bodily conversation. In these are
good subtle and fine puinctes of sophistry but they make nothing at all for
the purpose. The answer
For when Christ had spoken these words: Philip answered: Lo now thou
speak plainly, and without any parables. But if Christ's words were to be
understood after your mind: and interpretacion: his talk hadd been dark,
and his words spoken in parables. Morouer, if Christ do in such sort tarry
and remain corporally with us in the sacrament: than by the same or like reason
he may also tarry both in our hertes and al so in us. Therefore he might even by
himself in his own person have rewled and gou^rned the church after his
ascension, and yet still unto this day, and might have stand corporally with
his Apostles, and have been present with them, after his asc^nsion. Yet
nevertheless he said that he would give them another that should be with
the^ in his stead, menyng that he would send down the holy ghost, which holy
ghost had not been necessary, if Christ all togethers both in his godhead
and manhood were here present, as these me^ would have it. For seeing that his
fleashe and body is in every one of us, yea and also his godhead is present
with us by a certain communitee (as their own doc^rine is: he might have
wrought by his own persone^ without any inspiracions or admonicions of the
holy ghost.

Marie the mother of Christ being a most blissed virgin, The.xxvii. argument.
when she had heard of the Angel that y^ soonne of god should be incarnate,
and should take the nature of man upon him, and that she was chose^ to
conceive and to bring forth ye son of god: she thought in her mind y^ these
things were verai strange and wonderful. And therefore she demanded of the
Au^gel how this thing should be done. Some merueiling or so^ question, should
be made in the scripture about t^a^subs^anciacion.
Than forasmuch as this change of bread into Christ's body is no less worthy
to be weighed, nor is no lighter the^ ye mystery of Christ's incarnacion and
natiuitee to be borne of a virgin: it is a matier wo^derous y^ there is not in
y^ holy scripture either su^ wo^dering or else some question made about it.
Neither is this beleuyng of transubstanciacion commended unto us in any the
writings either of the Evangelists, or of the Apostles: though it be a ma^ier
of great weight and importance. Neither do we harken or pass upon some men's
words, An obieccio^
which say, that the question was moved before in the sixth chap. of John's
gospel. For they will wrest or turn away the answer which was there made of
spiritual eating, to this sacramental eating, which sacramental eating they
put to be much differing from that other spiritual eating.

The answer
Therefore that question and answer, makes all on our side: but it nothing
profits these men, who do feign another manner of eating much differyng
from that spiritual eating For they imagine this carnal eating whereof we now
talk.

The.xxvi. argument.
There follow also other inconueniencies and unreasonable things of these men's
feigning or inuencio^. For Christ said: I will that where I am, there my servant
should be also. And this he spoke more then once or twice to his Apostles, and
it is read in the reuelacion of Saint John (called the Apocalipse) of certain
Martirs: Sequunt^^ dum quocum que ie^it: that is, they follow him whether
soever he goes. Whereof it might be argued and concluded that this chau^ging
from one substance to another substance, as from bread into fleashe, should
not only be into Christ's body, but also the same should redound toward all
the Saints also, that is to say, all holy persons. Wherewith if they be
offended, leat them on gods behalf lea^e Christ in heaven with his Saints,
and holy ones, or else the Saints will follow after him because that
whersoeuer he becomes, thither do they also follow him. But than say they:
And so we do: we leave Christ in heaven visible, and in his majesty and
glory: but yet we put him here in the Sacrament invisible. And than as
concerning such things as be objected of Saints and Martirs folowinge
Christ, they say, that it is al true, as touching Christ so f^rrefoorth as he
is visible in heaven in his glory and majesty. But this answer stands upon
a weak and rotten foundation: for it supposes that the body of Christ,
being but one body, may be in many places at one time, which thing the
ancient fathers and writers deny. It presupposes also, that Christ is with us
as touching his body and fleashe, whereas Christ said, that as touching
those things in that behalf he would send another in his stead, meaning the
holy ghost.

Neither can they by their reason avoid but that Christ had two bodies.
The.xxvii. argument.
For at the Supper when he had taken bread in his hands, if the same bread
had by transubstanciation ben changed into the substance of Christ's body:
than should it follow and be true, that himself should with his own body
have borne and carried his own body: How Christ bears him el^e in his own
hades and how he eats himself.
and so should ye needs grant, that one and the selfsame body it was that did
bear and hold it in his hands, and that was borne and holden in his hands
and yet can it not by any reason or possibility be true, that one and the same
body is both the doer and the sufferer in respect of one thing, An obieccio^
of the adversaries.
and both at one time. And thus we see into what ^nconueniencies they cast
themselfes. The a^swe^
They be wont to bring for their part the words of Austen, upon the
Psalms, which words of Austen are, that Christ bore himself in his own
hands. But if that place be well considered, which is upon the threescore
and thirtenth psalm. It is there written that he bare himself in his own
hands: quodam modo that is to say, after a certain manier, or after a sort
or fashion: and so much do we grant. For he bore and held in his hands the
Sacrament of his body: but he did not bear ne hold his verai true body,
proprie et reasiter, that is to say, properly and really. And here might one
bring in again these men also, that by their reason, forasmuch as Christ
received the Sacrament and communion with his Apostles, it should follow that
Christ did eat himself. ^n obieccio^.
But herunto this was wount to be their au^swer. ^he answer
These things are exercises of our feith. But we say unto them again, that
we have far other manier se^te^ces of the scripture, wherein our feith may
exercise it self: The true exe^cises of ou^ feith.
rather then in such things as are of man's fantastical devise and
inuencion. We believe that the soon of god was incarnate of a virgin, that he
was borne of a virgin, that he suffered for us, that he died, that he was
raised up from death to life again, and that he ascended up into heaven, with
many things more of such like sort, in which our feith does sufficiently
and aboundauntly exercise it self.

And forasmuch as this change from substance to substance can not with our
senses be altered unto, The.xxviii. argument.
neither man's reason can understand it, neither experience does teach it:
how shall it be perceived? I know yt ye will say, yt it may be understood
and co^prehe^ded or conceived by feith. But in case ye matier must go by
feithe, that same feithe cannot be had without gods word, and i^ gods word ye
have not one jot for you

Morouer whereas Christ made this sacrament of two parts, The.xix. argument.
yt is to wete, his body for one part, and his blood for the other part: it
does by the same thing appear plainly enough, yt the matier must not be taken
or understood by this kind of transubstanciation. For in the real^ and
carnal body of Christ: these two parts be not divided or soondred the one
from the other. An obieccio^.
But a poor shifte they have and a stertyng hole: and they say, that there is
as much contained in any one of these two parts: as there is in y^ other
part. In deed we hear them thus affirm and this to hold: but ye words of
scripture do not teach any such matier, Another obieccio^.
but only at ye bread there is mention made of ye body, and only at ye cup,
there is blood perticulerly me^cioned and specified: but they have yet a
ferther answer to obi^ct against us, which is as touching ye bread, yt by the
strength, and virtue of the words, The answer
there is a transubstanciacion of bread into Christ's body or i^to Christ's
fleashe merlye and really and of it self: and then yt both the blood and the
soul and the deity or godheade of Christ do follow after, even as a shadow is
wont to go with the body in the Sunshyne. Per co^comitanciam.
And than also concerning the cup, they say, that by the strength and virtue
of the words, there is first of all and properlye a mere transubstanciacion
and change of the wine into blood: but afterward the body follows withal,
Against co^comitaunce that the school men speak of to be of
tra^substanciacion.
and is there also, and the solle, and the deitee or godhead, even by the same
reason and way as the blood and solle and godheade did follow with the
transubstanciacion of the bread into Christ's body, as is before said.

Which the schoolemenne in their term do say to be dooen per
concomitantiam, Per concomitanciam.
as if ye should say in English) by a necessitee of following after, so that
even like as a body cannot go into the Sunshine, but that the shadow of
the same body must needs follow and go withal: so can not the body (say
they) be but the blood goes withal: nor ye blood be, but yt the fleash and
body goes wtall. And thus by this their subtle and fine sophistical manier
of speaking, th^i make Christ not so wise nor provident, as he might or should
have been in that that he delivered and gave in two soondrie parts, no more
then is in either of the same parts severally contained. And out of their own
feynyng and imaginacio^ it sprang, that afterward they divided ye sacrament,
and by ministering unto the lay people the one part of the Sacrament only,
they persuaded the same and made them bele^e, that they received as much in
that one part, as if they had received both parts of the Sacrament according
to Christ's institucion. It may also ferther be said against them, that by
this their inuencion and imaginacion, they open a wyndoore, and do minister
occasion to many opinions of strange feyned doctrine. For there is none
opinion, nor no point of doctrine whereunto they may not tie and link an
infinite sort of things with their term of concomitaunce before mentioned. And
(as we said before) it would thereby follow that all the Saints are present
in this Sacrament for as much as they continually from time to time follow and
awayte upon Christ. But one argument and reason there is, sufficient an hable
enough wherewith to beat them from their purpose: which is, that this is a
point of their own inuencion and teaching, but the Scripture has not, made ne
does make any mencio^ of any such gear.

Another false and ill-favored opinion also follow eth this said
transubstanciacion, The.xxx. reason against trans^bstaunciacion.
in that they have supposed and thought, that after the receiuynge of the
Sacrament, the Sacrament did remain still, and that the bread or the
likenesses of bread did really and veraily conteyne Christ's body in it.
Which thing not to be so but much otherwise, we prove by the use of the other
Sacraments, where all the whole matier does co^siste only in the accion and
dooyng: Which accion finished the sacrament does by and by cease, and does
no more remain a sacrament. First in baptism, As soon as one is baptized in
water according to Christ's words and ordinance: and the accion of baptism
once accomplished, it ceasseth immediately to be a sacrament. And the same
thing was likewise in circumcision. For that sacrament also had his strength
and virtue for so long time, Sacraments are no longer Sacraments, then while
they are in doing.
whiles it was in doing and no longer. Neither will I disdeigne or think
skorne for the proof hereof to take which they themselfes call sacraments, as
confirmacion, (which we have used in English to call bishopping,) and also
the sacrament of extreme vn^tio^. (Which we have accustomed to call enoylyng,)
and also the sacrament of penance. With other like sacraments, all which
sacraments we see to take place only for the time whiles they be in doing,
and no longer. An obieccio^
But they be wont to say that this sacrament of thanks geuynge must be
in this behalf excepted. Thau^swere
But how reasonably and how Logician like the adversaries so say may easily
be understood. For seeing that all the parts of other like exaumples and
sacramentes^ granted, and an excepcion made of that same thing only which is
in doubt and controversy: Who sees not, that it is vnconueniently doo^n, and
only to defeacte out argument with a blyndcinque (as the common proverb
says?) For it is in a manier as much as if one would grant the first parts
and members of an argument: and yet deny the conclusion that by good reason
must necessarily follow of the same.

And by reason of this transubstancion being such a strange and monstreous
matier, The.xxxi. argument.
as the like has never bee^ heard of, the chief purpose and final end that
Christ set forth to us in holy scripture, is stopped and let, which
undoubtedly was, that we should have Christ and his death in remembrance and
in use amongst us. The chief end and purpose of the sacrament of thanks
^eu^n^,
For as the matier is now used all these men's minds is altogether occupied
and bestowed in beleuyng of this transubstanciacion. Yea and some priests ye
may see, which, when they come to ministering of the communion, they harp
altogether upon this only string, to beat into men's heads to believe this
only point, leattyng pass other matiers and uses of this sacrament, which
are much more necessary.

And because of this toye and fond imaginacion, the receyuyng of the Communion,
The.xxxii. argument.
is more s^^dome used then it should be. For when that toye and fantasy of
transubstanciacion was once sonke and settled in men's headdes, they begone
streightwayes to think this in their minds: If Christ be yonder bodylye and
even in verai fleashe covered with whiteness and such other accidents of
bread: how can we be better occupied then in going to the temple to see, to
wurship, to pray or call upon Christ, to light candels before him, and to do
such other things where with we may show forth the loving hearts that we
have toward Christ. Of the which opinion if they had not been, but had
thought it to be (as in deed it is) only a sacrament: they should have
perceived that they could receive no profit or commoditee of it, but by
receiuynge it in the Communion: The often taking of the communion is le^ted by
supposing a tra^substanciacion.
and so should their minds have been much more enflamed and enkiendeled to
the receyuynge of the communion which is the very true and only way to
fulfill and acco^plishe Christ's institucio^ concerning this sacrament.

Ferthermore, The xxxiii. argument.
ye must call to your remembrance and consideracion, that the time of Christ's
humility in which he abased and humbled himself so low, is now past and
gone. He reigns now in heaven, and he has now a name which is above all
names. Therefore, what need was it to bring him down again, by mean of
transubstanciacion (as touching the body) into the mouths and bealyes of
such as receive the sacrament of Communion? I know that they be wont to say,
An obieccio^ of the adu^^saries.
that Christ takes no hurt nor derogacion thereby, nor he takes no
filthiness nor uncleanness. I grant that Christ can take no hurt ne
derogacion: Thau^swe^e
but yet is it not fit nor comely for Christ, to be holde^ so long under the
said accidents (as they say he is) so long as the same accidents remain still
in their perfeccion, The v^comly pulling dow^e of Christ out of heaven every
day by tra^substa^ciacion.
and as soon as the same accidents are dissolved or perished, the body of
Christ immediately to pass and vanishe a way, (as they say it does.) But how
comes it to pass, y^ they enforce and compel Christ daily (and specially
til.xi. or.xii. of the clock, or till dinner time,) to come flighe down from
heaven, and up again continually? An obieccio^
But they allege that a man ought to put such fancies and thoughts out of his
mind, whereas themselves do put them into men's heads with their car^all
and fleashly transubstanciacion. If they might be brought to believe, Thau^swere
that we ought there to do all things spirituallye: there would no such
manner fausie or thought enter into any man's mind.

And whiles they hold this their opinion: that Christ's natural and fleashely
body is present in the sacrament: The.xxxiiii argument.
I would ask this question: whether they hold it for any such menyng, that
his fleashly body should perce or enter into our mind, or else that it should
conueye it self and perce into our body? They can not auouche that Christ's
fleashely body enters into the mind: For in the mind or solle nothing can
be received fleashely and bodily. That if they will affirm Christ's body to
p^rce and enter into our body: we demand of them, what operacion will it
work in our body? Sanctificacion begins of the ^^ll and not of the body
and what effect shall it weorke there? They will answer, that Christ's
body enters into our bodies, to the end that a man may be made holy
thereby. But it is mete and conueniente that holiness take his beginning first
of the mind or solle, and not of the body.

The.xxxv. argument against transubstanciacion.
They will ferther say, that a certain strength and efficacy is thereby
empriented in the body, through which efficacy the mind is the better, and
the body also is confyrmed and made strong. But if ye talk or mean of virtue,
An obieccio^.
it is nothing necessary yt it be brought to pass or wroughtby the mean of
transubstancion, Thau^swere
seeing it may be brought to pass even as well without it.

And the old writers when they did setie forth and teach the nature and
property of the sacrament^: they said, The.xxxvi. argument.
that an unbloody sacrifice was here sacrificed which thing will be found
far wide, An vnblody sacrifice.
if we hold that the verai true and corporal blood of Christ is contained in
the Sacrament. Neither does that point satisfy this matier, that they
affirm the sacrifice to be unbloody, in that that Christ is not killed in
it, An obieccio^
neither is his blood violently shed or poured out. For though these things
be not done yet the sacrament is not ministered (after their gross and
bluntishe opinion) without blood. Thau^swere
Wherefore it is plain yt the old writers meant that only a memorial or
remembrance of the true sacrifice is contained in this sacrament, and that
there is here a spiritual receiuynge of the true sacrifice which spiritual
receiuyng is comprehended and understood by feith only.

Beside this, The.xxxvii. argument.
they be wont to say, that the body and blood of Christ be unvisible and
not seen, but to the yie, but with whiteness, moisture, and such other
accidents of bread and wine, lest we should seem to eat raw fleashe and to
drink blood. But I would not think these men to say that we do not eat
raw fleashe, whether we eat raw fleash in the Sacrament
(how soever they painte and color the matier) if their transubstancio^ be a
true and a perfeict change in deed of the bread into fleashe, and of the wine,
into blood. For it is neither declared of them, neither showed in the
scriptures: how that same fleashe is boiled or roasted. And yet it was written
in the old testamente of the lamb of passover, (which was a figure of this
sacrament) that no raw thing should be eaten of that lamb.

We se also, that in this matier of thanks geu^ng Christ did ordeyne and
set up a sacrament, It is mete that in the sacraments all things be taken
sacramentally
whereby it comes to pass, that all things therein must be understood
and taken sacramentally. Neither should there be in Sacraments any thing more
either granted or required: then to the nature or property of a sacrament
does apperteine.

The.xxxix. argument.
Moreover, if we would consider what Christ did at that his last supper: We
should soon and easily perceive the matier. It is said yt he gave his body.
If we ferther ask this question: What manier a body did he g^ue? they can
shape no ready answer to escape with out a foil. Some seem to say, yt he gave
such manier a body as he than had, which undoubtedly was both passible
(that is to say, subject to hungre, thurst, cold, and other torments,) and
also mortal, (that is to say, subject to death.) But such manier a body
(with such manier properties as Christ had at that time) could not (as these
men dream) be fleashly and really contained in little cakes of bread. But
some others (which think themselves men of a wyser sort,) say that Christ
had in himself a body both passible and mortal (as is aforesaid,) but yet
they say, that in the bread he gave his body gloryfied and spiritual.

But than does that saying make against these men, which we read in the
words of the Lord: This is my body, which is delivered for you, and this is
my blood, which shall be shed for you, by which words he plainly ^eweth
and declares himself to mean the body which he had than at that present,
and the blood, which he used at that honre. For Christ had not these things
glorified and vnpassible till after his resurreccion. But leat us suppose that
the matier were as they hold. Than do we thus argue. The state and properties
of a passible body, and of a glorified body, be contrary the one to the
other^ so that they can not in one respect be in one body together and at
one time: wherefore it follows, if ye will have both the said contraries of
passible and glorified to be in Christ's body both at one self time: that
ye make Christ's body a double body.

Experience also and the veraye hystories do ^ewe us, The.x^. argume^te.
that this transubstanciation is not to be granted. For it is written in the
hystories, that Uictor the Bishop of Rome dyed of drinking poison out of
the Chalice at his Mass. And Henry the Emperor received poison by eating the
bread of the Sacrament. If all things there be changed by
transubstanciacion, and nothing there leafte remaining but only the
accidents. How could such things as these have been dooen?

Furthermore we know that all Sacraments be made and do consiste of two
parts, The.x^^. argume^te.
that is to wete, of matier, and of form (as the very adversaries selfs are
wont to term it in their School terms.)

And by the matier they mean the outward signs or elements and stuff that
goes to it, Ma^ier.
as the bread and wine in this sacrament. By the form Form.
they mean that same that is added to the signs or elements of bread and wine
by pronouncing of the words which make it a sacrament.

Now to our purpose, that that is made of two parts: ought not, nor can so
cast away the one part, that nothing but the only accidents of the same shall
remain for than ye nature and property of the framing and joining together of
the said matier and form in the sacrament should not be observed and kept.
The mati^r of the sacrament cannot be cast away no more then the form.
Wherefore the conclusion follows, that the substaunces of bread and wine
must needs remain still in the sacrament.

And whiles they thus over shoot themselfes for lack of taking head, the body
of Christ is by them deprived and spoiled of his quantity, The
tra^substa^ciatoures deprive chris^es body of his quantity.
of his situacion and placyng, and of the distaunce and proporcionyng of the
parts and members of his body one from another, so that all his whole body
must by that means be compelled and driven to be contained and enclosed in a
very little piece of bread.

This Sacrament is not only said to be the Sacrament of the body of our
savior Christ, but also of the mistical body of Christ: Wherefore Paul in
thissame his former epistle to the Corinthians said: Ye be the body of
Christ, and also: We being many, are one lofe and one body, all we that be
partakers of one bread or lofe. And Austen Aus^en.
in the tenth chapter of the two and twentieth book of his woorcke entitled,
Quia ips^ id sunt vide lice^ corpus christi.
De ciu^ta^e de^. says, that Christian me^ne do not offer sacrifice to the
martyrs. But the sacrifice is Christ's body, which body is not offered to the
martyrs: for martyrs them selves (says Austen) are Christ's body mystical.
Now therefore, seeing that this sacrame^te does comprehend and conteyne
indifferentlye both bodies, that is to wete, Christ's own body, The bread is
not changed into ch^istes body, no more the^ into the body m^stical.
and the body mistical tooe: even as they be not wont to hold that the
substance of the bread is changed into the substance of the mystical
body: so it shall not be necessary to require, that the substance of ye
bread be changed or turned into the body of Christ, seeing that this
sacrament is said to be the sacrament of both these two bodies indifferently.

And of this opinion it would follow, The.xliiii. argument.
that not only the fayethfull and beleuynge sort, but also the infideles that
lack faith, may receive Christ's body, which thing I have at large disproued
in an other place, with two sundry arguments: the one that seeing Christ's
body can not be divided from his spirit, it would then follow that the
ungodly or wicked lyuers do receive the spirit of Christ also.

Secondarelye, that where as the Infideles be as dead persons (as touching
the inward man) they utterly lack the tool or instrument, wherewith they
should receive spiritual things. ^^sten None re^iue Christ's body but such
as are of Christ's body.
And Austens saiynge is playnelye, that no folk, eat Christ's body: saving
such as are of Christ's body. Jerome
And Hierome in the two and twenty Chapter of his fourth book upon Jeremy
says: And where the prophet brings in and says. They shall not eat and
drink, etc. it is to be understand the body and blood of our savior. For in
that place he spoke of herityckes, and the same Hierom also in the threskore
and sixth chapter upon Esai. And as long as they be not holy both in body and
in spirit, they do nether eat Christ's fleashe, nor drink Christ's blood.
And a number there be in the old aunci^nte writers, of such like places as
these.

The.xlv. Argument
And where as they do often times in this matter bring forth many miracles
against us: men must not be so quycke, nor so light of credence, as to believe
every thing. For miracles are not wounte to be brought forth, but because
they be strange things and wonderful, by reason of whose seldom effect, and
unwonted coming to pass: Gods word may be the more esteemed and regarded.
For at such times when such miracles chance: men be stricken with a great
wonderynge. And thereby men are easelye or quyckely persuaded to regard, and
to believe christ's sayings, and doctrine.

But in this sacrament there is nothing changed as far as our eye can
judge, neither is there any such change made, as might provoke us to any
wonderynge. Wherefore these tra^substantiatours seem in vain to seek any
healpe for their purpose by miracles. It is in vain for the
transubsta^tiatours to seek healpe of miracles for their tra^subtiatiatio^
A true matter it is in deed that the vyrgin Marye did conceive of the holy
ghost: but she her self did perceive and feel that so it was.

And in case any man have at any time been converted to Christ: they have
perceived and felt that their mind, and their life has changed from their
old conversation.

But in this Sacrament, there is not perceived any one of these miracles
which they feygne. Only they set out two words, but not one of them all
can be proved, either by any reason, or by experience, or by scripture.

Ye may see moreover, The.xlvi. argument against tra^substantiation.
that look what respect or proportion there is, between the breaking of the
bread, and the death and passion of Christ. Even the same respect and
proportion there is between the bread and Christ's body.

But the breaking of the bread, (as these men them selves grant also) is
a Sacrament and a sign of Christ's breaking or sufferynge upon the cross,
and yet there is no such transubstanciation of the same, into Christ's
passion, yt the breakyng of ye bread should make the said passion, or
sufferynge of Christ to be really there present: therefore shall not the bread
neither be changed into Christ's body to make his body carnallye present.

And so, seeing that this opynion has nothing in it but only pratlynge and
babblynge about tryfles, and brings men, as it were into a maze, that they
can not get out of, when they are once in, it avails nothing at al nor
helps to the furderau^ce of devotion or godliness.

But now as concerning the ancient fathers and writers, The.xlvii. argument
Ireneus.
it behooves us to see whether they were of the same opinion or no. Irenaeus
against the herytykes called Valentinians, said: that the earthlye bread when
it takes his name of Gods word: is now no longer commune bread, such as
men co^m^nely use to eat: but it is now made the sacraments of thanks
geuyng, which in y^ greek is called Eucharistia. Eucharistia
Which Eucharistia or sacrament of thanks giving is made of two parts, the
one earthly, and the other heavenly. etc. Here first and formoste, he denies
not that the sacrament of thanks geuynge, called Eucharistia (as is
aforesaid) is bread, except ye will make it, or suppose it to be such commune
bread, as men do communely use to eat at their repastes. And afterward he
says, that the said sacrament does consyste of two things, of which two
things, the one is earthlye, and that is the bread, the other is heavenly,
as Christ's body. And like as the veritye is kept in the tone part (that is
to wete, as touching Christ's body) even so must the veritye be kept in the
other part also (that is to wete, as touching the bread).

And he adds by a similitude, or comparison. And so our bodies (says he)
receyuynge the sacrament of thanks geuynge, are now no longer subject to
corruption.

Tertullian
Tertullian in the first book against Marcion says, that God did not cast
away the bread (being Gods creature) for as much as with that bread Christ
represe^ted his body, and in the fourth book against the same. Marcion, he
says, When Christ had taken bread, and had divided it among his disciples,
he made that bread his body, by saying: This is my body, That is to say,
the figure of my body, but it should not be a figure of his body, unless
the body had been a very true body, in deed.

Origin
Origin upon the book of Numeri in the.xvi. homily we are said, yt we do not
only drink Christ's blood, when it is ministered unto us in the ordinarye
giving of the Sacraments: but also when we receive his words. Which self
same thing also Hierome wrote in one place, upon the third chapitur of
Ecclesiastes. The same Origin also upon the.xxvi. Chapitur of Matthew, has
these words: Panis iste, quem deus verbum Corpus suum esse fatetur, verbum est
nutritorium animarum: that is to say, this bread which god the word
(which is Christ) does plainelye affirm and say be his body, is a
word good and wholesome to nourishe our souls. The same Origin also in the
seuenthe homely upon the book of Moses entitled Leuiticus thus speaks: For
even in the ghospels also there is a litteral sense which kills, and not in
the old testament only. For if ye follow the litteral sense in this sentence,
unless ye eat my fleash. etc. And in the same book in ye nynth homely: do not
thou staigh nor dwell in the blood of the fleashe, but learn rather the blood
of the word, and hear himself saying unto thee, that this is my blood
which is shed forth for you. The same Origin again upon the fiftienth
chapitur of Matthewe: The bread that is hallowed, passes into the bealie (as
touching his material part) and is cast forth into the draught. etc. And
within a few words after he says thus. Neither is it the matter or
substance of the bread, but it is gods word spoken upon the said bread,
which profits those that eat the same not unworthily. The same Origin in
another place against Celsus in the eight book: Celsus.
when we have given thanks for the benefits of God bestowed upon us, we eat
the bread which was offered. Ciprian


Cyprian in the syxte Epistle of the first book to Magnus has these words:
The lord having bread made of many graynes of wheat joined together does
call it his body, and having wine which was trodden and pressed out of many
clusters of grapes, he calls it his blood. And the same Ciprian where he
declares and expouneth the Lords prayer, calls the Lords body bread, And
in his sermon of the Lords supper he says, that we do not whette or
sharpen our tethe, but says, that we break or eat the bread only with
a pure faith. The same Cipria^ in a sermon which he entitleth de chrismate that
is, of the Chrisme, says plainly that Sacraments have the names of those
things, which things they sygnifye. Whych^ two points (of calling it
bread, and of eating it with sincere faith only) it seems that Austen did
borow and take of him, the last thing Austen has in his epistle to Boniface
and the other thing, when he said Quid paras dentem, aut vetrem? Creed, et
manducasti.
That is to say, why do thou make ready thy toth or thy bealye: believe
thou, and thou have eaten it. And these words are in the five and twentye
treasyse upon John. But the same Cipria^, in his third epistle of the second
book, to Cecilius says: that the blood of Christ is showed or set forth
in the wine. And against those men which were called Aquarii, he holds
that the blood of Christ can not appear to be present in the cup or
chalyce, if the wine cease to be there: which thing should so come to pass,
by the transubstantiation which these men do put. And in his sermon upon the
Lords supper^ he writes that the signs be changed into Christ's body, but
yet in such wise, that he takes his similitude of Christ him self, in whom
the humanity or human nature appeared, and the godheade was not to be seen,
but was invisible. By which similitude ye see, that he means, that like as
two natures remained in Christ, so also in this Sacrament two natures be
reserved,

Also Ciprian in the third epistle of the second book has these words: After
such sort as neither flower or meal alone, or water alone can be Christ's
body, unless both things be ioygned, and coupled to gyther and made into one
whole mass or lumpte, by knyttynge it together into one bread or lofe, with
the which self same bread being now put to the use of a Sacrament, our
people is playnelye showed and declared to be a people ioygned together in one.

Athanasius also declarynge these words of Christ. Athanasius
If any man speak a word against the son of man, it shall be forgeuen him,
but he which speaks against the holy ghost, shall never have it pardened or
for given him in this world, nor in the world to come, writes in this manner.
And how great a body should it be to bring to pass that all the world should
eat and feed thereof. But he brings in afterward, that the matter should be
understood spiritually, and that Christ in that place therefore made mention
and spoke of his ascension against the Capernaites.

Basilius.
Basilius in his book entitled liturgia calls the bread (...) Corpus Christi
the exaumple or pattern or counterpaine of Christ's body. And this he says to
be after the words of con^ecracion are once paste.

Dio^isius
Dionisius in his weorke entitled de hierarchia Eclesiastica in the third
chapitur says: The bishop opens the bread which was covered and undivided,
and cutteth it in pieces.

Ambrose.
Ambrose declaryng the first epistle to the Corinthia^s, says: Since the
entente of the matter is, that this thing be dooen for a memorial and
remembrance of Christ and of Christ's death: we in eatinng and drinkyng the
Sacrament do signifye the fleashe and blood of Christ, which were offered on
the Cross. And the same man about the same place, says, that we drink of
Christ's mystical cup for a figure of Christ's blood. And in the fourth
chapitur of the fourth book entitled de sacramentis, that is to say, of the
sacraments, where he puts the change of the signs, he treats also of
our chaungynge into Christ, and yet is there not any transubstanciacion said
to be in such as receive the Sacrament. And the same man in the same fowerth
book of the Sacraments, and the fourth chapitur, says: leat us therefore
make this by good reason, how that thing which is now bread may be Christ's
body by consecracion of certain words pronounced over it. And not many lines
after, he says: If so great a strength and virtue be in the words of the
lord that things begin to be that they were not before: how much more than
can he weorke and bring to pass, that those things may still remain the
same that they were before, and yet may be changed into an other thing too.

Hierome upon Mathewe says plainly, Hierome.
that the body and blood of Christ is represented by the bread, and by the
wine.

Chrysostom upon the second epistle to the Corhinthians says: Ch^isostom
that not only that thing is Christ's body which is set before the
Christians at the lords table: but also that the pore folcke are his body, to
whom we are bound to show and to minister the worckes of charity. For even
the same Christ which said, this is my body, said also by his word, that
he was in need and necessity when poor folcke lacked: and that he had
kyndenes and benefyte showed to him self, when they received our almesdedes.
The same Chrysostom in the eleventh homely upon Mathewe, in the work which
is entitled, Imperfectum says thus. It is not christ's body and christ's
blood, which is contained in the holy vesels, Sed misterium corporis et
sanguinis Christi, that is to say, But it is the mystery of Christ's body, and
blood. The same Chrysostom in the.xxvii. homely upon the eleventh chapitur
of the second epistle to the Corinthyans. For as christ both in the bread,
and also in the cup said. Do ye this in remembrance of me, as often as ye
shall eat of this bread, and drink of this cup. etc. The same upon the.xxii.
psalm. Thou have prepared an eating table in my sight, that he might show
forth daily to us in the sacrament bread and wine according to the order or
fashyon used of Melchisedek for a similitude, of christ's body and blud.

Emisenus
And Emisenus whom they cite or allege out of the canon law, in the title,
De consecratione and in the second distinction, where he seems to put a
change of the symboles or signs, and matter of the Sacrament, even the same
manne makes mention of our chaungynge into christ.

Austen.
Austen has many testimonies of this mattier first upon the.lxxxix. psalm.
Ye shall not eat this body which you see with your eye, neither shall ye drink
the same very blud, which the Jews will shede forth upon the cross. But the
thing which I speak unto you is a mystery, and an high secret point,
which if it be spirituallye understood, shall quicken you to life. Also in
the third book, de trinitate, Panis ad hoc factus in sacramento accipiendo
consumitur. that is to say, the bread which was made for this purpose, is
consumed away, when the sacrament is received. Neither is there any title or
reason, why Fysher late bishope of Rochester should so have gone about to rack
this sentence, and to apply it to the show breades of the old law, which
were called, Panes prepositionis. For we have before this declared and by
diverse reasons proved, that his declaration does not, ne can be agreeable to
serve for that matter. First because that if thou follow the easy and plain
sense of the words, and that sense of the letter, which offers it self,
and comes to thy mind at the first sight or readinge: thou shalt see
plainelye, that Austen there speaks of Eucharistia, which is this Sacrament
of thanks geuynge, as is before said. And it is a word much used to signyfye
the Sacrament of Christ's body. etc.

And Erasmus in the worckes of Austen which he corrected, and set forth of
new, when he comes to the words above cited, ^^asmus
has for a note in the margente of the book directlye against the said
clause set this word, Eucharistia. to signifye that the said clause is
mente, of this Sacrament of Christ's body and blood.

Moreover the said Austen a little after, in the same Chapitur, and while he
yet treats upon the same matter, does so plainly make mention of
Eucharistia, that the very adversary can not deny it, nor say against
it. And he had written of the same Eucharistia, before in the fourth
chapitur of the self same book: when he began to treat of the same matter.
Ye may add to this also, that the word Sacrament is of purpose expreslie
mente, and playnelye named in these words of Austen which we have now in hand.
For if he would this word Sacrament to be taken co^munely, it might even as
well in every behalf have been applied to those other things which Austen in
that place had rehearsed before, (as for example to the brazen serpente, and to
the stone that was erected up by Jacob) as it might be applied or referred to
the loves of proposition, or the show breades before mentioned.

But Austen when he spoke and treated of those other things, did not make any
express mention of this word Sacrament, which word afterward in this
clause, he would in no wise leave out, because he would us to understand
him directlye to speak of Eucharistia,

Fynallye, to conclude the very words of Austen are these: The bread which
was made for this purpose is cousumed in receyuynge of the sacrament, or when
the Sacrament is received, which thing does in no wise agree, nor can not
be applied to the show breades of the old Testamente. For the laws of the
show bread were not made to any such use or end that they should be eaten,
but that they being set upon a table, should remain there before the
Lord, and so continue from time to time in that place, for the which cause
they were called in the Hebrew tongue. Panim. Pa^im


Afterward by a little chance (as ye would say) and of an other occation it
came to pass, that they were eaten, for this cause doubtelesse, to avoid
lest they should putrefye before the Lord. And for that cause, were they
changed weakelye. And when they were once offered, and dedicated to God, he
would have this honor given to them, that they should be eaten of the
priests. But the bread of our sacrament of Eucharistia, is made verily for
this only purpose and end, that it should be eaten and spente in receyuinge
of the sacrament. And to the arguments that I have already made, I add and
ioygne this one more also, which is of more force.

For saint Austen speaks by the present tense, and says, it is spente,
and not, it was spente, which ought to have been said, if he had spoken of
the figure and ceremonye of the old Testamente. In the ninteenth chapitur of
his book entitled, De side, that is to say, of fayeth, to one Peter, he
callethe it the Sacrament of bread and wine.

He does enstruc^e the said Peter in the feithe, of the memory of Christ, and
of his death eue^ at large: but yet of this transubstanciacion, the which
these men do now at this day so earnestly harp upon, and labor to bring in,
he speaks not so much as one word. In the twentieth book against Faustus,
and the one and twentieth chapitur, he declares that the fleashe and blood of
Christ was promised to us in the old testament under the similitude of the
sacrifices, and given to us in deed upon the cross, and in the sacraments to
be celebrated under a remembrance or memorial of him. And in the five and
twentieth chapitur of the one and twentieth book de ciuitate dei, he plainly
affirms that the wicked and ungodly sort do not eat the very thing of
the sacrament, that is to say, the body of Christ. For that man (says he)
ought not to be thought to eat the body of Christ which is not in the
body of Christ, and in whom Christ does not dwell, nor he in Christ. And
in the twentieth treactise upon Ihon, he has even the like saying And in the
thirtieth treactise, he says that the body of Christ is in one certain
place in heaven, but the verity of it to be sprede abroad in every place.
Which thing he says for this consideracion, because the truth is a spiritual
thing, and is continually evermore with the feithfull. And they that do
receive the communion, wheresoever they be, do confess Christ, and believe
that he had a true body and not a counterfaicte or a fantastical body, as the
Heritikes did suppose. In the book against Adimantius one of the Manychies
sect in the twelfth chapitur, he writes in this manner: The Lord did not
doubt to say, this is my body, whereas yet he gave them but the sign of his
body. Neither is it of any force if one would say, he gave them both the
sign and the thing. For Austen had no respect hereunto, but his mind was to
declare, that it was a figurate speech, and like to the other which he
allegethe out of the Deuterenomi. Blood is the soul or life. The Lord (says
he) therefore did not doubt, because we are some what bold in vsyng some
tropes, that is to say, such maniers of speaking as sometimes the scripture
does use. In the third book de doctrina Christiana, that is to say, of
christian doctrine, and the sixth chapitur, he does teach us that this saying
in the sixthe of John is figurate, Except ye eat the fleashe of the son of
man. etc. For (says he) here seems an heinous thing to be commanded. For
it is a thing more horrible and odious to eat the fleashe of man, Here is
partly touched the place that is in the second book against the adversity of
the law and prophets in the ninthe chapitur.
than to kylle him: and to drink his blood, than to shede it Therefore
(says he) it is a figure giving us enstruction that we swetelye and
profitablye have in memory that the fleashe of Christ was crucified and
wounded for us. In his epistle to Boniface he declares most plainly, that the
Sacraments bear the name of those things whereof they be^ sacraments. And he
expresses by name that the sacrament of the body of Christ is the body of
Christ after a sort: and he says a litell after, that the Sacrament of the
blood of Christ, is the blood of Christ. And all this did Austen write that
he might prove baptism to be the sacrament of feith, and that therefore it
may be said, that it is feith: and that children baptized have feith because
they receive that a sacrament.

And lest any man should say, y^ they be signs of a thing which present in
very substance (as these men term it) leat us diligently weygh the
similitudes that are brought in of this father and ancient doctor who^ we
have now alleged. Which is (says Austen) much like for an exaumple as when
Easter time is nere at hand, we thus say: Tomorowe shall be the Lords
passion: or, ye next day after to morrow shall y^ lords passion be. And on ye
sunday being Eastur day, we say: Christ has this day arisen again from
death to life. Whereas yet these things be not now present, but were done long
agon. And so Auste^ after these words affirms yt the baptism of ye litel
children is feyth, which feith nevertheless ye children have not presently:
Yea and ferthermore ye same Austen (as it appears in ye second distinction, in
ye chapitur yt begins, interrogo uos, yt is, I ask of you) says, yt it is
an offense of equal and of like negligence to suffer ye word of god which is
preached to skyp out of our minds, and to leat part of ye sacraments fall
unto the earth. But if we grant this transubstanciacion, tha^ were this
thing not so agreeable. For it seems a far more unmeet thing that the very
body of Christ should fall unto the earth or to be trodden on, tha^ to hear any
part of holy scripture neglige^tly, ferthermore upon the third psalm he says,
that Christ had Judas with him at this feast when he delivered y^ figure of his
body. They be wo^t to say, ye the body of Christ covered under the acc^e^dtes
in this sacrament is a figure or sign of himself, even as he hanged on ye
cross a dead body without life and blood: And ye the blood which is hidden
under ye accide^tes of wine, is the figure and sign of his bloudeshedde on the
altar of the cross.

But what is he that cannot see and perceive all this same, to be these men's
fond and vain imaginacions? For the sign and figure ought to be more
sensible and more easy to perceive, and to be better known then the thing
which is signified by it. And therefore the master of the sentences defines a
sacrament after Austens opinion in this manner: A Sacrament (says he) is a
visible sign of an unvisible grace. But the body of Christ hidden under the
accidents (as these men's doctrine teaches) is as unknown as that which
did hang on the cross. Yea (and if a man may say the truth) more unknown
too, and more obscure or dark to perceive, than is that which is signified
which things are much ageynste the nature both of a sign and of a figure.
For the body of Christ (as it hanged on the cross) is more easy to be
known and comprehended in a man's mind, then as it is of these men placed in
the sacrament.

Leo bishop of Rome.
Leo the Bishop of Rome in his Epistle to the cleargi and people of
Constantinople writes that this distribution is mystycall, and that it is a
spiritual norishment and heavenly virtue that we here receive, to the end
that we may be altered and transefourmed or changed into the fleashe of
Christ, who for our sakes took our fleashe upon him.

Cirillus in the fowerth book and the fowertenthe chapitur upon Ihon says
thus: Cirillus.
And so to his disciples which did believe he gave pieces of bread saying: take
ye^ etc. the same doctoure in his Epistle to one Calosi^ius says: Therefore
it became him after a sort to be joined to our bodies by his holy fleashe and
preciouse blood the which we receive in thelyuelye blessing in bread and
wine.

And now will we bring forth Theodor^tus who was bishop of Cyre, and lived in
Cyrilles time, and was in the counsel kept at Ephesus, and Calce^donie and was
esteemed for a man of excellent learning, and a man of wonderful eloquence. And
where as in the counsel holden at Ephesus, there be fell a variaunce betwixt
John the Patriarch of Antioche, and Cyrill the Bishop of Alexandria.

This Theodoritus seemed to leave to ye Patriarch of Antioche: but that
variaunce was taken up and pacified, and set at an end, even in that counsel.
And then afterward at the counsel of Calcedonie, the said Theodoritus was
acknowledged, and demed a^ man singulerly well learned, and an holy membre of
Christ's church. Yea, and in the books which he wrote, Nestorius an heritike.
he does of set purpose resist Nestorius and writes against him by name.
The book was printed at Rome.

And the Papists for as much as they have espied that he is most playnelye
against transubstanciation, they have excused him two ways. First that the
church had not as yet in his time determined this matter, as though we did
search what the Pope with his Cardinals have decreed, either at Constaunce or in
the counsel where Beringatius was condemned, and not rather, what was both
preached and taught and also believed in the old church. Secondelye they excuse
Theodoritus, and say, that in writing against the heritikes when he traicted
of mysteries, he leaned some what to much the other way against
transubstantiation, to this intent and purpose, that his adversaries might the
better, and the more effectuallye be confuted.

But how trifling an excuse this is, it may very well appear, of the whole
sequel of this writers process in his writing, where as one may ^^e, not
the escape of a word or twain, but the whole argument and pythe of the mattier
to be fette, and to be taken out of the nature of a Sacrament, so that if ye
mengle transubstanciation therewyth all, the matter can be brought to no
conclusion on his part, but contrarywyse the heritykes should win the whole
victory.

They allege furthermore that he speaks sumetime very honorably, and
reuerentelye of the sacrament in this same book.

But if ye look it all thorowoute, he never speaks so honorably, or so
reuerentelye of it, that he is any thing against this senten^e which we do
here hold.

His book is a disputation against such persons as deny that Christ had a
true body, and do say that his body in the time of his ascension was all
together changed into a divine nature.

First he brings in for his purpose, the prophecy of the aunciente Patriarch
Jacob, out of the.xlix. Chapter of Genesis, to the end that he might thereby
make him self away to bring his arguments out of the sacraments. And his
words ben these.

But for the better and more plainer declaration of the matter, I the
translatour have thought necessary to admonish the good christian reader, to
understand and to note y^ the purpose of Theodoritus is, to prove that the body
of Christ (as it is now in heaven raignynge in the glory of his father) is
his very true, and natural body, and the same body which he had when he
was conuersaunte here on earth in his manhood, and that the same body
remaynethe even still, and ever shall do, in the same his very true nature of
manhood, that it than had, and is not changed into the nature and
substance of his godheade.

For even at those days some heritiques did begin to devise and to write of
Christ, that after his resurrection and ascension, his manhood was now
changed into his godhead, and was no longer a natural body, so that he was
not now both god and man (said they) but God only, for as much as by
rysynge from death to life, and by ascending into heaven he had ouercomed
al corruptebilitie, and had cast of all earthlinesse of his natural body, and
of his manhood.

And the words are written in Theodoritus in manner and form of a dialoge
between a good Christian man, being of right opinions in matters of religion
who^ we shall here at this time call by the name of Orthodoxus, as the auctoure
does, and a Compaig^ion of his being as it were an Heritique or miscreaunte
whom we shall here for this present call by the name of Adversaries to the
truth) and thus do they talk together.

Theodoritus as hereafter follows, he washed his stole in wine, and his
garmente in the blood of the grape. Ortho. Do thou know that God called
bread his own body. Ad. Yea I know it very well. Ortho. Do thou know also that
in an other place again he called his body, wheat, corn? Aduer. Yea, I know
that too, even very well. For I have heard that he said. The hour is come
that the son of man must be glorified. And except the wheat corn being
cast down into the earth do there dye, it remains it self alone, but if it
dye, it brings forth much fruit. Orthod. Truly in the very giving and
deliuerynge of the mysteries, he called the bread his body, and the cup he
called his blood. Aduer. In deed so did he name it. Orthod. But even a body
after nature too, that is to say: his own body and his blood, might it have
been so called. Aduer. It is a plain matter to grant. Orthod. Yea and truly
our savior him self changed the names, and gave to his body the name of the
sign, and to the sign, the name of his body.

And in the same manner when he had called him self a vine, he called the
very sign by the name of his blood. Aduersa. In deed that word has thou
spoken very truly. And I would feign learn the cause too, why he so
changed the names. Ortho. That is an open mark to know unto all such as are
entered to be partakers of our holy sacraments. For his will was that such as
were partakers of the heavenly mysteries^ should not have respect to the nature
of the things which they see: but that by the chaungyng of the names they
should believe the alteracion which is made through grace. For the same Christ
which called his natural body a wheat corn and bread, and also named
himself a vine: the self same Christ honored the visible ^ignes with the name
of his body and blood: not chaungyng the nature of the things, but geuyng
grace unto the nature of them.

Aduers. In deed the mys^icall things were mystically spoken. And now has it
been of thee clearly expouned and opened, that is not known to all folks.
Orthodo^. Forasmuch therefore as he openly protests the Lords body to be
called of the Patriarche Jacob in the old testamente both a stool and a
garmente and we are now entered into a talk of the heavenly mysteries: Tell me
plainly and truly, whereof thynkest thou that same most holy meat to be a
sign and a figure: whether of the verai godhead of Christ our Lord, or else
rather of his body and blood? Aduer. Truly of these same verai things, that
they have taken the names of. Ortho. of his body and blood is it than that
thou say. Aduer. yea even so do I say. Ortho. Thou have said even truly.
For the Lord when he took the figure in his hand, said not: This is my
godheade: but, this is my body. And again: This is my blo^d, And in another
place: But the bread which I shall give, is my fleashe, which I will give
for the life of the world. Aduer. In deed all this is very true. For they be
the lords words. Ortho. And certes, if it be all true, than the Lord had
veraily a body. Aduer. But I say, that he is without a body. Ortho. But thou
confessest already, and canste not deny that a body he had.

Now the words of the same Theodoritus, out of his second dialogue. Aduer.
Truly it behooves us to use all means and ways possible, that we may
atteygne to the veritee and truth of things, but most specially in the
doctrines and opinions of divinity now propouned and put forth at this
present to talk of. Ortho. Tell me than, those same mystical signs which
are offered unto god by the holy ministers, of what things are they the
signs? Aduer. Of the Lords body and blood. Ortho. Of his veraye true and
real body, or not real? Aduersari. Of his true and real body. Orthodoxus.
Ueraye well said: For any counterpaine must needs be the true counterpaine
of the thing that it shall resemble. For the peinctures do counterfayct and
resemble nature, and do peincte the images, and lykenesses of such things,
as are natural and visible things in deed. Auersari. Ye true it is that thou
say. Ortho. Now than, if those holy and godly mysteris be paternes of a
body that is a true body in deed: than is the body even now at this present
the veraie body of our Lord. And yet is not his body changed into the
nature of his Godheade, but it is replete and filled with the glory of his
Godhead. Adue. Thou have in veraye good season moved this present talk of
these hea^^nly mysteries. For out of the same will I show unto th^e the
chaungyng of the Lords body i^to another nature. Answer thou therefore unto
my questions, that I shall put forth unto thee. Orthod. I will answer unto
them. Aduersari. That same gift that is offered up, what dooest thou call it
before the invocation that the priest or minister makes. Ortho. It behooves
not us herein to speak openly in plain terms. For it is very lykely that
some there be here present, which are not as yet entered and ^nstructed in the
profession of Christianity. Aduersa. Well than, leat thine answer be
mystical and couer^ly set forth as it we^ in a riddle. Orthodoxus. Than I
say, it is, an eatable thing made of such kind of sede or grain. Aduersa.
And the other figure, by what name do we call it. Ortho. This name is a
common name also, signifying a kind of cup to drink of. Aduersari. And
after the halowyng of it by what name dooest thou call these things.
Orthodoxus. The body of Christ and the blood of Christ. Aduersari. And
dooest thou believe thy self to receive the body and blood of Christ?
Orthodox. Yea truly I believe it. Aduersari. Than like as the ^ignes of the
Lords body and blood, are in deed one kind of things before the inuocacion
of the Priest or Minister, and after the inuocacion the same signs are
changed, and are made another kind of things: even so the Lords body too
is after his assumption into heaven changed into the substance of his mere
godhead. Orthodoxus. Lo, thou art now^ caught in the same net, which thou
haddeste set to catch me in.

Note here that the signs do not leave ne cast away nor lose their own p^oper
nature.
For those same mystical signs do not depart away out of their own proper
nature after the halo winge of the^. For they remain still in their former
substance, and their former shape, and their former kind, and are even as
well seen and felt, as they were before. But the things that are dooen are
understood, and are believed, and are wurshipped, even as though they were in
very deed the things that are believed. Therefore compare now the image or
first pattern with the counterpayne, and thou shall see the similitude. For
the figure must of necessity be agreeable and aunswerable to the truith. For
the self same body has verayly his own former kind, his own former shape,
his own former circumscription (that is to say, occupying of a rome and place
according to his quantitee if it were so requisite,) and (to speak plainly
without any subtilties) even the very same corporal and bodily substance that
it had before. But from the time of his resurrection foorthwarde it became
immortal, and had ouercomed all corruptibilitee and was judged worthy to be
placed in the seat of glory which is on the right hand of God, and
wurshipped it is of all creatures, as being the very natural body of our
Lord. Aduer. Yet nevertheless that same mystical sign that we treat of
does change the former name that it was called by. For it is not afterward
called by the same name that it was called by before, but it is called the body.
etc. The truth therefore and the thing self, of which this is the
counterpayne ought no more to be called God and no more to be called a body.
Ortho. Thou semest now to me a man that knows litell. For it is not called
the body only, but also the bread of life. For so did the lord himself
call it. It is in the Greek (...), that is to sai giving life, which in the
latin he calls ^ i^ific^^ that makes alive, o^ that makes live lie.
Yea and thissame body we call a divine or heavenly body, and a body that
gives life, and our masters body and the lords body, teaching, that it is
not a common body of any man indifferently without any choice, but the body of
our Lord Jesus Christ being both God and man, for Jesus Christ yesterday,
and this day is one and the same without any change now and for ever and
ever. etc.

Chrysostom in his epistle to one Cesarius a man than had given him self
to a solitary life, Chrysostom
written in the time of his second banishemente ageynste Appollinarius and
others which made no distinction betwixt the godhead and the humanitee or
manhood in Christ, and his Epistle is to be had in the Library at Florence al
though it be not printed, (Christ says he) is both god and man, God for his
impassibilitee and man for his passion, one son, and one Lord the very self
same without doubt that has one power and one dominion of the two natures
joined together, although they be not consubstancial that is to say of one
substance but so joined together that every of them being several without
menglyng does still keep a knolege and a token of his own propre nature
because they be two distinct natures and unconfounded, forlyke as before y^
bread is sanctified we call it bread, but when the divine grace has
sanctified it, the priest being minister it is delivered from the name of
bread and is cou^pted worthy the name of the Lords body although the nature
of bread has still remained in it and it is called not two bodies but one body
of the son: in likewise this divine constitution, the nature of the body
adjoined the two both together make on son, and one person.

Hesechius in the twentieth book upon the eighte chapitur of Leuitici
commaundyng fleashe (says he) for this cause to be ^aten with bread,
Hesechius.
that we might vnderstande^ that he meaned that mystery, which is both
bread and fleashe.

Gelasius.
Gelasius against Entichetes writes that the substance and nature of bread
and wine does not cease to be in the sacrament of the Lords supper called
Eucharistia and he makes a comparison of this sacrament with Christ, in
whom remains the divine and humain nature both the natures being hole and
perfect, as in this Sacrament do remain the nature of bread and the body of
Christ.

Gregorius.
Gregory in his registre says, as well when we receive unleavened bread as
leauened, we be made one body of the Lord our Savior.

Bertram.
Bartram in his book of the body and blood of the Lord says of the nature
of the signs: Look what they were as concerning the substance of the
creatures before the consecration, the same they continue also afterward.

Bernarde in his sermon of the supper of the Lord, Bernarde.
does make a manifest similitude of a ringe, whereby a man does receive
either the promise of Matrimony, or the possession of any dignity, as it is
used in making of Bishops, whereas the ryng or croasier staff, or Rotchet,
be signs or tokens of the things which are given or granted, and yet they
be no vain signs, for they do most surely bring with them the things that
they signify, the which same thing also he declares to be dooen in the
Sacraments.

Now must we answer to the arguments of these men, where with they gooe
about to prove their transubstantiation. And as concerning the first, we
answer, that Christ did promise us his fleashe or his body and blood, to
be our meat and drink and that in the sixth Chapitur of Ihon, which thing
he does as often as we do truly believe that he dyed for us, he did also
perform the same, when at his last Supper he ordained this Sacrament, for
he ioygned the signs to that spiritual eating. But they did most chiefelye
and principally lay against us this sentence. This is my body, about the
verity of which saying is now all our controversy, but all our
contencion consists in this only poyncte, how and in what mannier it is
his body for both parts, that is to weete, as well our adversaries as we
do hold that it is a true proposicion or sentence. And all our contencion
and striefe is only about the sense or meaning of it.

They say, it is a plain sentence: and we on the other side put them in
remembrance of that which Augustine teaches in his book entitled de
doctrina Christiana, that is, of Christian doctrine. Where he says, that one
place must not be so expouned, that it be contrary to many other, but rather
so as it agree with many others.

Neither must we evermore allege the plainenes of the sentence and stand
altogether upon the words, for than, where it is said: Leate us make man
after our Image and likeness.

The heritiques named Anthropomorphita, Anthropomorphitae.

A kind of heritiques that affirmed god to have a bodily substance or being,
and shape as we haue^


do by and by arise, and make an argument, that God has a body, and a
soul, and other members as we se to be in man's body. Thou say in this
behalf, that this similitude or lykenes of man to God, the image of god must
be referred to the mind or soul of man, whereby man has rule over all other
Creatures like unto God, but the said heritiques will say again, that these
things are there in plain words written of many, and that thou do in
vain go about to apply that which is written of the whole man, to the one
part only, that is to wete to the soul or mind. Thou alledgeste again,
that G^d is a spirit, and that a spirit has no flesh and bones, and ^o thou
gathereste the sense of this one place o^te of other places of scripture.

In like manner the Arians said that they had the plain and clear sense of
this place of scripture. Some sentence in scripture which seem most plain in
words. must not always be understood without so^e interpretacion.
My father is greater then I, Thou do apply this saying only to the humayne
nature of Christ because that in other places of the scripture the godheade of
Christ is declared and playnelye taught, as in the first chapter of John, and
in the ninthe chapter of the epistle to the Romans, and in the first Chapter
of the first epistle of saint John.

Also Christ says, In expouning of one place, a^ eye must be had unto other
places of scripture.
He that has no swerd let him bye him one, in which words it seems that he
provoke men to auengemente. But if ye have an eye to other places, ye shall
see that it is figuratelye spoken. Saint Paul has this saying: Pray ye
without intercession or ceassing And anon there started up a kind of
heritiques called Euchite, Euchitae a kind of heritiques co^cerninge prayer.
which thought that we ought to use continual prayers, never ceasyng to
murmr, then where as yet it is said in an other place. He that has not care
of them that belong to him, specially of such as be of his household, has
renounced the faith, and is worsse then an infidel.

And again, Let al things be done in order and in an other place: he yt
labors not, let him not eat. Also a certain sect of Heretics named
Chiliastae that is to say, Chiliastae a kind of Heretics.
a certain sect that taught how Christ should reign a thousand years. This
sect thought that they had the most evident word of god that could be for
their opinion in the Reuelacion of Ihon in the twentieth chapitur, of these
thousand years in the which Christ should reign with his. And the
Sabellia^s did hold yt there was no difference of persons between the father
and the soonne, Sabellians another sect of Hereti^ues.
and that same they did of this place, I and the father be one: and also of
this place, Philip he that sees me, sees the father also. And again: As I
do remain in the father so does the father remain in me, these places they
said were plain places and sayings of scripture, and that ye same made for
the^. The Ebionites did take Christ to be a creature only, Hebionit^s an other
sect of heriques.
and said yt this saying: god my god why have thou leaft or forsaken me? could
be none otherwise understood, for God (said they) does never leave ne
forsake himself.

And of this sentence written in the sixte of John: He that eats my flesh,
and dryncketh my blood, shall not dye for ever. Many said that it followed,
that those which did once come lawfullye to the communion, could not peryshe
for ever.

The which error, saint Austen in his book entitled, De ciuitate dei, that
is of the City of God, does clearelye reprove. Also the words of the
canticles which are entitled, Cantica canticorum^ if ye take the^ as they
sound in words, at the first apprearaunce they are but songs or ballades of
love, or marriage Songs. We must not therefore always allege the plainenes of
the words, and go no further. Christ says, He that has ears to hear, let him
hear, and he that reads, let him understand.

Neither is it conueniente by and by, to take the first sense that shows or
offreth it self without regarding or considering and conferryng of other
places with it. Christ said to his Apostles, Beware of the leven of the
Phariseis. The Apostles by and by thought that he had spoken of bread,
where as Christ spoke of their doctrine. He said also. Lazarus our friend
slepethe. Here did the Apostles sleep also, and said. If he sleep, he shall do
well inoughe, and recover again. where as Christ spoke of his death. The
Lord says in an other place. Destroy you this temple, and in three days I
shall build it up again. neither did the Apostles understand that he spoke
of his body. He that keeps my commandments shall not dye for ever. And
here also did the Jews think that he spoke of the bodilye death. Necodemus
did grosselye understand the new generation and birth that Christ spoke of.
Neither was the Samaritane woman any thing less deceived about that matter
which Christ promised her.

The Hebrews also were deceived when Christ said unto them. Abraham did se my
days, and did rejoice. Let them not therefore say evermore unto us, this
scripture is plain, This is my body, for we answer the^, yt it is plain as
concerning ye signification of ye words. But the sense of ye words is not
plain, as apeareth in such other like se^te^ces as these. Christ is a stone,
Christ is a lamb, Ye are the bodies of Christ, We (though we be many) ar
one bread, and one body, Al these be the words of god, and we may say of
them, that they be plain, and that they be evident, and yet none of the^ al
proves transubsta^tiatio^. Wherefore there is no cause, why the plainnes of
the words should so much be alleged. We must of other places of scripture,
and of the circumstaunces well consider what is in this mattier mente and
intended.

We will therefore expoune this proposition, somewhat depelye repetynge the matter
from the bottom God was willing to draw man unto him with large and great
promises: as, that he would make him happy and blessed.

And because he knew our beleuynge heart, he would that there should be
many benifites of his showing toward mankind, remain and appear in
memory, whereby he might allure and draw man unto him. Wherefore he did not
only give all creatures unto man, but also in the time of the floude, he
delivered our kind (which had full evil deserved it) from the destruction
of the water.

To Abraham he declared him self very favorable and louinge. To Isaac also,
and to Jacob his sons son. He prospered their stock when they were
oppressed, he delivered them, and gave them a fruitful contrye to dwell in,
and promoted them to the dignity of kings and priests, and yet were they
continually men of a hard belief, and did not perfectelye think that God
owed them good will. Wherefore for their infidelity, he cast them out into
diverse captiuities, and again many sondrye times he delivered them.

In conclusion to the entente that there should be no place left of doubtinge
of his goodness, he gave them the greateste and highest benefit of al
benefits that is to wete, his son taking on him our flesh, that he should
dye on the cross for our health and salvation, the which benefit was such
and so great, that Paul to the Romans, says: how has he not given us al
things with his son: And than left the same so great and so high a
benefit, should any more be forgotten, his will and pleasure was, that it
should evermore now and than be renewed in this sacrament of thanks geuyng,
to then tente that we should continually by faith think in our minds that
Christ was given by his father to death and that by the beleuyng thereof, we
should eat his fleashe and drink his blood, which thing to thente^t that
it might the more effectually be dooen, the signs of bread and wine were
ioygned unto it, which should more earnestly move us then bare words alone
had been wont to do. Therefore when he says, This is my body, he understood
none other thing, than he promised in the sixthe of John when he said: I am
the bread of life, he spoke of himself as concerning his body and fleashe
delivered to death, or rather that should afterward be delivered as plainly
appears by his words Neither meant he, any other thing, but that these
things should be unto us bread and meat, wherewith our solles might be
comforted and confirmed, and by the mind or solle the body also should be
confyrmed, and so consequentlye all the whole man. Christ therefore at his last
supper me^t nor went about nothing else, but turned and set the words of his
former saying: one in another place: and like as before he had said his body
and fleashe to be bread, so now placyng the words in the contrary order, and
showing forth the bread, he says that the bread is his body. And while he
pronounced these words. This is my body, it was eue^ as much as if he should
have said: My body received by feith shall be unto you instead of bread, and
shall be like as it were bread, wherewith ye may be spiritually fed and
nourished. Leat therefore the sense and plain meaning be this: I give you
bread to eat, and in the mean time I propoune and set forth unto you my
body which shall be nailed upon the cross, that ye may with feithefull
remembrance and with most attentive mind spiritually eat the same with your
selves: and that, as ye eat bread with your body, so ye may eat my fleashe
with your solle. What can there be either more easy or more clear and
plain to understand, then this interpretacion and exposicion, or that may
better agree with the promise which our Lord Jesus Christ made unto us in
the sixthe chapitur of Ihon? That if any man shall make any earnest matier,
that that same first saying of Christ, I am the lively bread. etc. is to be
taken and applied to his divine nature and to his Godheade (as Chrysostom in
deed seems to will it:) First we say, that this sense does not very well
agree therewith. For Christ had there entered a talk concerning the eating of
his body, and instead of yearthly bread he offered unto the Capernaites his
fleashe to be eaten: which thing so to be is evident and plain even by the
order and process of the words, (although he there says that the bread was
come down from heaven: For often times the thing that belongs to his godhead
is made common as it were emparted, to his humanitee also^ But if this
exposicion of Chrisostom be of such pith and effect with them, leat the same
man's exposicion be of like auctoritee with them where he afterward avouches
that same saying of Christ: The bread which I shall give, is my fleashe,
which I will give for the life of the world. etc. to apperteyne to this
Sacrament of thanks geuyng called Eucharistia. Neither does Chrysostom
alone hold that opinion: but the other expositurs also do assente and agree
with him there in. Forasmuch therefore as the Lord does there say and
affirm bread to be his fleashe: he does now at his supper testify the
self same thing. For showing forth the bread he says: This is my body. So
in both places he avouches his body or his fleashe to be bread, that is to
wete, bread of the solle, and of our substance now regenerate and borne of
new, which bread is to be spirituallye eaten.

And thus taking it, What manier of figu^ate speaking is contained in these
words, this is my body.
there shall be no conversion at al of the proposition or sentence, but
the same shall in both places be taken one manier of way. That if we take it
all whole together, that is to wete, the bread, and the thing offered by the
bread that is to say, Christ's body: than we admit the figure of
Syuecdoche, Sinecdoche
because that thing is said of the whole or of one part, which belongs to
another part.

For Synecdoche is, when that, that belongs but to a part of a thing, is
attributed or assigned to the whole: as for an exaumple, if one should say:
My foot is sore, when nothing is sore but his toe or his hele only, it were
Synecdoche, because that the soreness or grief which is in the toe alone, is
spoken of the who^e foot, or likewise if one should say of a black Moorian:
this manne is white in the teeth, whereas no part of the manne is white but the
teethe only. etc.

But in case ye refferre the saying to the bread, which does boeth signify
and offer unto us the body of Christ to be eaten: it shall than be a
figurate manner of speaking called Metonimia, Metonimia
which in our manier of speaking, is when the name of the thing that is
signified, is given to the sign, as here when the name of Christ's body is
given to the bread. In this exposicion also taking it after this sense last
before going all points are light, and easy, and plain to understand: all
poinctes of vnconueniences are avoided, and o^e place of the Scripture is not
repugnaunt to another.

The adversaries ferther alleged, as we have before said in the first beginning
of this work where we brought all the reasons that the schole men de^ise and
make for their transubstanciacion, Tropes of Scriptu^e. Except we use tropes,
we shall not be hable to resist the heretics.
the adversaries (I say) alleged for them, that if place be given to tropes,
that is to say, to figurate maniers of speaking in Scripture: that than the
Heretics will peruerte altogether And I on the other side say again, that
except we use tropes and figurative maniers of speaking in scripture: the
Heretics be sure of the over hand, as in those places which even now a
little before we have cited, it is most plain and euidente.

For the heritiques also on their part, will stycke to the propresence and
signification of the words, and to that sense, which at the first choppe
offreth it self to the reader.

Therefore this only point does now remain that we show such phrases of
speakinge, and such figurative manners of speakinge, to be much and often used
in the holy scriptures. Which thing to show and to prove will be a light
mattyer, and an easy.

We read written, The sede is the word of God. And. The stone was Christ.
etc. Albeit I know that many do make cauillations, and would have it taken
that there is no troth nor figurative speaking in this last clause, because
that Paul did restraigne this saying, and applied it to a spiritual stone,
which spiritual stone, they anouch to be Christ truly, and verilye, and
without any trope or figurative speakinge at all^ Yet nevertheless both Austen
and Origin make on our side, which plainly say, that that same external and
outward stone, did signify Christ.

But lest we may be thought slightly to avoid that is objected against us:
we say, that in case the adversaries will in this sentence aforegoinge, take
and understand a spiritual stone. Let them also in this our matter of the
sacrament take and understand the bread a spiritual bread and allegorical,
that is to say, figurately spoken throughoute in every place, that mentions
it, and then will we grant unto the^ that truly and verily, and without
any trope or figurate speaking at all, it is Christ. More over the Lord
said, I have chosen you twelve, and one of you is a de^yl. And yet was not
Judas therefore transubstanciated into a devil.

Concerning circumcision, it is written in the scripture. My couenaunte shall
be in your flesh, where as circumcision was not the covenant, but only a
sign or token of the couenaunte. In the three and thirtieth Chapitur of
Genesis, Jacob is reported that he builded an aultare, which aultare he called
the mighty God of Israel. Jacobs altar, the mighe^ God of Israel


Moses aulta^e, the Lord is my ban^e^.
And Moses in the seuententh Chapitur of Exodus, after the vyctorie gotten
against Amalech, builded an aultare, and called the name of it. The Lord is
my bannier. And Hieromie the Prophete^ makes mention of a City that should
be called God our rightuousenes. Hie^emies city, God our righteousness
Because that these should afterward be monumentes and tokens or marks of
those things which they did express by those names.

Of John the Baptist, it is written, that he was a candell burning, and
geuynge light, and aga^ne of the same John. John. xv.
Uerilye it is Helias, if ye will receive him. Christ says of him self. I
am the vine, and the branches. Luke. ii.
I am the door. Of the same Christ: we have also that he is a stone set for to
be the ruin and fall, and also the arisynge again of many in Israel.

In the Deuteronomie, it is written: The blood is the soul. Where as it is but
that thing whereby the soul is conserved and signified. Judas the brother of
Iosephe, speaking of Iosephe, and speaking that he might not be slain,
said: He is our own flesh. By the which phrase of speaking, the natural
knyttyng together, and necessity of blood and kynred was signified.

Saint Paul says, that we being many are one bread. etc. which saying
it can not be chosen nor avoided, but that it must ^e understood to be
fyguratelye spoken.

And Christ breathed forth upon his disciples, and said: Take ye the holy
Ghost. etc. Yet was not his breathynge transubstanciated into the holy
ghost. Gene^ vi.


In the book of Genesis it is said. My Spirit shall not still dwell in man,
because he is flesh, and in the first Chapitur of John. The word became
flesh. etc. in which place is the plain figure of Sinecdoch. For ye whole man
is understood under the name of flesh. And our lord Jesus ha^ging on the
cross, said to Mary his mother. Woman, behold thy son. And to his disciple
Iho^ Behold thy mother. Yet were neither of them tra^substanciated, but
remained still the self same persons that they were before: but there was
constituted between them a new order and degree, a new referrynge and
respect.

Of Christ it is said in the scriptures, that he is our peace, where as he
is only the cause of our peace. Also in an other place. My words are spirit
and life. where as they did but betoken the same, or else were cause of them to
the beleuers. John Baptiste said of Christ. Behold the lamb of god and yet
was not his nature changed into the nature of a Lamb.

It is read here and there, in many places of the holy scriptures, that the
Lords words are judgment and truth, and ryghtuous^nes, where as these
things are but signified and expressed in the said words of the Lord. And
this similitude or comparison does passinge well serve and agree to the
sacraments, which are said to words visible. In the Apocalipes, it is read. I
am a and o, Alpha

Omega.


whereby is mente, the first beginning, and the last end of all things.
And Paul speaking of his own gospel which he preached says. The power of
God it is to salvation unto every one that believes. Where as it is but only
whereby the power of God declares it self, for the sauinge of men.

And of the preachinge of the cross he says: that unto the wicked sort, it
is folishenes, that is to say: it signifies unto such manner of men but a
folishe thing, but to the Godly sort, he says it is the power and wisdom of
God, for because it shows and declares the said power and wisdom of God
unto the godly. And of the law of Moses God said, that it did put death and
life, blessinge and curssinge unto the people of the Hebrews: which is none
other but by the signification and notifiynge of the law, the promises and
threatenynges of God which were in them expressed. In the book of Genesis,
Gene. xl^.
the seven kyne, and the seven years of corn, are said to be seven years,
and that is no more but in signifiynge the same.

Ahias the Prophet a Silonite gave unto Hieroboam ten pieces of a cut or torn
cloak, iii. Ki^. xi
and said: that he gave to Hieroboam the kyngedome of ten of the tribes of
Israel. Also in this same very epistle to the Corinthians and the same
eleventh chapitur which we now traicte of. S. Paul wrote that a woman
should have a power on her head, by the which word power, he signifies a
coueringe, by the which covering, is signified the power and superiority of
the man over the woman.

And in the second epistle to the same Corinthians it is contained, that God
made Christ to be sin which was nothing else, but to the likeness of sin
and representation of our flesh. Yea, and the ghost that was offered up for
sin, was called sin. And the prestes were sayd^ to ^ate the sins of the
people which mente nothing else but eating the hosts that were slain and
offered up for the sins of the people In the prophet Ezechiel it is written. I
will pour forth clean water upon you, and by the wa^er he signifies the holy
ghost^ which self same thing we read of Christ, when he says. Who so
drinks of this water. etc. In which place the Euangeliste mencioneth that
Christ spoke of the holy ghost which they should afterward receive. Of
the Lamb we hear, that it was called Pascha, (though some there be that
attempt the same to deny) But the plain words of ye Hebrew does declare it
where it is said. The sacrifice is Pascha, that is the passover. By the
sacrifice there can not be understood any other thing, but either the
slain host that was offered up, or else that same very act of sacrifisynge
the said host. So we have the body of Christ expressed, both by bread and
wine, and also by the act, as well of eating as of drynkinge. And the said
Lamb was not the passinge over of the Aungel, but only a monumente and token
or signification of him so passing over. Christ sought a place where he might
eat the passover with his Apostles, and by the word of passover, he
understood those meats, and those consecrate or hallowed things, which did
betoken and signify the pass over. S. Paul also said. Christ our pass over
has been offered up. etc. And in the same place he called Christ himself our
solemnity, and our passage or passover, which things can not be taken nor
understood, but as figuratelye spoken. And the said lamb was not the
passinge over of the angel which was the^ to be done, or in doing: but
which was done in old time, many hundred years before, the remembrance,
whereof was represented by these same external signs. Here also in this
sacrament we have the body of Christ, that heretofore suffered, not that is
now at this present delivered unto the cross, or whose blood is now at this
day shed forth but a great while ago. And in case these me^ would straightly
expoune the words of Christ, when he says. This is my body. which is
betrayed for you. They could not chose but say, that the bread should be
crucified, or at least wise Christ covered under the accidents of the bread
in the sacrament, as their exposition and determination is. For Christ
shewinge forth that, y^ he the^ had in his hands, said, that the same it was
that should be betrayed and delivered, and shed forth for them. That if
they say, that in deed the same it was that was betrayed and delivered but not
after the same manier, nor in the same form or shape, than do they seek
interpretacions and expositions of the text and sterting holes, and do not
take the proposition or the clause playnelie as the words sound, without any
ferther addicion or circumstau^ce.

And the self same thing also ye may see in the words, is betraighed or
delivered, and is shed forth. The which words (if while we pronounce the
words in the con^ecration and halowing they betake^ as they son, the body of
Christ shall be signified, that even now, it is delivered unto the cross and
his blood is even now at this present shed forth, or else immediatlye to
be shed forth.

But now they will have these words to be referred to the times pas^e, so
that we must understand the body to be already delivered, and the blood
already to be shed a great while ago: and so to do, is handle the matier with
tropes, and figurative speakinges, wha^ one time is taken for another, and one
time referred to an other, or used for another.

Now where Paul said that they were gyltye of the body and blood of ye lord,
which eat it unworthily, and also that such persons do eat judgment unto
them selves, because they make no difference of the Lords body, all this is
no matter at all.

For Ambrose makes answer as touching the first, while he enterpreteth that
same very place of scripture and there he thus says. They shall be punished
for the Lords death, because he was put to death for such as accoumpt and
reken his benifite in vain. Ambrose does expoune such to be guiltye of the
Lords death^ (as we have heard) and yet ^s not transubsta^tiation thereunto
required. And such as take it unworthily, are iustelye affirmed not to put
such difference as they ought, that is they are judged not to have the lords
body in due price and estimation. For so great a conjunction there is betwne
the signs, and the things that are signified, that the despisyng^ or
vnreuerente vsinge of the one, redoundeth to the other. The vnreue^ent vsinge
of the sacrament redou^^eth to the bodi of Christ, which is the thing of the
Sacrame^te
After the same manner spoke Paul, when he said. A man prayinge or preaching
with his head covered, does open vilanye unto Christ. Where Paul plainly
determined, that it redounded to Christ, and touched Christ's honor, that was
done about the head of a man, because it was a sign and token of Christ.

It is further to be considered, that Paul wrote unto the Corinthians, which
were a people not altogyther destitute of fayeth: but they were infected with
certain infirmities, and as for such kind of people, we have not said that
they receive only the signs, and not to have the body of Christ: but it is
of infideles, Epicuria^s that think there is no god, and of such as are cut
of from the congregation, of such it is (I say) that we pronounce that they
receive the signs only.

Wherefore it might well be said to the Corinthia^s not only as concerning the
signs, but also as touching the thing of the Sacrament, that they were guilty
of the body and blood of the lord, and that they did not put a difference
between the Lords body, for as much as they received the things with feith,
and did not express the same feith in their living. And here this thing also
is diligently to be marked, that Paul when he traicteth of the sacramental
accion or doing, that is to wete, of eating and drinking of the sacrament at
the very receyuyng of it, he so speaks of it, that he calls it bread,
saying: Who so eats this bread. etc: but afterward when he goes about to
show the fault of ill receiving it how great and grievous it is, than does he
so make mention of it, that he calls it the lords body. Ferthermore if the
matier be well examined, and justly rekoned, it shall be found that in all
his trai^^yng of this Sacrament, the Apostle has oftener expressed the name
of bread, then he has mentioned the Lords body. For ye may well find that
five times he made express mention of bread: but of the Lords body no more
but four times. But now is it to be seen and considered, what occasions they
be that do so earnestly move us to take this clause and saying of Chr^ste,
This is my body, as a thing figurately spoken. First and formoste we do
consider that Christ himself was present at the supper, so that it was a
thing nedelesse for him to show his body to the Apostles. For they saw him
there present with their yies. Secondly how could it possibly be done, that
himself should really and corporally or bodylye eat his own self? And that
he did communicate with his Apostles, is not only aff^rmed by the old fathers
and ancient writers, but also Christ himself does say it, as thou haste in
the gospel of Matthewe, where Christ says: After this time I shall not
drink of this fruit of the vinetree. Ferthermore we have a regard, that here
it is treated of the memoryal and remembrance of his death and passion,
wherein is well to be notifyed that there is a figurative speaking in the
words. And as for these transubstanciatours we se that they do change the
times, so that, that which is spoken by the future tense, that is to say, for
the time to come, or by the presentense, that is to say, for the time that is
now^ present, of the delyueryng of the Lords body and of the sheddyng forth
of his blood: that same do they expoune by the preter tense, that is to say,
for the time past. After all this, we ferther consider that they can not lack
tropes in the consecratyng of the sacrament, for this word, Est, is, they
take for conuertitur, is changed, or transubstanciatur, is transubstanciated
or changed insubstaunce, or else forfyt is made. And forasmuch as Christ did
institute it as a sacrament, and for a sacrament it is convenient that the
signs be taken according to their significacions and betokenynges of the
thing, and that they be taken as figuratly spoken according to the nature of a
sacrament, which is, that it be a sign. We have also a respect to the
ascension of Christ into heaven, and to the veritee and truth of his humayne
nature which he took here upon him, and also to that that is contained in. S.
John's gospel when it is said to the Capernaites: My words are spirit and
life, the fleashe profits nothing, (as in deed true it is, if it be carnally
and fleashly eaten:) the spirit it is, that gives life: And again we
consider Paul who in this place to the Corinthians does in most plain
words, put the term of Bread, where nevertheless these men will needs have
that there is a trope and a figure, though they so greatly abhor that in
the other place of ours there should be any trope. We hear also Paul
himself witnessing that the ancient fathers of the old testament had the
very self same sacraments that we now have. For, as Austen records, he
thought it not enoughe that they had spiritual meat and drink, but he also
added, cundem, that is to say, the very same. And again because thou
should, not doubt but that Paul me^te that their sacraments and ours are
al one, he expressed baptism by name, which baptism he says the fathers
atteigned and had in the sea and in the cloud. Whereof it is evident that the
said fathers of the old law had their sacraments not only emonge
themselves, but also that they had the veraye same that we have. We see also
that other sayings of the scripture being veraye nere and much like unto
this saying that we traicte of, are even of these our adversaries taken as
words figurately spoken. For it is thus expressed: The bread which we
break, is the Communion or partakynge of Christ's body. And, this cup is
the new testamente. etc. which words we have now somewhat often rehearsed.
Besides all this, it does not properly agree nor accord to the body of
Christ for to be eaten.

And of the premises it is open at full and manifest, what ought to be said
to the secound argument or reason of the transubstanciatours, in which they
objected against us, that a sentence or clause in scripture ought not to be
taken after any trope or figure, except there were some thing contained either
before, or coming after in the same sentence which did advise and justly move
us that it were so to be dooen.

And they went ferther with us also, allegynge that where Christ says: this is
my body, that shall be given up for you, we did take the latter part of this
sentence in the bare and propre sense of ye words without any change or
alteracion which thing is manifestlye false, for so much as we there change
the times, and do not admit or take it to be the same body which was
betrayed and given up to death for us. For that body was not alonelye
visible but also passible. Neither can there be in one and the same substance
or subject at one and the same time the properties and qualities of a body
corruptible together with the gifts and properties of a body glorified: so
that one and the same body at one instau^t time should be both passible and
not passible. And besides this we have now already showed what other places
caused us to admit the figures before spoken of and declared, that is to wete,
Synecdoche and Metonimia where the thing instituted is taken for the auctoure,
that is to say, for him that did institute it.

Now will we make answer to the argument which is the third ceason alleged
in the beginning of this book for the establishyng of transubstanciacion: An
answer to the third argument that was made for transubsta^ciacion,
and the argument is concerning things of diverse and contrary natures which
are called of the Logicians in the school term disparata as is before said,
which are so unlike (say they) and so disseuered one from another, that the
one of them can not be said nor verifyed of the other. Whereunto we answer,
that such things as of themselves are in such sort diverse, and unlike, and
disseuered or contrary of nature and kind the one to the other: yet if they
be well ioigned together well applied and proporcioned ye one to the other for
the better signifying and expressinge of a thing, they may now in such case
be so ioygned together that they will make a good proposicion and a perfect
sentence. Which thing we see to have been dooen not only of Christ where he
says, The seed is the word of God and in another place, I am a vine tree: but
also of Paul where he says, that we all are one bread, and in another
place, the bread which we break is the partakyng and communion of the body
of Christ: and again: this cup is the new testament in my blud. Nor we do not
much pass on yt that some say, that Matthew and Mark did in plain and
express words say, this is my blood of the new testament. etc. for we deny
not but y^ these Evangelists did so write, but in the mean time we stiffly
hold and say yt the words which Luke and Paul have written, are to be
received and allowed too, as well as the others. And those words of Luke and
Paul we affirm (as we have said of the other sentences) that they are made
of words so far disagreyng and disseuered in their natures that they may
after the said school term of the Logicia^s be but well called disparata: but
yet in the way of signifying and for the better expressing of the mattier that
is meant and intended by them, they be veraye aptly ioygned and knitte
together and do veraye well accord.

In another argument it was said, yt when Christ spoke these words, An
answer to y^ fourth argument that was alleged for transubstanciacion.
This is my body, he said not this signifies or represe^teth my body, this
bread is a figur or sign of my body. etc. To this we answer and lay again for
us, yt likewise Christ never said yt his body lay lurkyng and hidden under
those accidents without a subject (as the transubstanciacioners do imagyn,)
nor Christ did never say that the substance and matier of the bread does
cease to be there in the sacrament or that it was changed and turned by any
kind of transubstanciation into the substance of his body, and the^ ferther I
do much marvel how men can obiecte those things in this wise against us,
seeing that these exposicions that it be taken in that sense are most playnelye
contained and expressed in the fathers and ancient writers of the church. For
they have very often in their books and writings these mannier of speakynges
the body and blood of Christ to be represented, to be signified, to be
poynted, to be betokeneded, and to be showed.

And the signs of bread and wine they do call by these terms, the seal,
the figure, and the pype or pattern, and the counterpaine of the true and very
thing it self. Neither is there any cause why any man may cavil and obiecte
that the fathers did refer and apply in these signs or figures to the death
of Christ, and ^ot to the body of Christ. For the fathers do most plainly
in their books write, and say, that the body and blood of Christ is
signified and betokened in the sacrament. And that we have the signs and
figures given us of the verai body and blood of Christ. For the ferther
proof whereof, and that thou majesty well know it to be true, we shall of
diverse and sundry places of their writing treacte and bring in a few here
ensuyng.

Austine in his tra^ctyse which he made of catechysynge and enstructinge the
rude and ignoraunte, Auste^.
says: As touching the sacrament that he has received (says Austen,) he
must be enstructed and taught that the seals and signs of the heavenly
things are visible. But the things selves that are invisible to be honored
in them.

The same Austen in the fifthe Chapitur of the tenth book de ciuita^e dei,
says: thus therefore the visyble sacrifice is a sacrament, that is to say, an
holy sign or token of a sacrifice invisible.

Hierome in the fowerth book upon Matthew and the sixth and twentieth chapitur
writes in this wise: To the entente that as in the prefiguracion of him.

Melchisedech the priest and ministry of the most high God did when he
offered up bread and wine, so Christ himself should represente the veritee and
truth of his body and blood.

Bartram.
Bartram also writes in this manner: by laying and applying the testimonies of
ye holy scriptures and the sayings of the fathers together, it is most
euidentlye proved and declared, that the bread which is called the body of
Christ, and the cup which is called the blood of Christ, is a figure:
because it is a mystery, and has a further thing hyd under it.

Tertullia^
And Tertullian against the heretic Marcion in his fowerth book: the bread
which he had taken in hands, and had distributed to his disciples, he made it
his body saying, This is my body, that is to say, a figure of my body.

Cyp^ian.
Cyprian in his secound book and third epistle: we see in the water the people
to be understood, and in the wine the blood of Christ to be vnd^rstanded.

Ambrose in his book which he made and entitled de his qui initiantur
mister^is, that is to ^aye, of them that are entered to the order of the holy
mysteries says in this manier: Ambrose.
before the blissyng with the holy words another kind is named: but after the
consecracion the body of Christ is signified.

The same Ambrose in the fifthe Chapitur of his fowerth book entiled de
sacramentis, that is to say, of the Sacraments: Make and do unto us that
this our oblation may be reasonablye and acceptablye, which is the figure of
the body and blood of our lord Jesus Christ.

And the same Ambrose again upon the eleventh Chapitur of the former epistle
of Paul to the Corinthians. We being mindeful hereof in ^ating and
drinking, signify the fleashe and blood of Christ, which were offered up
for us, and within a f^we lines again. In the form and sign of whom we
receive the mystical cup of his blood, to the safegarde and defense of our
souls.

Barnarde in his Sermon which he made upon the Lords supper, Barnarde.
speaks in this wise. Into him herefore the Lord drawing nere unto his
passion, vouchsafed of his grace and favor to clothe and cover his disciples,
to the end that his invisible grace might be given and delivered by some
visible sign.

Chrysostom in the first epistle to the Corinthians and the tenth chapitur:
Chrisostom
For what do I call the communion? that we are all but one very body. What
does the bread signifie^ the body of Christ. What become they, or what are
they made, that receive it^ the body of Christ.

Basilius in his book entitled Liturgia, Basilius.
calls it (...), that is: ye sample, or pattern, or cou^terpaine, of a
thing, and this does he call it after ye consecration.

And Austen in the third book Detrinitate, and the fourth chapitur. Austen.
The Apostle (says he) might by signifiynge, have preached and set forth
the Lord Jesus Christ diverse and sondrye ways, as one way by his tongue and
words, or otherwise by his epistles and writings, or else another way, by the
Sacrament of his body and blood. The same Austen in the book that he writes
against Adimanus has these words. The Lord doubted not to say. This is my
body, when he gave but the sign of his body. And likewise the same Austen
upon the third psalm. He admitted Judas to his mau^dye, in the which he gave
and commanded unto his disciples a figure of his body. The same man against
Maximinus in the.iii. book, and.xxii. chap. says thus. In the sacraments it
is diligentelye considered and regarded, not that they were, but what they
sh^we and signify. For the sacraments are signs of things, and are in
veraye deed one thing, and yet signify an other thing. By these places you
perceiuest and see, y^ the fathers and ancient writers, do not abhor to
put a signification of the body of Christ in this sacrament but do plainly put,
yt there is a signification of Christ's body in the sacrament. Ferthermore we
have alredi showed out of ye holy scriptures, The solutio^ and confutation of
the fourth reason, that was first recited for tra^substa^tiatio^
that there are many such manners of speakinge, as to say: that this or that
thing is such a thing, or such a thing, wha^ the menyng is, that this or y^
thing signifies such a thing, or such a thing. Where fore this argument is
plain blanke, and is brought to naught. Therefore wha^ they object y^ Christ
did not say, yt it did either signify, or represent his body: we make answer,
yt yet nevertheless even out of the scriptures it may so be taken, and that have
we proved lately enough before. Neither do we as (they think) reason or argue
after this manner and sort. Thyskind and manner of speking is so taken in other
places, and therefore it ought so to be taken here. But we only make answer to
the^, who when they should prove their transubstanciatio^ they bring for their
purpose this text. This is my body, which is the very place that all the
doubt and controversy is of, and of whose sense and mening all the doubt is.
They obiecte against us the naked and simple text, and grate still thereupon,
where as by other pla^^s of the scriptures it is manifest that their reason is
nothing firm nor substantial, for so much as this kind of speakinge is
oftentimes to be taken otherwise in the scriptures. Many moo and other reasons
we have to prove our sentence and opinion of the sacraments: neither do we
bring this for any of our arguments, but we do by this reason only answer
unto them, when they lay such a phrase of speaking in our lappes, and we ^aie:
that very often it does signify otherwise, and therefore we say, that it is
but a weak and a feeble conclusion or argument yt they make by that reason. The
co^futacio^ of the sixte reason that was made for tr^subs^anciation in the
beginning of this work.
The reason afterward concerning worshypping of it, that if there were bread
left remaining in the sacrament, the^ the same bread should be worshipped in y^
sacrament. But I wonder much, how they be come thus so dainely so reverent
obseruers of the true worshyppinge: seeing yt in other matters, both wood and
pictures and images be worshipped among the^ and prayed unto. But peradventure,
they will say, they worship not the stocks or pictures, but the things
selves which are represe^ted thereby. But why will they not grant ye same
things of ye bread if it remain in y^ sacrament, y^ it shall not be worshipped
it self, but those things which ye same bread does note and signify. Tha^
further (I prai you) whi did they by ye like reason reprove and take a wai the
accide^tes also, lest peradventure ye same accide^tes might apere to be
worshipped and prayed to in ye sacrame^t^ But peradventure they will excuse this
matter, and sai, y^ no man will worship y^ accide^tes in y^ sacrament, whereas we
al do very well know yt the picturs^ and images which they still suffer and
worship in their churches are nothing but accidents, nether before which they
bow and knele down to worship the^. For and if they longed to do worship to
the substance of wood or of stone, and not to the accide^tes they might
find every where in the woods, and in the streates store inoughe of stocks
and stones to worship and pray unto.

Further, the plain, and rude and ignorant people have no such learning nor
knoweledge that they can judge nor discern, or put any difference between the
schole terms of Accidents, and Substance. And these men that feygne them
selves to be moved with such great and hole zeal in this matter for
auoydinge this Idolatry, should have done very well to have made a
transubstantiation of the cup self too, lest peradventure the cup might
chance to be worshypped, and prayed unto, when it is lifted up above the
priests head, and showed. And truly this argument has ever seemed unto me, a
very slender and a vayn argument, though in deed it be objected of schole
doctors, yea, and such school doctors as be of no small name.

The fifth reason avoided that was made for tra^substa^ciatio^
It was further argued against us, that except we grant and put a
traunsubstantiation, there shall in this sacrament two natures or substau^ces
of bodilye quantitye be put together, at one time, and in one place. Who
would not marvel to see these men to be of such holiness, and confidence
toward lady Nature, and of such high reverence, as though they would not by
their wylles in any point break or violate her laws. Where as yet they
wilnedes have certain accidents to hang by them selves, and to be without
any subject of material substance, which thing is most of all others
contrary to the course, and laws, and order of nature, and yet nevertheless
they do not by this their folishe devise and imagination escape or avoid the
inconvenience which they most fear.

For when they leave the accidents remaining there is of necessity a body
emiddes the same accidents, which body undoubtedly perteyneth to quantity,
and can not be without a quantity and bigness, and does without doubt, fill
a rowme and a place.

And where they will neades have that the flesh of Christ is bodily there
present wythal, which body of Christ has also a quantity and bygnesse and
that the said body of Christ must lie there, as a thing hydden under the
accidents, they can not chose but remediles consounde and mengle together
sundry things of quantitye, and do mengle together two bodies, having their
seuerell quantities

But following our sentence and determi^ation that we shall put in this
matter, there is no danger nor peril of any such folyshe and unreasonable
inconvenience. The auoydinge of the seventh reason brought in to confi^me and
establishe transubstantiation.
They said further, that it was not semynge nor fit for the dignity of
Christ, that his body should be ioygned and annexed to the substance of
bread, which is a very fond, and a folyshe try flynge opinion.

For we do not say, that there is made one essensuall thing of the body
of Christ, and of nature of the bread (in such sort as of the divine nature,
and the humayne nature in Christ there is made one person nor we can not
perceive, what greater dignity, or higher prerogative there should be in the
accidents, the^ there is in the bread. So that if the body of Christ should be
put to be in the sacraments with the accidents (as they would have it) we see
no cause or reason why the same body of Christ may not even as well stand
together and remain with the substance and nature of bread.

And for as much as the divine nature of Christ, is said and affirmed to be
even in hell by his power, without any loss or derogation of his dignitye, and
for as much as this same body of Christ (as them selves thyncke and hold) is
given truly, and substa^ciallye to the wicked sort also to be received and
eaten of them, being men most corrupt and most unworthy to receive it.

Why do they so greatelye fear the dymynishynge of his dignytye in case it
so were, that the body and blood of Christ should be ioygned to the bread
and wine, specially seeing that the ioygninge and knittynge together for a
signification or betokenynge of the thing, ought to be put, and appointed
therein.

An a^swere to the eight ^eason that the tra^substa^tiatours allege for their
purpose.
They made also an other reason or argument concerning oblation and
sacrifiynge, of it. For the body and blood of Christ (say they) are offered
up in the mass, that if there should be no such mutation nor
transubstanciation^ than shall we offer up naught but the signification and
shadow of the body.

What sacrficeis in the supper of the Lord
But here shall Ciprian make answer for us, and shall satisfye them at large:
who in the second book and third Epistle to Cecilius^ says: that it is the
passion of Christ that we offer up at the Lords Supper.

And who is so rude, so gross, or so ignorant, that he does not know the
passion of Christ, not to be now present in the hands of the minister, for
as much, as it was a thing done and paste long sense. Whereof there is at this
supper a memorial celebrabrated and kept, and thanckes are given to God for
the same.

But all that ever they lay for them selves as a cloak in this argument, is
but a thing feigned and a veraye lie, by the which they devise and imagine the
very son of God truly, and substanciallye, and veraylye to be sacrificed and
offered up to the father by the priest and minister.

In which matter how wide they are, and how far they swerue from the
truth, there is no place at this present time to show.

Now have we to declare and to show that all yt they did after this bring
in and obiecte against us out of the sayings and testimonies of the fathers as
contrary to our purpose and opinion, An answer to the argument that the
schoolmen aledge for their t^a^su^stanciation out of the doctors
does in very deed make nothing at all against us.

But before I come to the expoundynge of them: I intend to speak diverse
things in the way of a preaumble unto the mattyer, which may stand instead of certain precepts and rules for the better understanding of the
fathers and aunciente writers in this behalf.

When soever they traict of this sacrame^tal matter, The fyfte rule how to
vnde^s^and the doctors.
and speak somewhat hyghly and vehemently thereof. First it is to be
considered, that the holy scripture does with a certain mutual relation, and
interchau^geablenesse, sometimes attribute to the things selves, such terms
as are propre to the Sacraments and signs on^lye, and those things whych^
are propre to the things selves, they do contrariwyse attribute and assygne
unto the sacraments and signs, which do but represente the things.

An enterchaung^inge of names between the sacraments and things of the
sacraments.
And the same self way and fashion do the aunciente fathers many times use,
so that a man shall oftentimes se and read them, so to speak of the things
s^lues, as though they spoke but of the Sacraments and signs: and oftentimes
contrariwise so to write and talk of the sacraments and signs, as if it were
of the things selves, which the same represente and signify. And so may it
be very well, because of the great likeness and similitude which is between
the said things, and the signs, by reason of Gods institution or ordinance
in them.

The second rule for the understanding of the doctors.
And Austen has given a plain aduertisemente and lesson or rule, as
concerni^ge this matter, written to Bonifatius: that in the sacraments the
names are changed and confounded as we have said before.

The fathers do always call this a spiritual food, and not a bodilye food.
An other rule is, that if ye diligently mark what went before, and what
comm^th after: ye shall always perceiue^ that the fathers do witness and
testifye, the food of this sacrament to be a spiritual food and not the food
of the gutte, or of the bealye, or of the teethe.

The third rule how to understand the doctors.
The third rule is, that if at any time they do write that we do communicate
carnally and fleashlye with Christ, so that our verai bodies also are fed with
the host and sacrament of Eucharistia: all this is in this wise to be
understood, that we must co^ceyue in our minds, that the son of God when
he was conceived of the virgyn Marie, and did take the nature of man upon
him: did even than f^eash^ly and naturally communicate with us.

And ferthermore we do than abide in him, and he again abides in us, when
we believe the words that he has spoken, and when with a true feythe we
receive the sacraments. For in communicatyng and receyuyng his body after
this sort, there is given and wrought in us a new spiritie, and our f^eashe
and bodies which before were of like nature with Christ, and now made
partakers all of like propretees and qualitees with him, and become apt to
receive his immortality, and his resurreccion. And wha^ they obey and serve y^
spirit: than are they truly and verily nourished unto life everlasting. And
thus our bodies by receyuyng of this sacrament are fed two mannier of ways:
the one, with the outward sign and figure: and the other, by this restoryng
of us to everlasting life: and so is Christ said to remain and abide in us
by means of this sacrament. And as touching the first kind, of
communicatynge which we have with Christ by his natiuitee and incarnation we
have a testimony thereof out of the Epistle of Paul to the Hebrews, in the
second chapitur, in these words: For as much than as the children are
partakers of fleashe and blood, he also has likewise been partaker with the
same.

Now that to this present purpose, it is ferther to be considered, that the
word of consecrating does signify nothing else with the fathers and old
writers, but to dedicate and appoint yt thing now to some holy use and office,
which before was prophan and common of his own nature. And therefore we must
not as often as we read in the fathers this word or term of consecration by
an by imagyn in our brains a transubstanciacion: How the ancient fathers do
take and use the word or term of co^sec^ating or consecracio^
And yet y^ there is a certain chaung and a mutation in the consecration, we
do not deny, that is to wete, such a change, for which these same things
are now made sacraments, to signify unto us effectually, that (as concerning
our mind, or solle and our feith,) the very body and blood of Christ is
given and offered by the power of the holy ghost.

It is ferther to be known, that as touching the things selves, there is no
difference between us and the Caper^aites. For they thought that they should
have eaten the veraye body and the veraye fleashe of Christ: and we do
grant no less to be dooen in the sacrament of the Lords supper.

The difference between us and the Capernaites in receyuyng the sacraments.
But the difference between the Capernaites and us, rests in the mannier and
fashion of eating it. For the same that they thought should be carnallye and
fleashly dooen: we teach to be done spiritually. And the very true body of
Christ and his very true blood it is that is given. For feith does not
embrace nor receive feigned things, but things y^ are true in deed. Also when
it is red in ye writings of ye fathers the body of Christ to be co^prehe^ded
and contained in these mysteries: there is nothing else to be taken or
understand by these words, but that it is limited, noted, showed, represented,
or signified by them.

And when thou hear any of the fathers saying that there is now no bread
nor wine any longer remaining in the sacrament, The sixth rule.
you must not understand this so to be without any farther addition or
circu^staunce but in respect of thy self when thou do deuoutlye and godly
receive it. For thou for thy part, at that time must not think any longer on
the bread, or on the wine, but thy mind and ^ence must wholly and only clea^e
and stick to the things which are there represented and signified by the
sacrament. And therefore it is said by the priest or ministe Lift up your
hertes, to the entente that thou should lift up thy mind and thy heart
from these visible things unto the things invisible which are there offered
and given unto the. Yea, and the holy scriptures do not abhor from this
kind of figurative speakinge neither, but do admit^e and use the same. For
Paul says We have no strife nor wrastlinge against flesh and blood. Who
nevertheless would not have denied, but that the body and fleashe does noye and
burden, and encumber the soul, and that the same body and flesh ought to be
bridled and kept under. For the same Paul in an other place writes in this
manner. The fleashe desyereth contrary to the spirit.

Neither was Paul ignorant that there be many ill folk, which in the
scripture be called flesh and blood, of whom nevertheless we be molested and
vered, and have a continual conflicte or wresting with the same. But Paul's
menyng was of that same chief and especial cont^^cion or striuyng, from the
which all these other striuinges take their beginning. Paul said also in
another place, that there is in Christ neither he nor she neither bondeman nor
free man. etc. Yet nevertheless these offices and these sorts of people are
not rejected or put away from Christ, or from the congregation of Christians,
yea and commandments and rules of order written in scripture severally of
the said sorts of people. But Paul meant that these things be not in Christ
as touching regeneracion in Christ, as touching forgiveness of sins, and as
touching the obteynynge of everlasting life, which things are the highest and
chiefest points in the profession of Christ. And in distributing of ye said
things. Christ has not any parciall respect to these states and to these
degrees of men. The same Apostle writes these words: The kingdom of God is
not in words: and yet he would not for that cause bannyshe out of the
congrega^ion or put away exhortacions, admonicions, and readynges, which be
dooen with words: but he had o^elye a respect to that chief strength and
efficace of the holy ghost^ whereby al things ought to be ruled or governed
in the congregation. And even after thissame manier do the fathers and old
writers speak, when they deny that the same nature or substance of the
signs do still remain in the sacrament which thing as we have said) is not
to be understood as the plain words ^oune without any ferther addicion,
circumstaunce, or consideracion: but as touching our feith, and as touching our
thynkyng which our feith and thoughts ought not over much to lean or cleave
to the said signs or tokens.

Aman may ferther say, The seventh rule or understanding of the D^^tours.
that feith is of such virtue strength, and efficacy, that it can make
things to be present: yet not only really or in substance, but spiritually.
For feyth does veraily comprehend such things.

And in this sense or meaning the Apostle said that Christ was crucified even
before the eyes of the Galathians. The presence that feith causes.
And after the same manier was Abraham said to have seen the day of the
Lord. And after the same manier the old aunciente fathers of the old
testament had the same Christ in their sacraments, that we have now in ours.
And thus ye see that to this presence it is not requisite that things dooen in
their natural constitu^ion and being should change their place, and come
from place to place, or that they should be present before our yies with all
their material and natural qualitees, states, conditions, and all other
appurtenaunces.

It is also to be observed and marked, The eighte reason how to understand the
writings of the fathers.
that things may be so spoken by alternacion, that is to say, for the
respect of a certain enterchaungeablenesse of the propretee, (which is after
such sort, that such things as do properly belong to his godhead, are some
time applied to the humanity, and contrary wise, those things that belong to
his humanity are sometimes applied and referred to his godhead: and this I
call alternacion, and communicating of propretees and by this alternacion
because the deitee or godhead of Christ is most truly present with us:
the same self thing may be made commune to his humanity also. As when Christ,
being upon earth, said that the son of man was in heaven, and in so
saying he applied that thing to his humanity or manhood, which belonged to
his deity or godhead. And after this fashion of speech: I would grant that
Christ's manhood is present to us when we receive his body. Albeit I would than
expoune it, that it were by the fore said communication of alternation of
propretees. Finally, why the fathers do somtymes speak more then the truth
is, vsy^g the figure Hiperbole.
if you demand, why old writers used such manners of speech as some
impossible: it was for these causes: partly, that they would follow the phrase or
manner of speech read in scripture, and partlye, that they might move men's
minds, with a greater zeal, and also, that they might declare that this
signification of sacraments was not like to things signified in a comedi^ or
tragedy. For in such enterludes, any of the players being disguised in his
players apparel may represente the person of (...) or Priamus, but than
gets he thereby (...) or nothing else to speak of, but when he has placed
his part he is the same man that he was before But in the recei^yng of Christ's
body the thing being represented with the strength of the holy ghost, is both
given and emprinted in our hertes and our solles through faith and many gifts
and graces do follow and specially a secret and an unspeakable knittinge and
union of us with Christ does follow, so that we are made one thing with
Christ.

The reasons avoided y^ was brought for transu^^^anciacion^ ^ut of the doctors.
Now the first objection was brought out of Ireneus, which says that
yearthly bread (when it has received another name is not common bread but it
is made Eucharistia that is to say, a sacrament of thanks geuyng.

We gladli grant this to be true for we do not hold y^ it is prophan and
common bread such as we use daily to eat: but that it is an holy bread, and
a bread appointed to an holy use and purpose, which at the receiving of
Christ's body is made (as Irenens said) Eucharistia, but all the words yt
follow in Ireneus do much make for our part. For he writes, yt Eucharistia
does consist of two parts, that is to wete of an heavenly thing, and of an
yearthely thing. And he did not say, that it is made of the accide^tes of an
yearthely thing, and after wards he writes our bodies receyuyng the
sacrament of Eucharistia, to be on this condition not corruptible, if the
same have hope of resurrection. And in case that so great a change be
granted and put of him to be in our bodies, that he made it equal with the
change of the bread: (for as that bread (says he) is no longer Common
bread so our bodies be no longer corruptible) what need shall it be, to set
up this transubstanciatyon, seeing he makes the two chaungeynges on both
sides equal. And a plain mattier it is that the substaunces of our bodies
be notte tratysubstancyated.

Secondartyly Tertullian was alleged. Tertullian answer unto.
And he also brings a declara^ion with him to show what he meneth for
Tertullyan does not only speak in this manyer: Our lord took bread and
made it his body, when he said: this is my body: but also Tertullyan puts
thus much more to it to declare it, and says: id est figura corporis m^i:
that is to wete says Tertullyan the sign of my body.

The objection out of Origin answered unto.
They brought in against us Origin also, because he wrote that Christ granted
the bread to be his body. And that do not we deny: but all our
controversy does consiste in the manier how it is Christ's body. And as
touching this point, Origin himself shows plainly in other places of his
weorkes, that there be figures here, and that this bread is called the word
nutritive of the solle, and gives a ferther lesson concerning the same, that we
must not set our minds to cleue and stick, to the blood of the fleashe, but
to the blood of the word.

Cyprian answered unto.
Ciprian seems to speak more hardelye, when he said that this bread is
changed, not in his shape, or outward apparaunce, but in his nature. But we
must have a regard and consideracion what he wrote to Caecisius. Which was,
that the Lords blood was showed forth with the wine, and that if wine
ceased to be in the cup, it could not seem that Christ's blood was in the
cup. And as touching that he writes in this place of chaungeyng the wine into
blood, we granted also that a change there is, but we affirm it to be a
sacramental mutacion or changing and none other. And thus taking it we grant
that it is not ye shape of ye bread, or ye form, or ye accidents of the
bread that have such office here as to be Sacraments: but we say that the
nature, and the veraye substance of the bread and of the wine is changed
into the sacraments of Christ's body and blood. And And as the very
substance of the bread and not the shape of the bread does nourishe: so
Christ's body does both nourishe our soul and brings cou^forte and
strength to our body.

And as the very substance of the bread is made of many graynes: so the
mystical body which it represents, has many members or parts joined and
united together. Wherefore as well we as our adversaries, do grant that it
is not the shape, that is to say, the outward appearance and sight of the
bread and the outward fashion of it, that is changed: but that it is the
very substance thereof, which is changed. Now our adversaries will have,
that the chan^ge is made by the castyng away of the breades nature but we do
hold, that there is but only a sacramental change.

And Cyprian himself makes plainly against our adversaries. For they do
not say, that the substance of the bread is changed: but they say, that
the substance of the bread is utterly gone, so that they take the bread
clean away. We say, that the substance of the bread is changed, and so
changed, that it becomes Christ's body: that is to say, the sacrament of
Christ's body: which it was not before. A man may also besides all this, say,
that this latin word natura is not evermore in the good auctoures of the
latin tongue taken for substancia that is to say, substance: but sometimes
it is taken for one of these words, vis the strength or virtue, ingenium the
nature or disposicion, or propri^tas, the propretee. etc. Whereof Cicero says
in his book entitled Desomnio scipionis: The propre nature and strength of the
solle is (says he,) that it is moved of it self. And in an epistle to one
Lentulus he writes thus: The nature and the religion of thy province to be
such etc. In which place the word nature is taken for the fasshion, and the
disposicion or inclinacyon. etc. And even in like manier is it to be taken
when it is said: the nature of herbs, or the nature of stones, and so others
like. And this sygnification of the word nature, does veraie well agree with
the saieyng of Ciprian before cited.

The ob^^^on. out of Ambrose answered unto.
They bring forth Ambrose against us also, and specyallye in his Books
entitled de sacramentis. Which books Ambrose did not make, as some men think.
Fysher late bishop of Rochester does inueighe and in manner rage against al
such as so think. And he says, that we ought in any wise to give credit
unto Austen, who avouches that Ambrose wrote the said books, and was Auctour
of them, and he testyfyeth in plain words, that Ambrose wrote these said
books of the sacraments. And for proof of the mattyer, he allegeth the
prologue of Auste^ upon his books entitled de doctrina Christiana which
prologue of Austen. I have often times read. But yet cold I never there find
that, that fysher wrytteth: unless paraduenture he mean of that that Austen
wroote in his book of Retractacyons, when he makes mention of his books de
doctrina Christiana and there in deed, he says such a thing, but not in ye
prologe of his work de doctrine Christiana, as fysher cites it. Morouer this
point I do verai well know, that Austen writing against one. Iulianus a
pelagion does allege Ambrose concerning the Sacrament of rege neracyon or of
philosophye: But he mencyoneth not any word of these books of the mysteries
or of the sacraments. And ye words yt Auste^ al^egeth in yt place are not in
these books of the sacraments. But I pass not for this. Suppose that Ambrose
were the autour and writer of them: they do not utterly dissente or disagree
from our minds in this mattier.

For many things he speaks of sygnyfyeng, and that these sacraments be
called, or said to be Christ's body: which things we do not deny. And in
case he do at any time speak or make mention of chau^ging or turnyng: tha^
is it all together to be understood of a sacramental chaungeyng. Morouer he
himself must be well looked upon and weighed, what he writes in other places.
First de officiis in the fourth book and fowertie eight chapitur, he has
these words here ensuyng: In the one, that is to say, in the old law, is the
shadow: and in the one is the image: but in the other, that is to say, in the
new law, is the veritee, in the law is the shadow: in the gospel is the
truth, and truth there is in heavenly things. In the old law, there was
offered a lamb, there was offered a calfe: now in the new law is Christ
offered, but he is offered as a man, and as one that receives his passion, but
he himself offrethe himself as a priest, that he may put away our sins:
here as if were in an Image or similitude, there in veritee, where he makes
intercessyon as an Advocate for us before his father. And upon the first
epistle to the Corynthyens, (as we have before alleged) the same Ambrose thus
says: In eating and drinking we do represente or sygnyfye the fleashe and
blood of Christ, which things be offered. And when he speaks of the
blood, he says, that we receive the mystical cup, in tipum ^ius, that is
to say, for a sign of he same blood.

Also the same ambrose in his fourth book of the sacraments, and the fourth
chapytur, puts plainly our chaungeynge into Christ: which self same
point we have noted and marked oftentimes in others of the old fathers, and
writers.

Now remains that we see concerning Chrysostom, what is to be said:
Chrisostom answered unto.
They brought in for their purpose his similitude of wax, which wax being
put to the fire, is distroyed as touching his substance, so that nothing of
the wax remains or eskapeth: So think thou (says Chrysostom) that the
mysteryes are consumed of the substance of Christ's body. Our adversaries
say: What thing can be spoken more plainly to declare that the substance of
ye bread is gone? but here I think it no labor lost but a profitable
excercyse to examine dyligently some places o^ Chrysostomes weorkes, that ye
may understand plainly, how well the things be marked which we spoke of
before: as touching such phrases found in old writers. In the.lxxxiii.
homelye upon Matthew. he wrytteth thus: Many men say, that they wisshe and would
fayn see the form, and shape and likeness of Christ: yea and that they would
veraye feign behold his garments and shoes: but he delivers himself to
thee, not only that thou may see him, but also that thou may touch him
Do not we here understand, how he appli^th that to the thing of the
sacrament, which belongs or pertayneth to the signs, as for example Christ's
body may be touched, and may be seen? which thing to be true of the
signs only: what it is that does not receive and see. Again, in the same
homely or exhortacio^: Christ reduces and brings us with him self into one
mass or lump, and that not only by faith: but also he makes us in very
deed his body. Which same self thing also he wrote in the sixtieth and
sixtieth one Homely, unto the people of Antioche: affyrmyng that we, not
only by faith and charitee: but in very deed: are made and are joined and
anexed to Christ's body. And if it so be, that our substance is not turned
into Christ's substance, and yet that we be so nyghe to Christ: why must
the substance of the bread be changed when it must be made Christ's body.
But a doubt might here arise, as though Chrysostom made against us, in that
we hold that this receyuynge is by feythe, where he says, that we be joined
and turned or changed in to Christ, not only through feyth, but also in
veraye deed. But here is to be marked, that although we hold Christ's body
to be eaten, and his blood to be drounke through feith in receiving of this
sacrament yet upon this receyuyng by feyth there does forth with follow not
a feyned ioygning but a true and an effectual couplyng between us and Christ,
through the which ioygning of us to Christ not only our mind and solle is
united and knitte unto Christ and made one with him: but also our body and
our flesh has thereby a certain restoryng and renewyng, so that we are thereby
truly and verayly made the members of the Lord, and we receive Christ which
is our head, of whom we draw and take our spirit and our life continually. And
this it is that Chrysostom meant when he said that we be truly and veraily
ioigned to Christ. And thus much more may yet be said herein, that
Chrysostom in the self same homely and sermon upon Matthew says, that th^se
be the signs or tok^ns of Jesus Christ, with the which signs we stop the
heretics mouths, when they demand of us after what sort or facion Christ
did suffer. For if he had not had veraie true flesh in deed, and also if he
had not truly and v^rily suffered passion in deed tha^ were these signs or
tokens but vain things. He says also in the same homelye, that our tongue is
made blouddye in the receiving of the Sacraments And lest one might make
some cauillacion, and say that this blood must be understand to be
invisible blood, (that is to sa^e, such blood as cannot be seen with our^
yies:) with the which blood being contained in the wine or in the accidents
of the wine (as themselves do term it) our toungue is made blouddie: the
same father Chrysostom in the sixtieth homely to the men of Antioche,
says, that our toungue is made red with this blood of the sacrament. In
the which words who does not se yt he speaks by ye figure Hiper bo^e, which
is: when a man for ye more vehement and more earnest expressing of a thing will
speak more then the truth is, or may without plain miracle as for exaumple
if one should say, that all the world heard a thing spoken, when his meaning
is, that a very great noumber heard it: this manier of speaking is called
hiper bole, and in his homelye made in Eucherius, he says that in the cup
there is blood taken out even from the lords side.

Which thing can not be believed in the verai same form that it is spoken,
Chrysostom himself declares his own hyperblicall speakynges.
forasmuch as Christ's side is not now at this day open, neither any blood
taken out therefrom.

He wrytethe morouer in the same Homely after this manier: Do thou see any
bread or wine? And himself in this wise makes the answer to the question:
Nay, god forbid. Surely if he should ask the senses of a man such a
question, they would answer (if they could speak,) that it were not true
that Chrysostom says. For after the judgment of our senses, there is
present both bread and wine too. But he speaks truly when he says
afterward, non ita cogites, that is, think no such thing in thy mind,
that there is bread there. For as touching our mind or thinking, all such
things must away.

The Same Chrysostom writes in this mannier: Ne putes te ex homine accipere
corpus Christi sed a seraphin, qui astet et forcipe tradat tibi Carbonem
ignitum. That is to say, think not thy self to receive the body of Christ at
a mortal man's hand: but of an Aungel of the order of Seraphin who stands
by, and delivers thee an hoate fierye coal with a pair of tongues^ etc.
here in this place I do not suppose that these men would have that the
minister or the pastor which ministers the Sacraments unto us, is
transubstanciated into an Angel. And the same Chrysostom writes afterward.
Accurramus ad exugendum sanguinem, qui ex latere domini prof^uit. That is to
say, leat us run to suck out the blood which flows out of the Lords
side. The very schoolemenne themselves dare not speak so large as this. For
they write yt the bread and the wine are turned into the substance of the
body and blood of Christ: but yet not so that any thing is added to the
veraye true substance of Christ's body or abated from the substance of the
same. And in the lx. and one homely to the people of Antioche, he says that
Christ did not give himself to us to be seen, but also to be touched, and
to be felt, and to have his fleashe fastened upon with our teeth. In which
place also, ye see that that is applied to the thing signified by the
sacraments, That that properly belongs to y^ sig^es as attributed to the
things.
which properlye and peculierlye belongs but to the signs only. For our
teeth do not reach so fer, as to touch ye substance of Christ's body, but
only to the bread, and the signs, and the Sacraments,

The same manne in the sixtieth Homelye to the people of Antioche says that
we ought not to think yt the ministers hand does hold forth the
Sacrament unto us: but that we should think Christ's own hand to be
stretched forth unto us and to do it. And likewise in Baptism that it is
Christ himself that executes the office of baptising. And in the three skore
and one Homely he exhortethe us to think that we do in this Sacrament
taste Christ sittinge in heauen^ which is wurshipped of the Angels. In all
which which places here now alleged it is manifest and plain enough that
this our old aunciente father trauayled by all means possible to call forth
the minds of such as receive the Sacraments from these yearthly and gross
and outward signs, to the contemplacion and meditacion of the godly and
heavenly things by them represented. And a thing it is much to be meruayled
at, that these men which be so diligent in serching and discussynng the
sayings of the fathers and old writers: Do not among all others, bring
forth the place of Chrysostom which is written in the sixtieth and one Homely
to the people of Antioche where he says, that those men are both light and
malaperte and froward which use to stand present by, at the ministryng of
the sacraments, and do not receue the communion themselves to. Wherein
Chrysostom affirms yt they do unto Christ a manifest iniurye and wrong. But
to tarry a little longer upon that that was set forth in the argument of weaxe
which melts altogether when it is set to ye fire (as aforesaid) we
answer, that Chrysostom has often times in that place this word Puta,
that is, think thou, to thentente we shoule understand that this and such
other mattyers must not be taken but only in respect of our feyth and our
thinking, with the which feith or thynkyng when we receive the bread and the
wine, we do not comprehe^or consider the bare things alone by themselfes:
But we lift up our minds, and seek the heavenly things which by way of
betokeninge are annexed to those yearthely things, Cirillus answered unto and
declared.
and by the same effectually signified. Morouer we bring forth a like
symilitude out of Cyrilus in the tenth book and the.xiii. chapitur upon the
gospel of Ihon where he says yt wax being melted and so mingled with other
wax yt both be made utterly one thing does represente ye verai same thing yt
is doe^ i^ ye receiui^g of ye sacrament: which is, yt we be made verayly one
thing with Christ.

And the same self thing he has again in the fowerth book and seventeenth
chapytur of the same work.

Now than if it so be that this symilytude of weaxe has place as touching
that we be made one with Christ, and yet no transubstanciatynge of our body
thereunto required: than may the same thing also be put and holden of
Chrysostomes similitude which he puts between the weaxe and the signs or
mysteryes of this sacrament. Besides the premises, it is to be demanded of
our adversaries whether they will have these and such other similitudes to
agree in all points.

Which thing if they grant to be true, than should they take away also
the whytnesse, the roundenesse, ye taste, and the other accidents of the
bread from this sacrament. For the weaxe that is put to the fire is not only
destroyed as touching the substance of it but also as touching the
accidents. If they will not the simylitude to have place in this behalf, than
shall it belefull and free for us also, to understand all this whole mattier,
and to apply it to the thinking and conceiuynge of our minds, and to that
that is comprehended and enbraced by feith: and there will we grant as
touching the conceyuynge or comprehensyon of our feyth that the nature both
of bread and wine departs away, and that our mind and solle is only
fyxed upon the things that are thereby sygnyfyed, and upon the things which
are offered unto us by mean of that outewarde signs, that is to say, upon the
body and blood of Christ.

And as touching Chrysostom, thus much suffiseth to be said: wherein we
may well see how truly those things which we have spoken before of
understanding and taking the old fathers and ancient writers of the church
do take place. Austen aunswred unto.


Then was Austens saying brought in and objected against us, for that he
wrote upon the three and thirtieth Psalm, that Christ did bear himself in
his own hands: Christ how he bare him self in his own hands
yea even at his last supper when he distributed and delivered the sacrament
about to his Apostles: and as for this, do not we deny. For what impediment
or let should there be, but that Christ might bear his own body in his
own hands if by his body a man understand the Sacrament of his body. And
this it meneth that Austen did add in the end of this place, this word
Quodammodo that is to say after a certain fashion, as though he should have
said, he bare not himself after a plain and absolute manier of speaking or
vnderderdandyng, but aliquo modo that is, after a certain fashion, and that is
the same veraye way or fasshion which we have here above already declared.

They lay against us also the same Austens saying written in the third book
De Trinitate, that is to say of Trinity where he says that the bread is
brought to his visible likeness of fashion by the handye work of man, but
that it could be made so great a Sacrament without the invisible operacion
and woorkynge of the holy ghost.

But it is a matier not alitle to be wondered at, how these me^ ca^ not call to
remembrance nor receive no other work of the holy ghost in this sacrament,
but transubstaunciation only. For as soon as they hear the name and mention
of operatyon of the holy ghost in this sacrament they can straight way bring
in transubstanciacyon whereas yet nevertheless these outward signs can not
possybly be so changed, yt they can be brought to such an high state and
degree as to be sacraments, It is the operation of the holy ghost that
these helementes are made sac^amentes.
nor cannot be changed. But by the power and might of God, yt is to wete,
through the lords institutyon and ordinance by pronouncyng of certain holy
words out of the sciptures, and by the strength and efficacye of the holy
ghostes workyng: For these godly things do not now any more come hurlyng or
stumblyng into our minds after the vulgar or commen sort: But with an
effectual and a very earneste enforcemente of the holy ghost. And by the
strength and virtue of the same holy ghost, our hearts and minds be persuaded
and moved to the conceauyng and enbracyng of the things of the sacraments
through feith.

Now as touching Austens saying who in the nyntie eighte psalm upon the
text Adorate scabellum pedem eius that is, wurshyp ye the foot stool of his
feet, seeks about what footestole the same should be, and at length fyndeth
that it is said in the scriptures Terra est scabellum pedum eius that is to
say the yearthe is his foot stool butte how (says he (shall we wurshyp the
yearthe: It is not written in the scryptures, Thou shall wurshyp the lord thy
god, and him alone shall thou serve, and is it not commanded (says Austen)
that we shall not wurshyp any of the things which are in ye heavens above, or
upon the earth beneath, or in the waters, or underneath the earth. But after
al this he brings in, that a certain earth there is, which both may and
ought of good right to be wurshypped, For (says he) the soonne of god took
upon him man's nature, that is to say, ^leashe of a virgyn, and fleashe is
called earth in the holy scryptures, because our body was taken of the
earth. And that the fleashe of Christ is to be wurshypped, does of this
mattyer plainly appear, because that when he gives the same to be eaten, no
man does eat it before he has first wurshipped it.

These words of Austen can make no thing against us. For we make no denial
at all but that the fleashe of Christ is to be wurshipped, because of the
ioygninge and couplyng that it has with his other nature of his Godhed. But
now at this present our contencion is, whether the said flesh of Christ lies
hidden in the sacrament under the accydentes of the bread, and not whether
the fleashe of Christ be to be wurshipped or no. But they say. If Christ's
fleashe were not there in the sacrament, and bread still remayninge or
contained in the sacrament: than should there be Idolatry committed. But we
thus answer again, that they also run into as great a daungier of
Idolatry, as we. For they also on there part should remove and take away
the accidents, lest the same accidents might happen to be wurshipped: and
they should change the substance of the veraye cup or chalice too, and
make a transubstanciacion of it for fear lest it would be wurshypped of
some ignoraunte persons, and Idolatry co^myted thereunto.

But in a sacrament we put a dyfference between the outward signs and the
things that are sygnyfied by them: and to these signs we give and show
honor and reverence that is to wete, that they be reverently handled and
after a comely facion, and that they be not cast away. For they be holy
things and deputed and appointed ones to god. But as touching the things
signified and represented by the out ward signs, (that is to wete, the body
and blood of Christ, we do quickly and without any sticking grant that
they should be wurshipped. For Austen says in this place. There is none
offense dooen in wurshyppyng of Christ's fleashe: But there is an offense
committed in not wurshyppinge of it. But yet does Austen forth with warn us
that we should nottary or fix our minds upon the fleashe of Christ: but that
we should lift up our minds to his godly nature and to his deitee, to the
which deyte Christ's fleashe is ioygned and knitte with such a knotte as can
not be vnlooced for else (says he) Caro non prodest quicquam sed spiritus est
qui viuificat. that is the flesh does nothing proffyt nor avail. But it is
the spyryte that quickneth and gives life. where mark, that this saying of
Christ which is written in the sixth chapytur of John's gospel, is
understood and taken of Austen concerning Christ's fleashe, and not after a
carnal and fleashely understanding of the same, as some men would have it.
But now for wurshyppynge of it I will here bryefly touch and in few words
repeat the same.

Which before this time I spoke when I declared this epistle: which was that
adoracion or wurshypping, consists in Inuocatyon or calling upon, (as when we
pray to God) and in confessyng or acknowelaygeyng, (which confessing is of
two sorts the one with the heart, and the other with the mouth,) and in thanks
giving. Al these things be dew both to god and to Christ where and when
soever he declares himself unto us. And this is done three manier of ways:
first by reason of gods word inwardly considered when some vehement
thinking upon God and Christ comes into our minds, by the strength and
power of the holy ghost. And than does wurshyppynge follow streygth way.
For either we confess and knoweledge his majesty to be most excellent. etc.
or else we call upon him to help us, or else we thank him for his goodenesse
showed unto mankind. And these things do sometimes, declare themselfes unto
us by external and outward words, that is to wete, as often as we ourselves
read the holy scryptures, or else when we hear godly sermons. For in this
case we be many times provoked to call upon God or to do other things
which perteyne to the nature of godly wurshyppi^g. To be short, Christ and
god sometimes does declare himself by outewarde signs as he did in ye
Mount of Synai unto Moses, and to the prophet Isai in likeness of a king
sitting in his regal throne. Exodus xix.
In the arc of promise, and in the Sacraments. Isay. vi.
And here also is adoracion or wurshipping used. But like as Austen gave
warning or exhorted us, that we should notte set our minds and stayghe
only upon the fleashe, but that we should go for ward lifting upon our
minds to his deite or godhead: So do I now here give warnyng, that when we
receive the sacrament we should not stop or tarry in the outward signs with
our wurshipping, but that we should in spirit and in truth wurship Christ that
sits in heaven at the right hand of the father. Which thing because some
unlearned people do not understand by reason of this false opinion of
transubstanciacion being now confirmed and rooted in men's minds: therefore I
would think it not unprofitable, if we did refreine our selves from outward
wurshipping of it, as from prostration or kneelyng, until such time, as the
rude sort and ignorant people were better enstructed and taught therein.
Inward wurshippyng may be used without daungier: nether were the outward
worshyppyng ill in his own true natural use. For many men do godly and
reuerentlye bow their knee when they hear those words of the gospel et
ver^um caro factum est that it is to say. And that word became fleashe. etc.
And yet is it not to be said of them, that they wurship the very words, but
the things that is sygnyfyed by the words.

Which same self thing what stop or let is there but that it may be dooen
in this matyer of the sacrament, so that the outewarde signs be no^
wurshypped, but the thing that is sygnyfyed by the signs. But in these
present days peradventure outewarde wurshyppynge is not expedyent to be used
for the foresaid cause, unless often mention should be made of such
matyers in the sermons to the people.

And yet leat not any man take occasion of these my words, to say, or think
that it is lawful to worship Images or pictures, because that god and Christ
do seem some times in them to declare him self effectually unto us. For we
have plain words of scripture yt we shall not make unto us any Images to
worship them. But as touching the words of holy scripture, and as touching
the sacraments here is nothing to the contrary but that in hearing or
receyuyng them we may worship them, because they be things instituted and
ordained by the word, the will, and the commandment of god, too the entente
that we might thereby be provoked to the due serving of good, which serving
of god, consists much in adoracion and humble wurshipping of him. Neither can
ye also of this matyer, or of any my words gather that any part that
remains after the receyuynge of the sacrament should be wurshiped. For what
so ever strength the outewarde signs in the sacraments have, they have it of
the holy ghost, of the lords words, and of his institucyon, and ordinance.
Which things do no longer remain, then while the use and receyuynge of the
sacrament does continue. And the promise of God, is applied to this
sacrament whiles we eat and drink the sacrament. Wherefore yt opinion and
doctrine of reserving the sacrament was not Catholic, nor vniuersalli used or
receives in ye Christya^ co^gregacio^s. For in ye time of Hesythius (as him
self testifies writing upon the book of Moses that is entitled leuiticus)
that yt was least of ye sacrament, was burnt which selfsame thing you haste also
in Orygyen upon the same book entitled Leuiticus (though it be but al one
book a scribed to know men. And clement bishop of Rome did ordein or make,
that the leauynges of this sacrament should be eaten of the clerks, as it
plainelye appears in his decree which is written in the title de
consecratione, that is of consecration, and in the second distinction. We do
not deny but yt the leauinges of ye sacrament were so^etimes reserved and kept:
but it was done without any wurshipping of it, and without any supersticious
points of reverence. The leauynges of this sacrament were delivered to
children and to women to be carried to sick folk, as it is plain in ye
history of Eusebius and in Hierome one of the doctors of the Church. And I
would su^what stagger to say ye receyuinge of such leauinges being done
privately out of ye holy compaignie, and with out the ordier and manier of
receiving the communion instituted of Christ, was a right, a full, and a
perfect receiving of ye communion or of ye sacrament which receiving of ye
sacrament among the sick folks, I could yet nevertheless grant unto, so yt
the same do repeat y^ holy words of Christ and so y^ some honest Christians
do there among themselves put in use ye ordinance of Christ in this behalf.
For except mo persons the^ one alone do receive ye communion together: the due
order and course of receiving this sacrament is not observed and kept. Christ's
words were to me the^ one, in this sort: Accipe, edite et bi^ite: yt is to say,
take ye, eat ye, and drink ye. There is bread broken into sondrye pieces,
which thing meneth, that it should be dealed about and disstributed to mo
then one. And they speak many things in their canon of the old Mass, which
unless a number do receive it together, are sterke false and very lies. And
besides this, it is called of learned men. Coena a supper, Communio, a
communion, and sinaxis a gathering or coming together: which names do nothing
agree with a private accio^ or doing of one person alone by himself. Neither do
we in any place read in old writers of any private masses where one alone
might receive the sacrament without the company of others Honorius bishop of
Rome was ye first yt made a decree yt the sacrament of Eucharistia should be
reserved and kept and decreed ferther that honor and reverence should be
dooen to it. Honorius bishop of Rome.
When it was carried abroad any whither. That if this thing had been dooen of
others before his days. It had not belo^ged unto him to make a decree of any
such thing. And to speak in a brief sum, we affirm and hold (as we have
before said) yt this Sacrament has not his full strength and vert^e and
efficacy but whiles it is in doing and in executing, and whiles it is in
receiving: which thing you see also to be done in all the other Sacraments.
Hilarious is brought against us, Hilarious au^swered unto.
but he had very great controversies and disputacions with the Arrians against
who^ he writes. Which Arrians thought that the father and the soonne were none
other wise knitte or joined together, but by a concord and agreement of will,
and by such unity of mind, that whatsoever the father would the son would
the same. Against these Arrians.

Hilarious thus says: I demand of you this question, whether the co^ioynyng
and unity that is between us and Christ be of the propretee of nature, or
else of the co^corde and unity of mind and will. For the Arrians would for
their purpose have caught hold on that that place, in which Christ prayed
that we might be made one with him, as he and his father be one between
themselves. The text or sentence is in the seventh chapitur of John's ghospel,
whence it is said: Nevertheless I pray not for them alone but for the^ also
which shall believe on the^ through their preachinge, that they all may be one
as thou father art in me, and I in thee: that they also may be one in us,
that the world may believe that thou haste sent me. etc.

The Heretics did put this gloss to it that we and Christ were none
otherwise ioygned and knitte together, but by consent and unity of will: and
there of they gatheredde and concludedde, that there was in like mannier none
other couplynge and knittinge together of the son of god with the father, but
only thissame knittynge together and union of mind and will. It was Hilarious
part therefore to decclare that we are knitte and made one with Christ
naturallye, that he might conclude, that the son of God also is naturally
joined to ye father in very substance. The proving therefore of Hilarious
co^clusio^ renneth thus: If the son of God did truly and verily take the
nature or substance of man upon him he agrees with us naturally in his
flesh, and we be said to abide in him be cause he has our nature in him.
And again for the other side when we receive the meat which was instituted of
Christ, if we do truly and veraily receive his flesh, we are partakers
with him naturally, and he does truly and veraily abide in us. And thus does
Hilarious take and frame his argument of the veritee and truth of the
sacraments, which veritee or to be in the sacraments we do not deny. And
this was a common custom among the ancient writers, to fetch the ground of
their arguments out of the Sacraments as things most perfitly known to al
Christian me^. And of al these things there is not one jot that is contrary to
our sentence and determinacion. For it is no part of Hilarious entente to prove
that Christ's fleashe lies hidden under the accidents of bread, or in this
sacrament: but he makes proof only and so concludes, that we be truly and
verayly joined unto Christ's flesh when we receive the sacrament, which thing
we do not deny nor say against. But ye that make so much a do for
transubstanciacion, mark me this poinct, yt the same self Hilarious a little
before these words which he writes of Eucharistia, does say the very same
thing of baptism, yt through baptism we be joined unto Christ, and every on^
of us to other not only by an union of consent and agreyng to gether in mind
and will, but also in an unity of nature and substance. Wherefore it ye same
thing so be, than are ye compelled and driven of force to put a
tra^substanciacion in Baptism too, if ye being a transubstanciacion into the
sacrament of Eucharistia for ye respect above mentioned. Chrysostom does not
much vary from this custom of framing his arguments out of the sacraments.
For in his eighty eighte Homely upon the gospel of Matthew he says (as we
alleged before) that these be the signs or Sacraments of our Lord Jesus,
with the which we do both bridle and stop the mouths of Heretics.

For they oftentimes say: how did Christ suffer? And we on our side obiecte
against them again. If Christ had not verai true and natural fleash in deed,
tha^ are these signs but vain things, which thing follows very well. For
else the sacraments should signifye and represente unto us, feigned things.
And thus the mouths of the Manichees of the Marcionites, and of such other
pernicious heretics, were stopped of Chrysostom and such others as he was.
As touching Leo byshope of Rome, An answer to Leo Bishop of Rome.
there is no cause why to take much ca^e or peine to answer him. For he in
the sentence and determinacion of the sacraments yt is laid unto us, does both
grant a mystycal dystribucyon of it to mo then one, and also does put a
spirytuall nourishyng, and an heavenly virtue, and affyrmeth that we be
transfourmed and changed into Christ's fleashe, as he took our fleashe and
nature upon him.

They bring, Emisenus against us, whose words be read in the title De
consecratione that is to say, Emisenus answered unto.
of consecration and in the second distinction. But there, (if thou look well)
thou shall find these words. Mente attingas, et manu cordis accipias corpus
Christi^ that is to say, touch thou Christ's body with thy mind, and take
thou his body with the hand of thy heart. In the which words it is plain,
that he does affirm and hold, that we do eat Christ's body spirytually
when we receue the sacrament.

And he moreover byndeth earnestly (as the other old writers do) upon the
chaungeyng of us into Christ, which chau^geinge nevertheless is done (as we
see) without any transubstancyatynge of us.

I know that many men may marvel, why we so often times do match that
same chaungeing which the old writers seem to speak of in the signs or
sacraments, with the chaungyng of us into Christ, which they all do grant
and constauntly affirm. And some men do imagine, that there is another manier
of ioygnynge between Christ's body and the sacrament, then there is between
us and Christ's body: and that therefore this proporcion and comparion has
no place in this matier, although ye old writers affirm and avouche both
chaunginges.

To such persons we answer and say, that our argument is most pithie and
strong. For the reason does argue (as the Logicyans terms be) a maiore ad
minus, that is to say, from the more necessary requisyte to the less, and
that regatiuely, that is to say, in the way of denyinge a thing to be so or
so. For there is a greater conjunction and couplyng together of Christ unto us
and to such as do receive the communion, then there is of Christ with these
outward signs of the sacrament. For somuche therefore as in us to be knitte
unto Christ and to be made one with him, there is no transubstanciacion
required: much less is there any such transubstanciacion required in the
said outward signs of the sacrame^te. And that we be more nere ioygned and
knitte unto Christ, then the outeward signs of the sacrament, we are more
nere joined ^o Christ the^ the signs.
it is manifestli proved by this reason, that ye ioynyng of Christ with the
said signs was first invented, devised, and wrought to none other end, but
the we might be ioigned to Christ and made one with him, as aforsaid.

Morouer y^ words of holy scripture pronounce before the receyuyng of the
Sacrament^ and the holy spirit (by which two things the signs be
consecrated) do much less appertain and belong to the said said signs, then
they do appertain and be long to man that receives y^ signs. And as touching
Theophylactus, we say yt he is but a new writer and a man that wrote but of
late days, Theophilactus answered unto.
and paraduenture, that chanced to live in those days when many doubts and
disputacions be gonne to be moved about this transubstanciacyon, that is to
wete Nycolas the bishop of Rome, at what time Ranfrancke and Berengarius were
alive. Morouer Theophylactus was a man of no great judgment, as it may full
well appear by his declaracyon and exposicyon of the third chapytur of the
gospel of John toward the later end of the chapytur, where he ch^cketh
expressly by name the latin Church concerning the procedynge of the holy
Ghost, because the latin Church hade determined, that the procedinge of the
holy Ghost is from the father and the soonne. Therefore we will not think nor
repute his aucthoritye to be of so great weight, that it ought to be
preiudicyall to the truth. Yet nevertheless, leat us ponder and weighe his
words he says yt the bread is not a sign of Christ's body: and this he
says upon Mathewes Gospel, which thing is well spoken, if he mean that y^
bread is not an emptye figure, or a vain figure and void of al strength and
efficacy. Neither do we say yt ye bred is such a sign or figure. And we do
nothing doubt, but y^ this was his interpretacio^ and mening in deed for
because yt upon Marks gospel he says that the bread is not a figure not only.

For else, if he should utterly deny that the bread is a sign or a figure of
Christ's bodi, he should be contrary to the rest of the fathers and old
writers whom we have already plainly declared to grant and put both a sign
and a figure to be here in this sacrament. He says also yt the bread is
transformed converted and changed from the elemente and matier that it was
before, into an other. Which maniers of speaking if he understand and mean
Sacramentally, we do not abhor from them. For the bread and wine become
sacraments, and they pass and be changed into elements, that is to say,
matyers of heavenly things and they put on as it were a new garmente and
shape to be now the signs and tokens of an higher matier.

But (say they) this Theophylactus writes that the fleashe and the blood for
this cause be not seen, lest our stomachs should stand against the
receyuynge of it. But if thou (what soever thou be) wilt so eagrely and so
sore bind upon these words: we for our part lay against the again, the
words that the same Theophylactus writes upon Marks gospel: which are,
that the kinds or symylitudes of bread and wine be turned into the virtue or
strength of the lords body and blood.

That if thou will allege that the said Theophylactus does in all other
places not say, into the virtue. etc. But, into Christ's boddye and blood: The
kinds and similitudes of bread and wine converted into the virtue of Christ's
body and blood
we answer, that the interpretacion of these words is, yt these signs take
unto them the virtue of the things which they signyfye, by reason of the
which virtue, the sacraments be of no less effect, then if the v^raithyng
self were there present. And (as I have said) the yrkesomnes and abhorrynge of
it is taken away, if we put that the change is made not into the thing, but
in to the virtue of the thing. His other sentence seems to be somewhat more
viole^te and of some more force and vehemencye^ which he wroote upon the sixth
chapytur of Ihons gospel, where he thus says: As the bread that Christ
did eat whiles he lived here in yearthe, was changed into his fleashe by a
natural transubstanciation or chaungeyng after the common rate of food and
nourishement in man's body: so is this bread changed into Christ's body
here in the Sacrament. Yet this similitude and comparison we grant also to
be true if it be generally taken. For in this sacrament also, we do not
deny but there is a change Sacramental, that is to say, such as in a
Sacrament is required.

That if thou say thou will needs take this similitude even plainly as it is
made, and as it souneth, which is that the bread be as verayly changed in
the Sacrament of Eucharistia, as bread was turned into Christ's flesh at
such times as he eat it whiles he here lived: than will there follow an
inconvenience clean contrary to thine own sentence and determination.

For it will follow, that the accidents of the signs cannot remain or be
reserved still in the Sacrament of Eucharistia. For in thee food and
sustenaunce that Christ took from time to time whiles he lived, the
ac^identes did not remain.

Besides the premises, I will here allege for our purpose the words of the
same self expositour upon the sixth chapitur of John's gospel, upon these
words: he that eats my fleashe, and drynketh my blood, abides in me, and
I in him. etc. Upon which words Theophylactus expounyng them in the person
of Christ, says that this thing is dooen, whiles the party is quodammodo,
that is to say, in a manier mingled and ioygned unto me, and is changed over
into me.

Where thou see again, that Theophilactus holds (as the rest of the
fathers and writers do hold) that there is so great a chaungeyng of us into
Christ, that he writes us to be changed over and do pass into Christ.

And thus much I say at this present for answer of that that was brought
in and allegedde against us out of Theophylactus. Of the later writers they
bring Anselmus, and Hugo, Anselmus and Hugo answered unto.
and Richard which were in the time of Uictor.

But fora^muche as in the time of these men the doctrine of
transubstanciacion was now already perforce thrust into the lap of the
church, and the people compelled to receive it: the said writers in such
works as they made, did according to the time, so that the new inuencion
of such oug^te not to have place to the prejudice of the most aunciente
opinion of the church, and of the determinacion of the old ancient fathers.

John Damascene au^swered unto.
But one man among all others they seem to have most high in price, and this is
John Damascene, who in the fourth book and fowerteenthe chapitur of his
work, of the right feith. Has verai largely wryte^ of this matier. But I find
that this Damascene lives under the Greek Emperor Leo Isanricus, so that
between the time of Gregorius Magnus bishop of Rome, and thissame Ihon
Damascene it was a full nigh hundred and twenty years space at the least. The
time of Damascene when he li^ed.
And whereas now already in the time of Gregory many poinctes of supersticion,
and many things of man's inuencio^ were come by heaps into the Church the
matier did every day from that time forward renew still headlong to wurse and
wurse. By reason whereof it is no marvel at al if this Damascene stumbled upon
many points that were both untrue, and also full of supersticion.

The judgment of Damascene in diverse Articles of doc^trine.
And as for his judgment how good and how great it was as well in arcticles and
points of doctrine, as also in expounyng of the holy scriptures, we have a
sample good enough. For he is a wondrous great favorer of Images, and
sustained both great and sore daungiers mo then one for vpholdynge and
maynteining of them: yea and in this selfsame fourth book he wrote a several
chapitur of a set purpose concerning the same matier of Images: where his
mind and sentence is, yt Images not only are to be made, but also to be
honored and wurshypped. Besides this, he so highly esteemed the relics of
saints and holy men which are now in rest, that he appointed unto them also
a certain chapitur for the nonce in which he feared not to call the said
relics, the fountaynes and wells of the gifts of God. And he is so bold
there as to say that we are bound to worship the Saints with feith, which
is a point intolerable, forsomuche as feyth is due only to God and to his
words. He has also a sermon concerning purgatory, in which his opinion is,
that Traianus the Emperor of Rome (who had lived both an Idolater and also a
persecutour of Martyrs,) was deliu^red from the punishment of hell at the
prayers and intercession of Gregory. And that one Falconilla a woman being in
her life time altogether given to the wurshipping of Idolles, was at the
prayers of an other certain man delivered from damnacion after that she was
now allreadye dead, and had lain fast holden and kept in the peynes of hell.
He ferth^r brings in a fable of one Macarius, how that he talked with a dead
man's skulle, of whom he heard that during the time while Mass was in saying
the solles of the dead which endure torments are eased and released of their
peynes: that same whole Sermon does he poudre with such like feygned tales
as these. Now as touching the exposition of scriptures, the self same Damascen
when he writes of the resurreccion, he labors to prove it by a place in the
book of Genesis, Genesis ix.
where it is red that the lord said to Noe. Fleashe with the blood shalt
thou not eat, for I shall require your solles at the hands of the beasts. He
will require them (says Damascene) at the resurrection. For the beasts do
not dye for man's sake. Wherein he appears to be ignorant of the law that
was made of god in the book of Exodus, and in the book of Deuteronomye, where
it is commanded that the Ox which renneth at men with his horns, and
sleagheth any body, shall be stoned to death.

The same Damascene also in his book De Virginitate, that is say, of
virginity, writes in this manier. If Adam had not sinned, man and woman^e
should not have been coupled to gether in Matrimony to bry^g forth issue. And
because he sees the sentence and determinacion of God to be against him, in
these words, Grow ye, and be ye multiplied: he says that it was perhaps
possible that men should have multiplied and gotten issue out of some other
part of the body. There is not one of the school divines that would thus
have said. The Same Damascene also wresteth and raketh Basilius. Damascene
wres^eth basilius.
For because he sees Basilius to affirm that the bread and the wine are as
it were the countrepaynes, or paternes of Christ's body he expouneth Basilius to
mean that same before the consecratyon: Which is a point without all ryme or
reason

For the bread and the wine before consecracyon have nothing at all in them,
more then other common meats have. And in case the bread and wine should in
such wise sygnyfye the body and blood of Christ, than should they be now
already Sacraments before the pronouncing of the Lords words.

Besides this, in the Mass of the Greek Church they do after the
consecracion in most open and plain words pray that the bread may be
made the body and blood of Christ.

And namely in the mass of Basilius, the matyer so renneth, that the said
words are set after the consecracyon.

Yea and in our Canon also that was used in the old mass if it be well looked
upon, it is named bread after the consecracion. But now are his arguments to
be considered and examined. The first of them is grounded upon the power of
god, for seeing that god was of power to create both heaven and earth by his
word, and by the same word to bring forth plants and trees, beasts,
fowls and fysshes: why should he not be of power to make his own body of
bread: But this kind of argument is of the weakeste and febleste sort that
can be^.

Neither do we now traicte or despute of the power of god For we do not
deny that god is hable to turn bread into fleashe: But all our varyaunce
is, whether he will so do or not. Another argumen^e of his is taken and
framed out of Christ's manier of speaking. For says Damascene, it was not
said of the lord: This is the figure or signs of my body, but is called the
very body of the lord. But unto this argument we have already made
answer before.

And in case this man when he denies the sacrament to be a figure of the
lords body, does understand it absolutelye, and even as the words soune
without any ferther addycyon, or interpretacion: he has in manier all the
auncyente fathers and old writers against him, who every one of them do
here in this matyer acknowledge a figure.

But in case he understand it to be not a figure only, that is to say, a
vain and a void sign, We our selfs also do wyllingly grant so much unto
him Albeit he does here and there in his wrytynges enter lace certain words
in which he may appear not to have been of so gross an opinion concerning
the sacrament, as he makes for. For in one place he has these words.

The bread of the communion is not simple and bare bread only: but it has a
godly virtue ioygned unto it. Which point we shall without any great stickyng
admit, forasmuch as we say not that the bread is in this case common
bread or mere bread, but that it is now a bread hallowed, and turned into the
nature of a sacrament. And godly virtue may for this cause be said to be
ioygned unto it, because that ye holy ghost does use the same as an
instrumente toward our salvation. Besides the premises, he makes a
comparison between this sacrament and baptism, in which comparison he says
that god has customably used to co^descende unto our usage, and to our
familiar facions that we are acquainted withal, and because that men are wont
to be washed with water, and to be enoyn^ted with oil: therefore god has
ioygned and given his grace unto these things, and his spirit unto baptism.
And in like manier forasmuch as it is the custom and usage of men to eat
bread and to drink wine: he gave and ioygned his godhed unto these things.

But now after the transubsta^tiacyons, god should not have ioygned his godly
power or his godhed unto these things: but he should clean have put away these
other natures of bread and wine.

And the reason and circumstaunce of the said com^parison does require, that
like as the ioygnyng of baptesme with grace and with the holy ghost does not
put away nor destruye the nature, of the water: even so the things of this
sacraments should not destruye or cast away the being and the true nature of
the signs. Damascene says morouer that god did so condescende unto our
custom and usage, that by mean of such things as are familiarly used among
us, and are within the order and course of nature, we should be placed and
set in those things which are above nature. In which place he touches
also of our chaungeyng into Christ. But it is here to be noted, that he
affirms the outward signs and matier of the sacraments to be things
according to nature, that is to say, natural things, and things of their
own natures.

That if ye put the same to be accidents only and without a subject, or
accidents that have the body of Christ hidden under them: than are they not
any longer to be taken for things of their own nature, or for things within
the order and course of nature.

And Damascen uses such plain terms in ye matier that he affirms the
nature of bread to be changed over, to be taken to another thing and to be
made Christ's body: which words change if they be taken and understood of
a Sacramental change, they make nothing at all against us.

And where he also says that these chaunges happen above nature, we admit
and grant that too. For it is not of any natural propretee belonging unto
common bread, that a sacrament should be made thereof, no more then the
fountain of our regeneracion or new birth to be made naturallye of water.

That if ye demand of Damascene the manier how this chaungeynge of the
bread into Christ's body comes to pass: he answers that it is not a
light mattier even for us to express the mannier how bread in our natural
food and susteinaunce is changed into our fleashe.

But as touching this similitude and comparison how it may be taken, we
have said sufficiently before when we spoke of Theophylactus. If ye take this
similitude generallye, and apply it to a Sacramental change, it is veraye
well, but if ye will have the comparison specially made of such a mutacion or
chaungeynge, as there is of the food that we take in our bodies, when it is
turned into our fleashe: than shall ye make not only the nature of bread to
give place and to depart away, but also the accidents thereof to do the same.

Damascene after all this affirms the bread so to be made Christ's body,
and the wine and water in such wise to be made his blood, that the same are
now not two things, but one. If he refer this term, to be one thing,
and not twain, to the cup and the bread, as though he should say that
these two are one Sacrament: We will make no great a do in the mattier,
(for in this accion or dooyng, as in one Sacrament, Christ is offered unto us,
for a food.

And yet in taking both parts of this Sacrament, the Church is not a
fearde to speak of them as though they were two, and to say, that there
be Sacraments here. And in the collectes which they were wont to say in
their old Mass they did after the communion many times say these words.

The Sacraments which we have received. etc.

But an if they affirm them in such wise to be one, that after the
consecracion the bread and Christ's body be now one thing, and notte
twain, for the transubstanciation that is incedente unto it: than will we
set against this the sentence and determinacion of Ireneus, in which he
writes the Sacrament of Eucharistia to consiste of two things, the one
yearthelye, and the other heavenly: We also set against them Gelasius
sometime Bishop of Rome who speaking of ye vnio^ of the humayne nature and
divine nature in Christ, both the said natures remaining wholle and
undefiled, argues and proves it to be true by the conioning and couplyng of
the bread with Christ's body in this sacrament, both natures remaining
whole and perfect. He affirms moreover that this Sacrament is not cast down
in the draught. Neither can it in very deed otherwise be spoken of the
transubstanciatours. For whereas they put and hold that in this sacrament of
Eucharistia there is nothing but the accidents of bread and of wine, and the
nature of Christ's body: there does no part of these things belong to any
draught. But against the premises I will now bring in and obiecte a most
manifest place of Origin upon Matthew in ye fiftenth chaptur, where he expouneth
and declares these words of the Evangelist: That that enters i^to the
mouth, defiles not a man. And there does Origin say thus: Origens mind of
the sacrament whether it go into the draughte or not.
If it do not defyle a man, than does it not sanctify him and make him
holy neither. But what shall we say of the Lords bread? Is it true that it
neither makes a man holy, nor defiles him? he answers: that like as if
any thing seem vnpure, it nothing at all defyleth us except through a corrupt
conscience in us: Even so also that that appears and is called holy, does
not sanctifye us nor make us holy, unless there be righteousness within us,
and perfectenesse of life. For if of it own nature it had the propretee to
sanctify and to make holy: than should there not have been many sick among
the Corinthians, and many have died. Where fore that that is material or
gross and corruptible in the lords bread, does pass down into the bealie,
and is cast o^t into the draught: and that that is by humble prayer and by the
lords word, is profitable unto the solle according to the portion of every
man's feyth. It is not than the material part of the lords bread that is
profitable: but the word that is put thereto is the thing that avails. And
to the entente that one should not think him to speak of any other meat: he
repeateth it again in a brief sum, and says: Thus much have we spoken of
the mystycall and Sacramental body of Christ.

Now leate not any manne to impougne this that we have said, cavil and
say, that Origin did now and than err in diverse opinions and articles. For
Hierome, Epiphanius, and the old aunciente fathers, which did with all
possible diligence search and bring forth his erroures to light, do not in
any place make mention that he was in any wrong opinion of the Sacrament,
which thing they would never have leafte unspoken, if he had in so great
a mattier gonne never so little out of square.

And Origin in the place before alleged most manifestly and plainly adds
these words also, that the wicked sort do not eat Christ's body, because
that Christ's body is a thing that gives life, and he that eats it, abides
in Christ. Wherefore against this Ihon Damascene being but a new writer of
late years, and a man not of so great a name to speak of, leat Origene be
set, who is both a very ancient writer and also esteemed of al men for a
right famous Clerk.

After this there was objected against us out of the Counsel of Ephesus that
which Cyrillus wrote in the behalf of the same counsel to Nestarius bishop
of Constantinople. The counsel of Ephesus and ver.


For all the matyer of the Consaill was than against the said N^storius,
because that he did constitute and set the person and nature of man in Christ
utterly soondred and divided aparte from the person of the soonne of God: so
that after his mind, there was none other coniunctyon or copulaty^n between
them but of a dignitee and woorthynesse in Christ. And Cyryllus argues
against the said Nestoryus taking his argument of the nature of the
sacraments. If the fleashe of Christ says Cyrylus be after that sort
separated from the person of the deitee and Godhed: than it follows that the
same is not of power to give life and when we eat in the sacraments the
fleash of Christ, we should eat the fleashe of some holy and excelente man
and no better. But thereby should we not obtain eternal life according to
the promyses.

This is the marcke and end of all those dysputacyons. Those fathers do not
contend, neither goo they about to enforce or affirm that the fleashe of
Christ lies hydden in the bread: but their mind is, that we ^ooe eat the
said fleashe of Christ in the ^acramentes, and that verayly, yea and such
fleashe as gives us eternal life: which things we deny not, so that the
eating be taken to perteyne unto the solle and to feyth. For we grant that
in the sacrament the fleashe of Christ is eaten spiritually, but yet truly.

Neither do we at any time feygne or imagyn such a person of the soonne of
God, as is separated and divided from the person of the Godhead.

They obiecte against us the Council of Rome or Uercelles, where Berengarius
was condemned and compelled to recante his opynion of the Sacrament.

To the which Councelles, for as much as the acts and determinacions of them
are not abroad nor set forth in wrytinge, we have not much to answer.
Wherefore it shall not be unprofitable to examyne and weygh the said
retractacyon or recantacio^ prescrybed and written word by word in the said
council unto Berengarius, by the said Nicolas than byshope of Rome as is before
said, and than by that we shall perceive what grauitee there was in that same
Counsel, and what great wise men and well aduysed they were that were the
presidentes and reulers thereof.

In the decrees and in the little de consecratione, that is, of consecracyon and
in the secound dystynccyon, in the chapitur begynynge Ego Berengarius. etc. the
said recantacyon of Berengaryus is written, An answer to the counsel of Rome
and Uercels of Berengarius.
wherein he was compelled to grant and confess that the body of Christ is
with the pryestes fyngers handeled, and with the pryestes hands is broken, and
with their teethe is chewed sensybly, that is to say, soperfyctelye and
veraylye, that the bodylye senses of feeling and tastynge may judge it.

Which things how conuenientlye they accord with the body of Christ
being now gloryfyed, The re^a^tacio^ of Berengarius.
0and how well it agrees with that sacrament leat any wise man judge.

The gloser of the decres, The gloss of y^ decres.
a man otherwise but of a gross understanding, yet could not choose but epsy
this great inconvenience. Wherefore he says in the gloss, that these things
must be taken very warely and handsomely, or fynelye, For else (says he)
thou shall fall into a greater error then that was, wherwyth Berengarius
himself was infected.

For this gloser saw well enough, that it was not conuenyent nor decent to
say, that the body of Christ should be sensybly handeled, broken, or
bruised with the mynysters teeth in the sacrament.

The master of the sentences defe^deth the recautacion of Bere^garius by a
figure.
And the master of the sentences in the fowerth book where he goes about to
heal this sore, says that these things must be attributed, not to the
body of Christ, but to the outewarde signs, which out ward signs the
transubstanciatours selfs put to be only accidents. And so he makes thereof
a figuratyue speech. But this fyguratyue manier of speking if we do use never
so aptely or conveniently, and duly, interpretyng the sayings of the fathers
when they use words of high reverence in speaking of this sacrament: our
aduersaires make a wounderfull out cry at the matier, allegeying that we do
corrupt and mar and also falsifye the ancient fathers wrytynges, not with
standing that they them selves do here flee to the same ancores and refuge,
and will have a trope or figure to be where none ought to be, namely in the
openyng and declaryng of a doctrine, and in framyng of a recantacion, which
ought of all other things to be most clear and plain. Therefore we pass
litell of that Council seeing they erred so grosely. The Co^seil of Constaunce
answered unto
The Adversaries do also obiecte the Synod or Counsel of Constaunce where
Wicliefe was condemned, and John Husse and Hierome of Praga were there both of
them burned for diverse articles, but chiefly for that they held opinion
against this transubstanciacion, which was there constituted and established
by a full decree. But as touching this counsel, we cannot but call it false
and perjured, The counsel of Consta^ce false for swor^e and cruel.
considering that it caused those two men to be put to death that were come
thither under false conduict, which also the Emperor took very greuouslye: For
he had promised for them that they should safelye return home again, and
was become suertye for them, or else the Bohemes would never have permitted ne
suffered them to go to that counc^ll. The falsehood and periurye ^f the Council
of Constaunce.
And that they did there make a constitucion and decree of
transubstanciacion, is a token and argument that the same is but a ^ewe
determinacion come up but of late.

Neither is it of any sort that many men say it was there but confyrmed
by a decree, The opinion of transubstanciacion is not old.
and not first constituted, because that under the forsayde Nycolas Bishop
of Rome in the counsel of Uercelles and Rome, the same sentence and decree of
transubstanciacion had been manifestlye enough declared.

For truly we grant that this opinion before the counsel of Constaunce
did (I cannot tell how) after a sort but break forth, and so was violentely
and parforce thrust into the Church: But because it was not fullye received,
but had every where many contradictions and gainsayinges: they judge it
necessary to be established again by a new decree, and that very cruely,
even with fire and deadlye threatenynges.

But against this council we obiecte the general and universal council
holden at Florence under Eugenius the fowerth bishop of Rome, who was there
present, and there was also present the Emperor of the Greeks together with
the Patriarchs of Constantinople, and many Bishops mo of the East parts. In
the which counsel the Church of the Greeks was reconciled and ioigned to the
Church of the Latins, and there they agreed as touching the discord and
controuersye that had been concerning the holy Ghost. And in the acts of the
counsel it is to be seen that after the Bisshoppes of the East parties and
ye Latins had agreed upon certain articles: ye Bishop of Rome than being would
have proceeded ferther and would have driven them to traicte of
transubstanciation, and to receive it as the Latins did believe it. But here
the greeks stiffely with stood him, and would in no wise traict of any such
matier. Neither could they be moved nor induced by any arguments to consent
thereunto. And wha^ the letters or instruments of unity, concord and agreement
between the^ should be made and published^ the said Greek Bishops made a
special prouiso, yt in no wise there should be any mencio^ made of this matier
of transubstanciation: which was also observed, as appears in the Bulle of
Eugenius, which begi^neth Exultent caeli et letetur terra. etc. where in he
rejoices in the behalf of Cristian nations for this most happy chance, that
ye church of the greeks and the church of ye Latins were ^ome to a concord
and vnytee again. Whereof it follows yt if the transubstanciacion had been a
matyer of such weight and effycacy: ye Romisshe church would never have come
to a tonement and been coupled with the Church of the Greeks not receiving
the same. For now of days they say it is a very pernicious and a detestable
H^resie not to admit transubstancio^. Nor it is not to be thought nor supposed,
that the Latin church would have coupled her self with heretics and been
one with them. By this also is the argument made void and of none effect,
which they brought of the universal consent and agreement of the church. For
it is not true which they affirm, that all Christen churches did conspire and
agree in this article of transubstanciacion. For that same ancient church
which was in the time of the fathers (as we have showed) did never ymagine nor
devise any such matier: Also the Greek church of the East parties was not in
like opinion that we have been in. Besides all this, to their argumentacions
they add most high praises of the divine and godly power, To the Argument
of ^he divine power.
to induce the people to believe so great a miracle. But this is an argument
most weak and feeble, for the thing which they ought chiefly to have
showed, they have never yet hitherto truly proved, which it is, that god will
do it, and that the holy scriptures do promise such a thing unto us. For
these words which they allege that is to wete, This is my body, th^se
words (I say) are the matier that is in controversy, and may have another
menyng wherefore the argument is of no strength ne force. And we shall declare
the weakness of the same by a certain example. The Lord said unto Nicodeme,
Behold a similitude of Nicodeme.
that no man could ^ntre into the kingdom of heaven, except he were borne
of new. Than N^codeme began to demand: how can a man when he is old en^re
again into his mothers womb.

It might have been said unto him: Christ has even now affyrmed that it
shall so be whi dooest than doubt of the power of God, by the which all
things were created. By the same power of God may thou undoubtedly be
borne again out of thy mothers womb. But the matyer was not so handeled: But
Christ declared that all this should be dooen by a spyrytuall regeneracyon.
For although he made mention of the water which parteyneth to baptism, Yet
did he most manyfestly teach, that the regeneracion must be dooen by the
spirit. And even so do we see it happen herein this matier of the sacrament.

Christ commands us to eat his fleash, and he taking the bread in his
hand, sayethe: This is my body. Now the transubstanciatours said: It cannot
be that the body of Christ should be to gether with the bread, Wherefore,
it must needs follow that the nature of the bread, be turned by
transubstanciacyon into Christ's body. And that it is so transubstauncyated,
they will needs parswade men by an argument of the power of God, Why the
fathers speakin^g of this sac^amente do so magnify the power of god.
because he is hable to do it. But in the mean while, the transubstanciatours
do thus obiecte against us We do not this allow, (say they,) for
Chrysostom, Ambrose, and Cyrillus, when they traict of this mutacion: the
likewise remit us to the power of god, and magnyfye the same power of god with
wunderful high lauds and praises. But to this we answer, yt the fathers
speak very well, for undoubtedly, it belongs to ye power of God so to
change bread and wine that they be made sacraments, which they were not
before: neither is it the work of nature that bread and wine should so mightily
and so effectually signify offer and represente the body and blood of our
lord to be comprehended with our minds and with our feith. Wherefore the
holy ghost does here entremeole himself: and the lords institution and
ordinance in this beha^fe, is of great strength and virtue: and the words
being at the first pronounced by the inspiracion of God and now repeated again
by the ministre do weorke no small effect. Ye may to the premises put
our conversion and chaungeyng into Christ when we do receive the communion,
all which things are far above the power and strength of nature. And now
where as the supernatural power of the lord may be required to al these
things: these men apply ye said power of God to transubstanciacion. But this
is a much like thing as it we should make an argument and should reason, (as
the logicians terms be) ab vniuersiliore ad particularius, that is to say,
from the more general to the less general affirmatyuely, that is, by the way
of affirmyng a thing to be thus or thus, which is the wourstkynde of
argument that can be made: as for exa^^le there can not be a wourse
ar^ume^te the^ to sa^. Thissame is a tree: ergo it is an applee tree. For it
may be a theritree, or an oak tree, or some other tree. But contrary wise,
to say: this in an aple tree. Ergo it is a tree, is a very good reason and a
well framed argument. So, to say: Gods will is to do such a thing or
such a thing: ergo he can do it, is a perfeicte good reason. But the^e can
not be a lewder manier of arguyng, then to say. God is of power to do such
a thing: ergo he will do it, or does it.

For God is of power even now at this day to heal all diseases and sicknesses
of all men, to make the dum to speak, to restore sight unto the blind, and to
revive men that are dead, (as Christ reised Lazarus, and as he wrought the
things before spoken^ and many other miracles, while he lived here on yearthe.

But to say that he so does were false: and to require that he should so do,
were a te^ptyng of him not far differing from blasphemy.

But to return to this matier that we now have in hand, it may ferther be
said that in Baptism also is required the same power of god. For it is not a
weorke of nature, that water should be made the fountain of our regeneracion^
or new birth in Christ.

But here some persons can not even very well heat, that baptism should be
after this sort compared with the sacrament of Eucharistia, For although they
can not say nay but that Chri^^e is present in baptism also, and is there
given unto us. (for it is written ye as many as are baptized have dooen christ
on upon you: yet is Christ (say they) after a more excellent ^orte in the
sacrament of Eucharistia^ then he is in the sacrament of baptism: and
therefore the bread is transubstanciated, and yet is it not necessary, that
the wat^r in baptism should be transub^ianciated.

To whom we answer, that it is not much to be passed on in whether of both
sacraments Christ be after a more excellent sort contained, then in the
other, so that he be granted to be present in them both.

And as he may be in the one without any transubstanciacion of the elements,
that is to say, of the naturalle things that the sac^amente is made of: even
so may he be in the other too.

That if ye will needs strive about the dignitee of the said two sacraments
whether of them is the more excellent: than may the excellency of baptism
be proved by arguments tyght effectual and pitthye. For first, it is a
greatter matier to be generate and borne, then it is to be nourished.

Secondely baptism was honored and notified, with a noumbre of miracles at
once: for the heavens opened at the baptisyng of Christ, the voice of the
father was heard, and the holy ghost was seen in the likeness of a dove:
which things did not happen at the i^stitutyng and ordeinyng of the
sacrament of ^ucharistia.

And yet do not we speak all this to the derogacion of this sacrament, (for
it is a sacrament of most high dignitee, and a sacrament most worthy and
mete to be chiefly had in honor and reverence:) but all this is spoken to
this only end and purpose that we may make a full answer unto the objection
y^ was brought against us of ye power of god. We have also declared already
before out of S. Austen in the third book of the Trinitee, and the tenth
chapitur, that ^^ of wine should so grow and multiply by his steightes of
iugleyng, that all the wholle cup should be full to the very brymme, yea
and run over too.

Yea and when an other bigger cup was brought unto him that would hold more
in it: this Marcus would so handle ye matier that the bigger cup should be
full too, without puttyng of any more liquour unto it then was before. What man
would say that this fellows was ever the more approved or confirmed by these
miracles? If we will come to the stories of the Gentiles, we read that there
has rivers and streams of blood run along upon the ground, Certain
miracles wrought by Ethnites and Gentiles.
and that Iuppiters thumb has spinned out with blood. Liuius tells that in
Rome our time it did ^aine flesh. Quintus Curtius reports that at the city
of Tyrus when it was besieged of Alexander the great, a lofe of bread did
openly in the sight of them all sweat out and drop blood when one of
Alexanders soldyars cut the lofe And Apollonius Thyraneus is reported yt wha^
he was at the parliamente before Domitianus the Emperor, he vanished away
suddenly, and could no more be found.

Thus there be miracles and woondres infinite which the Gentiles might in this
case bring in to confirm their worshyppyng of Idolles. And therefore all such
miracles as these men affirm to make for the confirmyng and establishyng the
supersticion of transubstanciacion, we utterly reiecte and dissallow.

Neither is it much to be regarded, that they bring in for this purpose, of a
miracle showed of Gregory bishop of Rome.

For it is written in his life, that the lords bread, or (if ye will so call
it) the sacrament of Eucharistia, was turned into a finger of fleashe.

Which thing if it were so dooen for either of the two causes which (as above
said) we do receive, there is no great earnest strife to be made for the
matier.

Albeeit that same life of Gregory is a matier of no great weight or force to
be passed on.

For if we will believe Uincentius the said life of Gregorius was written an
hundred years after he was dead of our Ihon of Rome a deacon, and sent to a
certan Emperor being a Germain.

But put the case that it was so in ded. If our adversaries will thereof
conclude by the showing of the finger of fleashe, that the fleashe of Christ
does corporally and bodyly lie hidden under the accide^tes of the bread than
might a body by this kind of miracles conclude, that under the sacramental
similitudes and signs there is both coals and ashes contained, because that
this holy bread was ones turned into these things in Cyprians time, (as
himself writes:) I believe also that the sleightes and illusions of vile lewd
fellows are not unknown, which they have often times used to devise and
inuente miracles.

In an other argument they laid very sore to our charge the dignitee and
excellency of Christ's body glorified, which from the time of his
resurrection forth ward is called his body spiritual, which dignitee and
excellency of Christ's body glorified we do in no wise deny.

Yet will we put you in remembrance of that that Austen has in an epistle
to one Co^se^tius, where Auste^ affirms that Christ's body glorified is not
after such sort a spiritual body, that it passes into the nature of a
spirit. For a certain kind of body there is, which of S. Paul in the
fifteenth chapitur of his former epistle to the Corinthians is called Corpus
animale, Corpus animale.
as if ye should say in english, a body en^ewed with a solle which the
translatours of the bible do for the more plainer understanding of the
unlearned call a natural body, and yet in the self same place of Paul, it
is said of Adam that he was made a living solle, and such a man is in the
secound chapitur of the same epistle called Animalis homo, and it is translated
in english, a natural man. But the said place of S. Paul where^ such a body
endewed with a solle is called Corpus animale, is not so to be understood,
as though the body does pass and change into the nature of the solle. And
again, the same austen in the twentieth chapitur of the thyrteenth book de
ci^it^te dei, that is to say, of the city of god, writes in this manier. The
solle sometimes, while it follows the appetite of the fleashe, is called
carnal and fleashely not y^ it is changed into the nature of fleashe: even so
the body is called spiritual, not because it is changed into the nature of
the spirit, but because it will be altogether obedient to the spirit, to
fulfille the desire and will of the spirit. And Hierome in an epistle to
Pammachius, which epistle was made in defense of the truth against Ihon the
bishop of Jerusalem, who says that the solles of such as arose, had every
one of the^ a body of air, which was not subject neither to touching nor to
the sight, and Hierome (I say) in this epistle does by all possible means
content to prove, that Christ after his resurrection had a very true body
in deed, and the same also visible. And Hierome answers to an objection
which objection was this: If Christ's body after his resurrection was in
such sort visible and was the same very body that he had when he was alive
before: Luke. xxiiii.
Wherefore was it not known at what time he showed himself like a pilgryme to
the two disciples going to the castle of Emaus? To this does Hierome thus make
answer. Because their yies were holden, that they should not know him: as if
he should have said: as touching the nature of his body, it was both
visible, and might have been known: but the let yt was, was in the same very
epistle to the Corinthia^s. Yet nevertheless our sacraments have many
prerogatives and many points of dignite above the sacraments of the old
law. For first and formoste they be firm and stable, and shall no more be
changed unto the worlds end: secondly they do not show of a thing that is
to be dooen and yet to come, but of a thing dooen already. Our sacraments
also be more simple and plain, and they perteine to a larger and a greatter
noumbre of people. And forasmuch as they be more clear and open then ye old
sacraments, they stiere up in us a greatter feith, and thereof follows a more
plenteous abundance of the spirit. And that they be more clear and open
does not proceed (as the adversaries imagyn to theymselfes in their brains)
of the outward prefiguracion of the ^ignes, because that the same is more
evident then the old was: but of the nature of ye words that are there
pronounced. For by the said words our rede^ptio^ is showed to be perfeict,
and it is showed with more clear and more open words, then the common sort of
people among the fathers of the old law did understand. Than if the thing be
more clear expouned and declared in words: the outward represe^tacion is not
so greatly to be regarded. Wh^^e^ the Church made ^awe been leaft in anecdout
our of god.
Besides this they made it a matier of woondre how it might be possible that
the Church should be so long in an error, and that no light nor small error
if it should so be as we say. Which thing for all that they would not so
greatly meruaill at, if they would thynk on the words that Christ s^ake of
his last coming.

Thynkest thou (says Christ) that when the son of man shall come, he shall
find feith upon the earth? He does al^o show that there ^^a^ in time to
come be so great an error in the Church that if it be possible, even the
very elect and chosen shall be deceived to and seduced. And leat these men (I
beseech you) tell us: what manier of Church, and in what state did Christ
find the church at his first coming? Had not ye Scribes, the Pharisees, the
Priests, and the Bishops corrupted all together? had they not perverted all
true religion with their traditions? Yet is it not to be thought that the
Church has at any time been utterly forsaken or leaft in error. For there
has been evermore from time to time many good people, wh^ this gear has
much myslyked, and that have openly cried out against it. And like as at his
first coming there was Symeo^ Anne the wedowe, Joseph, and the virgin Marie,
Elizabeth, and Ihon the Baptiste, which were godly folks and devout, and had
special good opinion of god, so that the Church could not be said to be
utterly forsaken: even so has it been dooen in these last times. For the
wholle universal Curche is not leauened with tradicions of men. They say
morouer that as touching that it is ordained but to signify and betoke^, the
selfsame betokenyng may be dooen by bread and wine at al meats when men
dyne and suppe, and therefore no cause to be, why we should so hyghly esteem
the sacrament of Eucharistia But this argument is as weak and as feeble an
argument as is possible to be. For at common repastes there is not the lords
institucion, there is no ordeinaunce of a sacrament, there is not heard the
lords words, nor there is not there any promise of god: therefore be not
these two to be compared together. Lastely there was an argument brought of
the virtue and efficacy of gods word, which (as Algerius cites and
allegeth in the seventh chapitur of his first book) is called of Ambrose
uerbum operatorium as if ye should say in english a word of workyng and of
operacio^, as by the which word the bread and wine which remain still in
their natures are yet nevertheless changed into another thing. But as
touching the words of Ambrose we accept them with good will. For we also
put that ye bread and the wine do remain still in their own natures, not
(as the tra^substa^ciatours affirm) as touching the accide^tes, or the
lykenesses and fourmes of bread and wine, so yt ye change is made by
alteracio^ and remouyng away of the substance: but that we affirm and
aduouche the propre natures of bread and wine to be kept still, and the
haungyng to be only sacramental through grace.

And in this our assercion we do nothing derogate or diminishe from the
efficacy of the lords words: but yet we do not think that it is to
attributed unto them as to a kind of enchauntimente or coniu^yng, that how
soever, or in what soever place they be pronounced by a priest or ministre
over bread and wine with a mind and intencion to consecrate, they shall by and
by have that effect. For the wholle matier depends of ye lords institucio^,
and of the action or workyng of the holy ghost. Now as for Algerius he is a
man not much to be passed on for he was after the time of Berengarius, and
makes mention of Berengarius ^ecantacion in his writing. Than morouer of what
a great and good judgment he was, it is manifest of a certain argument that
he makes. For in the one and twenteeth chapitur of his first book he wyllyng
and labouryng to prove yt as well the godly as the ungodly do receive Christ's
body in the sacrament, (which in deed follows necessaryly if there were a
transubstanciacion:) take a similitude (says he) of the outward voice or
word that a man does speak, and of talk that is made by sound of the
air. Unto what soever persons such words do come, it contains and has
with it his own propre sense and menyng. But if it come to men of good
understanding, the same do hear it with some profit, for they do well
perceive the things that are spoken. But in case it come to the unlearned, and
to men that lack knowelage, it does nevertheless bear with it the propre
sense of the words, but yet it is without any profit to the hearer, because he
is not a man of capacitee to understand it. This man lacks here for his
argument ye words bear their sense and menyng with the^: but he does not
mark that the sense is not included or enwrapped really (as the term is) in
the son or in the caractes of the lettres, but only by the way of
signifiyng. Which self same thing if it should be said unto him of the
bread and the wine in the sacraments, that they offer unto us the body of
Christ by the way of signifiyng or betokenyng and none other wise: he shall
be convinced in his own similitude and comparison. And by the same also it is
proved that the wyeked do not receive the lords body, even like as
unskillful or ignorant persons when they hear talk in greek or latin, do
not perceive the sense and menyng thereof. Whereupon conclude, that there could
not any thing have been spoken more strongly on our side the^ this similitude
of Algerius. The Same Algerius also in the first chapitur of the second book
aduoucheth that the accidents in this sacrament do not veraily and truly
susteme rottenesse or mouldryng away, but only that it so appears unto us,
and yet is not so in deed, which thing even the very scholemen would not have
said. For what other thing is this, but to establishe a perpetual illusion and
blyndyng of man's senses? Thus than we need not much to pass of Algerius,
though he labor by all means possible to ratify and set up his
transubstanciacion. We have now traicted of the first opinion, and that at
large. For the said opinion of transubstanciacion removed and taken away, there
shall there with also many supersticions be taken away. Of the other two
opinions we shall not talk so much at length. For whether of the^ both be
put or affirmed, we doee not so greatly pass, so that it be well
understood as it should be. We shall at this present only show of them, as
far as we may see i^ it what we judge mete to be eschewed or to be
received in either of them. There have been many which have retained and kept
still in the sacrament the substance of bread and wine, but they have ioygned
the body and blood of Christ with these material signs remainyng still in
their own natures: and these have they ioygned together with a very straight
and fast knotte, but yet (as I trow) not in such sort, that of ye book being
so ioygned together there should be made one substance or one nature.

(...)
Yet nevertheless they have said that the body and blood of Christ are
present in the bread and wine really (as they term it) bodyly, and naturali.

Some others again have ioygned them together only by the way of betokenyng.
Of these two determinacions the former is fathered upon Luther, and the later
upon zwynglius: Of the conte^cion between Luther and zwynglius.
albeeit I have heard of persons right credible, that neither Luther was in
very deed of so gross an opinion in this mat^er, nor zwynglius of so slendre
and light a belief concerning the sacraments. And their saying is, that Luther
bowed and lened unto phrases of speaking by ye figure hiperbole (of which
figure we have before noted) and to such phrases of speaking as in the very
words did after a manier excede the truth, because he supposed that
zwynglius and others minded to stablishe the sacraments to be naked and vain
signs, whereas zwynglius never went about any such matier. Yea and zwynglius
again on ye other side feared lesce Luther would put such things as might
both be derogatiue and prejudicial to the truth of the humain nature in
Christ and also would enclose the body of Christ in bread, whereby
supersticion might yet still be more and more nourished: and therefore he seemed
more slendrely to give honor to this sacrame^te. And thus did the contencion
between them enk^endle more then was behoufful, and was the cause of many great
evils, whereas yet nevertheless the contencion and strife was in very deed
about words, rather then about the thing self. We shall therefore remove our
discoursing upon these two opinions from the said two persons. For we do not
affirm that either zwynglius or else Luther were of such opinions as above
sai^d, but we shall only examine the said sentences and opinions such as they
are carried about and supposed to be.

These persons which do so grossly ioygne the body of Christ with the
outward and material signs: to the end that they may the better wind out of
all entangleynges, are wont to being in for their purpose two similitudes or
comparisons. The first similitude is this: If one have a pot or a pitcher full
of wy^e, and pronounce these words: This is wine he shall make no lie at all,
because he ^^eweth the ^era^ wine in deed contained in the pot. And even
likewise shall it be, if thou take a piece of glowyng iron, and showing forth
the fy^^ thou say these words. This is fire there shall i^ this case no thing
against reason be spoken or pronounced of thee. And eue^ so do these men say
yt it is to be understood, that ye lord saieth^ This is my body: and so
do they manifestely admit ye ^^ope or ^iguratiue manier of speaking called
Synecdothe, (of which also we have d^clared before.

For when they show the thing which theimselfes suppose to be compouned,
that is to say, made of two sondrie parts (as in this sacrament of bread and
of Christ's body. etc.) it is not a true proposicion or clause, to say: This
is the body of Christ, but as touching the one part of the thing that is
showed forth in sight. Yet nevertheless it is to be known, that these
similitudes or comparisons are not taken of these men, as though they were of
the opinion, that they do in all points or all manier of ways agree with
the thing that the comparison is made by: for theimselfes do earnestely
affirm and reason that Christ is not th^re present locallye, that is to say,
after such sort as things are commonly in places convenient for their
likeness and quantitee: but only diffinitiuely, that is to say, by the way
of determinacion and assignemente, which they understand than to be so, when
a thing is encompaced with the measure and largeness of a place aunswerable in
all points to his likeness, but yet it is said to be there, because the
nature or the being of it is for that present deputed and assigned to ye
place, or because it woorketh and has his operacion in that place: which
propretee does nothing at all agree with the wine in a pot: for there it
has his full place and full room with which it is encoumpaced. Besides this,
these men woul not say that Christ's body is so in the bread, that it may
have his name of the qualitees or accidents of the bread. For the body of
Christ being in the cake of bread can not truly be called white, round, or
baked, which thing nevertheless we see chance unto fire that is
entremiengled with read glowing iron. For the fire that is in hoate glowing
yro^ does so follow the facion of the iron as for exaumple the length, the
bredthe, and the thyckenesse of it, that it may well be named of such facion
or shape as ye iron has. Whereby it do manifestly appear, these similitudes in
this sentence and opinion not to be taken of these men so as it may be
applied to answer and agree in all points: but only that a true and a real
conjunction of the Sacrament and of the thing signified by the sacrament may
be showed and proved: which as soon as it is granted, it follows by and by,
that as well the godly as the wieked sort do receive Christ's body. The first
that is that the godly do receive Christ's body, because they think this real
conjunction of Christ's body and the sacrament to be sufficiently proved by
the lords words: the secounde, that is, that the body of Christ is given to
the wieked also, as well as to the godly, they see to follow necessarily. But we
have now already showed the contrary, which is, that these words of Christ
do not necessarilye drive or lead us to any such sense: and it is proved
by effectual and pitthy reasons that the wieked do receive only the
elements, that is to say, the outward and materyall signs, as bread and
wine and nothing else.

These men are wont also thus to argue: If the words of scripture be
taken as figuratiuelye spoken: than may it easily be brought to pass, that
many precepts of the law may be subverted and fordoen. Gene. xvi.
For Abraham might have said of circumcision when it was commannded: This is a
figurative manier of speaking, and I shall fulfill and satisfy this
commandment if I circumcise my heart, and cut away the eiuel desires and
vices of ye fleash. Also wha^ the choice of meats was commanded, Leut. xi.
the Isralites might have said that the execucion of that commandment might
consiste in a moral obseruacion or keeping of it: as if they did not commit
those sins which were assigned and noted to be in these unclean beasts yt were
for bidden the^, Whether tropes do empeache ye commau^ndementes of God.
and so neither circumcision nor the choice or deuersytee of meats had taken
place. But yt this a feeble reason, may hereof be well proved, because that by
very the lettre self, and by the express words of the text, it is evidently
to be gathered that the words are not spoken by any trope or figure.

For as concerning circumcision, the eighte day from the childs birth was
determinately and precysely appointed, and there is added that ye league and
couenaunte of the lord should be carried of them in the verai fleashe self,
by which words it is euydent that verai true circumcision in deed was
commanded. And as touching the choice or dyfference of meats, the condycions
of the beasts there mencyoned as well the clean as the unclean, are so plainly
and expressly described, and concerning the transgressors of that
commandment, there is an order of puryfiynge them so dystinctely and plainly
set out, that there is no place leafte of doubting or mistaking of it.

Auste^s rule how to take the words or the letter of the holy scripture.
We have also Austens rule of christen doctrine whereby he shows that unless
the words seem to command any vndecente or wyeked thing, or else to forbid
some good work, it must be taken as the lettre goes without any trope or
figure.

Which rule if it be laid to the meats and to circuncision: it shall declare
that the words of God are to be taken simplye and plainly as they sound
without any figure. They allege morouer that in the prophets and in the
histories there be tropes and figures easy and ready to be admitted because
that in them the holy ghost fares after the manier of men, and does
accomidate him self to the famylier mannier of speaking that men use, to
thentente he may the more vehemently and the better express the things that
are to be spoken: but in doctrines and in precepts or rules it may not so
be.

For there say they must all things be taken simply and plainly as the words
sound, without any ferther addicion or circumstaunce.

But this sentence of theirs is not firm and sure, no nor yet universal. For
as touching precepts and lessons geuynge, the lord says: Take heed and
beware of the leaven of the pharisees. etc. where he does most manifestlye
use a trope and a figure of speaking, yea and such an one, that the Apostles
selfs were there ouerseene in taking and understanding of it. He commanded
moreover in the seventeenth chapytur of Mathewe they should beware of false
Prophets for, (said he) they shall come unto you in shepes clothing but
i^wardly they are rauenynge woulfes. etc. In which precepte who perceyueth not
a plain fyguratyue speech? And in geuynge of doctrynes also and in structions,
there is no doubt, but that tropes and fygures are used.

Paul says in the new testamente, The stone was Christ: We are one bread:
and of God it is written, that he is a burnyge fire,

whether the body of Christ be eue^y where or not.
After this they contend that the body of Christ may be in all places and that
by the words of Christ to Necodeme in the third chapitur of John, where it
is said: No man ascends up into heaven but he that came down from heaven,
that is to say, the Son of man, which is in heaven. Be hold (say they) the
son of man that is to say, Christ, even in his humanite talked with them,
and yet was in heaven too. For his humayn nature cannot be separated from the
deuyne nature of his godhed: therefore wha^soeuer is affirmed of the one, must
in like manyer be veryfied of the other. But this is our answer, that we goo
not a bout in any wise to divide these two natures the one from the other, but
yet it follows not, that what soever is verified and truly said of the one,
ought also to be attributed to the other. This will we grant with a good
will, that the divine nature and godhede of Christ is every where: Yet will we
not attribute the same to his body in his humanytee. And this does Austen
most plainly teach in an epistle of his to one Dardanus And as touching that
which is alleged out of the third chapitur of John, the same Austen does
interpret and expoune it, yt it must be understood of his divine nature,
that the soonne of man was in heaven. Neither does Chrysostom take it any
other wise when he expounds this place. For he affyrmeth that to be in
heaven is not alttributed unto the son of man but according to this most
excellent nature of the godhed. But how weak this argument is, that these
two natures are ioygned together: ergo what so ever is granted to the one,
must olso be altributed to the other: may be well showed and proved by other
arguments. The body or balle of the sun that shyneth in the sky, and the
light of the same sun have between them selves a natural and a most high
coniunctyon: and yet the same body of the sun does not really and verayly
reach to al places that ye light does extend it self unto. Item the body or
substance of our yie and the sight of the same are verai nere coupled and
knitte together: and yet for all that our sight comes and reaches to many
things, which our bodily yie does not extend it self unto They argue
furthermore yt many things ought to be given, granted, and attributed to the
body of Christ a boue the common course and co^dycio^s of other bodies. And yt
for two causes, partly because it is glorified, and partly for yt it has ye
word ioygned unto it For answer whereof we confess yt many things must be
attributed and confessed of it: but as for this, yt it should be every where,
can not be attributed unto it without prejudice of the nature of a true humayn
and natural body. And in case we should grant somuche unto Christ's humayn
body it should not make fore his dygnytee, but rather quyte and clean to the
derogacyon and destructyon of it: For than should he be as it were thruste
out, and deprived from his true nature. Furthermore thissame could make but
little for our aduersaires purpose in this matier. For although we should grant
that the body of Christ might have this prerogative to be in many places at
once. Yet should it not follow that God will so do in this sacrament. Yet
ferther they labor and travail to prove this corporal presence of Christ
in the Sacrament by the similitude of a teacher that reads a lecture to an
audience: who in that that he may extend his words to many hearers, does
also in the^ communicate and utter unto all his hearers and audience all that
lies in his mind to utter unto them so that all the said audience every one
of them may fully and perfectly understand the botome of his heart as well one
as another. In like manier (say they) does our lord in the words that are
pronounced over the Sacrament.

He does (as it were) enwrappe his body in them, that by the same it may be
conueyghed unto all those signs or cakes of bread, and may so be
communicated and distributed unto all the receyuers thereof, how many soever
be of them.

If therefore such a gift or power (say they) be given and granted to a
scholemaister, or a preacher being but an yearthly and a mortal man: why shall
not the same be much more given to Christ? But in this comparison is a right
great dyuersitie. and odds. And besides yt also (as we have said) before the
words do not carye nor conueyghe things nor do not conueyghe the
conceits of the mind to the hearers, but only by the way of signifyinge and
betokenyng.

And where as they go about afterward to establishe and confyrme that the
body of Christ is in all places by the first chapitur of the Epistle to the
Ephesians, where it is said that Christ is made the head of the Church
which is his body and the fullness of him that fylleth all in all things. The
Greek words be (...).
etc. is of no force at all to this purpose. For there it is not signified ne
meant that the body of Christ fills all things, and is in all places as
they do bring in and conclude upon it. But because the significacio^ of this
Greek word or participle (...) is indifferente to be taken two manier of
ways, (for it is a verb common (as the Gramarians call it,) that is to say,
of such nature, that it may signifye either dooyng or sufferyng (as ye lust.)
For ye may chose whether ye will take it and English it, fillyng, or else
being filled: If ye English it, being filled: than shall the sense and menyng
of it be, that Christ being the head of the church, is in his members made
full and perfect in all points: not that he is made perfect on his own
behalf, (for he is both perfeicte and full enough as touching himself) but
it is to be understood that he is fulfilled and made perfeyct as touching us
that are his body, and his members. For as the head is compared unto Christ,
and he called the head: even so is the congregation called the fullness of
Christ because it fulfylleth and makes up his mystical body. But if ye
English it fyllynge: than shall the sense be, that Christ is the head of
his Chuche, because he fylleth and makes perfeicte his gifts and virtues in
all his members. Neither can the sense be that he is in all places after his
humanitee. And I think that the same may well be proved by the scriptures.

For Christ does manifest say and grant that Lazarus dyed while he was
absente from thence. That if the adversaries will contend that he had not at
that time a glorified body: Christ as touching his manhood, is not in every
place.
it makes not much to the matier. For he had nevertheless the god head
ioygned unto his body. But to put the mattier out of all doubts, the
Angel even after his resurrection said unto the weomen: he is arisen, he is
not here. And again he shall goo before you into Galilee. And again: he was
taken up out of their sight when he ascended into heaven. Therefore he fills
not all things, neither is he in all places after his humanitee. They are wont
also to allege a place out of the fourth chaptur to the Ephesians. He that came
down is even the same also that ascended up even above all heavens to fullyll
all things. Which place for all that proves nothing against us, and it is
exponnded two manier of ways. First that to fulfill all things be referred
to al those things which were prophesied and written of Christ, whereof a
litell before he rehearsed a scripture saying: he is gone up on high, and has
led captivity captive, and has given gifts unto men. And if ye will refer
it to places than ye must understand it of certain kinds of places, and not
of every singular place according as this saying here following is spoken. the
lord will have all men to be saved. Therefore we must say that Christ
sometime has occupied the middle parts, sometime the upper parts and sometime
the lowest parts, in the sepulcher. But now the transubstanciatours say that
they have nothing to do here wythall. For they say not that the body of
Christ is every where, but only he that is in all places where this sacrament
is. Howbeit it is against them nevertheless. For if it so be (as they
affirm,) that it is not repugnant to the body of Christ to be at one time
in the twenty or fifty so^dry places at once: If Christ's body may be in
many places at once than it may be in every place which also D^^us perceived
enough.
than shall it not be repugnant for the same body to be in an houndreth places,
or in a thousand, and consequentlye in all places, and so shall they make
Christ's body to be infynite. Neither can they well find fault with this
manyer of arguing or reasoninge as though this form of arguyng were not
good. For Hierome uses even the same manier of resonyng against John the
bishop of Jerusalem, where he minds to prove that our bodies after the
resurrection may endewe without fode. For (says he) Helias and Moses could by
the power of God continue without meat by the space of fowertie days: therefore
may an other man by the same power of God be susteyneth longer. And if he may
continue longer: than it follows, that he may continue always if it be the
will of God that he shall so do. But leat us return again to our aduersaires
the transubstanciatours They because they se that upon this so nere a
conjunction or couplyng together of Christ with the sacrament, it follows
that the same sacrament may be wurshypped: (For if the lord bether
contained really and corporalli, what his he that would not wurshyp him? (they
teach that we may indi^ferently at our pleasures either do it, or leave it
vndoe^.

For (say they) although he be there in deed yet is he not there to any such
end or purpose that he should be wurshipped. If ye take and eat the
Sacrament, it is enoughe if ye do also wurship it, ye do not amiss. But
that that we put of the Sacraments is a thing of more certainetee, which
is, that in our wurshippinge we may not direct our mind toward the
outewarde signs: but if any manne at the time of the ministracion of the
sacrament being well and rightly instructed before of this mystery direct
his mind to wurshippe Christ reygning in heaven: he does well, yea, he is
bound to wurshippe Christ who declares himself unto him. Neither is there
any Idolatry committed in so dooyng, as Paul teaches in the Epistle to the
Corinthians when he says: If any man come into your congregation being an
ignorant and unlearned person, and hears you altogether speak with tongues:
undoubtedly (will he say) these fellows are all out of their wits, neither
shall he be any thing edifyed. But if he hear you proph^cieng and perceive that
the secrets of his heart are opened, than will he fall down on his face, and
worship god.

He will not in this case wurshyp the men that so prophecy or preyche: but for
as much as the lord does there open him self unto him he will turn him self
to wurshyp God.

But now to be brief, The reasons against the second opi^ion that was
propouned in the beginning of this w^orke.
the reasons wherefore this so gross a supposicion and opinion seems not to
be true are these here following.

First, for that this real and corporal presence brings no manner of
vtilytye or benifite unto us, which we have not by that other spiritual
presence. For in the sixth Chapter of John, the lord has promised everlasting
life unto them that eat him, The first reason against the gross opinion of the
corporal presence of Christ in the sacrament
and he has promised moreover that he will abide in them, and that they shall
abide in him. And what can we require more then this? Secondly, it could not
otherwise be granted that both we and the fathers of the old law had one
manner of sacraments: For they could not have obtained this real and bodily
presence, The second
for somuche as the son of God had not yet taken the nature of man and flesh
upon him.

Moreouer^ it should follow that both the godly and the ungodly do eat the
body of Christ. The third reason.
Also over and above that spirytuall eating which we have in the Syxte
Chapter of John, The fourth
they bring in an other fleshely and bodily eating of Christ, which can
not be proved: whereas this and y^ other are but all one, saving that in the
latter there be added outward material signs to confyrme the thing so much
the better.

Also it should follow that while they yield so much unto the words and ye
letter, The fifthe.
they wade in ye same dificultee and hardenese, that ye transubstancyatours are
entangled with all, when they say: This is my body. For they shall not be
hable so to wind out or vntangle them selfs, but that they have condycyon
and repugnaunce emonge them selfs.

For they shall not be hable plainly to declare what they do demonstrate and
show by those words, nor how the words be true when they are in
pronouncynge, unless they will admit a trope or a fyguratyue manier of
speaking.

Ferthermore they do by this opinion scattre the body of Christ about to be
in many places at once yea and every where at once. The reason agains^e the
corporal p^esence.
Neither is it to any effect, if they said: not localli, that is to say, in
the way of occupinge a room, or of filling a place. For though it should be
there, as the Angels are said to be in a place: yet the same is not agreeable
for any creature, as has been proved here before by examples of Didimus,
Basilius, Austen to Dardamus, and of Cyrillus.

The seu^nth reason
The words of the scripture do not drive ne led us to such a gross and a
corporal presence. And feith comes by the word of God: wherefore feith is not
bound to embrace any such presence.

And besides this, the fathers do teach otherwise. The eighte reason.
For what manier of body there is in the sacrament of Eucharistia, Ciprian
declares it in his sermon of the lords Supper when he says: Cyprian.
who continually even unto this present day does create, sanctyfie, and
bless his body, distributynge the same to the godly receauers. Now Christ's
verai own propre body is not of new created, nor sanctified, nor divided.
Chrysostom
Chrysostom upon the fifth chapitur of Matthew in the eleventh homely of his
work that is called imperfect has these words: If therefore it be so
dangerous a thing to remove and apply to pryuate uses and occupynge these
hallowed vesseles in the which is not the very true body of Christ but only
the mystery of his body contained. etc. And how we ought to clyme up into
heaven, when we do receive the communion, if we will have the fruicion of
Christ's body, the same Chrysostom does also expound in his four and
twentieth homily upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians and the tenthe
chapitur where he thus says: he gives a commandment unto us that with all
possible concord and love we come unto him, and that we being made Angels in
this life, should flygh up into heaven or rather above the heavens. For (says
he) whersoeuer the carkesse is, there will the Eagles be also. The lord he
calls a carkesse, because of his death. For unless he had dyed, we should
not have arisen again. And he calls us Eagles to show that whosoever comes
to this body, must earnestly endeavor to clyme up on high, and must have no
fellowship with the yearthe, nor be drawn to the things that are beneth, as
it were one still crepyng by the ground: but that he must always flighe up to
the things that be above and must behold the sun of righteousness, and
also must have the yie of the heart most sharp and quick. For this is a table
for mounting Eagles, and not for pratlyng Iaies. Also the same Chrysostom upon
the syx and twentieth chapitur of Matthew in his four skore and third homely:
They were taking their iourneye out of Egypt into Palestine, wearyng therefore
the wede of a wayfaryng man: and shall the ^ou^tyng be from heaven down to the
earth? And in the third book entiteled de sacerdotio, that is, of priesthode:
Think thou that thou art^ conuersaunt and abidynge among mortal men in
earth? wylt thou not rather suddenly be removed up into heaven. Dooest thou
not cast a way all thinking of the fleashe, and beh^ldest with a single mind
and with a pure heart the things that are in heaven? Austen.
Austen unto Bonifacius has all these things after the same order and tenor,
saying: ye time of Ester drawyng nigh, we say: this day, or the day after to
morrow, did Christ dye. On the sondaie we say: This day arose Christ from
death. And, Baptism is feith, and, the sacrament of the body of Christ is
Christ's body.

The thing that is absente is spoken of the thing present
We see that in all these forsayde sayings, the thing absente is really spoken
of the thing present. The same Austen upon the fifty fowerth psalm: The head
was in heaven and said: why dooest thou persecute me? we are in heaven with
him thoroughe hope, and he is in earth with us thorough love.

And in ye hundredth and nyneteenth epistle to Ianuaryus: Wherefore did he unto
that persecutour whom he threw down with his voice, and did in amanier eat
him transportynge him into his body.

Wherefore (I say) did he to that persecutour call down from heaven, and say:
Saul Saul why dooest thou persecute me? etc. Also upon John in the thirtieth
treactise, and the same is cyted in the title of the decrees de consecratione,
that is to say, of consecracion, in the second distinccion in the chapytur
beginning prima qu^dem: The lord is above, howebeit the lord being the
truth is here also.

For the lords body whereyn he arose must needs be in one place: But his
truth is dyspersed, and spread abroad in all places.

Item upon John in the fiftyeth treactise, thus he says: For after his
maiestee after his providence, after his unspeakable and invisible grace it is
fulfill led that was spoken of him: Behold I am with you unto the worlds
end: But after the fleashe which the word took upon him according to his
being borne of the virgyn as touching his being taken of the Jews, being
nailled upon the tree, being taken down from the cross, being wrapped in
lynnen clothes, being laid in the sepulcher, and as touching that he was
manifested and did plainly appear after his resurreccion, it is fulfilled that
he said: Ye shall not have me always present with you.

Wherefore, because he was conuersaunt in his bodyly presence by the space of
fowertye days with his disciples, and they awaiting upon him (by seeing him,
but not by following him) he ascended up into heaven: both true it is that he
is not here, (for he sits there on the right hand of his father) and also
yt he is present there, for he is not gone away with ye presence of his
majesty. Otherwise, after ye presence of his majesty we have christ alwais with
us: and after the presence of his fleash it was rightly said of him to his
disciples: But as for me ye shall not always have with you.

For the Church had him after the presence of the fleashe but a few days: now
it holdethe and has him still through seithe, but with the bodily yies it
seethe him not. ^^amine this place by Auste^s works.
And the same Austen again upon ye Epistle of John well toward the end of the
epistle: Therefore our Lord Jesus Christ did for this cause ascend into heaven,
because he saw, that many would honor him: and he saw that their honoring
of him is unprofitable unto them, if they trample and trede his members on
earth. And to the ent^nte that no man should err, and when he wurshipped the
head in heaven, he should trede the feet on earth: he told where his members
should be. For he spoke his last words even when he was ready to ascend up
into heaven: and after the same words he spoke no more upon earth. The head
being about to asce^d up to heaven commended his members on earth. Thou
fyndest him to speak, but it is in heaven, and down from heaven. And why?
because his members were trodden upon earth. For unto Paul being a persecutour
of him, he said from above: Saul, Saul, why dooest thou persecut me? I am
ascended up into heaven, but I do yet still lie as an abject on the earth I
sit here at the right hand of my father, but there on earth I do yet
still houngre, and thirst, and am as a straungier How than did he command his
body on earth wha^ he was about to asce^de up to heaven? When his disciples
demanded of him: lord, wylt thou at this time restore the kingdom of Israel?
And he being eue^ at the very point to be gone from them, thus answered: It
belongs not to you to know the times, which the father has put in his
own power. But ye shall receive power of the holy ghost, why ^he shall come
upon you. And ye shall be witnesses unto me in Jerusalem. See ye what way he
spredeth his body abroad, and see ye where he will not have himself trodden
upon. Ye shall be vitnesses unto me in Jerusalem and in all Iewrie, and in
Samaria, and even unto the worlds end. Behold what way I lie abject, that
do ascend, for I doee ascend because I am the head, my body lies yet
still: what way or in what place lies it? truly through out all the earth.
Unto Austen does Cyrillus cons^nte, who writing upon Ihon in the syxth book
and the fowerteenth chap. thus says: here is to be marked, that although he
conueyghed hence the presence of his body: yet by ye majesty of his godhed he
is always present with us, as himself when he was at ye point of de^arting
away from his disciples promises, saying: Behold, I am with you all the day
until the co^su^matio^ of the world. And the same Cyrillus in ye nynth book
upon Ihon and ye.xxi. chap. Christ said that he would be with his disciples
but a litell space, not because he should go from them altogether, (for he is
still with us continually until the end of the world:) but because he should
not live nor be co^uersaunt with them, as he had been before. For the time
was now at hand that he should depart away from them up to heaven unto his
father. And the part of al feythfull is to believe, that although he be absent
from us in body, yet neu^rthe less all things are rewled by his power, and
we by y^ same power governed, and he evermore pr^sent with all them that love
him. And therefore it was that he said.

Uerayly verayly I say unto you, wheresoever there shall be two or three
gathered together in my name: there am I in the mids of them. For like as
even at that time when he was conuersaunt on earth as a man, he did also fyl
heaven, and forsook not the coumpaignie of the Angels: even so at this present
though he be in heaven with his fleashe, ye the fulfilleth the earth and is
pse^t with the^ that love him. And it is to be marked, y^ although he should
go away after his fleash only (for as we have already said, he is
continually psent with us by ye virtue of his godhed:) yet he said that he
would for a litell space remain with his disciples namyng himself in plain
words because no man should presume to divide Christ into two sons.

And with these men agrees Uigilius, who in the first book against Eutiches
writes in this manier. The son of god after his humanitee departed away from
us: but after his godhed he says unto us. Behold, I am with you until the
end of the world. And the same man not many lines after says: For whom he
leaft and from he departed in his humanitee, them has he not leaft nor
forsaken in his godhed. For after the form and shape of a servant or
bondeman which he took away from us into heaven, he is absent from us: but
after the fourine and shape of god he goes not away from us, but he is psent
with is even upon earth. And yet as well being present as absent he is one and
the same unto us. Again in the fowerth book: If the nature of the word and of
the fleashe be but one nature: how happens that whereas the word is every
where, ye fleashe also is not found every where? For wha^ he was on earth,
certes he was not in heaven, and now, because he is in heaven, certes he is not
on earth. And so ferreforth is he not on earth, that as touching the fleashe
we look for Christ to come down from heaven whom after the word, we believe to
be with us upon earth.

Therefore after your opinion, either the word is contained and encoumpaced
in some certain place together with his fleashe: or else the fleashe is every
where together with ye word. For one nature does not receive in it self any
thing that is contrary to it, or of a sondrie sort from it. And of a much
sondrie sort and far unlike be these two th^nges, to be encompaced or
contained in a determinat place, and to be every where. And forasmuch as the
word is euerywhere, and his fleashe is not every where: it appears that one
and the same Christ is of both natures, and that he is in very deed every
where after the nature of his godhed, and to be contained within the circuit
of a place after the nature of his humanitee and manhoed and also that created
he was, and yet has no beginning: and to be subject to death, and yet of
such immortalitee that he can not die. And within few lines after thus he
says: This is the catholic feith and confession, which the Apostles taught
and delivered, which the Martirs confirmed and which the feithful do keep
and hold even unto this present. Besides these also Fulge^tius unto king
Trasinnudus in the second book: ^ulgentius
One and the same man placeable as touching that he was borne of man, which is
god infinite as touching yt he was begotten of the father. One and the same man
after his humain substance abs^nt from heaven when he was conuersaunt on
earth, and forsakyng the earth when he was ascended up into heaven and after
his godly and infinite substance neither leauyng heaven when he came down from
heaven, nor bearyng the earth when he ascended up into heaven. Which thing
may by the most true and assured words of the lords self be known, who
to show his humanitee placeable, said unto his disciples: I go up unto my
father and your father, my god and your god. Also when he had said of Lazarus:
Lazarus is dead, he added thereto, and said: I am glad for your sakes, that ye
may believe, because I was not there. And to declare the infiniteness of his
godhed, he says unto his disciples: Behold I am with you all the days until
the consummacion of the world. How did he ascend up into heaven, but that he
is a very man in deed and placeable? Or how is he present with his feithfull,
but that he is very true god in deed and infinite? And the same fulgentius in
ye third book: Christ being one and inseparable, did after his only fleashe
arise out of the sepulcher: and the same Christ being one and inseparable, did
after the wholle and perfeict nature of man which he took upon hym^ forsake
the earth locally, and ascended up into heaven, and sits on the right hand
of god, and after the self same wholle and perfeict man he shall come to judge
the quick and the dead, and to croune the feithfull and godly. Finally Bernard
upon the ca^ticles of Solomon in the three and thirtieth sermon thus says:
Bernarde.
I also have the word, but in fleashe I have it, and the truth is set
before me, but it is in a sacrament. The aungel is fat fed with the fat of
the wheat and is now saciated and filled with the grain self and I must in
the mean while be contented with a certain rynde of the sacrament, with the
branne of the flesh, with the chafe of ye lettre with the vaylle of feyth.
And these things are of such sort, that being tasted of they bring death,
vnleste they have taken some sauce be it never so litel of y^ By the first
fruictes of the spirit, is meant some litel taste or portion of the spirit,
though it be not yet the full gift and perfection of the spirit. Romans viii.
first fruictes of ye spirit. He alludeth to the history of the pot of
pottage made with colloquintida in the land of Gylgal and swetened of ^liseus
with puttyng mele into the pot read.iiii. King. iiii.
There is utterly to me death in ye potte^ except it be swetened with the mele
of the prophet. And within a litel after, he says: But with how great
abundance soever these things grow in fatness, yet do not we with like
pleasauntenesse receive the rynde of the sacrament, and the fatness of the
wheat self: feyth and hope: remembrance of a thing, and the presence of the
same euerlastyngnesse, and transitorinesse: the true visage, and a glass: ye
image of God, and ye shape of abo^dman: for in all these things my feyth is
rich but my understanding is very pore. And (I pray you) is understanding
and believing of egual sauourynesse, seeing yt believing is unto merit, and
understanding unto reward? Thou see as far odds to be between the
prouenders, as there is between ye places. And as the heavens are exalted in
height from the earth: so are y^ inhabitours in them. Here thou see that
Bernard does in plain and open words make a co^trariousnesse between ye
remembrance of a thing, and the psence of the same: and so between certain
other things which do greatly auaille to this matter. But let us return to
our adversaries. They have of the fathers and ancient wrytters of the Church
who^ to lay against us yt is to wete, Ireneus who affirms the sacrament o^
Eucharistia, to co^siste of two things, ye one yearthly, and the other
heavenly, which self same thing Gelasius also does suppose But all this does
not conclude, saving yt if thou take al ye whole sacrame^te together, and make
one thing of the sign and the thing signified thereby: tha^ do we grant ye
same to co^siste of two things. How the sacrament is said to consist of two
things the one yearthli and the other heavenly.
But if thou would afterward put as great and as nere a coniu^ctio^
between ye bread and Christ's bodi, as there is between the divine nature and
the human nature in Christ: this poincte were in no wise to be granted. For
tha^ there should of necessite one substance or subject be made of ye bread
and of Christ's body, so yt they should never be plucked asonder or disseuered
ye one from ye other: which things were vttrely against al reason. Out of ye
rest of the fathers they obiecte for the most part ye self same things that
ye tra^substa^ciatours cited before. But now leat us see what those persons
which embrace ye third opinion, do say against these men. First and
formeste they do not admit ye said scatering abroad of Christ's body in
such sort, yt it may be every where: Objections against this opinion of
the co^pora^ p^esence of Christ in the sacrament.
because it is a thing repugnant to ye nature of man. And Auste^ to Dardanus
does in most plain words write to ye contrary. Secondly they will needs
have, y^ ye eating which is put in ye sixth of Ihon, and this last eating at
ye lords supper be utterly al one: saving that here in this later eating,
there be added outward ^ignes of bread and wine. And ye thing they prove by
this argument, because Ihon for somuche as he had once before made me^cio^ of
ye eating which he writes of, does not afterward in ye later part of his
ghospel make any mention of ye instituting of ye sacrament as the other
Eua^gelistes do. For he had sufficie^tely wryte^ al ye gear before. And the
sum of the doctrine which the others had leaft unspoken, Ihon did supply in
the said sixth chapitur. Neither is there any cause (say they) why any person
should allege y^ communion to be therefore superfluous. The vtilitees of
receiving the communion.
For by often receiving of the communion we celebrate

The lords memorial, and thanks giving, and the mind is stirred up by the
representacio^ of such things as are there dooen, neither be there contained
therein dom^e signs, but speaking signs.

Besides this there is there contained a certain token or pledge wherbye the
Christianes do note them selfs ioygned and knitte together among themselfes
and with Christ, and besides this, they profess their feyth concerning the
body of Christ nailled on the cross, and concerning his blood that was shed
forth for our redemption For it is not enough to believe with the heart, but
confession is made with the mouth too, and not only with the mouth, but also
with outewarde dooinges. Neither do these men admit that the others say,
which is, that the wicked also do receive the body of Christ. The wicked
do not receive christ's body.
For our senses and reason do not reach unto him, therefore it remains
that he is received by feith. Of the which feith, forasmuch as the said
parties are destitute, they can have nothing but the outeward signs. And Paul
writes thus. Whosoever eats this bread vnwoorthyly. etc. and says not, whosoever
eats the body of Christ unworthily.

Ferthermore they meruaille at these men which folowes the contrary opinion,
that they should attribut remission of sins unto the said corporal or bodyly
eating of Christ. For that is too admit a work yt is accepted for ye very
weorkyng or doing of it, whereas remission of sins is not had but through
feyth. They do afterward lene and staygh altogether upon the speakynges of
Paul, when the lord bids this to be dooen in remembrance in him, and his
death to be showed til he come, which words seem unto them to declare the
absence of Christ's body, and not his presence. But we have elsewhere given
aduertiseme^te yt this argument is nothing so strong nor substancial an
argument, except it be understood of the body of Christ really,
corporally, and naturally present.

For else forasmuch as it is received by feith, it is not understood to be
utterly absent, though his abiding be in heaven as touching his nature and
his substance. For he is eaten spiritually, and is thereby in very true deed
ioygned and knitte unto us.

They allege after this the fathers who do in plain and manifest words give
a determinate sentence, and say precisely, that here is a type or
countrepaine, a sign, and a figure of Christ's body. And they bring in for
their purpose two similitudes or comparisons, One is of a friend, unto whom
his friend that is absent is yet nevertheless said to be present wha^ his
mind or thought renneth on him. Also they put many lookyng glasses which
are in a circuit round about one and the same man, whose look and face is
multiplied through out all these glasses every one of them, though the man
move not out of his place. In deed I confess that these are similitudes though
some what to cold to agree well with this mystery. For a friend co^prehe^ded
and conceived in a man's thought and being stille rennyng in his mind,
does not weorke any alteracion or change in the party that is the thynker
on his friend, nor fedeth or nourishes his mind, nor also does so renew
his body, that he may be made apt or hable to receive the resurrecctio^.
And ye same yt is contained i^ a glass, is but a very sle^dre and light
shadow, neither ought so sle^dre a thing to be compared with our ioygning and
coupling to Christ. For the spiritual presence of Christ which we put, has
the power of the holy ghost annexed unto it, which does most straightly
couple us unto him. Yet the said similitudes are not utterly to be rejected
for somuche as they may by some manier of means induce and led us to the
truth so yt they be understood, not to be altogether full egual with the thing
self. For ye said similitudes do notify unto us how this receyuyng of
Christ is done by feyth, and with the mind. And mention they make of two manier
of couplynges of us with Christ. The one is, that by feith we enbrace his
body nailled on the cross, and his blood shed forth for our rede^pcio^. The
other is, yt ye very son of god took our very true nature upon him, and by
this means there is entered and begone a natural communion between us and
Christ, whereof there is a me^cio^ made in ye second chap. of the epistle to
the Hebrews. But there is a certain third knittyng together which we enter
and begin with Christ by eating him spiritually, of which they do not
make so often mention though they do not altogether hold their peace of it.
But of this third knittyng of us with Christ we shall traicte here a litel
after. That if these men be demanded the question, whether Christ be
present in the lords supper or not: they say he is, but they say this by ye
figure synecdoche, because ye one part of Christ, that is to say his godhed,
is veraily and truly psent there. Otherwise in expounyng our lords saying,
this is my body they use ye figure of metonimia, (of which we have before
spoken) using ye name of ye thing self i^ stead of ye sign. And they seem to
grant very Christ himself in such wise to be there pse^t, as ye su^ne,
which kep^th himself still i^ his own circle, is nevertheless said to be
present to the world, and ye same to govern with his going about and with his
light. And how veraily feith may make y^ thing pse^t, they think theymself^s
to have sufficie^tely declared out of ye epistle to ye Galathia^s where Paul
said y^ Christ was described and set out before their yies, and crucified
eue^ among them. Now remains yt b^twene these two opinions and
determinatio^s we show what is by our judgment either to be avoided, or to be
received: not y^ I mind to check singular and most excellent men that have
been or to give any geacke either to Luther or else to zwynglius. For as
thouchyng zwynglius I do certainly know, y^ in his book he puts ye signs
in this sacrament in no wise to be void or vain signs, as I have above said.
And also it has bee^ told me of me^ yt have bee^ co^uersau^t with Luther, y^ he
of a truth made none other co^iu^ctio^ between ye body of Christ and ye
outward signs, but a coniunctio^ sacrame^tal. But how the contencion between
them was increased and enkie^dled, y^ time serves not now to rehearse it.
Setting therefore these men aside, which never can be praised enough, we will
^reacte of y^ opinions eue^ as they are recited at large, and tossed to and fro
in ye world. Wherefore in ye former opinion, I do in no case approve ne allow
ye gross copulatio^ of ye body of Christ with the bread, so yt it should be
naturally, corporally, and really contained in ye same bread. For ye holy
scripture does not co^streigne us to stablishe any such doctrine: and to
multiply and heap up so many miracles without testimony of gods word,
stands not well with the rule of diuinitee. Besides this, such a presence is
not necessary, neither has it any efficacye as touching our salvation. Also
that the ungodly should receive the body of the lord I do not admit. For
whatsoever the lord has instituted he has done it that it might be to our
salvation: but the carnal and corporal eating is not for the salvation of the
ungodly: ergo Christ has not instituted the said eating of his body in such
sort. And whatsoever the ungodly do there eat corporally, it may not be
said that they eat the body of Christ, except ye will give unto the outward
sign or matier of the sacrament, the name of the thing. Morouer we will not
grant ye body of Christ to be every where, or to be dispersed thorough
out al or many places, because this is contrary and repugnaunt to the
conditions of man's nature.

Neither also is it to be thought that there is any difference between the
spiritual eating which is written in the syxth chapter of Ihon, and that
which the lord did institute at his last supper: saving that to the sam^
doctrine and promise which he had taught before, he did now at his last supper
add ye said outward signs, and put ye thing i^ execution, which he has
taught before. Also yt they speak doubtfully concerning the adoracion or
wurshippyng of the sacrament, ought not to be admitted. For we have taught
before both plainly and clearly, what is to be thought concerning that
mattier. And thus much of this opinion from the which I judge to be excepted
and avoided all these points which I have now rehearsed.

In the second opinion this I like not, that they do so seldom make mention
of the sacramental mutation of the bread and the wine, which yet is no small
matier. And the fathers wha^soeuer they seem to favor the tra^substanciatio^.
Yet have a respect unto ye said sacrame^tal mutation. Also ye holy scriptures
do not contemn it for Paul in the same place where he treats of the
sacrament, What thing is not approved in this opinion as touching the corporal
presence of Christ in the sacrament.

The sacramentalle change is a great matier and approved by holy scripture.


does not only call it the cup, but the cup of the lord. We see also,
that in the old testamente things that were offered, were not only called
holy, but also most holy, wherefore they ought not to esteem this mutacio^ to
be a small matier, seeing that it is of so great weight and efficacy. But if
they will excuse the matier, saying, that they do it because we should not
cleue to much unto the outward or material signs, it is to be answered,
that this sore may be easily remedied by a doctrine whereby men may be
instructed, that Christ is ioygned with us by a most excelent conjunction or
knotte when we do communicate, in that that he abides in us, and we in him:
Secoundly in that that he is ioygned with us by the words, Christ is ioygned
unto us by three things.
and that by the way of signifiyng or betokenyng. Thyrdly he is ioygned unto
us by the material signs, and that also by the way of signifiyng: which not
wythstanding is less then that which belongs to the words. Yea and the
material signs take their signifiyng or betokenyng of the former co^ioynyng
and couplyng which comes of the words. If these things be diligently,
duly, and ordrely taught: there shall be no daungier in the matier. I grant
that the writers of this opinion have sometime treated and made mention of this
sacramental change but yet very seldom. Morouer they have not allwaies
aydded theru^to that efficacye which is due unto it. Of the efficacy of the
sacrament.
For these things are not made vulgar or common signs, but such signs as
may myghtily and strongly stiere up yt mind. They will say: the^ shall ye
attribute to much unto the elements and material things of this world.
Wheru^to we answer, yt these things are not attributed unto them for the^
selfs, but for ye lords institution and ordinance, for the power of the holy
ghost, and for the clerenes and plainness of the words. If they demand
where I find, yt ye holy ghost weorketh in this matier: The holy ghost
weorketh at the receiving of the communion.
ye answer there to is easy. For we have already put and concluded yt this
eating is spiritual. And how ca^ we eat spiritualli without ye holy ghost?
As touching ye institucio^ of ye lord there is no doubt to be made: and of
ye efficacy of the word the scriptures speak in diverse places. Paul says,
that the gospel is ye power of god unto salvation, that is to wete, because god
does by ye instrume^te of ye ghospel declare his power. And what other thing
is ye sacrame^te of Eucharistia, but the ghospel, or the word visible? Paul
says also, that faith comes by hearing, and ye hearing by the word of God,
not yt ye word makes us believe, (for it is the holy ghost through who^ we
do believe:) but he uses ye instrume^te of the words, and also of the
sacraments, which are the words of God such as may be comprehended with our
outward and bodyly senses. Who knows not also yt by the word of God the
creatures are sanctified, as it is in ye epistle to Timothe, which also must
be ryghthely taken. For the holy ghost is he that sa^ctifieth in deed,
nevertheless he does it by the instrume^te both of the words and of the
sacraments. Therefore this mutatio^ or change, may not be taken away from
the bread and the wine, by ye which they are made signs of the body and
blood of Christ effectual and mighty in operation, that is to say, such as
by them the spirit of the lord woorketh in us myghtely, and not after ye
common sort, if ^o be, yt we on our part be endewed, with feyth and
godliness. For we do not here establyshe an efficacy which tyeth our
salvation to ye things of this world. Neither leat any man here obiecte and
say: Seeing this receiving of ye communion is dooen by feyth, what shall they
be the better yt do communicate, seeying that in case they be feythful, they
have Christ already ioygned unto them? For such persons may easily be
au^swered. Christ is in deed already ioygned unto us, but he is daily by
receiving the communion more nerer and nerer ioygned unto us: and when we do
communicate, he is more and more united and made one with us. Besides this, in
receiving of it we do fulfill the co^ma^deme^t of ye lord, who commanded yt
we should eat and drink this sacrament. Ye might else say eue^ the like of
baptism too. For wha^soeuer any man does believe, he is justified without
delay, and has forgiveness of his sins: and yet notwtsta^dyng he is not
Baptized in vain. If ye demand again, whether this efficacye of ye
sacrame^te of Eucharistia. Whether the efficacy of Eucharistia do exte^de
equally and indifferently to all men.
does extend equally and indiffere^tely unto al men: I answer, no. But it is
according to ye rate and porcio^ of feithe in the parties that do
communicate, as Origin said upon the fifteenth chapitur of Mathewe. It is not
ye substance of this sacrame^te that does profit, (says he) but it is
that which is by ye word and by prayer that heireth our minds according to
the qua^titee and portion of our feith. There is yet another thing that I would
have them to beat in to ye minds of ye people: which is, yt through the
communion we are incorporated, and (as ye would say) enbodied unto Christ
which word of enbodyeng, is no strange nor no new devised word in
scripture. For in Paul to the Ephesians it is sayd^ that the Gentiles are made
fellow heirs and concorporall with Christ: and the greek word thereof is
(...) For although we put that the understanding and taking of Christ's body
is dooen by feyth: yet notwythstanding at this conceiving and taking, there
follows effectually a true conjunction (I say) between us and Christ, (and
not a feigned or ymaginatiue conjunction) which first perteyneth to the solle
and then redoundeth unto the body. We are incorporated unto Christ wha^ we
do communicate.


And the same co^iunctio^ and incorporacion of us with Christ, is commended
unto us in the holy scriptures of Paul, under a comparison of the head and the
body, when he calls us me^bres of one body under Christ which is the
head: and under a comparison of the state and condition of wedlock, wherein
two are made one fleashe. Which thing to express, Cyrillus brought forth a
like exaumple of molten wax which being myxte with other wax becomes of
two substau^ces one substance. Even so is it Cyrillus mind that Christ is
ioygned unto us. And to this purpose do the words of Paul to the Ephesians
make verai greatly. Where it is said, that we are of his flesh, and of his
bones. Whether Christ be of our flesh or we of his fleashe.
Which words at the first sight when a man looks on them, seem to have
another menyng, and seem that they ought to have been spoken another way, that
is to wete, that the son of God is of our flesh and of our bones because he
took fleashe of our kind. But Paul understood not bare and common fleashe,
but such fleashe as were clean from sin, fleashe apt to receive the
resurrection and immortalitee. Which kind of fleashe the feithfull,
forasmuch as they have it not of theymselfes, nor yet by the procreation of
Adam they do challenge and take it of Christ wha^ they are incorporated into
him by the sacraments, and by feith. Thus than there happens a certain
slidynge and issuynge of Christ into us, The issuing of Christ in to us.
and a certain spirytuall touching which Paul considered and well weighed,
when he said to the Galathians: I live, yet not I, but Chyste lives in me.

Neither it is necessary that for these things Christ should be dyspersed
and scattered about throughoute infinyte places. For all that ever we do
here teach is spiritual. And yet is it not a feygned thing nor
fantastical. For fantasies, idolles, or things imagined and feigned, do
not feed the solle as it is certain that it is dooen herein this sacrament.
For we have said, and do confyrme, that these material signs do most
truly sygnyfye, represente, and exhibit unto us the body of Christ, to be
eaten: howebeit it is spiritually, that is, with the mouth of the solle to be
eaten, and not of the body.

If ye demand how the fathers of the old law could have the self same
thing in their sacraments that we have: the answer is easy to be made.

For we have concluded that in this sacrament the matier is not dooen
corporallye, but spiritually. And it is read in the Apocalypse, that ye lamb
was offered from the beginni^g of the world. The fathers of ye old law awaited
for things to come, and we remember the things that now already past.
Finally this only thing we show and declare necessary to be taken head
unto: which is, that the same which we do always add of the spiritual
manier of receyuyng taken to be preiudicyall or de^ogati^e unto the truth.
For Austen said upon the fifty fowerth psalm, that the lords body is in a
certain and determinate place, that is to wete, in heaven: but the truth of
the lords body is every where. For wheresoever the faithful be, they
conceive and believe that Christ had a true body in deed which was given for
us, and by feith they eat the same. Thus have I said my mind what ought to be
dooen according to the scriptures in this matier of the sacrament. Which
things I would wyshe the godly reader well to examine and pondre, and the same
to take in good pa^te. God of his goodness grant that the Church of Christ
may once obtain to come to the truth, and also to a concord and peace
concerning this sacrament. Which two things I do for this cause wish and
desire, for that I considre the sacrament of Eucharistia, whereof we treacte,
to have been hitherto overwhelmed, buried, and deformed with lies, deceyptes,
and supersticions, that it might be rather esteemed any other thing then that
which the lord in his supper did institute.

Which church to the intent we should not have easily or soon pourged, the
devil being a most grievous enemy to all peace and truth, has sown so many
opinions, contencions, debates, Heresies, and battles in manier even to
bloodshed and manslaughter: that an uniform and reasonable consent and
agreement therein such as is mete for Christen people to have, seems in a
manier impossible to be hoped for. Howebeit (alas) we suffer these things not
without desert, for ye that we have dishonored this sacrament two manier of
ways: partly in that that of this so excellent and so singular a gift of
Christ, we have erected and set up an execrable Idol: and partly for that
we have usurped these holy mysteries with an unclean feith, with a conscience
polluted with most grievous sins, without any due proof or examinacion of our
selves. Wherefore I beseech almighty god, that he will take pity upon this great
calamity, and that he vouchesafe once to restore unto his Church the
Sacrament of Eucharistia truly received and restored: and I beseech him that
he will grant us the right use thereof through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Finis.
Imprinted at London by Robert Stoughton dwellinge within Ludgate at the sign
of the Bysshoppes Miter for Nycolas Udall.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


