TRVE NEVVES From one of Sir Fraunces Veres Company.

Concerning Delftes-Isle, and sundry other towns in the Low Countries,
yielded to the General since May last.

Of the great army, now coming out of Germany for the aid of the French
King, and their hope for the speedye winninge of Antwerpe.

With the bloody persecution and Marterdome which sundry chief persons of
account did lately suffer in Spain for the profession of Christ Jesus.

Translated out of Dutch.

Seen and allowed.

Imprinted at London for Thomas Nelson, and are to be sold at his shop, over
against the great South door of Paul's. 1591.

The coppie of a Letter written by a Gentleman of account, sent to a Lady in
England, concerning the present state of the Low Countries.
RIght Honorable Lady to whom I am in all duty bound: the dispatch of my
last letter sent away with such great speed concerning the yielding up of the
Sconce and town of Zutphen, made me ouerslip to acquainte your Ladyship with
one piece of service don at that instant by a stranger in our Camp, a thing
worthy to be remembered, which was as follows. After we had obtained the
Sconce of Zutphen, we set forward toward the town, against which having
placed our ordenaunce, with full resolution by force to enter it: there issued
forth of the said town of Zutphen an Italian having so stern a countenance,
and being so mighty a man of person, yt he seemed more like a monster then a
man: this Italian carryinge a countenance as it had been a young Giant,
vaunted him self, and made a proud challenge before our General the Grave van
Maurice, offering to combat hand to hand with any Gentleman he had in all his
army, for the estate of the whole town. But the General made slight accounte
of his challenge, and was very unwilling that any one should fight with him,
the rather for that he seemed to be so mighty a man at arms.

Hereupon a young youth (borne in the Low Countries) stepte before the General
being scarce 19. years of age having no hair on his face, and upon his knee
besought the General that he might be permitted to Combat and fight with this
mighty Champion, whereunto the General would hardlye condecend by reason of
the youngnes of his years, nevertheless at the importunate suit of the young
man whose name was Rihouen, the General gave his consent, commaundinge him to
be mounted upon a great horse who being well armed and provided for that
purpose, set upon this challenger, they being both singled forth in the
plain field, began to assault and run at each other with their Lances,
which being broken, Rihouen suddenly began to draw forth his Cutlace
wherewith he entending to have smitten the Italian (from whom he also looked to
receive the like courtesy) suddenly espied this challenger to have a dagge
charged which he was discharging at Rihouen, whereupon Riechouen fiercely stroke
a him and at the first blow cut of his right arm, so that the arm, dagge and
all fell to the ground. Whereupon Riehouen took him prisoner and brought him
before the General, who not only commended him but bountifully rewarded him
for his honorable service.

Thus much I thought good to certify unto your good Ladyship the thing being
truth, and besides here withal to signify unto you, our good success and
affairs happened since that time. May it therefore please your Ladyship to
understand, that so soon as we had obtained Zutphen, we marched with our
forces to Deuenter, where having planted our ordinance before the weakest part
of the town, we played upon it with the Cannon, so yt on the first night, our
Soldiers were lodged under the walls thereof.

On the next morning early, the enemy perceiving our great preparation and whot
assault, and that we were resolved to enter the town by force, craved a parley
being no way able to withstand us, whereupon the Lord of Fama being General of
ye ordinance with some of the chief commanders of our army, asked them if
their demand were in good earnest or not, which they affirmed by a great oath
to be don in earnest.

Whereupon we presently appointed two captains the one called Vandernots, and
the other Lennits, these two we appointed to go into the City accompanied with
some few soldiers. On the Enemies side, two of their Captains came into our
camp as pledges the one being a Spaniard, the other a Wallonne, with who^ when
his excellency had co^ferred, he granted unto them after a ripe deliberation
with his council at war, the same conditions that he had granted before unto
the town of Zutphen, the coppie whereof was as follows.

The agreement of his excellency with those of Deuenter.
MAurice Prince of Orange, Earl of Nassawe Catzelenboghen, Vianden, dies etc.
Governor and Captain General of the dukedom of Gelderland and the counties
of Holland, Zealand, West-frieseland, Zutphen, Virich and Ouerrisell, Admiral
General, etc. Promise by these presents and upon our honor to the governor,
Captains, officers and soldiers, as also to the Citizens and inhabitants of
the City of Deuenter, of what quallitie or condition soever, that they may
with their wives, Children, mooueables, furniture, and withal other
appurtenances, freely depart out of the said city either to Nimweghen, or any
other place wheresoever it shall please them.

And if it happen that some of the said Captains, Officers, and soldiers
spiritual or temporal or any of the citizens be not able to dispatch their
affairs so soon, we then grant unto them moreover the space of three days
free, wherein to dispatch all their business: and that it shall be lawful for
them to depart when so ever they please. And those that shall be willing to
remain where they are, whether they are spiritual or temporal shall be used
as the other inhabitants of the united provinces.

And to the end that they may be the more assured hereof, we grant unto them
a certain Conuoy and six horses, upon condition notwithstanding: that their
Liefetenant Colonel shall promise and bind him self to see them safely
delivered again in Deuenter, so soon as they shall be arrived at the place
appointed.

These conditions being ratified and confirmed, under the hand and seal of
his excellency, on the tenth day of June, the said town was immediatelye
yielded up unto the said Lord General to the use of the States.

After we had thus obtained the town of Deuenter, we gave some small assault
against the town of Nimmingham where we made no tariaunce. Then we passed
toward Grunningen, and in our way we assaulted a town of great strength called
Delits I Will: beeinge eight English mile from Giunningen, which town was
strongly fortified and entrenched: nevertheless we had not lien before it
above two days, but the town was constrained by force to yield unto us, for
we entered the Sconce, where we had a fierce battle: but in the end we put
many of the Enemies to the sword, without the loss of any store of men.

THe town of Delftes Isle, (after we had obtained it,) we fortified it and
sent our army immediately toward Stenwick, before which town we nowlie, having
daily some small skirmishes: In this town it is supposed that the Prince of
Parma abides, whose strongest power at this present is not above three
thousand. We received certain news from Cullen that the Lord Uiconte of
Turyn, accompanied with some of the nobility of Germany, is coming down
into the Low Countries with thirty thousand footmen, and ten thousand
horsemen, these purpose to have passage into France for thereleefe and aid
of the french King, and our general meets them the twenteth of this month to
welcome them into the country: they are very valiant soldiers and wonderfully
well provided both for horse and foot, I trust very shortly to advertise you
of some attempt to be performed against Antwerpe: which forthwith we mean
to put in practice, for having gotten the Castle of Tuernout which we now
enjoy, we may plainlye come to the walls of the Cittye: We here good news
God be thanked out of all parts especially out of Brittany, where a Gentleman
of Captain Salamon Wolfes company writes that he is in good hope, very
shortly to send word of one of the most brauest and commendablest battles that
ever was fought this hundredth year, well God and S. George for England, God
bless them and our General with S. Frauncis Vere under whose commandment I
still abide, our General deserves great honor for his skill and curradge,
and so does S. Frauncis who is in good health, he shows that he is decended
of an honorable house: yea his very name is feared in all the emies forces.
The thundering shot of the Cannon calls me to my place, and therefore am
constrained to cut short, leaving your good Ladieship to the consideration of
all herein expressed which is no more but what I my self have seen and know
for truth.

The town of Groninghen is somewhat distressed, by reason the passage is
hindered thorough the taking of Delftes Isle.

The town of Huelft in the land of wast is lately yielded.

And the greatest part of Artoyes is now in yielding.

The bloody persecution and marterdome which sundry chief persons of
account, did lately suffer in Spain, for the profession of Christ Jesus.
THe Inquisitors of Spain having practiced a long time to entrappe and
overthrow all the secreet professors of Christ Jesus which might be found
in that Land, procured their officers and ministers to attache and apprehend
such as did any way deal contrary to the laws of their holy house, or varrie
in religion from the ordinances and detestable decrees of the Church of Rome:
For we are to note and may easilye conjecture that although the people of
Spain, are for the most part given to embrace Idolatry and superstition, yea
and to be adversaries and sworn enemies to gods truth and to the favorers
thereof: yet may we be assured that among so many, there is doubtless some
that are of the contrary opinion, such as not only fears God, but also are
secret imbracers of his truth, yea and such as shunneth not to teach and
instruct otherssecretly, in the principles of Christian religion. Among whom
one Doctor Cacalla a very learned man, who sometime had been Chaplin unto the
Emperor Charles he fifte, being hereof greatly suspected, was suddenly
attached and openly accused to be a Lutheran, Heriticke, and thereby an utter
enemy to the Church of Rome: whereupon he with sundry others his favorers
were sent to prison who remained there a long space while in the meanetime,
the whole house, stock and linnage of Madam de biuero, were all also attached
and sent to prison for the said cause, who would not shun in prison openly to
say and offer to prove with the loss of their lives, That the religion of
Spain was false, abominable, full of superstition and idolatry, and that God
blessed England for professing of his truth. The names of which persons, the
Popes ministers there never ceased till they had given over unto the
Inquisitors who soon after being openly denounced for Heretics, were brought
to Veledolid, the place where for the most part the King of Spain commonly
kept his Court, there was the sentences published against those Godly
professors, where according to the tenor thereof the prissoners were to be
executed for example to others, with many circumstaunces and seremonies
hereafter ensuing.

Whereupon as well for the proceedinge to judgment, as also for the due
execution of their sharp and bitter laws continually put in execution in
those causes, there was erected a large Skaffold in the midst of the great
market place of the said City of Valedoled, between S. Frauncis Church and the
holy house. Whereupon was placed a chair of six steps high, for every man to
behold, right against ye face of the town house, under which was seats very
broad and so large steps that many people might thereupon sit and be placed.

At the one side of the scaffolde there was made a gallery leading from the
town house, as well to avoid the preace of people, as also for the chief
states and Princes of the blood, to have free recourse too and fro, in which
Gallery was placed a rich seat toward the market place, only appointed for
the Princes and Kings sister and Regent of Spain, the kings bastard son,
and for diverse other Princes and courtiers, to here the sentence and to see
the law efectually prosecuted.

The appointed day being come, there was such a multitude of people assembled
to here the sentence and so see the execution of the prisoners, (because the
prisoners were of great account,) that not only al windows and houses were
full of beholders, but also all the market place and streets there about were
stored with such great prease, that hardly might the train have passage to the
place skaffold.

Whereupon about ten of the clock of the same day, there arrived the princes
Lady Jane sister to King Phillip, being first Regent of the Kingdom of Spain
being accompanied with the Kings great steward and sundry other Lords and
nobles and attended on with a company of knights, the guard, the Archers,
bowmen and Halberders, issuing forth of the kings Palace, who marched on
horseback directly to the town house, with four Harraldes of Arms going
before her and the Earl of Beudia carried the naked sword.

When these Princes and nobles were come to the place and set in degrees one
next unto an other, upon the aforesaid scaffold: presently the Archbishop of
Civil, the chief Judges of the spiritual court, and the counsel of the
Inquisitors together with the Bishop of Valencia rid through the town unto a
scaffolde for them appointed, but the whole train of the rest of the
spiritual court and those of the holy house went all upon an other scaffolde
through the gallery.

The prissoners being in number thirtye, were brought forth and led, as it
had been in a triumph, one carrying in the middle of them the picture of a
deceased gentlewoman: These prisoners did all severally wear the Sambenito as
the Spaniards call it, which is a yellowe coat made like a fools coat full
of red crosses before and behind with vglye faces painted upon the coats, all
carrying in their hands waxen lights, or wax candels.

Now the cheifest malifactors as they termed them, namely those that before
were secretly appointed to be burned, had on their heads Miters or crowns of
paper, called in Spanish Crocas, upon the which was also painted devils and
ugly faces, before the^ was carried a cross covered over with black lining,
in token of mourning, and after them issued a bundance of people, crying out,
and reuiling them in most clamarous and foolish manner.

Immediately after that, the Judges and chief Inquisitors were placed upon the
Skaffold, the prisoners were placed also in order, being brought in every one
led between two false brothers, Officers to the Inquisition, called Familiars,
such as to a man's face will speak him fair, and seek to cut his throat
behind his back. Now were the prisoners set upon the six steps before the
Chair, and as a principal party, Doctor Cacalla aforesaid, was set upon the
first step, and so every one in order, according to the quallity of his
offense. Then was there a Friar of S. Dominicks order called Melchior Cano,
this Friar made a sermon to the company and prisoners, which continued ye
space of an hour, which being ended the L. chief Justice, went from his first
place to another Chair, purposely made ready for him. The Archbishop of
Civil went also from his Skaffold, unto that Skaffold where the Princes sat,
and advised them to swear, (having their fingers laid upon a cross, which
stood pictured in a Masse-booke) namely, that they should upon their honors,
support, maintain, favor and defend the holy Inquisition, and thereunto to
show daily their good affection toward it, never to hinder their intentions,
but to give them full power hereafter, to burn all those, that (departing
from the Romish Church) should follow the doctrine of the Lutheran Heretics,
without exception of person, of what age, state, quality or calling so ever.
Secondly, that they should force and command their subjects, to submit
themselves to the Romish Church, and to observe their Laws without force or
any violence. The Princes took this oath, and thereupon the Archbishop gave
the^ with his forefingers his benediction or blessing, saying, God send long
life to your Highnesses. Which being dooue, the several sentences and
judgments of the prisoners, were them read before them, and afterward
publicly pronounced by the Official, who called unto him Doctor Augustine
Cacalla, priest in Valedolid, who being come from his seat, was set upon
another by the said Official, to hear the sentence of Condemnation, namely,
for that it was known unto them, that the said Cacalla, was the chiefest
preacher of that new sect and eronious doctrine, (as they termed it) to those
that were of that Conuenticle, that therefore he was first to be disgraduated,
and after to be burned, and his goods confiscated to the benefit of the
Justice.

After his sentence was read and pronounced, Francis de biuero, Priest of
Valedolid, and brother to the above named Cacalla, received like judgment, and
to the end he should speak nothing against the horrible abuses of the Spanish
Inquisition, and their detestable doctrine, as he had before very constantly
done, as well without as within the prison, the said Frauncis biuero (being
very well beloved of the Common people) had his mouth gagged, by means whereof
he could not speak one word. The next was Mistress Blanch de biuero, called and
condemned as her brother was before. The fourth was John de biuero, brother to
the rest, and he was condemned to perpetual imprisonment, and there to wear
the Sambenito or fools coat as is aforesaid, all the days of his life. The
next was Madame Constance de biuero, sister to the aforesaid Gentleman, being
the widdowe of Ferdinando Ortis, dwelling before in Valedolid, she followed the
rest in like judgment, and was condemned to be burned. The sixth sentence was
denounced against Madame Leonore de biuero, mother to those persons,
aforesaid, who being dead and buried long since in Valedolid, yet forasmuch
as in her life time she had greatly favored all true professors of the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, and had suffered many godly assemblies and Sermons to be made
in her house, as appeared by the confessions of sundry, examined to that
purpose, her bones were commanded to be dug forth of the grave, and being
brought thither in a Coffin, were condemned to be burnt, for that (as they
said) they were the relics of a Lutheran Heretic, and that all her goods
should be confiscated to the benefit of the Magistrate: and finally, that the
house wherein she dwelt in her life time, should be raced down to the ground
and left vacant. And that the occasion of racing the said house, might be
commonly known to all persons, it was ordained at that present, that a pyller
of stone should be erected in the same place, and the occasion thereof to be
engraven in the said pyllar: which thing was presently put in execution and
performed forthwith* so yt the stone pyllar stands still in memory hereof.
The next was, Alphous Pieres, Priest of Valentia, he was condemned, first to be
disgraduated, and afterward to be burned, and his goods confiscated.

After these 7. had received their sentence of condemnation, the Bishop of
Valencia put on his episcopal ornaments, and clothed Doctor Cacalla, Frauncis
his brother, and Alphonse Pierze, with the vestments appertaining to Priests,
each of the^ holding a challice in their hands, but he presently unclothed them
again. When they were now disgraduated, and that all the holy Oil was clean
scrapt off from the crowns of their heads and their fingers ends, then was
the Sambenitoes, namely the coats of shame and dishonor cast again over their
shoulders, and their Miters of paper in scorning manner set again upon their
heads. This done Cacalla, opened his mouth, desiring the Princes and other
Nobles there present, to give him audience, but he might not obtain that
favor. Nevertheless, he openly protested before the whole assembly, that his
faith, for which he was so rigorously handled, was not false, but true,
agreeing with the word of God, for the which he was ready to dye as a true
Christian, and not as a seminary Heretic, as they reputed him to be.

The eight man condemned, was Don Piero Sarmenta Knight, of the order of
Alcantera, son to the Marquess of Poza, who after he was declared to be an
Heretic, was condemned to were the coat of dishonor all the days of his
life, and so to remain prisoner, besides, to be displaced of his estate of
knighthood, and forbidden for ever, to wear any gold, silver, pearl or
precious stones whatsoever. Next to him his own Lady was declared to be an
Heretic, and therefore condemed with her husband, and in the like sort
adjudged to sustain imprisonment. Next after them was called Don Lowys de
Royas, heir to the Marquess De Poza, who being declared an heretic, was
condemned to wear the Sambenito perpetually, yet at the importunate suit of
his friends and Allies, he wore the coat but from the Skaffold to the
Towne-house, nevertheless, he had all his goods confiscated, and so was
released.

After him was called the Lady Anne Hentiques, dwelling in Toro, daughter to
the Marquess Dalcauizes, and mother to the aforesaid Marquess De Poza, she
also was condemed to were the Sambenito to the Towne-house, and had her goods
confiscated. Next after was called Christofell del Campo, Citizen of Zamora,
he was condemned to be burned, and his goods confiscated. Christophell Padilla
received the same sentence. Alphonso de Huesuuelo dwelling in Toro and being a
batcheler, was declared to be an heretic, wherefore his goods was confiscated
and he condemned to be burned. And forasmuch as he did speak his conscience
to the Nobility, and offered to speak a few words to the people, he had an
iron violently thrust through his lyps, only to hinder his speech. Katherin
Roma was next called and condemned to be burned, and her goods confiscated.
After whom Isabella de strado, and Jane Valasques, received the like sentence.
There was also a Smith condemned to be burned, for keeping watch for the
Congregation while they were at prayer. And a Turk condemned to the fire for
reuolting to his Turkish opinions, after he had been christened.

To conclude, the wife of John de Biuera was also condemned to perpetual
imprisonment. Leonora de Lisneros, Martin de Saranedra, and Daniell Quadra,
were all condemded to perpetual prison in like sort. The Lady Mary de Royas,
sister to the Marquess of Royas, because she had been in a Monastery, and
come of great kindred, she was favored by wearing the coat from the stage to
the Towne-house, and awarded to do penance all the days of her life. At the
same time there was Anthony Dominick a Skots man, and Anthony Baser an
Englishman, both condemned together, the Skots man had three years
imprisonment, and in that space to wear the coat of dishonor, but the
Englishman was conveyed into a Monastery, to be instructed in the Romish
Religion. Then Trumpets sounded, and ye Princes with the Judges departed, but
the prisoners immediately were laid hands on by the executioners who forthwith
did set them upon Asses backs, guarded by many Soldiers, who did beat and
misuse them grievously in the way to ye place of execution, which was about a
quarter of a mile without he said City, where 14. wodden stakes were set
up, of equal distance one from another, every one having a seat with three
steps, to go up and down to the^ all, having on the tops of those stakes a
piece crossing overthwart, whereunto they bound the arms of the prisoners.
Some of them they strangled for courtesy, and burned them afterward. Making a
very soft fire under some of them, especially to those whose mouths were
pinned up, who continued in great pain many hours.

Thus these true Christians suffered death, for professing of the Gospel,
betrayed and innocentlie slain, even as sheep led to the slaughter, yet
comforted one another, while the beholders and standers by, meruailed greatly
at their invincible constancy and stedfastnes.

FINIS.

