THE.V. A BHOMINABLE BLASPHEMIES contained in the Mass, with a short a^swere
to them, that say, we run before the king and his counsayse.

decorative border

HEre I was minded (good christen readers) to have made an end of writynge
against that cursed and abominable sacrifice of the Mass, but being
compelled by the obstinate blasphemye of certain papists, which every where
do depredicate, and say, that we run before the king and his counseill (for
good christen readers, this is their only refuge, that they flee to, not
having one syllable in the scriptures to confyrme their purpose) I am fain to
meddell farther in this mattier, and to show how they go about in so saying,
to make the king and his counseill partakers of their ungodly blasphemye
against god, and his scriptures. Which thing may be prouyd after this manner:
Omnis potestas a domino deo est, that is to say: All power is of the lord
god. By the which saying it follows, that generally all kings, rulers,
magistrates, and governors, if they entende to live according to their
vocacion, must of necessitee do the thing, that god commands and wills
them to do, (for who so ever does otherwise, whether he be king or emperor,
he is no more worthy to be called a prince or governor, then the foul spiryt,
which is within a man is to be called his soul, sithe that a prince is unto
the common welthe, that same self thing, that the soul is unto the body) but
this is the chief duty and office of a king or go uernour, to seek, promote,
and set forth the glory of god, to extirpate and clean banisshe away, all
such strange worshippynges, dreams, and vain inuencions of men, as do in any
wise obscure the same, deface the mexites of the passion of Christ, and
obliteratte or blotte away his death. Now mark ye this argument, mark ye I
say, what follows of your sayings if the king and his honorable couceill
have not yet (as ye most craftily persuade unto the simple and ignorant people,
which if it were not for you would gladly and joyfully receive, the gospel of
the soonne of god) disanulled and put down the Mass. that is to say, the
most abominable, pernicious, and damnable idolle, that ever Satan with all
his craft could invent then are they, by your own confession, all ungodly,
and also partakers of your idolatrous blasphemy, which thing ye shall never be
able to avoid. Sicquod vos perduellionis alligatis, yt is to say: ye attache
your selves of plain and deadly treason, against the king and his honorable
counseill. Which all (thanks be unto the lord, that has the hertes of all
rulers in his hand) be as far, in this point, from al ungodliness and
blasphemye, as ye are now from al truth and verity, that so stiffly keep up the
baner and standarde of your master Satan. This I say, is the very baner and
standard of Satan the devil, which he has set up, to ebscure, pervert and
utterly abolisshe from the memory and remembrance of all men, the death of
our savior Jesus christ blindynge all the world with most pestilent error,
that is to say with full persuasion, that the Mass was a sacrifice, and
oblacion to obtain remission of sins, or a work whereby the priest,
ytoffereth Christ, and they that are participaunt of the same, do deserve
exopere operato, that is to say: of the work that is wrought, forgyuenesse
of their sins, and heavenly joy, not only for the^ that be in purgatory,
but also for them that be in hell, briefly for all them that are alive and
dead, though it be a. M. years ago. Is not this to blaspheame and dishonor
Christ, to burn and oppress his cross, to bring his death to perpetual
oblivion and forgetfulness, to take away the fruits of his passion, and to
euernate and abolisshe the sacrament of his death?

These five abhomynable blasphemies I will here with the leave of god, so
lively depicte, and set before the eyes of all christen readers, that the very
infauntes and babes shall clearly see, that they, which so lewdely affirm
that we do run before the king and his counseill, entende nothing else, but
to defame their prince, and all them that be about him, with papisticall
heresye, therewith sekyng to keep the true subjects of this illustrie realm,
in perpetual blyndnesse and ignorancye.

THis is therefore the first blasphemy done unto Christ by the mass. Christ,
by the heavenly father, is consecrated and made high priest or high bisshoppe,
not for a time (as we do read that they were made in the old testament,
whose priestehode, because that they them selves were mortal, could not be
immortal, and therefore they had need of successors, which always should
be substituted and made in the rowme of them, that died) but as he is
immortal, so his priesthode is everlasting, and needs no successor. Therefore
he was made by the father of heaven, a priest for ever after the order of
Melchifedech, to execute and minister that priesthode that endures for ever.
This mystery was long before prefigurated in Melchisedech, whom after that the
scripture had ones named to be the priest of the living god, no more mention at
all, in the scriptures is made of him, although he had never ended his life.
For this similitude is our Messiah called a priest after the order of
Melchisedech. But now, they that use this invented sacritice of the Mass, must
needs daiely to make priests, whom they do substitute and subrogate unto
Christ, as plain successors. With the which subrogacio^ or substituting they
do not only spoil Christ of his honor, and take from him the prerogative of
his everlasting priesthode, but also go about to pluck him, from the right
hand of god the father, where he can not set immortal, except he remains a
priest for ever. Nor they ca^ not thus excuse the^ selves, saying: that their
massyng priests are not subrogated or substituted unto Christ, as unto him,
that is still withholden with death, but ioygned only to him, as suffragans of
his everlasting priesthode, which for all them, remains with out end. For
the holy apostle sainet Paul concludyng them more narowly, says plainly
that there was in the old law many priests made therefore, because that they
were let by death to continue, ergo sith that Christ can not be let by
death, be is that one only priest and has no need either of suffragans, or
successors. Read the.v. vii. ix. and.x. to the Hebrews.

The.ii. bsaspbemie.
THe secande abhominacion of the Mass is, that it does vtterli deface,
obscure, conculcate and tread under feet the cross and passion of Christ.
Which thing is very evident, for if Christ did offer him self on the cross a
sacrifice, therewith to sanctify us for ever, and to pourchasse everlasting
redemption unto us: vndoubttyngly the streingth virtue and efficacy of this
sacrifice, is with out any end: Else we should judge no better of Christ
than of bulls and calves, which were offered in the old law. Which oblacions
were therefore corrupted weak and of no effect, because that they were
oftentimes repeted, iterated and offered of new again. Therefore we must
confess, that ryther this sacrifice of Christ, which he did offer in the
cross, does lack and want the virtue of everlasting purificacion clensyng
and redemption, or that it was ones sufficiently offered for ever.

Which thing the apostle in the ix. and.x. to the Hebrews does testify
saying: This high bishop Jesus Christ, did appear ones in the end of the
world, to put syn to flight, by the offering up of him self. Again we are by
the will of god sanctified, by the offering up of the body of Jesus Christ,
ones. Item Christ did with one oblacion make them perfect for ever, which are
sanctified: unto which sayings he does add this godly sentence: and where
remission of these things that is to say, of sins, is, there remains no
mo offering for sin. This thing did Christ, when he did yield up the ghost,
signify saying: Consummatum est, yt is to say: It is finisshed. With the
which word Christ does testify, that with this one only sacrifyce, he
has consummated performed, and fulfilled, what so ever is necessary to our
salvation. But yet not withstandyng we do daily, unto this omni sufficient and
most perfect sacrifice, as though it were most imperfect, patche innumerable
sacrifices. Since therefore, that the holy and sacred word of god, does affirm
proteste and testifye that the virtue of this sacrifice ones offered for ever,
does euerlastyngly continue: do not they, that require any other most
blasphemously insimulate and accuse it of imperfeccion and weakness? Now the
mass, which for that intent was instituted, that every day. MMM. sacrifices
might be offered, what other thing, I pray, does it go about, but utterly to
drown and burye the passion of Christ, wherein he did offer him self a
sufficient sacrifice unto his heavenly father? Here every man, except he be
utterly blind, may see, that this is the extreme boldness of Satan the
devil, which repugneth to so manifest and open truth. But let us see,
with what subtiltee this father of lies, does go about, to cloak his impietye
and ungodly inuencion. We do not, says he, offer sundry and diverse
sacrifices, but that one sacrifice only, such myste, with the beams of the
light son truth and veritee, is sone discussed and driven away. For Paul
does not only affirm, that there remain no more sacrifices, but also that
this one sacrifice ones offered for ever, can be offered no more. Some men
would escape more subtilli and craftily saying: that they do not offer it of
new again but that they do apply the fruits thereof unto us. This vain
sophistry also can easily be confuted, for Christ did not offer himself upon
this condition, that his sacrifice should be every day confirmed and ratified,
with new oblacions, but that with the preaching of the gospel, and ministryng
of his holy souper, the profittes thereof should be communicated to us. For
Paul says, that Christ our passover is immolated or offered, and therefore
he bids us to eat and drink. etc. This I say, is the right way to apply
this sacrifice of the cross unto us, when we feed upon the body and blood of
Christ spiritually, either in the holy misteryes, or in the hearing and
receiuyng of his word faithfully. here I think necessari, to touch a littell,
what they do allege for the chief foundation of their mass. God in the
first chap. of Malachie, speaks after this manner: From the east to the weast
my name is great among the gentilles, and in all places encence is offered up
unto my name, and a pure offering also, for my name is dreadful among the
gentilles. Here ye may see, say they, that the prophet, many years before
the incarnacion of Christ, did prophecy of this holy sacrifice of the Mass.
For what other sacrifice or offering should he mean? Thou shault therefore
understand, good christen reader, that therbe.ii. kinds of sacrifices. The one
called Propitiatorium or expiatorium, that is to say, a sacrifice, wherewith
the wrath of god is pacified, full satisfaccion and amends is made for all
thesynnes of the world, and the sinners yt fly unto it by faith, so
reconciled, yt they be accoumpted just and rightuous before god. This
sacrifice did Christ ones offer for ever in ye altar of the cross, as we have
showed by the word of god. And for this cause, were al y sacrifices of the
old law which did prefygurate that one only sacrifice, called
propitiatories. The other is called Eucharisticum, that is to say a sacrifice
of thanks geuyng, which comprehends all the parts of charitee and love.
For by it we honor god in his lymmes we do offer unto him our prayers, lauds
and thanks geuynge, which by the strength of that other sacrifice are
acceptable unto god. That therefore Malachie did mean this sacrifyce, we will
prove by strong scriptures, which the papists shall never be able to avoid.
Let my prayer, O lord, says david, asce^d up before thy sight as encence.
C.xli. psalm. Again Paul commands us to offer our bodies, a lively
sacrifice, and reasonable worshyppyng. Item Paul does call the liberalitye of
the Philipenses, where with they did refresshe him, an offering of sweet smell.
Also Osee does call our thanks geuyng the calves of our lips, which David
does call the sacrifice of laud and praise And Paul in the.xiii. to the
Hebrews, the fruits of our lips that confess the name of the lord. whereby
any man may see, that Malachie did in the foresaid place understand this later
sacrifice of thanks geuyng, as holy Hierome in his commen taries upon the
foresaid place, does testify. Read the place who will. Now have I proved by
the scriptures, that Malachi helps them nothing, but that this sacrifice of
the Mass, is a new inuencion of Satan, to deface the cross and passion of
Christ.

The.iii. blasphemy.
NOw we will come to the third blasphemye, and prove that the Mass does
obliterate and drive away from the memory of al me^, that precious and most
wholesome death of Christ. For as the approuyng of the testament or last will of
a man, depends of his death: so ye testament wherein our lord Jesus Christ
did be quest unto us fre remission of our sins, and everlasting
rightuousenesse, was confyrmed and approved by his death. They yt do immutate,
alter, or change any thing in this testament, do deny his death, and
accoumpt it for naught. But what is the mass but a new and clean contrary
testament does not every one, of their masses, promise a new remission of
sins, and a new acquisicion or pourchassyng of rightuousenes? We have now as
many testamentes as we have masses. Let Christ come therefore, and with an
other death, yea with infinite deaths confirm the innumerable testamentes of
the masses. That there fore that I have said, is very true. By ye sacrifice of
the mass, that one only and true death of Christ, is obliterated and clean
blotted away. Would not these massarie priests, if it lay in their power,
slaye Christ again of new? for Paul says: where the testament is, there
the death of the testatour or testament maker, must be between. The mass is
accoumpted to be the testament of Christ: ergo it requires his death. Besides
that, the host, which is offered, must be slain. If Christ is sacrificed
in every Mass: then he must be slain, most cruelly every day in a. M.
places. This is not mine. but sainet Paul's argument, which says, If he
had need to offer him self oftener, then he should had need to have dyed
many times, sens the beginning of the world. Now ye may see what goodness is
in this abominable Mass.

The.iiii. blasphemy.
THe fourth detriment or harm that comes by the mass, is that it takes
away from us, the fruits of the death of Christ. For who will acknowlage or
think, that he is redeemed, by the death of Christ, when he sees, a new
redemption in the mass? Who will trust that his sins are forgeuen, when he
sees every day a new remission before his eyes? And surely they that say,
that in the mass we do obtain remission of our sins, only because that it
was before pourchassed by the death of Christ, can not this escape. For this
is none other thing, but to say, yt we are therefore bought and redeemed of
Christ, because that we should redeem our selves. This is the doctrine set
forth by Satan, which with fire and sword, they do so stiffely defend,
and uphold. We do (say they) offer Christ in the mass, that by this
oblacion, we may obtain remission of sins, and be partakers of the passion
of Christ. What is then the passion of Christ, but an exaumple, whereby we
should learn to be our one redemers.

The.v. blasphemy.
NOw I come to the fyft abhominacion, how by the mass, the holy souper, in
the which the lord left unto us the remembrance of his passion, is utterly
cancelled and put away from us. For the souper of the lord, is a gift which,
with thanks geuyng should be received, where as the sacrifice of the mass, is
a price or reward offe red unto god to be received of him, for a satisfaction
and amends. Look what difference is between geuyng and receiving, that same is
betwixt this word sacrament, and this word sacrifice. And surely by this,
does the wretched unthankfulness, and ingratitude of man declare it self.
For where man should have acknowlaged the gratuit benignitee of the living
god, and given thanks unto him, in that he makes god his debtor. The
sacrament did promise, that we were by the death of Christ, not for ones
restored to life, but still continually viuified, because that then our
salvation, was fully accoumplisshed. But the Mass sings an other song, that
is to say, that Christ must be daiely offered for us, thereby to obtain
restitucion of life. the souper of the lord, was distributed in the
congregation among the faithful, to aduertyse us, that we should be al one in
christ Jesus. This communion the sacrifice of the Mass, has clean banisshed
away from the congregacoin and has brought in, instead thereof, a very
excommunicacion, as I have sufficiently showed before, in the preface of ye
mass. Do not now the very blind see, the deaf, hear, and the very infa^tes
understand, yt this is the abhominacion, which being reached for the in a
golden cup, did inebriate and made dronken, al ye kings and people of the
yearthe, from the highest to the lowest, came singyng as brute beasts, and
unreasonable creatures, to put their whole hope and confidence in this
pernicious puddel of idolatry, and spiritual fornicacio^? For this is the
adulterous Helene, for whose sake, al ye enemies of the truth, do so rageously
contend, strive and expugne the kingdom of Christ, his true doctrine and
gospel. This I say, is the adulterous Helene, with whom all the papists
thorough out al ye world, do commit deadly fornicacion and adultery. But
blessed be that puyssaunt lord of hosts, which of his tender love and mercy,
has preserved our most sovereign lord and prince Edward the syxt, from the
flatteryng lyppes of this adulterouse harlotte, which has so by the space of
these.v. hundredth years and more deceived all nations, alluryng them from their
true spouse and housband Jesus Christ, to all kinds of abhominacion and
filthynesse: Oh how much bound are we all, which have any zeal to the
gospel of Christ to laud and praise that almighty and merciful father, which
has provided such a noble protector and defendour, not only of all the
kings dominions and realms, but also of all truth and veritee, which at
this present time Satan does not cease with his ministers to expugne and
assail on every side: calumniatynge the true preachers thereof, as though in
this matter, they should run before the king and his honorable counceil
surely is nothing else, but which to accuse their prince and governor, with all
his honorable counseilours of plain blasphemy against god and his word,
which to do is no less, than deadly treason, as I have said before, Beware
therefore, and cease to bear your selves, in this your abhominacion, by your
prince or any of his honorable counseill, which all do deteste, abhor and
hate, all such idolatrous blasphemye, being always ready with all their might
and endeavor to seek, set forth, and promote, the glory of almighty god, to
whom with the soonne and the holy ghost, be praise glory and honor for ever.
So be it.

FINIS.
Compiled by John Veron, Senonois.
Imprintyd at London, by Humfrey Powell, dwelling Above Holburne conduit.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

AN. Do. 1548.

