Most Godly prayers compiled out of David's Psalms by D. Peter Martyr.

Translated out of Latin into English by Charles Gremhan. G.

Seen and allowed according to the order appointed.

Imprinted at London by William Seres.

1569.

Cum priuilegio.

woodcut title page incorporating printer's device of William Seres, similar to
those in McKerrow 139 and 148

To the Reader.
Correct your Book in the arguments of the.14. and 15. prayer as follows.

Prayer.14. The argument thereunto set, belongs unto the.15.

Prayer the.14. His proper argument: A prayer for the grace of Christ against
original sin.

Josias Simler sends hearty greeting to the right worshipful and his
singular good friend Doctor Herman Folkersheimer Friselander.
WHen as the last year (most courteous Herman) I perused the writings of the
exceeding godly and notable learned man Peter Martyr my scholemaster, and had
gathered together out of his library every small pamphelet noted with his own
hand, I lighted by chance upon certain papers cast a side and laid apart,
wherein were diverse holy prayers of his own hand writing. And when I had
perused these diligently over, I thought it meet to put them forth in print:
for although I certainlye knew he did not make them to that intent, yet
nevertheless there be diverse causes which move me to go on with my former
determination. The first is, that when the counsel of Trent began, there rose
up both grievous and deadly war in Germany for Religion, at which time
Martyr finished these prayers which he openly used in the Schools at
Strasborow at the end of his lectures, and are now very convenient to be set
forth in these days, wherein it behooves us to make fervent prayers unto
almighty God, that the like to the Counsel of Trent being now ended be not
kindled again. Moreover the prayers contained in this small book, are both
plain, and do very little disagree from the words of the Psalms, which I
account to be highly esteemed amongst prayers. For diverse arguments of many
Psalms are briefly and evidently expounded in these prayers, and a number of
dark and hard places made plain with a notable Paraphrase. Wherefore I doubt
not but that such as be desirous to read this short little book, shall reap
far greater commodity thereby then many would suppose. Now have I dedicated
this small book unto thee (my dear Herman) that thou may have both our
Martyrs token of remembrance and mine also. For seeing that thou did
honor and reverence Doctor Martyr (so long as he lived) like a father: and
moreover louedst me so excedingly hitherto, as I may rightfully place thee in
the number of my dearest friends: I verilye think that thou vvilt take this
book in right good vvorth, (although it be of a very small volume) which I
send unto thee being vvritte^ in both our names. For so often as you shall look
in this book (which of your godly disposition you vvil do very often) so many
times shall you call to mind the remembrance of your old friends, not
altogether to thee unpleasant (as I hope.) Neither can the death of Doctor
Martyr cause us to be any thing forgetful of him: nor yet the distance of place
be any breach of our unfeigned good will so long as we have life, that we
should retain any whit less the friendship heretofore begun with letters
and a friendly recordation of old acquaintance.

Fare well at Zurike the xx. day of June in the year of our Lord 1564.
Holy Prayers collected out of David's Psalms, by Docter Peter Martyr.
A prayer out of the first Psalm.
O Most good and most mighty God save and keep us (we pray thee) first from
the persuasion of all wicked counsayles, A prayer for a christian life.
next after this from all heinous and deadly crimes: suffer us not to fall into
a wicked and vicious kind of life, and finally remove our minds far from
the contempt of godliness and deryding of all manner of virtuous deeds: grant
that in the stead of these most pestilent things, we may perpetually occupy
our selves in thy law and in the holy Scriptures, so that we be not led about
like the wicked with every blast of affections and doctrines, as small dust and
empty chafe: but rather as trees planted by the rivers side, being endued with
the life of the spirit and with faith, we may abundantly show forth the fruits
of good works: and that whatsoever we go about, may have prosperous
success: to the praise and glory of thy name, and the increase of our
salvation: So that at the last, when in the trial of thy judgment, the wicked
shall be cast down and brought to shame and utter confusion, we may by thy
mercy both stand and be acquitted through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
WE know evidently enough (O most mighty God) ye grievous calamities and
miserable, do in this respect vex the Church, because we have often
freque^ted the counsels of the wicked, which (being known of us) we ought
forthwith to have eschewed: who have in like manner not declyned from ye way of
naughty and malicious persons, but daily followed their lewd footesteps,
through continual transgressions of thy blessed commandments: moreover,
wholesome corrections and helthfull discipline have of long time been despised
by us: and whatsoever was through thy sacred word offered unto us, we have
frowardly enough, yea and impudently neglected it, and made a laughter thereat.
Wherefore no marvel is it, if in steed of felicity and quiet peace, which
we have hitherto (alas) too too long abused, we are now enforced to taste al
heavy, sorrowful, yea, and most sore and bitter griefs. But now (O good God)
by the acknowledging of these our wicked and lewd deserts, we humbly fly unto
thee for succor, and with vehement and most fervent supplications, desire, yt
the sins which we have so foolishly and wickedly committed, thou will
favorably pardon and forgive. We heartily pray thee yt thou would make our
minds most studious of thy sacred law, so as we may day and night meditate in
our hearts none other thing then ye words of the holy scriptures. For so through
assured confidence in thy blessed word, we shall bring forth seasonable and
pleasant fruits: neither shall the ornaments of ye holy ghost be quite taken
from us: yea happy successes will always ensue of our works, although at this
present, through ye just desert of our heinous sins, we are like to dust or
chafe toste up and down with the blastes of tempestious afflictions. Grant
yet at ye least way (O most merciful father) that our life may not come to an
evil end, as wicked men's does. But that thou will defend ye cause of the
righteous with an exceeding great care and mighty protection, so as in the
judgment and fellowship of the just, we may stand, and not be brought to
confusion: through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
Seeing that we know right well (O most mighty God) that a good part of our
felicity (whilst we here live) consists in this, that we take heed of the
wicked counsels and curssed behauiours of men, by eschewing the fellowship of
them, who be so dispitefull that they laugh and scorn at all matters: And
that in stead of these most deadly things there be placed in us an exceeding
fervent zeal of Gods law (therein to delight and exercise our selves both
day and night,) and thereby to perceive how that hitherto we have greatly gone
astray from the scope and mark of our salvation, yea and to have offended very
miserably and lewdly against this thy blessed law and divine word: we desire
thee that thou would (of thy singular mercy) pardon and remit whatsoever we
have committed against thy excellent majesty: And vouchsafe (through the
continual study and exercise of thy word) to make us ever hereafter fruitful
and lively plants, so that we may not only bring forth wholesome and pleasant
fruits in thy sacred Church during this life, but also may in the other
world stand fast in judgment before thee (who know and best
understand the way of the righteous) through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the second Psalm.
WE now perceive (O most good and mighty God) that not only Antichrist, A
prayer for comfort in persecution.
but also the force and power of the world has co^spired against thee and thy
anointed: as they who think the gospel and reedefying of thy blessed Church to
be intolerable bands, and a most hard and grievous yoke: Wherefore they
endeavor themselves (by all means they can possible devise) to break the
society of the faithful, and utterly to cast away all discipline: but seeing
that thou sit in the heavens, and art not ignorant what the Devil and
wickedness of the flesh enterpriseth: laugh thou also their vain counsels to
scorn, and make such things as they have begone and enterprised, of none
effect, causing them in like manner to be as a mocking and jesting stock unto
thy elect and chosen servants. Do those me^ to understand thy heavy wrath,
and at the length to be so terrified with ye fury of thy indignation, that they
may have no power or strength to destroy thy blessed Church, over the which
thou have set Jesus Christ our only Savior, for to reign therein with his
blessed word and holy spirit, with such might and puissaunce as may never
have end. Vouchsafe therefore to give unto us (although thy most unworthy and
traiterous children) so much faith and constancy, as we may both take him to
be our only king, and also confess him so to be, and without all doubting
assure our selves that we are his Nation, people, and heritage: knowing this
assuredly how that he is of such force and power as he can torment and vex
whom he list, with a dominion far stronger then any steel, and break them
in pieces like potsheards. Convert therefore (O mighty God) the hearts of the
kings of the earth, in such sort unto thee, yt they may be so perfect wise, as
truly to acknowledge, heartily embrace, and lovingly kiss thy d^ere and only
son: least his ireful wrath being kindled and enflamed, they perish
immediately: and make those which have wholly committed themselves to thy
protection, evermore happy and blessed, when it shall seem good in thy sight,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An orher prayer out of the same psalm.
Although (most good and myghtie God) the Devil fret, the powers of the
world stand up daily, and the flesh with all her seruitors conspire against
the kingdom of thy only son Jesus Christ our Lord: let us yet understand,
yea, let us be persuaded through a constant faith that thou do deryde and
contemn all such: who (so soon as it pleases thee) art hable to destroy
them in thy wrath and whote displeasure. But alack, seeing in this confidence we
are oftentimes unstable and moveable, in so much as we (being led away by
diverse terrors) do obey thy commau^dements less than it becomes us, we
beseech thee of thy favorable and bountiful goodness to be merciful unto
us, so that we may ground our selves steadfastly upon this rock of faith, that
thy son our king and redeemer has in thee of all things the highest power
and government, for when thou did beget him, thou gave all Nations to him,
to rule and govern them by right of inheritance. Grant therefore, that we
may once at length be so godly, wise, and so ryghtly instructed, as (serving
thee with all reverence and humble fear) we be not at the last day like a
potters vessel, consumed and brought to naught with the rod of thy
indignation: through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the third Psalm.
THeir armies (O most merciful and mighty God) which assault and persecute
thy Church, A prayer against our persecutors*
are increased above measure: for even now very many are so bold as to
disquiet and vex the same, who do cruelly rise up against it, having
confidence truly in none other counsel, but that they imagine and determine
with themselves, how that there is no more help for us to be looked for at thy
hand, as thought thou have utterly abandoned and forsaken thy people, and
bereft them of all manner of succor and defense. We deny not truly,
considering the sins and wickednesses by which we have offended thee, but
that we have deserved to be loft destitute of thy help, and set out as laughing
stocks to the despitefull dealings and injuries of those which are the enemies
of thy holy name. But notwithstanding for the faithes sake, which through thy
favorable mercy remains in us, we are bold to come nigh unto thee and
beseech thee that amongst these rauillous and false braydings of our
adversaries, thou will vouchsafe to give us so much spirit and constancy, as we
may not doubt, but that thou will be ye only defense, worship, and mighty
revenger of thy blessed people. Having this assured faith and confidence, that
if we shall crave thy ready help in our earnest prayers, thou will without
fail hear us out of thy heavenly dwelling: yea, whilst we do wholly rest and
fully repose our hearts on this thy protection, we shall be so void of fear
(even in the middle of thousands of our enemies) that we may according to our
accustomed manner, safely take our sleep, and wake again, because we do with
a good and bold courage stick steadfastly to thee alone. Wherefore arise (O
mighty God) according to this our assured trust: and according to thy
accustomed and woonted manner, break the teeth of those that boast themselves
against thee, so that they be not of force to tear and crash thy sacred Church
in pieces at their own will and pleasure: make them to understand that
salvation belongs unto thee, and how thou can of thy favorable goodness,
rid and deliver thy blessed people out of these extreme dangers: through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
ALthough (O most mighty God) the force of Satan and all malicious powers
(who seek to stop from us the kingdom of thy dear son) seem to augment
and increase daily more and more, and go about to bring us in utter despair,
as though there were no succor nor help any more hereafter to be looked for of
us at thy hands, albeit we perceive that sin abounds much and increases
greatly in us, notwithstanding all this, we lift our head and hands unto thee,
who art our strong shield and glory, and desire thee (according to thy
accustomed mercy) to pardon and forgive those things yt we have done amiss,
and also to give a favorable and attentyfe ear unto the prayers and
supplications which we pour out before thy divine majesty: that being raised
up from heinous and deadly works, and having a good affiaunce in thy loving
mercy, we need not to fear whole Millions of thine enemies, whom now by
faith, we know thou have smitten upon the cheek bone, and dismayed utterly.
Grant (O dear Father) that we may feel the plentiful abundaunce of thy
blessing to be poured upon us, and be most assuredly persuaded that our
salvation depends only upon thee: Through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the fourth Psalm.
^ prayer for true faith.
WE being straightly holde^ in with great perilles and distresses, cry unto
thee (O almighty God) that thou ayding us with thy puyssaunt help, we may at
length have most large and pleasant passage out of the afflictions of this
world. We acknowledge our selves to be unworthy of thy assistaunce, because
we have very often and grievously declyned from thee: but our humble petition
and earnest request is, yt thou would vouchsafe not to regard every
particular and several work of ours, but the worthiness of the cause. And
for so much as (O God) thou thy self art accustomed to show and approve in
every point the righteousness of thy blessed word, defend and uphold now
mightily thy high renowned honor and Gospel, and us also, who, according to
thy will and pleasure are corrected and chastised. This is it that we bewail
and lament presently before thee, that ye mighty and puissaunt of this world,
being united together, go about by all the means they can, to defate the glory
of thy sacred gospel and pure religion, yea, and utterly to subuerf it, by
means of their foolish devises and vain hopes, which of themselves they have
imagined. I would it were thy pleasure (O high and mighty God) openly to show
and make manifest the beauty of thy true Church unto them, which thou have
picked out and chosen for thy self, and which also thou hear so often as it
prays and calls faithfully upon thee. So they should peradventure
understand, so should they be rather moved, and have a very great regard they
offend it not. They would perhaps weigh with themselves, yea, even in their bed
they would consider; what a regard they ought to have unto ^t, and so
peradventure they would be in quiet, and persuaded to offer, wysh it the
Sacrifices of true righteousness: where as now being altogether blind, they
wish nothing more then to satisfy their madness and outrage against the
same, and esteem it an high felicity to subvert and utterly overthrow ye true
church. But so many of us (O good God) as honor and worship thy divine majesty
in spirit and truth, have very often prayed to thee for these our cruel
enemies: yea when any good and prosperous things happened unto the^, we did
heartily rejoice. Grant therefore (for thy infinite mercies sake) yt we may at
the last live peaceably and in quiet by them: vouchsafe also (I say) that
reposing our selves only in thee, and assuredly stayed on thy faithful
covenant and promise, we may dwell with thee in safety without fear,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
O Mighty God, from whom comes all our righteousness, who of thy goodness
art wont to give ear to those ye cry earnestly unto thee, and bring them out
of straightnes and adversity into a sweet state of freedom and liberty: we
humbly beseech thee not to despise thy faithful servant ye cry and call unto
thee for help, nor suffer our glory (which is true and perfect godliness) to
be brought into contempt of any, although he be a great potentate and mighty
ruler of this world. We have in deed sinned against thee, yea and that very
greeuouslye: but nevertheless of thy infinite mercy and clemency, provide
that vanity and lying overcome us not, nor yet prevail any thing at all
against us, but as thou have elected and chosen unto thy self those whom thou will have saved, so grant that the grace and favor of thy loving countenance
may in such wise shine upon us, as we may be glad and rejoice even at the
prosperity and welfare of our enemies: vouchsafe (O good Father) that we being
grounded on an excellent and perfect faith, may take very great pleasure in
thee only, and trusting also in thy mighty protection, may dwell safely in
thee and with thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the fifth Psalm.
A prayer against false Prophets and enemies of the truth.
WE fly daily unto thee in our prayers (O almighty God) and do early in
the morning direct and lay forth our petitions before thy divine majesty as
those who be not ignorant yt thou hate iniquity, and do marvelously
detest sin: whereof, although we may not deny but yt we are guilty (for we
feel our selves to be laden therewyth above measure) yet do we fly and
approach unto thee for succor, trusting most assuredly in thy exceeding
plentiful goodness and clemency. We beseech thee to pardon and forgive us
whatsoever we have sinned and committed against thee, and lead us hereafter in
thy righteousness and innocence, least the adversaries of our salvation (in
whom verily there is no part whole and sound, but all full of viciousness)
prevail against us, let their counsels and devises be of none effect, and
cause their force and layings awaite to be utterly consumed and brought to
naught: so that we thy dear and faithful children may perfitely rejoice,
whilst thou do defend, nourishe, and compass us about with thy favorable
kindness us with a shield: Through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the sixth Psalm.
SO it is, A prayer in distress.
that we deserve without fail (O most mighty God) by reason of the euilles
and infinite sins we have committed, to be grievously and sharply chastised
at thy hands. Yet we beseech thee, (trusting in thy excellent and exceeding
great mercy) not to chastise us in thy furious wrath and whot indignation: who
tremble (O good Father) and are almost dead whilst we consider on the one
side our own sins, and on the other side thy justice: therefore we beseech
thee that thou wylt not (as we have justly deserved) thrust us down into the
pit, because we can there neither sing, nor by any means praise thee. Our
enemies do maruelously, yea and that with great feruencie desire it should so
be, but have thou (O good God) a regard unto the tears and clamours of those
that trust in thee, and cause the author^ and ^n^enters of iniquity to depart
and go far from us. Finally give ear unto us in such wise, that so many as
are enemies to thy glory and our salvation, may be ashamed and brought to
utter confusion: Through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the seventh Psalm.
A prayer against the adversaries of the Gospel.
THou know, O most mighty and merciful God, with what an earnest affection
the adversaries of our salvation do both day and night assault us, who,
(except thou be our ready helper) covet most cruelly like fierce and savage
beasts to have us torn in pieces and swallowed up into everlasting
destruction. But like as we put our trust and confidence in thee only, so our
earnest desire is, that thou will succor and defend us. We do not lay forth
our own cause before thee, as though we had committed none of these things
whereof they accuse us, but are persuaded that thou (of thine own mercy) wilt
pardon and forgive us the same, through the intercession of Jesus Christ our
Mediator. Wherefore we humbly require and earnestly beseech thee to stand up
for to be our helper, that thou will also direct, and as a most strong shield
defend us yt those evils may fall from us, and light upon the authors of al
temptations, deceites, and maliciousness, so as we may on the other side
praise thee and set forth thy glorious name with all possible and studied
co^mendations, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Another prayer out of the same psalm.
IT is truly a singular and right excellent benefit (O almighty God) to be
an obseruer and keeper of thy blessed precepts, but yet such a one as they can
not attain and reach unto, from whose eyes thou have not taken away the veil
and cloak of darkness. Which being not removed, the secret and hidden things
of thy divine law cannot be seen: wherefore we lamentably desire thee to
help and lighten our infirmity and blind ignorance, that whilst we live and
remain here as strangers and pilgrims, thou would not hide from us the
pure and right understanding of thy blessed commandments: wherewith, for so
much as we have through our own default been hitherto little instructed, we
are fallen into these reproaches, into this contempt, and into these evil
reports. For besides the perils and grievous afflictions wherewith thy holy
Church is at this day sore vexed and oppressed, are added slau^ders of thy
sacred doctrine, reuylinges of true godliness, and horrible blasphemies of thy
blessed name: forgive therefore thy people and pardon (O mighty God) whatsoever
they have committed against thee, refresh those that be fallen, with thy sacred
word and promises. We do day by day very boldly open and declare our cause to
thee: harken unto us (we earnestly beseech thee) and from time to time
confirm with new benefits the faith and hope of those that be doubtful,
neither put them to shame and reproach which call upon thee, so that we being
again quieted and restored to liberty, may run in the way and pathe of thy
blessed commandments with a perfect joy and hartye cheerfulness, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Ame^.

A prayer out of the eight Psalm.
ALl the things (O most good and merciful God) which thou have created both
in heaven and earth for our commodity and singular profit, A prayer in trouble
for the favor of Christ.
declare most evidently how wonderful and excellent thy glorious name is: and
although thy goodness be spread forth, and seen in all things, nevertheless
even the very infantes and sucking babes (whom from their mothers womb thou
causest to be cherished and brought up with most tender and loving
carfulness) do give us such assurance thereof, that we cannot but warrant our
selves al excellency of ye same, insomuch that the infantes in the time of
their noureing, and when they begin to speak, do set before our eyes most
evident tokens of thy gentleness: by these wonderful things are all the wicked
confounded which carp^ and speak evil of thy excellent goodness and divine
providence. The heavens truly might have been thought a piece of work
worthy such a workemaister as thou art, but in that thou would so much
humble and abase thy self as to have so careful a regard to frail and mortal
man, it appears to be a sign and token of thy wonderful unspeakable love
toward us. Wherefore again, and that worthily are we provoked, (although we
have heynously sinned, and lived unworthily both in respect of thee and of our
own vocation) to beg and crave at thy hands with a very earnest and
assured confidence, not to permit thy Church to be overwhelmed with these
present troubles. For if thou have so highly extolled man to be little inferior
unto Angels, whereas otherwise, he is vile of his own nature: remember them
much more I heartily beseech thee, whom you have now adopted to be thy dear
children, and to whom thou would (for thy mercies sake) have all the works
of thy hands serve and be obedient, suffer them not to be trodden under foot
of ungodly and wicked persons. For thou have always accustomed to visit the
children of men with thy fatherly care and prouydence: assist us now also with
thy ready help, when we stand in most need thereof. Deliver us in such
sort we humbly beseech thee, that all men may well understand thy name thereby
to be right wonderful (as most certainly it is,) and by all means possible
worthy to be honored and made glorious, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Another prayer out of the same psalm.
THy magnificence and renoumed glory (O almighty god) is well and sufficiently
set forth by these things which through thy excellent power and divine
providence, be done both in heaven and earth, notwithstanding for the more and
better stirring up of our gross and leaden hearts, thy power would set out it
self also in babes and young children. Even from our childhood we are miserable
and wretched, not by the workmanship and creation, by the which thou have made
and fourmed us, but through our original and natural sin, and an infinite
number of faults that we our selves have added thereto: for the which
nevertheless, we humblye beseech thee, be not so displeased with us, but
that (according to thy accustomed mercy) thou will often visit and look
upon us, and those whom thou have made little inferior unto Angels, make
them partakers of thy own nature. Finallye, seeing that thou haste in lawful
wise made us Lords over all thy creatures, grant that we may use them to the
praise and glory of thy name, so as thy sacred word and Gospel may be
spread abroad amongst all Nations, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the ninth Psalm.
A prayer against our enemies in persecution.
IF thou (O good God) wilt take our cause in hand, and revenge us upon the
enemies of thy glorious name and of man's salvation, we will (from the bottom
of our heart, and with an exceeding great gladness) show forth and celebrate
thy wo^derous and excellent acts: who be afflicted in deed with temptations
and other like oppressions (by reason of our heinous sins) but we beseech
thee O high and mighty God (for thy goodness and mercies sake) that as thou
have accustomed to be a Sanctuary and sure defense for the oppressed which
fly unto thee for succor, so now forsake us not, neither seem to be
forgetful of the prayers that we vnfeinedlye pour out before thy divine
Majesty. Have mercy upon us (O good God) deliver and rescue us from the Gates
of death, least we be swallowed up therewith: being aided and helped by thee,
we shall show forth thy worthy praises in the congregation, namely, because our
trust has not been reposed in thee in vain. Arise therefore, and suffer not
impiety, unrighteousness, and sin to prevail against us, but grant also,
that we bearing well in mind our own estate and condition, may with a
modest and lowlye mind, be always obedient to thy will and pleasure, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Another prayer out of the same psalm.
IT happened very often in our fathers days (O most mighty God) that thy
people were filled with a wonderful and unspeakable gladness, who being
replenished with exceeding great joy, did set forth thy glorious name with
songs, and celebrated thee with high praises, and that with their whole heart,
because they (having thee for their rock of defense) drove their enemies back
in the day of battle, who fell and perished at thy presence. Neither have
thou only once given sentence on the behalf of thy saints, or defended their
cause, but did oftentimes rebuke and destroy the Heathen that purposed in
themselves to subvert the famous Cytyes of thy people with an utter ruin, and
haste puyssauntlye overthrown such wicked men, insomuche, as even the very
name of them is also abolished. Seeing therefore that thou reignest eternallye,
and have always a seat prepared for judgment, to the intent thou may
presently try out the truth, as touching the spilling and shedding of thy
Saints blood. Despise not neither yet contemn our hearty prayers (O mighty
God) nor be thou forgetful of them. We know verily that we have sinned and
offended thy excellent majesty diverse and sundry ways, which now we are both
heartily sorry for, and also do openly confess the same: yet through the
confidence we have conceived by the things which thou (O Lord) have done for
our fathers, (though of their parts undeserved) we draw nere unto thy divine
Majesty and humbly beseech thee to be favorable unto thy Church: have a
regard (we heartily pray thee) unto her great trouble, and deliver the same
from the cruel gates of death, so that it may daily be able to celebrate thy
worthy praises more feruentlye. Extend thy wrath toward them that are
forgetful of thee: let them perish in their own crafts and deceites, and
be taken in the nets that they themselves have laid, which (with such greedy
endeavor and violence) seek thy peoples destruction and utter undoing. But let
us (that are helpless and grievously afflicted) take a little breath and
receive some comfort under thy strong defense and mighty protection. Up lord
and suffer not vile mortal men to have the upper hand of thee and thy holy
Gospel? put our enemies in fear, and terrefie them in such sort, as they may
understand what a thing it is to set themselves against true godliness and
pure religion, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the tenth Psalm.
A prayer against enemies and tyraunts.
Seeing that (O most good and merciful God) our belief and confidence is, that
thou art not only the chief good thing, but godliness it self: we earnestly
desire thee not to turn and withdraw thy countenance from us, as sometime
thou seem to do. For although we do not deny but that our sins have
deserved that punishment, yet we humbly beseech thee, (even as thou art right
gentle and merciful) to pardon and forgive us the same: and that contrary to
our deserts, thou will notwithstanding, favor our cause (for the glory of
thy name) to the intent the ungodly may well understand that they beguile
themselves in thinking thee to be no GOD, neither meanest at any time to
look for an account at their hands, of the heinous deeds and crimes which
they do wickedly commit: who lay snares, oppress, beat, and miserably kill
the godly, being now fully persuaded that thou have forgotten and art utterly
unmindful of the state of the world. Wherefore assist those which call upon
thee, and lovingly give ear unto their humble petitions, so that the Godly
(being by thee set at liberty) may teach the proud and oppressors to behave
themselves after a more modest fashion, when as it shall be manifestly known
that thou have a most vigilant care and regard of thy beloved Church, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Another prayer out of the same psalm.
THou might be thought (O most merciful father) to have withdrawn thy
self marvelous far off from thy servant, in this most troublesome time of
affliction, insomuch as with closed up eyes thou forgettest to look and
behold what the wicked Antichrists (with an extreme pride and set
obstinacy) attempt and enterprise against thy faithful people, because the
things they devise have so good and luckie success: whereby it comes to
pass that they stick not to blaspheme thee, yea, and be persuaded that there
is no God, and because thou seem to have withdrawn al kind of punishment
from them, their opinion and belief is, that they shall never fall, and assure
themselves that their estate will be always prosperous, whereby they have no
measure in periuries, deceites, iniuryes, and dishonestie, they kill thy
faithful servants, both openly and privily, they do assail, vex, and
oppress thy blessed Church, thinking (O good god) that thou regardest not the
same, nor have any care at all thereof. But although we have now well deserved
that thou should turn away thy eyes from our calamityes, and to consider
nothing at al our troubles, in that we have grieuouslye sinned, and been
marvelous ungrateful for thy notable benefits (abusing our vocation, Gospel,
and Sacraments, and dispising the liberty offered unto us) to serve thee
according to ye express rule of thy sacred word: yet we acknowledge and
confess our selves to have committed all these things against thee, and other
innumerable detestable factes, whereof we do now earnestly crave perdon, and
most humbly beseech thee at length to arise, and (with thy mighty hand) to
repress the wicked from the blasphemies, wherewith he has both rayled against
thee and thy blessed doctrine: we commit our selves wretched creatures and
miserable caytifes unto thee, who of thy own accord use to be an helper to
the poor and distressed. Break thou yet once at length the power of the
ungodly, hear the prayers of the afflicted, and finally deliver the
oppressed, so that they being set free from so great terrors, may give due
thanks unto thee in thy sacred church, for thy great mercy and compassion,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xj. Psalm.
IN thee (O most good and mighty God) repose we our whole trust and
confidence, A prayer against the temptation of faith.
therefore when our flesh, when human wisdom, when also the ungodly do
object and lay to our charge that our cause is turned vpside down, and quite
overthrown, neither any help at all left for the maintenance of the true
doctrine and the most holy and sacred Gospel, we are not for all this
persuaded to despair of thy mercy and power* who see in deed that the enemies
of thy glorious name have bent the bow of their puyssaunce, and made ready
their arrows to pearce and shoot us through: Moreover we also wey and
consider that our life has been such as we deserve all manner of evil hap
and misery that may be, who have not done after thy will as it became
obedient children, no, but have always hitherto (which now sore greeueth us)
rebelled against thy holy commandments. Yet now with all humility do we
crave pardon for our sins, and are very bold to require this of thee,
through the confidence we have in thy excellent goodness, and singular
clemency, that thou (which have thy exceeding princely palace and most holy
seat in the heavens, from whence it is thy accustomed wont to look down,
and fix thine eyes upon all things that are done on the earth) wilt at length
diligently try out the equity of this cause, and look upon the ungodliness
and cruelty of our enemies: But restrain thou and keep back (which have
very often used to cast fire, brimstone, and burning thunderboltes upon the
ungodly) at the least wise the cruel persecutors of thy blessed Church, to
the intent all men may know (that thou being most righteous) do favor the
right cause, and wilt be our strong defense, who have taken upon us an earnest
zeal and love of thy most glorious name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Another prayer out of the same Psalm.
WHen we (O most good and mighty God) do put our whole trust and confidence in
thee so much as in us lies, the desires of our own flesh, the counsayles of
the ungodly, and the temptations of Satan do not sleep or cease, wherewith
we are alured day and night to renounce and utterly forsake all Godliness, as
though we should be wholly oppressed and vanquished with the strength of bow,
of arrows, and other force of our wicked enemies, if we go on forward to
lead such a life as becomes thy servants. But we (notwithstanding we be
compassed about and overwhelmed with greauous sins, and iniquity) yet
nevertheless upon the sure trust and confidence that we have in thy rich
mercy, we humbly beseech thee first to forgive us our heinous offenses who do
acknowledge and confess the same unto thy divine Majesty: And that then thou
would (out of thy celestial and heavenly palace) show forth thy loving
countenance to be our most strong helper, that at what time thou have tried
and proved the case on both parts with an equal balance, then the enemies of
godliness may be justly punished according to their own deserts, and on the
contrary part thy beloved servants try by receiving of salvation that thou
art a defender of equity and upright dealing, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

A prayer out of the.xij. Psalm.
^ prayer against hu^aine, false, (...) erroneous ^octrine.
IN so great a want and scarsitie of good and godly men, thou only (O most
merciful and mighty God) remaynest to be our strong defense: Wherefore we
draw near and approach unto thee with these our daily prayers beseeching thy
divine Majesty to help at length our most troublesome and afflicted estate:
For unless thou mightily defendest thy loving Church, how can it be in safety
amongst such kind of enemies, who do not keep any manner of fidelity, and go
always about to deceive plain simple persons with vain lies and false
flattering words, never faythfullye thinking that in their heart which they
utter by word of mouth: Deliver us not over (O most merciful father) to be
handled of them as our sins and wickedness deserve: but in this case have an
especial regard to the glory of thy puyssaunt name, the mighty increasing of
thy Gospel, and the far passing faythfulnesse of thy loving promises: this
do not (for our sakes) but for the causes here showed and mentioned: bear not
with these men that seek to augment and enlarge their own power only, which
being strangers to Godliness, have no knowledge at all of thee: Look upon
the great affliction and groninges of thy blessed Church: arise up now and
help us, according to thy merciful promises: For thy words are white and
more pure then the most excellent and finest silver. Finally seeing every sort
of wicked and ungodly persons did couitte with all the wit and industry they
can, to be most mighty, defend thou thy Church (for thy infinite mercies
sake) from those men's extreme iniuryes and cruel oppressions, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
For So Much as (O heavenly father) during the time we live in this transitory
world amongst frail mortal creatures, of Godly true dealing and faithful
persons, there is marvelous great want, whereas, contrariwise, men may see a
wonderful company of ungodly persons, deceytfull men, flatterers, and such as
be great talkers, and speak very proud words: we pour out our humble
prayers before hand, unto thee, who art our refuge, beseeching thee, that thou
would not so weigh and regard those things which we have frowardly
committed against thee, as to give us over unto the lust and furye of wicked
and lewd men, according to our just deserts. But rather (for thy great mercyes
sake, which is marvelous ample and exceeding large) arise, and with thy
mighty power, deliver those that trust in thee, from the snares, deceit, and
subtle wiles which the enemies of all godliness do practice and imagine
continually against them: that whilst thou art their defense and mighty
preserver from the wicked and most cursed generation, all men may understand
thy promises and words to be both garnished with a singular and unspeakable
verity, and also most pure and vncorrupt from every sport of deceyuablenesse
and vain leesing, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the xiij. Psalm.
Whilst that the Godly (O most mighty God) do see themselves vexed with
grievous afflictions, A prayer that we despair not in trybulation.
and tossed with painful miseries, they greatly fear that thou art
forgetful, and take thy grace and favor utterly away fro them. Grant that
such manner of thoughts and suspicions be not graft and fixed in our minds:
for surely we deserve to be utterly left and quite forsaken of thee, by reason
of our most heinous offenses: but suffer not O good God (for thy most glorious
names sake) the stout arrogant enemies of Godliness, either to prevail any
thing at all or have occasion to triumph over thy faithful servants like
victorious conquerors: illuminate and lighten the eyes of our mind (we humbly
beseech thee) with thy holy spirit, that we seeing and right well allowing
those things which be most just, may neither honor nor worship thee amiss,
nor yet become slothful toward the amendment of our sinful life: for so
shall all occasion of rejoicing and vaunting be quite taken from our
adversaries, and we have great cause to render eternal thanks unto thy divine
Majesty as thou have right well deserved, through Jesus christ our lord. Ame^.

A prayer out of the.xiiij. Psalm.
A prayer that we may perceuer in the number of true christians.
TAke away from thy dear children (O most mighty God) those notorious wicked
Counsels and foolish imaginations, whereby we may surmise in our minds that
thou art no God at all: and although thou know well enough that we have
oftentimes erred and gone astray from the true path of righteousness, for
which cause sake, we have very well deserved even like bread and most delicious
meat, of them to be devoured and utterly consumed as are the most mischievous
and furious enemies of godliness. We humbly beseech thee, that as thou have
promised to aid and assist the generation of these men, and all such as put
their trust in thee, so thou would not forsake us being thus extreme
miserable and greauously afflicted. Let thy help appear and show forth it
self out of the heavenly Sion, that when thou have delivered us from the
bondage and corruption of sin, death, and the Devil, thy beloved Church may
not only be cheered and refreshed, but also be exceeding joyous, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xv. Psalm.
Seeing that (O most mighty god) none can inhabit and dwell in perpetual
felicity and thy heavenly kingdom, but such as have been void of fault, and
undefiled fro the filthy corruption of wickedness, who have in such wise
yielded and dedicated their heart, tongue, and outward works, to the honor of
thy blessed name, that they do omit or let slip by negligence or malice none of
thy sacred commandments. Hereby we now perceive and right well understand
(that if we should be dealt withal as our own deserts are, and according to
the worthiness of our works) how far of we be from thence, so as we may in
a manner despair and be altogether doubtful of our salvation: but (trusting in
thy excellent goodness) we boldly demand this at thy merciful hands, that
(the merits of our deeds being laid apart) thy faithful promises may
according to our assured hope, still remain most firm and stable, and
vouchsafe to grant unto us received again into thy loving favor, that being
henceforth adourned with the ornaments of perfect righteousness, sincere
truth, and pure love, we may never be drawn away from the habitation of thy
blessed felicity, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xvj. Psalm.
For So Much as we are so poor (O most dear father of heaven) and thou so
exceeding rich in all things, A prayer tha^ we may not perish by faith, but
attain unto glory thereby*
and thy works most noble and plentiful, surely nothing is given unto us, nor
any thing at all in our power whereby we may either merit or increase thy most
blessed estate and felicity: but yet seeing that our whole trust and affiaunce
depends on thee only, we humbly present our selves, and fall down before
thy divine Majesty, beseeching thee to preserve us from those evils which
inuiron and compass us about on every side. And our heinous sins wherewith
thou well perceyuest unto be ouerladen, being pardoned, grant that as thou art
become our rightful inheritance, so we may whol^ set our joy and delight in
thee aga^^, and account it a most pleasant camely thing to set forth and
commend thee only and none else: instruct thou us, counsel thou us, and be
thou always before our eyes, least we swerve at any time from the right way,
so that we may with great joy (during this mortal life) remain and abide in
thee, and after the most and glorious resurrection be partakers of those
everlasting and perfect pleasures, which we believe do consist only in thy most
mighty will and power, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xvij. Psalm.
^ prayer that ^ur enemies may not get ^he victory ^uer us.
THy blessed Church prays thee (O most mighty God) and lifts up her voice
daily unto thy throne, beseeching thee to weigh and consider at one time or
other her most righteteous cause: wherefore give ear and have regard unto the
prayers which the faithful sort pour out before thee with an unfeigned heart:
who know very well that we are laden and burdened with other innumerable
sins, so as we are feign at all times humbly to crave pardon of thee for the
same: but as for those which our adversaries do lay to our charge, we are
nothing guilty in them: wherefore if thou thy self (who art a most righteous
judge) be examined in this case, we know nothing can be found that by thy holy
word may be condemned. But our whole doing is only for this end and purpose,
that the renewing and setting up again of religion and true godliness may be
advanced, to the intent thy blessed commandments might be duly observed,
and thy sacred law with more sincerity obeyed: And whereas this care and
study has brought upon us most extreme perils, yea almost utter destruction,
unless thou remove and turn the same away quite from us: we humbly beseech
thee to hold up and strengthen our goynges in thy paths with a puyssaunt
steadiness, which are otherwise of themselves very slipperie, that we may
neither stand in doubt, nor be discouraged in these kind of distresses. Thou
may hereby make thy excellent goodness (O merciful God) to be much
marueled and wondered at, if thou will defend those that trust in thee at a
time unlooked for, yea, thou shall not only revenge us thy loving servants by
that means, but thy self also, for so much as they have chiefly risen up and
bent themselves against thee. Hide us therefore under the shadow of thy
wings, and the more prosperous success that they seem to have in their
doyngs, so that now they hang upon our necks like hungry Lions, the more a
great deal prevent thou their furye, and speedily deliver and rescue the life
of thy faithful servants out of their hands, and unto the same grant, that
by acknowledging and confessing thee, they may both in this life, and in the
life to come, be far more happy and blessed then their enemies, because they
rejoice and vaunt themselves above measure in their present luckie estate,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Another prayer out of the same psalm.
FOr this intent and purpose we now pray (O most mighty God) because we
nothing at all mistrust but that thou will harken and give ear to our humble
petitions, which we pour out before thee, not of hypocrisy and double
dealing, but sincerely and from the heart: for seeing that we desire to be
tried rather by thy judgment then man's, grant that when we are sore tempted
and proved by greauous adversities, nothing may be found in us whereby we
should be condemned and adjudged to perpetual destruction: but for so much as we
are naturally evil, how can this thing come to pass, unless you do stay and
govern our steps with thy excellent grace and holy spirit, and so uphold and
vndersette us, as thy unspeakable mercy may wonderfully utter and show forth
it self by our salvation? defend and keep us therefore from all men which
resist the force of thy glorious Gospel, and strive against thy holy will so
much as in them lies. Thou see what diligent watch our enemies lay for us,
and how like devouring Lions they covet to pray upon us: they are as swords
(O good God) prepared to be the hands and instruments of thy indignation:
defend and keep us nevertheless under the shadow and most sure defense of
thy wings, that during this wretched life, we may be comforted with thy
favorable countenance, and in the blessed resurrection, have with an exceeding
great pleasure, the fruition of thy glorious presence, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xviij. Psalm.
A prayer to be delivered out of great distress.
WE acknowledge and confess thee (O most mighty God) to be our only health,
buckler, defense, strength, and sure refuge, and therefore do we both
earnestly love thee, and greatly covet to publishe and set forth thy worthy
praise everlastingly: but our extreme enemies do now thus greauously oppress
us, because our sins deserve the same, so that we (being sore discomforted)
are almost in the strait pangues and anguishes of death: wherefore it seems
that no other help and succor remains for us, but to make our cry unto
thee, and to direct our prayers toward thy mercies seat, unto whom, seeing
that the Mountains, the earth, the heavens, lightnings, winds, clouds,
raynes, hayle, and tempests are obedient without any delay or gainsaying, it
shall be a thing most easy for thee to rid and deliver us from the force of our
outragoius enemies, although they be never so mighty, which we earnestly
require (O good God) that thou would vouchsafe to grant unto the fervent
prayers of thy sacred Church, having no regard at all to our lewd deserts,
but chiefly to thy exceeding great clemencye and uprightness of the cause it
self, so that thou may deal holily with the holy: and contrariwise upon the
wicked send trouble and adversity: preserve thy afflicted people according to
thy accustomed manner, and in so great darckenesse lighten them with the bright
lamp of faith and perfect wisdom, to the intent they may acknowledge none
other buckler or defense but thee only. Grant us (O most dear father) so to
walk without fall or stumbling, as the feet of our faith may not stacker in
such great perilles: arm and strengthen thy beloved servants to battle, and
confound them (O most mighty God) who go about to gainsay and resist thee, to
the intent thy blessed name may be spoken of and magnified amongst all Nations,
because thou have given great and glorious prosperity unto thy renowned
Church, through Jesus; Christ our Lord. Amen.

Another prayer out of the same Psalm.
Seeing that we are very weak by nature, an^ compassed about on every side
with most thick clouds of darkness, we come unto thee (O most mighty God)
and require at thy hands that the splendent light of thy holy spirit may be
kindled in our hearts, for so shall we understand thy undefiled word, and most
vncorrupt speech of thy sacred scriptures, wherein it is most clearly and
evidently promised that thou will be an excellent strong defense for all such
as have their only aff^aunce in thee. The sins truly which we have
committed, deserve not that we should obtain so much favor and help at thy
hand: but our earnest desire is that these things may happen unto us even for
the glory of thy most renowned and excellent name. For So Much as therefore none
other God is to be sought out or found, who may be compared with thee either
in power, or goodness, garnishe thou us with holiness, and gird^ us about
with such strength, as we may once be led out and utterly delivered from
imminent dangers, and obtain full triumph and conquest over the enemies both
of thy glory and our salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Another prayer out of the same psalm.
WE can not choose, (O most mighty and merciful God) but earnestlye love
thee, seeing that (by the faith which thou have given us) we well perceive
thee to be our only refuge, stay, and deliverer: for our sins have
oftentimes purchased unto us most deadly griefs, and mighty and valiant
enemies, who have (like vehement streams of water) environed and compassed us
about with tribulations, snares, yea and death it self: but thou (O good God)
who as thou (being the sovereign Lord of all things) art known to have thy
throne in heaven, even so for thy infinite mercies sake, have respect unto us,
and when thou have remitted and pardoned our offenses, vouchsafe that we may
be delivered from thy wrath, and extreme punishments which thou art wont to
lay upon ye ungodly. And grant that whilst we invoke and call upon thee,
our loud cries and earnest prayers be not poured out in vain, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
THou know (O merciful and most mighty God) how many and how great
adversaries we have both within and without, who as they can not away with thy
name and glory, so do they also most lewdly and wickedly repine at our
salvation: wherefore we do not without just cause, humbly sue unto thee, that
as thou have often delivered us out of the dangerous perilles of damnation and
perpetual destruction, so now also (notwithstanding the most grievous and
heinous offenses which we have committed against thee, and for ye which we
repent us at this time of them from the bottom of our heart) it would please
thee to fortefie and strength us in such wise with thy assistaunce, as we may
vanquishe and overcome what thing soever has set it self against thy glorious
kingdom, whereby we may at length show forth and magnify thee only in the
chiefest assemblies of men for our alone defender and excellent savior,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Another prayer out of the same psalm.
Seeing that we are (O heavenly father) during this miserable life, wrapped in
and compassed about with an infinite number of perilles, we direct our humble
prayers and hearty peticions unto thee, to the intent thou would stretche
forth thy mighty arm to be our defense, and not suffer the great and very
strong enimyes of our salvation to prevail against us. When we are most
busily vexed and afflicted of them (O good God) make it manifest that thou art
our mighty protector and ready defender. There is no righteousness or purity
in our works which we may vaunt and boast off in thy presence: we francklye
acknowledge and confess that we have greatly strayed from thy holy precepts.
Nevertheless yet pardon (according to thy accustomed wont and mercy) the
grievous sins committed by us, and vouchsafe of thy gracious favor, to
grant that we may hereafter live as becomes thy chosen, blessed, and
innocent people, so yt (on the other side) we may find thee elect, holy, and
hurtlesse unto us, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xix. Psalm.
^ prayer that ^s may be ^rtakers of Gods divine ^orde.
THy wonderful power, wisdom, and goodness (O most mighty God) which thy
nature is exceeding plentifully endued withal, shows it self in all places
unto us, by those things which thou have fourmed and created. The heaven truly
with all her ornaments, with the alteration of times, with the brightness of
the Stars, and of the most whote burning Sun, are nothing else but plain
voices and a universal doctrine for all sorts of people, by ye which the
praises of thy Majesty are most amply blazed and set forth. Wherefore we
confess how that we can make no excuse at all of our so slender confidence
and feeble love toward thee: who ought truly to have been assuredly
persuaded by the authority of these things, that we should unseperably
cleave unto thee alone, being the chief and principal causer of so many good
works bestowed upon us: but, alas (these admonishments not regarded) we have
followed, the lusts and desires of our filthy flesh, with mad imaginations
and feyned things of our own brain, and made very little account of thee,
who art the Creator and maker of all things. And for that cause do well
deserve the offlictions which we are assailed with, who have not only
despised and had in contempt the works of nature, that should have allured and
drawn us unto thee, but have coldely and altogether unprofitably heard thy
word, that is to say, the holy Scripture, and Gospel of thy dear and
well-beloved son, provoking thy indignation toward us by that from whence we
should to the comfort of our souls, have drawn out wisdom, light,
ioyfulnesse, and perfect righteousness: but although we now seem (for these
weighty considerations) most unworthy of thy mercy, yet we instantly require
thee to pardon and forgive us, and not to afflict thy Church according to her
deserts. Grant (we humbly beseech thee) that we may hereafter to our great
profit and comfort have these thy creatures in estimation: and let thy words
be not only sweeter unto us than honey, but far exceed all the joy and
pleasure of this world. Take from us our heinous sins, and show thy self to
be a true defender and redeemer of thy chosen people, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
WE understand it comes to pass through thy excellent goodness (O
almighty God) yt the knowledge of thee may be graft and imprinted in men's
minds, by the form, order, and most beautiful comeliness of the things
that be created, whom the circles and globes of the Heavens, the continual
alteration of the day and night, and most goodly brightness of the sun, do
declare to be their most wise Creator, and with words plain enough do teach
us both to know, and also to wonder at thy Majesty: hereunto are added thy
written laws, which have brought unto us mortal creatures, the true wisdom,
the testimony of thy will, the substanciall pleasure of the soul, and
heavenly delicates. But as we be lewd and wicked wretches, so have we never
made an end of abusing both these most faithful scholemaisters. Therefore our
earnest request is that thou would vouchsafe to pardon and forgive wherein we
have offended thee, contrary to the admonitions of so worthy instructions: and
grant us hereafter so attentively to behold with due fruct, the creation and
workmanship of ye world, that we may become very earnest obseruers of thy
sacred laws, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xx Psalm.
Our daily peticion is (O almighty god) that the kingdom of our Lord Jesus
Christ may be augmented, A prayer for ye prosperou^ success of christ's
kingdom against the enemies thereof.
and appear at length to be most perfect, which thing we now also desire very
instantly in our hearty prayers and humble supplications. Be always mindful
thereof (O good God) of his fat and most pleasant oblation which he made for
us upon the Aultare of the Cross, and grant that by the tryumphe of his most
perfect victory: and conquest, we may take both salvation and delyghtfull
pleasure. Although we deny not but that the same shall come to pass without
our deserts, who have (through our manifold wickedness) offended thee very
many and infinite ways: yet (for thy tender loving mercies sake) put them to
shame and confusion, that repose all their trust in Charets, horse, and worldly
power: but raise and lift up to salvation such as are wholly bent to depend upon
thee, and bow down thy merciful and favorable ears to hear the fervent
prayers and peticions which we make unto thy divine Majesty, for the mighty
enlarging of our Lord Jesus christ his kingdom, through the same Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xxj. Psalm.
A prayer for ^he praise and augmen^ation of the Gospel.
We confess with a singular joy (O most mighty God) that Jesus Christ our
king being endued with power and honor after his resurrection, does abide and
live with thee. And for so much as he has now obtained and gotten most largely
whatsoever may be wished or desired, tending to most perfect and everlasting
blessedness, it can not otherwise be but that very much of his salvation,
gifts, and glory be shed abroad and light upon us also, which are his
members. Of which felicity and most singular gift, although we acknowledge and
confess our selves most unworthy, by reason of our wicked manners and ungodly
life: yet for so much as we heartily repent us of them, we are nothing doubtful
of his ready help, but do also most assuredly believe that he will once
vanquishe, and bring to naught so many as do advance and set themselves
against his glorious Kingdom. Grant (we humblye beseech thee, most dear
father) that their pestiferous devices being of none offect, thy high and
famous power may at length be so known and manifested, as we may always show
forth thy worthy praises and passing wondrous works, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xxij. Psalm.
A prayer for Gods favor in distress.
THou could endure and suffer that our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son (O most
mighty God) should so be tormented on the cross for the sins of men, that
he did appear to be utterly forsaken of thee and left void of all help. Thou
which were wont to aid and succor thy Saints at what time they called upon
thee, seemedst to contemn our Saviors prayers, as though he had been a worm
and no man, the very abject of all mankind, and the outcast of the people:
and at length sufferedst him to die a very shameful death by the hands of the
furious raging Jews, who came and fell upon him as they had been mad dogs,
fierce bulls, and roaring Lions. Whom notwithstanding thou did raise
afterward from death in such glorious wise, that for the same cause his
faithful members do always laud and celebrate thy excellent name: therefore
we heartily pray and humbly beseech thee (for that thy most abundant mercy
wherewith thou were moved in such wise to permit so many evils to happen unto
thy only beloved son for our sakes) not to suffer the cause of thy most
afflictted Church to come into ruin and decay. We acknowledge our sins to be
passing horrible, for the which not only a temperall, but also an immortal
death is due: yet look thou not upon us (O mighty God) in respect of that we
are our selves, but because we be members of thy dear and only begotten
son, effectually preserving and mightily defending our cause in the Gospel,
being also thy case, and which the adversaries of the gospel judge that thou
have left destitute and utterly forsaken, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
For So Much as thy son our lord Jesus Christ (O most mighty God) suffered in
such wise for our redemption sake as he might seem to be cast out of thy sight
and utterly forsaken of thee: who being overwhelmed on the Cross with the
waves and sourges of a most bitter death, at the last dyed, and (being made a
most innocent sacrifice) suffered the pains and torments which we had justly
deserved. Then being raised from death after three days, appeared to his
disciples, and manifestly showed forth and published thy excellent name and
glory, none otherwise then he accustomablye used a little before to do while
he lived among them. Seeing that therefore we both acknowledge and also
confess our selves to have been abusers of such an unspeakable mercy and
infinite clemency, we humbly flee unto thee heartily praying that whom thou
have granted and ordained to be ingraffed and to spring a new in so excellent
a Mediator (who is the author and only preserver of our salvation) thou
would grant the same to be pricked forward and stirred up, so much as in us
lies, to seek for all true godliness, so that not only the whole number of
us which be now living, but all mortal men also that shall live hereafter may
be drawn to worship and serve thee alone, holily and after a most chaste
manner, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Another prayer out of the same psalm.
THy Son our Lord Jesus Christ (O most good and mighty God) suffered
marvelous bitter punishments, and extreme painful torments for the
salvation of mankind. For when he had laid the sins of the world upon
himself, it behooved him to be vexed so fiercely and outragiously, as he might
suffer the full punishment for them all. Finallye, being nailed unto the
Cross, he spent his most sweet life for us, unto whom he has, by that
means purchased pardon and forgiveness of sins, thy loving friendship, and
eternal life, if we shall faithfully believe his sacred doctrine and blessed
gospel. But alas, as we be very weak in faith, so are we lightly forgetful of
such great and manifold benefits: yea we rather live as men unworthy of the
redemption that was of so mighty a price unto our most innocent lord. For
which cause we bewail this calamity in thy presence (O heavenly father) humbly
praying and earnestly beseeching thee not to suffer us to be utterly destitute
of the fruit of our Lord Jesus Christ his Cross and death, who lives and
reigns with thee evermore world without end. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xxiij. Psalm.
A prayer that God would both feed and defend us.
AL such as have thee (O most mighty God) for their shepherd, do lead their
life exceeding happily, as those who have always food abundantly enough of
thy heavenly doctrine, and most fruitful and plenteous watering of the holy
Ghost, whereby they may be renewed, and comforted so often as they shall be
oppressed with the mishaps of this wretched world, or wearied with the
afflictions of the persecution thereof. Although therefore we acknowledge and
confess our selves unworthy of thy governance and shepherdlike care over us,
who have very often despised thee and thy sacred word, and (by reason of our
most greauous and innumerable transgressions) deserve to be thrust out of thy
blessed sheepefoldes: notwithstanding we having confidence in thy great mercy
and goodness, which is unto thee proper and natural, humbly beseech thy
goodness that thou would vouchsafe to gather us home as lost sheep unto
thy self, and suffer us not to wander and stray without thee, through the wide
deserts, and outgrounds of this deceyuable world. Thou see us now to be at
deaths door, therefore be so present with us as we may put away and cast off
all fear: who now stand in need of thee to strengthen and comfort us, with
the staff and sheepehooke of thy authority. Thou can refreshe us if it
please thee, with a most exquisite and well furnished banquet of thy sacred
doctrine and blessed sacraments, and make us to drink plentifully of the cup
of thy holy spirit and grace, the enemies and adversaries of thy glorious name
beholding the same. O let that thy mercy and clemency always so embrace us
(we humbly beseech thee) which thou have accustomed to bestow upon thy
faithful servants, as in the sacred Church (which is thy mansio^ house) we
may continue steadfastly in faith and thy most glorious Gospel, through the
merits and love of our Lord Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns with thee
world^ without end. Amen.

Another prayer out of the same Psalm.
THou use (O most mighty God) to preserve those thy children whom thou have
lovingly adopted, with no less care and diligence, then if they were sheep,
and the same always led of thee, being their most loving shepherd, toward
their own health and perfect commodity, who, so long as they have thee for
their master and governor, they shall be destitute neither of the meat nor
drink of thy most wholesome doctrine. Whereby it is manifest that if we pine
away (so long as we live in this miserable and wretched life) for the hunger
and thirst of true and perfect goodness, it happens for this cause (and of
no other) in that we have forsaken thee and followed strange guydes: whereof
come the great perilles and miserable troubles of mind which fall upon us.
Wherefore we humbly beseech thee (O most faithful and loving shepherd) to
call us back from errors into the right and perfect way: correct the vices of
the wandering and straying flock, with the rod and sheepehooke of thy
righteousness, so that we may feed at length, orderly, purely, and chastely
of the most wholesome delicates of thy sacred word and blessed Sacraments,
by which means, the whole head, heart, and all the powers of our mind may be
made fat and well liking, and we be always so underpropped with thy loving
mercy, as we may finallye enjoy in thy house the sovereign delights and
dainties of everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xxiiij. Psalm.
THou (O most mighty God) which art not only the founder and maker of the
earth and all things contained therein, A prayer for the kingdom of Christ a^
a new life.
but also have fourmed man the tiller and inhabitor thereof, and vouchedsafe to
instruct us mortal creatures with the doctrine of thy divine law and sacred
Gospel, by which means they may annex and knitte themselves again unto thee
from whom they came into this worldly light, that is to have their habitation
in the holy Mount of thy sacred Church wherein thou art always conversant:
who truly requirest this of them, that they should be of an undefiled
conversation, pure of heart, not addicted to vain and transitory delights,
neither folowers of deceipts, nor yet perjured persons, which sort of men thou
do promise to be partakers of thy infinite mercy and singular liberality.
Therefore ought we to have endeavored our selves to seek thee out by these
means: but we have, (like most sinful wretches) declined from this path of
truth and righteousness, and fallen from thee, through the perilous steep
ways of vices and of all voluptuousness. Wherefore no marvel is it, if we
now be fallen into so marvelous difficult times and troublesome estate. Thus
thou see and right well perceyuest by what means the state of thy blessed
Church is at this present in a manner desolate and thrown down. We humbly
require thee not to take vengeance upon our evil and lewd factes as they have
deserved: but (for the glory of thy name) as thou art a most puyssaunt king
and excellent in virtue, in whose hands are all armies and powers, eue^ so
show forth thy most valiant strength in defending thy beloved Church, and thy
singular good will toward those which repose their whole trust and confidence
in thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
Seeing that all things (O most good and mighty God) have their being through
thy creation and making, we must certainly without any doubt conclude, that
both the earth, and also men which inhabit the same, be only thine: but unto
thee verily (who, as thou art Lord of all things, so art thou accounted, and
that most rightfully, to be the perfection and highest tipe of our felicity)
can no man come, but such as have a pure heart, innocent hands, and constaunt
fidelity toward their neighbors. For So Much as we be not as now endued with
these kind of ornaments, but rather spotted with filthy vices, being
altogether utter enemies to these virtues, we do in our fervent prayers
lamentably desire thy favorable mercy (which thing only is the last refuge we
have to stay our selves upon) that thou which art called the king of glory,
accounted strong and mighty, a valiant conqueror and noble triumpher in
wars, wilt with thy merciful goodness far surmount and ouerpasse our
sinful deseruings. And grant (although of our parts greatly undeserved) that
we may be partakers of thy excellent blessing and incomperable righteousness,
for so much as we have reposed our whole faith and confidence in Jesus Christ
thy son, who lives and reigns with thee evermore world without end. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xxv. Psalm.
A prayer for constancy in a troublesome contention for the word of God.
WE lift up our minds, prayers, words, and hands unto thee (O most mighty
God) desiring this especially, that whilst we stay our selves and depend
wholye upon thy goodness, thou do not suffer us to be so confounded, as the
adversaries of thy glorious name, and enemies of the pure and sincere doctrine,
may greatly rejoice thereat, and be much boldned in their wickedness. Neither
do we pray for this as though our deserts justly required the same: but
confess how much and how greatly we have gone astray from thy sacred law and
blessed will, which, as we acknowledge willingly and before the face of the
world, so endeavor we our selves to crave pardon and forgiveness of thee in
these our daily prayers. Declare therefore thy blessed ways hereafter
effectually unto us (according to thy mercy and loving kindness) and bring us
in ure with thy sacred laws and statutes, to the performaunce whereof you
would have us surely bound. For it is a thing impossible, but that he does
steadfastly persevere and abide in thy holy covenant, whom thou thy self
shall instruct and teach: because his mind (without doubt) shall enjoy
perfect good things, and his feet be set at liberty, were they entangled in
never so strong and crafty a net. Behold now (O good God) with what
troublesome afflictions and painful griefs thy blessed Church is oppressed,
whose safety and deliverance depends only upon thee. Deliver her therefore
in such sort (O mighty God of Israel) that she fall not under the most
furious rage of Antichrist and the Devil, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
WE do resort and have daily access unto thee (O most mighty God) who
insta^tly in our earnest prayers and fervent peticions require thy merciful
goodness not to suffer nor permit us to have the foil in the contention
which we now hold continuallye with the cruel enemies and adversaries of
man's salvation. Pourge and utterly wipe away the sinful blemishes and spots
of our infirmity, with thy unspeakable clemency: and although we be
altogether unworthy of thy loving favor (by reason of our naughtiness and
wicked life) yet we heartily require, and earnestly desire thee, to direct,
teach, govern, and finally, show us thy blessed ways which we know are
garnished with an incredible liberality, and marvelous assured truth. Have a
great regard and care (O most gentle father) unto the perils and calamities
wherein we are wrapped, and in manner overwhelmed. Deliver us out of them, and
wipe away al our wretched iniquities, and rescue thy sacred Church, (which to
do is in thy only power) not only from outward afflictions wherewith it is
diversely vexed, but chieflye from that great calamity whereby thy honor is
much defiled, neither purely and chastely set forth as it ought to be, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xxvj. Psalm. A prayer tha^ we revolt no^ from Christ

IF we had led our life innocently (O most mighty God) we should not be so
stricken with fear and terror in these days (as who should know for a
certainty that they cannot waver nor fall in decay, which surely have sticked
and cleaued to thee) yea rather we should wholly submit our selves with a
willing mind to be searched and tried out of thee. But forsomuche as we had
little and very small confidence in thy divine Majesty, we trusted in vain
persons and fleshly help, neither have we forsaken the company and fellowship
of very hurtful and wicked doers, but have both with our filthy hands and
lewd conditions, defiled thy most holy Gospel: therefore are we at this
present in great peril, least our life and soul perish after the manner of the
mischievous and blood thirsty. Wherefore we heartily pray thee to be as now
merciful unto us, and forsomuche as we call upon thy blessed name, yt thou
would vouchsafe to pardon and remitte whatsoever we have hitherto so
wickedlye committed against thee, and let the uprightness of our cause,
obtain that thing at thy hands which we do not deserve: for in this case not
only our salvation is impeached, but also thy sincere doctrine and pure
religion. Suffer not thy sacred church therefore to be in subjection, and as an
underling to the frauds and decepts of Antichrist. Deliver it from the
destruction which the Devil and his members do prepare and work for her,
that we may hereafter lead an holy and innocent life, and highly extol thy
noble acts and wonderful works, in the sacred and blessed congregations,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Another prayer out of the same Psalm.
WE are very desirous (O almighty God) to lead an innocent and blameless
life before thee, and not to turn from the right way, when thou shall try us
with sundry and manifold temptations: we have not as yet atteyned thereto,
because we have reposed small faith, and little hope (to speak of) in thee.
Wherefore our humble request is that thou would have mercy upon us, and
pardon whatsoever we have committed and done amiss: for if thou be favorable
and gentle unto us, we will never be unmindful of thy loving mercy and
everlasting truth. Grant (O most benign father) that amongst innocents we may
live innocently, and utterly detest (with an extreme kind of hatred) all
manner of decepts, and cursed lying, that we may addict our selves with all our
hearts, to laud, magnify, and celebrate thy glorious name: neither suffer us
to knitte up and finishe our last days with malefactors and wicked persons,
but rather let a blessed enteraunce to the house of eternal felicity,
(whether we have daily a fervent desire to come) be set open and made as a free
passage unto us, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xxvij. Psalm.
A prayer for comfort in faith against our enemies.
For So Much as (O heavenly Father) we make our account of thee only, to be the
whole stay and principal defense of our salvation, light, strength, and
steadfastness, it should behoue us to continue: and abide (wish a good
courage, and assured constancy) in the study of godliness, whatsoever the
world may seem to attempt against us, what adversity soever may (by the
instigation of the devil) hang over us, and finally, what calamity so ever
men do move and stir up against us, all that we ought boldly to despise, thou
being our strong defense, and hiding us in thy blessed Tabernacle. But because
our faith is very weak, and our confidence in thee does oftentimes both waver
and stagger, hereof it comes that we are so much fearful and timorous.
Therefore strengthen thou us (O high and mighty God) with thy excellent
grace, and bounteous spirit, that we may live orderly, godly, and after an
honest sort in the holy congregation, which is thy blessed Church in deed.
Hide not thou thy loving countenance still away from us (we humbly beseech
thee) for that is our sole and only desire. Grant that we may constantly
persevere, and be made strong to abide the coming of thy ready help with
steadfast and unappalled courage, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the xxviij. Psalm.
IF thou (O most mighty God) should dissemble, A prayer for comfort in
necessity against doubl^ tonged persons.
and have little regard to help and comfort us in these our grievous
afflictions which happen unto us, not only true godliness should come to
ruin and decay, but we also might incontinent be easily compared to those
which are put down, and laid at the pittes door ready to be burned: give
ear therefore unto our humble prayers and peticions, whom thou see to have
assured confidence in none other, then in thy only son Jesus Christ our
Savior. For as touching our selves, we have behaved us so evil, and lived so
lewdly and ungodly, that when we consider and look upon our selves, we see
nothing due unto us but death and endless damnation. Therefore of thy singular
mercy and goodness destroy us not (according to our deserts) amongst the
ungodly, deceptfull, and wicked persons, but reward all thy adversaries, and
namely the enemies of thy blessed Church, according to their just deserts, so
yt whatsoever the unfaithful do either invent and imagine against us, may fall
upon their own head. But whenever they begin little to regard thy holy words
and wondrous works, bring to naught their crooked and cruel devises, whereby
thou thy self may be exalted and lifted up with high praises, because thou
have heard the voices and piteous complaints of thy most humble and lowly
servants. Be thou (O good God) our assured strength and shield of defense,
preserve thy faithful people in these great dangers, and such as thou have
chosen to be thy gracious heirs, augment and heap upon them thy saving
health and most noble benefits: give those men sufficient food so long as
they here live, and finally bring them unto eternal joy and blessed felicity,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
WE heartily require thee (O heavenly father) to be favorable and merciful
unto us, that seeing we pour out our humble prayers and earnest petitions unto
thee, thou would (according to thy excellent goodness) patiently hear us.
If thou O Lord should accept us according to the rate and goodness of our
deserts, we should every where and in all places suffer an infinite number of
greauous miseries and sorrowful calamities. And because the outrageous
adversaries and cruel enemies both of our salvation, and also of thy famous
honor, go about nothing else then to pull thy faithful servant away from
true Godliness, and that steadfast desire they have to lead a virtuous life:
be thou therefore our assured strength and strong shield of defense against
them. If we be thy blessed people and chosen heritage (as thou have promised
and as we faithfully believe) then preserve, feed, and be favorable unto us,
and bring us forth to the chief and highest bless which we have always an
especial eye and principal regard unto, through Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

A prayer out of the.xxix. Psalm.
A prayer that we may be obedient to the word of god.
SO many of us (O heavenly father) as are promoted through thy unspeakable
mercy, that we both be, and also are named the children of God, have no light
occasion or small regard to celebrate thy divine majesty, by the effect of
those things which in the work of nature we see to proceed from thee, which
are so passing excellent and marvelous, that they show forth themselves, to
those that behold them, as most certain and manifest tokens of thy unspeakable
glory and dignity. Thou bring forth so mightily, when thy good pleasure
is, showers, clouds, lightnings, earthquakes, and ouerflowings of waters, that
even the hills and trees (although they be very high, and all other living
things, do both greatly and horribly quake. We only (O good God) are blind,
deaf, and dull to conceive these thy most wondrous works. Wherefore, for
the love thou bear unto us, having compassion upon so great foolishness and
unskillfulness, which proceeds of nothing else then of sin, grant that we
(being at length exempted from them) may both acknowledge thy excellency in
thy notable works, and sing also perpetual praises to thee for thy manifold
benefits extended toward us, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xxx. Psalm.
WE ought (O most merciful god) to celebrate and extol thee with wonderful
and unspeakable praises, A prayer tha^ all our afflictions may well depart
from us, by Gods especial grace.
because thou art so prone and ready to preserve those that with an unfeigned
heart call diligently upon thy blessed name. We do plainly acknowledge and
openly confess our sins to be innumerable and most heinous, for the which
right worthy are we to be adjudged of eternal destruction and perpetual death.
But our earnest request is ye thou would show the like favorable mercy
toward us, as thou were accustomed to do unto thy elect and chosen
servants, although thou art wont to chastise them with a short kind of
wrath, and such a one as indureth but the turning of a hand, which forthwith
thou alterest into an exceeding great good will, and such a one as lasts
continually. Preserve us therefore from the present evils and iminent perils,
which hang over our heads, that we (being saved and delivered out of all
danger) may confess thee, and be both sure and experienced witnesses touching
the truth of thy faithful promises, and also every where, and in all places
show forth and publishe that thou only and none other ought to be trusted in,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
THy blessed Church (O almighty GOD) prays thee to relieve her, being sore
tossed and oppressed with these stormye tempests: neither suffer thou the
fierce enimyes of thy glorious name to rejoice and triumph at her destruction.
Thou art accustomed (O good God) both to hear and also to help without delay
such as earnestly call upon thee, and it is in thy mighty hand and power to
bring back again from the grave, and to quicken those which were now in a
manner fallen into the pit. Wherefore to the intent thou may stir up an
earnest desire and fervent affection in our minds to thy worthy praise, show
thy self to have been angry with us, yet let it be but for a moment: neither
shall that inestimable love of thine toward us (whereby we live and shall
live in thee) be any thing the more in that respect deminished. Bring speedily
to pass we humbly beseech thee, that our sorrowful tears, deep sighs, and
piteous groans, may shortly be changed into godly mirth and joyful gladness.
Mark thou in no wise our deserts, but what beseems thee best. We truly are
worthy of deadly hatred and extreme punishments, by reason of our manifold
sins, who so long as all things happened luckely, and as we would have it,
vainly imagined, that we could bear out all things of our own strength and
power. But now, when thou have a little turned thy loving countenance from
us, and present calamities have appeared, we are so astonished and stricken
with fear, that we can scarcely abide or stand upright. Howbeit have thou an
especial regard (O good God) what thy merciful promises require, namely that
thou will not suffer those to perish and come to ruin which cry heartily
unto thee. For our adversaries would do nothing less then set forth thy
worthy praises. At length therefore make an end of our sorrowful mourning,
that (the spirit of gladness being restored to us again) we may both now
and in an other world also, render everlasting praise and thanks unto thee,
through Jesus christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xxxj. Psalm.
Seeing that thou (O most mighty God) art our assured rock and strong defense,
A prayer in distress and trial of faith
it is now needful for thy names sake, that thou should save and deliver
those which repose their whole trust in thee, so that we may be nothing ashamed
of the faith that we have firmly affixed in thee. Thou see how they (of
whom thy sacred doctrine and holy Gospel is had in contempt) have privily
laid snares and nets to trap us. We therefore which see that we can be
preserved by none other mean, do now commit our selves to be defended by thy
only hands and mighty power. For we have no affiaunce in curious and wicked
arts, but repose our selves (O good God) upon thy goodness only, and require
thee to have an especial care and regard to the afflictions we now are in,
neither suffer thou us to be shut up into the hands of wicked persons. We
know for a certainty that our sins wherewith we are so sore burdened,
shall make exceedingly against us in thy just judgment, that of right we can
not escape. But beseech thee of thy infinite goodness, to have mercy upon us,
neither suffer thy blessed Church to be a by word and ieasting stock both to
the neighbors and enemies thereof. Show forth thy cheerful countenance upon
her, let the wicked be put to utter shame, we humbly pray thee, who may stop
the mouths of liars, when they most arrogantly imagine very horrible
accusations against her. And although (as to the judgment of the flesh) we
think our selves to be thrust down hedlong, and cast utterly from the sight
of thine eyes: yet notwithstanding, we still hope in spirit that thou will give
attentive ear unto our hearty prayers. Grant therefore that the virtuous men
which earnestly love thee, may well understand that thou mightily preseruest
thy faithful servants, and do greatly strengthen such as honor and
reverence thee with an unfeigned heart, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
LEt thy favorable and loving countenance (O most mighty God) shine upon us,
from whence comes all consolation, joy, and gladness unto thy beloved
servant: and seeing we crave for thy ready help, bring utterly to naught the
subtle inventions, crafts, deceptes, and laiyngs awaite of the violent force
of our enemies. Surely most great, most bewtifull, and most joyful is the
sweetness of thy inestimable goodness which thou have laid up for those
that repose their whole trust in thee: that the sins therefore which we have
lewdly committed seclude us not from the same, we heartily beseech thee to
cleanse and purify us with thy gracious favor. For if we once obtain this,
there is no doubt, but that we shall be both hidden, and also defended from all
imminent mischiefs, under the tabernacle and strong defense of thy mighty
protection, so as we boldly and steadfastly perseuering in thy blessed love,
may at length be brought and conveyed unto thee, being the pillar and chief
stay of our salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
THe confidence (O most mighty God) which the Godly repose in thee, has this
notable and singular property, that it makes no man ashamed thereof, nor
defraudeth any person of his just desire: the same therefore does greatly
enforce us to crave thy ready help, that thou would always be our
puyssaunt strength, strong defense, assured stay, valiant Captain, and most
provident nourisher. Moreover we know right well, that (by reason of our
manifold sins) the malicious enemies of thy glorious name and our salvation,
have every where laid snares, trappes, and ambushes for us. Therefore do we
commit our whole spirit and life to thy faithful custody, and put them into
thy hands to be strongly defended: for so much as thou see our innumerable
infirmities, and how we are always environed and compassed about with the
violent force of our fierce enemies: be merciful therefore to our sorrowful
estate, and help us presently without any delay. And as thou have both life
and death in thy puyssant hands, grant that we thy faithful servants may live
and rest with thee for ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xxxij. Psalm.
We are admonished by thee (O most good and merciful God) that the felicity
of thy faithful servant consists herein, A prayer tha^ our sinful crimes
may be pardoned.
that their sins are forgiven, covered, and not imputed unto them in thy just
judgment: which thing if ever we had need to obtain, certainly we now seem
to lack it most, when as (through present calamities) our heinous sins are
set before our eyes. For we feel thy hand to wax heavy over thy sacred
Church, wherefore we have thought good not to hide our sins, but publicly
and openly to confess them before thy d^uine Majesty: neither do we any
thing at all mistrust the unspeakable goodness thou art endued withal, who
incontinent do quite, pardon, and utterly forgive us our grievous offenses.
Therefore we that be thy dear beloved servants, do now earnestly require thee
(doubting not but thou art to be found) not to permit thy faithful people to
be violently oppressed of their cruel enemies, who be like unto ouerflowing
waters. Be thou a den and place of refuge for us in these most grievous
afflictions. Inform and teach us the right way of blessed salvation, and
whatsoever brutishe and beastlye lust remains as yet in us, keep thou it so
under with the hard bit and bridle of thy holy spirit, that we be not for
the same cast down hedlong into perpetual destruction: and finally pour out
lamentable sorrows and pitious calamities upon the adversaries of thy most
glorious name, but let such as trust only in thee be enclosed and fortified
with thy singular loving kindness as with a strong rampire, that those which
have a fervent zeal to thy excellent name, and be of an upright heart, may
cheerfully rejoice in thee, and triumph with a perfect gladness, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
THey without doubt are right happy and blessed (O most mighty God) to whom
thou of thy unspeakable mercy have forgiven their grievous sins, not imputing
them, but covering and remitting what wicked and naughty thing soever they
have been stained and polluted with. We do most manifestly acknowledge that
so great and notable a benefit could not have happened unto us, unless our
sins verilye were openly known and disclosed to thee, and that we pour into
thy blessed bosom what sins so ever we have lewdely and shamelessely
committed against thy sacred law. Therefore we acknowledge and confess unto
thee (O heavenly father) that our unrighteousness is exceeding great, and our
souls miserably burdened with the weight of our impiety: wherefore now aid
and help us with thy favorable mercy, and we heartily beseech thee, to wipe
away after a loving and gentle manner, what naughtiness soever does remain
behind. Deliver us from the sorrowful calamities and grievous miseries that are
hanging over our heads, make us to have an vncorrupt mind, and govern us
with thy provident care least through our evil affections, we do not
degenerate into most foolish brute beasts, but being environed and compassed
about with thy excellent goodness, let us be cheared up with rightful mirth
and assured joy before thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xxxiij. Psalm.
A prayer for praise and ^hankes gy^ing to God ^or his omni^otencie.
HOw many soever (O most mighty God) as have attained unto righteousness
through an unfeigned faith, do well understand how much praise and glory
thou art worthy of by reason of thy marvelous works. There is nothing in the
world but it bears witness that thou art good. The heavens stand fast, and all
the hosts of them were made by thy sacred word, neither are the waters of the
sea and great deepes contained within their bounds by any other power, then
through thy holy spirit and mighty force. Therefore it is and has been our
duty both to honor and fear thee only, even as thou have rightly deserved:
but we have (O sinful wretches that we are) done nothing less in all our
whole life. And therefore have well and justly deserved the great troubles and
dangerous perilles we now are in. But seeing that thy infinite goodness
cannot be drayned dry through men's naughtiness and lewd behauior (be they
never so innumerable) we crave pardon and forgiveness of all those things
which we have committed against thy divine Majesty, and heartily require thee
(according to thy woonted mercy) to make void all the subtle counsayles and
lewd devices wherewith the fierce enemies of godliness pretend to subvert and
overthrow thy sacred Church. Let thy thoughts and ymaginations stand
immovable toward that people which has thee for their favorable God and
most lawful heritage. Thou that beholdest the hearts of men from the high
heaven, and which have fourmed them from the beginning, know well what the
Antichristians have ymagined against thy faithful servants. Wherefore
vouchsafe we humbly beseech thee to maintain and defend us at this instant:
for we require neither valiant prince, nor strong horse, nor yet man's force
(which are of no power) to save and deliver us, but fly unto thee only, who
set our souls at freedom and liberty: let thy inestimable mercy (we
earnestly require thee) be at hand and ready for us, as we undoubtedly believe
and certainly hope it will so be, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
THy glorious name (O almighty) God) for diverse causes deserves to be
extolled with unspeakable praises, and to be celebrated with a marvelous
earnest endeavor of the godly: for so much as all thy words, and all thy
precepts and deeds are nothing but faythfulnesse, virtue, justice, and
goodness. Whatsoever is in the whole universal world either bewtiful or
gorgeous: what soever is profitable and commodious, all that proceeds and
comes from thee only. Thou alone bring to naught the pernicious
counsayles of the ungodly, and make their wicked enterprises void and of
none effect. But thy ordinances are most sure with a marvelous inviolable
constancy. Wherefore right happy and blessed are those people who have chosen
thee to be their God, and honor thee most purely and alonely as their
principal heritage. Therefore thou being such a one, and so mighty a fourmer
and maker of us, art not ignorant how often and horribly we have transgressed
thy divine law. Pardon us (we humbly beseech thee) neither suffer thou us to
repose our trust in the force and power of any creature: but grant that we
having thy wonderful mercy in experience, may perfectly rejoice, and
rightfully take pleasure in ye same, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xxxiiij. Psalm.
THy singular and most notable deserts extended toward us (O mighty God) in
what case so ever we are, A prayer for comfort in distress.
whether it be prosperity or adversity, moves us at all times to celebrate
thy glorious name with great praises. Surely thou art always present to those
that unfeignedly crave thy furtheraunce, and deliuerest the miserable from
careful and grievous calamities, and such as fly to thee for defense, thou
do fortify and enclose them with a guard of Angels. We therefore being sore
oppressed and vexed with the fardell of most grievous mischiefs, are like to
be led and carried away unto final destruction, without thy assistaunt help.
Wherefore we heartily pray and earnestly require thee to raise up those that be
fallen, and receiving us again into thy loving favor, thou will teach us the
true fear, perfect worship, and sincere love of thee, so that we may have
especially a pure conscience: bridle our tongue least it babble unadvisedly such
things as be unseeming for thee or our own vocation, but let us in all our
deeds decline from wickedness, and rightfully perform those things which
thou willest us to do, and become very zealous desirers and earnest seekers
of thy gracious peace: and as thou would not have our souls to be redeemed
with a common and simple price, so vouchsafe to bestow eternal salvation
liberally and bountifully upon them, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xxxv. Psalm.
Seeing that thou (O most good and merciful God) have an invincible strength
and most ready will to help thy faithful servants when they unfeignedly call
upon thee. A prayer bot^ against our enemies, and false prophets also.
We now earnestly require and hope assuredly in all our fervent peticions, that
thou will vouchsafe to aid and assist us, seeing we are continually (during
this mortal lif) so greatly oppressed through the violence and force of our
adversaries: for Satan is risen up, with an unspeakable deadly hatred, to cut
us off from our salvation. Wherefore have no regard at all how wickedly and
lewdly we have behaved our selves toward thee, but (of thy infinite mercy)
forgive our most heinous and grievous offenses, wherewith we feel our selves
to be most miserably ouerburthened: drive away far from us through thy
invincible power, and force of thy blessed Angels, the outrageous assaults of
the Devil and all his adherents, in such wise as both they may be disappoynted
of their practices, and our minds (by reason of thy loving favor and present
help) may sweetly rejoice, and proclayme abroad how there can be no God
found which may deliver those that call unfeignedly upon him, from al woeful
calamity, like unto thee. They scorn and mock at our infirmity and
weakness, but we humblye beseech thee O excellent father, (who beholdest the
great dangers and miserable distresses we are in) to take us into thy mighty
protection, and vouchsafe to preserve us from everlasting damnation, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
We have a great while sore longed (O most merciful God) to celebrate thee in
the most frequented assembly of the godly, which truly we will then do with a
most ready and joyful mind, when as thou (through thy mighty power) shall
rid and deliver us from the cruel Devil and his furious Ministers. It is not
unknown to thee how craftily, deceptfully, and after what a wicked manner he
disquieteth thy faithful servants. Wherefore we heartily beseech thee, with
so Godly an affection as we can, first to pardon and remit whatsoever we have
unworthily committed against thy sacred law, and consequently stir up thy
self stoutly to maintain, and valiauntly to defend our rightful cause,
least the pernicious enemies deride and vaunt themselves against thy dearly
beloved servants, (when as at their pleasures) they shall make them become
very miserable: but rather let confusion and shame fall upon them, at what time
they dare presume to set themselves against thy glory and our salvation. But
contrariwise, let us (which be desirous of thy famous honor and excellent
righteousness) be filled with perfect joy and gladness, that with a pleasant
and cheerful heart we may set forth thy noble praise and deserved
worthiness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xxxvj. Psalm.
We know right well (O most mighty God) the force of wickedness to be so
great, A prayer for upright justice.
that who soever has the same abiding in him, cannot be pricked and moved with
the fear or reverence of thy divine power. For he is so delighted in his own
detestable acts, that in the end it becomes both known and hateful unto
all men. For whatsoever he speaks is very wicked, neither can he be
persuaded to permit himself to be instructed to do well, but ymagineth much
mischief in the night and so incourageth himself in his heinous sins, that
he escheweth no kind of evil which comes in his mind. For thy infinite
mercy sake therefore (O good God) and for thy singular faythfulnesse, justice,
and most upright judgment, which reaches even unto the glorious heavens and
high clouds, which passes the most large Mountains, and excels the
bottomless depth, giving life and health not only to men, but to every living
thing also. We humbly beseech thee (that our grievous sins being done away)
thou would not suffer our souls to be defiled and stained with filthy
wickedness. Yea rather grant, yt we (reposing our selves under ye shadow of thy
wings) may through thy most rich spirit and his eternal dainties, enjoy the
Princely Palace of heaven, and quaffing very abundantly of the well spring of
life which is with thee, may (by the excellent benefit of thy glorious light)
behold the brightness of perpetual felicity: so that they which be deadly
enemies of our salvation, may be of no force or ability to pull us therefrom,
but rather (unless they cease from that they have begun) let them so fall
that they have no power at all to rise up again, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xxxvij. Psalm.
For So Much as thy blessed Church (O almighty God) has many weaklinges which
might perhaps be grievously offended in seeing most wicked and naughty
persons to have such prosperous success: A prayer for constancy in faith
against such as will hurt us.
confirm thou them therefore with thy holy spirit, to the intent they may
right well understand this felicity (which now the enemies of the Gospel
enjoy) is not stable and durable, but rather that it shall be dried up very
quickly like a withered weed, and most vile grass. Vouchsafe so to
replenishe us with thy heavenly grace, that we may have our affiaunce only in
thee, and always conceive a singular delight in charity and well doing,
whereby we may thorowlye persuade our selves, that all pleasure and felicity
ought to be fetched from thee, as out of the only vndraynable well spring.
Grant also, that we may with a right contented and pacient mind, suffer thee
to work thy divine will in all our affairs (so far as it shall seem good
in thy sight) and boldly abide and wait thy blessed leisure when it shall
happen that thou seem to prolong the time for our, help and deliverance in
such wise as we be not furiously offended at matters which be presently done,
but perfectly understand and right well perceive that our most heinous sins
have deserved far greeuouser plagues: for we have in such sort (O good God)
sinned against thee, that all the punishment which lights upon us, is far
less then our wicked and lewd merits deserve. Yet notwithstanding, vouchsafe
thou (who art most favorable) to direct our goyngs, and so assist those which
trust in thee, that all men may perceive us not to be utterly thrown down,
although we have gone far astray, because we are very gently and marvelous
softly holden up with thy strong hand: and let all people unfeignedly confess
that thou do in no wise forsake and abandon thy faithful servants,
whereby very many may be bold and hardy to commit themselves to thy mighty
protection, so that thou may be their ready helper, and deliver them
(through thy present aid) from the hands of their ungodly and cursed enemies,
by Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
LEt not the prosperous success of the wicked (O most good and merciful God)
move us to withdraw our minds from following thy most pure and sincere
Religion, for so much as thou declarest unto us that their prosperity is so
short and vanishe so quickly away as the greenenesse of grass and flowers in
Meadows. Unburden thou quickly (we humbly beseech thee) our consciences from
the heavy ferdell of our sins, from the which (unless we be eased by thy
gracious favor) we shall very readily fall into utter destruction. But
seeing that thou art our sole and only confidence, upon whom we wholly depend,
and have committed our selves altogether unto thy custody, we doubt not but
thou will condescend and give ear unto our earnest requests: which is, that
we may repose all our whole pleasure and felicity in thee alone, wholly
dispising and setting utterly at naught all the prosperity of this wretched
world. For like as such as lean thereunto are destroyed in a moment, even so
those that be exceeding quiet, very meek, and of a right up mind, shall after
a marvelous gentle and peaceable manner enjoy a perpetual heritage. We need
not to fear howsoever the ungodly rage, whatsoever he does manace and practice
against thy blessed Saints, for his naughty and lewd enterprises shall fall
upon his own head. But pardon thou (O good God) and try both our intentes and
doings, whereby an everlasting heritage may remain and abide for us, who
celebrate thy glorious name from day to day, with most high praises, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
Seeing that thou (O most mighty God) have taken upon thee to be a guide and
companion for the godly, to the intent they should not stray from the true
path of righteousness and a proppe to shore them up if peradventure they
should fall by mishap: and moreover, inasmuch as these thy promises have been
hitherto so firm and stable, that there was never found any godly person so
destitute of thy favorable good will, but had all things necessary for the
preservation of his life. Therefore assuredly hoping and faithfully trusting in
thy merciful promises, we humbly beseech thee not to punish us, as the sins
we have committed against thee do merit and deserve, but pardon them (for thy
excellent mercies sake) to such as fly unto thee for ready help: and
vouchsafe to bestow (upon those that trust only in thy goodness) thy blessed
will and sacred laws to be printed and engraven within their hearts, to the
intent they may continually meditate and talk of the same, neither let them
be variable and inconstant touching the execution thereof. Suffer not the
glittering and famous fortune of the ungodly (who bear unreconcilable hatred
and deadly food to thy faithful servants) to remove us any thing at all
from the right way, but so inflame and lighten our souls with thy holy
spirit, that we may quickly perceive them to be utterly wiped out, and fallen
into most extreme and endless torments: but indue thou us with firm strength
and perfect health (according to the confidence we have reposed in thy
faithful promises) and grant that we may be delivered from imminent
calamities and the spiteful enemies of our salvation, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xxxviij. Psalm.
A prayer against our e^imies and ^he dread of ^onscience.
REbuke and chasten us (O most good and merciful God) like thy dear children,
by removing and taking away thy grievous wrath and dreadful indignation from
these present adversities. Surely we feel thy heavy hand and perceive the
great perils we are in, who know that it can not be remedyed and amended by
man's help: which thing does not befall and happen unto us without our just
desectes. For doubtless our heinous sins and grievous iniquities have
wrapped us in on al sides, wherewith we are sore bourthened and miserably
oppressed far above our power. Hereupon it comes to pass that we go always
mourning, and are in a manner at deaths door, through great heaviness and
anguishe of heart. We see our neighbors and friends stand a far of, and our
adversaries pitch guileful snares, who work all the means they can possible
devise utterly to overthrow us. Thou therefore (O good God) for thy loving
mercies sake, first and foremost reconcile us unto thee, by louinglye forgiving
and favorably pardoning whatsoever we have most filthily committed against thy
divine Majesty, then make have and speed to be our ready help. We abide
looking forthee our only refuge, who have been accustomed readily to succor
those that unfeignedly call upon thee, and give ear unto their lamentable
peticions. Thou art not ignorant how the Antichristians triumph and rise up
against us, whilst we are so shaken and tossed: for they which hate us very
unjustly, increase and wax daily stronger and stronger. Wherefore we humbly
require thee (O excellent Father) not to forsake us in so great and grievous
afflictions, seeing that thou thy self art our only salvation, make haste
(we heartily beseech thee) to help and succor thy blessed Church, and mightily
rescue it, being in extreme peril, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
ALthough (O most good and merciful God) we find the fardell and burden of
wickedness which we have committed against thee to be so great, as we are not
now any longer able to sustain and bear them, therefore upon affyaunce of thy
unspeakable goodness, we come and call upon thee with a sorrowful heart, not
to correct us for them with ire and wrathful indignation: let thy admonition
be fatherly as thou have been accustomed of old to show and extend the same
toward thy faithful servant. Behold how (through conscience of our heinous
sins) our hearts be altogether amazed, all things are marvelously putrified
and very corrupt in us: we shall live exceeding sorowfully in affliction, and
in a manner quite destitute of light, unless thou put to thy assistant
helping hand. Neither do we trust any thing at all in our friends and
neighbors: for our grievous sins purchase us all things frowardly and after
an envious manner. Therefore (O good God) at what time we pour out our wretched
iniquities into thy bosom, and are so much careful to procure pardon for
them, let us not be utterly destitute of the loving favor and rich mercy that
is naturally graffed in thee, but as thou art always tractable and easy to be
entreated, so vouchsafe to make haste for to minister speedy and steadfast
help in our sorrowful distresses, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xxxix. Psalm.
^ prayer a^^inst vani^, and the ^ters of ^ns life ^d safety.
Seeing that (O most mighty God) we are vexed with present calamities in this
most troublesome time, and oppressed with so great a storm of afflictions: we
fly unto thee for succor, humblye requiring that thou would so bridle our
mouth and tongue with thy holy spirit as nothing may pass from us either
detestable to thy divine Majesty, or unseemly for our profession. But seeing
we cannot rightfullye complain that these perplexities and anguishes do
surmount our heinous sins, or that we be unworthily punished, grant we may
appease and stay the cursed cries of such as wrongfully complain of thee: but
rather let our bowels be stirred up with a perfect grief for the heinous
sins we have committed, let them wax whotte with a most inward sorrow, and
cause our hearts to be kindled and set on fire with a continual earnest
repentance. Grant that we may right well understand (O most gentle father)
every moment and hour the state of our unripe life, for so much as it is but
mere vanity howsoever we lead it, and we are far wide to think that our
careful turmoyle, or heaping together of uncertain riches, are able to
profit or avail us any thing at all. Therefore it behooves us (O mighty
Lord) to have a special regard unto thee only, whom if thou will especially
relieve from our grievous sins and heinous iniquities, our assured hope is
that we shall be no more a scorn and reproach to the ungodly. For thou have
been accustomed to remove thy plagues from such as be purged and cleansed of
their wicked crimes, and sinful deeds, least they should be utterly consumed
at the shaking of thy most mighty and invincible hand: which, if it should
persevere and go on in continual vexing men (according to their just deserts)
it would no less consume the^, and grind them to powder then Mothes fret out
clothes. Give ear therefore (O good God) unto our humble prayers, and seeing
thou know we cannot have an assured and perfect rest upon earth, grant that
we may finallye live with thy excellent Majesty by a constant faith, and walk
before thee in much safety, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
WHile we feel any tokens of thy rygor and severity (O most mighty God)
although we are persuaded in spirit not to speak evil of thy goodness or
justice: yet (through the greatness of our extreme sorrow and testimony of
our sins) we are almost so far gone, and brought to such a point that our
life is very yrkesome unto us: wherefore, seeing yt we confess our heinous
sins unto thee, and have sundry ways wickedly offended thy divine Majesty,
be merciful and favorable unto us for thy loving kindness and mercies sake.
Thou see how short and vain a thing our life is, being like unto shadows,
wherein is nothing firm, sound, or worth ye trusting to: we fade away in a
moment, and what time soever thou give us here to live, we pass over all the
same (through our own default) with most heady, troublesome, and pernicious
affections. We require thee therefore that thou would yet at length have
mercy upon us: let our earnest peticions and sorrowful mourning (which thy
blessed spirit has from our hearts wrong out in us) enter into thy merciful
ears, and moreover vouche thou safe to refreshe our distressed minds, with
thy loving favor from time to time, so long as we wander like pilgrymes in
this wretched world, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xl. Psalm.
THose which are sustained and stayed up with such a hope (O most mighty God)
that they look for thy ready help in their present tribulations, when they
most charge them, A prayer the our sins may be pardoned through the merits of
Christ.
and have an especial regard unto thee, being in no despair thereof at all,
thou at length (according to thy accustomed goodness and unspeakable mercy)
grauntest their humble requests, thou hear their loud cries out of the
deep waters, and sticking fast in mire and dirt liftest them out thereof with
thy most puyssaunt help. Whereby it happens, that they being mightily
delivered, have thy enestimable praises continually in their mouths, which
they celebrate with new ditties, both openly and privately, to the intent they
would stir up and provoke all men to the perfect belief, assured hope, and
due fear of thee. Give us therefore at this present such grace, as we may
both repose our whole trust in thee only, and also not to pass for the proud
persons or liars that have risen up together against thy sacred church,
perceiving right well that thou art the author of all wonderful matters, who
have in the high treasures of thy divine providence, such devises and purposes
which no man can rehearse or show forth in order, nor yet once to utter, in as
much as they excel in number and greatness all force of words, and
efficacy of speech. Therefore where as we have hitherto grievously offended
thee, by reason of our heinous sins, neither can make sufficient satisfaction
by any sacrifice of our own, grant us an obedient faith to be at all times
procliue and ready to follow thy blessed will, which thou have vouchedsafe to
manifest and reuele unto us in the book of thy sacred law: grant that we
may readily and with a free will execute the same, being surely printed in the
most inward parts of our sinful body. And like as thou do never withhold
thy self from speedy mercy and unspeakable goodness toward us: so again
let thy zealous loving servants manifestly show forth thy steadfast
faythfulnesse, upright justice, and sincere truth, both in their words and
conversation. Thou see how we are borne down and laden with grievous
sins, how we are overwhelmed with miserable adversities, and how both heart
and wit fails us: wherefore have thou an especial regard to our salvation,
and make speedy have to help us. Or rather confound and put the fierce
enemies of thy blessed name to utter confusion, but let us which unfeignedly
seek thee, be at length greatly refreshed, and cause us to find by proof,
that it is not in vain, that thou art reported to be the most assured
salvation it self, and helper of poor siely wretches and grievous afflicted
persons, through Jesus christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
THey which suffer the prolonging of thy favorable help (O most mighty God)
with right and pacient minds, do at length well perceive and assuredly feel
that thou hear their fervent prayers: and when in good earnest they find
themselves to be delivered, do not only celebrate thy glorious name with due
praises, but give a sufficient example to other godly men for to do the like.
Now therefore (which we may only do) for so much as thou delightest not in
outward sacrifices, we endeavor and strive to obtain thus much by our hearty
prayers, that we may become very loving and desirous to follow thy holy will
daily more and more, setting forth thy blessed truth and unspeakable mercy
toward us with often, or rather continual praises. But in the mean season,
what soever we have done dishonestly or after a wicked manner against thee,
according to thy loving mercy and excellent goodness forgive it us, neither
suffer those grievous punishments and woeful calamities to ouerwhelme us, which
our sins have justly deserved. And let such as seek thy dishonor and our
confusion, be put to utter shame and rebuke: but cause those that be exceeding
zealous and very careful of thy blessed name, to be replenished with true joy
and perfect gladness. But seeing thou right well know that we are greatly
despised, and marvelous destitute of worldly and fleshly help, make thou have
mightily to save us, who art our puyssaunt defense, and very strong fortress,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xlj. Psalm.
IT is a token of no small grace (O most mighty God) well to judge both of
such as be feeble minded, A prayer against the enemies of Gods holy word, and
for ye work of charity.
and also of all the Godly whom thou do sometime chastise and scourge
diverse manner of ways, although thou use correction with a fatherly
affection, yet will thou readily deliver them, speedily quicken them, and in
the end abundantly bless them with thy excellent presence: which hope we also
leaning unto, and trusting upon, (who are now most grievously afflicted) do
here together earnestly require thee to have mercy upon us, by releuing and
delivering us from the grievous sins wherewith we have most heinously
offended thee. Thou know undoubtedly that the cruel enemies of thy holy
Gospel, wish us much evil: thou understand what they ymagine and
determine amongst themselves of our destruction. They verily practice and go
about nothing more then to overthrow thy blessed Church, and with them also do
such take part as we though to have been allied with us, both by religion, and
also for many other respects and good turns. Extend thou therefore (O good
God) thy mercy and compassion toward us, whereby thou have been accustomed
not only to raise up such as are fallen and lie under foot, but also utterly
to confound and bring their adversaries to utter ruin. Give not the fierce
enemies of true religion and perfect godliness, scope to rejoice at thy
faithful servants destruction. But if thou will mightily deliver us out of
these present calamities, and with great force confirm the same by thy holy
spirit, thy blessed name shall be openly commended and highlye praised of all
godly men, which thing we earnestly require may continually come to pass and
that without ceassing, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
THere remain wonderful great rewards (O most good and merciful God) for
such as have much compassion upon the afflicted: but those that show mercy
unto the most miserable, and such men as be in great distress, do immitate
and follow the example of thy exceeding great goodness. For thou art wont to
comfort thy faithful servant which lies sore sick in his bed, so that thou
thy self seem to make the same, to the intent that he which is diseased
might lie the softer, neither is there any point of dutifulness which we
account most singular, wherewith thou do not very favorably pleasure and
serve the turn of thy blessed people, whenever thou shall think time
convenient to help them. Wherefore seeing we may well perceive that (for our
grievous sins) we be fallen into most dangerous and sore distresses, we
humbly fly unto thy goodness only, hoping that thou will vouchsafe to remit
whatsoever we have offended or displeased thee in, neither suffer the wicked
enemies of our salvation, to triumph and rejoice at our destruction, for so much
as it shall be manifested in this one point, that thou do make a very great
account of us, when as thou art our strong defender in such a noisome and
troublesome time. Succor us (we humbly beseech thee) and show how thou do
mightily uphold us, whereby we may (according to our bounden duty. Publishe
and set forth the worthy praises of thy most glorious name, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.lxij. Psalm.
A prayer in distress for the comfort of the gospel.
THere is none (O most mighty God) that well and rightly considers thy
inestimable goodness, but with a fervent mind does (like unto a heart that is
very thirsty) breathe and fervently bray unto thee both day and night: for
how can it be that any man having a true faith, should not make earnest haste
to come unto the living God? but we have been hitherto greatly slack in that
hearty desire, neither have we unfeignedly sought God (as we ought to do) in the
sacred and holy Congregations. Therefore, (through much heaviness and sorrow)
piteous tears have been our meat and drink in these marvelous troublesome
times, whiles the most cruel enemies of thy blessed Church do daily mock and
jest at us, saying where is their God. But as thou (O good God) art merciful
and most gentle, so lay down and turn away (we humbly beseech thee) thy
heavy displeasure which thou have rightly conceived against us, and remembering
thy faithful promises, grant unto us (although we in no wise deserve it) that
our assured hope and constant faith may be most firm and strong, so as our
soul be not cast down lower then it ought to be. For although floods,
tempests, and bottomless pittes of temptations seem to be poured out upon
thy blessed Church, yet so assuage and moderate them with the goodness of thy
singular mercy and excellent grace, that our mind and conscience be not
deprived of their perfect joy. Grant, that we being stirred up with thy holy
spirit, may always encourage our selves to hope and trust in thy most
steadfast help because we shall yet still celebrate and praise thy glorious
name, for restoring us health and perfect quietness, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
We desire with our whole heart (O most good and merciful God) to be knit and
annexed unto thee, daily hungring and thirsting for the same, because we can
not without great sorrow and grief, hear the gyrds and scornings both of our
own mind and of our cruel adversaries (when thou seem to have forsaken
us) wherewith they mock at godliness and faith conceived, namelye by casting
us in the teeth with the woeful cares, piteous miseries, and lamentable
calamities that we (being sore oppressed) seem in a manner to be cast down
with, and that so much the more because our own sins become every day
greater and greater. We humbly beseech thee (O good God) for thy excellent
mercies sake, to pardon and forgive us the same, whereby we may be made able
to confirm and strengthen our selves, being assuredly printed in our minds by
thee only: and seeing that our evil affections and grievous terrors of
punishments are very troublesome unto us, grant that we (being mightily
strengthened with thy loving promise) may comfort our own afflicted souls,
persuading the^, that as they trust only in thee, so shall they be in good
hope cheerfully to celebrate thy most glorious name, because thou art both
become their perfect salvation, and also their true God, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xliij. Psalm.
TAke at length upon thee (O most good and mighty God) through thy own
authority and invincible power, A prayer in necessity.
the judgment of our cause, which although it indeuoureth to maintain and
uphold the true worshipping of thee and thy pure religion, for which things
sake, the same is very good, and yet nevertheless is it forsaken and
disallowed of all men. Wherefore we have exceeding great need that thou do
deliver us from deceypfull and wicked men. Thou only remainest ye chief
comfort, assured strength, and strong defense of thy blessed Church:
Notwithstanding we have lived unworthy of thy holy name, profession, and
doctrine, but such is thy unspeakable mercy, that it hydeth such men's
iniquities as unfeignedly repent and turn unto thee, it forgiueth heinous
sins, and will not lay to the charge of the faithful whatsoever they have
most wickedly committed. Therefore we heartily require thee to have pity upon
us, and make us in such wise partakers of thy splendent light and glorious
truth, that we may both here worship thee purely in the holy congregations, and
at the last be conducted to the most blessed habitations of eternal life. Our
soul truly is now heavy and utterly dismayed: we are oftentimes vexed with
timorous imaginations, and the bowelles within us do tremble and quake for
fear. Yet we humbly beseech thee (O excellent father) to confirm such an
assured hope in us, that we may hereafter set forth thy worthy praises, and be
exceeding cheerful for the obteyning of our salvation, when as thou shall
declare thy self to be our most famous God, as in very deed thou art, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
We commit our cause to thy strong defense and puyssaunt government (O most
mighty God) being in marvelous great danger, and in so great perils of this
sinful life. For although we have no strength and power in our selves, so long
as we continue in this most miserable life, whereunto may we lean, seeing we be
wretchedly ouerlayde with original sin, and an infinite number of
wickednesses adjoined thereto: yet we humblye beseech thee, let the clear
light of thy most loving countenance shine upon us, that the darkness of our
mind may be made bright thereby. For if it happen unto us through thy
unspeakably mercy, to be replenished with thy exceeding gladness and
incredible joy, we will then bid our mind (which otherwise would be abashed)
to be of good cheer. This one thing we heartily require of thee, to vouchsafe
for to grant us, that we may repose our whole trust and affiaunce in thee
alone, because thou only art become our salvation and very true God, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xliiij. Psalm.
prayer in ^secution, ^el against ^porall eni^es as spi^all.
THou have of thy singular goodness (O most mighty God) chosen thee a Church
out of many nations, planted with thy puyssaunt hand, and not by man's force,
which being (through thy singular favor and blessed spirit) cleansed and
pourged from her heinous sins, has hitherto escaped the mischievous
assaults of the cruel devil, through thy mighty aid and strong defense:
thou have always preserved it from her outrageous adversaries, and put them to
utter shame and endless rebuke which bore deadly hate thereto. We ought
therefore to have reioysed in the alone, and highly to extol thy blessed name
only: but alas for sorrow, we have been most ungrateful for all these
excellent benefits, in flesh and man's power has been our only affiance, for
we (through our most wicked life and ungodly behavior) have brought thy
blessed doctrine which we profess, to great infamy and reproach. Thou
therefore do cast us down presently, and heapest shame upon us: we are now
in a manner become a pray unto Antechrist, and a mocking stock unto our
neighbors. Thy sacred Gospel (O good God) is at this present a bye word unto
the Infidels, a scorn unto the people, and a Mayegame unto every rascal: we
acknowledge that all these things have happened unto us by reason of our
mischievous sins, and that right worthelye. But (O excellent Father)
reconcile us again unto thee (according to thy merciful goodness) and
vouchsafe to pardon whatsoever we have very lewdlye and foolishlye committed
against thy divine Majesty, and grant also that we be not any thing at all
forgetful of thee, neither be found false hearted, or unfaithful in thy holy
covenant. Let not our mind at any time start and shrink aside from thy
blessed footesteppes, although we should be worn to the uttermost, and
compassed about on every side with the shadow of death. Let us never so
ouershoote our selves, (no though we be appointed as sheep to the slaughter)
as to be forgetful of thy glorious name, and to have recourse unto detestable
worshipings. Awake (we humbly beseech thee (O good God) neither slumber nor
sleep thou any more. Let not thy face be hidden from our grievous afflictions:
arise and mightily preserve them that are thrown down, and brought very low,
whom we doubt not but thou of thy unspeakable mercy have chosen unto thy
self, through Jesus Christ our lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
Wonderful things are set forth unto us in the sacred scriptures (O most good
and merciful God) of thy excellent mercy and victorious acts which thou have
showed in old time, as touching the strong defense, the mighty preservation,
and excellent increasing of thy faithful servants: by hearing whereof, we are
assuredly persuaded to repose our whole trust in thee only, and not in our
own strength, riches, and power. But now (being sore oppressed with the most
grievous burden of our heinous sins, when as we feel the deserved
reuengement of thy heavy wrath, and fearing more dreadful pains and sharp
punishments, (as men whose consciences do justly accuse them) earnestly require
thee, who art always very merciful, to pardon and forgive whatsoever we have
lewdly commitced against thy divine Majesty: furthermore, if thou shall
purpose and determine with thy self to vex us with bitter calamities and
woeful miseryes, grant that the same be not the cause we defile the godly awe
and reverence which is due of our parts unto thee: neither suffer thou us to
have recourse unto any other counsels then thine. Stir up thy self
therefore, and make haste to help us: for thou seem to have turned away thy
favor from us, while thou prolongest the time to be our strong helper. And
therefore, to the intent thy accustomed tender mercy and favorable goodness
may be manifested and well known, vouchsafe mightily to deliver us from
these dangerous perils that inuiron and compass us about on every side,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xlv. Psalm.
A prayer for salvation purchased unto us by Christ.
WE have Christ Jesus (O most good and merciful God) an only and most ample
King to all sorts of good men, whose force as it is very notable, so is the
throne of his glorious Empire established for ever. His excellent power is
invincible, it is garnished with most notable righteousness, he stands in
high favor with thee, and is (in his unspeakable wisdom) right glorious.
The Church is unto him as a most royal Queen espoused, to the intent she may
bring him forth a most plentiful and holy seed. We therefore which ought
with all our endeavor to have honored so mighty a King, have (through our
naughtiness, and lewd behavior) defiled his excellent name and holy
kingdom, which we now heartily acknowledge, and earnestly confess before the
(O most excellent father) humbly requiring thy divine majesty to pardon, and
forgive us the same, that we being received into thy loving favor, may feel a
fresh the benifits of our good king: and although we neither merit nor deserve
the same, yet grant that he may arise in this time of our great distress, be
girded about with his two edged sword, and deliver his dear espoused Church
from the violent injuries and opprobrious slanders of Antichrist. Let him now
draw out the exceeding sharp darts of his mighty word and blessed spirit,
and execute the rod of severe judgment and righteousness, wherewith he has
been always accustomed to govern his kingdom: and at this present very
manifestly to declare that he greatly loves truth, and hates iniquity as a
most wicked thing, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
THy only begotten son our Lord Jesus Christ (O most good and merciful God)
is worthy to be commended by all means possible that can be devised, who has
above all things uttered and set forth him self elegantlye and after a
beautiful manner, in the form of excellent virtues, and shape of pure
holiness, using a most gentle manner of persuasion, both in his teaching and
exhortation, and brings all things under his divine power and omnipotent
government, through the puissant sword of his blessed word, and efficacy of
his incomparable force: who has from time to time showed himself a very
great lover of righteousness, and a most extreme enemy of iniquity. But
whereas we sinful wretches as a chaste spouse in wedlock were handfasted to
such and so puissant a one as he is, have defiled our selves through sundry
and manifold spots of corrupt vices. Therefore our earnest request is, that
thou would cleanse us with hearty rapentaunce and thy blessed spirit,
whereby the wicked and lewd desires that be graffed in us, being once
forgotten, we may altogether aspire unto the love of this most delectable
bridgrome, and that through our labor laid together in steed of our fathers,
who are now already gathered unto him, many mo faithful children may be
begotten unto him a new, with whom we may always set out and celebrate his
famous honor and most noble praises, through the self same Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xlvj. Psalm.
Whosoever do certainly believe thee (O most good and merciful God) to be
their only hope and assured strength, A prayer for victory in temptation.
thou have been always very prone and ready to help them in their great
afflictions. Wherefore the faithful are utterly void of all manner of fear,
although the whole earth be moved, the hills shake, the waves and sourges of
the sea do so outragiously beat upon the shore, that all things may seem
incontinent to be destroyed and quite ouerflown with waters: and on the other
side they are endued with a great and notable assurance, when as thou
refreshest them in their grievous distresses, with the most pleasant rivers of
thy heavenly consolations, namelye in setting out the rare and wonderful
means of thy assistant help through thy fruitful spirit. Upon which thy
excellent goodness, we also having assured confidence, notwithstanding the
innumerable sins which we confess to be the chief cause why we have
offended thee most grievously, require that thou would shake and make feeble
the Nations and Kingdoms which thou see do resist thy sacred Church with
great violence, and most crafty devices: show forth that voice of thine
wherewith the earth and every creature therein are wont to be shaken and
utterly brought to naught. Be thou (O our God) as a most strong and invincible
Tower unto us: cause thou wars here to cease, and make thou spears, horse,
charets, and all kind of weapons blunt, that they may finally leave of their
lewd enterprises, who mightily fight against us, and show thou thy self
great and excellent above all things, while thou do manifest thy self to be
better for our deliverance then all the armies and puyssance of the whole
world, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
AFter what sort soever a very sudden or horrible mishappe (O most mighty
God) shall sore vex us, our hope shall not fail us, neither will we be any
thing dismayed or troubled, seeing we are now fully resolved that thou art our
only helper and deliverer: although the whole world be moved, the storms of
human flesh do swell, and that all the Devils of hell with their whole
furniture should seem to shake all things of ours, yet do we repose and
settle our selves in thy unspeakable goodness, and invincible power. Our
sins truly deserve all manner of trouble and enmity: but forgive thou us
them, (according to thy accustomed goodness) and pitiyng our present
calamities, grant that such as unfeignedly call upon thee, may enjoy health,
peace, and quietness of mind: for thou can very easily disappoynt and
break the swords, bow, warlike ingines, and all the crafty deceyptes and
imaginations of the Devil, not only through thy most mighty and invincible
word, but also even with a beck, and at thy only will and pleasure: our
earnest request is (O good God) to apply our selves here unto that we may
attentively behold those marvelous acts which thou do for thy faithful
servants, whereby all Nations may right well know and perceive that thou
take our part, and determinest to be a continual helper, of thy blessed
people, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xlvij. Psalm.
A prayer for the good suc^esse and in^reasment of ^he Gospel.
THou have vouchedfafe (O most mighty God) to gather and collect a Church
unto thy self on earth, which thou have not conveyed into stony houses, or
Temples of Marble, but into the lively hearts of men, whom thou deckest and
garnishest with thy most wonderful gifts, and do pollishe the same passing
well with the holy Ghost: and therefore seeing they be endued with so great a
reward, it behooves all faithful people to make an exceeding pleasant mirth
and joyful gladness. But the most deadly and heinous sins which we have
committed, do greatly darken these thanks giuings and merry songs, who are
worthily very sore oppressed with the afflictions of them: and seeing we
heartily acknowledge and earnestly confess that we have hitherto gone astray,
and suffer none otherwise then we have most justly deserved: thou that art very
mercy it self, forgive thy faithful people, and thou also who art most
high, and rulest far and near, destroy us not according to our merits.
Grant (O excellent father) that our naughty and lewd behauiours hinder not
the propagation of thy glorious kingdom: arise and go forwards by causing
strange people to be in subjection to the faith, and make those Nations (which
have been hitherto Infidels) obedient to thy sacred word: and thou who have
chosen thee a Church as a most notable and famous heritage, magnify thy self
continually by all means and with most exquisite praises therein, in such wise
as all men may account, preach, and exalt thee for their king: but as for thy
faithful servants who now seem to be above all others most cast awayes,
lighten them in such wise with thy blessed spirit, and rule them so by thy holy
word, as all men may perceive that they be guyded and governed by thy mighty
power. And vouchsafe that the sovereign estates and what power soever is in
the world, may at length be annexed and knit unto thee, that thou be none
otherwise their God then thou were in old time the God of faithful Abraham.
Grant that the kings and princes who ought of duty to help and defend
their subjects, may perfectly acknowledge thee, whereby thy famous honor and
renowned glory may most brightly shine therein to the singular benefit of
thy sacred Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
IT behooves all faithful people (O most good and gracious God) to extol and
advance the kingdom of Christ with an exceeding joy, wonderful gladness,
and most hearty endeavor: for so thy unspeakable goodness is both mightily
declared, and we also are come to the full attainement of our salvation. Surely
it is very requisite that all people and Nations should be in subjection to
his government, and the world shall go best on our side, who be his peculier
heritage, and especial flock. We heartily require thee therefore (O our most
puyssaunt king) who art exalted into the high heavens, and unto the right hand
of thy father to vouchsafe for to acquire us of the heinous faults we have
grievously committed, and whatsoever sorrowful calamities and strange mishaps
be like to fall upon us, put them of from our shoulders through thy inestimable
mercy and mighty power, whereby thou thy self alone may bear rule and
reign in our minds. And grant that all kings, all princes and great states
that have authority upon earth, may unseperably cleave unto thee being the
rightful and most true God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xlviij. Psalm.
THy excellent Majesty and exceeding honor (O most good and merciful God)
abounds greatly in the Church, A prayer f^^ the christian Church a^
congregati^^
seeing that thou do mightilye rule her with thy sacred word and holy
spirit, neither art thou marvelously praised there only: but what comeliness
or perfect joy soever is in the whole world, it issues and proceeds
doubtless from thee. And for so much as thou art far better known there then
any where else, it comes hereof, that thou art in the same place a sure
defense and most strong fortress to thy faithful servants. Let the kings
therefore assemble together, and the princes conspire (as they think good)
utterly to subvert and overthrow her, yet shall they be enforced to leave of
their fond devices, as who at the feeling of thy mighty power present (being
stricken with exceeding fear) must needs cease from their wicked attempts:
for such as thou strykest a fear into, they are overtaken with sorrow as
women laboring of child. Wherefore (O good God) suffer not our heinous sins
to exceed and surmount thy unspeakable goodness: we truly have offended thee
very grievously (neither do we deny the same) but together with our heinous
sins we acknowledge also thy exceeding great mercy, which we seek for with
sorrowful tears, that we may at length be reconciled unto thee, not for our
own deserts, but through the inestimable goodness, loving favor, and bening
grace of thy dear son: and grant that the fierce enemies of thy blessed
Church may in likewise come to utter ruin, as ships are oftentimes torn
amiddest the sea through the very great and exceeding hideous noise of the wind
which is suddenly stirred up: so that like as we have heard with our ears thy
most large promises set forth and preached out of the holy Scriptures, so we
may also with our eyes see them mightily come to pass and be performed. We
have already conceived an assured hope and steadfast confidence by those
things which are set out unto us in thy most blessed word, now grant (we
humbly beseech thee) that the thing may take so good success, as through the
publishing of thy glorious name and goodness, incontinent after the
performaunce of thy excellent benefits, we may with great solemnity render
due thanks for the same. And to the intent it may be every where known, that
whatsoever proceeds from thee, is nothing else but upright justice: be thou
our God, even our God I say, both so long as we here live, and also
everlastingly, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
ALl creatures (O most good and merciful God) do plainelye and euidentlye
acknowledge thy great goodness: but thy sacred Church is the especial work
wherein thou art singularlye preached and magnified. From thence all the whole
world receives gladness, for so much as the sound doctrine is there, whereby
both thou thy self art manifestly known, and we also called to heaven, for
what most pleasant, joyful, and blessed thing so ever can be had upon earth,
it florisheth there. And therefore no marvel is it, though the adversaries
force rages against her with cruel threatening, outrageous madness, and
furious violence: if thou be at hand without delay, thou do maintain,
favor, and defend it in such wise, that the mighty rulers of the world, and
princes of darkness are enforced will they nill they to be sore troubled to
run hedlong away, and to be marvelously disquieted with exceeding great
fear. Their impotent threatenings are utterly disapoynted through thy mighty
power: but there thy faithful servants are unburdened of their heavy cares
and sad greefes, which benifites of thine we now and then feel not, because
we fall exceeding miserably and marvelous painfullye into sundry and manifold
faults, being driven thereto partly by infirmity, and partly through
ignorance. By this so great honor of thy glorious house, we humbly beseech
thee therefore to blot out whatsoever we have committed against thee, to the
intent that thou thy self may rule and govern us in the same Church, to the
glory of thy most excellent name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xlix. Psalm.
WE heartily require thee (O most mighty God) that faith may be annixed to ye
doctrine of thy holy Ghost, A prayer that we abuse not temporal goods.
when as being greeuouslye afflicted through the naughty behavior of our
outrageous enemies, we may duly way this with our selves, that they stay most
upon their transitory riches and wealth wherein they much abound: for they
verilye perceive not that men can by no riches in this world redeem themselves
from death and eternal damnation. Bridle thou (O excellent father) our
affections, in such wise that no frail things take any place at all in us. Let
the common infirmity and misery which is wholly sown in such as we be,
admonish us, or else very death yt spreads it self over all people, how
wise or foolish soever men be, they can in no sort so mock death, as always
to keep and enjoy the goods they have gotten in this wreched world. We also
do plainly confess, that we have oftentimes fallen on this behalf, who,
trusting in worldly strength, were persuaded of wonderful victories, pompes,
and triumphs, as though our names should have been exalted above all
measure. Neither did we well consider that a good fortune, and prosperous
success of the flesh, endures but a time, and so many as have assured
confidence in them, shall perish at length like beasts, and are put into
hell, and inprisoned under an everlasting night. Forgive us (O good God) this
heinous crime, that putting away and casting aside all vain hope of worldly
wealth, thou thy self may take us up into thy tuition, and raise us from
eternal death and the pains of Hell. Grant that we stand in no fear at all
of them, who have greatly increased themselves and their houses with riches and
honor, all which things are but commodious only for this present life, that
they might be the better able to follow the sensual appetite of their fleshly
lusts. Finally, we humbly require thee (O good God) to deliver thy blessed
church from these outrageous enemies which have not this perceyueraunce, as to
understand that the honor and authority they have, is given them of God, who
dye not only like senseless beasts, but (being deprived of their worldly
goods) shall after this wretched life, suffer eternal punishment, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
THe renowned oracles of the sacred doctrine which thou have vouched safe to
set out in the holy scriptures, ought men (O mighty God) well to consider
with most attentive minds: yea, there is no man so ignorant, or any of so
high degree, but it behooves him very diligently, to ponder and way the
excellent things that thou speak. And this thou chiefly admonishest us off,
that we have not that confidence in the pleasures of this world, (being very
vain and frail) which we ought to repose in thee only. What thing soever is
wonderful, puissaunt, exceeding strong, marvelous excellent, or very
honorable amongst men, are of no force to redeem and deliver us from death:
but such is their property and condition, that they are quicly changed, and
perish in the twinkling of an eye: neither may the man which has his whole
affiaunce in these, abide any while in honor. For so soon as they wither and
perish, so sone also does their counterfeit renown fade away. Wherefore we
earnestly require thee (O good father) to forgive us, because we have hither to
(so long, and with such a fervent desire) trusted in these transitory riches,
that our hearts and minds being withdrawn therfro, thou would most
straightly annixe them to thee and thy sacred words, to the intent we may
delight in nothing more, then to follow thee, and cheerfully endeavor to do
whatsoever is thy holy will and pleasure, least we become as brute beasts, and
perish like most dumme cattle, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.L. Psalm.
O Puyssant and most mighty God, A prayer for remembranc^ in distress of ye
last judgment and promises of god.
who of thy bountiful mercy have vouchedsafe to gather thee a blessed Church
out of all parts of the world, and that first by the Apostles whom in Mount
Sion thou induedst with thy sons most abundaunt spirit. Neither would
thou for any other cause gather thy very chosen and good people so wonderfully
together, but that a true way how to worship thee (wherein doubtless
consists the whole perfection of faithful beleuers) might at length be
universally known amongst all nations: and cause us to learn that godliness
does not altogether consist in outward observations and most dumme ceremonies.
For like as these things do please thee so long as they are witnesses and
testimonies of faith, so if they be destitute thereof, they are exceeding
odious, and very detestable in thy sight. The thing that thou chiefly requirest
of us, is this, that thy holy name may be highly praised and duly glorified,
not only in words and thoughts, but with all the deeds of this our life. Thy
blessed will is that we should unfeignedly perform whatsoever we have heartily
promised, and with fervent zeal vowed unto thee, so as we be assuredly
persuaded that they are both agreeable to thy sacred word, and a furtheraunce
to perfect godliness. Moreover thou requirest us to invoke and call upon
thee when we are most touched with adversity, and to render due thanks to thy
divine Majesty (as expedient it is so to do) at what time soever we be
mightily delivered therefro. Thou do exact and require these things at our
hands as the chiefest points of our religion. But we (O good God) have
hitherto most wretchedly and unhappily sinned, who have always put no small
affiaunce in our own rites, and ceremonies, and perused oftentimes the holy
Scriptures when our heart was far from them: discipline has been displeasaunt
unto us, and we have every where (through our most wicked lusts) neglected
thy sacred commandments. Now therefore (for thy singular mercy and infinite
goodness sake) pardon and forgive us these our misdeedes, and mightily deliver
us from such as (being wrapped in with rapine and unchasteness) spoke most
vileynously of thy sanctified Church and holy Gospel, believing that thou
spiest not the naughtiness which they lewdly commit, when as thou seem not
to revenge it, but very patiently to permit and suffer the same. Cause them
shortly to understand this right well, neither let us be haryed thus violently
of them, as though there were none that could or would deliver us, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
THou have showed unto us (O most good and mighty God) through that severe
sentence of thine, by what thing mortal men's causes are to be decided before
thy high judgment seat, and it likes thee nothing at all to make inquisition
for burnt offerings, or outward sacrifices, seeing the Calves, Goats, wild
beasts, and finally all living things that be in the world, are in thy
mighty hand and power, neither was it thy good pleasure at any time that
these things should be offered unto thee, any otherwise, but as manifest
tokens of reverent awe, pure religion, and inward godliness. But thou have
chiefly required this of mankind, that they should yield and render most
hearty thanks for the benefits they have received, and to ascribe all the
good things they enjoy unto thee only: but let them diligently annixe and
join this thereunto, that whatsoever they pretend or purpose to do, it may
(according to their faithful promise) greatly redowne to the glory of thy
blessed name, and call upon thee only in their great distress and miserable
calamities. We do in this point (as thou O good God right well know) err
very grievously: and therefore our hearty desire is, that (for thy infinite
goodness sake) thou would pardon and forgive whatsoever we have wickedly
and after a lewd manner committed against thee, so as we handle not thy sacred
word to our condemnation, least we be, through thy upright sentence,
pronounced wonderful arrogant, strange children, exceeding covetous, given to
fleshly lust, and curssed speakers, but rather that we may earnestly offer unto
thee an acceptable sacrifice of thanksgiving, and fashion our whole life
according to the square rule of thy blessed commandments, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lj. Psalm.
We lamentablye with heartye prayer call upon thy loving mercy (O most good
and gracious God) that we may be cleansed, A prayer for remission of sins.
washed, and pourged from our heinous iniquities, and exceeding detestable and
mischievous deeds: who do acknowledge and confess how lewdly we have
hitherto behaved our selves, but our grievous sins shall never be of such
force, as to make thee unjust, or false of thy excellent promise: we truly do
right well understand that our deserts are not such, as thou should
vouchsafe to make most large and notable promises unto us, but stand now in
great need of thy unspeakable faythfulnesse and constancy to help us. Thou
see that we were brought forth into this world corrupted and defiled even
from our mothers womb, and were before conceived in the same iniquities also:
purify therefore our minds, and garnish them with such a passing whiteness
as seems acceptable unto thee. Create in us a pure heart, a right, holy, and
serviceable spirit, that we be not cast of from thee as most wicked persons,
but may recover the true joys and perfect consolation. If thou will deliver us
from those deadly sins which accuse us as gyltie of eternal death, our
lips shall merrily and with right great joy show forth thy worthy praise.
Grant (we heartily beseech thee) that we may approach unto thy divine Majesty
with a troubled spirit, and an humble and contrite heart, as an offering
wherein thou chiefly delightest: then shall our present calamities be
mollefied, and then also shall we not celebrate thy praises unthankfully:
manifest thy loving kindness unto Sion, thy beloved Church: for thou right
well perceyuest the manifold perils it is subject unto, and that she is
grievously assaulted both without and within. We heartily require thee to
deliver her not only from outward enemies, but also reform the same, and set
it in good state, to the intent she may not seem altogether unworthy such an
husband as thou art, through Jesus Christ our lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
We acknowledge (O most mighty God) with how great a pernicious infection
of sins we have defiled our minds: which thing seeing that it is most
troublesome and exceedingly greeueth us, neither can we (through our own
strength and good works) wash out the spots already conceived: but this is
our only refuge, that we may come unto thee being the well spring of mercy,
so that thou having compassion upon us, may do away our grievous offenses,
wash away our deadly iniquities, blot out our heinous sins, and purify
again our vices, wherewith we are wonderfully infected even from our conception
and birth. For if thou will most franklye pardon the misdeedes and wickedness
wherewith we are sore burdened, then verily shall thou appear to be exceeding
true, faithful, and most constant in thy faithful promises. Vouchsafe to
sprinckle us with the blood of thy only begotten son, by which one
sovereign thing both the soul and body may be renewed with a marvelous
comfortable joy. We earnestly desire a new heart to be created in our bowels,
and to be endued also with thy most noble spirit, to the intent we may not
compelled, but with right good will, offer unto thee a sacrifice of a troubled
and contrite heart, which thou never use to contemn: that finally being so
cleansed by thy gracious favor and loving mercy, we may always offer unto
thee an acceptable sacrifice of thanksgiving, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lij. Psalm.
SVch as have (through their own maliciousness) prevailed, A prayer against
all pernicious seducement.
and by their pernicious factes attained unto some authority, are wont to
boast arrogantly thereof, and have always had a great delight in cursed words,
accompting it for the singularest pleasure in the world, to do hurt, to lie,
and to speak very deceyptfully. But yet (like miserable wretches as they be)
they do not in the mean while diligently consider how suddenly and in a time
unlooked for, their prosperous estate and such transitory goods, will be
turned up side down, and they also to have no portion at all of eternal
salvation, in such sort as they shall not have any place in the land of the
living. But we O almighty and most merciful God (who chiefly trust in thy
unspeakable mercy and infinite goodness) beseech thee, yt the heinous sins
being done away, whereinto we have through humain inbecility oftentimes
fallen, may be of a right lowly mind, neither puffed up with arrogancye through
any of thy excellent gifts, but by the fall and overthrow of proud persons,
may rightly perceive, that they took not God for their invincible strength and
sure defense, but riches and worldly prosperity. Grant us we humbly beseech
thee for thy infinite mercy and goodness sake, steadfastly to repose our whole
confidence in thee only, and that we may like the leauie and flourishing Olive
tree, live fruitfullye in thy sacred Church, and magnify thee (as meet it is
so to be) because thou art most richely liberal to such as be thy faithful
and loving servants, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Liij. Psalm.
A prayer for deliverance ^ut of trouble through faith
WOE be unto the brainsicke lewdness of the ungodly which has burst forth into
such madness, that they persuade themselves how there is no God, whereby
they lead a most filthy life, and are defiled thorowout with detestable
conditions, and most abominable factes: but as they be beneficial to none, so
do they seek their own things with doing of wrong to other folk. But, God,
whom they little set by knows these their lewd practices right well: who,
although he fills the heavens with his Majesty, yet espyeth he out men's
wicked and lewd facts, amongst whom (alas for sorrow) he sees not one truly
that sets his mind upon goodness, faythfulnesse, and uprightness: all
have strayed aside from the right way, al oppress the weaker sort, neither do
they uprightly honor God, nor truly call upon his blessed name. But the time
will come, when as these that be so careless shall be quickened up with most
vehement fear. And such as now seem to welter fortunately in their own
wickedness, shall at the last be deprived of all their goods, and feel God
to show himself angry with them. Wherefore our earnest request is (O
heavenly father) that thou would be favorable and merciful to such as fly
unto thee for succor, and losen us from the Chains of our grievous sins
wherewith we are fast bound, so that we may be comforted with a right perfect
joy, and live with thee in perpetual felicity and most happy blessedness,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Liiij. Psalm.
A prayer for help in necessity against the cruelty of the ungodly.
AT what time thy faithful servants (O most good and merciful God) be tossed
with doubtful casualties, and their minds very unstable through most grievous
thoughts, then laying a side all man's help (which thou tellest them is
altogether vain, and in no wise to be trusted unto) do come unto thee as their
most strong defense, calling upon thy invincible Godhead (and that from the
bottom of their heart) to deliver them from the outrageous, unmerciful, and
cruel hearted, who rise up to assault thy dear saints, whom thou have chosen
unto thy self to inherit thy glorious kingdom: and so much the more
maliciously do they deal with them, and practice all kind of outrage,
because they never set thee before their eyes, whom they ought to have in
great honor and high reverence. Seeing therefore (by reason of the heinous
sins by us committed) we perceive that deserved torments and grievous
punishments do hang over our heads, we require thee to show thy lawful
favor unto them which make humble intercession, who are heartily sorry in that
they have so grievously offended thee, and (for thy infinite mercies sake)
stand in their defense when their raging and most cruel enemies do assault
them, for although our merits require it not, yet nevertheless does thy
assured faithfulness, steadfast truth, and constant promises assure us the
same. But having achieved our desires, we shall with songs of praises,
continually call upon thee, and will show forth our thankful mind in the
joyful Congregation of faithful and godly men, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
WE do continually call upon thy glorious name (O most mighty God) to the
intent we may find thy present help in these extreme miseries of thy grievous
afflicted Church: it is now needful for thee (through thy force and
invincible power) to rescue us out of the hands of the ungodly, and take us
unto thy self: and although our corrupt manners and wicked life which we have
hitherto led, do nothing at all deserve the same, yet notwithstanding we know
thy favorable mercy to be such that thou will not despise those that fly
unto thee for succor, be they never so miserable and unworthy: for that
mercies sake therefore, and not for our good works, which (as we have none, so
can we not boast of any) give ear (O good God) unto our devout prayers, and
gently accept the words that we with one consent have poured out before thy
divine Majesty: thou see after what sort the wicked and strangers which
fear thee not, do most cruelly rise up against us, who, seeing that they have
not thee nor thy sacred words before their eyes, go about by all the means
they can possibly devise, to overthrow thy blessed and sanctified Church. Be
thou (we humblye beseech thee) our ready helper, make thou thy servants to
be of a notable stout courage, and requite the ungodly with the notorious evils
which they have deserved, to the intent we may abundantly glorify thy most
excellent name, and every where show forth thy unspeakable goodness, because
we be delivered from all grievous oppressions, and see those things light upon
thy enemies, which all the faithful would right gladly wish to have fallen
upon them, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lv. Psalm.
WE are enforced (O most good and merciful God) by reason of the extreme and
urgent distress of the Church, A prayer for salvation purchased us by Christ.
to cry out daily unto thee: for we cannot be quiet in our minds, when as we
both see and know for a certainty, that those who wish much evil unto the
Gospel, do so carefully endeavor themselves to bring such unto confusion as
unfeignedly trust in thee, we greatly tremble, we are thoroughly troubled, and
quake for fear, wishing that we had wings like Doves: whereby we (eschuing
these mischiefs) may at length rest quietly in thee. But very convenient is it
that we should be afflicted for our heinous sins wherewith we have of long
time, and that exceeding grievously offended thee: those truly are the
occasion why these great mischiefs do light upon us. But we earnestly require
thee (O most excellent father) not to be more heynously moved against our
wickedness and very lewd behavior, then thou will give us grace well to
bear: deliver us (for thy infinite mercies sake) from subtle words, and
deceiptfull devices, and have a great foresight that thy holy church be not
sore plagued of them, who seem sometime greatly to favor her, and were
partakers in the same with us, of the most pleasant and sweet food of thy
blessed Sacraments: we now heartily call and earnestly cry unto thee with
importunate prayers, that as thou have oftentimes heretofore miraculously
helped thy faithful servants, so thou would at this present time deliver
us from immine^t destruction. Let not the league be broken which those have
that be at one with thee. We now cast our heavy burdens and most grievous
troublesome cares wholly upon thy shoulders: vouchsafe to bear both them and us
also through thy mighty power: otherwise we slide and faint under the burden,
wherefore sustain and increase this our feeble and slender hope with thy most
present and ready help, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
THere is right great cause why we should always (O most mighty God)
lamentably require thy ayding hand: for we are continually afflicted by
sundry mishaps of the world, the flesh, the Devil, and enemies of
righteousness, which moves us more often and after a vehementer sort to wish
that thou would give us wings and feathers of Doves, wherewith we might fly
hence most spedily unto thee: for here have we no man to deliver us out of so
great evils, but thee only: yea so deceiptfull is the hope which we repose in
men, that such as a man would judge to be most bound unto him in love, those
are found his extreemest enemies: for venomous tongues do every where scourge
the godly: violence, quareling, wrongfulnesse, oppression, frauds and deceipts
do in all places assault them. Wherefore we earnestly cry unto thee even from
the heart root, that our minds being pourged, thou would blot out the
faults wherewith we are miserably stained, and betake us to thy self who
repose our whole confidence in thee only: for we have cast our heavy burdens
and great griefs upon thy back. And in so much as we are almost sunken down
under them, we beseech thee to hold us up with thy unspeakable goodness and
mighty power, that the confidence we have affixed in thee, do not slide nor
be weakened, but may become strong and steadfast daily more and more, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lvj. Psalm.
A prayer for a steadfast confession of the Gospel.
WIcked men (O most good and merciful God) go about to swallow us up: they do
assault and afflict us so much as in them lies. But seeing that thy mighty
power far excels the princes and kings of the earth, and our whole
affiaunce depends on thee only, extend now thy favorable mercy unto us:
for we heartily confess that we have most grievously provoked thy heavy
displeasure for our manifold sins, considering that we have so wretchedly
despised the doctrine of thy sacred law and Gospel, which thou have sent unto
us, that we have always hitherto been a slander unto the same. But now are
we very heartily sorry for it, who trusting in the death and bloudshedding of
thy son Jesus Christ our Savior, do with great feruencie and most earnest
prayers, lamentably call upon thee for pardon of all our sinful crimes. For
when thou shall have received us into thy gracious favor, we need nothing at
all to fear what flesh can do against us. Thou shall be present at thy own
case, and shall see how the ungodly do all the day long rail upon thy
glorious Gospel, and true worshipping of thee, and how they continually
imagine mischief against thy dear and chosen people. For So Much as therefore
they deal lewdely against those whom thou have redeemed, how shall they
escape thy wrathful indignation. Thou art wont to put down thy adversaries
at what time thou art angry with them. It is not thy property to be
forgetful of the sorrowful mournings and lamentable cries of thy poor
afflicted servant: for the whole number of our prayers are already written in
the book of thy providence. Harken unto them (O God our heavenly father) and
when as we be moved and stirred up through thy holy spirit to call upon thy
blessed name, turn thou our enemies back, and put them to flight. Be thou
present with thy army, defend it, strengthen it, and confirm the same with
courageous boldness: if thou be on our side, we will not fear what man
do against us: who being delivered by thee, shall magnify thy blessed words
and faithful promises for ever. Vouchsafe (O good God) that we having
achieved peace and tranquillity, may be conversant in thy sight for ever, and
directed always with the bright light of thy favorable and loving
countenance, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
SO long as we live here (O most mighty God) all things are so unquiet and at
so small stay unto us through the desert of our grievous offenses, that we be
on every side, assailed with the deadly assaults of the force of our
adversaries: but unless thou put to thy helping hand, we shall seem to
be swalowed up out of hand. Wherefore, (to the intent we may be defended so
often as our frail minds be possessed with a vehement fear) we pour out our
fervent prayers before thy mercy seat, which glistereth and shines most
far abroad, that regarding and highlye esteeming thy sacred words and
loving promises in such sort, as (being strengthened by them) we may with a
stout courage overcome whatsoever sorrowful, horrible, unpleasant, and rough
thing sets it self against us. As our tears (O excellent father) are
gathered and written by thee, even so when thou art called upon, deliver thy
faithful servants from the Gyues and Fetters of their careful minds: and
thou of thy infinite goodness, purging our gyltinesse, bestow upon us so much
strength and steadfast hope, as we need nothing at all to fear the violence
and power of malicious disposed persons: for if thou shall be our redemer
(especially from eternal death) we will always in our daily prayers show
forth the worthy praises of thy most glorious name, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
WE do daily endeavor our selves (O most mighty God) lamentably to call upon
thy mercy, when as they go about to subvert thy sacred Church, who (being not
a few in number, and waxen strong above measure) do not cease by sundry
means to assault the same. Neither is there any thing that makes us more
afraid, then these our own proper sins wherewith we have most grievously
offended thee, and made our selves utterly unworthy of thy gracious favor:
yet notwithstanding (of the great and unspeakable loving kindness that is in
thee) we cease not to hope, but set thy loving promises before our eyes, the
sayings and words whereof, we commend and approve, and also (so much as in us
lies) take hold of them by faith. Grant therefore (O excellent father) that
we be not more fearful then is decent, which the flesh is able to work
against us. We know assuredly yt the wicked do now every where maliciously
rail upon us, bending all their devices against thy most sacred doctrine,
lying in wait, and seeking occasion by all means possible quite to subvert
and utterly overthrow thy sacred Church. Despise not thou (O good God) the
prayers and sighs of thy faithful servants, so strengthen and confirm our
weak consciences, that we pass nothing at all what men do against us.
Deliver our souls from sliding and destruction, so that we may both now and
also after this life be partakers of thy most commodious and splendent blessed
light, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lvij. Psalm.
Seeing that there is no refuge for us (O most gracious and most mighty God)
but to fly unto thee only, A prayer for the aduau^cement of the Gospel
contrary to her enemies expectation.
we commit our whole salvation into thy tuition and government, to the intent
thou should miraculously preserve the same, so that thou may be our
strong defense until this their outrageous fury (who violently oppress thy
sacred Church) be much abated and greatly brought low. Therefore we
incessauntly call upon thy everlasting name, through whose mighty power and
high aucthority all things may for the Godly be surely brought to pass.
Grant (we humbly beseech thee) that our heinous sins be not the cause thou
withdrawest thy merciful goodness from us, which, as we confess them to be
most grievous and infinite, so are we nothing doubtful but that they shall be
forgiven us, for our only mediator Jesus Christ's sake, through whose loving
favor thy faithful servant shall not only be preserved in the glorious
kingdom of heaven: but for thy excellent promise and goodness sake, they
shall also at length be brought to confusion, whosoever they are which go
about to oppress thy constant and steadfast beleuers. Thou thy self right
well see (O excellent father) how his blessed Church is compelled to have
her dwelling continually amongst Lions, in the midst of whote burning
flames, environed with most forceable weapons, and tongues chiefly that be
very noisome and do exceeding great hurt. To the intent therefore thou may
show forth and mightily declare thy invincible power touching her preservation,
grant that the snares and great layings awayte which be prepared for thy holy
ones, may in conclusion be only hurtful to the Authors and chief deuisers
thereof: but vouchsafe to give unto us a right steadfast heart and exceeding
constant mind touching the confession and publishing of thy blessed name. For
we heartily acknowledge and earnestly confess thy unspeakable goodness to be
so great, as it deserves high praise, not only in voice, but with Lute and
Harp, and by all ways and means of commendation that possible may be, which
pearceth the clouds even unto the glorious heaven. And for because it may
daily increase the better, and be more understood, lift up thy self in this
our age, by showing forth thy right excellent power in being our shield of
defense and buckler, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
THere is nothing that does more relieve and comfort our feeble minds being in
great distress and extreme calamities (O most good and merciful God) then the
Ancre of faith, which depends most steadfastly upon thy excellent goodness.
Wherefore, seeing that not without just cause we burn and fry in our lewd
vices, we resort unto thy divine Majesty, and (being marvelous sore burdened
with the grievous fardell of our most heinous sins) do daily call upon thee
for thy assistant and ready help. Send us aid from heaven we humbly beseech
thee, otherwise we shall not be in safety from the Lions, Spears, Darts, and
deceiptfull tongues, wherewith Satan does merueylouslye aflict thy holy
Church. Advance thy self, and make thy infinite power most manifest in taking
us out of our enemies hands. For so thy unspeakable clemency and notable
faythfulnesse (which far surmount the Clouds and glorious heavens) shall
appear bright in their own excellent greatness, and we in giving due thanks
for our deliverance, will ioyfullye sing double praises to thy glorious name
for evermore, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
Seeing that thy blessed Church (O most mighty God) is so vexed with the
cruel enemies of thy glorious name and blessed doctrine, we repose our whole
confidence in thee only, and fly for succor under the shadow of thy wings:
we acknowledge and confess that it is our parts to direct our supplications
parpetually unto thee, when thou only and none else art able to redress our
good cause. We do not deny but that our deserts are marvelous wicked,
insomuch as we should very justly be altogether destroyed with these present
calamyties: who have nothing faithfully performed that which in name and
outward show has been of us professed. But it is thy nature, O good God,
(forsomuche as thou art mercy and very goodness it self) not to cast off
those which fly unto thee for succor. Send down thy ayding hand from
heaven (we humble beseech thee) whereby thou may deliver thy faithful people
from the reproaches of ungodly and wicked persons. The Antichristians rore
against thy blessed Church like Lions, and their hot burning fury against thy
holy word increases daily more and more. Show forth thy self therefore (O
excellent father) and cause thy glory wherewith thou art renowned above all
other, to be manifestly known. Rende the nets, fill up the ditches, and
make the deceiptes of none effect, which they practice against the sacred
Gospel, whereby our mind may daily more and more be strengthened heartily to
confess, courageously to extol, and above all things to exalt thy wonderful
praises vncessauntlye, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lviij. Psalm.
^^ayer a^st our ^rall de^ngs from (...) and crafty ^ges a^e of the ^dly.
THe princes of this wretched world (O most mighty God) do grievously assault
thy blessed Church, because sound and upright judgment is not given upon
divine and heavenly things, by such as continually imagine mischief in their
minds, and only practice violence against thy elect and chosen servant.
But how should they do otherwise, that even from their mothers womb are
borne wicked into this world, and have a most noisome venime (like unto poison
of Ser^ents) naturally graffed in them, which c^uld never by any exhortations
or friendly ^arnings at gods hand be taken out of the^: for they put those
things after none other sort from them, then do the deaf Adders that shun
the charms of the Charmers. Our heinous sins therefore have very well
deserved that the outrageous enemies of thy faith and doctrine should afflict
us, which now we both heartily confess, and also (for thy infinite mercies
sake) earnestly require thee to pardon and forgive. Furthermore we fervently
desire this at thy merciful hands, that thou would break in pieces and
gnashe the Lions teeth, to the intent they may shed away as water, and be like
broken shaftes, neither let those men hurt thy faithful servants any more,
but cause them to wither away as a Snaile in her shell, and be weak as the
untimely fruit of a woman. And finally, let their outrage fade away even so
easily as a flame made of thorns is quenched. But cheer thou up (O good God)
thy faithful servant, who (seeing the great reuengementes which thou thy
self take upon the sworn adversaries of thy blessed religion) may right
well perceive that thou have a reward laid up in store for thy faithful
believers, and let their well doing be established, when as they shall
assuredly know and perfectly understand that thou executest straight judgment
upon the earth, through Jesus christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
ANtichrist with all his adherentes do imagine none other thing in their mind
against thy sacred Church (O most good and merciful God) then mischief and
most wicked devices: but whereas they make a goodly show to the intent they
would be accounted godly and religious, yet in very deed they imagine nothing
but lies, going astray from thee, even from their birth, having always
hitherto marvelous great delight in erroneous things. Now at length are they
desirous to spewe out and cast forth their venom which they (like the Adder)
have kept in a readiness, neither could they so be charmed with the sayings of
the holy Scriptures, as to cease from their own lewd desires. Surely (O
heavenly father) we are not they that deserve not to be destroyed by them for
our evil deeds and lewd behavior, for so much as (through thy excellent
mercy) we have well known the way of truth and life, albeit we have
continually started aside therefro, and given our selves to vain ymaginations
and wicked desires. But deal thou with us according to the glory and honor of
thy name, and vouchsafe to yield unto us not that which we have deserved, but
that which by thy promises behight us. Overthrow, grind to powder, and
utterly make void the subtle devices, outrageous force, and deuilishe power
of the enemies of thy glorious name and sincere doctrine, so that the godly may
perfectly rejoice when as they see thee take their cause in hand, and shall
perceive that their is some fruit of righteousness, while thou dealest by
upright judgment, through Jesus Christ our lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
THe behauiours of the wicked (O most mighty God) are so corrupt and naughty,
that very little wholsomnesse or none at all can seem to be in their decrees:
they practice deceyts, they offer wrong, and now from their childhood have both
fallen from thee, and also live in subjection to their own ca^kred
maliciousnes: in fiercenes, in hardness of heart, in furious mood, in outrage
of mind and in unbridled cruelty, they may be likned unto stinging Serpents,
roaring Lions, and such kind of ravenous beasts: therefore (we earnestly
require thee) not to suffer us for to fall as our heinous sins have justly
deserved, into such an extreme madness, that (forsaking thee who art the Well
and Fountain of all good things) we may put our trust and confidence in them,
neither permitting us to follow their lewd decrees and fond fantasies, which
were so perilous a thing as the other. Cause us (we humbly require thee) to
dissent wholly from them, and in the mean time let their power in doing any
hurt be utterly abated, so that as men altogether unarmed, although their
desire to do mischief be not aswaged, yet both ability and knowledge to
fulfill their wicked desire and extreme egernesse be quite taken from them.
Confound thou in the turning of a hand their lewd devices, and cause the
Congregation of the faithful greatly to triumph, when as they may right well
perceive that thou both renderest the fruit of righteousness to the righteous,
and also take punishment of the ungodly, according to their wretched and
lewd deserts, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lix. Psalm.
Our earnest request is (O most mighty God) that thou only would be our
speedy deliverer, A prayer against the Pharisees and false pr^phets.
when as the extreme enemies of thy sacred doctrine and pure religion do
grievously oppress us: now it apperteyneth unto thee for to defend us from
naughty persons, who gape much for our destruction, and have augmented their
force and power with great and huge conspiracies, to wipe out thy holy ones
from off the earth. They do persecute us nothing at all for our heinous faults
and mischievous deeds, whereof we acknowledge and confess that we have
committed many, but they run upon us for hatred they only bear to sincere
godliness and perfect religion, to the intent they would both craftily and
with extreme violence furnishe themselves to our destruction. But thou (O good
God) who have dominion over all creatures, first pardon whatsoever we have
wickedlye committed against thee: then stir up thy self, and at length
discuss the cause of the godly. Our most cruel enemies go to and fro, they
grenne like Dogs and run about in all Countries, for, when they speak any
thing of our matters, swords and weapons only are in their lips, but thou
(O good God) shall laugh these men to scorn and have them in great dirision:
we attend and look for help altogether at thy merciful hands, who art our
mighty Tower and most strong defense. Let thy sacred Church be such a
partaker of thy wonderful and unspeakable goodness, as she may see her
desire upon the enemies of all righteousness. Slay not these men after an
accustomable manner, but destroy them utterly in such a sort as thy blessed
people may not lightly forgette the same: cause thou them to become runagates
and beggars for ever, by reason of their abominable vices, blasphemous lies,
and cursed periuries, wherewith they are be wrapped and abound greatly: consume
thou such manner of men at length, bring them to naught I say, as they may
become a laughing stock and by word unto every man, to the intent all people
may assuredly know and right well perceive that thou show thy self a very
God unto thy blessed Church, wherein thou ought to be highly magnified as a
firm defense, and most strong aid for all such as will unfeignedly invoke
and call upon thy glorious name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
WE being hedged in (O most mighty God) through human infirmity, and bound
in conscience with the chains of most heavy sins, do continually with right
great lamentation, call upon thy unspeakable mercy, wherewith thou may
willingly and gently bow down thy favorable ear to our humble peticions:
the force of our outrageous enemies does wonderfully assault, marvelously
invade, and greatly oppress us, but seeing yt the strength of our nature
utterly falls in this behalf, and shows it self altogether vnuaylable,
arise thou (O God) and overthrow by thy mighty puyssaunce, whatsoever shall
be repugnant to our salvation, and finally deride and mock such a one as has
a greater pleasure to resist thy blessed will, then to submit himself
thereunto as meet it is he should so do. We have reposed the whole strength
of our welfare in thee only, having no mistrust but that thou art our chief
goodness and most merciful God: although therefore the fierce enemies of thy
glorious name compass us about, and after a sort besiege us with the dark and
obscure blindness which they shead, we (trusting in thy excellent goodness)
hope that the malicious wickedness they have imagined, shall not fall on us,
but light upon their own necks: wherefore let thy inestimable goodness
(according to our assured hope) be in steed of a strong fortress, puyssaunt
refuge, and mighty Bulwark unto us, who are wonderful desirous to celebrate
and set forth thy exceeding great honor and unspeakable mercy, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lx. Psalm.
THou have used oftentimes (O most good and merciful God) to chastise thy
dear children with a fatherly correction, A prayer for Gods help in
necessity.
so that they being at length brought low through unfortunate mishappes, and
broken with miseryes, may right well perceive and understand that they have
sinned greatly, who aspiring with all their endeavor to come unto thee, may
much covet to be delivered from these abominable vices wherewith they were
before excedingly overwhelmed: there do thou yield thy self again, being
altogether appeased and at atonement with them. Wherefore we humbly require
thee (O heavenly father) that thou would in like manner keep still with us
this thy ancient covenant, and vouchsafe to take thy poor humble suitors
which fly unto thee for succor, from their grievous sorrows and lamentable
miseries that our heinous sins do daily purchase unto us: which we mistrust
not but will come to pass, for so much as we be nothing doubtful but such
things as thou have promised shall not fade out of our remembrance. For this
cause chiefly is our mind much revived, hereby we be well cheered, and finally
by this we are certainly persuaded that we (which seemed in times past, and
that lately to be rejected of thee) are now in very deed and that wholly
received into thy loving favor. Proceed and go forward therefore to succor
us, so that we being furthered by thy mighty defense, may boldly and manfully
go through with the matter, to the glory of thy blessed name, by Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
THou seem very often (O most good and merciful God) to put back thy
faithful servants from thee, and being in a manner sore angry with these
men, do scatter them abroad into diverse parts of the world: but thou
comforting thy blessed people again with thy exceeding great clemency, bowest
down thy favor and loving kindness afreshe toward them: by means whereof
our hope is renewed in us, that (seeing it has seemed good unto thee to move the
land in this our age, and to dismay the inhabiters thereof with a new and
extraordinary fear) thou will also heal her grievous wounds. And although it
be thy good will now and then to vex thy faithful people with hard and most
bitter mishappes, in like wise as if thou should give them a poisoned cup to
drink of: yet notwithstanding, thou raysest up the banner of salvation
unlooked for, unto such as daily fear and perfectly honor thee, to the intent
that thy loving promises being assuredly performed, they may lead their life
very prosperously under the same: now therefore turn thou always thy eyes
from the sins we have most grievously committed: for we deny not but that we
have done very wickedly and peruersely, but for so much as (of thy infinite
mercy fake) thou will pardon and quite forgive such as unfeignedly call upon
thee, finally aid thou thy beloved Church according to thy accustomed use, and
mightily preserve her with thy puyssant right hand. But go thou O good God
(which seem to have forsaken thy blessed people for a time) now forth with
us, and raise up thy self to be our ready helper, for we crave not thy
favorable aid without just cause, who have learned even by experience it
self, that man's power and strength is but a vain thing to stay by. Be thou
therefore a present succor unto those which repose their whole trust and
confidence in thee: grant that they may deal manfully and do mighty acts,
so that they may by thy means get the victory over their most cruel and
outrageous enemies, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lxj. Psalm.
A prayer for constant ^^ith in christ jesus.
Our earnest and fervent desire is, O most good and merciful God, that as thou
art in deed a singular good father and wonderful merciful unto us, so thou
would hear the lamentable cries which we pour out before thee, by reason of
the exceeding heaviness we are oppressed withal, and for the grievous
temptations we endure, suffer not thy beloved servant, miserably to perish,
in whom the devil goes about to quench and bury thy benign grace and
especial good gifts. Permit us therefore to have a fort and strong Tower with
thee, whereunto because we are not able to clime up of our own power, breath
thou thy loving favor down upon us in such wise, as we may be lifted up unto
the Tabernacle of thy glorious sight, and under the covering of thy glistering
wings, so that by this means we shall be delivered from the thresholde and
jaws of death. We truly have transgressed thy holy law, and through our
most heinous sins have defiled the sacred body of thy blessed Church. How
be it whilst we acknowledge this, and lamentably require thy favorable
mercy, surely we feel very great ease and comfort, neither are we now
afraid of any bitter mishaps, for so much as our whole confidence depends upon
thy inestimable goodness, but rather our heart is inflamed with an ardent love
both in celebrating thy glorious name, and also in rendering most abundant
thanks for those things, which by our profession we owe and think to be due
unto thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lxij. Psalm.
^ prayer for true faith and contempt ^f mutable ^hinges.
Seeing that we are persuaded (O most good and merciful God) that thou art our
strong defense, invincible tower, sure aid, and mighty safegarde, we keep a
quiet and very peaceable mind even in the midst of our extreme miseries
and grievous calamities. For we doubt not but that the devil and his wicked
members shall have no success at all in those things they enterprise to do
against our welfare: and whosoever they be which thrust forward themselves
contrary to thy blessed will, are in no wise able to stand and abide, but are
at the end disappoynted of that they look for. Wherefore we humblye require
thee, that our offenses being done away, which (by reason of our infirmity) we
deny not, but are an infinite number, thou would still persevere to be our
Buckler and sure defense as thou have hitherto been accustomed. For So Much as
through thy especial help, we shake of all worldly men's fear, as whom we
know to be altogether vain, yea and so foolish, that if they were weyed in a
balance, they should be found altogether lighter then vanity it self. And as
we dread them nothing at al, so likewise our earnest request is, that we may
have no affiaunce in evil gotten goods and flourishing riches, but always
well and diligently to set before our eyes, that thou art just, merciful, and
of a wonderful invincible power, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lxiij. Psalm.
We do in this wretched life (O most good and mighty God) with great
feruencie, sighe, desire, A prayer i^ distress for the comfor^ of the gospe^
and earnestly thirst for thee only, when as all things are become
troublesome, horrible, and cruel unto us. We are greatly desirous clearly to
behold thy singular virtue and excellent honor, for nothing can happen more
blessed, nothing more joyful, and nothing more pleasant to mortal creatures,
then the perfect knowledge thereof. We may through thy ready help (O heavenly
father) exalt thy glorious name continually, when as we render due thanks for
the excellent benefits thou have bestowed upon us, always requiring of thee
in our earnest peticions and most ardent prayers, those things which may be
both to thy glory and our own salvation. These verily are the mere delites
of the godly, there is the mind fed with perfect and true gladness, when as
even at midnight in the bed it is not forgetful of thy goodness and
clemency. But our heinous offenses are a very great hinderance to this
singular benifite, whereinto both our infirmity and ignorance drives us,
which, we humbly beseech thee (for thy infinite mercies sake) to wipe away: be
our ready helper as thou have begun, hide us under thy favorable wings, and
cause our minds to be linked always unto thee. But as for such as resist thy
glory obstinately and with stubburnesse, let them run hedlong into the deep
gulf of perdicion, and make us evermore rejoice and be glad in thy comfort and
consolation, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lxiiij. Psalm.
IF we were not altogether drowsy minded and utterly dulled (O heavenly
father) we are daily stirred up to invoke and call upon thee with our fervent
prayer. For why, A prayer against the wicked enemies of the Godly.
Satan and his wicked retinue make great haste both day and night to destroy
us, and the filthiness of the flesh strives continually to drive us hedlong
into the disobedience of thy blessed commandments. Seeing that therefore our
mind is on sides assailed, and the strength we have become feeble and
deminished, through a false tongue, deceiptfull words, most pearcing stinges,
and deadly darts, we fly unto thee only, being the true haven of safegarde,
and require, that since thou perceiuest us to be sore and painefully troubled
sundry ways for the sins and grievous offenses we have committed) thou
would for thy tender mercies sake pardon and forgive what spotte or
giltinesse soever we are infected with, ruling and governing us in such sort,
as we may lay all the burdens wherewith we are grievously oppressed, on thee
only. So shall we have just cause to be exceeding joyous, neither shall it
repent us any thing at all, but contrariwise we will greatly glory for that
we have betaken our selves wholly to thy protection and government, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lxv. Psalm.
^ prayer for ^stenaunce and all kind ^f Gods be^efites.
SO great and manifold are thy benefits (O most good and merciful God) toward
mankind, as al people in every place ought greatly to land, wonderfully to
praise, and highly to extol thy blessed name: for what thing can be more
pleasant to men, then yt thou do easily hear them at what time they call
upon thee for such things as they stand in need of. In what other good thing
ought we more to rejoice of then this, for that thou yeeldest thy self
appeased and favorable to our iniquities. Or why be we not right happy and
blessed whom thou did vouchsafe to annix unto thy self in thy sacred
congregation, in feeding our hungry stomachs with spiritual good things, and
heavenly dainties? Thou dealest favorably even with all other creatures for thy
elects sake: thou stablishest the Mountains, stillest the raging of the sea,
appeasest ye madness of the people, and do refresh and lighten with great
joy the uttermost parts of the earth, through the brightness of the heavenly
fires. Thou sendest seasonable and timely showers, whereby only comes
fertility, and the fields wonderful garnished with all kind of fruits,
whereby both men and beasts have abundantly whereon to feed. Grant thou
therefore thus much also unto us (who art the auctour of so many good things)
that we may render most condign thanks, and use to our health and comfort
those things which thou so lovingly bestowest upon us, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lxvj. Psalm.
A prayer in necessity to the glory of God, for set^ing us at liberty.
SVch is thy mighty power and invincible force (O most good and merciful God)
that thou at length use to subdue under thy obeysaunce the enemies of thy
name and glory, even by thy puyssaunt strength, how much so ever they strive
against thee in their furious madness: which thing the godly duly waying with
themselves, have a very great and fervent desire to honor thy divine Majesty,
to exalt thee with praises, and faithfully to worship thy excellency. For as
thou in times past causedst the sea to open her self unto the children of
Israel, and did turn aside the river of Iordane against his stream, and
have expulsed ye Jews enemies from their ancient inheritance, who seemed
otherwise not to be subduable: so we now earnestly require thee that thou
would do the like for thy dearly beloved: let them flourishe in heavenly
gifts, so that they faint not through exercise of temptations, but being well
tried, fined, and thoroughly pourged with unfortunate mishaps, they may shine in
the brightness of virtues, who having comfortable things prepared for them of
thee, being their father and creator after their grievous afflictions and much
troublesomnesse of mind, let them in the end render unto thee, the vows of
praise, and songs of commendation. Move us forward I humbly beseech thee, to
fear and honor him, by having his benifites very diligently in our
remembrance, which (of his infinite goodness) he has bestowed upon us, who
being provoked by our thankfulness, may hereafter give a more loving and
favorable attentive ear to our lowly prayers, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lxvij. Psalm.
THe two things (O most mighty God) which mortal creatures do very greatly
wish for, are these, A prayer for the augmentation of the Gospel.
namely yt they may be acceptable to thy divine Majesty, and replenished with
the light and brightness of thy loving countenance, which two we right well
know do fail us by reason of the sins we have very grievously committed:
therefore our earnest request is that thou would heal our deadly wounds
with the plaster of thy unspeakable mercy, and whatsoever we have offended
thee in, let thy loving favor wholly remit, and cause thy most gladsome light to
drive away the darkness that we have procured unto our selves: which suit, if
we may obtain, yet shall we readily acknowledge (although we be environed with
the darkness of this mortal life) the devises, ordinances, and means,
whereby thou do greatly govern, prouidently maintain, puyssauntly defend,
and mightily preserve all things with incomparable goodness and faythfulnesse,
and prouidest wonderfully for thy blessed people: which things being well seen
and rightly considered, we and all people shall show forth thy worthy
praises, and be also thoroughly replenished with pleasant joy, for so much as thou
rulest all Nations, Provinces, and Kingdoms, with rightful judgment and most
indifferent justice. For if al people did manifestly know the same in such sort
as it is, every man would praise thee in the open face of the world. Grant
unto us therefore (O excellent father) these two things, neither disdeyne to
add unto them a plenteous fruitfulness of the earth: for the more bou^tifully
thou dealest with thy dearly beloved children; ye more shall thou be feared
and amplier honored, through the whole universal world, by Jesus christ our
lord. Ame^.

A prayer out of the.Lxviij. Psalm. A prayer for the unity an^ enlargement of
the Christian Congregation.

WE have both our health and also all other commodities of this life at thy
merciful hands (O most good and mighty God) being the fountain and
original of all good things, who do both adorn and continually bestow so
great benefits upon thy faithful servants, that impossible it is to count the
number of them. But this chiefly ought not to be passed over with silence, that
thou thy self have so happily and with so good success fought our battles
against sin, death, the devil, and all euilles, insomuch as the deadly
enemies of our salvation felt thee to be our present help, when as thou
did puyssauntly overcome, mightilye subdue, and grievously punish them.
Wherefore it is our right bounden duty to render perpetual thanks with
Psalms, loving praises, godly songs, and all kind of ditties and Music,
which thing that it may not be done maliciously, and grudgingly, but with a
mind void and free from fleshly cares and carnal desires, we humbly beseech
thee to pardon whatsoever we have transgressed, either through the darkness of
ignorance or weakness of mind, and proceed also ever hereafter to defend
us from the crafty snares and subtle layings awayte of the force of our
enemies (as thou have heretofore stedfastlye from time to time assisted such as
trust in thee) whereby all men shall assuredly perceive that thou so fauourest
the faithful beleuers, as thou give unto them abundance of strength and
power invincible, through Jesus christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
Seeing that thy power is such, O most good and merciful God, as no enemies
(although they be never so strong and mighty) are able to stand against thee,
our earnest request is that thou would (for thy infinite mercies sake) most
puyssauntly arise to help us. The children of Israel felt thy presence to be
a continual safeguard unto them, at what time they encountered to fight with
their enemies, although kings and armies throughlye furnished were raised up
against them: for so much as therefore thou have lifted up thy invincible power
and puissant strength on high, disdain not (we humbly beseech thee) to turn
thy loving countenance toward us, who do continually wrestle with Satan,
the flesh, and lusts thereof: surely we acknowledge that thou art our sole
and only defense, who fly therefore unto thee, because thou art the fountain
and root of all good things, requiring, that we (being mightily delivered
from the mischievous euilles which inuiron us on every side) may set forth the
worthy praises of thy most glorious name, even as it has right well deserved,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
THy force and puyssaunce (O most good and mighty god) is of so great a
strength, that when thou mouest and stirrest up thy self, they are immediately
scattered from their place, and put to flight whosoever they be ye bear hatred
to thy blessed name and glorious kingdom: wherefore, neither do we doubt but
that at this time the power of Satan and his adherents (who cease not every
where to overthrow thy faithful people) shall be dispatched and come to
naught, even like unto smoke that vanishes, and mistes which pass away. And
for this cause, there is laid up a great pleasure and exceeding comfort unto
the faithful, whereof, we heartily require thee that we also may be partakers,
and that thou would ease us of the fardell of sin wherewith we are most
grievously burdened, and that taking us unto thy gracious favor again, thou will indue us very largely with thy holy spirit. Seeing that thou art the
father of the fatherless, and a revenger of such as be miserably oppressed,
vouchsafe also to deliver us from the fetters of our iniquities, neither be
thou any thing less our strong defense, then thou were the children of
Israelles mighty protector in the wilderness. We be as thou well perceyuest
(by reason of our heinous sins) greatly disfigured: let therefore the bright
favor and light of thy favorable countenance be present with us, whereby our
minds may be made splendent and reformed unto the sovereign bless and
highest felicity, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
SVch is thy excellent wisdom (O most good and merciful God) that as thou
have an innumerable manner of ways and infinite means to preserve thy
faithful servant, so have thou also as many to bring the wicked to
perdicion. Wherefore in restoring thy blessed people being sore oppressed both of
sin and Satan, and in getting great and famous victories of thy cruel
enemies, out of all doubt, thou deseruest that so many as naturallye apperteyne
to the stock and lineage of Israel, should set out thy worthy praises and
most noble triumphs with a wonderful great gladness. Wherefore we humbly
require thee (by thy notable and exceeding great power) that what gifts of
salvation thou have begun to bestow upon us, thou would from day to day
augme^t and increase with a prosperous success, whereby we may offer unto thee
(who art borne up beyond the heavens with noble triumph) not the sacrifices of
brute beasts, but our selves as an acceptable and blameless freewill
offering, to the intent it may be left for a sufficient witness both unto us
and to all others, that it only apperteyneth unto thy singular force and
incomparable power to bring thy elect children unto the most desired
felicity, and chiefest place of bless they look for, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lxix. Psalm.
A prayer in ^ribulation ^or the glory ^f the resur^ection.
Man's weak and frail nature (O most mighty God) is continually tossed and
turmoyled with infinite calamities. Neither should that seem a matter so
greatly to be lamented, if in this universal case, such as faithfully honor
and worship thee, were not seen to be more grievously afflicted and punished
then the rest: but the world goes so that the stormy waves, the clammie
mire, the deep and whirling gulphes of temptations do little better then
choke up those which have a steadfast belief and assured trust in thee. Which
matters being done to the intent they may patiently and with a quiet mind
suffer whatsoever is commodious for them, does certainlye not much further the
salvation of such as be weak, who see these things come to pass, unless thou
(for thy infinite goodness and unspeakable mercies sake wherewith thou art
plentifully endued) put too quickly thy speedy furtheraunce: for so shall
the thing which seems to have weakened and dismayed their hearts,
wonderfullye cheer and refreshe them: for if thou shall give ear unto our
lowly prayers (as our assured trust is) and deliver us out of so great perils
according to our humble peticions, these grievous afflictions truly shall bring
forth fruit not to be repented of. Grant we heartily beseech thee (O excellent
father) that such as be in a manner consumed and at deaths door for the zeal
they bear to thy glory, may according to their fervent prayers, obtain this
of thee, both the enlarging of thy most famous kingdom, and also their welfare
which assault the same, and be sworn adversaries thereto, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
SVch was thy exceeding great goodness and clemency toward mankind (O most
good and merciful God) that to save them thou did suffer thy son Jesus
Christ our Lord to be touched with most grievous reproaches and heinous
sclaunders, insomuch that even at the hour of his death he being greatly a
thirst, they gave him none other drink, but most sharp and sour vinegar
mingled with gall. If we be any thing forgetful of these things, either we
show that we are utterly destitute of faith, or make our selves guilty of most
hateful vngratitute. We have before our eyes the most grievous vengeance
which in the end thou tookest of those wicked and ungodly persons, who raged
so greatly against thy most dearly beloved son, and yet are not moved by
their example to amend our naughty factes and wicked life: then the which,
look how much he is now more glorious and excellent then he was at that
time, so much the more wrong and reproach is done unto him on our behalf. We
therefore humbly require and earnestly entreat thee that thou would
vouchesafe to inspire into us a more perfect mind and a better desire which
profess his glorious name and most pure religion, by the self same Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lxx. Psalm.
FOr this intent and purpose (O most good and merciful God) have we recourse in
our fervent prayers to thy gracious tuicion and favorable mercy, A prayer i^
necessity.
for that we see nothing in this life, either void of perils, or in safety
from the outrageous enemies of our salvation, through whose spiteful malice,
deuilishe falshoode, and tyrannous cruelty, we find all things very froward,
and full of most grievous enmity: but because we feel our selves guilty of no
small or light crimes, and are nothing ignorant how thou of thy justice take
punishment of our grievous sins, we humbly beseech thee (according to thy
woonted and accustomed mercy) to forgive us whatsoever we have filthily
committed, and what vengeance or punishment is worthilye and of desert due
unto us, may either be utterly released, or else mercifully mittigated. So
shall so many as be sworn adversaries to thy true religion which we profess,
be abashed and put to utter shame when thou shall have helped and assisted us:
but contrariwise they which be greatly desirous to set forth thy glorious name,
shall be right glad and triumphantly rejoice with us. Therefore make no long
tarying to be our ready helper, least the ungodly (which thing they are very
ready to do) vpbrayde us therewith, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lxxj. Psalm.
A prayer that ^ur faith fay^th us not in ^ge and great ^istresse.
For So Much as we do euidentlye know (O almighty God) that there is always
speedy succor in a readiness to help and further such as fly unto thy
protection, therefore have we reposed our whole trust and confidence in thee
only, that of whom we ought to crave assistaunce, unto him must our faith and
hope be most advisedly directed. Thou aydest, cheerishest, and garnishest those
which honor thee from their youth, insomuch as that if thou seem at any
time to leave them, it is wont to be taken for a wonder. We hope therefore,
that (seeing thou have been always with us from our conception and birth)
thou will not forsake us, neither in our crooked old age nor at the last end
of our life: in consideration whereof, that what praises and thanks we are
bound to give unto thee, the same do we daily yield, and (as our assured
trust is) shall yield for ever, that as thy benefits toward us are
infinite, and the more thy goodness also and mighty deeds are set forth, so
much the more are they known to surmount the prowes of all praise and
commendation. Notwithstanding, unto the rest of thy benefits, add this also
(we heartily beseech thee) that as thou layest now and then bitter and
unfortunate things upon thy faithful servants, so thou thy self would
vouchsafe readily to comfort and quicklye ease them of the same, through Jesus
Christ our lord. Ame^.

A prayer out of the.Lxxij. Psalm.
A prayer that the kingdom of heaven may come upon us through the preaching of
the gospel.
For So Much as we shall have Jesus Christ our Lord as a most just judge, it is
meet that we should always both fear and reverence him. For seeing that his
father has as now also endued him with a singular power, this was his
chiefest care, that the righteous might be strengthened to the intent they
should both set up, and also enlarge the true worshipping of him so far as
might be. Our humble request is therefore (O heavenly father) that (before we
be brought unto his tribunal judgment seat) we may be redeemed from the
heinous sins which we are guilty of, who being thus regenerated by his
blessed spirit, may bring forth plenty of good works, so that we be not
dampened for our wicked misdeedes, which thing if we by strong and constant
faith may perceive our selves to have obtained, we shall verily (by reason
thereof) judge our selves blessed and marvelous happy for the same, who mind
to extol and celebrate thy excellent name and glory with most high praises,
whereby the whole earth (if it were possible) may have true and perfect
knowledge of thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lxxiij. Psalm.
ALthough thy goodness (O almighty and most gracious God) A prayer the we may
n^ repine at the prosperity the wicked*
be exceeding notable toward those men that reverence thee with true and
perfect devotion. Yet notwithstanding (such is the weakness of man) that the
prosperity of the wicked does very often bleare and dasell the eyes of thy
elect and chosen servant, whilst they see all things happen unto them
luckely and as they would wish, who contemn as well all human laws as
divine, and are fallen into so extreme wickedness, insomuch as they both
think and preach most shamelessely, that thou have now no regard of our
affairs and welfare. Neither suffer (we humbly beseech thee) the feet of our
faith either to stacker or to be any thing doubtful, stretch forth thy mighty
hand to our great misfortune, and bridle our mouths and imaginations in such
sort, that we begin not to ymagine a vain and unprofitable manner of
worshipping thee. Strengthen us so, as we may patiently and with a Christian
kind of sufferaunce abide the issue and uttermost success of things. At what
time thy last exceeding great judgment shall mightily show forth her self,
then will it appear with how notable an uprightness thou orderest all
things. Grant us also in the mean season, to desire nothing more fervently,
then that our minds may be fastened and linked unto thee with an indissoluble
knot, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lxxiiij. Psalm.
A prayer for ^e churches ^reseruation ^gaynst the ^duersaries the gospel.
IF it shall happen (O most mighty God) which we right well know does
oftentimes come to pass, that (by reason of the manifold sins which are by
us oftentimes committed) we provoke thy wrathful indignation against us, and
purchase the grievous scourges wherewith we be much chastised. Be mindful (we
humbly beseech thee) of thy exceeding great goodness and loving promises,
which thou know we have already laid hold of by faith, neither deliver
thou our souls into the power of the outrageous adversaries of thy glory and
our salvation. For So Much as they earnestlye bend themselves about none other
thing, but either to throw down thy excellent works, or to make void and of
none effect the salvation of mankind, which with so great mercifulness thou
have purchased, let their enterprises be made frustrate, whose driftes tend to
none other end but that thy glorious name may be blaspheemed and very evil
spoken of. Be mindful (we humbly beseech thee) of the good things which thou
have hitherto bestowed upon us, neither cease to bring unto perfection ye work
of redemption yt thou have already mightily begun in us. Arise (O good god)
and aid such with thy speedy helping hand, as unfeignedly call upon thee, that
the fond devises of the ungodly have no success at all either against thy
renowned glory or our salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lxxv. Psalm.
A prayer that we may be obedient to ^he word of God.
Our earnest and fervent desire is (O most mighty God) to celebrate thy
glorious name and exceeding wondrous acts: for we require thee (even from the
bottom of the heart) to bring to pass, that thy blessed people may be
defended from these terrible dangers, in such wise as they come not to utter
ruin. Remove our heinous sins out of thy remembrance (we humbly beseech
thee) neither impute this thing chiefly unto us, that where as thou have called
us unto thee, and set before our eyes an order of true godliness, and made the
same free for every one of us to lead our life according to thy blessed word
and christian profession, we have not only behaved our selves coldely
therein, but have most unthankfully cast away the discipline and trade of
living which the faith thou inlargest us with and bestowest upon us, is worthy
of. Regard not therefore the number of our heinous sins, neither how great our
deserts be, nor yet what thy justice might rightfully require at our hands:
but (for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake thy most dearly beloved son) be
merciful unto us, and set forward thy self to defend us against our most
vehement and outrageous enemies, and publishe that abroad to their shame,
which is rightful and exceeding just, when it shall seem good in thy sight.
Thou vpholdest the earth and whole world, and every creature depend only upon
thee: wherefore if thou do stand on our side, nothing can so hinder us, but
that we may be safely preserved. The very foolish and ungodly Antichristians
have not only lift up their horns, but also are wonderful outrageous
against us, who utter horrible and unspeakable blasphemies against thee, and
with a stiff neck cast away from them every yoke or burden that thy sacred
word brings. Our help (O good God) which is of any force, comes neither
from the East, nor from the West, nor yet from any other part or coast of the
world: but thou only ought to be our judge, who can at thy will and
pleasure both raise us up and cast us down again. But for so much as the cup is
in thy hand, let them drink and suck out the dregs thereof, wherewith they
may be so brought a sleep, as thy blessed Church may be no more hereafter
troubled of them. We will then talk of thee, and sing Psalms unto thy
glorious name, when as the horns of the ungodly shall be broken in pieces,
and the righteous take quiet and peaceable rest in thee, through Jesus Christ
our lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
FOr this intent and purpose (O most mighty God) are we determined to honor
and extol thee, because thou art always ready to hear those that call upon
thy glorious name with a right sincere faith, and do manifest thy presence
by ye bestowing of notable and excellent gifts. We render most hearty thanks
unto thee for this cause chiefly, in that thou have vouchedsafe to choose unto
thy self a Church out of this great number of us, wherein (seeing it is
convenient that thou should reign and show thy almighty power) we
earnestly require thee, utterly to subvert all manner of ungodliness, and
contrariwise maintein innocence and right pure religion. What earthly and
fleshly thing of the world remains in us, let it forthwith be drowned, and
cause thou all things (which by thy heavenly spirit thou have bestowed upon
us in our regeneration) to be thoroughly grounded in us: make thy righteous and
elect servants like unto most strong pillars, but let such as inhabit the
earth, which strive against thy holy name, and blessed doctrine, stagger and
fall. Have a regard to this, we humbly beseech thee (O excellent father) that
the fools may forsake at one time or other their folly, and let the wicked at
length cease to abuse their power, which they seem to bend against godliness
and thy sacred Gospel: do away their furious words, arrogant taunts, and
rebellious blasphemies. Neither have thou (O good God) any respect in this case
what our sins have deserved (which are very heavy and right grievous to be
borne) neither are we ignorant of them, nor yet do we mistrust, but thou (for
thy infinite mercies sake) wilt utterly blotte those out, least we be enforced
through the same, to drink dry the cup of thy most bitter wrath. Let so many
as give themselves to naughtiness, drink of the same, yea make them to suck
out all the dregs thereof, so that thy blessed church may have thy just
judgments in perpetual remembrance, and extol them with continual praises,
when as she shall see the horns of the ungodly broken, and such mightily
preserved and highly set up as have altogether addicted themselves to
righteousness and a perfect godly life, through Jesus Christ our lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lxxvj. Psalm.
A prayer that our courage fails us not in affliction.
IT has pleased thy unspeakable goodness without any of our deserts (O most
mighty God) that thy blessed word should be well known amongst us, and thy
sons holy Gospel preached in the midst of us, which thing, as we do know to
be a singular and right excellent benefit, so do we diligently consider, that
(through our own default) the same does greatly burden us. For we have
doubtless used shameful unthankfulness toward thy divine Majesty, in
that we have framed our life nothing at all according to the knowledge of thy
blessed word and sacred doctrine. Notwithstanding for so much as we be sorrowful
for our great wickedness, and are willing to amend our heinous faults, we
humbly require thee to help them that are fallen, stretch out thy ayding hand
to such as call upon thy most holy name, and pardon us whom it heartily
repents to have any thing at all offended thee. And for so much as (according
to thy loving promises) we be thy Tabernacle and dwelling place, against ye
which the ungodly have set themselves in battle, to the intent they may
utterly subvert it and pull up the same by the roots: break thou their Darts
and Bows in pieces, and strike down their shields, swords, and armor. This
can thou do without any trouble, because thy force is more excellent and of
greater power then all the tirannie of ye world. Let it therefore wast and al
to spoil them: let both their horsemen and footeme^ be cast in a dead sleep at
thy mighty rebuke. And when as such have slept their sleep which lean so
prowdly to their own strength, let them find in their hands that which may
either do them good or delight them. We know for a certainty that thou art
very terrible, and how no man is able to stand before thee when thy heavy
wrath shall be kindled: wherefore we humbly require thee to arise and save thy
meek people. For at what time thou shall subdue this force and fury of our
adversaries, it will redowne to thy worthy praise: forsomuche as therefore
thou can mightilye bridle the spirit and cruelty of Princes, neither suffer
us to come under the yoke thereof, but rather assist us in such wise, that we,
atchieuing and getting the victory, may pay the hearty vows which we owe
unto thee, with a right joyful mind and most ready will, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
For So Much as (O most mighty God) thou have chosen thee an house and mansion
place in thy sacred Church, therefore art thou well known in her, and thy
glorious name is there most notably set forth, because thou have full many a
time and very often driven the shaftes, bow, sword, and shield therefro,
with all warlike ingines, and subtle devices invented by soldiers, which the
fierce adversaries of thy sacred doctrine and enemies of true religion did
prepare against the same, being set up thereto by thee. There thou have (I say)
for this cause been continuallye famous and had in very great admiration above
al robbers and tyraunts of this wretched world. Wherefore our right humble
request is, that our sins be not the occasion thou withdrawest thy self
from so laudable and renowned a custom of thy excellencye. But if thy sacred
Church be a little while afflicted and grievously troubled, as we have well
deserved, make thou, for the glory of thy name, her puyssaunt adversaries,
(yea rather thine) of such feebleness, as those be which are a sleep, so that,
if they will abuse their strength, let them greatly fail thereof, and cause
both their footmen and horsemen (through thy rebuking of them) to be of no
force at all. We right well know (O good God) that thou only ought to be
feared, insomuch as no man is able to endure thy wrathful displeasure. Arise
therefore to judge thy sacred Churches cause, insomuch as her mild Citizens
may by thy puyssant help be mightily preserved, and that whatsoever the most
disdainful enemies have interprised by threats to do against the same, it
may redowne to thy own praise and renowned glory. Grant (O good God) that
we may with an exceeding cheerfulness and ioyfulnesse of heart, render such
thanks giuinges as we have vowed unto thee for so great a benefit, when as we
shall perceive all the kings of the earth to stand in great fear of thy
excellent Majesty, and that thou have abated the courages of the mighty
princes of this wretched world, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lxxvij. Psalm.
^ prayer of ^onsolation ^ distress, ^ considering ^^e wonder^ll works ^ God.
WE cry unto thee in heart and voice (O most mighty God) with such an assured
confidence, that seeing thou be our puyssaunt God, we are heard of thee in
these our sorrowful tribulations, who (through our earnest repentance and
hearty invocation of thy blessed name) make diligent search for thee, whilst
we are on every side oppressed with much anguishe and sore afflictions, neither
is there any other firm and substanciall consolation remaining unto us. For so
long as our mind is grievously troubled, and heart exceedingly disquieted, what
other thing remains, but that we (being moved with extreme heaviness and
doleful sorrow) do make our moan and heavy complaint unto thee. Above all
other things our heinous sins do sting us, whereby we both right well know
that thou art offended, and also feel by experience a troublesome and wounded
conscience in our selves. Wherefore our minds are miserably afflicted, and
being overwhelmed with fear and sorrow, all our strength does utterly fade
away. Our eyes attend diligently upon thee, whose mind and heart being broken
and cast down, we lamentably require thy favorable mercy. Ah God most dear
father, shall our manifold sins be the cause why thou will always hyde thy
self from us? Will thou cease to show thy self both merciful and gentle
unto us? For thou truly art of nature patient and long suffering: wherefore
let us not be destitute of thy mercy and loving kindness which are
unmeasurable. Be not thou (O good God, who art the father of mercy) forgetful
to show thy favorable compassion toward us. We verily have provoked thy
heavy displeasure, by reason of our naughty behavior: notwithstanding thou
can with thy most high right hand easily alter the same and pardon our
grievous offenses, which we have no mistrust of, so long as thy excellent
works depart not out of our remembrance. Thou were wont to show wonders in
delivering thy faithful people: therefore at this time also stretch out thy
mighty power against the ungodly, who have assailed thy blessed flock with
deceyptfull pollecies and warlike cruelty, and deal with them according to
thy old accustomed manner. It is not vnbeknowen to us how wonderfully thou
did deliver the Israelites from the Egyptians. The waters of the great
deep, the clouds, the thunders, the lightnings, and al creatures have at thy
forceable word set forth their safegarde and welfare: insomuch as thou did
lead out thy chosen people like sheep by the hands of Moses and Aaron, even
whither soever it pleased thee. Be thou (O excellent father) in such wise
assistant unto us with thy armies, that (being delivered from our most cruel
enemies) we may through an unfeigned faith and pure conversation of life, be
drawn unto thee, who art our assured hope and chief thing we delight in,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
WE have a perpetual regard to thy excellent goodness (O almighty God) in
these most troublesome times, who make thee weary through our daily prayers
and very fervent peticions, flying to thy divine Majesty as unto our only
Savior, whilst thy blessed Church is in so great peril. Neither is our sorrow
and mournings smally increased, so long as we call to remembrance the things
that were done in old time, wherein a man might with an assured mind and very
quiet conscience, peaceablye and without offense have addicted himself to set
forth with high praises, both thy glorious name, and also thy excellent
doctrine. But for so much as we have very much abused the gift of so great
security and most sound quietness, we do now earnestly beseech thee (O
excellent father) to forgive whatsoever we have committed against thy excellent
Majesty: but seeing it cannot come to pass that thou should be forgetful
to show mercy toward thy faithful servants, cast us not utterly away.
And for so much as it behooves thy loving promises to take place at length,
withdraw not thy favorable mercy altogether from us. We do now right well
call to remembrance thy wondrous works of old, which thou wroughtest in
delivering the children of Israel out of Egypt: for so soon as the waters in
the sea beheld thy omnipotent power, they were sore afraid, and moved after a
marvelous sort. Thou did fight against the ungodly with dark clouds,
thunderinges, lightnings, winds and an horrible tempest. In like manner
therefore thou then deliueredst thy people of Israel, even so now preserve thy
blessed Church from the outrageous cruelty of Satan and envious enterprises
of his wretched adherentes, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
THe greater the afflictions be (O most good and merciful God) that we endure,
so much the more are we accustomed to pray the ferue^tlier unto thee: for
seeing that we now right well perceive and do daily more and more feel that
thy sacred church is miserably tormented and vexed sundry ways, we come and
make intreatance to thy gentleness, beseeching thee to aid her in such wise
as thou were wont to do in her first age. Doubtless thy most perfect nature,
and also thy exceeding constancy, wherewith thou art endued, can not abide
that thou (who have been always favorable toward those which thou did
most tenderly love) should now gather, thy goodness together in a bundel,
to the intent thou would withdraw the same from them. Wherefore our earnest
and hartye desire is that thou would utter thy ancient invincible power
toward us at this instant, in raising, cherishing, and restoring thy holy
Church, no less then thou shewedst the same in times past touching the
deliverance of the Israelites from the Egyptians bondage and servitude: to the
intent that how much the more care thou have thereof, so much the more a great
deal it may appear that thou have mightily delivered the same from the
devil, sin, and most cruel death, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lxxviij. Psalm.
A prayer for grace and ^prightnesse of heart.
For So Much as the divine scriptures have most perfectly published thy exceeding
glorious works (O most mighty God) by setting thy children at liberty in
Egypt, assuredlye knowing that what things soever are set forth in the holy
Bible, they all make very much to our comfort and consolation: we now most
heartily require thee, that thou would in these exceeding dangerous times,
continuallye renew our memory with thy holy spirit, who being moved
herewith, may repose our whole confidence in thee only. Thou broughtest thy
children of Israel out of Egypt, in working of dreadful things against
Pharao. The sea gave place, a cloud covered them, a light of fire guided them
on their journey, the rock gave water, the heaven sent them both Manna and
flesh: and in Mount Sinai thou shewedst thy self at what time it pleased thee
to give them a law by Moses. Thou therefore who have done so great and
manifold things for the Israelites, forsake us not in such wise, as the sheep
of thy flock may be scattered abroad by the Devil and Antichrist. We verily
have sinned against thee, and that grievously and very often: howbeit they also
were oftentimes rebellious and murmured against thy divine Majesty in the
wilderness, when as they had less credit to thy sacred word then beseemed
them. There thou did sharply punish that people, neither yet sufferedst
thy heritage to be destroyed, but knew well that they were flesh, and had a
very wavering spirit: wherefore thou were so touched with mercy that thou
did help them in adversity. We therefore earnestly require thee (O good God)
that thou would do none otherwise to thy blessed Church at this present, in
mighty defending and valiant delivering her after any other sort then thou
did the Jews when thou had laid thy rod of correction somewhat upon
them, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
We heartily acknowledge and earnestly confess (O most mighty god) that the
ingratitude of mankind is exceeding great, which thing truly appears
plainly by our lewd deeds: but seeing that it is an easy matter for every man
to be blind in his own case, it is more manifestly set forth by our
forefathers acts, which are most truly made mention of in the holy
scriptures. We have heard that the children of Israel were delivered through
thee, by a number of miracles, when as thou broughtest them out of Egypt, who
being governed, defended, and nourished in the desert with such a diligent
study and prudent care, as no greater could be devised and imagined, yet for
all this the same people are reported to show themselves so much ungrateful
and obliuious of thy excellent benefits, that they always murmured against
thee their god, their maker, deliverer, and guide most just. Therefore we
humbly beseech thee, O excellent father, that (seeing thou of thy free mercy
have elected us, and moreover bewtified us with the highest ornaments of thy
grace) thou would never suffer or cause the same to depart out of our
memory, but rather stir us up every moment with thy blessed spirit to render
such kind of thanks unto thee, whereby both thou may be most honored, and we
greatly provoked forward to lead a godly and virtuous life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
BEsides the prodigious wonders and marvelous signs (O most good and
merciful God) whereby thou thoughtest good diverse and sundry times to
maintain and defend the fathers in the old law, the self same have thou
commanded both to be set forth for the commodity of those that come after,
and also to be registered for a perpetual remembrance, to the intent that so
many as shall perceive the things by faith, may conceive as assured an hope of
thy mercy, loving kindness, and faythfulnesse toward themselves, as they
wonder exceeding greatly at thy unspeakable goodness extended upon their old
fathers. For the seeing of those men's chasticements by the severity of thy
just judgment, may also be a very great warning unto them, that they shall be
no more spared then the others, when through their lewd behavior, they cease
not to provoke thy wrathful indignation against them: Our earnest request is
therefore (O heavenly father) that we may reap much commodity hereby. For we
verilye are (through thy gracious favor) delivered from everlasting
destruction, even as they were out of Egypt. But this is our most earnest
request which we require as now at thy merciful hands, that we be not led
by our filthy lusts and lewd desires to provoke thy heavy wrath unto our
confusion, in such sort as they were by grudging at thy inestimable goodness
in the wilderness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
WE may right well perceive (O most good and merciful God) that the desires of
our wicked lusts be much hurtful, either because we are provoked through the^
to pour out complaints against thee, who art most perfectly good, or else for
that (in compassing the filthy desires of them) we purchase greatly unto our
selves the most severe punishments of thy unspeakable justice: for we are now
admonished in due time by the holy ghost, of all such things as happened unto
the Israelits in the wilderness. Wherefore we (being taught by other men's
perilles) are very careful, least we be wrapped in semblable misfortunes
through the like misbehauiour. Our earnest desire is therefore that thou
would give ear unto our fervent prayers, wherein, we humbly beseech thee to
give us grace that we may never be forgetful of thy excellency, neither let
it come at any time into our hearts, either by words or thought, to dallye with
thee, in whom is nothing but most perfect verity. For whenever we fall
through human infirmity, have thou mercy upon us, who know us to he both
frail flesh, and also very weak spirited: and so (of thy infinite goodness)
incline thy self now partly to raise us up, being already fallen, and
partlye also to confirm us, that we be not thrust down into everlasting
destruction, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lxxix. Psalm.
A prayer for obteyning of mercy and favor against the persecutors of the
Church.
THou have chosen us (O most mighty God) to be thy heritage, and doubtless
there is nothing permitted which might be a furtheraunce to the furnishing,
garnishing, and making us right blessed: thou have given us the knowledge of
thy sacred scriptures, the preaching of thy blessed Gospel, the administration
of thy holy Sacraments, and others innumerable, which belong to the bewtefying
of this thy heritage. But we alas, (being ungrateful of all these most
excellent and singular gifts) have accomplished nothing as was required of us.
Therefore the wicked and barbarous Nations are not without just desert stirred
up together (through thy wrathful indignation) to invade thy holy Church, and
to shed the blood of thy faithful people and blessed inheritance as if it were
water, making of us a very scorn and laughing stock: and that (which is more
lamentable and greatlier to be sorowed) they persecute in us not our deadly
sins, but thy own self, thy holy Gospel, thy divine honor, and pure
worshipping of thee. Wherefore (O God most dear father) our earnest request is
that thou would not be always angry with thy people and sheep of thy
pasture. Pour out therefore this thy wrath (which is kindled against us for
our sins) upon the heathen that have not known thee: and suffer not thy
blessed Church to be devoured of the ungodly. We heartily desire thee (for thy
infinite mercies sake, and by the intercession of thy most dearly beloved
son our Lord) to have no more in remembrance our old heinous sins. And
seeing that we put our whole trust and confidence in thy goodness only,
assist and deliver such as cry and call unto thee, even for the glory of thy
names sake. Be merciful unto our grievous sins, otherwise ye ungodly will
say that thou have rejected thy own case. Let the sorrowful sighing and
lamentable tears of ye oppressed came before thee, and not be put out of thy
sight: pardon whatsoever we have grievously committed against thee, and
vouchsafe to show upon us the force of thy assistant help to the intent that we
thy loving heritage, thy faithful people, and sheep of thy good pasture, may
give thee thanks for ever, and show forth thy worthy praises from one
generation to another, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
LEt the wonderful examples of thy rygorous justice (O most mighty God)
wherewith thou have subverted the Kingdom of Israel, and wrapped that people
for their rebelliousnesse against thee, in slaughters, rapes, booties,
burnings, captiuities, with all kind of miseries and infelicitie, be a
wholesome and comfortable admonition unto us, so that we may with a right
cheerful mind, lay hold upon true repentance, and be delivered thereby from
most grievous torments, which (through our innumerable heinous sins) we have
worthily deserved. For very meet it is that thou should have an especial
regard unto thy most blessed and glorious name: but if thou shall pour out
thy wrath upon us, the wicked will imagine yt thou had no care to help such
as duly honor thee, and crave thy assistaunce with abundance of tears: for if
any calamity or adversity light upon thy sacred Church, it is incontinent
their accustomed manner malipartly to scoff against the same, saying, where is
now their God become? What profit have they by their religion? By means
whereof this kind of reproach redowndeth unto thee* upon thy sacred doctrine,
and upon thy holy Gospel. Wherefore our humble and earnest request is, that
(being right mindful of the sheep of thy pasture) thou would so defend
and mainteyne us, as we may perpetually in all places, both publish and also
set forth thy worthy praises, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lxxx. Psalm.
A prayer for the repairing of the afflicted Church.
THou have always hitherto been accustomed (O most mighty god) to be present
like a loving sheepeherd, with thy faithful people, and to lead them forth
under thy protection, as if they were sheep. We now therefore require thee to
stir up thy mighty power in so great perilles, and show us the bright light
of thy favorable countenance. Raise up thy self and be ready to help and
deliver us. We truly acknowledge and earnestly confess, that (in
consideration of our heinous iniquities, and most grievous sins committed
against thee) thy heavy wrath has not without good desert been kindled
against us, and thy justice to be the principal cause why these exceeding
great mischiefs wherewith thy blessed Church is now oppressed, have invaded the
same. But seeing that at this present, we are right heartily sorry for all the
sins which have by us been committed against thee, and that we may
lamentably require thy loving favor and mercy, how long will thou be angry
with us? How long will thou suffer the great strife, grievous rebukes, and
opprobrious slanders wherewith the ungodly and most lewd persons do touch
thee in us? Turn unto us, O excellent father (in this most troublesome time)
the quiet and cheerful countenance of thy inestimable goodness, and be
mindful of thy notable benefits which thou have bestowed upon thy sacred
church: and seeing that thou have hitherto nourished it, bewtified it, and
always garnished the same with the most plentiful and large gifts of thy
blessed spirit. Deliver her not now over (we humbly beseech thee) to be
spoiled of the outrageous, ungodly, and most cruel Antichristians: suffer not
so pleasant and chosen a vineyarde, which (with thy most high and exceeding
mighty right hand, thou have planted and increased) to be shamefully and after
a very wretched manner cast down, set on fire, and utterly rooted up. Look
down from heaven and have an especial regard unto such as earnestly cry and
call for thy speedy assistaunce: let the ungodly perish at the rebuke of thy
loving countenance, who do perpetually blaspheeme cruel bondage of
Antichrist: but we vile wretches have most filthily abused our fredome and
benefit of quietness. Thou have oftener then once (as thou did unto the
Israelites) both by the sacred Scriptures, and also through the ministers of
thy blessed word, protest unto us on this wise: give ear unto me (O my
people) and acknowledge me truly to be thy God, not in words (I say) only, but
in mind verily, and with a perfect and most pure worshipping. But we (alas)
have turned our heart from thy holy words, whereby our heinous sins are
continually more and more increased, and the adversaries of thy holy Church
also (whom thou without doubt would have overthrown and cast down if we
had given credit unto thee) are now become a very terror unto us: for we
that might exceeding quietly and carelessly have inioyed thy most sweet and
pleasant gifts, are now overthrown day by day with greater and more grievous
afflictions. Yet we humblye beseech thee (for thy singular mercyes sake) not
to forsake thy sacred Church being vexed so miserably and after such a wretched
sort. Be present at length thereunto in such wise, that she may perpetually
keep and retain the true Religion and pure doctrine which thou have set forth
and delivered unto her, through Jesus christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lxxxij. Psalm.
THe government of all kingdoms and earthly power appertains unto thee (O
most good and merciful God) who neither minister justice nor right unto their
people, A prayer for a good Magistrate.
unless they be ruled and guided with thy blessed spirit. Wherefore we
earnestly require thee to help mortal men's causes which be far out of
order, both by multiplying and mainteyning of good Princes: and also by
correcting the lewd and outrageous, so that poor men's suyts be not neglected,
that the oppressed may be set at liberty, and that godliness in especial
may flourishe and greatly go forward. And as thou have vouchedsafe through thy
divine power to bewtifie our Maiestrates, Princes, and King, with thy heavenly
name, even so we heartily require thee also (of thy unspeakable goodness) to
cause their work and ministry to be such, and so duly executed, as the
faithful (so long as they live in this wretched world) may honor thee purelye
and lead a right virtuous and godly life, so that together with them they may
be brought unto thee (who art king of kings and Lord of Lords) where they may
jointly be pertakers of eternal good things, and most excellent felicity,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
WE heartily acknowledge and earnestly confess (O most mighty God) that thy
chosen people who have neglected their obedience toward thee are very often
enforced to be in subjection unto wicked rulers, and unbelieving Princes,
neither is there any cause why we should complain of injury proffered unto us
in so doing. For we have so grievously and after such a froward manner sinned
against thee, as we have not only deserved these, but also much more heynouser
punishments. Notwithstanding, the assured hope we repose in thy blessed words
and loving promises, we most heartily and with much feruencie beseech thee to
succor thy sacred Church in these most troublesome times. And thou who have
vouchedsafe to bewtifie the superior powers and Magistrates with ye name and
title of Gods, vouchsafe also to ouerlooke their counsels with thy justice,
showing thy self as an upright judge amongst them, least they (being left unto
their own sensuality and lewdness wherewith man's corrupt nature is of it
self greatly ouercharged) do not very wrongfully persecute thy holy Church,
and yield unto ungodliness those things which be neither meet nor
convenient. If thou O most dear father, do (according to our earnest prayers)
intermeddle thy self amongst them in ordring the common wealth, we doubt not
but thou will (by thy direction and furtheraunce) revenge the poor and
fatherless, and set such at liberty from their most grievous and extreme
perils, as be exceedingly afflicted and very sore oppressed. Our earnest request
is, that thou would not deliver thy blessed Church under their rule and
dominion which walk in darkness, who, having no manner of understanding, nor
perceyueraunce of their duty, go about so much as in them lies to overthrow
all right, justice, and godliness. Now when these men (who are so highly
promoted by thee, as to be called Gods, and the Sons of the most highest)
do neither perceive nor yet understand the same, they deserve to be cast
away, and die like most vile persons. The Church (O good God) is thy chosen
heritage, wherefore mightily assist it, and take thou thy self upon thee her
case to maintain and defend, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lxxxiij. Psalm.
^ prayer that ^od would ^fende his lord in dis^te of the ^ngodly.
THe hatred, armies, deceipts, and pernicious devices of the fierce enemies of
our salvation (O almighty God) do so daily increase, that we are enforced to
cry upon thee continually. Whose whole driftes tend to none other purpose
then to pull us from thee, and that there might not any person be found, which
should either trust in thee, or purely call upon thy blessed name as he ought
to do. For our own flesh, our senses, and ungodly men have together with the
fierce rulers of darkness, conspired against thy sacred Church, and finally
all earthly and worldly affections and ability have lift up themselves to
overthrow the same. Wherefore our earnest request is that thou would not
keep silence, neither hold thy peace, nor yet be in quiet: for like as thou
have of old time overthrown the Egyptians, Madianites, Cananites, and
Philistines, for the safeguard of the Israelites: even so at this day deliver
thou those which have wholly committed themselves to thy faithful protection
and government, whose force, puyssaunce, and salvation, is laid up in thee
only. Bridle thou so the boldness of our outrageous enemies (or rather of
thine) to the intent all men may perceive that thou only art the God, whom
(rejecting all manner of supersticions) they ought wholly to worship and purely
call upon, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lxxxiiij. Psalm.
A prayer for ^he increasement of ^ayth.
Look what earnest and fervent desire so ever the old fathers had (O most
mighty God) to come unto the place wherein thou had appointed a Tabernacle
to thy self for that time, even the like are we kindled withal in beholding
the repayring of thy sacred Church, and to see therein a very great company of
Godly men lawfully assembled together for the advancement of thy glory,
hearing thy holy doctrine, and duly receiving of thy blessed sacraments
accordingly. Wherefore we humbly beseech thee, (which art our God and King) that
we may one day or other rejoice to be there: for what felicity soever may be
attained unto in this frail life, we doubt not but it will light upon the
sacred company of the godly. Give ear therefore (O excellent father) unto our
earnest prayers, and grant that we make none other account of thy blessed
house, then thy will and pleasure is we should do: for a more blessed thing it
were for us to have one days meeting and abode therein, then if we abide never
so great a time of continuance in the congregation of the ungodly, or in
such a one as is not lawfully assembled with the advantage and overplus of
all the pleasures of this transitory world. Seeing that therefore thou art our
most splendent light, and strong defense, cause our assemblies on the earth so
to redound to thy unspeakable glory, that our assured hope (by coming in the
end unto thee into the everlasting tabernacles of the heavens) may be
augmented, and very much increased, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lxxxv. Psalm.
Show thy self gentle and gracious (O almighty God) toward thy beloved
Church, A prayer f^ the whole congregat^ of Christ.
for thy exceedinge great gloryes sake and mercy most magnificent, that we
may be miraculously delivered from the horrible fardell and cruel bondage of
our deadlye sins: who have hitherto been bond slaves to the flesh, and
wretched prisoners of the diuill, and yet have thou vouchedsafe to release and
forgive us the whole number of our deadly iniquities, and covered all our
heinous offenses. Notwithstanding therefore we are now also very ungrateful,
and such as be not worthy of thy gracious benefits: our earnest request is
that thou would withholde thy self from thy wrathful indignation. Surely
thou art justly angry with us, but (for the glory of thy name) repress this
fury which is stirred up by reason of our grievous sins, and lead us into
the strait way of perfect health, for so much as it apperteyneth not to thy
loving kindness, to be always offended with thy faithful seruau^ts, or to
continue thy heavy wrath and fierce indignation unto many generations. Deal
with us after thy old accustomed manner, and not according to our lewd
deserts, scatter abroad our cruel enemies, and put them to flight whom thou
(being provoked through our great default) would that we should feel. Thou
which in thy great wrath do kill, and being pacified, quicknest again,
show thy mercy and saving health, like as thou have set destruction before
our eyes, to the intent thou would both terrefie and chastise us. Grant that
we (which have heretofore been marvelous rebellious and very stubburne) may
ever hereafter give obedient ear to these things which thou speak and
willest us to do. Let thy unspeakable loving mercy and famous truth be
lincked in us together, and vouchsafe that peace and righteousness may with an
vndissoluble band, stick fast in our hearts, that when as thou have delivered
us from the hands of the most outrageous Antichrist and his cruel Champions,
we may yield unto thee the plentiful fruits of holiness and perfect
righteousness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
For So Much as (O most mighty God) we be thy adopted sheep, faithful people,
and loving heritage, our whole assurance is that thou will be merciful unto
us, yea and so favorable, as to forgive our cursed iniquities and heinous
sins, and to pardon such grievous penalties and horrible punishments as we
have right worthily deserved. Quench thou of thy loving kindness (we humbly
beseech thee) thy great fury which we have kindled against our selves, and
dissolve the yrefull indignation that we have provoked to be poured upon us,
for so much as it is not thy property (although our lewd and naughty behavior
has justly deserved the same) either to be always angry, or else to show
forth thy fierce wrath a long time. But contrariwise do rather set out thy
inestimable goodness every where and in all places, and art accustomed to
profer salvation unto so many as fly unto thee for the same. Grant thou (O
most dear and excellent father) who speak always peaceable matters and
those things which are for our singular commodity, that we may have a very
great regard to thy blessed words. Which thing if it so fall out, we shall
not only be saved and adorned with glory, but also every thing of ours shall
be replenished with goodness, truth, righteousness, and peace: faith shall
abound, and through the same shall we be plenteously justified. Our earnest
desire is to obtain this at thy merciful hands, that we be not idle and
unfruitful servant, but may walk in holiness and innocence before thee all
the days of our life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lxxxvj. Psalm.
Seeing that (O almighty God) our wretchedness and poverty is right great, A
prayer in distress.
therefore have we very much need of thy salvation, for so long as we now
fly unto thee to the intent thou should be our speedy succor and assured
defense, we call to remembrance our most grievous sins, corrupt life, and
lewd behavior, which neither we will hide, nor yet (if we were willing
thereto) could keep ye same secret from thee. Thou right well perceyuest all
our naughtiness, which we truly acknowledge and confess unto thy divine
Majesty: we have greeuouslye sinned, we have done greatly amiss, we have
been marvelous disobedient, very stubburne, and exceeding wilful against
thee, who deserve far more heinous displeasures then these which we now
feel and suffer. But how thou down thy favorable look (O excellent father)
and give ear unto our fervent prayers, have compassion upon us that cry out
daily unto thee, and lift up our sorrowful eyes and heavy minds toward thy
most excellent mercies seat, having this assured confidence, that, thou who
art ready to forgive, rich in loving kindness toward such as call upon
thee, and exceeding mighty in thy works above all Gods, wilt not despise us
in so great distress and tribulation. Thou art most puyssaunt, thou show
wonderful things, and thou art God alone. Teach us therefore thy perfect
ways, cause us to walk in thy blessed truth: call back our wandering heart
unto thee, that it may stand greatly in fear of thy holy name. Thou verilye
have nobly made us partakers of thy excellent mercy, but for so much as we were
very ungrateful, the hosts of the ungodly are risen up against us, and the
forefrunt of cursed men's battles has assailed us, who neither regard thee
at all, nor make any account of thy most blessed name and pure doctrine,
indeuouring alonelye by their most lewd practices, through the same mean to
destroy at one push both the true worshipping of thee and our souls also.
Seeing that therefore thou art a very merciful God, long suffering, of great
love, and true to trust unto, have an especial regard unto the children of
thy loving promise, be favorable, strengthen, and defend them, advance thy
Banner to our salvation, so that the cruel adversaries may be confounded, and
all men right well see and evidently perceive thee only to be our most good
and loving God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
NOtwithstanding we do right well consider (O most mighty God) that our force
and counsayles are very simple, yet we doubt not but that we thy blessed
Saints and elect vessels, are provoked to pour out our earnest prayers and
woeful cries continually before thy divine Majesty, and to repose our whole
confidence in thee only. Be thou therefore pressed and ready (who art very
meek and loving, and also endued with most bountiful mercy and goodness)
to hear them that call vncessauntly to thee for speedy help. Before all
things teach us thy most perfect ways, so that (all dissimulation and
hypocrisy being laid apart) we may very purely and with much sincerity obey
thy blessed commandments. And like as nothing is able to match thy Godhead,
so our earnest desire is that all mortal men should know and duly reverence
the same: which thing shall be done, if, as thou have oftentimes delivered thy
loving servants from most dangerous perilles: so thou would at this
present have an especial regard unto them, by increasing their strength and
making their perfect deliverance more ample, at what time the most puyssant
enemies of man's salvation rise up mightily against thy faithful people.
Publishe we humbly beseech thee, this famous and notable sign, to the intent
that when as the cruel adversaries of thy glory shall right well understand
the same, they may in good earnest unfeignedly turn and be converted unto
thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lxxxvij. Psalm.
Seeing that the Church is thy blessed house wherein thou (O Lord God) art
highly praised and greatly commended. A prayer for the reedifying of ye
christian congregation.
Vouchsafe we humbly beseech thee, that the foundation thereof be not made upon
sand, but in a large plain ground cituated upon the hills of thy most holy
Saints, whose head and Chieftain is Christ. And to the intent thou (O good
Lord) may continually abide therein, or the place of thy habitation to be
wonderful pleasant and delectable, in which thou speak things of very great
importance, whereunto men have recourse from all parts and borders of the
world, being augmented through the mighty preaching of thy blessed word, and
is notably increased upon all men by the comfort of thy exceeding sweet
promise: let her fame be very largely spread abroad, for that she has no
respect of persons or deserts, but cause all thy sanctified children (be they
Jews or Ethnicks, Lords or servants) to spring and grow up in the same
together, through the steadfast and unremovable faith they have in Christ Jesus.
For this was thy own purposed will (O most high and mighty God) even from the
beginning, to gather some together out of diverse nations of the world, through
the most manifest declaration of strange and unknown tongues, by whom thou
might be highly celebrated in pleasant songs and loud blastes of glorious
Trumpettes, through Jesus Christ our Lord. So be it.

A prayer out of the.Lxxxviij. Psalm.
A prayer in the trial of faith.
Seeing that our only salvation depends wholly upon thy divine Majesty (O
almighty God) and that we do cry daily upon thee, bow down thy favorable
ear to our humble prayers, turn not away thy face from them, but permit the
same to come into thy blessed presence, specially at this time when we be so
glutted with adversity, who are neither unjustly, nor yet without good cause
punished with these troublesome and most sharp afflictions: for we have
behaved our selves so unthankfully, lived after such a wicked sort, and so
negligently honored thee, as all those euilles light upon us for our naughty
and lewd behavior. How be it we are exceeding sorry for the same, and do
lamentably in our most fervent prayers, require thy favorable mercy,
bes^eching thee not to deal with us according to our iniquities and naughty
vsages. Make us not like unto them that now lie in the grave, neither reckon
us with those that go down into the pit. Thou see what man's strength is,
what succor is to be had in fleshly hands, and how vain a thing outward
power is: wherefore make haste to be our ready helper, neither establishe thou
thy wrath upon us, nor yet suffer us to be drowned in these stormy times of
Antichrist. We are become an open shame unto the adversaries of thy glorious
name and Gospel, our friends and acquaintance withdraw and hide themselves
from us. For which cause we call earnestly upon thee, and stretche forth our
sorrowful hands unto thy most favorable mercies seat: hide not thy loving
face from us, we humbly beseech thee, whereas otherwise we shall die like
miserable wretches, neither be able to abide the terror of thy fierce justice.
Although our dear friends, nere neighbors, and familier acquaintance
withdraw themselves far from us, yet show thou thy self present with us,
and lighten us in such wise with thy most ready help, to the intent, that
being delivered from so great perilles, we may not praise thee in the grave,
or in death, but amongs such as remain a live, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
Because (O most mighty God) we often fall from thee like men, so long as we
here live, our minds being ouercast with darkness, and we who ought to walk
outwardly in thy blessed ways, have diverse times either fallen, or else do
cowardly lie still: from the which thou (of thy unspeakable goodness) have
been accustomed to raise up such as thou well fauourest, either with some
sickness, or adversity, to the intent thou may shake of their vnpalpable
darkness and slothful sluggishnesse from them, which thing we assuredly
know thou will presentlye do, and that without any delay, who feel our
selves so bowed to the ground and made crooked with the heavy burden of woeful
miseries, as we are even in a manner brought to utter confusion and undoing.
Wherefore our earnest request is, (O most dear Father) that thou would not
chastise us in thy fury, nor destroy us with the wrath of thy sore
displeasure: but we would that the things which have hitherto happened, might
make to our renewing or restoreme^t. For we now pour out our humble peticions
and lamentable cries before thy eye sight: thou see how our friends and alies
are gone clean against us, and that ye adversaries laying awayt for our life,
cease not to pitche snares, who do always imagine crafts and deceypts
whereby they might do us some notable mischief. Give ear (O good God) to our
fervent prayers and earnest peticions, and suffer not the enemies of thy
glorious name to triumph over us. Forsake us not utterly, hold not thy self
aloof from us, and make haste to be our ready helper, forsomuche as the
whole hope of our salvation consists only in thee, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
For So Much as (O almighty God) during this wretched life, we are hedged in
with naughtiness on every side, who have such plenty of calamities, and be
so glutted with miseries, that being yet alive we walk in the midst of
death: therefore with vehement and continual prayer we cry unto thee without
ceassing, whom we account as our only Savior. Behold (we humbly beseech thee)
how we by reason of our heinous sins, are so sore pined away, as we be now
in a manner swalowed up of final destruction: thy grievous wrath and heavy
indignation being kindled for their sakes, does make us much afraid, and
miserably vexes us. Neither can our faithful friends, loving neighbors, or
well willers, help us any thing at al, touching our deliverance from so
grievous inconveniences. Wherefore make have (O excellent father) to help us,
and for thy infinite mercies sake, pardon whatsoever we have most lewdly
committed against thee: which, if thou do not so long as we here live, that
(which our desire is thou would remove from us) can take no place after thy
last judgment and sentence of condemnation. Show forth again the light of
thy favorable countenance upon us, which (by reason of our most wicked and
lewd deserts) thou seemedst worthily to have turned so long time from us,
whereas otherwise we shall not be able to endure any longer, our conscience
accusing us, and the sharp hands of thy justice ouerwhelming us, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Lxxxix. Psalm.
THy inestimable mercy (O almighty god) is most manifestly known, A prayer to
put God in remembrance of his promise.
both because all Saints do celebrate the same, and also for that it does
continually utter and show forth it self throughout all generations, by
means whereof thou art brought to make a covenant with thy elect people, ye
Christ's kingdom and his seed (which is the Church) should always endure,
neither ought any mortal man to fear or stand in doubt, that thou art not
able to perform whatsoever thou have stedfastlye and with a solemn oath
promised. The evident proofs of thy almighty power appeared by punishing the
Egyptians: and seeing that the heavens, the earth, the whole circuit of the
world, the winds, the seas, and whatsoever thou have made, perteyne to thy
mighty government, we doubt not but thou can right well preserve thy
beloved people whom thou have adopted unto thee, and which walk in the light
of thy blessed countenance. And hereupon we have great need, that thou
should do thus much for us in especially: namely to vouchsafe to forgive us
the sins, wherewith we confess our selves to have most grievously offended
thee, for so much as they truly be the only things why we are sore afflicted,
and it is the weight of them that press us most down. Give pardon therefore
unto such as humbly call to thee for ready help, and be our strong defense
against the fierce adversaries of thy blessed name: stretche out thy mighty
arm, make thy hand strong for our preservation, and in these dangers arm thy
puyssaunt right hand for our deliverance, least the outrageous violence of
the ungodly prevail against us: and suffer not the children of iniquity to
trouble us according to their hatred and malicious evil will. Shake thou those
and turn thou them so aside, that they be not able to execute the mischievous
devises which they intend to do against our holy Gospel. We call upon thee,
being our only Savior, loving God, and merciful father: perform therefore
and keep thy sacred covenant which thou have favorably made with thy
faithful ones. We have utterly forsaken thy divine law, we have not walked in
thy holy commandments, we have unhallowed thy sacred things, neither have we
been obedient to thy blessed will: wherefore refuse we not to be beaten with
the rods of thy heavy displeasure, or to be kept under, with the scourges of
thy most grievous chasticement, but this only is our humble request, that
thou would not berefe us of thy unspeakable mercy, favorable loving
kindness, and unspotted truth, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
WE heartily acknowledge (O almighty God) that it is the use and guise of the
Godly to set forth thy unspeakable mercy and favorable goodness, when as
their affairs have so good success as they would gladly wish: but if we
undoubtedly shall reteyne and keep that custom in unfortunate mishappes and
grievous calamities, as to set out thy favorable mercy and loving kindness
continually thorowout all generations, then shall we be most assuredly able to
bear witness of the effectual working of thy grace in us. Suffer therefore
(we humbly beseech thee) the promises and couenaunts which thou made with
David thy most faithful servant, never to slip out of our memories, namely,
that thou would of his seed give Jesus Christ a most puyssant and
everlasting king for all faithful beleuers, under whose government the
universal Church should both be defended from the enemies force, and also
greatly flourish, being right well garnished with all kind of good things.
More then once we have tried the assuredness of these faithful promises. For
thou have oftentimes delivered thy blessed people from most grievous and
horrible dangers, for none other cause the^ this only: and therefore are we
now encouraged to be importunate upon thee, that thou would (according to
thy old wont and accustomed manner) provide remedy for the necessity of thy
loving people, when they stand in most need thereof, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
THou have not only promised unto us (O most mighty God) abundaunce of grace
in Christ Jesus our Lord, whereby we may be acceptable unto thee, and become
thy trusty friends, dear children, and peculier heirs, but also thou have
taken upon thee to bestow so great clemency upon us, that if we fall into any
kind of vice through our weakness, thou will chastise our iniquities with a
fatherly rod and merciful scourge, and not turn away thy loving
countenance and well inclined mind from thy blessed Church at any time. Be
mindful therefore (O heavenly father) of this thy sacred covenant which thou
did once determine to be more firm and of stedfaster continuance then the
high heaven, the bright Sun, and the splendent Moon: but for so much as thy
wrathful indignation is not a little kindled by reason of our most grievous
sins, and that thou seem to thrust down the case of thy faithful
servants, and not a little to favor the adversaries of true godliness and
enemies of thy glorious name, show forth now at length (we humbly beseech
thee) thy great mercies of old, neither suffer us which are the dear members
of Christ (although of our parts marvelous unworthy) not to be made a
laughter and mocking stock for the unbelievers to jest at, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xc. Psalm.
^ prayer both (...) attain vn^^ the know^dge of god, and the va^tie of this ^e
also.
For So Much as thou (O almighty God) would we should have this knowledge of
thy holy Tabernacle, that it was not in deed of so great bigness as it could
contain thy infinite power and unmeasurable nature, therefore do we now
heartily confess this to be most manifest, that thou art the only tabernacle,
habitation, and sure refuge to our weakness: neither art thou to be compted a
fresh or new made dwelling place for the faithful, but such a one as is
perpetual and permanent, seeing thou choosest them before the making and
constitution of the world. And therefore the grievous calamities and painful
miseries which we endure, drive us from all sides unto thee our mighty bulwark
and most strong defense. Surely we lead both a very miserable and fugitive
life, which flows abroad like water, fades away as a sleep, and withers
incontinent in such sort as does a green herb, while we are continually
consumed and put in fear by thy grievous wrath and heavy indignation. We
acknowledge that the heinous sins which we have lewdly committed, be the
only cause why thou art justly sore displeased with us, for if thou did
purpose assuredly to be revenged of them, thy most arden displeasure would
utterly consume and bring us to naught. Our earnest request is therefore (O
mighty God) that thou would forgive the heinous offenses and exceeding
wicked deeds wherewith we have greatly offended thee, so that thou do not
condemn us for ever, but cause us to reap this singular commodity of these
present mischiefs, that (considering and well waying the force and efficacy
of thy heavy wrath, and our brittle and most short life) we may with a greater
earnestness stand more in fear of thee. Use thy old accustomed manner (O
excellent father) in showing thy self as now well pleased with thy afflicted
and persecuted children: then shall we perfectly rejoice and be right glad when
thy working appears and is made manifest unto us. Let thy holy Ghost (we
humbly beseech thee) direct us in such wise, as thy famous honor, thy
excellent glory, and thy clear brightness, may shine both in us and in all
our doings, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
IF we do greatly rejoice in our own behalf (O most mighty God) that the
plentiousnesse of thy loving favor was so exceeding abundant toward us, that
such as thou right well love, those did thou elect before the foundation of
the world was laid, and did predestinate to be partakers of thy eternal
joys or ever ye mountains were made, or any part of the world brought in ripe
shape: our joy doubtless shall be doubled, if we thoroughly way and consider how
yt of our own selves (both by infirmity of nature, and also through the
wickedness of our heinous sins) we are otherwise nothing. For we run hedlo^g
into perdition, slide as water, vanish away like a dream, and in the
twinkling of an eye we wither like grass. Which discommodities, at what time
we call to remembrance, let them (we humbly require thee) stir up in us an
occasion of learning and wisdom, so that we may understand and right well
perceive how unworthy we are (in respect of our selves) to enjoy thy loving
favor, and contrariwise, how great thy benign clemency is toward us, by
the which (we heartily beseech thee) to turn thy favorable countenance upon
us, in showing that we are thy workmanship, as we be in deed. Let thy
excellent brightness lighten our blind minds in such sort, that our deeds
never swerve from the mark of thy exceeding great glory, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xcj. Psalm.
A prayer in temptation and perils, for deliverance and preservation.
Whosoever depends wholye upon God, so that he accompteth him to be his sure
defense and most strong hold, he needs not to fear any calamity, no
layings awayte, nor finally to dread any distress. For God no less defends
his servants, then the hens do their chickens at what time they hide them
under their wings, or that the Soldiers defend and cover themselves in
battle with their shield and target. For can pestilence, plague, calamity,
or wasting, terrefie those which believe faithfully in God? Nothing truly shall
make them afraid? For although Satan and all the ungodly work most grievous
and pernicious things against him, yet has God committed his welfare to an
innumerable company of Angels, through whose conduct and protection he is not
only defended, but carried also on their hands and shoulders, that he dashe
not against hurtful things. There is no power in the most cruel beasts, but
is trodden upon and beaten down under his feet. If we therefore stand now in
much fear of the wicked, it is a plain token that we have small confidence
and little trust in thee, by reason of which dull and weak faith, we are
become so pliable to an innumerable sort of sins, as by our backslydinges
from thee, we provoke thy grievous wrath continually against us. Wherefore our
hearty request is, that (according to thy accustomed goodness) thou would
in such wise pardon whatsoever we have very lewdly committed against thee, and
make us hereafter most earnest lovers of thy divine Majesty, that we may in
right perfect faith, have thy glorious name and dignity in wonderful
admiration, and cause our prayer not to be unfruitful before thee, whereunto
we humbly beseech thy infinite goodness, that thou would make answer
according to our demand. And finally be present to the fervent peticions and
troublesome matters of thy blessed Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
SVch as repose their whole trust and confidence in thee only (O almighty
God) have put themselves under the shadow of thy assurance and fortress of
thy most strong defense, where they may be in safety from all the assaults of
the enemies, and preserved from every pernicious thing that may annoy them.
When as wicked men (being undoubtedly members of the devil and his
Catchpolles) shall practice any evil thing against them, they shall at no time
be left destitute of Gods assured help and faithful promise, for he will
quickly defend them as a mighty strong shield. And when most grievous
temptations, which happen daily, do rage on every side, whereby an infinite
number of mortal men fall down hedlong into everlasting damnation: what soever
they are which have assured themselves in their hearts and prayed unto the
Lord: thou art my God, and thou art the thing I only trust in: evil shall in
no wise happen unto these kind of men, but they shall remain steadfast and
without fear when others fall and come to naught. He will not only deliver
them from troublesome mishaps by the hands of blessed Angels, but also there
shall be no beasts so venomous and outrageous that may hurt them any thing at
all. And therefore we humbly require thee (O excellent father) to vouchsafe
that we may not be secluded from partaking of so great good things, but that we
may in such wise love thee, and so repose our whole trust in thy divine
Majesty, as we may seek none other refuge and pillar to stand by, but thee
only, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xcij. Psalm.
WE are then slack in celebrating thy glorious name (O almighty God) when as
we forget thy wonderful works, which, A prayer against the persuasion such as
we have justification to pr^ceede of goo^ works.
so soon as we diligently consider, and think more attentively of, they shall
by and by cheer us exceedingly, and consequently enforce a great strength and
efficacy in us touching the setting forth of thy worthy praises. But such
truly are very foolish and dull fighted, who either do not way them, or else
are nothing moved therewith: their eyes therefore are sore blinded, because
they see the matters of the ungodly to have good success and go long
unpunished. But these manner of men ought to consider that for this purpose thou
would do thus with the wicked, because they might be the more sorrowful to
see their flourishing estate suddenly altered, yea, and that in a time unlooked
for, who (after they have walked in the shadow of felicity) may run into
mere and assured calamity, and such verily as is everlasting, and has no
end, when as the just men (like the Ceder and Palm tree) enjoy the sincere and
everlasting good things in the blessed habitation of the heavens. We humbly
beseech thee (O excellent father) to cherishe and comfort this hope in us, to
the intent we may right well perceive, that thou art both good and just, and
also do publishe unto all creatures that there is no unrighteousness in thy
noble judgment, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xciij. Psalm.
WHen as we right well consider (O most mighty God) that the world was made
of thee to abide exceeding firm and immovable, A prayer (...) the
establi^^me^t of christ kingdom.
who do govern the same with so great constancy and in such perfect order,
as we verily know thy excellency, might, and noble power thereby. Wherefore
we take heart to us, and persuade our selves most assuredly, that thy loving
promises shall be of no less assurance to stick unto, then the nature of
things teaches us, that thy glorious kingdom is both strong and immovable.
Although therefore the cruel enemies of our salvation do vaunt themselves
against us, fret exceedingly, and continually dashe us together with the
sourges of their yrefulnesse and grievous temptations, and rise up against us
like huge waters, and tempestuous seas, yet our assured hope is that thou will
defend us with thy invincible power and exceeding great might. Vouchsafe
therefore, that both this faith may always be printed in our minds, and
also that thy good and notable promises which thou have made unto thy blessed
Church, may not only come to pass, but also (being bestowed upon it) may
long time be preserved in the same, so that thy most famous goodness and
unspeakable mercy may be published more and more throughout the universal
world, by Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xciiij. Psalm.
^ prayer a^aynst our e^^mies, de^eyptfull tea^hers, and cruel ^^raunts.
THe presumption and stateliness of sinners (O most mighty God) is wonderful,
for it does not only tear in pieces the feeble, and grind to powder the
weaklinges, but also brings them in the end to such madness, as they judge
their wickedness and grievous offenses which they have most lewdly committed,
to be hid and unknown unto thee. Vouchsafe therefore that this kind of
foolishness may b^e far from our thoughts, and grant that we may be most
assuredly persuaded, yt thou having made the ear, fourmed the eye, and given
unto men the power and ability of understanding, art ignorant of nothing
which is done by us in earth: but rule and order us so in the mean season, as
we may not only escape and fly from the everlasting and perpetual
destructions which are prepared for the ungodly, but also enjoy the most high
quietness and perpetual felicity which thou have vouchedsafe to bestow upon
thy faithful servant. If thou verily be not present, having the help
always prepared and in a readiness, wherewith thou may mightily defend us,
we shall easily fall into those mischiefs which hang over our heads. Be thou
(we humbly beseech thee) our Castle, fortress, and strong shield of defense,
least we seem to have vainly reposed our whole trust and confidence in thee
only, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xcv. Psalm.
For So Much as (O most mighty God) thou art our salvation and strength, A
prayer for true faith.
it is meet we should praise thy glorious name to the uttermost of our
powers: and to the intent we may the more orderly do the same, we first and
foremost come unto thee with hearty confession of our heinous sins. Whereas
thou have (of thy infinite goodness, and not for our merits sake) chosen us
to be thy blessed people and sheep of thy pasture, as having no need of our
service at all, forsomuche as thou art the great king above all Gods, in whose
hand be not only the earth and exceeding high Mountains, but also the heavens
and all creatures: we have grievously offended thee diverse and sundry ways,
hardening our sinful hearts at thy fatherly admonicions, who have very readily
fainted in temptation, our mind has fowlye erred, and we have always (by
reason of our lewd sins and most wicked deserts) become bourdenous and
merueylous troublesome unto thee. For which cause thou have at this time raised
up so proud and cruel enemies against us, by whom we are brought into great
peril and danger: nevertheless acknowledging how vnrighteouslye we have
dealt, we know for a certainty that besides thy infinite goodness and
mercy, there remains none other defense for us. Wherefore with these our
fervent prayers and earnest supplications we prease into thy sight or ever we
perish, requiring thee not to grind us unto powder in thy most grievous
wrath: take away the heinous sins (we humbly beseech thee) wherewith we and
our fathers have greatly tempted thee, and provoked thy heavy displeasure
against us. Call to remembrance that thou art our mighty God, valiant king,
and loving shepherd. Therefore mightily preserve, valiantly keep, and noblye
defend us from those that hate thee no less then they do us: suffer them not
(according to ye lust of their cruelty) utterly to destroy the work of thy
blessed hands which thou have begun passing well in us, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
THy excellent Majesty and invincible power (O most good and merciful god) is
of such force, as every where it excels and bears dominion most amplye
and without desert, but seeing that all things as well high as low were made
by thee, there is nothing to be found either hidden in the depth of the earth,
or set up in the height of the mountains, whereof thou were not the author
and first founder: for which cause we justly desire to show forth thy worthy
praise. To the furtheraunce hereof also makes this, that thou art our only
stay, and we as thy blessed flock and sheep of thy pasture appertain and
belong unto thee only. Therefore do we greatly worship, humbly reverence,
duly honor, and right earnestly call upon thy most favorable Godbeade,
requiring this especially, that thou suffer not our heart (which of nature is
disposed unto evil) to be hardened at thy friendly admonitions. Make the same
soft (we heartily pray thee) with the inspiration of thy good grace and holy
spirit, neither suffer us to strive and struggle against thy blessed
commandments, like unto the stifnecked Jews, who would so often times put
thee to the trial of thy mighty power: but seeing it was not their hap to
enjoy the promised land, grant (for thy infinite mercies sake) that we may at
length be permitted to enter into the haven of eternal felicity after our
long and daily travail, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xcvj. Psalm.
WE are admonished for diverse and sundry causes (O most mighty God) greatly
to magnify thee, A prayer of thanks giving for Christ's benefits bestowed
upon us.
and highlye to sanctify thy holy name. But able we are not thus to do,
unless the heinous sins wherewith we are miserably oppressed, be first put
away and driven far from us. We have received at thy merciful hands
(through the preaching of thy blessed Gospel) the most noble and excellent
gift of salvation, but we have hitherto led our life so coldly therein, and
wrought so contrary to our vocation, in neglecting and dispising thy sacred
commandments, that needful it was in the end for the calamities which we
now suffer, to encounter with out lewdness, and that thou should extend
thy furious wrath upon us, by these most grievous perilles, being moved and
provoked thereto through our wicked deserts and naughty behavior.
Notwithstanding (O good God) have no regard at all to our merits, but rather
see to this, that thy famous glory may be greatly published amongst the
heathen, and thy wonderful worckes made manifest unto all people. Both thy
adversaries and ours also repose their whole affiaunce in worldly strength and
cursed Idolatry, who would enforce us to yield such honor unto Antichrist as
they do: whereas we contrariwise acknowledge thee to be a great and terrible
Lord above all Gods. Wherefore we earnestly call upon thy excellent
Majesty, and in these dangerous days fly unto thy mercy seat, requyring
pardon for our heinous sins, and that thou would show how vain our
enemies goods be. Judge (O good god) the adversaries of thy true worship,
and enemies of thy sacred Gospel, so that thou (as right meet it is) may
reign and bear dominion over the heathen. Stretche out thy invincible power,
thy puyssaunt glory, and thy renowned magnificence (O good God) for our speedy
deliverance, who being delivered from so many and great inconveniences, may
render unto thee due oblations of hearty praises. Cause thy glorious name to
be well spoken off in every place, and let all men honor and reverence thy
divine Majesty with most pure and perfect devotion, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
THy benefits (O almighty God) are not only bestowed upon us continually, but
also after a new and unaccustomed manner do spring up fresh from time to time:
wherefore (unless we will be marvelous ungrateful) they deserve that we
should, evermore magnify the same with new praises and pleasant songs. Such
is thy magnificencie and unspeakable power, whose beauty and Majesty is so
great, that thou do surmount beyond all measure, what Godhed or Deity
soever me^ could at any time device to themselves. Grant therefore that
whenever we go about duly to honor and reverently to worship thee, we may
cheerfully offer up our selves and all that ever we have to thy inco^prehensible
glory, so yt we may preach thy glorious kingdom to all nations, not only
with words, but in verteous life and holy conversation, to the intent every
man may right well know and perceive that like as thou have created us and
the whole universal world, so also shall we and all things be repaired
again, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xcvij. Psalm.
A prayer that we may appear in the ^ay of judgment, with a ^ure and
chear^ull heart.
THou thy self (O most mighty God) which art the author of full joy and
perfect gladness, art also endued with exceeding severity and dreadful
power, which thy properties thou bestowest upon man, according to thy infinite
justice and righteousness. Wherefore our earnest request is, yt thou would
not burn us up with the fire of thy wrathful indignation, who otherwise (by
reason of our heinous sins) are worthy of most grievous punishments, but
(according to thy great mercy, and through the merits of thy only Son Jesus
Christ our Lord and savior) remit and pardon whatsoever we have lewdly
committed against thee: but contrariwise, turn the wrath of thy heavy
displeasure upon thy fierce adversaries. Let those men be set on fire, make
them to tremble, let them melt away like wax at the sight of thy bright
countenance. But let us (being restored and reformed in a new kind of life by
thy blessed spirit) feel in our selves, and set out thy noble justice such
wise unto them, as all people may right well perceive the same. For although we
have greatly and very much strayed from thy holy will revealed unto us in the
sacred scriptures, we are notwithstanding heartily sorye for our lewd deserts,
and be very desirous to make thy glorious renown exceeding famous. Let not
therefore this our assured hope and fervent desire be made frustrate: put them
to confusion who believe nothing at all in thee, but have an infinite number of
Idols, wherein they put their whole trust, whereunto they show much worship,
merueylous great honor, and wonderful obedience. And finally grant this
thing also, that such as thou have regenerated and quickened with thy blessed
spirit, may utterly detest sin, and whatsoever fights or is repugnant to
thy holy will. Afterward take the souls of thy faithful servants out of
wicked men's hands, and when we be thoroughly delivered from them, cause us not
only to rejoice with great gladness, but make thy healthful light of
salvation to shine upon all that are thine, whereby they may be converted unto
thee, and celebrate thy worthy memorial with perpetual praises, through the
self same Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
Seeing it is thou (O almighty God) that rulest far and near, and mightily
gouernest all things, there is nothing in the whole world but ought to be
exceeding glad thereof: for like as thy glorious kingdom (which is the
chiefest thing to be desired) is most gorgeously decked with justice and
equity, even so is there such strength and puyssaunce graffed in the same, as
no crafty devices, and subtle practices can prevail against it, but that
(whatsoever thou have with a most rightful counsel and singular justice
decreed upon) shall be brought to good end. We earnestly require thee
therefore that as the earth, heaven, and universal world are most evident
witnesses of thy unspeakable wisdom and singular justice, so the truth and
sincere worshipping of thee may appear in thy blessed Church, where all men
may heartily rejoice together, because supersticious and corrupt Religions are
altogether banyshed. Let them be joyful in this behalf which purely and with
fervent zeal do unfeignedly love and honor God: whom finally (we humblye
beseech) to augment the light of our minds, and that we may with an
exceeding pleasant cheerfulness, rejoice in the sacred Congregation of his
blessed Saints, for the unspeakable benefits he has bestowed upon us,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
For So Much as all thy judgments (O most good and merciful God) do shine
forth with perfect equity and right up justice, we ought therefore to be
exceeding glad and very joyful. For although thy faithful servants be punished
for a while so long as they are in this wretched life, yet the time will one
day come, when thou by fire and with the clear lightsome presence of thy
divine Majesty shall judge the world, rewarding every man uprightly according
to his deserts. Then shall the very heavens show forth thy righteousness,
and al men compelled whether they will or no, to say that thou art most just:
and then also shall thy blessed Church be filled with true and perfect joy.
Seeing that therefore the matter stands thus so long as we are here strangers
from thee, cause light to rise in us, and a spiritual rejoicing with exceeding
pureness of heart, whereby we may sincerely and after a due manner joy in thee
only, so that one of us may always put an other in remembrance not to be
forgetful to publish thy unspeakable holiness, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

A prayer out of the.xcviij. Psalm.
A prayer for the favor of Christ through his glorious resurrection.
THou have showed oftentimes that salvation belongs unto thee only (O most
mighty God) for the doing and accomplishing whereof thou have no need of any
creatures assistaunce. Thou shewedst marvelous wonders in our fathers days,
and did often preserve them with thy only right hand and blessed arm:
for thou have in such wise extended thy ready help toward them, yt thy
excellent mercy and unspeakable goodness became manifest to al nations. Seeing
that therefore thou have not hitherto been forgetful of thy faithful promises,
but rather have always assisted thy beloved servants, when soever they stood
in need of a deliverer: whereupon they thought thy glorious name was to be
extolled and praised all manner of ways, so much as in them lay, both with
heart, voice, trumpets, harpes, shawmes, and sundry ditties of songs: we
therefore thy faithful people do in like sort pray at this present, that thou
hidest not thy self from us in this time. Thou truly art not ignorant how
many and how great the perils are, which do grievously molest us. And so long
as we do wey the case by our own deserts, they seem to be more hard and
grievous unto us then we be able in any wise to bear: for we have sinned in
such wise against thee, so impude^tly transgressed thy sacred laws, and so
often played the rebels against thy divine Majesty, that if thou should
reward us according to our lewd life and filthy conditions, we may be even in
utter despair of our salvation. But we do greatly and with much feruencie
labor to obtain this at thy favorable hands, both that thou would deal.
with us according to thy accustomed manner, by forgiving the penitent, pardoning
their heinous offenses which vncessauntly call upon thy blessed name, and being
merciful unto such as faithfully trust in thee. And also that of thy singular
justice and excellent clemency, thou would mightily deliver us, after a
puyssaunt manner maintain us, and defend us with an invincible force, from the
most cruel enemies of thy blessed name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
AL mankind in general (O most mighty God) are bound to praise and set
forth thy blessed name exceedingly, for the notable benefits thou bestowest
upon them, and most especially, for that thou have delivered us from
everlasting death by the help of none other creature, but only through the
sole oblation of thy alone and most dearly beloved Son: insomuch as we may
rightly say, that thou only defendest us with thy holy arm and puissant
right hand. Thou have very certainlye showed how mindful, and what a good
keeper thou art of faythfulnesse and goodness, which the whole ends of the
earth and all mortal creatures may assuredly see and right well perceive by our
redemption: but we be so dull, rude, and blockishe, that we have in a manner
lost the whole perceyueraunce of so noble and great liberality, the fault
whereof we must impute to our heinous wickedness and mischievous deeds.
Wherefore, with a mighty lamentation and very sorrowful cry, we do
earnestly call upon thy inestimable mercy to forgive whatsoever we have most
grievously committed against thee, and to take from thy blessed Church the
occasions of so great sorrow. For whilst we know godliness and religion to
hang in so great distress, we can in no wise sing unto thee with heart and
voice as we ought to do, or provoke all creatures through our great joy, to
unspeakable gladness. We do now earnestly require thee to come and judge the
case of thy faithful people. Raise up and sustain with thy judgment such as
mourn, and comfort the afflicted, that thy equity and justice (wherein thou
do much excel all others) may most manifestly show forth it self,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.xcix. Psalm.
A prayer for the justification of faith, against the righteousness of works.
IT is truly an exceeding great force of thy glorious kingdom that thou (most
mighty God) use in the defense of the Godly, and overthrowing of the envious
and rebellious people, which our fathers have oftentimes had trial of. Whereby
we do most certainly believe and earnestly confess, that so long as thou do
favor thy faithful servant, the courages, minds, and strengt^ of those that
assault them, yea and the ver^ earth also does quail: seeing therefore tha^ thy
puyssaunce and strength is so great i^ the Church, let thy mighty power (we
b^seech thee) disquiet and trouble all nations which would quite subvert and
utterly overthrow thy glorious kingdom. And as thy puyssaunt force and mighty
strength surmounteth all Gods and kings, even so now show thy self a terrible
and fearful GOD for the preservation of thy blessed Church. It is verily not
vnbeknowne unto us, that thou love iugdement, and decidest men's causes
uprightly. We heartily require thee therefore to vouchsafe, that (when as our
iniquities which we have committed provoke thee to extend thy severity upon
us) thou would turn thy eyes from these things, and bend them wholly upon
Jesus Christ our savior, who is for us in the stead of Aaron, Moses, Samuel,
and a true Bishop. Be mindful of the prayer, sacrifice, blood and tears
which he shed for us upon the Alter of the Cross. Admit, we have committed an
infinite number of naughty factes, yet remember that we through him do call
upon thy blessed name, pardon therefore, forgive, and utterly remit our heinous
transgressions, and make no ^ariance in delivering us from these exceeding
great and dangerous perils, so that we may lead our life with an vncorrupt
heart toward thee, and exalt thy glorious name, even as it right well
deserves, with such praises as may pearce the heavens, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
ALthough the ungodly (O most mighty God) seem to ruffle sometime so greatly,
as they turn all things vpside down, yet there is no cause why ye faithful
should be greatly afraid, for so much as thou have taken the government of all
worldly things into thy mighty protection, and guydest with thy excellent
wisdom the state of the whole world: for whosoever they be which are
assuredlye persuaded in this point, they leave fear for such as be otherwise
minded, while they themselves (being fully replenished with pure joy and
perfect gladness) do extol thee with vncessaunt praises to the vttermoste of
their powers, and show forth thy famous glory by all means that can be
devised: unto whom we also annix our endeavors with an exceeding cheerful
courage, and also humbly require thee in our most fervent cries and earnest
petitions, that as thou shewedst thy self gentle and treatable unto Moses,
Aaron, Samuel, and the remnaunt of thy most faithful priests, when they did
invoke and call upon thy glorious name: give ear in likewise to us at this
present, and defend thy sacred Church (which now stands in great need of thy
mighty assistance, if ever it wanted the same) no less with thy divine
presence, good counsel, holy spirit and grace, then thou did help our
fathers in times past with a pillar of fire, with clouds in the Sea, and in
the most wide and large wilderness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.C Psalm.
VErily thy exceeding great honor (O most mighty God) and notable benefits
bestowed upon us, A prayer that we may in all places both glorify God, and
also confess him.
require this, yt we of duty should come before thy presence with thanks
giving, and magnifying thy blessed name with a notable gladness and
unspeakable joy. There be two things chiefly which seem to hinder us from
doing thereof: first we are burdened with an innumerable multitude of horrible
vices, and so kept down with sin, that we dare scarcely lift up our eyes
unto thee: furthermore we are by the desert of our own lewd factes, environed
in such wise with anguishe and fear of Antichrist, as we are in a manner
swalowed up therewith. For experience teaches that he is so stirred up against
us by thy justice, through our own wicked behavior, that (unless thy loving
mercy be our ready helper) man's power and strength shall further us nothing
in this behalf. First and foremost therefore our earnest request is, that thou
would take utterly away from thy faithful servant, the burden of
wickedness, and grant that we may lead a pure and undefiled life, in steed
of such a one as is very lewd and marvelous corrupt. Secondly, that thou
would deliver thy blessed people from the Jaws of the most cruel enemies,
whose endeavor is always to bring not only the bodies and goods, but also the
souls of thy faithful servant to eternal destruction. Thou that art our
God, suffer not these things to be done we humbly beseech thee: we are the
work of thy hands, for thou did make us and not we our selves. Seeing
therefore that we be thy chosen people, and sheep of thy pasture, be present
so to help us both in the outward and inward man, that we may in the end enter
the Court of thy divine presence, by publishing thy unspeakable goodness with
high praises, godly Hymns, and pleasant songs, so that assurance thereof may
be given by us, both to all Nations, and throughout all ages, by Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
WE being greatly assured by the outward testimony of the sacred scriptures,
and inward inspiration of thy blessed spirit (O most good and merciful God)
that thou will be favorable and merciful unto us and all ours, are both
filled with perfect joy, and receive full pleasure. But forsomuche as we right
well perceive by the excellent benefits of faith, that thou art our founder,
by whom we are created and chosen to be thy beloved flock and peculier
people, we can never be fully satisfied (...) due thanks giving, and
remembrance of thy so great goodness. We come and approach unto thee
therefore with vncessaunt praises and humble supplications, most earnestly
requiring thy divine Majesty in our fervent prayers, to manifest thy glorious
name unto all Nations, and of thy loving kindness to set thy sacred Church
again in such blessed felicity, as all men may right well know and perfectly
understand thy clemency extended toward her, both for the verity of the
doctrine, and also for living and conversation fully agreeable to the things
that are faithfully and truly taught, by Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cj. Psalm.
^ ^rayer for ^dly life.
THou requirest this especially in such men's livings as profess thy blessed
name and holy Gospel (O most good and merciful God) that they should lead
their life exceeding justly and with great uprightness, and to perform the
deeds of charity toward their neighbors: which thing seeing the holy
Scriptures do every where beat into us, we unfeignedly confess that we have in
no wise performed it, and in this behalf we acknowledge before thy divine
Majesty, our grievous wickedness and most wrongful dealings, and the cold
zeal we have had toward thy holy Church and blessed people: praying thee
that thou would pardon and remit whatsoever we have hitherto traitorously
and rashlye committed against thy sacred commandments, and grant that (being
enforced thereto through the wisdom of thy holy spirit) we may begin an
innocent and blameless life: let all wicked devices be excluded far from our
hearts, and cause us to detest such matters as be repugnant to justice and
equity, so that we may neither think nor yet do any thing which may be
disagreable to thy blessed law and good pleasure. Moreover (we humbly beseech
thee) not to forsake thy holy Church in this most troublesome time: for thou
both feast and right well perceiuest, how the cruel, malicious, and ungodly
Antichristians have invaded her: being so puffed up with pride, and inflamed with
fury, scorning as well divine laws as human with like stateliness and
equal contempt, doing nothing with courtesy and faythfulnesse, but practice
to bring all things to naught by forged tales, politic deceypts, and very
much outrage: wherefore our earnest request is (O good GOD) that thou would
make have to succor thy faithful people, and destroy with thy puyssant force
and mighty power, such as are wicked, who be no less adversaries to thy
blessed name, then of our peace and quietness, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
IT behooves the Church (O al^^htye God) which is thy blessed house, to be
decked with all manner of ornaments apperteyning to holiness and virtue,
whereof, for so much as we see it to be as now miserably destitute, we humbly
beseech thee, who art beneuolent, and wishes her (as we doubt not) all good
and prosperous things, whom thou especially fauourest according to the meaning
of thy loving promises, grant her in such wise to be restored, as all things
may be ordered there by thy spiritual wisdom, and avoid those offenses
therefro, unto which everlasting damnation is due by justice. Let them depart
thence which fall from thee by infidelity, and are through obstinate
wilfulness, traiterous rebels to thy sacred law: let backebiters, together
with such as are proud, and those which dare shameleslye presume any thing,
be utterly rooted out. And contrariwise, let there be space in especially for
such as be very zealous of the truth. Let not these be only conversant there
before thee, but cause them to feed thy blessed people with a singular faith
and inno^sie, and minister all things diligently unto them, which be necessary
toward salvation. Remove far from thence, far from them (O excellent father) be
all man's inue^tion and deceyptfull ydolatrie, so that finally all Godliness
may be utterly rooted up from the Congregation of the faithful, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cij. Psalm.
WE are of our own selves altogether unworthy (O most mighty God) A praye^
the trial faith a^^fliction ^ Church
that thou should give ear unto our prayers, seeing we have every where
transgressed thy sacred law and blessed commandments, and lived exceeding
dishonestly toward thy holy Gospel, and our vocation. Howbeit, hide thou not
away thy face (for thy infinite mercies sake) from our humble petitions and
earnest supplications. For we are grievously assailed and sore oppressed with
most great perilles. And therefore bow down thy favorable ear unto us, and
grant them with speed their desires which invoke and call upon thee. First
we require to be delivered from our heinous sins and lewd corruptions, and
let our weak and feeble hearts be strengthened in thy blessed way, and the
withered powers of our mind (which are dried up) watered with the holy Ghost,
that we may live unto thee, who (being altogether repaired and wholly renewed)
may cause thy glorious name and sacred Gospel to be well spoken of. This once
done, extend thy invincible power and might upon such as raise up innumerable
slanders and reproaches upon the name of thy Son and his holy doctrine. Have
mercy out of hand (we humbly beseech thee) of Sion, that is to say, thy
blessed Church, for the time is now come that she stands in great need of
thy ready help. Look out, we heartily pray thee, from thy high dwelling
place, behold our grievous calamities, and hear their pitiful cries which are
in great bonds, much beaten, and grievously tormented to death diverse manner of
ways for thy glorious names sake, by preserving thy chosen sheep out of so
great dangers, whom the Antichristians do adiudge not only to death, but
also to utter destruction, that thy adobted children may one time or other
lead a peaceable and quiet life before thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
THe whole company of thy faithful people (O most good and merciful God) do
lamentably require thy favorable help, which is cruelly oppressed through the
tyranny of sin, and the sacred sap of godliness almost dried up in the
same, for her mouth is in a manner so stopped up that she cannot sing thy
worthy praises, and there remains not well near any member in her body
that may execute his office in helping one another. Thou therefore which
always florishest fresher and fresher, rise up to be our speedy helper,
because we have now thought it high time for thee to assist thy blessed Church
so grievously afflicted: which thing if thou will grant us, we doubt not but
the fear of thy glorious name and sincere godliness shall be spread very
far abroad. For if thou will deliver thy faithful people from so great and
mischeeuous dangers, thou shall teach thereby that thy loving promise
remains always firm and vnappayred: in such wise, that although the heaven
and earth be troubled with wonderful interchaunges, and be so shaken as they
perish, yet does the same continue always one toward thy elect servant,
whereby, we heartily beseech thee, to be both preserved, and also set in good
estate again, not according to our own strength and deserts, but through
his mercy and gentleness effectually working the same, by Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Ciij. Psalm.
WE are bound (O most mighty God) for thy singular deserts extended toward
us, A prayer for a new life.
to praise thee continually, with mind, heart, and all our whole power,
rendering condign thanks unto thy divine majesty, unless we will like
ungrateful persons, forget all those things which thou have hitherto bestowed
upon us. First thou have freely offered us forgiveness of sins, by Christ,
and regeneration through his precious blood: hereunto is added doctrine,
sacraments, bodily life, and whatsoever else apperteyneth to the preservation
both of the outward and inward man. But we heartily acknowledge that we have
notwithstanding most filthily abused all these thy excellent benefits, for we
have done nothing faithfully that answers fully to our calling. We now
therefore do humbly beseech thee to pardon our grievous offenses and lewd
behavior, amending our corrupt manners and the dishonest life which we have led
hitherto. Deal not with us after our sins, neither reward us according to
our iniquities. Will thou (seeing that singular loving kindness and mercy
preuayleth with thee) be always reuengeable? or correct and chastise us in
thy fury? Remember that thou art our father, and therefore earnestly do we
desire thee to show forth a fatherly affection toward such as both honor and
worship thee. It is not vnbeknowne to thy divine Majesty that we are dust, and
(unless thou be present with us) the vaynest things that ever were made: we
are more lither then grass and flowers. Regard not therefore our lewd and
wicked factes, but way rather the league made betwixt thee and us, and deliver
thy faithful people from the hands of thy cursed and most mischievous enemies,
so that we may magnify thy wondrous works, with the glorious Angels, and
all holy men for evermore, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
Man's weak and feeble nature can at no time (O almightye GOD) praise thee
according to thy worthiness: for thou do not only bestow upon us the
benefits whereby we both obtain life, and also do from day to day continue
and maintain the same, but thou have forgiven thy faithful people their most
grievous and infinite sins, by Christ, which surmounteth al other things that
thou have participated amongst us, for the which most excellent and notable
gift, we yield thee hearty thanks, although not such as we ought, yet such
as we can: and to the intent we may thereby become more cheerful in requiring
the same, our earnest request is (O excellent Father) that thou would
establishe and perpetually maintain the word of pure and sincere doctrine in
the mouth of thy blessed Church, so that an alteration of her old Leven being
made, she may (like the Eagle) from time to time renew her youth. And like as
thou dissembling the sins of the Israelites, did not only bring them to
the dwelling place that thou had promised by Moses whom thou had taught,
but also through the perpetual benefits of thy excellent mercy bestowed
upon that people did show and manifest, that thy goodness, toward them,
surmounted all their mischievous deeds, no less space then the heavens are
distant from the earth: be thou (which art our father and we thy dear
children) moved with mercy toward us, who are like to be overwhelmed with
darkness and lewd behauiours, unless thou presently put to thy assistant
helping hand. Cause us to find by proof that thou have renewed the covenant
made betwixt thee and us, and (the same being restored) let us with all
earnessnesse, endeavor our selves to set forth thy blessed law and
commandments in holiness of life, whereby not only the earthly Church may
render condign thanks unto thy unspeakable goodness for our salvation, but
also the Aungelles which accomplish thy holy will with a marvelous
cheerfulness may do the same, through Jesus Christ our lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the. Ciiij. Psalm.
A prayer that we may use ^he creatures of God in such ^ort as we ^re willed.
EVery creature does abundauntlye show forth unto us thy invincible force,
splendant bewtte, and famous glory (O most mighty god) inasmuch as we see that
all things do adorn thee with their whole power and might, obeying not only
thy sacred words, but even thy very beckes also: it behooves us in like sort
to be likewise affectioned, seeing that thou have created all things chiefly to
our profit and singular commodity. For we certainly know and right well
perceive how the earth does continually yield fruit for our sustentation, and
how we be helped with the wells, floods, beasts, rain, herbs, corn, wine,
oil, and all kind of food: but our nature is so blind, corrupt, and
defiled, that the more we are bound to thee for thy exceeding great benefits,
so much the stubburnlier swerve we from thy sacred words and blessed will.
Wherefore our earnest request is, that thou would (for thy infinite mercies
sake) pardon whatsoever we have hitherto committed against thy divine
Majesty, and vouchsafe us to depend soly upon thee, will we or nill we,
touching our bodily food, so yt also our whole motions, strength, counsels and
works be fastened only upon thy excellent goodness. Moreover, we humbly
beseech thee, not to turn thy face away from us in these our days, whereas
otherwise we shall be sore troubled, give up the ghost, and be brought to
nothing. Thou have (O good God) diverse means and sundry ways to destroy thy
mischievous enemies: who use the most violent winds, lightnings, and flames
of fire, in steed of thy messengers, for if thou do look down upon the
earth, it trembles by and by, and if thou touchest ye mountains, they smoke
straight ways. Sley thou therefore the wicked Antichristians, in such wise, as
they may no more remain: and let peace and tranquillity be so given to thy
blessed Church, that she may joyfully sing, and pleasantly show forth thy
most worthy praises, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
IT is not vnbeknowne to thy faithful people (O most mighty God) that thou
have created all things from the beginning to the behoof of thy elect
servant. Therefore like as we see the whole world which thou have made to be
garnished with wonderful and most bewtifull ornaments: so (we humbly beseech
thee) to lighten and pollishe thy blessed Church in such wise (which is the
congregation of such as shall be saved) that thy glory may no less appear
in her then in the whole world: let the pure light of thy sacred words shine
especially therein, which may cause the mighty power and invincible force of
thy Spirit to work more effectually in our hearts, and make the constancy
in faith of the beleuers, so great as they may be more steadfast then the mass
of the earth, or foundations and pillars of the world. Drive from thence at
the rebuke of thy puyssance, dangerous temptations, the hurtfulnesse of hell,
and the prince of darkness: and contrariwise in steed of them, let the
inspiration of thy most sweet spirit succeed like springs of living water,
and let not perpetual food be wanting to our weakness, where with to feed
it. But let there be a fortress in the confidence of thy glorious name, for us
to retire unto: and like as in thy blessed creatures is great abundance of
light, whether it be in the stars, or in the sundry variety of beasts,
herbs, and stones, so we humbly beseech thee, to garnishe and bewtifie thy
holy Church with the brightness of all virtues, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
AL creatures which thou have created (O most good and merciful God) are
witnesses, by their greatness and most exquisite ornaments, with what a
wonderful wisdom and invincible power thou flourishest: there is nothing but
it depends wholly upon thee, for what things soever have life, are fed by the
food which thou give them, and from such as thou hidest the sight of thy
loving countenance, they are not able any longer to endure but die incontinent
whenever they be deprived of thy spirit. For So Much as therefore (O excellent
father) thou art so good and mighty in working, even toward those things
chiefly which thou have ordained to be far inferior to man, we humbly
beseech thee to extend thy favorable clemency no less toward thy blessed
Church. She verily is thy own work, wherefore rejoice and delight therein,
and (of thy exceeding high providence) cause thy majesty to show forth it
self in her most evidently, whereby we may always both jointly amongst our
selves have most pleasant words concerning thy blessed will, and also magnify
thee with perpetual praises, for so much as thou have taken all uncleanness
quite from her, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cv. Psalm.
THy marvelous and unspeakable works (O heavenly father) do much counsel
us, A prayer the we be not ^^norant of t^^ works of o^ redemption
and thy commandments earnestly teach us, to search for thy loving
countenance with a most pure worship and faithful invocation in thy holy
congregations, by calling this to mind and remembrance, that thou art our
merciful God, who have made us the true Israel by Christ, and sons of thy
most famous servant Abraham, through faith. Take away therefore from us (we
humblye beseech thee) our heinous sins and all uncleanness of life, to the
intent we may according to our bounden duty, seek thee and come before thy
divine presence. We acknowledge our selves to have hitherto most grievously
offended thee both in mind and voice, and unless thou make haste to help
us, our sins will cast us down into the deep. For (even according to our
just deserts) the outrageous enemies of thy blessed name, are raised up and
have mightily prevailed against us, who daily strengthen themselves against thy
son our Lord and fauiour Jesus Christ. We know right well yt (by reason of the
life which we have hitherto lived repugnant to thy glorious name and our
profession) all these most grievous euilles have happened to thy sacred Church.
But our earnest request is that thou would be mindful of thy faithful
covenant, wherein thou promisest that we should be the meeting line of thy
blessed heritage: for thy covenant is not transitory, but perdurable. Thou
have used at other times to chastise kings that they should not hurt thy elect
people, who do preserve and defend thy blessed servant inhabiting here
upon the earth, so often as it is thy holy will and pleasure. The Heaven,
Elements, and all creatures have served thee as soldiers in Egypt for the
deliverance of thy faithful people. As thou therefore were not then
forgetful of thy sacred covenant, so show thy self mindful thereof at this
present: for wicked men, the devil, and Antichrist, practice by all the means
they can possible imagine and devise to swallow us up. Wherefore renew thou thy
wonderful works in us, O mighty God, who (being altogether void of help)
require thee to hide us under thy merciful wings, and spread them so over us,
as thou may not only be our defender, but cause us to lead a quiet and
peaceable life toward thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
Seeing that the godly (O almighty God) can not have an excellenter and more
noble desire, then unfeignedly to remember thy marvelous and exceeding great
acts, by celebrating the same both in word and most exquisite commendations,
being now folowers of the faith of Abraham, and children not degenerate from
the ancient holy fathers, members of Christ, and instructed by the tradicions
of his blessed Apostles, do call to remembrance how vnuiolably thou have kept
the sacred covenant which thou made with thy holy Church from the
beginning. Thy sure protection and most strong defense has been always
merueilous ready to help thy elect servant at what time they reposed their
whole trust in thy unspeakable mercy, and when thou tookest upon thee to be
their strong helper and mighty deliverer, no man could in any wise hurt them.
Moreover when thou did strike the whole world by any calamity, with thy
severe justice, or did trouble it with scarcity of food and lack of
vittailes, all that (so much as it was) turned at length to thy singular welfare
and famous glory of the people of Israel. We being greatly admonished by
these things, are of very good comfort, who come humbly unto thy divine
Majesty, and heartily pray thee that thou would be no less mindful of thy
holy covenant toward thy blessed church at this day then thou were in old
time. For thou see how many discommodities do on every side assail her and
besiege it about: we humbly beseech thee (O excellent father) who alone can
do this, to commau^d all those things either to fade away, or else grant them
power to pourge us of our lewd conditions, through Jesus christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
Our earnest request is (O most good and merciful God) that thou would
augment the fellowship of thy dear children (as well in number as also in
faith) and all other ornaments of thy excellent grace. And like as thou have
given Aaron to be a most faithful pastor of thy children of Israel when they
grew to be a very great people, so now also prepare godly, learned, and wise
Ministers for thy sacred Church, by whose good behavior the Egypt of our men
may fade away, and let the doctrine wherewith we be instructed by them, be
kindled daily more and more in us, so that every one of us may be enriched most
abundantly both with spiritual goods, and spiritual fruits. Suffer us not (O
excellent father) to be at any time destitute of the bright light of thy sacred
word, and guyding of the holy ghost, whereas otherwise we shall both miserably
stray in the Wilderness of this miserable life, and also perish exceeding
unfortunately, that when as innumerable perils of temptations hang over thy
faithful servant, let them not want the strength of thy good grace and
loving favor, whereby they may be able (so long as life indureth) to set out
thy glorious kingdom unto many, and finallye obtain at thy loving hands the
dwelling place of perpetual felicity, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
Seeing that the holy scriptures make not mention, without just cause, of the
children of Isreal's ingratitude and rebellion against God (for they were
always troublesome to him by reason of their complaints) we humbly beseech
thee, O heavenly father, so to rule and govern us with thy unspeakable mercy
and fatherly loving kindness, that we be not found like unto them. They did
lately and very readily forget thy wonderful works, whereby thou deliueredst
them from bondage: then they trusted in strange Gods: they were defiled with
fleshly pleasures; and finally did both despise the amiable land which thou
promisedst them, and also polluted themselves with most grievous and shameful
offenses. For the which notable and grievous sins, thou have oftentimes
chastised them with a fatherly discipline, but yet (such was thy unspeakable
goodness) thou were never forgetful of thy covenant made with their
forefathers. Even so, we humbly beseech thee (O good God) to chasten and
correct thy blessed Church (when it does now and then slide very sore) with
thy accustomed mercifulness, and favorable loving kindness, saving the right
of the everlasting covenant, which thou have renewed with us through the death
of thy only beloved Jesus Christ our Lord, who lives and reigns with thee
evermore world without end. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
THy unspeakable goodness is such (O most mighty God) toward the
congregation of thy faithful servant, that look whatsoever thou have done
hitherto for setting thy faithful people at liberty, the same also might she
now both hope for, and also assure her self of, if she had abidden in the
covenant that she made with thee. For even as the persecutors of the Israelites
were sore vexed and at length oppressed through thy mighty power: so in likewise
(when it shall seem good unto thee) let all such as be enemies to thy sacred
Church and verity, be consumed with the force of thy invincible spirit. We
now therefore require this especially at thy merciful hands, that thou would
(so long as we be strangers from thee in this wretched life, and are compassed
about on every side with an infinite number of perils) lighten the night of our
darkness with the bright fire of thy blessed spirit, and vouchsafe to
mittigate the heat of our manifold temptations, with the most sweet cloud of
thy benign grace, whereby we may so purely and with such safety finishe our
journey through the deserts of this sinful life, as in the end we may
rejoice, for being come unto thee with pourged minds into everlasting
tabernacles, through Jesus christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
Our faith (O most good and merciful God) is more feeble and weak then it
ought to be, whereof it comes that we sin oftentimes with our fathers,
whilst that we do not faithfully trust to thy blessed promises: but as thou
(who art God) have not dealt with the children of Israel according to their
infidelity and unbelief, but did deliver them with a strong arm and most
puyssaunt power from the bondage of the Egyptians, even so we humbly beseech
thee to be in such wise present with us by vanquishing and beating down the
grievous sins whereby we are led into captivity, as thou have drowned the
Egyptians in the depth of the Sea, to the intent that we being moved with ye
feeling of this thy unspeakable goodness, may have a more firm and constant
faith, nothing pampering our lusts in passing through the desert of this
wretched life, least we also in like manner kindle not thy heavy displeasure
against us, as did the Israelits who provoked thy wrathful indignation against
the^, through their sundry naughty and lewd desires. Let us (we heartily
pray thee) have their penalties and punishments always before our eyes, who
being admonished by other men's perils and mischief, may behave our selves
warelier and with more wisdom in thy blessed house, which is thy sacred
Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cvj. Psalm.
A prayer for perfect con^ssion, and that grace which God has in^ued us with,
^aye have ^uch rule ^uer us.
WE are all greatly bound to magnify thy blessed name so much as in us lies (O
most excellent God) for thy singular goodness and everlasting mercy, who
have very often showed the unspeakable force of thy puyssant strength for thy
faithful peoples deliverance, the like we now do humbly beseech thee to
visit and comfort thy afflicted Church withal, which now is little better
then oppressed with the fury of Antichrist and lewd practices of evil persons.
But for so much as it is thy blessed heritage, we have a merueylous earnest
desire once to behold the peace, joy, and prosperity thereof. We know right
well, and plainly confess, that we have committed very much lewdness
together with our fathers, so that we have sinned exceeding grievously, and
have most wretchedly fallen from thee our God: yet do we not therefore
despair, because we verily perceive that thou did always show thy self to
be such a one toward thy chosen people of old time which thou did adorn
with incredible benefits, who although they were altogether forgetful of the
same in starting aside to ydolatry and ungodliness, yet did thou only not
utterly overthrow those men, but (being chastised with a fatherly correction
for a season) restoredst the^ to their former quietness, at what time they
returned into the way of thy holy commandments. Wherefore (we humbly beseech
thee) O most mighty God, to preserve us none otherwise, and not according to
our deserts, but for the glory of thy name only, that like as we are gathered
together out of many nations, so also being delivered from a number of great
perils, may show forth thy most worthy praises and speak very much honor of
thee, through Jesus Christ our lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
THy inestimable clemency and wonderful goodness (O most good and merciful
God) is such, that the deepelier we consider the same by thy glorious works,
so much seems it to be a more difficult thing to praise thee according to thy
desert and worthiness: yet seeing the minds of the beholders hereof do
always perfectly see that such are blessed which execute Justice and equity,
and contrariwise those most unfortunate, that in their life and conuersasion
swarne from thy sacred laws. We earnestly require thee therefore to keep us
(through the grace and favor of our Lord Jesus Christ) in the obedience of thy
most holy will, and call us back from our innumerable and most grievous
sins, vouchsafing finally to preserve thy blessed church, not verily for her
own deserts sake, but for the honor of thy most glorious name. Let it never
be forgetful of thy unspeakable benefits, which, if we do not always well
consider, we shall readily yield to worldly and fleshly desires. Remove far
from her, hatred and sects, whereby thy faithful Ministers have been
sometime vexed by the craft and subtlety of the Devil. And like as thou have
of old time spared thy people (whom thou determinedst to destroy) at Moses
intercession, even so pardon and forgive us all manner of crimes and faults
that we have offended thee in, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
THe fathers in the wilderness behaved themselves hedlessely toward thee (O
most mighty God) and were so shameless, as they are a spectacle unto us, who
did (in a manner parpetually, or at the least within a short while one after
another) provoke thy wrathful indignation, swaruing marvelous unfortunately
from thee through their lewd temptations, wicked grudginges, and most odious
repinings. Wherefore thou were rightly, and not without good cause moved
against them, for which things sake thou shewedst forth thy heavy displeasure
now and then in suffering and permitting their cruel enemies marvelous
severely to chastise them. These things ought to be an ensample and warning
unto us, for to have an especial regard to eschew those kind of vices, for
the which we know they were cast of from thee. Howbeit, we are so apt and
pliable to wickedness, that we have miserably defiled our selves with the
self same vices no less then they did. And therefore have we oftener then
once felt, that thou (who art a righteous Judge) have given us up to be
punished by our own wickednesses and lewd desires: but (seeing we have now
suffered punishment enough) we humblye beseech thee, that like as thou did
help the Israelites when they called upon thee, in the chiefest storms of
their calamities, being nothing forgetful of the covenant thou made with
the^, so also thou would be our mighty defense, and set us at liberty from
our errors and bondage of sins that we are grievously burdened withal, into
the favor of our Lord Jesus Christ thy son, who lives and reigns with
thee evermore world without end. Ame^.

A prayer out of the.Cvij. Psalm.
SVch verily are greatly bound to thy clemency, O almighty God, A prayer for
ye knowledge of Gods benefits, contrary to all worldly lew^ things.
unto whom (so long as they sail and are miserably toste of stormy tempests
and windy waves) thou sendest thy ready help in time convenient, and that
because they have faithfully called upon thee. Also thy mighty power is no
less showed in giving abundance of water to dry and sandy places, and in
altering and turning the barren ground to a fruitful soil. And contrariwise,
men's sins are the occasion thereof, that by a wonderful exchange, thou
make pleasant and fertile places to be come barren and altogether
fruitless: in fine, to the intent thou may be well known, thou causest
mortal creatures to feel thy invincible force, by casting down exceeding
mighty kings and princes, and making them to be had in contempt, and become a
most shameful laughing stock, and liftest up the poor and basest in degree,
unto highest kingdoms. We earnestly require thee therefore not to suffer us to
think of those things negligently, but rather grant this thing only, that
we being moved hereby may commit our selves altogether both to be preserved
through thy unspeakable goodness, and also guyded by thy sacred law, so that
thou being our chief Captain and ruler, we may swim out of worldly sourges,
whose minds being hitherto utterly void of good deeds, may now bring forth
most abu^dant fruit: and that whereas we have been pinched with an exceeding
scarcity of goodness, we may (by thy only help) attain to the excellent
riches of the kingdom of heaven, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
Whosoever they be (O most good and merciful God) that thou deliuerest from
exceeding grievous dangers, it behooves them incessantly to celebrate thy
worthy praises, and to render condign thanks to thee for the same. Such as
are driven to wander from place to place, and walk through theeuishe ways in
solitary and unhaunted places, being in danger of wild beasts and thieves,
even these when they earnestly pray unto thee, do daily feel thy loving mercy
and ready help. Thou art present also with them that are distressed with
captivity, bound with fetters of Iron, and laid in most dark dungions.
Neither art thou forgetful of them whom deadly diseases have almost consumed
and made utterly an end of: for so much as thou have once decreed that such as
lamentably require thy assistaunce from the bottom of their heart, shall never
be destitute of thy helping hand. We therefore that have of long time and that
grievously wandered out of the path of godliness and holy life, do now come
unto thee for succor, who (being so wretchedly oppressed with the tirannicall
bondage of our heinous sins) do call upon thee, and finally in all our
prayers do earnestly desire that thou would heal the diseases of our
wounded souls, so that we may always live as thy faithful servant, and
thou thereby to receive perpetual praise, through Jesus Christ our lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cviij. Psalm.
A prayer that ye godly may ^aue grace to ^ithstand the assaults of ^he wicked.
STrengthen and furnish our minds and hearts in such wise with thy holy
spirit (O most mighty God) that although diverse and sundry mishappes fall
upon them, or that they be shaken with the fear and dread of the enemies of
true godliness and sincere religion, yet they may not cease to show forth
thy worthy praises. Let our whole wit, mind, and perceyueraunce. (O
excellent father) he stirred up in us for the right understanding of thy
goodness, and acknowledging of the most steadfast faythfulnesse of thy benign
promises. For these two things are so famous in thee, as they do not only (by
reason of their hugeness) surmount the high Clouds of the air, but also
far exceed the height of the heavens. Therefore are we bold humbly to
entreat and heartily beseech thee, that (our innumerable and most grievous
sins being forgiven) thou will set up thy honor again, and show thy famous
glory to the whole world, by delivering thy sacred Church from the Iawbones
of Antichrist. Call to remembrance that she is thy beloved heritage and chosen
possession, which (although for our iniquities sake) thou seem sometime to
relinquishe and cast of from thy favorable protection, yet art thou not able
for thy goodness and faythfulnesse sake, to forget it in deed. Wherefore our
whole trust consists in thee only, as they that know most certainly that
man's help is of none effect. Be thou therefore present with us, and grant
that we may behave our selves both boldly and with great constancy in the
behalf of thy glorious name and of thy holy Gospel, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
Whilst we call to our remembrance and think upon the riches (O most good
and merciful God) of thy loving promises, we are wonderfully stirred up to
celebrate thy name with singular praises, which then augmenteth a more vehement
desire, when we find by experience that thou do very faithfully perform
whatsoever thou have promised to bestow upon us. Thou verily have given us
hitherto many things, and that truly without our deserts, yet there be many
remaining, which we earnestly require may very speedily be accomplished. Thou
have begun to deliver us from the hands of our cruel enemies, and let this
luckie beginning proceed to a further success: we be now so far forth
exempted from sin, that (so long as we truly believe in thee) they shall not
be imputed to us unto death. But yet for all that are we hitherto still
oppressed with them: let us therefore by thy high and mighty power, shake of
their yoke daily more and more. For So Much as thou art the first founder of thy
sons Kingdom (who is the true David) have a regard therefore, (we humbly
beseech thee) to set forth and make famous the light thereof amongst all
Nations, and that he may purely and with great devotion be honored and called
upon by us in especial, whereby thy sacred Church may do things nobly for
the advancement of thy glory, and not be plucked back by the enemies of
ungodliness from the right path of perfect religion, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cix. Psalm.
WE acknowledge and confess that thou alone (O most mighty god) do give us
all things which we possess: A prayer of the godly for the enemies of the
gospel.
under whose government and religion we account it a marvelous felicity to
lead our life, neither have we any other thing so dear and precious unto us,
as to continue in the praise and commendation of thy glorious name. Dissemble
not at this time nor keep silence against the wicked persons and guilefull
enemies of thy holy Church, who do not only rise up against thee with forged
tales and blasphemies, but also make war against us with a most furious hatred
and outrageous cruelty, being utterly forgetful of all humanity and
godliness. But thou (O good God) right well know how peaceably we have
been hitherto toward them, and have heartily loved those men, and earnestly
prayed for them both publikly and privately, who now recompense us with
extreme afflictions and grievous calamities for our good turns extended
toward them. Wherefore be thou stirred up against them (O heavenly father)
let their cursings and blasphemies which they have continually in their mouth
return upon them, overtake, and sore oppress them, having a just reward for
their hatred and injuries, which they extend chiefly both toward thee and
also toward us that be thy faithful people. But deal not with us (O most
merciful father) according to the worthiness of our iniquities, who have in
such wise sinned, and behaved our selves so wickedly in thy sight, as there are
no punishments (though they be never so grievous) but that we have deserved
the^. Yet have thou not a regard unto us, but to the glory of thy own name:
preserve and succor us, for thy infinite goodness sake, when we be grievously
afflicted and utterly destitute of all succor: let the Antichristians be put
to rebuke and clothed with shame, and cause reuilings to be a daily cloak to
cover them withal. But be thou always ready to assist us with thy ready
help, save the souls of thy faithful servants which depend wholly upon
thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
Seeing therefore thou art the same God (O heavenly father) which we make a
vaunt that thou art, Neither be thou silent or at rest in so great oppressions
of thy sacred Church, when as none other things are every where heard, then
mere blaspheemies against thee, against thy pure doctrine, and against thy
blessed people, yea and that chiefly of such, for whose preservation she has
always prayed heartily to thee. Thou know right well how we have continually
wished that peace and all good things might happen unto our chiefest
adversaries, who notwithstanding are now most impudently puffed up, for so much
as they verily think that they have espied a convenient time to overthrow thy
blessed heritage. Wherefore, they surely do right well deserve that thou
should pay them the hire of their lewd behauiours, and all those things
which we have now heard thy holy spirit to threaten against obstinate and
incurable sinners. But our conscience does accuse us that we have behaved our
selves most unworthy of thee and thy sacred doctrine, who first confess our
sins to be exceeding grievous, and secondly do earnestly desire thee (for
thy infinite mercies sake) to forgive us the same: and finally that thou will
succor thy afflicted people, to the intent we may both confess thee, and also
celebrate thy glorious name in holy and great congregations, because thou have
set thy self as a ready defender at the right hand of the poor, and of such
as are very like to be overthrown, and have preserved their life and religion
from the force and madness of Antichrist, who now seems to presume and take
upon him to do what he lysteth against them, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
O Most good and merciful God, who of all the praises wherewith the Church
magnifieth thee, art the rightful and rich ground and matter, it is not hidden
from thy divine Majesty, what the subtle and deceyptfull sort do daily
practice against the same. She of her gentleness loves them with a motherly
affection, and with prayers both most fervent, and also most often, does make
supplication to thee for their welfare. Notwithstanding, seeing that they do not
amend, but are more stubburnly boldned in their naughtiness (we humbly
beseech thee) at length to assuage and repress their furious rage, and
appoint some mean and end for thy servant afflictions. Thou see how all
things are now in a manner brought to extreme weakness, so that there is
almost nothing in thy worshipping, but is shamefully defiled and very lewdly
corrupted. Make haste therefore to be our ready helper, to the intent it may be
perfectly known that thou want neither strength nor wisdom to succor those
that be thine, which shall be marvelous convenient for the delating and
publishing of thy blessed name and most worthy praises: wherefore, seeing that
there is now great scarcity of good and spiritual stuff in thy blessed
Church, remedy thou the same with the most plentiful treasures of thy bright
light, pure doctrine, benign graces, and unspeakable benefits, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cx. Psalm.
^ prayer for ^e benefit our re^mption ^rchased ^ Christ.
Seeing that thou (O most mighty God) have vouchsafed thy dearly beloved Son
our Lord and savior Jesus Christ to sit at thy right hand, having a full,
perfect, and sovereign power, insomuch as he does rule and govern all things,
neither shall there be any of his adversaries remaining, but may at length be
cast under him as his footstool: ponder diligently we humbly beseech thee,
after what sort the ungodly and most outrageous Antichristia^s advance
themselves in these days, who dare openly say of him: we will not have this
man reign over us, neither can they be any thing satisfied by showing forth
this their outrageous anger after a most spiteful manner, both against thy
blessed spirit, and also upon us thy chosen people: wherefore send out from
heaven (O mighty GOD) thy puissaunt Scepter and rod of thy great fury upon
them, so that thy dear son may (by the holy ghost and sacred Gospel) be of
sovereign authority, even in the midst of his deadly enemies. Grant also
his faithful people to be of such a willing and ready mind, as they (being a
very great number) may assemble and meet together for the defense of his
glorious kingdom, not only with their most fervent prayers, but also by all
yt means they can possible imagine and devise. We truly are (by reason of our
heinous sins) unworthy of so great and unspeakable a benefit, who have
hitherto led our life nothing faithfully. Have no regard to us at all (O
heavenly father) but unto thy solemn oath and promise, wherewith thou have
ordained thy dear son to be both a noble Prince, and also a loving priest in
the true Church for the preservation thereof. Vouchsafe therefore in these our
days, that the kings, rulers, and mighty powers of this wretched world, (who
have so laid their heddes together against him) may be utterly consumed
with the fury of thy heavy displeasure, and do due execution upon these
blasphemous and most dishonest adversaries, so as this sacred Dominion and
Empire of the glorious Gospel may be greatly enlarged thorowout the universal
world, and that Jesus Christ thy dear son which seems to be in a manner
altogether oppressed in us, may be right well known to lift up his head most
renowmedly, and after an excellent manner, for whose sake we heartily require
all these things, which lives and reigns with thee evermore world without
end. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
For So Much as it is thy gracious will and pleasure (O most good and merciful
God) that our savior Jesus Christ thy dear son should show forth his
notable power over all creatures, and set in such wise on thy right hand, as
at length the force of all his outrageous enemies may be like a footestoole
cast under him: our earnest request is that he would now set out and publishe
his mighty power in this great needful time of the Church. Let him raise unto
himself willing and forward laborers for such a noble, excellent, and most
commodious a work, who being inflamed with the zeal of his honor and
dignity, may establishe the truth of his doctrine, amend men's manners, and set
up integrity of life amongst thy faithful people. For, seeing we heartily
acknowledge and humbly confess that we have both defiled and polluted our
selves by diverse innumerable and most grievous crimes, we earnestly beseech
thee to absolve us of them, through the expiation of Christ our mediator and
high priest, which thing unless he does it, who is ordained a priest for us
after the order of Melchisedech, we can none other ways obtain the same.
For So Much therefore as our heinous sins are blotted out and wiped away by
him, turn thy heavy displeasure from us, and pour it out against the
stubburne and rebellious enemies of al godliness. Give sentence in such wise
upon the wicked people, that at what time thy straight justice shall be seen,
known, and manifestly perceived, al men in general may lift thee up with
perpetual praises, according to thy worthy deserts, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
WE know (O almighty God) that the desolution of the world is not so long
deferred, and that our Lord Jesus Christ thy most dearly beloved son being
conveyed out of our sight, sits on thy right hand in glory, for any other
cause, but that all the enemies of the Gospel should in the mean while fall
down flat under his feet, and that his doctrine (which by the impulsion of the
holy Ghost is spread abroad from Mount Sion thorowout the whole world) should
both be published far and near, and also bring forth fruit in such wise,
that thou may have whole nations true worshippers of thee, not now
constrained and brought thereto by compulsion, but of a willing heart, and such
as will think it a goodly matter to spend not only all their goods, but
even their life also for the defense of thy sacred truth. Seeing that thou (O
excellent father) have promised with an assured oath to perform these things
in very deed, we do challenge thee at this time upon thy faythfulnesse to
accomplish them with so much speed as possible may be: pronounce sentence (I
heartily pray thee) with thy sacred Church, which the prince of darkness has
of such long time and so sharply assailed. Tear in pieces the devils cursed
engines, and mad outrage wherewith the infernal powers keeps her besieged,
so that one time or other Christ may put up his bright head amongst us, who
lives and reigns with thee in the unity of the holy Ghost evermore world
without end. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxj. Psalm.
AL thy works, O most mighty god, A prayer the Gods wonderful wor^ may be mad^
manifest.
are very great and wonderful, which (if we did devoutly and with much
feruencie search out) we should find nothing in them that should not greatly
satisfy our desires. But (alas for sorrow) seeing that we are so much
burdened with a corrupt life and an innumerable multitude of sins, we are
not able purely and with singleness of heart, to behold the magnificence and
uprightness that thou use in thy marvelous works. Yet notwithstanding by
calling to remembrance the unspeakable benefits which thou have bestowed upon
us and our fathers, we can not but say that thou art loving and merciful unto
us. Abolishe not thou therefore (who never have forsaken thy faithful
servants, by nourishing and giving them the promised heritage of the
Gentiles) the holy covenant which thou made with them, neither be
forgetful of us, for thy infinite mercies sake, but show forth thy self an
earnest lover of judgment and verity, by manifesting the equity, justice,
and uprightness of thy blessed will. The cause why our fierce enemies do so
assail us, is not vnbeknowen to thee, but thou understand right well the
cruel malice and mischievous hatred they have borne to sincere godliness,
true religion, and pure invocation of thy blessed name: who can not abide that
the Gospel should flourishe in our Churches, for which cause they are so
earnestly bent to swallow us up. Send thou therefore redemption unto thy
faithful people: and let the blessed covenant which thou haste made with thy
sacred Church, be inviolable and everlasting, in respect whereof (we humbly
beseech thee) mightily to deliver us, so that all men may right well perceive
thy infinite goodness, and greatly fear and stand much in awe of thy divine
Majesty: but cause us always to celebrate thy most worthy praises, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
IF we did diligently pervse and seek out the things which thou (O almighty
God) have created, we should even with all our heart be enforced to acknowledge
the equity and uprightness of them: for so much as we see nothing amongst all
thy creatures but is wonderful notable, and most excellent. Moreover the
famous tokens of thy inestimable goodness which thou do for men, are of
everlasting memorial, and ought at no time to be forgotten. Thy faithful
servant have hitherto never lacked or been destitute of thy ready help,
who have very carefully thought always of the covenant thou made with them.
For thou give us abundauntly all manner of things which are for the health of
the body, thou adornest them with an exceeding great heritage, and do
furnishe them with doctrine and most wholesome precepts: adding moreover
hereunto the wonderful promises annixed to a marvelous steadfast verity, and
finally have been accustomed to deliver the^ from sorrowful bondage and
grievous oppression. We that believe assuredly these things, do now with much
humility, present our selves before thy gracious presence, requiring thee to
remit the most grievous sins wherewith we have offended thee, and to deliver
us from imminent perils, so that we (being void of fearfulness and free from
wicked persons) shall by that means have the fear of thee (which is the
beginning of wisdom) and the true understanding of thy blessed law, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
WE ought to pour out (both openly and in private places) no fained praises
before thee (O most good and merciful God) but such as proceed from the
bottom of the heart: for thy notable factes whereby thou have linked us unto
thee, are so to be marueyled at of all men, as the Godly do not search those
out but for a singular delight they take in them. Neither doubt we but that
thou will yet do such things for our preservation, as shall be worthy to be
regestred in perpetual memory: for we are nothing mistrustfull that thou
can be at any time forgetful of thy holy covenant which thou have
vouchedsafe more then once to enter into with thy faithful servant. We right
well perceive, and the Scripture does every where put us in remembrance, how
thou have always stood most constantly to thy blessed couenaunts. For thou
have not only brought our Fathers out of Egypt, but of thy wonderful clemency
feddest them in ye desert, who did (according to thy faithful promise) place
those thy people in ye land of Canaan: our earnest request and humble desire is
therefore, O excellent father, that thou would extend thy mercy and truth no
less toward us. For performaunce whereof send out thy most puyssant force of
thy blessed word, whereby the true honoring of thy holy name in thy sacred
Church may be set free from errors and darkness, so that we may at length
luckily attain to the true worshipping of thee, which is the original and
pillar of all wisdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxij. Psalm.
A prayer that ^he godly ^aye be ^lessed.
For So Much as we have not yielded such honor unto thee (O most excellent father)
as was our right bounden duty, neither have been obedient to thy blessed
commandments as we ought, therefore are these troublesome and difficult
times now come upon us. For those which duly obey, faithfully love, and
truly worship thee according to thy prescript word, do not wallow in
darkness, but are strengthened in righteousness, and order all their doyngs with
an upright judgment. Let thy unspeakable mercy therefore, O most mighty God,
amend that in us which has (through our lewd default) been greatly appared.
First vouchsafe to give thy benign consent unto this, that we swerve hereafter
nothing at all from the perfect way which thou have set forth unto us: then,
so strengthen our minds and hearts, that we be not more affrayed of imminent
mischief then need is, but vndershore thou the weakness of our feeble
mind, and grant that we may repose our whole trust in thee only. Cause the
horn of thy people to be exalted and lifted up in this so sharp and
perilous a battle. Thou see how greatly ourwicked and ungodly enemies do
fret at us, for if they were of ability, they would not only destroy us and
all that we have, but also utterly race and abolishe out of the Church the pure
worshipping of thee, all perfect Godliness, and true religion: who gnashe the
teeth of their cruelty, and with most forceable weapons they rage without
mercy. Beat thou down therefore and make frustrate their deuilishe
enterprises with thy excellent might and invincible power, so that they may
fade away as void of their fond practices, and all their most detestable
ymaginations utterly perish, to the glory and praise of thy name, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
THe due fear of thee (O most mighty God) that is to say, reverent
godliness, causes men to be right blessed, who care for none other thing then
how they may most readily obey thy blessed will. Therefore are we moved
lamentably to require thy loving mercy, whereby thou might renew thy holy
Church being in a manner come to utter ruin: for otherwise shall not her or
rather thy posterity or offspring be at any time either famous or mighty, for
the abundaunce of spiritual gifts is to be looked for from none other place,
neither will light burst out by any other means in the middle darkness of
errors and wickedness. Moreover, if godliness (according to our earnest
peticion) may revive in her, the perfect office of charity toward our
neighbor shall not be wanting, but every man will pleasure his brethren so much
as in him lies, ordering his doings not rashely or by chance, but with a
spiritual and ghostly judgment. Wherefore we earnestly desire thee to
establishe us quickly in thy confidence, from the which, let not (either
tempestuous storms and grievous adversities, or the delight of fortunate
things) in any wise withdraw us, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
Like as they which endeavor themselves to the uttermost of their powers for to
follow true godliness and the observation of thy holy commandments (O
merciful God) do lead a right happy and blessed life: even so do we right
well perceive that it was very agreeable to thy incomparable justice, that we
should be presently tormented with these troublesome times, who have coldely
applied our selves to the true honoring of thee, and negligently obeyed thy
sacred law as becomes us. But take not thou (O good God for thy infinite
mercies sake) such reuengement of our sins as they have justly deserved, but
cause some light to shine out unto us in so great a mist of darkness, whereby
pure godliness may be set up again in thy sacred Church, and holy religion
flourish exceedingly. Grant moreover that thy true word and faithful
promises may take such deep root in our sinful hearts, that (although we
hear of grievous mischiefs hanging over our heddes) yet let us not start nor
stagger any thing at all from thy sacred faith and holy purpose. Underprop
thou us thy own self, by causing it thus to fall out that we may in this
dreadful time, lean steadfastly to thee alone, so as Antichrist may fret and
gnash with his teeth, and the spiteful adversaries of thy glorious name pine
away. But contrariwise let the praise and clearenesse of thy favorable mercy
exalt it self more and more, and be made manifest to all creatures, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxiij. Psalm.
A prayer for the comfort and consolation of Christ's Church.
Seeing that we ought to magnify thy glorious name (O most good and merciful
God) so much as in us lies, and by all the means we can possibly devise, who
have not lived in such wise heretofore, as to further thy worthy praises
according to our right bounden duty, but rather thy blessed truth and sacred
Gospel has (through our great default and cursed lewdness) been much
slaundered, and that thing which ought to have been highly commended amongst
all Nations, is every where (by our naughtiness) made of none account.
Wherefore we heartily acknowledge and earnestlye confess that thou have most
grievously vexed and troubled us, to the intent we should the better understand
thy justice, and upright judgment. Yet notwithstanding, our earnest request
is, yt (for so much as nothing can be compared unto thee in respect of goodness
and mercy) thou would at length be our ready helper and speedy deliverer: who
have been accustomed, of thy infinite bountiousnesse, to look not only upon
the things that are in heaven, but also do humble thy self to behold all
matters which be done upon the face of the earth. Have an eye therefore unto
the troublesome estate of thy blessed Church, and diligently regard the most
grievous oppression of thy faithful people. For So Much as we have hitherto
wallowed in the m^ery puddle of our lewd vices, and be now (according to our
just deserts) sore tossed with the heavy burden of extreme adversities.
Stretch thou out thy helping hand to aid our princes and armies, who use to
take the simple out of ye dust, and do lift the poor from the dunghill, and
succor thy blessed Church in such sort, as it do not become altogether barren.
Vouchsafe that it may one day rejoice in peace and tranquillity, and grant
her to be made unto thee (through thy sacred word and holy spirit) a mother
of many children, by whom thy glorious name may be exalted with perpetual
praises, even as it behooves the^, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
Whosoever addict themselves to honor thee (O most mighty God) with faith and
pure devotion, are bound to render immortal thanks to thy glorious name, which
they ought to pay unto thee in all places, every year without ceassing, every
day, and every hour. The puyssaunt force of thy great goodness extended
toward us is manifested in such wise, as all men must needs confess that
thou art no less merciful then invincible. For although thou art said to
have placed thy kingly Court and Palace in the highest coasts of the Heavens,
notwithstanding thou submittest thy divine providence to every base thing which
lies hid in the lowest part of the earth, insomuch as nothing can be done
either in heaven or earth, but is clearly and most plainly seen of thee.
For seeing therefore we perfectly understand that such things as be done of
us are not vnbeknowne to thee, and that it is always thy accustomed manner to
raise up the poor and needy (so they believe unfeignedly in thee) out of the
foul and filthy dust, to more noble and most renowned Kingdoms: who also
do often cause the childlesse and barren women to have a plenteous household,
we do with great humility lamentably require this at thy favorable hands,
that thou would be merciful unto the calamities thy blessed Church is now
in, so as it may at length (by thy good means) be most noble and right famous,
which yet goes bestoubered with filth and dust, and whereas she seems to
have left child bearing, let her be glad with a perfect and substanciall joy
for the number of her most faithful sons, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxiiij. Psalm.
WHen as thou (O most merciful God) broughtest the children of Israel by thy
invincible power, A prayer for a true faith by the contemolation of Gods
wonderful works.
from the bondage of Egypt, and had laid sufficient grievous punishments upon
the cruel and obstinate Egyptians, having a fatherly careful regard and
singular affection toward the people of the Jews, did therefore most
manifestly declare (through wonderful examples and most abundaunt favor)
that thou were with them at the division of the waters in the red sea, by the
marvelous quaking of mount Sinay, by the going back of the river of Iordane,
and the incredible gushing of waters out of the hard rock: whereby we may
right evidently understand that al things happen prosperously, and are greatly
obedient to those whom thou have vouchedsafe to regester in the number of thy
elect servant. For which cause sake, an exceeding lively hope is raised up in
us, that seeing our assured affiaunce is, that we belong to thy blessed house
by the adoption of faith, it will come to pass, that as we be already
delivered by thy benign grace from the misery of eternal death, so also
whatsoever is among thy blessed creatures (whether it be the likeness of
prosperity or adversity) shall redounde at length most luckely for the
welfare of thy sacred church: unto the which thing as we right well perceive
that our heinous sins be worthily and not without just cause a great let and
hinderance, so also, we humbly beseech thee, (for thy infinite mercy and
promised good wills sake) to bring the same very speedily to pass, and that
in the name of thy son Jesus Christ our Lord, who lives and reigns with
thee evermore world without end. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxv. Psalm.
AT what time we do lamentably require thy favorable mercy (O most mighty
God) A prayer for a constant confession of the Gospel.
thereby to be delivered from such horrible calamities as do greatly assail
us, which is not done only to the intent we our selves should receive
benefit thereby, but also that thy blessed name might become more glorious
through out wonderful deliverance. For if thou should suffer thy blessed
servant to lie under foot, we see it would easilye come to pass, that the
children of this wretched world will vpbrayde them, and account the hope they
repose in thee only to be as a vain thing. As for our part, who being
illumined with thy heavenly grace do very well consider (that what good thing
soever is in this wretched world, whereof the unbelievers have made themselves
their ydols) they have neither power nor ability at all to make men happy
and blessed, although they both honor and reverence them. Wherefore we know
this to be still remaining for us, that so many as have the fear of thy divine
majesty before their eyes, and appertain to the spiritual Israel, and be also
graffed in the Kingdom and priesthood of Christ, should make their full account
to have thee as their only helper and defender. For if that be done which they
are bound to perform, they shall daily attain greater encreasementes of
perfect good things. For which cause we heartily require thee, who dwell in
the high heaven, and have ordained us to have our habitation in the earth so
long as this life indureth, grant us so to live, that thou suffer us not to
pass our time like unto them which be dead, who can not set forth thy worthy
praises, but our earnest desire is that we may both in talk and holy works
always set out thy most glorious name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxvj. Psalm.
THou do then most chiefly declare thy singular good will toward the
Godly (O almightye God) A prayer to the like effe^ of the psalm^ which goe^
next before.
when as thou art present to help such as lamentably call upon thee in the
midst of their unfortunate mishaps: and the heynouser those be whereout thou
do deliver them, so much the greater is thy notable loving kindness
manifested upon them, and the minds of them all more inflamed to have access
unto thee in their most hard and troublesome times. We therefore being sore
cast down and overwhelmed with the most grievous burden of our heinous
sins, do humbly call upon thee. And for so much as we know by experience that
men are liars, and all hope to be of none effect which shall be reposed in
things created, we heartily require thee with so much earnestnes as can be
devised, to forgive us whatsoever we have wickedly and lewdly committed, by
taking away those punishments from thy sacred Church which our deadly sins
have worthilye deserved, that we being mightily delivered, may be exceeding
joyful before thee, and both quaffe the cup of thanks giving, and also cause
thy singular loving kindness, toward us, to be made manifest unto all men.
And like as thou have always had not only a special regard unto the death
of the blessed saints, but also unto their miserable affliction and most
pitious lamentation, so (we humbly beseech thee) to take pity at this time
upon the feebleness of thy sacred Church being in a manner as now distroyed
and brought to utter ruin, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxvij. Psalm.
^ prayer for ^e perfect ^nowledge ^ Christ.
THou have created mankind (O most mighty God) to the intent all Nations
should be knitte together to render universal praises unto thy glorious name:
for the doing whereof, thou did in old time ordeine the Patriarchs,
Prophets, and Apostles, to this office, and at this time (when all things were
now defaced with darkness, fond abuses, and filthy defilinges) thou have
gathered us in the sacred Church for the self same work and purpose. Which
thing, to the intent we may commodiously and very conveniently accomplish, we
humbly require thee that our heinous iniquities and most deadly sins be not
an hinderaunce hereunto, which as we heartily acknowledge and earnestly
confess to be right grievous and innumerable, so we humbly desire thee, that
they may be utterly wiped away, clearly remitted, and quite pardoned, who be
now (as thou well see) so hedged in with great perils, and little better
then already oppressed, because we have reposed our whole trust and confidence
in thee alone. Look therefore (we humbly beseech thee) that our faith may be
so underpropped with thy blessed spirit, as it shrink not in these troublesome
days. Set (we heartily pray thee) thy unspeakable goodness before our eyes,
which thou have always most lovingly bestowed upon the godly, that we,
acknowledging the same fullye and evidently, may be nothing mistrustfull but
that thou will at this present be a faithful patron and assured defender of
thy blessed Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
AT such time as mankind (O most good and merciful God) was stricken with a
wonderful blindness and overwhelmed with mischiefs innumerable, then was thy
infallible mercy at hand unto him, through the which thou did vouchsafe
to deliver thy only begotten son Jesus Christ our Lord for the salvation of
the world: therefore are we bound to give thee immortal thanks, who see our
selves preserved by thy mere and singular goodness only, and not through our
own deserts. And for so much as we have found thee so constant and right
faithful in thy loving promises, we doubt not but thou will (of thy excellent
mercy and unspeakable goodness) at thy appointed time, fully accomplish those
small things which are yet remaining to be fulfilled. Our earnest request is
therefore, that thou would so fortify our weak minds with the spirit of
faith, as we may not only lay hold upon the good things thou proferest us
without any mistrustfulnesse, but also render thee condign thanks in thy
sacred Church with all people and nations, for so great bountifulness and
liberality bestowed upon thy faithful servants, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxviij. Psalm.
SO many as fear God, A prayer ^ we may ^ comforted in faith.
and be graffed in Christ, and have a fervent zeal to godliness, are daily
allured and provoked by new means and infinite benefits, to magnify his
blessed name: for seeing that they well know Gods goodness to be of such
great force as he is present therewith unto those that unfeignedly call upon him
for the same, and delivers them from all peril and disquietnesse of mind,
who causes them to have so great faith and confidence, as they need not to
stand in need of man's power, be it of never so great a force. Wherefore, in
as much as the same is not at this present vnbeknowne to us, we commit our
selves to thee only (O most mighty God) who art our alone savior, requiring
that thou would vouchsafe to defend thy blessed Church being as now hedged
in and compassed about on every side with extreme perils: our sins have
justly deserved far greeuouser things, who do confess (O good God) that we
have heynously and like miserable wretches offended thee, but here it behooves,
that for thy singular cleme^cies sake, our wicked deeds should be vanquished
of thy unspeakable mercy. Grant us therefore (being chastised by thee as
disobedient and rebellious children) not so to be delivered to subjection and
destruction, as we may not highly celebrate, worthily praise, and duly magnify
thy wo^derous works within the Gates of thy glorious kingdom amidst the
congregation of the righteous. Vouchsafe yt we, who are now as reprobates,
castawayes, and made a laughing stock to al men, may be advanced so much in
righteousness, holiness, and good living, as all men may right well
understand, that whatsoever we determine or go about to do touching religion,
it is not man's devise but thy own only work, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
WE are continually tossed with so many grievous storms of adversities (O
almighty God) as it behooves us to have access and recourse unto thy mercy
only, that we be not overwhelmed under them. But now we know for a certayntie,
that man's power can do nothing touching their overthrow whom thou have
appointed to salvation. For So Much as therefore we see them fed with a false and
deceiptfull hope which have any confidence in men, we judge this to be a
singular point of wisdom of the godly, to trust hereafter in no mortal
creature, but to repose their whole affiaunce in thee alone. For which cause,
we humbly beseech thy divine Majesty (O excellent father) that, although thou
art sometime angry, and, by reason of our heinous sins, do worthilye
chastise and subdue our stubbornness, yet let us not fall utterly away from
thee, which thing shall verily come to pass, if thou will build us upon that
most firm corner stone, who as he was laid aside and dissalowed of men, so is
he advanced by thee to the chiefest top and pillar of glory, through our Lord
Jesus Christ thy son, who lives and reigns with thee evermore world
without end. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxix. Psalm.
^ prayer in ^ecessitie, an^uishe, and ^stresse.
THou have always of thy unspeakable goodness and clemency (O most good and
merciful God) from time to time endued us with notable and plentiful
benefits, but we of the contrary part (who ought to obey thy blessed
commandments with all earnestness) have very miserably transgressed the
same, and procured unto our selves the euilles wherewith we are sore
oppressed, neither can we iustlye complain, that Antichrist and his cursed
members have worse dealt with us the^ our deserts required: but know assuredly
that thou do not chasten and correct us in thy furious displeasure, but with
fatherly mercy and loving kindness. Wherefore we (whom thou sore chastisest)
having recourse unto thee, require these things at thy merciful hands, that
thou would open the eyes of our mind with thy healthful light, so that we
be not blinded at the beholding of thy wondrous works: let not thy sacred
precepts be hid from us so long as we be pilgrims in this wretched world,
causing our minds to be continually inflamed with a most ardent desire
toward those things which thou have given in commandment to be observed.
Grant that our deserts be not such henceforth, as we be reproved amongst the
lewd sort, or cursed like execrable things, because we have greatly swarued
from thy holy precepts. Thou see right well the slanders and reproaches
wherewith thy cruel enemies do every where assail us, and after what sort the
great princes and mighty rulers of this wretched world when they were set
together against us, did strive not only by word, but also by endeavor to
turn us away from thy sincere word, from the devout worshipping of thee, and
from thy pure ceremonies. Thou therefore so strengthen and quicken us with thy
puyssaunt force and mighty power, as we may be assuredly persuaded that thy
faithful promises are most true and certain, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

Aleph, Beth.
SVch truly are to be accounted right happy amongst mortal men (O most
good and merciful God) as have thy sacred law always set out before the eyes
of their mind, which they make as a pattern to begin their life by, and as
a rule to proceed by, when they have begun, so that if they shall perhaps
go astray, their fault may both be amended thereby, and they also lead a
virtuous life according unto justice. These shall live blameless, and when
their doings shall be examined by upright judgment, they shall not be ashamed,
which will greatly avail, if it be diligently practiced from the tender age.
But we heartily acknowledge and earnestlye confess (O most dear father) that
all man's policy is altogether unprofitable, and none account at all to be
made thereof, unless thou be present with thy blessed spirit, and do
direct our minds, for otherwise what gain may we have by meditating of thy
holy law, then a cold and very hurtful knowledge. Wherefore our earnest
request is, that thou would not only minister strength unto us by thy
grace, for the accomplishing of those things which thou commaundest in thy
divine law, but also to bring this unto good effect, so that we may have more
felicity in them, then in all our own devices, and take a greater delight in
the execution hereof, then in any fleshly or worldly pleasures, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Gimel, Daleth.
Seeing that all the force we have, depends upon thee (O most good and
merciful God) and that we do nothing, without thy gracious aid and
furtheraunce, which may please thee, we have good cause to fly unto thy
excellent mercy seat, so that we may (through the help and assistaunce of
thy good grace) frame our deeds altogether confirmable unto thy holy laws,
which thing can in no wise happen unless thou remouest from our eyes the vale
which evil lusts and lewd desires do always put betwixt us and thy wholesome
doctrine, by reason whereof we do not well consider the beneficial things
which are there commanded us to observe. Drive also far from us (we heartily
beseech thee) the swelling of the mind and a haute conceypt, wherethrough we
are accustomed beyond all measure to have men's ordinances and human devices
in marvelous admiration, so that sometime thy holy precepts seem vile unto
us, in comparison of them: and that most chiefly when as we be afraid to
abide the displeasure of mighty men and the shame of this wretched world. At
what time therefore our mind shall be thus diversely severed, refreshe thou us
(O good God) with thy blessed word, and mittigate with thy spiritual
calmnesse, the over unquiet thoughtfulness of our mind, and suffer us not to
be deceived by the leasings of this corrupt life, being of themselves
marvelous pleasant and flattering. For if thou shall once set our destressed
heart at liberty, there can be no cause to the contrary, but that we may make
wonderful expedition for the accomplishing of thy sacred commandments:
which, we humbly beseech thee, to vouchsafe that we may obtain with as earnest
an intention as can be possibly devised, through Jesus christ our Lord. Amen.

He, Vau.
WHen as we on the one side do consider the weakness of our own strength
(O most mighty God) and contrariwise the absoluteness and perfectness of
thy blessed law, we evidently perceive, that for the obteyning thereof, thy
most puyssant help will stand us in very great stead: first therefore teach
us the true ways of thy holy commandments, moreover illuminate in such
sort our mind and understanding, as we may be able to incline with great
feruencie unto those things which thou have both taught and commanded.
Furthermore it is needful for thee to grant us power and ability to
perform whatsoever we have learned of thee, otherwise it shall profit us
little or nothing at all to have knowledge, unless some part of obedience be
either performed or at least wise begun in us, which the lewd inclination of
our sinful heart does greatly hinder; and finally our senses and corrupt
affections are wonderful huge adversaries hereunto. Succor thou us therefore,
we humbly beseech thee, with thy good grace and abundant favor, forgiving
whatsoever we have committed and do daily after a most sinful manner against
thy sacred law, neither let it be imputed unto us for our eternal
destruction. And in the mean season (O good God) let thy loving mercies utter
and show forth themselves to be a strong defense and mighty preservation for
thy sanctified Church, which thou see grievously tormented with great
perilles, mischievous reproaches, and diverse kinds of afflictions, not
permitting her to be in such sort wrested out of thy hands, as she may be
robbed either of thy blessed word, or of the lawful, holy, and most pure
honoring of thee, through Jesus Christ our lord. Amen.

Zain, Heth.
WE fly unto thee in this most troublesome time (O almighty God) when as we
see thy blessed church so sore afflicted, and that through our own evil
deserts: who have greatly sinned against thee, done very lewdely, and
transgressed thy sacred laws innumerable ways, and there is but one thing
only which rayseth up our hope, and comfort us most in these our grievous
afflictions, namely that we know how thou art right mindful of the loving
promises made to thy faithful servant. For So Much as our sins and former
wretched life do marvelously accuse us, (we humbly beseech thee) therefore
so to quicken and lift us up with thy unspeakable mercy, which we see offered
unto us in the benign promises of thy holy Scriptures. Our earnest request is
that thou would not permit us to swerve from the sacred law which thou
have vouchedsafe to set before us, who do with much feruencie desire to be
unseperably annixed unto thee, howsoever the ungodly do sore vex and scorn
us. For seeing that thou have diverse times heretofore taken upon thee to
discide thy faithful servants causes when as they were in a manner drowned
with extreme calamities: therefore now also leave not of to succor and help
those which unfeignedly call upon thee. Thy outrageous enemies commit none other
thing then to deprive the Church of thy sacred words, thy holy ceremonies, and
all devout worshipping of thee. For So Much as thou art our only lot, we lift up
our eyes unto thy face with our whole heart: but or ever the multitude of
wicked and most abominable men do swallow us up, be thou present for thy
infinite goodness sake to succor us, so that we may apply our selves day and
night to laud and praise thee for thy just judgment, through Jesus Christ our
lord. Ame^.

Zain, Heth.
We have not conceived hope of our salvation (O almighty God) any where
else, then from thy most faithful promises, drawing out thereof only an
assured consolation, if that at any time either the flesh, man's reason, the
devil, or wicked men shall vaunt themselves any thing stoutly against us. We
take a marvelous good courage against all these things, for so much as thou will most largely perform whatsoever thou have faithfully promised, because,
that even from the beginning, we have had thy faith in perfect remembrance,
seeing it does manifestly appear (...) thou have never deceived any that trust
only in thee. Vouchsafe therefore that we may both day and night be
unseperably annixed to this most strong rock, invincible fortress, and well
cast Anchor. For inasmuch as we mistrust not but thou will perform whatsoever
belongs unto thee, this remains, that we execute with an exceeding fervent
desire, the charge which is left unto us, so that we may (marvelous speedily)
bestyrre our steps and feet toward the fulfilling of thy blessed law. Cause
thou us (O excellent father) we humbly beseech thee, to cut of and cast aside
all delays, and that contrary to the expectation of the ungodly, who always
cast lettes to intrappe us, we may be obedient to thy sacred precepts, so that
all those which honor and love thee purelye, may accompany us, that like as
the earth is every where replenished with thy inestimable goodness, so the
number of thy true and faithful suppliauntes may be daily more and more
greatly augme^ted, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Teth, Iod.
THou have been hitherto accustomed (O almighty God) to deal lovingly with
thy faithful servant, and we especially being (through thy unspeakable
mercy) brought to the true knowledge and perfect understanding of thy sacred
Gospel, have had thy excellent benefits in a wonderful trial, which we do
plainly acknowledge and confess that our heinous sins have greatly defiled,
wherewith we have not only polluted our selves, but also thy holy name, and
the blessed doctrine of thy dear son is thereby evil spoken of amongst the
Gentiles, and a great number (by our default) driven with fear from the way of
truth. We now therefore heartily beseech thee (O heavenly father) to cause us
for to sauer thee rightly and so acknowledge thy blessed name as we may most
constantly stick to thy sacred words and holy commandments. Let the
afflictions wherewith we are touched be effectual spurs and pricks to move
us for to return into the right perfect way: and for so much as thou art good
and favorable unto al men, suffer not those (whom thou have adobted to be thy
beloved sons by Christ) to deny thee shamefully. For the more that the
devil, Antichrist, and his cursed members endeavor with all their industry to
pluck us from thee, make thou us on the contrary part (we heartily pray thee)
to be unfeignedly obedient unto thy blessed precepts: and what troublesome
things soever these men have subtilty devised, let the same turn to ye profit
of thy blessed Church. Let our heart (which of it self is gross and fat) be
made soft diligently to perceive and right well understanding thy sacred word
and divine law, having it in more credit and estimation, then gold, silver,
and all the treasure of the world. Forsake not (O good God) ye work of thy
hands, which thou thy self haste made and garnished: and let the ungracious
persons be put to shame, who (through a lewd zeal) go about to overthrow thy
blessed ways. But let such rejoice in thee, as honor thy divine Majesty, and
have an eye with a pure faith unto thy loving promises. Cause them also to
enjoy thy unspeakable goodness, and lead always such a life as may right well
please thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Teth, Iod.
THere is nothing either more honorable or greatlier to be wished for of us (O
most good and merciful God) then that thou would give us power to understand
thy holy word with a right up judgment: and we so feruentlye desire this,
that we may be also in a readiness to purchase the same with any calamity
whatsoever it be. Wherefore if thou see that thou can by evil success of
fortune or by adversities bring thy elect to a right mind, which slide away
oftentimes, deal which way thou seem best for to make us apply our selves
with earnest desire to live after thy divine law. And seeing thou have
fashioned us in our mothers womb, so favor thou us also and illuminate us in
such wise that we be not blinded in the word of thy blessed truth. For whilst
we earnestly desire these things at thy merciful hands (O excellent father)
we do not only with heart crave our own consolation, but the comfort of all
those which make much of thy sacred law and perfect truth. These verily will
wonderfully rejoice, if they shall perceive every one of us to be annixed unto
thee with vncorrupt minds. Wherefore we heartily beseech thee, that thy holy
will (which thou have set forth unto us in the sacred Scriptures) may be
dearer unto us then gold, and more beloved then all riches, so as we may
embrace ye same with a right perfect heart, and nothing whatsoever we attempt
to do, may redowne either to our shame or to the dishonor of thy sanctified
Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Caph, Lamed.
For So Much as we have an especial regard (O most mighty God) in these our
days to thy faithful promises, and that our soul does in a manner faint with
longing for thy aid: whiles health seems to vanish away from before our
eyes, it is time for thee to be our ready helper and sure defense. Wey not, we
humbly beseech thee, our weak faith; corrupt vices, and wicked behavior
wherewith we have slaundered thy blessed name, and caused thy sacred gospel to
be evil spoken of. Vouchsafe (O good God) that we may lead the rest of our
life, altogether in godly and religious works: for if we shall obtain this at
thy merciful hands, we mistrust not but thou will immediately after power out
thy fierce judgments upon thy enemies, who do assault us thus cruelly. And
thou thy self see how undeservedly they do it. For although we have sinned
so heynously as we have procured unto our selves greeuouser punishments then
these be, yet our adversaries have not for our sins sake only dug these
pittes for us, but they persecute, yea and would utterly destroy us, for that
religion is a little purged, and the true worshipping of thee restored.
Therefore confirm and strengthen thou us (O excellent father) for thy infinite
goodness sake, vouchingsafe that thy holy word may have a perpetual abiding
in thy sacred Church, and suffer us not to perish in this grievous persecution,
but cause us to be delighted therein and to refresh our selves therewith, that
for so much as we are thy faithful servants, and have no confidence at all in
man's force, save and defend us thy own self from such perils as hang over our
necks, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Caph, Lamed.
Our souls have now fainted us (O most good and merciful God) with careful
longing after thy blessed word, so long as we hope both for help, and
salvation at thy hands only. Unto thee, I say, do we lift up our hands day
and night, to the intent thy faithful servant may at length enjoy their
hoped promises, who in the mean season do desire to have this granted us,
that in no wise we be forgetful of thy sacred law, whilst thou delayest thy
help in the midst of our grievous calamities. And like as thy sacred law
abides steadfast in the most bewtifull furniture of the heavens, and by it a
most firm stabilitie in the earth, and also that most commodious and goodly
variety of time perseuereth and has his continuance: even so we humbly
beseech thee, that it be not worn out of our heart and inward parts by any
process of time, for unless our meditation be always hereof, we shall easily
perish in our sorrowful afflictions. Seeing then it is thy blessed word which
quickneth us, (for if we give credit thereto, we shall obtain both salvation,
and also know how to behave our selves according to justice, neither shall we
be troubled at the injuries which our adversaries profer us: grant O
excellent father, that this may never slip out of our remembrance, but
vouchsafe us rather to see an end of all other things, then thy sacred word
either to be forespent or overthrown in thy blessed Church, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Lamed, Mem.
Whosoever they be that apply themselves to thy blessed word (O most good
and merciful God) shall reap at length no small fruit and commodity thereby,
for they shall not only surmount their enemies in knowledge and understanding
of heavenly things, but also far excel those which are had in great
reputation, both for their learning, and also for the experience they have
attained unto, by reason of their long life. To the intent therefore we be not
deprived of so great a benefit, we humbly beseech thee, that (detesting
utterly the lewdness of our heinous sins) we may have more felicity in thy
sacred words then in all other pleasures. And for so much as this life of ours
is hedged in and compassed about on every side with blind ignorance, we can
not have a meter lamp then thy divine word to lighten our minds withal:
man's way ought to be ordered and directed hereby, even like a most clear
light, and that chiefly, when as the matter it self does declare how that
every one of us do bear his life always in his hands, by reason of the
exceeding great perils we are in. There want not every where puyssaunt
Champions of the adversaries which lay a thousand snares for our life:
wherefore we entreat thee so much as in us lies, that thou would stir up
our sinful hearts to fulfill thy holy commau^dements which thou have
vouchedsafe to beautify with so great promises, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

Mem, Nun.
THy divine law and sacred words (O most mighty God) be of such force, as
those which love them and think continually thereof, become every day wyser
then other, and surmount all mortal men in understanding, although they be
better learned and auncienter in years: which study is marvelous commodious
to withdraw our feet from the path of wickedness, and does sometime confirm
our feeble footsteps, least they swerve peruersly from thy blessed
commandments. For So Much as therefore we have miserably declined from thee in
our former life, and shamefully sinned, which does manifestly appear in that
we have neglected thy righteous words, loving promises, sacred ceremonies,
and whole law. Wherefore we ought not to wonder or complain at all that thou
do at this present punish us unjustly: but have truly well deserved this
(through our naughty and lewd behauiours) that so unjust and cruel enemies
should rise up against us: for these things verily would not have happened
unto us, if we had always used thy blessed words and holy precepts as a
Lantern to our feet: nevertheless our earnest request is (O good God) that
thou would (for thy infinite mercies sake) have an especial regard to the
grievous dangers and perils whereinto our soul is now brought. Pardon, we
heartily beseech thee, our heinous sins, and make our heart meek and forward
to fulfill thy holy commandments, so that thou may deliver us from the
snares which the enemies of thy blessed name have laid to tray us in, and
suffer not those whom thou have chosen and adopted into thy everlasting
inheritance, to be utterly oppressed and come to miserable confusion, through
Jesus christ our Lord. Amen.

Samech, Ain.
SVch as be illumined with thy heavenly spirit (O most mighty God) do utterly
hate all manner of sin and iniquity, and therefore have thee for their sure
refuge and strong shield: because they see them live most blessedly and in
great felicity, whom thou do strengthen with thy puyssaunt force and
invincible power, and such as thou susteynest and nourishest be delivered from
most grievous perilles, whereas contrariwise so many as fall from thee, and go
astray from thy blessed precepts, are horribly punished. Our earnest desire is
therefore, that (being moved by like persuasions) we may both put our whole
trust in thee only, and also become most zealous in all thy holy
commandments. For flesh and the power of our adversaries practice continual
enmity against us: let them not be of such force as they may destroy us, but
make us rather stick fast unto thy sacred words, so that we may take as much
delight in them as in the greatest pleasures: for the accomplishing whereof it
is very needful that thou, of thy infinite mercy, do instruct and teach
us. For seeing the knowledge of divine things can not be atteyned unto without
thy good spirit, vouchsafe thou therefore thy own self, that we may very
perfectly understand thy sacred law, and judge thereof aright, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Ain, Pe.
THy blessed words (O almighty God) are in all places so worthy of
admiration, that they can not but be regarded of the godly, therefore we
earnestly require thee, that thou (who art merciful and plentious in
goodness) would look upon us altogether well appeased, and so frame our
thoughts and deeds, that we give no room at all to ungodliness, then the
which nothing is more vain: for seeing we be men, and therefore hedged in with
a fleshly burden, suffer not the weight thereof to ouerwhelme us, but rather
breath the spirit of repentance into our nostrelles, whereby we may shed forth
most flowing rivers of tears for the faults we have every where committed.
For because thou art our exceeding right up Judge, who neither clokest our
sins, nor yet permittest them to go unpunished: and seeing that thy judgments
and laws are stuffed with so great uprightness, as nothing is contained in
them, that any creature can by just reason reprove or find fault with (for
silver and gold tried in the fire, matcheth not the pureness of them.)
Therefore we earnestly desire thee, that thou would not only cause us to
acknowledge them, but also obey the same so much as our feeble and weak nature
is able to do, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Pe, Zade.
Our mind (O most good and merciful God) is very much darckned even of
native infection, with a thick mistiness, so that it is not able to
understand thy holy commandments perfectly: and we are of nature exceedingly
bent unto affections, which as they be displeasant to thee, so they
marvelously like us, and we cannot abide the scorninges of the ungodly
wherewith they vaunt themselves over us when we do wholye apply our minds to
serve thy excellent Majesty. We earnestly require thee therefore, that thou
would lighten our darkened minds, assuage our lewd affections, and
strengthen us in such wise, that what reproach so ever shall hang over our
heads for thy glorious Gospels sake, we may overcome it with a stout courage.
And cause us to resist those which jest at us, with a steadfast hope and
assured confidence we have to thy loving promises, so that the naughtiness of
lewd lusts may be broken in pieces with the puyssant force of thy blessed
truth. Let not any worldly power (most dear father) be an impediment to us,
but that we may steadfastly defend thy holy precepts in the presence of all men
be they never so glorious and wonderful in their doings, which I beseech thee
to make so pleasant and delectable unto us, as we may count nothing in this
life to be preferred before the^, neither any matter to be an hinderaunce, but
ye we may perform the same with an exceeding cheereful mind, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Cuph, Res.
WE require thee (O most mighty god) even from the bottom of our heart, and
with an unfeigned faith, that we may he diligent obseruers of thy sacred law and
holy commandments: for we are wonderfully provoked to defile thy blessed
precepts through the impulsion of fleshly motions, fierceness of our native
corruption, and vices graffed in us, but seeing that we have bound our selves
with such a number of most grievous and detestable sins, it is no marvel,
if thou (who use justice and severity toward thy elect servants) do
suffer us to be thus tormented and put in fear of Antichrist and his rascals.
But now our earnest request is yt thou would (for thy great goodness and
infinite mercies sake) pardon whatsoever we have greeuouslye committed against
thee: and look upon the state of the Church, being in a manner rent and torn,
with a marvelous loving eye and right favorable countenance, delivering her
(according to thy accustomed manner) from imminent perils, when as she could not
be preserved but by thy only guidaunce and government. It is meet (O good
God) that salvation should be far from the ungodly who do utterly despise
thy sacred word, holy law, and blessed commandments: but it happens
otherwise to them that trust in thee, for they have loving promises of their
salvation, of all the which, truth is the most excellent and notablest. To the
intent therefore it may remain without spot and unviolated, defend us with thy
own hands when as we be in great distress and much peril for the
profession of thy glorious name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Cuph, Res.
For So Much as through fleshlye affection (O most good and merciful God) we
are persuaded to receive any thing rather then thy divine law, therefore have we
daily recourse unto thee in our fervent prayers* that thou would guide us
with thy holy spirit for the observing thereof. And to the intent our
lamentable cries may not be in vain, soften thou our hearts, and bow thou our
minds in such wise, that they may care for nothing so much, as to obey thee in
all things whatsoever they do. We meditate upon this one only matter at
midnight, and in the dawning of the day, that whereas there wants no store of
things to draw us an other way, we may therefore be fortified with thy mighty
protection against the same. And as thy blessed precepts be certain and sure,
so cause us to stick fast unto them: for whosoever of a frowardness swerve
therefro, do stray far from salvation: by means whereof, if this shall happen
unto us through our infirmity, lay to thy helping hand without any delay, by
raising up us that are fallen: and although our case be very naught, yet help
us with the warrant of thy blessed word. For seeing it is not vnbeknowne to
thee (O excellent father) how many go about to destroy us: therefore make thou
speedy have to be our ready helper and deliverer, by confirming those most
steadfastly which invoke and call upon thee with most steadfast belief in thy
faithful promises, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Schin, Tau.
THe Devil verily, Antichrist, and puyssaunt Princes of this wretched world,
do persecute thy blessed Church (O most mighty God) without any offense
given, who seem in such wise to vaunt themselves and wax furious against
godliness, as the faithful be not without just cause greatly afraid, whom
nothing but thy word is able to make mirry and restore to gladness again:
therefore stir us up in such sort with thy blessed spirit, that we may be
always wonderful desirous thereof. For we certainly know that peace will
ensue, augment, and continue in them which love thy sacred law, so that nothing
verily shall be able at any time to do them hurt, but if we be as now void
of perfect peace and quietness of mind, the occasion without doubt must rise
hereof, because we have neglected thy holy word, and slenderly followed thy
divine law. Pardon us therefore, pardon we humbly beseech thee, what wicked
and lewd thing soever we have committed against thee, so that we may not
decline any more hereafter from the perfect way of thy blessed
commandments: then may we claim unto our selves the true and substanciall
delights, wherein our souls may live, yea and lead such a pleasant life, as
they may by all means endeavor to set forth thy most worthy praises. For
seeing that we have wandered hitherto like brute beasts, therefore call thou us
away, O excellent father (who art our only savior) from the heinous errors
and grievous sins we are infected withal, so that every one of us may be
wholly addicted to obey thy sacred will and holy commandments, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Schin, Thau.
ALthough the malice and deceyptes of those which in the world are always
adversaries to thy glory (O almighty God) be both mighty and of great force
against our feeble courage: yet notwithstanding on the contrary part, so great
is the pleasure which thy sacred word brings unto us, that it is now deerer
unto the godly then any spoils be they never so fat, or then any pray be
it never so ritche: for they prick us forward to render day by day wonderful
praises unto thee. And this only remains as a special comfort that thou will not suffer us to be deprived of the salvation which we look for at thy
merciful hands. Our earnest request is, that thou would (for this cause)
give an attentive and ready ear to our humble petitions, that for so much as
the righteousness of thy blessed law is in all points true and steadfast,
furnishe us fully with this thy holy spirit, that whatsoever we have now
chosen to keep, through the grace thereof, we may accomplish so much as our
feeble nature is able to do: and where the weakness of the flesh fails,
there let the invincible power and notable strength of thy holy spirit
supply. We have wandered hitherto (O Lord God) diverse ways like foolish and
misled sheep, for unless thou do seek us out with a fatherly and
shepherdlike providence, we shall readily perish in our naughtiness: and
therefore suffer us not who are in very great danger, to walk any more in
darkness and amongst ravening Wolves, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxx. Psalm.
We being wearied and sore troubled (O almighty GOD) with most grievous and
exceeding perilous mishappes, A prayer against the enemies of Gods diui^ word.
as thou right well know, do daily fly unto thy gracious mercies seat,
humbly requiring thee to give ear at length unto the fervent prayers which we
always make, namely that thou would deliver thy blessed Church from the
deceypts, lies, and false ymaginations of Antichrist and his retinue. For the
blasphemies, reproaches, and slanders wherewith they invade and defame thy holy
gospel, may be compared to deadly sharp arrows, and whot burning coals,
through which the hearts of the godly are stricken with exceeding great
sorrow, and their minds be inflamed with zeal and rightful anger for the
glory of thy name. We acknowledge our selves verily to have well deserved for
to be troubled with such unclean infection and outrageous pestilence, because
we have sinned most heynously against thee and thy divine law. But our
earnest request is that (of thy natural and free mercy wherewith thou art
endued) we who are so greatly desirous of perfect peace, for the true
honoring, sincere celebrating, and due setting out thy worthy praise, may at
length attain thereto through thy most gracious favor, sore against their
wills, which are chiefest enemies to the peace and tranquillity of thy
faithful, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
WE know by experience (O almighty God) how great the affliction and misery
of the Church is, for the vices and lies of corrupt opinions sakes which are
brought into it. Wherefore we humbly beseech thee to deliver her from this
kind of calamity: for we have now at length begone right well to
understand how deceyptfull and crafty the seducementes of Antichrist has
been hitherto. Cause henceforth the puyssaunt force and most sharp weapons of
thy blessed word to be present, whereby all the subtlety of Satan may be
confounded and brought to naught. Yea rather thurst thou in thy most mighty
shaft (which thou use diverse times to punish ungodliness withal) against
this pestilent plague, so that all malicious snares may thereby be consumed, as
it were with most whote burning coals: whereas otherwise, if thou do not
lay to thy most strong and puissaunt hand, our pilgrimage shall be continued
in woeful miseryes and sinful wickedness without end. For there is no hope of
peace to be looked for where thy sacred truth is had in deadly contempt: yea
rather it seems daily to be the further of from thy blessed Church, the more
love and earnest desire she has thereto. Seeing therefore that it behooves us to
wage continual war against spiritual wickedness, refuse not thou (O
excellent father) redily to help such as unfeignedly call upon thee for the
same, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxxj. Psalm.
A prayer in necessity for Gods divine ^reseruation.
WE look for thy assistant help (O most mighty God) with an exceeding
heaviness of mind in these our most troublesome mishaps, eliuating our eyes
to thee only, through whose mighty power, like as we know that heaven and
earth was created, so also our assured hope is that thou can deliver us from
these present mischiefs. Verilye we acknowledge our sins to be such as they
have deserved to be punished with these sore afflictions and grievous
chasticements. For we have not yielded due honor and reverence unto thee when
as thou did call us to the profession of thy sacred gospel, but seeking our
own profit only, have miserably neglected thy renowned honor and famous
glory. Wey not therefore (O good GOD) this our ingratitude and wickedness
committed: but (for thy infinite mercies sake) keep our feet from falling, by
settling them so in thy holy law and sacred commandments, as they swerve not
at all therfro. Moreover seem not to slumber or sleep touching the defense
and preservation of thy blessed Church being so sore afflicted. If it has
been thy accustomable manner to defend thy faithful servant from the heat
of the Sun in the day time, and from the cold of the Moon in the night,
despise not us that suffer so many and great torments through the fury and
outrageous woodnesse of Antichrist: preserve not only our souls and life from
his subtle devices, but especially maintain thou thy pure religion, which he
does most of all fight against. For our earnest request is that thou would
so direct the begynnings and endings of our doings, in the true paths of thy
blessed commandments, as they may perpetually abide in the perfect rule
thereof, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
SO long as we (O almighty God) are tormented with these sorrowful and most
troublesome times, our hearts and eyes are erected to thee only, as under
whose dominion we doubt not but the chief force of all things consists,
whereby we are greatly inflamed lamentably to require thy ready help. For by
what most excellent power thou have formed the heaven and earth, it is now
very needful for thee to help thy blessed Church with the same, when it is
in a manner swalowed up with the most noisome Jaws of her cruel enemies.
Suffer not (we humbly beseech thee) the feet of our faith to stagger or
folter: for of it self (such is the infirmitye wherewith we are clothed round
about) it is weak and wavering enough. We truly fell first from thee, and
swarued wretchedly from the law and decrees of thy blessed will: but vouchsafe,
we humbly beseech thee, not to deal with us according to our worthiness, but
after thy unspeakable goodness and most excellent mercy, preserving the
Church, being well hedged in and compassed about with thy puyssaunt defense,
for if thou should forsake her (who art otherwise the keeper of Israel)
she can in no wise endure. But if it be bereft and spoiled of thy mighty
protection, then through whose care and industry may she be preserved?
Grant that we may gather our wits to us and call them back unto thee, to
the intent thou may not only be our defender, but also the preserver of all
that ever we have, through Jesus christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
For So Much as we are always subject to adversities (O most mighty god) during
this wretched life, therefore do we look every where about us with our eyes,
from whence found and perfect help might be ministered unto us: and thou before
all things meetest with our faith. For seeing we right well know that all
creatures were made by thee even from the beginning, and that thou nourishest
with thy perpetual goodness, both celestial powers, and also terrestrial:
we humbly beseech thee, that whereas otherwise thy high and excellent
providence is not used to be interrupted, thou would show thy self to be a
most vigilant shepherd toward us. Let thy loving favor (we heartily pray
thee) be every where our sure defense, that we burn not with to fervent an
heat of filthye lusts, or (through coldness of infidelity graft in our
sinful hearts (both the love we ought to bear toward our neighbors, and
also the godly devotion which of right is due to thee, be not utterly
extinguished. O that we might by daily prayer and intercession, obtain to be
kept pure by thee from all infection of vices, so that our life may be such,
as either by our going or coming, we may be both cleansed from our wicked
faults and also, plentiously garnished with most excellent virtues, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxxij. Psalm.
A prayer that ^he christian Church may through ^ayth and cha^itie) be
re^ayred.
THe Godly do continually stir up one another to make holy assemblies (O
almighty God) with wonderful exhortations, wherein thy blessed name is lifted
up with high praises, the faithful instructed in thy sacred words, and thy
holy Sacraments duly received. Now for so much as we see presently before our
eyes that this is in a manner hindered by Antichrist, to our exceeding great
sorrow, for (like a naughty pack and cast away as he is) he practices nothing
else, but that the holy Jerusalem which is newlye begun to be edified and
repaired, should fall to decay again and be utterly overthrown, to the
intent the pure worshipping and holy inuocating of thy blessed name might have
no more place there. We earnestly and with a fervent mind and vehement
affection humbly beseech thee (O most excellent father) who well considerest
how great a broyle and trouble he makes, that thou would cause those things
for to have good success, which appertain unto the quietness of Jerusalem,
being thy holy and santified Church, our unseemly deserts somewhat laid
apart. For seeing we do exceeding filthtly transgress and most lewdly defile
thy sacred laws, we ought of right to assure our selves of no good thing. But
when as we have an especial regard to the honor of thy glorious name, then
taking a courage again, we do boldly require thee, that thou would be
present with the^ which are assembled together in the name of Jesus Christ, and
do call upon thee thereby, to the intent we may one day repose our selves in the
true Jerusalem, being quite delivered from the furious and violent invasion of
Antichrist. And cause that those Citizens which do credit the sacred doctrine
of thy holy Church may by thy excellent benefits become friends and faithful
brethren one to an other, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
ALthough the holy Scriptures do teach us every where that the heaven (O most
good and merciful God) is thy dwelling place, yet the same do in such wise
set out thy infinite goodness, as the Church is both called, and also is in
deed thy sanctified house wherein thou most frequentest: at what time
therefore we shall come together in the holy congregations, our earnest request
is that we may be there with cheerful and very desirous minds. For thou truly
have (of an exceeding liberality) adorned thy holy Church with most
flourishing and excellent gifts, neither is there any thing pretermitted that
apperteyneth to her garnishing, which may either belong to the spiritual
decking and bewtifiyng thereof, or to the plenteous enriching of it in
abundaunce of all heavenly good things. Which seeing they have proceeded most
fully from thee, this only remains, that thou would so condescend unto our
fervent prayers, as the members thereof may be annixed together with a
perpetual concord: cause their meetinges to be in such sort as they may
render due honor unto thee, let the sacred scriptures be there purely and
sincerely interpreted, and let thy glorious Kingdom from day to day be more
and more enlarged, making all these things to be stablished with thy joyous
peace and the tranquillity of thy holy spirit. For so long as we pray for the
quietness and felicity hereof, let us procure substanciall and perfect good
things both to our neighbors, and also unto thy blessed house, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxxiij. Psalm.
THere remains no greater help for thy faithful servant (O most mighty
God) then that which comes from heaven: A prayer for the mercy of God.
for the puissant force of Antichrist and his deuilish practices have so
greatly prevailed, as true godliness, and the right honoring of thee are in a
manner extinguished and utterly overthrown. Therefore lift we up our eyes to
heaven unto thee, to the intent thy helping hand may revive us again, and that
we may escape out of so manyfold great dangers. For as the eyes of servants
and maids look unto their Masters and Mistresses: even so do our eyes wait
upon thee, being the only refuge of our salvation: that like as they do wholly
depend and hang upon their Masters and Mistresses, so do we cry daily to
thee until thou have mercy upon us. Be not thus exceeding wrathful and
angry at our wickedness, wherewith we are little better then overwhelmed, that
thou do less regard the glory of thy name, then the revenging of them.
Pardon we humbly beseech thee, thy poor suppliants, that they may be nothing
destitute of thy infinite mercy and singular goodness. Have pity upon us (O
good god) in these miserable days, be favorable unto us, who know right well
with what troubles and reproaches thy holy Church is every where sore touched.
Let not the arrogancy and dispitefulnesse of the wicked pass any further,
being now so puffed up without measure through the prosperous success of the
matters they take in hand, as man's power is nothing able to assuage the same.
Make thou therefore (who art invincible and omnipotent) an end of their
outrageous madness, and keep them within their bounds, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
ALthough thou have appointed thy seat and dwelling place (O most good and
merciful God) to be in the passing high heavens, yet notwithstanding thou
never ceasest to stir us up with thy holy spirit, whereby thou instructest
the hearts of the faithful, who at what time we be tried with heaviness of
mind, yrksome tribulations, and dangerous perils, endeavor our selves both by
our earnest prayers and continual petitions to crave help at thy hands
only. Now therefore, like as servants are attendant only at the hands of
their Masters, and handmaydes wayt diligently upon their Mistress hand, even
so the eyes of our faith look only upon thee (O heavenly father) and shall
always hereafter have a due regard to thy divine Majesty until thou have
mercy upon us. Be favorable unto us we humbly beseech thee, according to thy
accustomable mercy and loving kindness, neither suffer the force of our
fierce adversaries to have thy faithful servants in contempt and make us a
ieasting stock. We doubt not but thou know right well that the mighty and
high minded of this wretched world do with much arrogancy both hate and
despise thy holy and sanctified Church. Wherefore our earnest request is, that
thou would speedily lay to thy ready helping hand, not permitting her
neither to be polluted with supersticious and deuilishe errors, nor yet oppressed
by Satan or force of the ungodly, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
Look down from heaven upon us (O most excellent father) who do eleuate and
lift up our eyes to thee only, earnestly requyring that thou would defend
us by thy ready help from the great perilles wherewith we be at this present
sore vexed. For seeing thou have created us, and we be duly and rightfully
thine: lord (of thy infinite goodness) despise not thou thy servants who look
for help at thy hands only in this their needful time. We acknowledge
verily, we confess I say, that we have (by reason of our heinous sins and
great offenses committed against thee) deserved these things which are now
fallen upon us. But our fervent desire is, that thou having compassion upon
thy loving feruauntes, would pardon (for thy great goodness and infinite
mercies sake) what things soever they offend thee in them. Wey not (O good God)
our unworthiness, but consider the rebukes and slanders wherewith thou art
touched in us. For whilst the wicked enemies do stir up blasphemies against
thy faithful people, they do wrong, not unto us, but to thy glorious name,
when as they rage by force of arms and great violence, they chiefly shoot at
ye overthrowing of thy true honor, sincere religion, and most blessed word:
these are the things which they mean to take utterly away, if they might have
success. For so long as they perceive themselves to abound in much strength,
and do whatsoever it pleases them, they become marvelous high minded, and
thy Church being troubled by them, is put to an exceeding great foil, which
has none to fly unto for help, but thee only who art their Lord. Drive thou
away these injuries and mischievous euilles which they bring upon us, we humbly
beseech thee: for nothing is required in this behalf, but that thou would
defend the honor and glory of thy true doctrine and sacred gospel, least the
wicked make a laughter hereat. Grant (O good God) that those men may one day
feel the force of thy blessed verity, so as they shall will they ^ill they,
acknowledge thee to be a God of might, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxxiiij. Psalm.
A prayer against violence and deceypt.
Unless thou do assist us (O most mighty God) with thy puyssaunt power and
ready helping hand, the Antichristians are so bent to rise up against thy
faithful people, as they seem to commit nothing more then to swallow us all
up even quick: whose woodnesse is in such wise kindled, that (if thou
put not to thy helping hand) they are like to consume and devour us,
which truly we can not deny but has been of our parts justly deserved, if
we well wey and consider our own sins. For what scourge and torments can
we deem that thou ordeynest unjustly for us, weying so great ingratitude as
we have showed toward thee? who have been such transgressors of thy holy
commandments, as there is no penalty so great, but that we both are worthy
thereof, and also seem so to be. For although thou will not be present to
help thy sacred Church for our sakes, yet do it for the glory of thy name,
least the most raging rivers do ouerwhelme and choke it up with their
ouerflowing and violence of waters: turn away (we heartily require thee) their
mouths and teeth from thy holy ones, least they tear them in pieces like unto
a pray: who verily hunt for nothing else by their subtilties and lewd
practices, then to catch and snarle in the trappes of their ungodliness those
which have addicted themselves to thy blessed words, to the pourging of the
true worshipping of thee, and to a more sincere and pure manner of religion.
Make have therefore (O good God) to be our speedy helper, and deliver us from
the Nets of such cruel hunters. But vouchsafe thou (we humbly beseech thee)
who have made heaven and earth, that we may impute our whole salvation unto
thee only, and none other, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
Unless, thou thy own self (O most good and merciful God) do at this
present suppress and keep under the fury and madness of the Antichristians,
in such sort as they be not able to accomplish those things which they have now
enterprised and devised amongst themselves, they will swallow up thy sacred
Church whole and quick: who do in such wise rise up, gnash their teeth, rage,
and swell for anger, as thy faithful servants are now in a manner almost
drowned of them, unless thou do very speedily assuage and thrust back the
storm of ungodliness, and huge waves of the devil. Turn away thy furious
wrath from us (we heartily pray thee) O heavenly father, and punish not thee
wickedness which we have committed against thee, according to our just
deserts: who do not this only to the intent thou should consider our
worthiness, but that thou might not fail thy own name, thy pure doctrine,
and thy faithful promises. Grant that we may once say, verilye our God is to
be magnified and praised, which will not suffer his blessed Church to be
dispersed of wicked men's outrageous cruelty, but has taken her from the
snares and Jaws of ungracious persons, by his exceeding famous and most
puyssant arm. Cut their Nets asunder, let their naughty enterprises be
frustrated, and make their force to fail them, who do now greatly terrify
all such (O good God) as stand in fear of thee: let us look for help at thy
merciful hands only who have made heaven and earth. Wherefore our earnest
petition and hearty request, is, that thou would (of thy singular mercy and
excellent clemency) yield thy self pliable to our fervent prayers, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
SVch as belong to thy heritage, and are the true Israel, must needs confess
with us (O most mighty God) that unless we had been preserved and helped by
thy singular favor and mighty power, we should have been swallowed up and
utterly consumed to nothing more then once, by the fierce enemies of our
salvation. For if we look for help else where to succor us, we know assuredly
that it is of no force at all. The violence and outrage of those men which do
grievously assault us, is like most swift streams of water that do suddenly
ouerflow the fields, whose outrageous cruelty may be fully compared to the
fierceness of brute beasts, which men also use such crafty and covert snares
to trap us in, as the fowlers and hunters are nothing comparable unto them
herein, but seem very simple, and far their inferiors. Wherefore (according
to our bounden duty) we render condign thanks unto thee, for so much as thou
have hitherto delivered thy simple and feeble flock from so great perilous
dangers, and request this at thy merciful hands, that thou would in
likewise not suffer thy sacred Church hereafter to be overthrown, neither by
outrageous violence, nor yet through subtle deceit, so as our assured
confidence in thee may be daily more and more greatly augmented and mightily
increased, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxxv. Psalm.
For So Much as man's help (O most good and merciful God) is very weak, A
prayer for the preservation and long continuance of faith.
wonderful uncertain, and merueylous deceyuable, we are evidently taught to
repose our whole confidence in thee only, unto whom whosoever they be that
do annixe themselves, they never go nor yet wander out of the right way. Thou
therefore which have promised to stablishe Mount Sion (being thy holy Church)
in such wise with thy mighty protection, as it may abide for ever against all
the crafty assaults and layings awayte of her outrageous adversaries: have
the like regard (we humbly beseech thee) to the same at this present, neither
permit the rod of the ungodly to wax fierce upon her. For if it be enforced
to be in subjection to thy wicked enemies, even they also which seem godly
men shall fall redily into impiety. Punish our sins, O good GOD, (which be
great and grievous) with an other manner of chasticement and correction: for we
do desire no more at this time, but that we may not be oppressed by Antichrist,
requyring thee to defend the congregations of thy faithful inuironing them
about on every side like most defenceable Mountains, so that the wicked
adversaries of thy glorious name have no power to make havoc of them at their
will and pleasure. Deal lovingly and favorably in these days with such as be
greatly desirous of goodness and upright dealing: but cause those to feel and
have in trial what the workers of iniquity do deserve, whose minds are not
only wrapped altogether full of ungodliness, by practicing mischief and
naughtiness, but also endeavor so much as in the^ lies, that thy blessed
word may no where flourish, that true religion might be utterly extinguished,
and the perfect inuocating and calling upon thy glorious name quite rooted up.
But as for thy beloved Israel, after she has inioyed peace and tranquillity,
let it be joined more and more unto thee, so as she may continually lay sure
hold upon thy worthy praises, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
IN whose minds soever the belief of thy faithful promises (O most mighty
God) is assuredly graffed and firmly established, they being like unto well
grounded Mountains, do nothing shake in troublesome times, but their
constancy and vnremoueablenesse is of such force, as their assured hope is,
that they be no less armed with thy mighty protection and sure defense, then
was the City of Jerusalem environed with a rampire of Mountains which did
ouerlooke it round about on every side. Now therefore when as the mischief
and flame of the ungodly is occupied on this one point, how to scatter the
Church and to oppress it, assist the same (O excellent father) and make it
manifest unto her what a singular love thou bear thereto. But if (as we
openly and with a sincere faith acknowledge and confess) our horrible
naughtiness have deserved, ye (being deprived and left destitute of thy aid)
we should be given over into the woodnesse and cruel hands of the
Antichristians: wey not, we humbly beseech thee, what our misdeedes do rightly
deserve, but have a regard how we are committed unto thee, and that thou art
put in trust with us in christ: neither show thy self wrathful contrary to thy
old and ancient custom, whereby thou never gave liberty to the tyranny of
wicked persons to persecute the godly any long time, least if thy upright
judgments should be prolonged, they perhaps (who are righteous) may be boldned
to revolt therefro, and yield to naughtiness, as ye common sort do. Be thou
(O most mighty god) good, loving, and merciful unto these men whose earnest
desire it is to have the zeal of godliness imprinted in their hearts, and
extend thy indignation rather upon those which think and do nothing but rather
that which is lewd, unrighteous, and wicked. But preserve and increase (for
thy infinite mercies sake) the accustomable peace of thy beloved Israel,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
Whosoever do give credit to thy sacred truth (O almighty God) as becomes
them, remain irremoueable like unto steadfast Mountains, and most strong
rocks, what great storms of temptations soever the devil or world do
stir up against them: for as Cities be fortefied and raunged every where
about with thick rampires, strong walls, huge towers, and high hills, so God
does, as with a shield defend those whom he greatly favors, and which are
his elect servant, and gardeth them also like an exceeding strong Bulwark.
Therefore do we not without just cause (O excellent father) call earnestly
upon thee, that thou do not permit the ungodly to pour out their cruelty
upon the Church of the righteous, least if such as be yet weaklings amongs the
faithful, see the prosperity of wicked persons, they also of an evil zeal,
begin to follow their lewd vices and most grievous sins. Wherefore rather
defend and advance (we heartily pray thee) thy blessed saints, and be
favorable unto them, whom thou have now appointed to follow thee with a
perfect mind and vncorrupt faith. But beat down such with thy puyssaunt
strength and mighty power, as be enemies to godliness and the honor of thy
glorious name, so that thy sacred Church (which is the holy Israel) be not
defrauded of the joyful salvation she looks for at thy merciful hands,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxxvj. Psalm.
A prayer that we may be delivered from thraldom, and attain to the glory of
god.
SVrely the thraldom and bondage of thy blessed church (O most good and
merciful God) has been hitherto exceeding hard beyond all measure, being
sore oppressed under the tyranny of Antichrist, and yet notwithstanding, thou
(of thy infinite goodness) have redeemed it to our wonderful comfort, and the
great hope of others which as yet have an earnest desire to the attayning of
Christian liberty. We at this present heartily beseech thee (that at what time
the devil and power of the adversary seem by all the means they can devise
to bend their force for to hinder the good works which is begun) not to be
forgetful of thy Churches captivity, from which thou have after a sort
begun to restore the same, who verily has behaved her self so unthankfully
toward thee, as one that made small account of the benefits bestowed upon
her, according to their worthiness. But forsake her not (for thy accustomed
mercies sake) before thou have fully repaired in her yt which remains as yet
to be restored thereto, yea rather vouchsafe to bestow upon the same (as on
fields wanting moisture at noone time) the most swift streams of thy
heavenly grace, and flowing waters of thy blessed spirit, to the intent we
may with abundaunt gladness reap the pleasant fruit of the prayers which we
do now sow with tears* so as the heathen which behold these calamities with
a doubtful mind, wherewith the outrageous enemies of thy glorious name do
sore oppress us, may at length openly publish that thou have dealt honorably
with thy faithful servants by which means we may (after these grievous
sorrows be ended) enjoy not only such a gladness as we would willingly
wish, but also a very healthful comfort, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
Seeing it is thy most ancient accustomable manner, O almighty God, to and and
help such as unfeignedly trust in thee (by thy wonderful and singular
providence) when as they be fallen into greatest distress, so that thou
sendest them deliverance even when they least look for it, seeming rather to
enjoy the same as a dream then like a matter of truth: we have no despair at
all of thy sacred Church, being almost without hope of recovery, who know right
well that it is a light thing to thee, yea and exceeding easy, to fill our
mouth with laughter and our tongue with joy, in such wise as our cruel
enemies shall be enforced to say whether they will or not, that these men's God
has undoubtedly done wonderful great things for them, at what time he
caused those his servants to enjoy a notable comfort and marvelous
delectation, eue^ when they were without hope thereof. Our earnest request is
therefore that thou would, for thy infinite mercies sake, pardon the offenses
wherewith we have stubburnlye (through our outrageous madness, feeble
imbecillitie, and natural corruption) provoked thee to extreme anger, so that
we obteyning again at thy merciful hands the ancient favor and
benevolence, may find no less alteration of our estate, then those which
being parched with a Southern drougth and such ardent burning as is at noone
day, may be moysted with a fresh and sodeyne abundaunce of waters unlooked
for. And what things soever we sow with tears, grant us (we heartily pray
thee) to reap them at length with great joy and gladness, so that finally we
may have most plentiful fruits of consolation out of the prayers we (in
most humble wise) pour out daily before thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
WHen it happens at any time (O most good and merciful God) that thou of
thy singular goodness, do utterly deliver thy sacred Church from the
captivity and thraldom of the devil, and that it beholds al thy members
and hirs quite set free from fond errors and blind darkness, then shall it
be replenished with such gladness as she shall rather think how she
dreameth of that great good thing, then verily to enjoy the same. At what time
she may well say that she is mitry in deed, and shall be endued with
perfect gladness, neither shall she not only render immortal thanks and
praises unto thee, but also every man will marvel at the high and mighty
things thou have done for her. Our earnest request is therefore, that thou
woldst now at length condescend unto the accomplishment of these things, and
exceedingly favor her captivity being thus miserable and of such long
continuance: deliver thy faithful servants from obscure darkness, and
unloose the bands of thy accustomed loving kindness wherewith thou have
redeemed the children of Adam which are so long a time in bondage and
thraldom: and with the lively waters of thy benign grace cause thou the
barrenness and thirsty soil of our soul to be right pleasant and fertile,
so that the woeful tears which the godly did sow and pour out in the time of
their captivity, may bring them at length to their desired joys, and that
such (as with great sorrow and heaviness) have hitherto sown the seed of
fervent prayers and doleful sighings, may with very much joy and marvelous
pleasure reap the sound fruits of true godliness and pure religion, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxxvij. Psalm.
IT is out of all controversy, A prayer for sustentation and safe keeping
and a matter agreed upon among al godly persons, that no family can be well
ordered, or any commonwealth rightly governed, unless thou (O most mighty
god) do further and prosper their proceedings. We therefore who are not
ignorant but thou will do far better for thy holy Church then for any house
of honor, or most large City of this world, know assuredly that the same
can by no means continue without thy mighty preservation, and that especially
in this time, when as both so many of the devils engines, and also of
Antichrists subtle pollecies, do much invade us. For that thing therefore
which could not be achieved by the painful labor, careful watchings, and
great industry of men, we do most earnestly require of thee (O heavenly
father) by continual prayers, who have been accustomed to grant unto thine,
as it were in their sleep, the thing which seemed otherwise to be exceeding
difficult and almost impossible. First and foremost, take away our grievous
iniquities which are the chiefest let and stay why thou releauest not the
present wretchedness and miserable calamity we are in, for it is they and
none other thing that do disseuer and withdraw us from having confidence in thy
unspeakable mercy. Now at what time thou shall have pardoned them (as our
earnest desire is, that thou would) be so good as to increase thy blessed
Church with a plentiful issue: for if she shall engender children unto thee,
let them (who are worthy of thee and thy blessed spirit) be sent out like
arrows, through thy invincible arm against the outrageous enemies of
godliness and doctrine of the sacred Gospel: but cause the uncorrupted
Congregations and assemblies to have a company of valiant and strong men, who
(so long as they take upon them to defend thy sincere truth both in word and
deed) may neither be ashamed, not yet once shrink back therefro, through
Jesus christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
AL our force and enterprices are of none effect (O almighty God) without thy
especial grace and favor: for if no private house can be maintained, or any
City builded, except thou layest to thy present help and gracious good will,
how much less then may the blessed Church be reedified, enlarged and set at
a stay, unless thou be marvelous ready to assist the same with thy holy
spirit and benign grace: men have labored in vain, their rising up early,
and holding long fastings, shall be to none effect and vainly and to no purpose
shall they forespend themselves with toiles and troubles. Wherefore we
earnestly entreat thee (O good God) that thy divine presence and mighty power
be not far from us in any of our attempts and enterprises. For what thing
verily soever has been at any time gathered up and repaired of the ruins of
the Church, it takes no good success without thee, yet rather thou have given
the same to thy laborers as it were in their sleep, making it such a thing by
thy secret and wonderful means, as humane strength (if it were duly
considered) is altogether insufficient to so puyssant a work. But seeing we
have been now very ungrateful, and most lewdly abused so great and manifold
benefits, thou have not without just cause begun to vex us with exceeding
grievous troubles, from which men's painful travail and subtle pollecie
are of no ability to deliver us. Make thou have therefore, for thy accustomed
mercies sake, (when we think least hereof, or judge our selves to be in
danger of many perils) to vntangle those which fly unto thy divine Majesty,
that being set at liberty, we may acknowledge thee to be the only Author of
true and perfect salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
Because so many as enterprice any thing without thy especial assistance and
favorable good will (O most gracious and merciful God) do labor to no
purpose and trouble themselves in vain, and that they which have not thee for
their ready helper, cannot save and defend themselves from their cruel
enemies: therefore seeing (that both thy Church stands always in very great
need of building, and the City of our congregation is destitute and void of
defense) we call upon thee only to be our courageous helper, who art ready to
aid the builders, and can strongly defend the valiant fighters. But to the
intent we may the readilier attain the same, multiply (we earnestly require
thee) the issue of thy sacred church, which may be sent out as arrows to raise
it up every where by thy blessed word, and be made so skillful and well
practiced in handling thy sayings, that when those things be done which
apperteyne to their vocation, they may by no means be put to shame and rebuke
of the most godless and unfaithful persons, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxxviij. Psalm.
^ prayer that ^e may fear God and lead blessed ^^fe.
IF no good thing or any kind of felicity can happen to any but to such as
fear God and reverence him, and to those, which (through a perfect life) walk
faithfully in the ways of his blessed commandments, the matter is now
manifested unto us why we are thus vexed with grievous calamities. For whereas
thou of thy infinite mercy (O almighty God) have given us a comfortable and
wholesome doctrine, we have performed nothing less then honored thee as is
our bounden duty: who have set more by our own filthy desires, then the
fear of thee and due reverence of thy glorious name, by casting aside the
ordinances of thy blessed precepts. Wherefore there is no cause why we should
complain that afflictions are wrongfully laid upon us at any time. Pardon we
heartily pray thee, our grievous iniquities and mischievous deeds, and renew in
us (for thy infinite mercies sake) perfect fear, true godliness, and holy
conversation. Finally shine down out of Sion (that is, from thy exceeding high
light, and such as can not be attained unto) upon thy afflicted Church, and
deliver the same from the number of perils which she is in danger of. But
for so much as thou have coupled her unto thee to be thy wife by faith, grant
that she may have an infinite company of holy children: let her be as a vine
spreading it self far abroad, which Antichrist may not with all his
industry be of force to cut and hew down. For we require this chiefly at
thy merciful hands (O most excellent father) that thou would indue thy
heavenly Jerusalem with good and wholesome things, and send peace and
tranquillity upon thy true Israel, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
THy sacred word (O most good and merciful God) does teach us that godliness
only makes men right happy and blessed. For the fear and dread wherewith
godly men do reverence thee, is an effectual bridle to cause them for to
proceed justly in the way of thy righteousness. But because this virtue is a
singular ornament of thy beloved church, our earnest request is, that there may
be continual laboring in the same by doctrine and example to nurter thy
blessed children, so that the works be not in vain, or to none effect. Let
her be daily made like unto a most fruitful woman, that may be compared to
the rank Olives and exceeding fertile vines: which unspeakable happy gifts
we mistrust not but thou will one day bestow readily upon us, if from the
seat of thy Majesty, it shall please thee to behold the congregation of the
faithful with thy merciful eye, because al things that apperteyne to true and
perfect felicity, come from the will of thy inestimable goodness. For seeing
we doubt not but this redowneth to ye honor of thy glorious name, (that a
continual offspring of thy dear children should be multiplied in the blessed
Church, and become notable in peace, in praises, and in purity of life) we
heartily require thee in our most fervent prayers to obtain the same, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxxix. Psalm.
THou know (O most good and merciful God) how greatly the enemies of thy
glorious name have fought continuallye against thy sacred Church, A prayer
against the counterfeit holiness of such as would be justified by their works.
and always troubled the same from her infancy, yet notwithstanding thou have
done this of thy singular favor thou barest thereunto, that her adversaries
could never prevail against her, who did it for this intent, because thy
faithful promises should be accomplished. They seemed diverse and sundry times
to thrust the share of affliction very deep into her back, who (having a
marvelous obstinate heart) purposed to make exceeding long ridges upon the
same. But thou O good God of thy perfect justice, have always cut a sunder the
cords of the ungodly in pieces. Wherefore we now heartily beseech thee not to
regard our wicked factes, but the glory of thy name. For if thou should
deal with us according to our worthiness, we do not only deserve such
painful miseries, and sorrowful calamities, but much more greeuouser. Yet
(for thy infinite mercies sake) pour not out thy furious wrath on us, but upon
the ungodly, let them be confounded and turned backward, and grant that they
may quickly wither even as the grass, before they be any thing able to bring
their lewd enterprises to an end: whose deserts are not such as we ought to
pray for their good success, seeing their practices be exceeding naught. But
now cause the Church of thy faithful people, to inioye some blessing of peace
and tranquillity, through Jesus Christ our lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
THe assaults of thy faithful people (O most good and merciful God) be not
only very many and diverse, but they are also continually tempted, and be
enforced to fall into utter destruction: for the devil and power of our fierce
adversaries desire nothing more, then to turn thy Image unto them from the
purpose thou have ordained it for. And therefore we heartily cry and call unto
thee (who have an incomprehensible mercy joined with thy exceeding great
Justice) that thou would, for the entire good will and loving favor thou
bear unto us, break a sunder the slithe coardes of temptations, and tear
in pieces the subtle snares of such as lay deceyptfull trappes to snarle us
in, so that the wicked enemies of our salvation, may (according to their just
demerites) be brought to utter shame and confusion, to the intent all men may
right well know that thy perfect righteousness will not suffer their deuilishe
frauds and cursed deceyptes to escape always unpunished: whereby thy blessing
which thou have appointed for the elect and chosen, may not be impeached: and
let not the force of the devils subtilties and crafty ymaginations, disappoynt
the salvation, which we (that hope in thy faithful promises) look to atchieue
and attain unto, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxxx. Psalm.
THou art wont very often (O almighty God) to punish thy faithful servant
grievously, A prayer for grace in the time of need.
to the intent they might thereby return unto thee with earnest and perfect
repentance, which now experience teaches us to feel in thy sacred Church by
reason of these most troublesome times: for we that have been hitherto
innumerable ways very vngratful toward thee, and every where transgressed thy
holy law and blessed commandments, are so oftentimes vexed with the
fierceness of the cursed devil and his bondslaues, that we be enforced to
cry unto thee out of the bottomless pit, and from the unmeasurable deepenesse
of our adversities, requiring thee not to mark our heinous sins so severely.
For if thou (O good god) wilt dulye consider and justly punish the iniquities
that we have committed (according to their just deserts) which of us shall be
so blameless and holy, as he may be able to stand before thy justice? But,
for so much as we right well know that thou art endued with exceeding great
gentleness, we do both early and late look and wait for thy ready help.
Although therefore our iniquities are very many in number, vouche thou safe
(for thy most abundaunt goodness and infinite mercies sake) to redeem us from
them all, so that we, being delivered from imminent perils and present
calamities, may as well believe in thee only, as publish to the whole world
that there is true and perfect redemption, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
Seeing that we be perpetually tossed (O almighty God) with the most deep sea of
temptations, neither are able of our selves to match them, there is good reason
why we do not without just cause require thee speedily to help and succor our
woeful miseries. But, if thou (who art both a rightful judge and perfect
arbitrer of our causes) would consider all things whatsoever we have
grievously offended thee in, and earnestly mark the same, who were able (I
pray thee) to stand before thy tribunal seat? Seeing therefore thy mercy is
notable and infinite, our earnest desire is that we may in such wise depend
only thereupon, as the iniquities which we have committed, might be redeemed
thereby, who are nourished daily and hourly in this hope alone, trusting that
thou will never be forgetful of the true Israel, which is thy holy and
blessed Church. Grant us therefore (we humbly beseech thee) to obtain at thy
favorable hands, pardon and remission of sins, as a sound and sincere
fruit of this steadfast confidence, through Jesus Christ our lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxxxj. Psalm.
A prayer that we may have humility, and despise arrogancy.
For So Much as we are marvelous ungrateful toward thee (O most mighty God)
for the exceeding great benefits bestowed upon us, leading a life hitherto
nothing agreeable to thy holiness and our vocation, there is no cause why our
heart should be puffed up, or walk in wonders. Cause thy holy spirit to be
abundantly poured upon us, insomuch as all pride and arrogancy being utterly
laid aside and quite done away, we may heartily acknowledge this which is most
true, how that we are heinous sinners, by which means thou will (through a
true and sincere repentance) pardon our naughty and lewd behavior. Moreover
frame and comfirme us in such wise toward thee, as we may be like unto a
weaned child, which always longs for his mother, by whom it is cherished
and nursed. Unless thou therefore be our ready helper, what other thing either
can we or ought we to judge of our own power and strength, but the same shall
be hurtful unto us. Wherefore, seeing that thy blessed Church has none other
refuge but thee only, being utterly void of all human help, therefore even
after the manner of a child it looks unto thee, whose earnest desire is that
thou would not utterly forsake her, but so assist the same with thy
favorable goodness, as she may always wholly addict her self to call upon
thy glorious name, and publish thy famous renown, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
For So Much as (O most good and merciful God) it verily behooves thee only to
be high and excellent, our earnest request is that thou would not permit
pride to break into our heart, being of it self stubburne and rebellious
enough, seeing that all human arrogancy and ouerweening of our selves can
not be but very vain, as that which has neither true nor just cause so to do.
We desire therefore a very meek heart and marvelous lowly eyes to eschew all
such lewd devises and fond enterprises as may exceed the mean and bounds of
our vocation. Vouchsafe (we humbly beseech thee) that our mind may none
otherwise depend upon thee, then Infants hang upon their Nources breasts. For
we perceive right well that thy blessed Church shall never be compted in a
prosperous estate unless she does both utterly despair of her self, and
also repose her whole hope and confidence in thee only, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxxxij. Psalm.
A prayer that ^he Gospel may reign amongst us.
WE know right well (O most good and merciful God) that thou art not forgetful
of the covenant thou made with us in Christ Jesus: but acknowledge our selves
to have swarued from thy most sacred couenaunts and blessed agreements. For,
whereas it behooves us to frame our life so as we might please thee, and that
all our deeds ought to redowne unto the glory of thy blessed name, then the
which we have done nothing less, who have marvelous coldly exercised true and
perfect godliness, neither endeavored our selves to reedifie thy holy Church
with a fervent desire as it became us to do. But be not thou revenged (O good
God) upon our naughty facts, neither let these things which we have
heynouslye committed against thee, be an occasion that thou should not give
ear unto our hearty prayers. For this verily do we earnestly desire in all
our humble petitions, that the place wherein the Arc of thy glorious covenant
remains, that is to say, (thy elected church) may continue thy loving Spouse,
inioying at length a quiet and peaceable rest, to the intent thy blessed
kingdom may more prosperously be enlarged, and the glory of thy famous name
spread abroad far wider then it is at this day. Show we humbly beseech thee,
that thou art (according to thy faithful promise) truly resident in thy holy
Church, by induing thy faithful servants with true holiness and perfect
salvation. Suffer not (as thou have lovingly promised) the light of thy people
to be extinguished and quite put out: but let the princely beauty and renowned
glory of thy excellent Majesty shine perpetually in her, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
For So Much as thou of thy infinite goodness (O most gracious and merciful
God) have determined to dwell perpetually in the congregation of the faithful
(which is the Church that Christ has redeemed with his precious blood) we
humbly beseech thee never to forget this thy most loving promise. For our
earnest request is to have thy resting place abide in us, and that thou
would have an holy and well furnished habitation in our hearts through
faith. As therefore we mistrust not but thou will keep this thy sacred
covenant firm and steadfast, so we heartily desire thee to vouchsafe that we
on our part may not swerve therefro, but follow and accomplish to the uttermost
those testimonies of thy holy will, which thou have thought good to teach us in
thy sacred scriptures, so that the ministers of thy Sacraments, the faithful
people, and all the estates and degrees of thy elect servant, may shine in
true godliness and most sincere virtues, to the honor of thy glorious name,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxxxiij. Psalm.
WHen as those which take upon them the defense of thy glorious name (O most
mighty God) do live wonderful friendly amongst themselves, A prayer f^^
christian charity.
and practice all the means they can devise to honor and reverence thee, then
does thy blessed church increase daily more and more in famousnesse and
puyssaunt power. And in likewise on the other side it is greatly torn and
weakened if they which ought to have dwelt together like brethren, break out
into dissentions, or else be plucked asunder through any debate. Our earnest
request is therefore to have such peace granted us by thy excellent goodness,
as we may be joined together like members in thy one body which is the holy
Church. But, seeing that our innumerable sins do marueylouslye hinder so great
a felicity, how then can it fall out that such as be at discord with thee,
may be in unity amongst themselves? We earnestly desire this at thy merciful
hands, that the heinous offenses wherewith we have sundry times and that
greeuouslye provoked thy wrathful indignation being quite forgiven, thou
would receive us again into thy blessed favor, causing us faithfully to
embrace mercy and loving kindness in such wise, as we may be annixed unto
thee without separation: for hereof our tranquillity shall have her original
and deriuation, hereof shall there be made an excellent and most fertile Church
of good deeds, hereof shall the hid and secret treasures of thy holy spirit
open themselves unto us, and brust out into very sweet and pleasant fruits,
and finally a most redolent smell of justice and virtue shall breath forth from
thence through out the whole world. Grant therefore (O excellent father) to thy
humble suitors, that they may have peace with thee, amongst themselves, and also
with all men so much as in them lies, whereby, they being gathered together
in thy blessed name, according to thy loving promises, may have thee present
with them, feel thy most plentiful blessing, and finally obtain eternal joy
and felicity, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
For So Much as thou have of thy singular favor and exceeding great goodness (O
merciful God) adopted us to be thy dear children through faith we have
conceived in Christ Jesus, it behooves us to lead a life amongst our selves
not like strangers, but as brethren and sisters ought to do: neither have the
godly a greater desire or more pleasure in any thing, then to be in perfect
unity and peaceable agreement in the house of God. Wherefore it is no small
grief unto us that this brotherly affinity is every where rent and broken
asunder, which we ought warely to cheerishe and have in great estimation. But
we acknowledge our selves to have given an apparaunt cause of this grievous
vexation and sorrowful calamity: for how can it be then that we who are not
knit unto thee with our whole heart, and be nothing in such wise obedient to
thy sacred commandments as thou requirest, should be well joined together, or
be in love with our neighbors? We humbly beseech thee therefore (O good God)
to pardon whatsoever we have heretofore lewdly committed against thee, being
adversaries to thy divine law and sacred commandments, and to couple us one
to another, with an exceeding steadfast charity, into the sacred body of thy
holy Church, so that our loving consent and faithful agreement may spread it
self abroad most largely as a sweet smell of mutual love, and through the
pleasant dew of thy heavenly blessing, become every day more fruitful then
other in good and godly works, leading (of thy singular good will) not only a
quiet and peaceable life, free from the present evils in this wretched world,
but finally obtain such a one as is blessed and everlasting, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
Seeing thou have of thy loving kindness (O most good and merciful God) chosen
all faithful people to be thy dear children, grant that we who are brethren
by a blessed generation, may be fastened together in mutual love, long peace,
and perpetual charity, so that (during this lfie) we may take perfect
pleasure of such kind of tranquillity, and also become an exceeding delectable
odor toward the perpetual salvation of all others which be as yet strangers
to thee. Thy blessed Church may be (O heavenly father) through this especial
example, greatly wondered at of all men. For certainly we know by experience
that thou have used to pour out a most ample blessing upon so many as lead an
agreeable and friendly life in thy healthful doctrine and pure religion: and
therefore do we now require this earnestlye at thy merciful hands before
all riches and other earthly commodities, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxxxiiij. Psalm.
A prayer for faith in our daily peticions.
IT ought to be a most pleasant and joyful thing unto us (O almighty God) to
celebrate thy high praises perpetually, and show forth thy marvelous works
without ceassing: for the performance whereof, godliness would require, that
we should not only do the same on the day time, but also in the night
season. But yet notwithstanding, our most heinous sins and continual
backslidings compel us rather to brust out into sorrowful tears, piteous
sobbinges, and deep sighs, wherethrough we may say always before thee: we
verily have sinned (O good God) exceeding grievously, whose offenses are more
in number then the sand of the sea, and Stars of the sky, but now we lift
up our hands unto our holy sanctuary, which is Jesus Christ thy dearly
beloved Son, so that whatsoever we cannot obtain through our own
worthiness and deserts, we endeavor to atchieue the same by his only means
and gracious favor. We heartily require this at thy merciful hands (O most
excellent father) that thou would at one time or other, out of Sion (that is
to say out of the hid treasure of thy clemency) be favorable unto the people
which fly to thee for succor, by delivering them from present mishaps, whereby
thou (who did make heaven and earth) have vouchedsafe to call us unto the
knowledge of thy blessed name, so that we may lawfully render abundant thanks
and show forth thy worthy praises with a most free and joyful heart, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
Seeing thou have bewtified all those with a notable promise (O most mighty
god) which are knitte together in the honoring of thy blessed name, so that
thou will not only be present with them, but also bestowest excellent
benefits upon these men whosoever they are that excel in sincere faith and
pure godliness, and have an exceeding desire to be in the blessed
congregations, insomuch as there is nothing which they more covet or desire,
then to appear diverse times before thee in the sacred assemblies. But because
we see our selves greatly defiled with most heinous faults, ouerlading us in
such wise, as we dare not celebrate and praise thee as Christians ought to do:
our earnest request is therefore that thou would (of thy unspeakable mercy,
infinite goodness, and excellent clemency) deliver us from the Champions of
Antichrist and his ministers, who endeavor themselves so much as they can
possible, that thy faithful servant might no more assemble and meet
together for to honor thee sincerely and as they are willed to do. Reserve
those to thy self (we humblye beseech thee) who have so great a desire to lift
up their hands unto thee and to direct their prayers unto thy mercies seat
with a most holy intent: show these men much pleasure from heaven, cherishe
them greatly, and be their strong defense, being a thing nothing impossible to
thy wonderful and invincible power, for so much as the whole world and all
things contained therein, were not only made by thy puissant might, but also
endure and be preserved through thy omnipotency, by Jesus Christ our lord.
Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
THy unspeakable goodness is such (O most merciful God) as it ought always
to be greatly praised and highly magnified. We will therefore lift up pure
hands in all places, touching the publishing of thy glorious name, and render
perpetual thanks (according to our bounden duty) for thy loving kindness
extended toward us. But, seeing that this ought to be done in the most sacred
and holy assemblies, our earnest desire is for to have thee present there with
us, and to bestow thy plentiful blessing upon thy beloved Israel, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxxxv. Psalm.
Whosoever they be that are moved by the holy ghost to assemble together (O
almighty God) for to celebrate thy glorious name, A prayer against a (...) and
false confidence.
have a wonderful heap of benefits set out before them, which thou have most
plentifully bestowed upon us. For look what things thou have by thy
wonderful wisdom created in heaven and earth, all the same do thou
continuallye dispose according to the pleasure of thy good will, causing the
clouds, rain, winds, and other works of nature to be in such wise obedient
to thee, as they serve exceeding commodiously for the utility of mankind. But
seeing that the hearts of kings and princes are under thy dominion, thou do
continually bow them so far as the preservation of thy faithful servant
does require, which is sufficiently manifested enough by Pharao king of Egypt,
Sion, and Og, most puyssaunt princes of the land of Canaan. By reason
whereof, the hope that we have assuredly conceived in thy beloved promises, is
so confirmed and established, that (although we may see the Church
greeuouslye oppressed with exceeding great perilles) yet our only trust is
that thou will so aid and help the same, out of the hid and secret
treasures of thy loving mercy, as first and formoste to pardon our innumerable
and most shameful declinings from thee, wherewith we have mischieuously
polluted our selves: and that thou will also in such wise vanquish, subdue, and
repress the malipertnesse of the devil and his guard, as we be not enforced
any more by them, to embrace again an ydolatrous trade of worshipping thee,
and give honor to those Images which can neither speak, hear, nor yet have
breath, although they seem as if they had both ears, hands, and mouths.
Grant we heartily pray thee (O excellent father) that all men may perpetually
laud and set forth thy glorious name out of Sion (which is thy true Church)
with an ancient, yea rather an everlasting peace and tranquillity, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
THou deseruest very great commendation for a number of excellent causes (O
almighty God) and diverse ways to be extolled with most noble praises: first
and foremost thou art good, and thy name is marvelous pleasant and wonderful
amiable. Moreover thou have chosen us to be thy peculiar people, that is, and
true Israel, who art of such an invincible force, as there is only not any
creature, but also none other God at all that may be compared to thee in power.
For thou only do wondrous things in heaven, in earth, in the sea, and in
the deepes and bottomless pit: thou also stirrest up and bridlest at thy will
and pleasure, the flaming lightninges, boisterous winds, raynie showers,
raging waters, and stormy tempests. Whose mighty puyssaunce, the Egyptians,
Amorreites, and Chenaneits have felt, when thou did defend the children of
Israel with thy accustomable clemency, and gouernedst them through an
unspeakable loving kindness and wonderful mercy that thou did extend
toward them. Judge thou therefore thy faithful people, who have been
accustomed to rule the course of nature by such a wonderful means, and
finally comfort thy beloved servants, have an especial regard, behold, and see
(we humbly pray thee) the grievous calamities of thy sacred Church, neither
deal with us according to our wicked and lewd deserts. We acknowledge verily
(even from the heart) that we have led a life to much unbeseeming thy glorious
name and our vocation, who do not now return unto dumb Idolles (when we are
thus grievously afflicted) being the works of men's hands, having as it were a
mouth, eyes, and ears, and yet do they not speak, neither see, nor
understand: but have recourse unto thee, our true and only God, that like as
thou love the sacred Church and would be highly praised therein, so
vouchsafe to deliver the same from imminent perils, through Jesus Christ our
lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
THere be two things (O most good and merciful God) which ought chiefly to
stir us up to speak of thy worthy praises: whereof, the one is this, for
that nothing can be found or ymagined greater the^ thou art: the other, because
there is a pure joy and assured pleasure conceived in the very setting out of
thy worthy praises. Moreover the number of thy notable benefits are so great,
as not only matter to the publishing of thy glory is ministered every where,
but also that it does in a manner ouerwhelme such as think thereupon any thing
earnestly, as they can readily find neither beginning nor yet end for the
setting forth of thy glorious name, without the wonderful assistaunce of thy
holy spirit. Which thing (so long as it is duly considered of our parts) we
do earnestly require in our daily prayers, that especially in the sacred
assemblies, we may with most pure faith set out thy worthy praises, yield
thee thy true worship, and publishe thy renoume with a pure life and holy
conversation, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxxxvj. Psalm.
A prayer for (...) knowledge ^f Gods om^ipotent goodness.
THy puyssaunt power and singular goodness (O most gracious and merciful God)
does every where so abound upon us, as man's thought and ymagination can not
sufficiently comprehend the same: for if we look unto the sky that is
garnished with exceeding bewtifull and almost innumerable lights, or if we
consider the earth which is marvelous abundauntly replenished and decked with
most pleasant fruits, they be always wonderful tokens of thy unspeakable and
passing good will toward us. Hereunto are added, the wonders which thou did
in Egypt, where through (when thou had spoiled the tyrant of all that ever
he had, and finally bereft him of his life) thou made it manifest what a
pleasure the fredome of the children of Israll was to thee, unto whom thou
shewedst thy self no less a most steadfast preserver in the wast and loathsome
wilderness, then an exceeding strong defender, at what time they walked
through the whole land of Canaan, and causedst the huge and mighty kingdoms
thereof to be under their subjection. Thou therefore who art endued with
excellent goodness, wonderful clemency, and unspeakable mercy that never
has end, have an especial regard (we heartily pray thee) unto thy beloved
Church, being now in marvelous great peril and extreme danger, neither let
the most lewd deeds (wherewith we have both polluted our own selves, and
also thy sacred Gospel) draw thee from thy native loving kindness. Pardon
(we heartily pray thee) what soever we have committed against thy divine
Majesty: and suffer not thou (who give sustinaunce to all flesh) thy
faithful servants to be deprived of a perfect doctrine and most pure and
sound sacraments, which are in deed the feed of eternal life. Vouchsafe that
every man may hereby perceive how good and mighty thou art, to the intent all
persons may every where (as right meet it is) fear and love thee with a most
fervent and hearty good will, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
THy goodness is such and of so great force (O most mighty God) as thou
would not only have us fed thereby, but also (which is not the least part
of our felicity) that we should feel and perfectly acknowledge the same: who
have for this cause, brought forth exceeding bewtifull things as well in
heaven as in the earth, after a most wonderful artificial manner. All which
matters, if we did behold with a godly affection and well disposed mind, our
heart without doubt should always be kindled and inflamed with a fervent
desire it has toward thee. To the intent therefore our stony and frozen
hearts might be more vehemently styrred up, thou have chosen out for thy self
one people, which was Israel, by whom thou might declare with how great
zeal and after what manner of providence and most large benefits thou have
showed thy self beneficial unto such as continually applied themselves to the
true worshipping of thee and unto godliness. But have at length poured out al
treasures of thy excellent goodness in Christ Jesus our Lord, and thy most
intierly beloved son, to the end thou would deliver us from eternal and
everlasting death. For which cause sake, we being provoked (through the
wonderful miracles of so great and manifold benefits) do render hearty
thanks unto thee, although verily not such as thou deseruest, yet those that we
are able, and to the vttermoste of our power we do commend thy sacred Church
unto thee, by the selfsame Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxxxvij. Psalm.
Whosoever they be (O almightye God) that make a true account of sincere
godliness and pure religion, A prayer ^gaynst su^ as be eni^^es and derid^ of
the gosp^
are exceeding sorrowful if they see the sacred Church scattered, wholesome
doctrine derided, the praises of thy divine name had in contempt, and such
things as apperteyne to a devout worshipping of thee turned unto heathnish
gewgawes and voluptuous pleasures. To the intent therefore these things may in
no wise happen as now unto us, which we see not to be far of, we power forth
daily before thee, with great submission, these our doleful complaints, that
thou would first of thy exceeding great goodness and loving mercy, blot
out all our heinous offenses (being in a manner infinite and exceeding grievous)
committed not only through weakness and ignorance, but also done oftentimes
both maliciously and of a set purpose. Moreover be favorable unto our grievous
sins, and turn away from us in such sort the most fierce wiles and subtle
layings awayte of Antichrist, as thy sacred Church be not deprived of all
blessed joy and spiritual gladness: suffer not the mouths of good and
wholesome instructors to be closed up, permit not thy due honor to be had in
oblivion, nor yet let the hymns and songs wherewith thou art highly
celebrated, be usurped of such as will have the same in derision. We humbly
beseech thee, O excellent father, that (what wrath or indignation so ever is
due unto us by reason of the heinous sins we have wickedly committed) thou
would, for the glory of thy famous name, turn it from thy sanctified
Church, and pour out the same rather upon them, who, with a enemy like rage
and most malicious affection, ymagine nothing else, but quite to mar and
utterly lay waste thy blessed heritage, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
THy sacred Church would be greatly desirous (O most mighty God) to extol thy
famous name joyfully with Psalms and Hymns, but as yet her oppression and
bondage is so great in darkness and blind errors of new fond supersticions
that have been brought thereto, as it is more agreeable for her sorrowful
estate, rather to lay aside the instruments of gladness, and give her self
day and night to weaping, wayling, mournings, lamentable prayers, and most
fervent supplications, wherewith she may crave thy furtherance and ready
help: to the intent it may (in the strange tents of this wretched world)
rather be forgetful of all delectable pleasures, then utterly void of true
and perfect worshipping of thee. Our earnest request is therefore yt thou
would very speedily deliver her from the tirannie of the enemies of
Godliness, who have in nothing so great a delight, as to rejoice in the
destruction thereof. Turn thy self we heartily require thee, unto them, and
restrain their mad outrage, so that they may hereafter the less pollute and
defile the Church thy loving spouse, either with their deuilishe errors or
lewd behauiours, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxxxviij. Psalm.
THy mercy (O most mighty God) is so notable and famous, ^ prayer that ^ men
of ^^eat power ^d high au^oritie may ^brace the lord of god.
as it ought to be celebrated, with seemly praises, even in ye assembly of
princes and highest powers: for seeing yt thou have, with all faithfulness
abundantly accomplished thy loving promises, the reputation of thy glorious
name is wonderfully augmented by giving salvation every where to such as
lame^tably require the same. For So Much as therefore the monuments of thy great
mercy be innumerable, we earnestly entreat and humbly beseech thee not to
decline therfro in these our most wretched days, nor yet permit thy self to
be alienated and withdrawn from us. Although we have not framed our deeds,
according to thy sacred laws and divine will, as was our bounden duty, but
have wretchedly sinned against thee, deadly offended, and spitefully revolted
from thy excellent Majesty: which verily we heartily acknowledge and earnestly
confess, and albeit we are unworthy that thou should be favorable and
merciful unto us, yet it greatly apperteyneth unto thee for to pardon such as
crave mercy at thy hands through an unfeigned faith. Wey not then (in this so
cruel a case) what we are bound to do, but that which belongs to thy
unspeakable goodness. For if thou will be present at this time to help such
as unfeignedly call upon thee, there is no man living but shall follow thee with
a wonderful admiration. The common people, the nobility, yea and kings also
shall strive who may praise thee most: for thou shall very manifestly prove to
their faces, that thou have a great respect to such things as be exceeding
lowlye and of very small reputation, although thy tribunal seat be in heaven:
for, notwithstanding thou seem to dwell very ry far of from us, yet thou
make all men understand the wonderful tokens of thy excellent justice and
unspeakable goodness. Establishe us (O good God) with hope in in such wise, as
if we should walk even through the midst of trouble and great distress,
thou will not permit our courage (being vpholden with thy right hand) any
thing to fail, but remember the work of thy hands, what manner a people so
ever we be of our selves, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
THe people and common sort of men ought not only to extol the honor of thy
glorious name, and nobleness of thy famous words with right great praises (O
almighty God) but also such as be noble and renowned are bound to do the
like, because thou pourest thy singular benefits upon all mortal creatures,
and never faylest of thy loving promises in faythfulnesse and truth, but rather
do perpetually give an attentive ear to those which call upon thee with a
pure faith and vncorrupt mind. Let so many therefore as be famous and excel
in dignity and power amongst men, praise thee when as they shall perceive the
marvelous wisdom of thy deep counsels and excellent devices. For, though
thou excellest all others in height, yet do thou not despise such things as
be humble and lowly, but seem to behold the proud a far of, because thou
alowest in no wise their doings. We humbly require thee therefore to refreshe
and quicken us in the midst of our sorrowful tribulations, and repress the
violence and hatred of the outrageous enemies of godliness, so that whilst
thou shall nourishe and defend us (being the work of thy puyssaunt hands)
thy infinite mercy may be made right famous with eternal glory, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxxxix. Psalm.
A prayer for ye knowledge of Gods divine providence.
THy knowledge and wisdom (O most mighty God) is of such force, as thou
perfectly know all men's words, deeds, and thoughts, who also understand
the ymaginations of our minds before we utter them. For no man is able to
conceive and evidently discern the great wisdom thou show in making and
fourming of our bodies: if we were comparable to the swift course of ye Sun,
or did excel the quickenesse of the Morning, or might clime up to heaven, or
go down to hell, there is no place but thou would meet with us, who have
seen and most evidently perceived even from the first creation, the unshapen
mass of our bodies with all the members thereof, when as yet there was none of
them. For So Much therefore as thou seem to be on all sides so wonderful,
our earnest request is that thou would (for thy famous honors sake) be at
length highlye reverenced and dulye worshipped in thy blessed Church. Let the
wicked and such as have thy glorious name in great contempt, depart thence: but
try thy faithful servant, we humbly beseech thee, and search them thoroughly
out, to the intent they may know themselves: that if perhaps they swerve from
the true and right way (as it often so happens by human infirmity) bring
thou them again of thy great goodness, into the straight path of perpetual
felicity, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxl. Psalm.
Seeing that we can look for none other thing to proceed from wicked and
ungodly men (O most good and merciful God) then abominable naughtiness: A
prayer against the venomous tongues of the ungodly.
for where there is a lewd heart, a man can never see an uprightness to be
observed neither in words nor deeds. Therefore do we most earnestly call upon
thee, so much as we ran possible, to rid and deliver us from the violence and
malicious enterprises of lewd persons. But many are the coardes, trappes, and
snares, which the Devil and his cursed members do prepare against the Church.
Be thou thy self therefore her mighty strength and puyssant preservation, by
fortifying the same in such sort with thy steadfast defense, at what time the
battayles of temptations are fought, as the lewd subtilties, wherewith it is
furiously assailed, and vnluckely oppressed, may fall and light upon the Authors
thereof. Which thing, if thou will thus do, thou shall reteyne thy old wont
by vndershoring with thy divine and celestial help, such as be utterly
destitute of man's aid: whereby the godly may continually set forth thy
glorious name, and enjoy eternal felicity by the favor of thy bright and
shining countenance, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxlj. Psalm.
A prayer against hypocrisy.
We daily crave for thy gracious help (O almighty God) and earnestly require
this at thy merciful hands, that our fervent prayers may be accepted with
thee as a most laudable sacrifice: for, seeing we perceive it can not be
done, unless we refrain our minds wholly from vice, we desire thee therefore
inespecially to remove all our sins from us, wherewith we have exceeding
filthily defiled both our own selves and thy glorious name also: who do not
keep this secret, that we have lived heretofore unworthily and after a most
wretched manner, but acknowledge and make the same manifest before thee, with a
common and very willing confession. Our earnest desire is then that thou
would pardon thy poor suppliants, by seuering our hearts in such sort
hereafter from the contagion of filthy wickedness, as we may in no wise
attain thereto, either by thought, word, or deed: vouchingsafe to fortify
godly men's minds with such a manner of puyssant force and renowned godliness,
that they suffer not themselves to be deceived with the subtle allurementes
and crafty promises of the wicked, but rather beat, chastise, and correct
thou us thy self (O good God) then permit us to be shaken or made tender with
the subtle inticementes, delectable pleasures, and poisoned flatteries of
mischievous persons. We be discouraged and slain (as thou right well know)
and final destruction hangs over the Church: notwithstanding we lift up our
eyes exceeding steadfastly toward thee, and heartily require that thou would
deliver us from the subtle wiles and crafty layings awayte of execrable men.
But, for so much as they are past all hope of recovery, better it is for them to
be caught in their own nets and lewd engynes, to the intent thy sacred
Church may escape the mischievous hands of those wicked and ungodly men,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
MAke have to be present with us (O most mighty God) according to thy
accustomed goodness, when we heartily invoke and call upon thee, least we be
enticed by any means from thy sacred word and pure religion. Let the unfeigned
prayers (which we pour forth) ascend into thy sight like a pleasant perfume,
and a most acceptable sacrifice, although our sins do not deserve the fame.
For we earnestly confess, even from the heart root, that we have very often
inclined to most hurtful things, and not obeyed thee hitherto in word and
with mouth, but have offended thee in that behalf also, and been more ready
and hasty then needs, to commit deadly wickedness, which is the only
cause why thou do now thus greeuouslye rebuke and chastise us. But grant
this (O good God) for thy exceeding great goodness and infinite mercies sake,
that we may assuredly know these thy favorable chasticements to be the m^ere
benefits of thy most fatherly good affection toward us, so that (when as
they proceed from thy divine providence) we may both account and also
esteem them more profitable, then if we inioyed marvelous abundantly the
love of the world and pleasure of ungodly persons: for our assured affiance is
such in thee, as we know most certainly that it is thy accustomed use to help
them (so that they crave the same at thy favorable hands) whose bones are
both broken a sunder and also dispersed in such wise, as though they should go
down out of hand into hell. Forsake not therefore the Church (according to thy
woonted manner) in these perilous days, at what time she is in most misery,
but deliver her from the trappes, snares, and nets of the ungodly, and let
the wicked fall into their own wiles and pittes, which they have made and
dug, and not thy faithful people, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
Withdraw not thy ready help from us, we humbly beseech thee (O most good
and merciful God) so long as we lamentably require the same at thy merciful
hands: for this is our daily sacrifice wherewith we do greatly honor and highly
reverence thy glorious name, neither does it less please thee to have us
taught in thy blessed word, then if we should burn upon Alters a most sweet
odor and pleasant perfume of spices, as the use and custom was in old time:
our earnest desire is therefore, that thou would set a sure watch upon our
tongue and heart, that we may not do any thing either in word, or thought, (and
much less in deeds) contrary to thy blessed law. Remove from us all
intercourse of the ungodly, but cause us to take in exceeding good worth
brotherly admonicions and friendly rebukes, having no regard at all to high
praises and pleasant flattering tales. For seeing that there be a thousand
snares and trappes which our ancient enemy has laid to snarle us in, let
thy gracious favor at length deliver us from the whole number of them, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxlij. Psalm.
We cry out daily in thy sight (O most good and merciful GOD) pouring out
our fervent prayers and humble supplications, A prayer for comfort in
persecution.
that the sorrow and heaviness conceived in our heart may be uttered, and this
we do in thy gracious presence, who only know the way and means how to
deliver thy faithful servant in their uttermost troubles. Our spirit verily
is continually vexed within us, so long as we consider the present state of
things, insomuch as whether we look on the right hand or toward the left,
we see no man truly which will unfeignedly take upon him either to defend or
acknowledge ye cause of thy blessed Church. Which euilles in deed happen unto
us by reason of our heinous sins, wherewyth thou art thus grievously offended
against us, as to stir up so fierce and sly enimyes against thy chosen
people, who lay snares almost in all places, and extend violence every where
upon us. Be merciful now therefore unto us (O God our dear father) at what
time we seem to be destitute of al succor, neither is there any remaining
alive that has a regard for the preservation of our souls: hear thou thy
self our woeful complaints, and be a sure refuge for us, and our portion
amongs the living: by delivering us from our malicious persecutors, who seem
at this present to have the upper hand. For if thou will mightily deliver thy
sacred Church from this sorrowful calamity, thy excellent name shall be spread
abroad in every place, and all men will rejoice with us, upon whom they shall
perceive that thou have showed this unspeakable favor and loving kindness,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
Seeing that we are perpetually environed (O most mighty God) with an infinite
number of perils, necessity it self persuades us never to desist from
prayer, but always to pour them out exceeding fervently before thee. For, to
whom may we better declare our extreme heaviness and grievous misery (which
does daily assail us) then to thee? who know all things right well, neither
art ignorant of the crafts and subtilties of the force of our cruel
adversaries. Thou only can succor and deliver us: who may not trust in man's
aid, either because they will not, or else for that they be not able to help
us. And therefore do we earnestly cry unto thee, being our sanctuary and
lotte in the land of the living, to the intent thou would set us free from
the devil the ancient enemy of mankind, and his cursed guard: whose minds
being thus recreated and refreshed, shall incessantly acknowledge thy blessed
name: and all such as be faithful lovers of virtue, will together with us
publishe and set out thy excellent benefits with condign and deserved
praises, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxliij. Psalm.
We do earnestly desire thee (O most good and merciful God) to accept our
common petit^ons, A prayer in temptation for the avoiding of desperation.
and that thou would (for thy excellent mercies sake) hear the hearty
prayers which we pour out before thee, neither deny we that the heinous
sins, wherewith we daily provoke thy heavy wrath, has not deserved the same.
But if thou will enter into judgment with us, and give severe and upright
sentence, seeing that no man living, yea no creature at all (be it never so pure
and holy) is able to abide the same, we also shall without fail be cast,
neither have any force to stand in thy presence before the tribunal seat.
Look thou therefore upon us with thy loving favor and woonted clemency,
that as the enemy has greedily persecuted our souls, so verily we seem,
being sore smitten and greatly forsaken, to be in a manner at the point of
death, because our spirit is thus vexed within us, and heart made desolate. Who
are notwithstanding right mindful of thy old and ancient mercy, wherewith
thou have been accustomed to succor and help thy elect people at what time
they were miserably afflicted. Therefore do we not only lift up our sorrowful
hands unto thy divine Majesty, but endeavor our selves so much as in us lies
for to have thee deliver thy blessed church from the hands of her outrageous
enemies: directing us so with thy good spirit, that we may hereafter execute
those things faithfully which are right and holy, according to thy divine will
and pleasure, being conveyed out of this present distress by thy good
guidaunce, and quickened with thy ready help, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
THe infirmity of our righteousness (O most good and merciful God) is of
such force, as those which be instructed with thy blessed spirit, know very
well that it is not able to stand before thy judgment seat: when as
therefore we do consider our lewd deserts, our spirit fades away, and our
heart waxes amazed. But we have recourse out of hand to thy infinite mercy,
who do heartily acknowledge and earnestlye confess that our righteousness
proceeds not of our selves, but comes from thee only: so that we (being
stayed up and confirmed by this steadfast faith) do lamentably require thy
favorable assistaunce in the dangerous perils of this wretched life. For,
unless thou put to thy ready helping hand, we do utterly despair of
our salvation. Show us the way wherein we may walk without danger, and teach
us after what manner we may accomplish thy blessed will, and rule all our
thoughts and deeds by the help of thy holy spirit which proceeds from
thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxliiij. Psalm.
WE unfeignedly confess (O most good and merciful God) that all warlike force
and policy proceeds from thee only, ^ prayer a^aynst wic^ed doctrine
ydolatrous ^orshipping.
who bestowest the same at thy will and pleasure, upon such as thou will:
for so much as therefore we ascribe all power and victory to thy blessed name,
we take thee only to be our strong Castle, invincible Tower, unremovable
rock, and mighty shield. For although we right well perceive that man of his
own nature is a thing of naught in respect of that he should be acknowledged
of thee, and we to have sinned so heynously, as we are altogether unworthy
that thou should make any account at all of us, but having nevertheless
assured confidence in thy unspeakable mercy, we are bold to direct our hearty
prayers unto thy divine Majesty, in this our most difficult and troublesome
time, requiring thee to show forth thy mighty power from heaven for our
deliverance, by scattering and dispersing of our cruel enemies. Stretch out
thy puyssaunt hand (we humbly beseech thee) and rid us from the layings
awayte of ungodly persons. It is thou which have sent help unto kings and
princes that put their whole confidence in thee, by the delivering not of David
only, but also through the often setting at liberty of very many of the
ancient fathers from noisome mishappes and extreme perils. For So Much as
therefore thou have always endued thy faithful servant with innumerable and
most excellent benefits, as well temporal as spiritual things, that is to
wit, a plentiful issue, flocks of sheep, riches and honor, insomuch as all
people might easily judge ye nation blessed which took thee for their God.
Reject not now thy sacred Church: for, seeing that thou know the great
afflictions, wonderful perils, and marvelous distress she is in, make
speed to help her, neither permit the enemies of thy glorious name to lay the
same waste: and grant that she, being at length delivered from these evils,
may sing new songs unto thee, and extol thy excellent name with perpetual
praises, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
THere is none other force (O most good and merciful God) besides thine,
wherein thy faithful people may have their rock, their fortress, shield and
place of refuge in a readiness. But should thy godliness make any account of
us who be vile dwarfish men? For both we and all our doings shall fade away
like a shadow and mere vain thing, unless thou of thy excellent mercy be
present and deliuerest us, from the dangers that are without measure laid
every where for us: who then can otherwise escape the subtle crafts and wily
imaginations wherewith the enemies of mankind does daily assail us? Our
earnest desire is therefore to have thee lay to thy helping hand, whereby we
may diverse times celebrate thy worthy praises with new songs and ditties.
Neither do we only require this, that those things may thrive with us which
apperteine to this life and a worldly prosperity: for, although these
co^monlye be of great weight, yet do we account it a greater blessedness, if
thou verily wilt so show thy self to be our god, as in deed thou art, through
Jesus christ thy son, who lives and reigns with thee evermore world without
end. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxlv. Psalm.
THy worthynesse is so noble and excellent, O almighty God, A prayer for the
glorifyin^ of gods works in us with the pr^seruation of the Church and comfort
of the faithf^
as our searching (be it never so exactlye done) can in no wise comprehend
the same. Yet we certainly understand this by faith, that thou art exceeding
merciful, and so aboundest therewith, as it is very long before thy heavy
wrath be kindled. For such is thy unspeakable goodness, that nothing can be
found either among the creatures which thou have made, or in the government of
the world, but that thy singular clemency appears in the same. For So Much as
therefore we know assuredly that the sacred Church which is thy glorious
kingdom, shall endure for ever, we earnestly require thee to uphold the same
continually, when as it is like to fall, to raise it up when it seems most
pressed down, by feeding all thy people in time convenient with thy blessed
word, and satisfying all such (with thy liberal grace) as repose their whole
trust in thee: neither suffer these men's prayers to be in vain which with a
pure and unfeigned heart call upon thy most holy name, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxlvj. Psalm.
A prayer for ^he acknow^edging of our ^utie in pray^ng God and ^rusting in
^im, of our ^eaknesse, and ^f Gods pro^ection over ^ll sorts of people.
THou right well deseruest (O most good and merciful God) that we should
continually extol thy worthy praises from the bottom of our heart and with a
right pure mind, neither can we practice any thing in this life more noble or
of greater profit. In thee only ought we to repose our whole trust, and not in
men be they never so famous and puissant: for their body is easily dissolved,
their soul is soon breathed out, and their ymaginations are of none effect.
But thou (who have created the whole world) do confirm thy faithful
promises with everlasting truth in revenging the oppressed, satisfying the
hungry, delivering the fettered out of prison, giving sight to the blind,
recomforting the heavy hearted, favoring the righteous, defending the
strangers, fatherless children, and widows, and also in disappoynting the
lewd wyles, sly crafts, and subtle disceyts of ungodly persons. Seeing that
all these things be thy wondrous works, and are seen of us continually,
they do marvelously establish our wavering faith. And therefore, being styrred
up by them, we do earnestly beseech thee both to govern and also preserve ye
Church (which is thy blessed kingdom) among the waves of this wretched world,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxlvij. Psalm.
WE are bound to render exceeding great praise (O most mighty god) to thy
glorious Majesty, A prayer the the word (...) God may b^ of great for^ in us.
who do evidently perceive that thou healest those which are broken in heart,
exaltest them that be meek, and bring the ungodly even unto hell. There is
no force able to encounter with thy puissaunce: which rulest the stars, and
call them forth by name for the accomplishing of thy blessed will, as though
they were thy sheep or servant. Thou therefore that bring forth clouds,
rain, and hay, which do feed cattle and young Ravens, and preseruest such
as fear thee, without the help either of footmen or horsemen: look upon thy
blessed Church, we humbly beseech thee, fortify it against her enemies, and
indue her children with continual peace. Suffer it not to pine away for lack
of the food of thy blessed word: and even as by thy word thou sendest forth
snow, yse, and hoar frost, dissoluing the same incontinent with a puff of
wind when it seems good in thy sight, even so with thy gracious favor,
cause thou those adversities which thou procurest for a time to exercise her
withal, to vanishe speedily away. And thou (who have not dealt in such wise
with other nations as to reuele the mysteries of thy sacred scriptures unto
them, grant that we may use them to our souls health, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxlviij. Psalm.
Seeing that the monuments of thy excellent goodness and invincible power in
all things which thou have created (O almighty God) be far and near so
famous and notable: A prayer that God may be commended in all his creatures.
the setting out of thy worthy praises in them, seems wonderful and in a
manner singular, if so be that any man does deeply well consider the heavenly
minds, the Sun, Moon, Stars, and workmanship of the Skies, none other
thing shall be found there, then a mere commendation of thy loving favor
and unspeakable wisdom. All which things, seeing that the clouds, rain,
thunder, winds, hills, plants, living creatures, with the whole universal
work both of nature, and of ciuell ordinance, whereby common wealths be
governed amongst men, do manifest the same unto us: it is a thing to be
wondered at, how we should be so cold in this behalf, that being so pricked
forward and stirred up with all things, should keep silence and become
almost as dumb persons in publishing of thy worthy praises, yea (and which
ought to seem more hard and grievous) in stead of praising and glorifying thy
excellent name which we owe unto thy divine Majesty for so great benefits as
thou have bestowed upon us, we have requited thee with slanders, reproaches,
and blasphemies: which things (although we do not pronounce in express
words) yet notwithstanding, for so much as we have so sore defiled our selves
with the most filthy spots of sin, dishonored thy holy doctrine, and by
our lewd examples have called others back from the praising of thy blessed
name, we dare not be so bold as to speak of thy commendation, and therefore
worthily are our calamities made every day more grievous then other. But our
earnest request is (O good God) that thou would swa^ue nothing at all in this
most sorrowful time from thy accustomed goodness and loving mercy: who know
thee very well to be of sufficient force for to vanquishe all manner of things
that be repugnaunt to thy blessed will, which puissaunce of thine is in no wise
shaken of, albeit thou have thought good to hide it for a time, to the intent
we should understand how sore we have sinned. Vouchsafe now therefore that thy
blessed Church may (according to thy faithful promises) both enjoy and also
retain all good things which make to the glorifying of thy blessed name, even
as it deserves, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same psalm.
THy unmeasurable goodness, infinite power, and excellent wisdom (O most
mighty God) has after a wonderful sort set forth it self in all things
which thou have created for our sakes. Wherefore it is not without just cause
said that every creature does publishe thy glorious renown, for they have not
come to light of their own proper nature: but to the intent they should be,
they were called out by thee, and afterward when they were made, thou did not
stablish them any otherwise then by thy sacred commandment, who do observe
the laws which thou have appointed, neither pass they the certain and
decreed bounds that be limited them. All which things so long as we do daily
behold with diligence, it is very requisite that we should be stirred up to
magnify thy blessed name, because in them thy own only workmanship comes
to our sight and remembrance: whereupon we, being moved hereby, do as now fly
unto thee for succor, whom we have learned to be the aucthour of so great
and manifold good things, whose earnest desire is, that thou would lift up
the horn of thy mighty power unto thy beloved people being thy blessed Church,
so as she may have sufficient ability to withstand all the force of hell,
and be linked daily more and more unto thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cxlix. Psalm.
^ prayer for ^e aduau^ce^ent of the Gospel.
EIght worthy art thou (O almighty god) to whom new songs should continually
be song in the sacred Church, and whose praise should be set out in the
Congregation of Saints. For can it be that such as are thy faithful people
will not publish thee their king and maker, doing the same not only with heart
and voice, but also with every outward instrument prepared for the same
purpose. Seeing then that thou ought to be so greatly commended and highly
magnified for thy nature, goodness, and excellent benefits extended toward
us, be not so greatly provoked at our heinous sins, as to chastise us in thy
fury: pardon us, (we humbly beseech thee) for thy infinite mercies sake,
when we turn unto thee, and lamentably crave thy ready help by continual
prayer. But if thou have so good a lyking of thy blessed people as thou have
oftentimes affirmed, then assist and garnish them with thy ready help in so
great an extremity. Give us this cause of exalting thy glorious name, which
may be evermore in the mouth of thy faithful servants. For we doubt not but
thou can be revenged of the nations and people that blaspheeme thee, and
bind the kings and princes (who be adversaries to thy blessed religion) with
fetters and linkes of Iron, by executing most severe justice upon them. Our
earnest desire is therefore that thou would either convert them unto thee with
the two edged sword of thy blessed word, or if it seems not good in thy
fight so to do, remove the same far from our necks, that all men may right
well perceive what great things thou do for such as commit themselves wholly
to thee, and be desirous to celebrate thy worthy praises, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
For So Much as thou have from time to time (O most mighty God) blessed us with
new benefits, it is very requisite (unless we will become utterly unmindful
of our bounden duty) that we should daily with fresh ditties and new songs
give thanks to thy blessed name in the congregation of the faithful. For what
end shall we make of praising thee, whom in all things and at all times we
feel to be our maker and perfect king of our salvation? Certainly seeing that
we right well perceive thee to be so favorable to the faithful, and do
garnish such as be godly with most plentiful gifts, it is requisite that we
should utter tokens of a right thankful mind, in thought, word, and work,
and with all instruments, means, and ways wherewith that thing may best be
done. And to the intent this thing may be the better accomplished of us, put
into the hands of our heart, the sword of thy blessed word, whereby we may
take vengeance of the flesh, wicked vices, and lewd desires, which do in a
manner destroy us, and so to bridle and keep under sin which is natural unto
us, that it may be deposed from the tyranny which he executes upon the
children of Adam, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer out of the.Cl. Psalm.
WHen as al things which thou have created (O almighty God) praise thee, A
prayer (...) we may praise G^^ with a ch^^^full heart
they do not only that which is due to thy famous honor and glorious renown,
but also they work most wonderfully and abundantly their own perfection:
for there is nothing which we can do of more excellency, then to celebrate
thee as being the original and end of all good things, whose unmeasurable
benefits we feel daily poured upon us. But neither can we sufficiently enough
perceive them, nor yet thy infinite goodness, so long as we be here oppressed
with the most grievous burden of our heinous sins, and borne down by reason
thereof, with an exceeding great weight of afflictions, so that a man must
needs unskillfully praise the thing which he knows not. We do therefore
earnestlye require thee (O mighty God) even from the bottom of the heart, to
disburthen us of the fardell of our corrupt naughtiness, which being laid
down, we mistrust not but the darkness of present calamities shall be driven
away from the sacred Church, so that she may lift up her eyes to her maker and
redeemer, who (wondering as well at the riches of thy excellent goodness, as
of the unspeakable wisdom) shall magnify thee with most high praises, as
meet it is. But now verily, so sorrowful and lamentable things do encounter
us every where, that we see nothing toward us saving thy wrathful
indignation: which as we deny not our selves to have deserved, so we earnestly
desire and heartily pray thee, to withdraw the same from us at length, to the
intent we may be stirred up to the worthy praising of thy glorious name, not
only in words, but with all tunable instruments meet to lift up our
minds unto thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

An other prayer out of the same Psalm.
LIke as the holiness and magnificencie of thy excellent name (O most mighty
God) is continually celebrated in the glorious Sanctuary of such as be
blessed and spiritually minded, which thing may be done so much ye more
excellentlier of them, for that they behold the secretnesse of thy Majesty
both nearer and perfectlier: even so is it meet also that mortal men should
always addict themselves to extol thy worthy praises: who see the
unmeasurable treasure of thy excellent goodness, mighty power, and
incomprehensible wisdom to be daily manifested, both in heaven and in all
creatures. But above all others, this belongs to our charge, who (being
illumined with faith and with thy heavenly spirit) do understand more of thy
divine mysteries out of the holy Scriptures, then nature is able to set forth
with all her bewtifull furniture: and therefore (we humblye beseech thee) to
stir up our sinful hearts in such wise, as we may worship thee with most
pure praises and exceeding fervent peticions, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

A Prayer of Doctor Peter Martyr against worshippers of bread and all manner of
supersticion.
Aid us now at length I humbly beseech thee (O heavenly father) by lightning
the minds and hearts of thy Christian people with the spirit of thy son
Christ Jesus: who (laying Idolles and superstitions apart) may return to the
pure and vncorrupt worshipping, honoring, and calling upon thee only: neither
suffer the honor due to thee alone to be wickedly and deuilishly attributed
unto bread, wine, pictures, Images, and bones of dead persons: thy holy name
has already been to long slaundered, to long has the purity of thy blessed
Gospel been polluted: men have enough and to much abvsed the institution of
thy sons supper, by converting the same to most filthy Idolatry. Mittigate
at length these outrages of mad brayned men, that miserably overthrow
themselves hedlong, as they may no more go a whoring lewdly and void of shame,
upon every hill, under every tree, in all by ways, streets, Churches, and
Chapels, with bread and wine, under the name of thy dear sons Sacrament,
and let them not defile the true honoring of thee after this wicked and
blasphemous manner. Unless thou (O most good and merciful God) do with thy
puyssant hand, take away and utterly subvert this worshipping of bread, the
salvation of mankind and reedifying of thy sacred Church can never be looked
for. Help (O good God) succor thy faithful people whom thou have redeemed
with the blood of thy dear son. And thou, O Christ Jesus (who art a true and
everlasting God) establishe this work which is begun by thee, and bring it
to the desired end: or if the sore be without hope of recovery, and that thy
truth may not any more take place commonly and openly in thy sacred Church,
then come and exercise judgment with all speed, and drive away (for the
glory of thy name) so shameful a reproach from thy holy supper, which thou of
thy incredible mercy and singular goodness have instituted, who lyuest and
reignest with the father, and the holy ghost evermore world without end. Amen.

Finis.
A Table wherein is contained the effect of all such notes or arguments as be
set in the margent at the beginning of the first prayer for every Psalm,
containing in number. Cl.
A Prayer for a Christian life. Psalm. j. A prayer for comfort in persecution.
Ps. ii. A prayer against our persecutors. Ps. iij. A prayer for a true faith.
Psalm. iiij. A prayer against false Prophets and enemies of the truth. Psalm. v.
A prayer in distress. Psalm. vj. A prayer against the adversaries of the
Gospel. Psalm. vij. A prayer in trouble for the favor of Christ. Psalm. viij. A
prayer against our enemies in persecution. Psalm. ix. A prayer against enemies
and tiraunts. Psalm. x. A prayer against the temptation of faith. Psalm. xj. A
prayer against human, false, and erroneous doctrine. Psalm. xij. A prayer that
we despair not in tribulation. Psalm. xiij. A prayer for the grace of Christ
against original sin. Psalm. xiiij. A prayer that we may persevere in the
number of true Christians. Psalm. xv. A prayer that we may not perish by faith
but attain unto glory thereby. Psalm. xvj. A prayer that our eminies may not
get the victory over us. Psalm xvij. A prayer to be delivered out of great
distress. Psalm. xviij. A prayer that we may be partakers of Gods divine
word. Psalm. xix. A prayer for the prosperous success of Christ's kingdom
against the enemies thereof. Psalm. xx. A prayer for the praise and augmentation
of the Gospel. Psalm. xxj. A prayer for Gods favor in distress. Psalm. xxij. A
prayer that God would both feed and defend us. Psalm. xxiij. A prayer for the
kingdom of Christ and a new life. Psalm. xxiiij. A prayer for constancy in a
troublesome contention for the word of God. Psalm. xxv. A prayer yt we revolt
not from christ. Psalm. xxvj. A prayer for comfort in faith against our enimyes.
Psalm. xxvii. A prayer for comfort in necessity against double tongued persons.
Psalm xxviij. A prayer that we may be obedient to the word of God. Psalm. xxix.
A prayer that al our afflictions may well depart from us, by Gods especial
grace. Psalm. xxx. A prayer in distress and trial of faith. Psalm. xxxj. A
prayer that our sinful crimes may be pardoned. Psalm. xxxij. A prayer for
praise and thanks giving to God for his omnipotency. Psalm. xxxiij. A prayer
for comfort in distress. Psalm. xxxiiij. A prayer both against our enemies, and
false Prophets also. Psalm. xxxv. A prayer for upright justice. Psalm. xxxvj. A
prayer for constancy in faith against such as will hurt us. Psalm. xxxvij. A
prayer against our enemies and the dread of conscience. Psalm. xxxviij. A prayer
against vanity and the haters of man's life and safety. Psalm. xxxix. A prayer
that our sins may be pardoned through the merits of Christ. Psalm. xl. A prayer
against the enemies of Gods holy word, and for the works of charity. Psalm.
xlj. A prayer in distress for the comfort of the Gospel. Psalm. xlij. A prayer
in necessity. Psalm. xliij. A prayer in persecution, as well against corporal
enemies as spiritual. Psalm. xliiij. A prayer for salvation purchased unto us
by Christ. Psalm. xlv. A prayer for victory in temptation. Psalm. xlvj. A prayer
for the good success and increasement of the Gospel. Psalm. xlvij. A prayer
for the Christian Church and congregation. Psalm. xlviiij. A prayer yt we abuse
not temporal goods. Ps. xlix. A prayer for remembrance in distress of the last
judgment and promises of God. Psalm. L. A prayer for remission of sins. Psalm.
Lj. A prayer against all pernicious seducement. Psalm. Lij. A prayer for
deliverance out of trouble through faith. Psalm. Liij. A prayer for help in
necessity against the cruelty of the ungodly. Psalm. Liiij. A prayer for
salvation purchased us by Christ. Psalm. Lv. A prayer for a steadfast confession
of the Gospel. Psalm. Lvj. A prayer for ye advancement of the gospel
contrary to her enemies expectation. Psalm. Lvij. A prayer against our natural
declinings from God, and craftye layinges awayte of the ungodly. Psalm. Lviij. A
prayer against the Pharisees and false Prophets. Psalm. Lix. A prayer for Gods
help in necessity. Psalm. Lx. A prayer for a constant faith in Christ Jesus.
Psalm. Lxj. A prayer for a true faith and contempt of mutable things. Psalm.
Lxij. A prayer in distress for the comfort of the Gospel. Psalm. Lxiij. A
prayer against the wicked enemies of the Godly. Psalm. Lxiiij. A prayer for
sustenaunce and all kind of Gods benefits. Psalm. Lxv. A prayer in necessity
to the glory of God, for setting us at liberty. Psalm. Lxvj. A prayer for ye
augme^tatio^ of ye gospel. Ps. Lxvij. A prayer for the unity and enlargement
of the christian congregation. Psalm. Lxviij. A prayer in tribulation for the
glory of the resurrection. Psalm. Lxix. A prayer in necessity. Psalm. Lxx. A
prayer that our faith fails us not in age and great distress. Psalm. Lxxj. A
prayer that the kingdom of heaven may come upon us through the preaching of
the Gospel. Psalm. Lxxij. A prayer that we may not repine at the prosperity of
the wicked. Psalm. Lxxiij. A prayer for the Churches preservation against the
adversaries of the Gospel. Psalm. Lxxiiij. A prayer that we may be obedient to
the word of God. Psalm. Lxxv. A prayer that our courage fails us not in
affliction. Psalm. Lxxvj. A prayer of consolation in distress by considering
the wonderful works of God. Psalm. Lxxvij. A prayer for grace and uprightness
of heart. Psalm. Lxxviij. A prayer for obtaining of mercy and favor against the
persecutors of the Church. Psalm. Lxxix. A prayer for the repayring of the
afflicted. Church. Psalm. Lxxx. A prayer for perseverance in faith. Psalm. Lxxxj.
A prayer for a good Magistrate. Psalm. Lxxxij. A prayer that God would defend
his word in disyite of the ungodly. Psalm. Lxxxiij. A prayer for ye increasme^t
of faith. Psalm. Lxxxiiij. A prayer for the whole congregation of Christ. Psalm.
Lxxxv. A prayer in distress. Psalm. Lxxxvj. A prayer for the reedifying of the
christian Congregation. Psalm. Lxxxvij. A prayer in the trial of faith. Psalm,
Lxxxviij. A prayer to put God in remembrance of his promise. Psalm. Lxxxix. A
prayer both to attain unto the knowledge of God, and the vanity of this life
also. Psalm. xc. A prayer in temptation and perilles, for deliverance and
preservation Psalm. xcj. A prayer against the persuasion of such as would have
justification to proceed of good works. Psalm. xcij. A prayer for the
establishment of Christ's kingdom. Psalm. x^iij. A prayer against our enemies,
deceyptfull teachers, and cruel tyraunts. Psalm. xciiij. A prayer for true
faith. Psalm. xcv. A prayer of thanks giving for Christ's benefits bestowed upon
us. Psalm. xcvj. A prayer yt we may appear in the day of judgment, with a pure
and chereful heart. Psalm. xcvij. A prayer for the favor of Christ through his
glorious resurrection. Psalm. xcviij. A prayer for the justification of faith
against the righteousness of works. Psalm. xcix. A prayer that we may in all
places both glorify God, and also confess him. Psalm. C. A prayer for a godly
life. Psalm. Cj. A prayer in the trial of faith and affliction of the Church.
Psalm. Cij. A prayer for a new life. Psalm. Ciij. A prayer that we may use the
creatures of God in such sort as we are willed. Psalm. Ciiij. A prayer that we
be not ignorant of the works of our redemption. Psalm. Cv. A prayer for a
perfect confession, and that the grace which God has endued us with, may have
much rule over us. Psalm. Cvj. A prayer for the knowledge of Gods benefits,
contrary to al worldly lewd things. Psalm. Cvij. A prayer that the godly may
have grace to withstand the assaults of the wicked. Psalm. Cviij. A prayer of
the Godly for the enemies of the Gospel. Psalm. Cix. A prayer for the benefit
of our redemption purchased by Christ. Psalm. Cx. A prayer that Gods wonderful
works may be made manifest. Psalm. Cxj. A prayer yt the godly may be blessed.
Psalm. Cxij. A prayer for the comfort and consolation of christ's Church. Psalm.
Cxiij. A prayer for a true faith by the contemplation of Gods wonderful
works. Psalm. Cxiiij. A prayer for a constant confession of the Gospel. Psalm.
Cxv. A prayer to the like effect of the psalm which goes next before. Psalm.
Cxvj. A prayer for the perfect knowledge of Christ. Psalm. Cxvij. A prayer yt we
may be comforted in faith. ps. Cxviij A prayer in necessitye, anguishe, and
distress. Psalm. Cxix. A prayer against the enemies of Gods divine word. Psalm.
Cxx. A prayer in necessity for Gods divine preservation. Psalm. Cxxj. A prayer
that the christian church may (through faith and charity) be repaired. Psalm.
Cxxij. A prayer for the mercy of God. Psalm. Cxxiij. A prayer against violence
and deceit. Ps. Cxxiiij. A prayer for the preservation and long continuance of
faith. Psalm. Cxxv. A prayer that we may be delivered from thraldom, and attain
to the glory of god. Psalm. Cxxvj. A prayer for suste^tatio^ and safe keeping.
Ps. Cxxvij A prayer that we may fear God and lead a blessed life. Psalm
Cxxviij. A prayer against the counterfeit holiness of such as would be
justified by their works. Psalm. Cxxix. A prayer for grace in ye time of need.
Psalm. Cxxx. A prayer that we may have humility and ^ispise arrogancy. Psalm.
Cxxxj. A prayer that the Gospel may reign amongst us. Psalm. Cxxxij. A prayer
for christian charity. Psalm. Cxxxiij. A prayer for faith in our daily
petitions. Psalm. Cxxxiiij. A prayer against a vain and false confidence. Psalm.
Cxxxv. A prayer for the knowledge of gods omnipotent goodness. Psalm. Cxxxvj. A
prayer against such as be enemies and deryders of the Gospel. Psalm. Cxxxvij. A
prayer that all men of great power and high authority may embrace ye word of
god. ps. Cxxxviij A prayer for the knowledge of Gods divine providence. Psalm.
Cxxxix. A prayer against the venomous tongues of the ungodly. Psalm. Cxl. A
prayer against hypocrisy. Psalm. Cx^j. A prayer for comfort in persecution.
Psalm. Cxlij. A prayer in temptation for the avoiding of desperation. Psalm.
Cxliij. A prayer against wicked doctrine and ydolatrous worshipping. Psalm.
Cxliiij. A prayer for the glorifying of Gods works in us with the preservation
of the Church, and comfort of the faithful. Psalm. Cxlv. A prayer for the
acknowledging of our duty in praising God and trusting in him, of our
weakness, and of Gods protection over all sorts of people. Psalm. Cxlvj. A
prayer that the word of God may be of great force in us. Psalm. Cxlvij. A prayer
that God may be commended in all his creatures. Psalm. Cxlviij. A prayer for the
advancement of the Gospel. Psalm. Cxlix. A prayer that we may praise God with
a cherefull heart. Psalm. Cl. A prayer of Docter Peter Martyr against
worshippers of bread, and all manner of superstition.
Finis.

