decorative border IH^S
R V
SOLE FRA LE STELLE

Tenet Angelus Deam.

A new years gift, whose good well seen,
May please the wisdom of a Queen:
True use whereof, well weide in deed,
May stand the gracious in good steed.
decorative border with royal coat of arms near top center HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y
PENSE

THE RIGHT WAY TO HEAVEN: And the true testimony of a faithful and loyal
subject.

Compiled by Richard Vennard of Lincolnes Inn.

MATH. 6. First seek the kingdom of Heaven, and all things shall be given. AT
LONDON Printed by Thomas Este. 1601.

R. V.

SALVATOR MVNDI.
I IN this thy Name, my soul great comfort finds,
H Heald from her leprous sin by thy dear blood:
E Eschewing that molests disturbed minds,
S Seeking for that may do my conscience good:
V Vouchsafe thy Nature, as thou give thy Name,
S Sweet Jesus, that a blessed Savior came.
C Come comforter, behold my soul is sad,
H Help with thy Mercy, that thy Hand has made:
R Regard me so, with hope I may be glad,
I In thy dear grace, let all my deeds be staid.
S Son of thy Father, such true lightning send,
T That in thy favor Christ, our lives may end.
AMEN.
TO THE HIGH AND mighty Princis Elizabeth by the grace of God Queen of
England France and Ireland, defendor of the Faith: etc. Richard Vennard of
Lincolnes Inn Gent: Wishes all happiness in this life: And in the world to
come Celestial Eternity.
MOST Renowned Sovereign, pleases it your Sacred Majesty, at the humble
hands of your loiall subject, to accept this little handful of my hearts
labor, wherein my feeling of Gods mercies, my knowledge of your gracious
goodness, and my care of my countries well doing, have made me take such
pains, as if it may be pleasing in your sight, shall breed no little joy to my
Soul. Who kneeling at your Royal feet, do beseech the God of all Glory, to
indew your Highness with his infinite blessings, and long to preserve your
sacred Majesty in all joyful health and prosperous life.

Your Majesty's most faithful and loyal subject Richard Vennard.

Laudetur Dominus in aeternum.
OH Heavenly Spirit of especial power,
That in thy hand, thy praise of praises hold:
And, from the top of Truths triumphant tower,
The hidden sense, of fairest thoughts vnfoldest:
Inspire this heart, and humble soul of mine,
With some sweet sparkle of thy power divine.
Teach me to thinck but on that only thought,
Wherein does live the grace of virtues glory:
And, learn no more, then what thy truth has taught
To those best wits, that write thy worthy story:
Wherein is seen, in heaven and earths preserving,
The highest point of praises praise deserving.
Let not compare, come near unto none such,
Heaven be my thought, and let the world go by:
And say withal, that say I nere so much,
All are but trifles to thy treasury:
For all, no more, then what thy mercy gives,
Who can behold wherein thy glory lives?
No, I can see the shining of the Sun,
But cannot sound the Essence of the light:
Then, of thy face, in whom that fair begun,
How can my soul presume to have a sight?
No, my dear God, thy glory has a being,
Where Eye, nor Heart, nor Soul may have a seeing.
And therefore Lord since such thy glory is,
As cannot be, but of thy self conceived:
And heaven nor earth, conteines that spark of bliss,
But from thy hand of Mercy is received:
What spirit can her sweetest passion raise?
Near to the due of thy deserved praise.
Yet, since all glory does belong to thee,
Thy name in all things must be magnified:
And by thy Mercy thou have made me see,
How in my soul thou may be glorified:
In that sweet Mercy make my Soul to know,
How best I may thy blessed glory show.
Oh glorious God, what creature can there be?
That moves or Breathes, or grows, but shows thy glory:
What art, or science, but does speak of thee,
And writes the wonder of thy wisdom story:
What sound or sense, can reasons Soul refine?
But speaks in glory of thy grace divine?
The Sun, in brightness glorifies the light,
That in the beams but of thy beauty lives:
The Moon and Stars amid the darkest night,
Show what a light thy loving Mercy gives:
So, Sun and Moon and all those shining creatures,
Do show thy glory, in their lightsome natures.
Is not the day a figure of perfection,
Wherein thy creatures were created first:
And Night of sin, that with a foul infection,
Shows how the Soul is for her sins accursed:
But night once past, the Glorious day appeering,
Shows sins forgiven the joy of mercies cheering.
So, Sun and Moon, and Stars, and day and night,
Speaks of thy glory in their cause of being:
And, how they serve but in obedience right,
Unto the grace, but of thy will agreeing:
While wisdom shows in state of reasons story,
They give us light, that we may give thee glory.
The Azure Sky, more clear then Chrystalline,
Wherein the Sun does cast his beams abroad:
How does it figure that fair hand of thine?
Wherein thy Mercy makes her most aboade:
While, to the humble souls believing eye,
Thy glory shines far brighter then the Sky.
The Clouds that shed those dropps of blessed dewes,
That water the dry places of the Earth:
What drop so small, but it thy glory shows?
To bring a plenty where was erst a dearth:
How do they figure faithful sorrows tears?
Whence sin-burnt souls the fruit of mercy bears.
The Aier, that gives each living creature breath,
Speaks of thy glory in that breathing power:
And, when it leaves the creature unto death,
It shows thy glory, in that parting hour:
To leave the flesh so in corruption wounded,
Till grace renew, that was in sin confounded.
The earth, that yields such choice of fruits and flowers,
How does it show, that glorious power of thine?
When, all unseen do hidden lie those powers,
That Art or Nature never can define:
How sweetes, and forms, and colors so should grow,
But that thy glorious will would have it so.
And, as the spring brings forth the budding green,
With, beauties dies for to adorn the field:
So in the winter, few or none are seen,
That can the eye contentiue pleasure yield:
So that the earth that never silence breaks,
In her dumb speech, yet, of thy glory speaks.
The Sea wherein those worlds of fishes live,
That floate and tomble in the tossing waves:
What Notice do they of thy glory give,
That from the Whale the little Herring saues:
And makes the Dolphin wound the Whale so sore,
As drives him from the Sea to die on shore.
What beast so great? or creeping worm so small?
what bird so high, or of so low a flight?
But, that thy name is glorified in-all,
who, having made them by thy heavenly might:
Preseruest them so, that all the world may see,
They have their being only but in thee.
The beast his hear, the feather of the bird,
The fishes scale, and every tree his bark:
These for defense does Nature all aforde,
As of thy glory, every one a mark:
wherein thy hand of Mercy is beheld:
That does such comfort to each creature yield.
Is not the Fire a figure of thy wrath?
That soon consumes the proud assault of sin:
The air, the patience that thy mercy has,
When true contrition does remission win:
The water, tears, that thou for sin have shed,
The Earth, thy death for to redeem the dead.
Since then, above, and in the Elements,
Sun, Moon, Stars, Sky, Fire, water, Earth, and Aier:
And, what may be beneath the Firmament,
Beasts, Birds, Fish, worm, scale, fether, hide, nor haier:
Nor Tree, nor Flower, nor Herb, nor Grass, does grow,
But, someway does thy glorious mercy show.
Shall wreched Man? whom God did only make,
To his own Image in his Mercies love:
So far himself, and all his good forsake?
As, to forget so sweet a Turtle Dove:
As his dear God, that so of nothing wrought him,
And his dear Son, that has so dearly bought him.
Shall Man, I say? that only special Creature?
Whom God has made to serve his Majesty:
In lack of Grace, reveal so vile a Nature?
As not to seek his Name to glorify:
No, heavens forbid, though sin be never such,
In Man should live ingratitude so much.
No, he whom God has made to monarch so,
Above all Creatures, that do grow or breath:
And by his wisdom makes his will to know,
The good above, and evil from beneath:
And how he helps the spirit in distress,
His glorious goodness cannot but confess.
And, when he sees with those inseeing eyes,
That in the soul do give the spirit light:
In what the height of heavenly glory lies,
To whom all glory does beelong of right:
His heart will write, in his worths worthy story,
To him alone be given all only Glory.
Oh, he that sits above the starry Sky,
In holy seat, of heavenly residence:
And at the twinkling of his glorious eye,
Commands the world to his obedience:
Leave that foul soul in sorrow ever friendlesse,
That does not sound thy name in glory endless.
All grace, all goodness, wisdom, power, and peace,
All truth, true life, all bounty, mercy, love:
These all together sing, and never cease,
Unto the glory of this God above:
And can it be? that Man, who sees all this,
Will not give glory to this God of his?
No, heavens forbid, that hell should have the power,
To spit her poison upon Man so much:
To make him live to that unhappy hour,
wherein to show his wicked Nature such:
As to forget Gods gracious goodness so,
As not some way, his glorious Mercy show.
Then set my heart among that world of souls,
That seele his blessings every day and hour:
While truth records in her eternal rowles,
The gracious goodness of his glorious power:
Sing in my Soul and never cease to sing,
An Halleluiah to my heavenly King.
Laus, Gloria Deo.
The high way to Heaven.
Cap. I. He that in Heaven will taste the fruits of Divinity: must first learn
to know himself in the schole of Humility.
HVmilitie, is a virtue springing from the fear of GOD, the mother of
meekness, and sister of Devotion, without which no man can attain to the
knowledge and feeling of his own misery in Adam, and felicity in Christ.

A Bird except her wings be moved downwards cannot fly up to the top of an
hill: nor man, except the affections of his heart, be humbled downwards, mount
up to the Tower of divine understanding. And therefore that godly father Saint
Augustine compares Heaven to a fair stately Pal lace with a little door,
whereat no man can enter except he stoop very low. As who should say, God
rejects the proud, but gives grace to the humble and lowly.

The true wisdom of a Christian, consists especially In his book against
the Pelag.
in the knowledge of his own imperfectio^s. Then are we said to be righteous
(says saint Jerome) when we acknowledge our selves to be wicked transgressors.
He has much profited in this life (says Saint Augustine) that has learned
August.
how far he is from perfection of righteousness. For the less opinion a man
has of himself, the more trust he has in God: and the more he meditateth on
the horror of Hell, the nearer is he to the joys of Heaven. None more near,
then the Psalm. 51. 17
humble penitent: whose heart is most deeply wounded with the grieuousnesse of
sins: nor none so far from true Religion as he who thinks himself most
perfect and very religius.

The joys of Heaven are prepared, not for Luke. 18.
proud presumptuous Pharases (which seem in their own eyes to be most just,
pure and perfect: but for poor humble Publicans, that justly condemn
themselves, as most vile, miserable and wretched. The son of man came not to
call the righteous, but sinners to repentance: to seek none, but those that
acknowledge themselves to be lost: to comfort and raise up none with his
Gospel, but those that are discomforted, and cast down by the law: nor to
anoint or heal any with his oil of gladness, but such broken and contrite
hearts, as for grief of sins are sick and mourn in Syon.

Cap. II. Of our loathsome deformetie through Adams fall.
A Natural man consists of three parts, the Spirit or immortal Soul,
endued with reason, will, and divine understanding: 1. These 5. 23. 1. Co. 2. 11
the natural affections or powers of the Soul as indifferent spurs to To. 8.
5. 17 7. 13. 1. Pc. 2. 11
provoke, stir up and prick forward unto virtue or vice: and the
terrestrial Body, wherein Satan, by tempting of Adam, has Gal. 5. 1* 5
written the law of Sin. All which parts of Man, at the first were in such
perfect order and concord framed together, as neither the immortal Spirit did
conceive any thing, the natural powers of the soul desire any thing, nor the
terrestiall body execute any thing, contrary to the will of God. All creatures
under Heaven being obedient to the body of man, as the subject to the Prince:
the natural body obedient to the reasonable soul, as the servant to the
Master, and the reasonable soul (with his affections) obedient to God the
creator, as the child to the father: till that cutsed Serpent, our mortal
enemy, found means to set them at variance and discord. Since which time the
nature of Man became so frail and weak, the occasions unto evil so many, and
the illusion of Satan so prompt and ready, that except Gods especial grace
prevent him, he is apt and prone upon every light occasion, to yield unto sin
and wickedness, being more easily brought to conceive an error by one little
word, then the truth by a long tale: and sooner seduced to consent unto vice by
one small example, then converted unto virtue by many vehement persuasions.

Cap. III. Of the misery of Adams posterity, and vanity of the world.
FOr-asmuch as of all other vices, that old rooted infection of Pride,
Vaineglory and Presumption, is most universally grafted in man: there is
nothing more necessary to suppress and subdue his haughty affections, then
continual remembrance what he is, from whence he came, Eccle. 7.
and whether he shall. That in calling to mind, his base mettle, his wretched
condition, and mortal generation, he may the rather be moved more humbly and
lowly to conceive and esteem of himself.

What is Man? Telluris invtile pondus, an unprofitable Man what
lump of earth, like as one might say to a piece of ye, thou wast water, thou
art water, and to water shall thou be turned again.

So Man was earth, he is earth, and to earth he shall be turned again. Thou
have fashioned me of mould and earth (says Job) and I am become like dust and
ashes. O homo (says Chrysostom) Job. Chrisost.
si consider as, quid per os, quid per nares, quid per ceteros meatus
egrediatur: numquam vilius sterquilium inuenisti.

What is Man? his matter is base slime and clay, his nature, weak and feeble,
his birth pain and sorrow, his life, vain and miserable: his state, slippery
and uncertain, his time short and tedious, his sins horrible and filthy, and
his end grievous and loathsome.

What is Man? A mirror of misery: a play of fortune, and a pray of death: he
is borne we ping and wayling, to show his wretchedness: he lives laughing
and toying, to beewray his folly: and dies sighing and sobbing, to declare his
weak infirmity.

What is Man? Apuleius a Philosopher, and scholar to Plato, describes him in
this wise: Men, Apulcius.
says he are living creatures, dwelling upon the earth, having souls
immortal, brutish servile bodies, subject to death: light careful minds, apt
to error, vain in labors, diverse in conditions, long ere they be wise, their
time but short, and during life never content.

What is the state of Man? Saint Barnard describes Barnard.
it in this manner. There comes before thine eyes, faith he, a man, poor,
naked, and miserable, mourning that he is a man, blushing that he is naked,
weeping for that he is a wretch, replenished with misery, and fearful for
that his time is but short. A great part of his life passes away in doing that
is evil, a greater part in doing nothing, and the greatest part in doing
things to small purpose. And as the life of man is vain, transitory, and
miserable: even so is the world, with all things else wherein human nature
takes pleasure and delight: as health, wealth, honor, wisdom, strength,
beauty, or whatsoever.

What is the World? A vale of misery, a sincke of sin, a mould of mischief,
a den of thieves, a World.
Court of Satan, a purgatory of pain, a mother to the wicked, and a stepdame
to the good: where the proud and vicious are daily advanced without desert,
and the humble and virtuous oppressed without cause: the way ward and seditious
befriended, and the quiet and obedient molested: the ignorant and foolish
permitted to speak, and the wise and discreet put to silence, crafty
dissemblers extolled, and simple innocents despised.

What is the world? her mirth is but sorrow, her pleasure but pain, her
wisdom but folishnesse, and her wealth but misery: where nothing is to be
looked for, but even a rank of troubles, one following in another neck. A
great travail is created for all men (says Jesus the son of Sirach) Eccle.
and a heavy yoke upon all men's children: some so pinched with poverty, and
oppressed with misery: some tossed and tormented with strife and contention:
some tormented with sickness, sores and contagious diseases: that if an old
man would set down the tragedy of his life (from the day of his brith till
his departure to his grave) a man would wonder that the body could suffer, and
the heatt could bear so painful and dolorous a pilgrimage. All the godly
from the beeginning have tasted the troubles of their time.

Adam, when his children did one kill another.

Abraham, when he wandered into a strange country.

Job, when he saw the spoil, and havoc of his goods, the destruction of his
children, and his own body tormented with botches and sores.

Joseph, felt his part of misery, being sold by his brethren, and imprisoned
without cause.

Noah felt his part of misery being persecuted by the wicked.

Lazarus was both sick, sore, hungry, and thirsty.

Father Jacob complained, that his days were few and evil. David said, he
was a worm and no man. Solomon was weary of his life, because all he saw
under the Sun was nothing but vanity, misery and vexation of mind. Father
Jerome complained, that Satan sought to over throw him, and that his weak
flesh was ready to consent

The prophet Jeremy, cursed the day of his birth.

Jonas said, it was better for him to dye then to live. Chrysostom called the
days of his life, the days of his sorrow. Nazianzen wept that his mother had
brought him forth to see such miserable days.

Such travail has God given unto men under the Sun, to be exercised therein.

Cap. IIII. Of the race of man's life: And certenty of death.
AND as the days of this our painful pilgrimage are vain and miserable: so
are they short and tedious. The one foot no sooner on the ground, but the
other is ready to step into the grave.

Man that is borne of a woman (says Job) has but a short time to live, and is
full of misery, he springs as a flower, vadeth like a shadow, and never
continues in one state.

The life of man is aptly compared to a vapor, to the trace of a cloud, to a
ship passing over the waves of the Sea, tossed and beaten with tempest: to a
bird that flies in the Air: or a shaft, that is shot at a mark, and never
staieth till it light on the ground: Even so man, as soon as he is borne does
begin immediately to draw to his end.

The godly Patriarks, who lived in the first age Certainety of death
of the world, saw many years: yet at last they dyed. Death was always the
end of their song.

Adam lived 930. years. Seth, 912. Enoch 905. Kenan 910. Mahelael, 895.
Iarard, 962. Methuselah, 969. Lameth, 777. Noah, 950. and they dyed, says the
text.

Abraham, the Father of the faithful: David, a man according to Gods own
heart: John Baptist, of whom our Savior Christ says, there has not risen a
greater among the children of women: yet they dyed.

All the Prophets, Apostles, and godly Martirs were greatly in Gods favor; yet
they dyed. Rich and poor, wise men and fools, learned and unlearned, godly
and ungodly: all must follow the dance of death. Many are gone before, the
rest must follow after. Wise Solomon: Rich Job: Strong Sampson: and fair
Absolon, have trod the path of al flesh. Great Alexander conquered the whole
world: yet could find no weapon to conquer death. The stiffest steel yeldeth
to the hammer: the strongest Oak to the Axe: and the stoutest heart unto nature.

And as death is a thing of all other most certain and sure: so is the time
most uncertain and doubtful. The Lord in his word has revealed unto man
many notable lessons, touching the knowledge of his will, yet not the day of
his death, knowing that as the course of his life is the race unto death, so is
death the gate to eternal life.

So though our Bodies laid shall be
to rot in loathsome grave:
Yet afterward in glorious state
more beauty they shall have.
When Death has held them down a while
anon they shall arise,
Eternally in joy to live
with Christ above the skies.
Cap. V. The defense of a Christian soldier.
FOr-asmuch as our enemies, the children of the world, are more subtle,
crafty, and politic in their generation, then the children of God, able to
deceive if it were possible, even the very elect.

Satan can transform himself into an Angel of light. Pharohs sorcerers Exodus
could work strange wonders, turn a rod to a Serpent, water into blood,
and make quick frogs. It is written that Simon Magus could by forcery fly in
the air, turn stones into bread, make serpents of brass, sikles to reap
come with out hands: images of stone to laugh, and dogs to sing.

And our enemies being so many in number as which way so ever we turn us,
we be sure to have some of them ready to encounter us: at our right hand the
world the flesh and the devil watch to entice us to our utter destruction, at
our left hand Adversity, Poverty, and Affliction of body is ready to cast us
down into the dungeon of despair: beehinde us our sins are at hand to
bewray us, within us our own consciences belayeth to accuse us: before us are
Gods judgments ready to condemn us, and hell mouth open to devour us.

To resist these Tirannies, it stands us in hand to be strongly armed with
the breast plate of Equity, the shield of undoubted Faith in Christ, the helmet
of assured Hope and Faith in Christ Jesus, always ready to do our best, and
trusting in him to do the rest.

Cap. VI. He that in Heaven will come to joy with Christ, must first travail
with patience under the cross of Christ.
AS the Israelits could not come to the land of promise, but Patience.
by long painful travail through the wilderness of tribulation. The law of
Adams children is to live in labor, and the curse of Eues brats to suffer
affliction: yea, all mankind does feel the biting of the Serpent. He that
will taste of the glory of Heaven, must first be pertaker of his cup upon earth:
he that after death will rejoice at Christ his presence, must first in his life
time mourn for his absence: There is no other way left for the members, then
to follow their head, the disciple is not above his master: nor the servant
above his Lord. Seeing the good man of the house, has been called Beelzebub,
Glutton and a companion of the wicked, how can the Servants look for better
entertainment? All the Apostles and godly Martirs suffered with patience the
troubles and persecutions of their time, to obtain the kingdom of Heaven.

Esaias had his carkas cut a sunder with a wodden Prophets.
saw. Amos thrust into the temples with a nail. Daniell condemned to the
Lions. Jeremy and Steven stoned to death. John Baptist and Paul beheaded. The
three Israelits (Sidrach, Misach and Abednago) committed to the flaming fire.
Thomas preaching the Gospel in Judea, was slain with a dart. And Simon
Zelotes preaching in Britain, was there crucified. But these valiant and
victorious conquerours were well assured, that prosperity and adversity, life
and death, are all Gods gifts to try the hearts of men.

Ignatius (scholar to John and Bishop of Antioch) being condemned to dye for
the Gospel, in his greatest torments, did valiauntly comfort himself saying,
Iam incipio esse Discipulus Christi, now begin I to be the disciple of Christ.

It is written how a certain Pagan tormenting a Christian, asked him in
disdain, What profit he received by his Christ, who answered, That I
patiently do suffer thy tyranny, and willingly pardon thee without revenge.
For as a noble man's servant is known by his Masters cognisaunce, so is a
faithful Christian by bearing his cross with patience.

Cap. VII. Of true Repentance with her inseparable furniture.
REpentance is an inward sorrow Repent.
and mourning of the heart and conscience for sins committed: And contains
three parts, first Contricion of heart, the second Confession of mouth, the
third Reformacion of life.

Like as a man feeling his body infected, first does acknowledge his disease:
Secondly seeks to the Physician for remedy: Thirdly being cured, is careful
to keep himself from future grief by keeping good diet.

So is it the duty of every good Christian, feeling his soul infected with
sin, first by earnest repentance to acknowledge the same before God:
secondly by humble and devout prayer to seek unto Christ for pardon: thirdly
by restrayning of his affections, prone to evil, to keep him from salling
again.

So when a faithful Christian feeling his conscience burdened with sin,
does humbly bewail and confess the same with tears trickling down his
cheeks, with groaning and sobbing unto God for mercy, being easily won and
entreated, strait followerh pardon in Christ, comfort of conscience, and
quietness of mind.

In such manner the Prophet David confessed Kings.
his sins to be more in number then the hairs of his head. Manasses bowing
the knees of his heart unto God, confessed his faults to be more in number then
the sands of the Sea. Ezechiah turning his face to the wall, mourned heauely.

Mary Magdalen fell down behind Jesus and lamented pitefully: Peter
remembering the words of Christ after he had forsworn him, went out and wept
bitterly.

Thus whersoeuer true repentance goes before with her inseparable furniture
(as humble Confession, Faithful prayer, and amendment of Life) the Remission
of sins does follow after. And where thackowledging of sins leads not the way,
there the gates of Gods mercy are always shut.

Cap. VIII. Of true Fasting.
FAsting serves to three Fasting.
ends, first to mortify and subdue the lusts of the flesh, the second to
stir up our minds to meditation and prayer, the third to be a testimony of our
inward humility, and dutiful obedience to the will of God.

We ought to fast; says Saint Ambrose, to keep our bodies from surfeting, and
our souls from sinning.

The diseases of the mind, says Saint Jerome, are healed with praying, and
the lusts of the body with fasting For even as a wanton pampred horse does
strive to cast his rider, so does a wanton pampred body by nature resist
against virtue.

It is good to fast, said Saint Ambrose, but better to give Alms. When the
lusts of the flesh are mortefied, our wronged brother satisfied, and our
needy neighbor reliued: then God with our fast is well pleased.

Saint Augustine in his Sermon in the Wilderness, says,

The sick for lack of stomach fast,
the Poor, for want of meat:
The covetous chuffe to spare his pursse,
the Glotton, more to eat:
The Apish Ipocrite for praise,
a good man for his Soul health always.
Cap. IX. A brief exhortation to Christian Religion.
AS the wise men of the East did offer unto Christ their Math. 2.
costly presents, of Gold, Frankencense, and Mirh: so the most precious thing
that we can present unto him is, the Gold of Faith and sure Hope, the
Frankencence of Zeal and true Devotion, and the Mirh of Virtue and Charitable
living.

To honor him with due obedience, and depend wholly upon his providence,
joining always practice with knowledge, deeds with words, keeping with
hearing, walking with talking and expressing with professing, knowing that not
the hearers of the word, but the doers thereof shall be saved.

Not every one that cries Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of Heaven,
but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven.

If ye understand these things, says our Savior, Ioh. 13 17.
happy are ye, if ye do them: blessed are they that hear the word of God and
keep it.

He that hears the word willingly, understands it rightly, believes it
faithfully, applies it profitably, and keeps it diligently, shall joy with
Christ assuredly And thus is Religion or godliness, the ground of conscience
and true devotion.

John heard a voice from Heaven saying, Blessed are the dead which dye in the
Lord, even so says the spirit, that they rest from their labors, and their
works follow them. And he that will dye in the Lord, must first be careful
to live in the Lord

It is an infallible rule: Qualis vita, Finis ita, to him that lives
virtuously, God does always give grace to die faithfully. A joyful death
follows a charitable life, and a happy life insueth such a death.

So he that lives to die well, shall assuredly die to live better: such as live
like Wolves, do often dye like Swine. And commonly after a dissolute life
(without fear of death) follows a desperate death without hope of life. And
it agrees with all equity right and reason, that such as in lewd behavior
have passed their time, shall by rigor of justice receive their end.

Cap. X. An Exhortation to continue patient in Adversity.
IT is required in a true Christian to be strongly armed Adversity
with Patience, and to abide firm and stable in time of temptation and trial,
so that neither prosperity nor adversity, weal nor woe, life nor death, can
once move, quail or discourage him. Worldly Riches are subject to many
mishaps, bodily health is taken away with sickness and by age, that daily
creeps on, Beauty is soon consumed: But a true constant mind, comforted by
Gods holy spirit, no chance or misfortune can alter or quail.

Elias in the wilderness, John Baptist in the desert, and Peter in prison
(with the rest of the Apostles) whose commendacions by Christ himself are very
great, not only for leaving their parents, friends and country, to follow him,
neither for their godly kind of living, but by continuing constant unto the
end. You have bidden with me, says our Savior Christ, in my temptation, and
I will give you a kingdom. Be faithful says our Savior to the end, and I
will give you a crown of life.

He that ouer-commeth shall possess all things, and I will be his God, and
he shall be my Son, and shall eat of the tree of life, but he that takes
the plough in hand and looks back, is unmeet for the kingdom of Heaven.

Not every one that works in the vineyard, but he that coutinueth till night,
has the penny not every one that fights, but he that gets the victory,
has the crown of triumph: not every one that begins well and does good for
a time, but he that endures to the end shall be saved.

Happy and blessed is he whom the father of mercy indueth with his interior
grace, so to work, run, and persevere, as in the end he may say with the
Apostle, I have fought a good fight, and got the victory: I have finished my
course and woone the price: Christ is to me life, and death to me advantage.

Cap. XI. A comfortable consolation to the faithful children of Christ.
PLuck up thy heart and rejoice, little poor despised flock, for the Lord has
heard the voice of thy weeping, whose will and pleasure is to give thee a
kingdom; Great are the troubles of the Righteous, but the Lord is the defender
of the righteous cause, and wildeliuer them out of all. Even as a Father
pittyeth his own son, so is our God merciful unto them that fear him. I
have been young, and now am old, says David, yet saw I never the righteous
forsaken, nor his children beg their bread. Rather then Elias shall perish
for soode, God will prepare the Ravens to seed him. Rather then Sampson shall
decay for drink, God will bring water out of an Asses law to refresh him.
Rather then Israel shall sterue, the Lord will rain Manna from Heaven: and
rather then his people shall faint with thirst, the Lord will turn a great
Rock into a mighty fountain. Yea rather then harmeshal come to any one of
his chosen, he will set his Angels to preserve the^

The mountains shall move and the hills shall fall down, but my loving
kindness shall never be removed not fall away from my elect, faith the Lord:
whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and yet delights in him, as a Father in
his son, because thou wast beloved of God (says the Angel to Tobias) it was
necessary that temptation should try thee.

Like the herds man, when any of his flock is unruly and straieth from his
fellows, sends forth his dog not of malice, to hurt or devour him, but of
love to save and reform him* even so our savior Christ (being our heavenly
shepherd, when his sheep goes astray and offend him: he sends out his dog
of tribulation, not of envy to destroy or harm them, but of favor to correct
and amend them.

Even as Moses by striking the hard stony rock with his rod brought forth
plenty of water, even so God by striking the hard stony heart of man with
affliction brings sorth tears of contrition.

And as in the goldsmithes forge, the gold is fined, and the coals burned: so
in the forge of temptation and trouble, the faithful are tried, whilst the
wicked are hardened and consumed yea, even as the seed that is cast upon the
land, unless it endure the coldness of rain, frost and snow, can bring forth
no fruit, no more can a man, unless he bear the cross of Christ by
tribulation and adversity, bring forth true fruits of the Gospel.

Cap. XII. Of the joyful state of Gods children, after the last Iudgeent.
AS the world had a beginning so shall it have an ending. The Heavens shall
pass away in manner of a tempest (says the Apostle) the element also shall
melt with heat, and the earth shall be consumed with fire, but the Lord will
create new, and the former shall not be remembered.

And as we are now clothed with the image of Adams corruptible body, subject to
death and misery, so shall we then be clothed with the image of Christ's
glorious body, changed into perfection and sincerity.

When Christ shall appear, says the Apostle, we shall be like unto him, and see
him as he is, and though we shall not then, as now, be maintained with
earthly or elementall food, but as the Angels of Heaven, yet our bodies of
the same humane nature, shape and fashion, of flesh and bones with all parts
and members of a man, as in this lise, not altered in substance, but changed in
property. Behold my hands and my feet (says our savior to his disciples) for
it is even I my self, handle me and see, for a spirit has not flesh and
bones as ye see me have.

And as we shall be new men, so shall we have new senses, to understand things,
not as they seem. but as they are in deed, and behold the divine Majesty of
God, face to face: the fruition of whose glorious presence, as the original
fountain from whence all wisdom, gladness, joy, virtue and true felicity
proceed, shall so ravish, content and satisfy every member, power and sense
of both body and mind, with such full perfection of pleasure and delight, as
neither eye has seen, ear has heard, tongue can express, nor any heart of
man imagine, in comparison whereof all the desired and gladsome pleasures of
this world are but feigned shows and dark shadows.

And as our savior Christ laid aside part of the Majesty, took upon him the
form of a servant, and having performed due obedience and subjection, unto his
father is now advanced to the highest dominion, and crowned with honor and
glory, so that all knees shall bow unto him. So after the last day when he has
performed the office of a Meditor, he shall yield up into the hands of his
Father, both the kingdom, name and crown of glory, that God may be all in
all, to whose heavenly mansion the God of all glory bring us for his Son
Christ his sake.

AMEN.
A most godly and comfortable Prayer, in time of Adversity.
O Eternal and most loving Father, thou GOD of mercy and judgment, to whom
all things in Heaven and earth do bow and obey, at the continuance of whose
glorious Majesty the wohle world does tremble and quake, who has fashioned
Man of slime and earth, covered him in his mothers womb, and delivered him from
death and hell. To thee our heavenly Father, I humbly bow the knees of mine
heart, beseeching thy Fatherly goodness in Jesus Christ to hear me, poor
wretched child of Adam, begotten and borne in sin, disquieted with troubles,
wrapped in adversity, and oppressed with misery yet by thy secret purpose
pertain to thy kingdom. A Sheep of thy fold by election and calling, though
unruly: A servant of thy household, by obedience and duty, though
unprofitable: A son of thy famely by adoption and grace, though unworthy.

I will call mine own ways to remembrance, confess mine iniquities against
my self, and power out my complaint before thee. Give ear to my prayer O
Lord, consider my distress, and pardon the voice of my humble desires let the
words of my mouth, and the meditations of my heart, be always acceptable in thy
sight, O Lord my strength and my reedemer. I have sinned grievously, O
merciful God, against heaven and before thee, and now Ioh. 13 17.
in the vexation of my spirit, and the anguish of my soul remembering thy
fatherly kindness toward penitent sinners: I appeal to thy eternal mercy,
acknow^edge my wickedness, and lament my grievous offenses.

My heart is broken with sorrows, my life waxen old with heaviness, and my
years with mourning. How long will thou be angry with thy servant O Lord? how
long shall I seek counsel in my soul, and be so vexed in my spirit? how
long shall I poor sorrowful wretch, be tossed with these troublesome floods
of mortaletie, bewailing the tediousness of this my irksome pilgrimage?

The infant overcomes his mother with crying, the child his father with
weeping, and the servant his master with submission, and will thou be no more
entreated o Lord? where are thy tender mercies which have been ever of old? our
fathers hoped in thee and were delivered, they put their trust in thee an I
were not confounded.

Thou art the Father of the fatherless, and the helper of the friendles: thou
have always hard the humble desires of the poor, and thou preparest their
hearts to call upon thee, and thine ears harken thereunto: thou deliuerest
them from wrong, and right dear is their blood in thy sight.

Why art thou so full of heaviness then, O my soul? and why art thou so
disquieted within me? O put thy trust in God, for I will yet give him thanks,
which is the help of my countenance, and my God, yea though he kill me, yet
will I trust in him: I will sing unto the Lord so long as I live, and will
praise my God so long as I have any being.

He has chastened and corrected me, but not given me over unto death: and
therefore my heart daunceth sor joy: my flesh shall rest in hope, and in my song
will I praise him. I will honor him with due obedience, serve him with fear,
and rejoice unto him with reverence.

Rebuke me not in thine anger O Lord, neither do thou chasten me in thy
heavy displeasure: forsake me not in mine old age, when my strength fails
me: but comfort my heaviness, pity my misery, and relieve my necessity.

Cleanse me from my secret faults, and pardon the sins of my youth. Grant
me a new heart, a new mind, a new spirit, and a new life: and I will offer unto
thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and rejoice in my salvation, O thou most
highest.

An Exhortacion to continue all Subjects in their dew obedience, together with
the reward of a faithful subject to his Prince.
To the Reverend Lo. Bishops and the Clergy.
FOR-asmuch as your ecclesiastical office is given you from God, as the next
principal members (under the head) to govern the Common wealth of this
mystical body: and that there is required at your hands an extraordinary
duty touching the function of the Soul. Let me entreat you to be as
vigilant as the five wise Virgins, having Oil always in your Lamps, against
the Bridegroom comes forth of his chamber. Your office is the Soul of the
Laity, the heart of government, and the very Epitome of all obedience. From
you as the Moon boroweth her light of the Sun, all inferior Ministers take
their order of perfection. Let then your doctrine be pure and steadfast like
Moses bush, that always burned but never cousumed: your preaching in season,
and out of season, and your conversation as spotless as the sacrifice of
Turtles. You best know what plenty of Manna has rained in Israel, and how
many Homers full every man ought to gather: Be not any of you ye first yt gather
more then is commanded, and in mistrust of Gods benefits infect the whole land
with the vice of Avarice.

You ought rather to be like Pellicans in the wilderness, who in tender love,
peck the blood from their breast to feed their young ones. You see with your
visible eyes how wonderful almighty God, has always preserved the Queens
Majesty, from the snares of her manifold enemies.

And in you pr^ncipally lies the sacrifice of thancks giving, it is you that
ought to dance before the tabernacle, and to go with the people to the Arc
Number. 17. 8
of covenant: that your righteousness may bud like Arons rod. It is you that
ought to fly forth from this tossed Arc, and like the Dove, bring the Olive
branch of peace in your mouths, and tell Genesis 8. 11.
the people, that if they return, God will be their God, and send a truce to
their distressed souls by you his ambassadors.

Fly not to Tharsis, when you are sent to Niniue, least devouring destruction
attend you: nor with the Man of God go not out of the way, least a Lion tear
you in pieces. But still be conversant with the Lord, that your saces may shine
with Exo. 34. 30
Moses, when he came from the Mount, and bring the image of Gods glory to the
people in your foreheads: you must bear, with Aron, the brestplate of
judgment upon your hearts. There must Exo. 38. 30
be graven upon your forefronts, Holiness to the Exo. 35 36
Lord, and your soundes must be heard when you go into the holy places before
him.

So shall ye stand like mount Synay, never to be removed: and your golden
candlestick shine in the Temple of the Lord. Remember the charge your master
Christ gave to his servant Peter, binding him three times, above all things by
his fervent love, and the dear affection he bare to his Master to feed his
sheep: to be with Paul, the faithful Ambassadors of Jesus Christ, as though
God did beseech you through us: we pray you in Christ's steed, that ye be
reconciled to God. With Paul like 2. Cor. 5. 2.
wife to be an example of life and doctrine, as in these words: And follow hard
toward the mark, for the Phil. 3. 14.
price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Let us therefore, as many as
be perfect, be thus mindded, if ye be otherwise, God shall reveal, even the
same unto you.

Ye are, most Reverent, the salt of the earth, Mat* 15. 13
which wanting savor, is to be trodden under foot: ye are the light of the
world, a city that is set on a hill cannot be hid, let your light therefore
shine, that they that see your good works, may glorify your father which is
in Heaven.

Thus unworthy to counsel so grave aduisements, as if the body should
instruct the Soul, I only like a trauailer in his pilgrimage, seeing a King
go out of his way, tell him there is a better, a more perfect and a
straighter: So referring you to your Masters reward, who hates a hidden talent,
I beseech that God, who guides Israel by day Exo. 13 21
in a pillar of cloud, and by night in a pillar of fire, to direct your
earthly bodies and spiritual souls to his service.

Amen.
To the true Nobility of this Realm.
TO ye, Right Honorable, that are the props and supporters of a kingdom, that
like Atlas should bear the weight of Heaven on your shoulders, give me leave
to stretch forth the Artires of my heart, and as in a tempestious time, in peace
unite you together like one body, obedient to one principal head. In that
worthy member, the Heart, the monarch seat of our Microcosmos, should be your
residence, with in whose center as in a Princes Court, are diverse receptacles
for you to inhabit in. Then as branches extending from the lofty Ceder, being
fed by one root, do notwithstanding cherish one another with their natural
sap. So like the true stock of Nobility, descended from your worthy
ancestors, be you combined in a conjunction of inseparable aid, that the body
of the tree, may be comforted in so happy an issue, and in the proudest blast
of conspiracy, keep you still vnremouable. Be ye like faithful Mardocheus,
spotles in your ways, when Esser.
traitors like proud Haman shall perish in their own complets. For if ye
please to peruse our Histories, both ecclesiastical and profane, ye shall
find, that never traitor to his native Prince, but had his reward threefold
returned into his wicked bosom. And though it has pleased God, sometime to
suffer them (the cause best known to his sacred pleasure) to bring to pass
their hateful purposes: yet as a woe pronounced to them by whom such evils
come, their mischief has not past without greater mischief reguerdond. There
is none of your Honorable society, but knows that treason is the deuider and
seperater of all good things, and a fatal disioyner of perfection, bringing
with it ruin, and the merciless substitutes of war: where on the contrary,
obedience is the sinowes of the state, and glewes the hearts of Nobility
together, like one indivisible substance. And as the seven lean Kine in
Pharaohs dream, devoured the seven fat, Gene. 41. 4
yet themselves not the fatter: so stands it with treason, like a cormerant, it
deuoures all: yet is it felfe the better by nothing. What greater pattern of
misery can there be, then a kingdom divided in it self, it is like the
dangerous Eclipse of the Sun: nay like the unnatural separation of Heaven,
that brings all danger and destruction. No plague of Egypt comparable to that
misery, for civil discention is the gate to let in ruin, and foreign
inuasio^: it is like a wedge of iron, that entering into an Oak, disseuers both
sides in several pieces, and makes them both fit for the fire.

The flourishing state of Rome was devoured by that Monster, and all
tranquillity swallowed at a bit by that hedius Leuiathan. It is like the blind
Mole, that loving still to be mischieuously laboring, tosseth up her own
destruction.

Let then, Right Honorable, that acceptable sacrifice of your hearts be offered
to our gracious Sovereign, which far exceeds the external offices of fained
affection, who with an eye of vigilance, will, no doubt, regard your virtues:
and like the cheerful comfort of the Sun, with her blessed countenance,
make your young blossoms come to pleasant fruit, and bring the fruit by
comfortable warmth to full maturetie.

By this means, shall your Phoenix live still and you be made most happy in
her fresh renewing. God so direct your hearts to work in you unfeigned loyalty
to her sacred Majesty, and deadly hatred to self devouring treason:

Amen.
To the Civil Maiestrates, the Lord Mayor and the Shrifes of London: and other
inferior off^cers.
THe natural care that your loyalties have ever borne to your Sovereign,
since your first flourishing time, both in peace and war, has in ages past (as
deeds worth registring) been recorded: yet it has been manifest when
Princes, that heretofore have grouerned, have held the raines with a more
severe hand, then in our time (God be thanked) yet ye have without repining
willingly sustained, as giving place to time, to fortune, or both.

And as in all dangerous Commotions, you have made apparent your forward loves
and loyalties, to her Majesty and your native country, so it cannot be
doubted but your vigilant care, confirmed in perfect resolution, like the
helping hands of a distressed body, will in all love, when occasion shall
serve, minister, as to your selves, the faithful assistance of all your power.
Wherein you shall find our Sovereign, like a careful Mother with Hester, be
ready to offer her self for her people, and with Judith, to dread no danger
to preserve her own nation.

I know it is yet extant in your memories, how careful she has been to send
comfort to foreign distressed Christians, and with the help of God, has
delivered them, where otherwise, like a flock of Lambs, not able to defend
themselves, their throtes had line open to a heard of savage Wolves.

How much more then, her highness showing such compassion to strangers, will
she have especial regard of her natural people, and in most especial to you
that are, by often apprelation, tried to be of her most faithful, loiall and
dearest subjects.

The tirants Nero, Dioclesian, and Phalaris, who most bloodely diued into the
bowels of their friends and subjects, being Heathen, were obeyed both in love
and fear, though their tyranny extended to all licentious and uncivil
proceeding. How much more then ought ye, having a most Christian Prince to
govern ye, that tenders the pricking of your finger, as a wound near her
own heart, to prosecute her Princely affection with pure integrity. I urge
not this, as though your loves were doubted, or held in the suspense of unequal
balance, but as remembering you of that which cannot be to often mentioned,
considering the danger of disloial seducers, that thinck to bribe the faithful
hearts of her Highness loving subjects (as the Devil that sows darnel amongst
the best wheat) with their falls shows and deceitful practices: or like the
Crocodile in Nilus, that weeps like a child, till she alure some passengers,
and then appearing in the nature of her ougly shape, extends her hunger bitten
paunch, and presently deuours. Of such pestiferous natures are all glozing
siccophants that guild their pretenses (to keep the counterfeit unspied) with
such false suggestions, carrying no show of reason or truth* but like the
Devils that entered into the heard of Swine, when they cannot have liberty or
license to do one mischief, covet to enter into another, so their malice may
be set on work. But to withstand such, I know both your civil policy is
able, and your well instructed minds very willing.

Herein ye ought the rather to be thoroughly confirmed, seeing how God has
from the beginning of her Majesty's reign, defended her in all manner of
envious assaults, and laid their own evil, upon the wickedness of their
own heads. And her Majesty is thoroughly persuaded of your fidelity, and
sound incorruptible love to her Crown and dignity: and that you will
hereafter be chary to discover to her, if need shall be (as god forbid) any
mischief lurking like the poison of Aspis, under their lips, then others should
by wise policy inkindled by her tender love, bring the same to evident light.
And as in a late proclamacio^ she promised in the continuance of your dutiful
and seruent affection, ye shall find her more careful of your welfare, then her
own; more desirous of your preseruacion the^ her own: and that no particular
hurt or disco^te^t shall be wrongfully imposed upon you: but she in her princely
nature will be ready in person both to hear it and to right it. I know that in
some foreign countries (yet in Christendom) they can scarce sustain their
bodis with such meat and drink as they like, yet is necessary for the^, and
with such other things as the nature of man requires, but as yoked with a
domestical seruiletie, they are constrained to pay tribute for the use of them,
and give double, both for their appetite and sustenance. God forbid (as thanks
be to God it is not) that the subjects of England should be oppressed with such
tedious clogges.

This as one fervent in affection, aduising (where I know notwithstanding, there
is a settled unity of love) even as you hope to have your souls lift up on
high, and your coffers enriched on earth: as ye look to have your warehouses
filled with Gods blessings, to have your wine good, and your oil fat: so once
again I stir you up, like a flame that is quickened with blowing, to love God,
obey your Prince, and be careful for your country, so shall her proudest
enemy die at your feet, and ye be made worthy instruments (like a tower of
Marble) to defend her sacred Majesty, whom God continue long in all joy full
health and prosporous life:

Amen.
To the true and faithful private subject.
AND now beloved countrymen to you in general, that carry with you the full
current of affection, the swiftest stream of deep guiding love, not to be
reuerted or turned back by the vehement opposition of my resisting wind.

To you, as to tbe open mark, whereto my heart leauells her pretended aim
(being the vpshot of mine exhortacion) I send this loving and friendly
counsel. Like to a strong City fenced about with impregnable walls: so ought
you to be in time of domestical rebellion or foreign invasion. For you are the
main battle, the strength and trust of your country: and to you belong a
chief trust in this required preservation. Even as her highness may well be
compared to the apple of our eye, of which naturally (by reason it is tender
unto us) we have a diligent care: so ought you to join your whole body of
defense, both arms, legs, feet, and heart, to protect her royal person,
without secret grudging, private muttering, or unnatural controversy.

You ought to be like steadfast Rocks in the Sea, ready to front every storm,
and to withstand (without removing) the most bitter blast, that either winter
or foul weather affords.

I know my most loving countrymen, that you well perceive the Princely care of
her Majesty toward you her loving subjects, and the honorable disposition
and noble industry of her vigilent counsel. Of which Honorable society,
although now untimely decessed, I cannot but call to mind that Right Honorable
and most worthily to be remembered, the late Lord Burgley, and Lord high
Treasurer of England. Whose fame may not be sealed up with the leaden hand of
Oblivion, who whilst he lived showed himself one of the most faithful,
careful, and wise councillors that ever lived in any kingdom of Christendom.

He was the Beacon that discovered foreign malice, and homebred mischief,
the never failing watchtower of the commonwealth, the heart of lustice,
bearing up the balance of weighty causes with an even hand, and cutting down
with the sharp sword of preuencion the children of rebellion at home, and the
envious intencion of the Enemy abroad. For causes in common trial, I call
heaven to witness, I speak but what I know, as he was Judicial, wary and
circu^spect, so was he upright, discreet, and pitiful, not leaning to any
side either for favor or gift, but with an impartial eye judging all things
according to the equity of the cause. Would many branches like to that tree
from whence it sprang might from that stock spread their virtue, in this her
Majesty's garden of happy government.

In which rank of true Nobility, diligent watchmen, and grave Councellers, I
may not omit that Right Honorable and mild condicioned Lord the Earl of
Nottingham, whose true loyalty to her Majesty, never spotted with the least
mistrust, may keep even wing with the rest of that Honorable society, whose
true show of a virtuous and noble mind, is daily made apparent by his
exceeding bounty toward the poor and needy. The fruit whereof is Eternal
salvation.

And that Reverent and careful Gentleman, Sir John Popham Knight, Lord chief
Justice of England, being another of the body of the Counsel, whose Honorable
forwardness, with great discreation has been often proved in your Majesty's
serious affairs (as in calming the Realm with quiet, that has been hertofore
tempestuously troubled with blody murderers and felonious robbers: but now,
God be thanked, by his diligent and wise government well reformed, whose
exceeding love to his Prince and country, has been often made apparent by his
laborious endeavors.

To conclude, I beeseech God in his infinite mercy, stir up in you dear
affecting love to her Majesty, who for the comfort of his chosen, and
maintenance of his truth, has defended her highness this 44 years, our most
merciful gouernes: Mercy has always sitten at her Majesty's right hand, and
houered about her like a continual handmaid. Mercy is the wedding ring, that
like an unspotted Virgin has married her to our Savior Christ: and settled her
Highness, the faithful president of his true Church, wherein long may her
Majesty continue many happy and peaceful days, to the great glory of God,
and to the exceeding comfort of all us her faithful and loving subjects.

Amen.
What a faithful subject is.
A Good Subject, next to the Diadem that adornes a Princes head, is the
chiefest orname^t that decores his dignity. He is as the precious Balm that
anoints his brows: and is nearer to his heart, then his Scepter to his right
hand: as sweet in his nosthrills as the groves of Gylead: and more precious in
his sight, then Solomon's Iuorie throne covered with purest gold.

His heart is clothed with peace, like Mount Oliuet, and his eyes as harmless
as the sight of a Dove. His tongue sounds like the Harp of David: and his lips
deliver the happiness of loyalty: his ears are the portalls that receive
understanding, and all perfection from thence is conducted to the heart: His
hands are ready to fight the battles of the Lord: and his feet (shunning
the steps of blod) are bent always to walk in the paths of innocence. Thus
excellent in the sight of his Prince, shines a faithful subject, more gorgeous
then the Ephod of Aron: and more sumptuous then Solomon in all his Royalty.
Who so is this to his Prince and country, the Lord will prosper him, and he
shall be blessed in an everlasting generation: And for one of these benefits he
receives on earth, he shall have a million in Heaven. For one of those
perfections he pertakes off in this world, nombers above number, shall attend
him in the world to come. And his Prince shall thus pray for him and bless
him, as Solomon did his subjects. And the King turned his face and blessed all
the Congregation of Israel, and said: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who
spoke with his mouth to David my Father: and has with his hand fulfilled it.

And though my self may say with Isaie, I am a worm and no man: yet (I speak
it in despite of vaineglorie) I would with all my heart as an Isaac in the hands
of Abraham, serve as a sacrifice, to do my Prince and country good. For surely
he cannot be a true seruitour of God, that is not a faithful subject to his
Prince. Neither would I judge any felicity in this world answerable to that,
if once my soul might be employed to please my Prince, and benefit my
country.

For all the offices of humanity depend only upon those principal
performances, for I know by that means there comes a blessing from a far, a
reward full of joy, which none else are worthy to obtain: which reward I
heartily pray the great rewarder of all, to send to the true, loyal, and
faithful subject, and so with one voice proceeding from one unity of heart,
let us all say faithfully, God save the Queen.

Amen.
E
E EXceedings made the Miracle of Nature,
L Love ioin'd with life, to frame a blessed creature:
I Joy in each part, where wisdom has expressed,
Z Zeal in the heart, to make the spirit blessed:
A A work of worth, well worthy admiration,
B Beyond the Mount of Man's imagination:
E Esteemed more worth, then any worldly wonder,
T That by desert, puts all earths praises under:
H Heavens bless the work, wherein such wonder dwells
A As, all worlds wonder, in such worth excels.
R
R RAre is the substance of this worthy sense,
E Expressing all in only Excellence:
G Giu'ne by the heavens unto the world a blessing,
I In Fames reporting, and in Truths confessing:
N Near are such notes, unto an Angels Nature,
A As makes a Queen a Goddess, of a creature.
The Miracle of Nature.
AMong the wonders of this Age of ours,
That Ear has heard, or Eye has euerseene:
Upon the top of Honors highest towers,
The glorious notes of our most gracious Queen:
Through all the world, all worthily confessed,
Show, never Kingdom in a Queen so blessed.
First, for her Birth, the daughter of a King,
And such a King, as peerless in his praise:
A blessed sprig, from such a stock to spring,
As does increase the honor of his days:
And, in her self, in more then worlds perfection,
The Art of Nature by the heavens direction.
For Beauty, but behold her blessed Eye,
Where fair DIANA puts foul VENUS down:
For Wisdom, in true sacred Majesty,
The worthy head of an Imperial Crown:
For Mercy, who so perfectly divine?
For Grace, who does not to her Grace resign?
For bounty, note her Liberality,
To maintain Right, and to relieve the wrong:
For Virtue, what true virtuous Quality?
But may be sung in her true praises song?
For Learning, where more in a Princess seen?
For Language, there was never such a QVEENE.
For Constancy, who so immutable?
Whose love to God, no Devil can remove:
For gracious speech, what Prince so affable?
To win the heart of every worthy love:
For Zeal, the trial of religious truth,
For Patience, read the troubles of her youth.
Whose mind of truer Magnanimity?
In dangers to disdain the thought of fear?
whose heart more necre unto Divinity?
with Patience Care, all discontents to bear:
whose Soul more full infused with Gods Spirit,
Through all the world that does such wonder merit.
With all these blessings, from the highest Bliss,
Her Care to keep her kingdom still in peace:
Shows that her mind is hardly led amiss,
That does such glory to her Crown increase:
That Fame does sound, in her best pleasing breath,
But only Englands QVEENE ELIZABETH.
Since then that God does with that Grace inspire her,
That shows her blessed in the heavens above:
And all the Princes of the world admire her,
For all the wonders worthy honors love:
Why should this Earth live ever to forget her?
But in the Soul of loves Remembrance set her.
They that have lived, could say while they did live,
Subjects are blessed in such a Sovereign:
They that now live, may well like witness give,
A gracious QVEENE does make a glorious Reign:
They that hereafter live her Grace to see,
May say on Earth, not such a Queen as she.
How has she kept her Court in comeliness?
Her State, in state, of gracious Majesty?
Her Peers in love, her Church in Godliness?
Her laws in strength, her Lords in unity?
Her Peoples awe, in Loves persuasion?
Her Land, in Peace without Invasion?
Does she give hearing unto grave advise?
Great is her wisdom so to guide her will:
Sounds she the depth of good, or ill devise?
Blessed be the Care, of such a Princely skill:
Leaves she the worst? and only takes the best?
Blessed be her choice, so be she ever Blessed.
How has she sought to beat offenses down?
With kind Corrections, not with Cruelty?
How has she kept the honor of her Crown?
With Love and Mercy, not with Tyranny:
How has she liude, that all the world may know,
Was never Queen, whose love did gouerue so.
What Neighbor people has her land relieved?
Who driven from home, make here their safe abode:
And, with her will, what people have been grieved?
Except they be the Enemies of God:
Within her Land how soon all tumults cease?
While love, and Mercy breed continual peace.
To speak of such particularities,
As in exceedings, do set down her name:
Which all, and some are singularities,
That make true Nusique, for the Trompe of fame:
Is meet for some heaues Muses to endite,
While Angels pens are fittest for to wtite.
But, as an Eye, that all far of beholds,
An Excellence it can not comprehend:
Yet, what Conceit, in secret sense unfolds,
It has a Will in wonder to Commend:
Yet, when it speaks, it wincketh at the light,
As though to weak, to speak of such a sight.
So, my poor Spirit, whose hearts humble Eye,
Sees by the light, that it has power to see:
A world of worth, in wonder all so high,
As shows, what worth above worlds wonders be:
In her due praises can set down so little,
As to her Title, all is but a tittle.
Yet, though mine Eye can touch nor Sun nor Moon,
Shall I not praise the cleerenesse of the Sky?
And, though my Morning be an after Noone,
Shall I still sleep, as though I had no Eye?
No, give me leave to say the Sun is bright,
Although mine Eyes but dimly see the light.
And, though my knowledge be but Ignorance,
Compard to that, her praise should Comprehend:
And, such a Muse, as would her pen advance,
To write her worth, should but her will attend:
Yet, let me say to them that can say more,
England had never such a QVEENE before.
Who would but note this four and forty years,
how Mercies Justice has her Scepter swayed:
Of which no Prince, nor Emperor, that hears,
But, is with wonder of her worth dismaide:
Woul say in Soul, on earth was never seen,
Kingdom so gouernd by a VIRGIN QVEENE.
Now, for her Counsel, all admire those wits,
That with such wisdom do advise her will:
And, in her will, thinck what true wisdom sits,
That is the ground work of their gracious skill:
And say, that God, that Land a blessing gives,
Where such a Queen, and such a Counsel lives.
Some Male-contented Malecondition'd minds,
Where private grudge regards no public good:
Mistaking Reason in malicious kinds,
Like Serpents hatched of an unkindly brood:
In hate may blot, that better love commends,
But such ill Spirits, God send speedy ends.
I pray for few, I hope for none at all,
Indifference speaks so truly in her praise:
That, while cold fears unchristian hearts apall,
Faith finds in her the Phaenix of our days:
While humble love in loyal hearts does pray,
That she may live until the latter day.
Now, for her Treasure, how she does bestow,
her blessed Talent, in her Crowns behoue:
May witness well, that God himself does show,
She is the fair dear daughter of his love:
Whom his high hand has over men so placed,
And so above both men and women graced.
What Noble spirit, has true honor proved?
But, her sweet Eye has graciously regarded:
What virtuous spirit but her heart has loved,
And to the due of best desert Rewarded:
For Princely kindness, to her humble friends,
Fame sounds her point, in praise that never ends.
What should I need to walk my wits about?
A world of wonder, where there is no truth:
When Truth it self, does bring these wonders out,
Both in her Princely Peereles Age and Youth:
Where old, and young, may all and only see,
How blessed a Kingdom in a Queen may be.
I make no Care of fictions, nor of fables,
Minerua fair, and Pallas were but fained:
But, Truth may write in her memorial table,
That, such a Queen in England never reigned:
As makes all Poets idly spend their breath,
That name a Queen, but in ELIZABETH.
I cannot choose but wonder at those wits,
That have employed their pens in Poetry:
In whose deep brains, that best invention sits,
That looks at honor with a heavenly eye:
That some, or all in all their songs and lays,
Have not Contended for Elizas praise.
But, it may be, they found their wits to weak,
To equal will, in writing of their wonder:
Yet such as could of Earths chief praises speak,
Might say her praise, puts all Earths praises under:
And say no more, then all the world may see,
If Angel woman, on the Earth it is she.
Some out of French, Italian, Dutch, or Spanish,
Do draw discourses of most worthy Creatures:
But let those Fictions, all like fables vanish,
To show the notes, of all those gracious natures:
I go no further, then our Sovereign Queen,
Where all in one, and one in all is seen.
For Virtues Grace, beeholde her Virgin train,
Where fair demeanours, put foul humors down:
For Majesty, what Monarch does retain?
So grave a Counsel to a Gracious Crown:
And for attendaunce, let*loues Muses sing,
A Virgin Queen, deserves a servant King.
For, truly sound each point of such perfection,
As makes a Kingdom blessed in a Queen:
And let but Truth confess without exception,
The sacred worth, in her true wisdom seen:
And Englands heart may have just cause to say,
Blessed be her Birth, and Coronation day.
A lovely Day, fair may it ever last,
A Sunshine Day, whose beams are heavenly bright:
Clear may they shine, and never ouercast,
With any Cloud, that may obscure the light:
That, in her height of Brigtnesse not declining,
England may joy to see her ever shining.
Oh, could I fly with such an Eagles vvings,
As, could be soaring in the Sunnie light:
Or, could I here but what that Angel sings,
That never Poet had the power to write:
Then should my spirit and my pen not cease,
To write her praise, that now must hold my peace.
And only pray, that he that sits on high,
And holds the hand of mercies majesty:
Our gracious God, that she may never die,
But in the life of loves eternity:
Live from the blot of foul obliuions pen,
All faithful hearts in England, say Amen.
FINIS.
A faithful Subjects prayer.
O Glorious God and only King of Kings,
Whose holy eye both heaven and earth beholds
And from whose Mercy all and only springs,
The fairest life that faithful love unfolds:
Mine humble spirit I beseech thee raise,
To give thy glory, all eternal praise.
O gracious God among the many graces,
Wherein thy Mercy has this Island blessed:
In whom the height of all our happy cases,
Under thine only holy hand does rest:
For our sweet, gracious, virtuous Sovereign Queen:
Let our hearts humble thanckfulnesse be seen.
Bless her O Lord with Nestors happy days,
Health, wealth and peace and everlasting pleasure:
Let Virtues love, resound her worthy praise,
And thy true wisdom be her spirits treasure:
Her greatest hopes upon thy graces grounded,
Her state preserved, and her foes confounded.
Preserve oh Lord her faithful Counselors,
Her Loyal subjects, and her true attendants:
Her virtuous Lawiers, valiant Soldiers,
And let thine Angels be her loves defendants:
Her state of bliss be Englands blessed story,
And give her Soul a Crown of endless glory.
Amen.
R. V.


