THE GROUNDS OF THAT DOCTRINE which is according to Godliness. Or A brief and
easy Catechism, (gathered out of many other) with Graces and Prayers for them
that want better helps.

By T. V. B. of D. Vicar of Cockfield in Southsex.

The second Edition.

LONDON. Printed by T.C. and R. C. for Michael Spark, dwelling at the blue
Bible in Green Arbor. M.DC.XXX.

A Brief Catechism, with Prayers and GRACES.
CREATION.
Question.

WHo made you?

Answer. Esaias* 44.2. Thus says the Lord that made thee and formed thee from
the womb; he will help thee. See Psalm. 139.13.14.15.
God Genesis 17.1. I am God Almighty. Job. 42.2.
Almighty, the Esaias 44.24. Thus says the Lord thy Redeemer, and he that
formed thee from the womb, I am the Lord that made all things, that spread out
the heavens alone, and stretched out the earth by my self. See Nehem. 9.6.
Genesis 2.4.5.
Maker and Psalm. 103.19. The Lord has prepared his throne in heaven, and his
kingdom rules over all. See Psalm. 33.13.14.15.
Governor of all things.

2. Q. Wherefore did he make you?

A. To Psalm. 100.3.2.] Know ye that the Lord is God, he has made us, and not
me our selves, serve the Lord with gladness* See Deuteronomy. 10.12.
serve him.

3. Q. How will God be served?

A. As he has Deuteronomy. 12.30.31.32. Beware lest thou ask, saying, How did these
nations serve their gods, that I may do so likewise; Thou shall not do so to
the Lord thy God. Whatsoever I command you, see you do that; thou shall put
nothing thereto, nor take ought therefrom. See Psalm. 119.4.
appointed in his Laws.

(...), The Doctrine of the Law.
4. Q. What be those Laws of God?

A. The ten Commandments.

5. Q. Which be they.

A. The same which God spoke, Exodus 20.1. saying, I am the Lord thy God, which
brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage:

1 Thou shall have none other gods but me.

2 Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the waters under
the earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them. For I the Lord
thy God am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the children
unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me and show mercy unto
thousands in them that love me, and keep my commandments.

3 Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

4 Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Six days shall thou labor
and do all that thou have to do, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the
Lord thy God. In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou and thy son, and
thy daughter, thy man servant and thy maid servant, thy cattle, and the
stranger that is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven and
earth, the sea and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day. Wherefore
the Lord bessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.

5 Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

6 Thou shall do no murder.

7 Thou shall not commit adultery.

8 Thou shall not steal.

9 Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

10 Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor
any thing that is his.

6 Q. Can thou keep all these laws without breaking them?

A. I desire to have an eye unto Psalm. 119.6. Then should I not be confounded
whilst I have respect unto all thy Commandments.
all Gods Commandments, but such is the Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am.
wretchedness of my sinful nature, that Romans 7.21. I find then by the Law,
that when I would do good, evil is present with me. See Romans 7.18 19. and
Genesis 8.21.
when I would do good, evil is present with me.

7. Q. What punishment is due for the breach of these Laws?

A. The Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which
are written in the book of the Law to do them.
curse of God, upon which follows Math 25.41. Depart ye cursed into
everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his angels.
eternal destruction of body and soul.

REDEMPTION.
8. Q. HOw do you escape this punishment?

A. By Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, when he
was made a curse for us. Coloss. 21.14.15.
Jesus Christ Act. 4.12. Neither is there salvation in any other.
alone, that eternal 2. Pet. 1.17. For he received of God the Father honor
and glory; when there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This
is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. Heb. 1.2.3.
Son of God.

9. Q. What has Christ done to free thee from this punishment?

A. He has suffered the torments of Hebr. 2.14.15. For as much the^ as the
children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself took part with
them, that he might destroy through death him that had the power of death,
that is, the devil: And that he might deliver all them which for fear of
death were all their life long subject to bondage, Hebr. 5.7.8.9.
death for me.

10. Q. But seeing Christ was God, how could he die?

A. Christ Jesus was both Romans 9.5. Of whom are the fathers, and of whom
concerning the flesh Christ came, who is God over all blessed for ever, Amen.
Esaias. 9.6.
God and Phil. 2, 6, 7. Who being in the form of God thought it no robbery to
be equal with God; but he made himself of no reputation, and took on him
the form of a servant, and was made like unto men, and was found in shape as a
man. 1. Tim. 2.5.
man; and in that he was God he could not die; but being man he Romans 4.25.
Who was delivered to death for our sins, and is risen again for our
justification. 1 Pet. 2.24.
dyed for my sins* and rose again to make me righteous.

(...), The Doctrine of Faith.
11. Q. Are all saved by Christ's death?

A. No; none but Ioh. 2.16.18.26. For God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but
have life everlasting. He that believes in him shall not be condemned, but he
that believes not is condemned already. He that believes in the Son has
everlasting life, and he that obeys not the Son shall not see life, but
the wrath of God abides on him. Act. 13.48.
such as lay hold on him by a lively faith.

12. Q. What is a lively faith?

A. A lively faith is a Romans 4.20.21. Neither did he doubt of the promise of
God through unbeleefe, but was strengthened in faith, and gave glory to God,
being fully assured that he which had promised, was also able to do it. Ephesians.
3.12.17.
full persuasion of my heart grounded on Gods promises, that whatsoever Christ
has done for the salvation of man, he has done it as well Gal. 2.20. I live
by the faith of the Son of God who has loved me, and given himself for me.
Ioh. 20.28.
for me as for any other.

13. Q. Where have you the sum of your faith?

A. In the Apostles Creed.

I. I believe in God, the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth.

II. And in Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord.

III. Which was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary.

IV. Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried, he
descended into hell.

V. The third day he rose again from the dead.

VI. He ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the Father
Almighty.

VII. From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

VIII. I believe in the holy Ghost.

IX. The holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints.

X. The forgiveness of sins.

XI. The resurrection of the body.

XII. And the life everlasting Amen.

SANCTIFICATION.
14. Q. HOw come you by faith?

A. It is the Phil. 1.29. For unto you it is given for Christ, not only to
believe, but also suffer for his sake. Ioh. 6.^6.
gift of God, which the Act. 16.14. Lydia's heart the Lord opened, that she
attended to the things which Paul spoke. Act. 15.8, 9.
Lord works by the secret operation of his Spirit in my heart, through the
outward Romans 10.14.17. How shall they believe on him of whom they have not
heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? then faith is by hearing,
and hearing by the Word of God.
preaching of the Word.

15. Q. How is faith increased in us?

A. By three means. 1 Thessalonians. 1.5.8. For our Gospel was not unto you in word
only; but also in power and in the holy Ghost, and in much assurance; your
faith also which is toward God spread abroad in all quarters. 2 Thessalonians. 1.3.
Preaching, Luke 17.5. And the Apostles said unto the Lord, Increase our faith.
Act 4.29.31.
Prayer, and Act. 2.42. And they continued in the Apostles doctrine; and
fellowship, and breaking of bread, and prayers.
Sacraments.

(...), The Doctrine of Preaching.
16. Q. What is Preaching?

A. Preaching is the 2. Tim. 2.15. Study to show thy self approved to God, a
workman that needs not to be ashamed, dividing the Word of truth aright.
dividing of the Word aright by a 1. Cor. 4.1. Let a man so think of us, as of
the Ministers of Christ, and dispensers of the secrets of God.
Minister thereunto Heb. 5.4. No man takes this honor unto himself, but he
that is called of God, as was Aaron.
called.

(...), The Doctrine of Prayer.
17. Q. What is Prayer?

A. Prayer is the 1, Sam. 1.13.15. Hannah spoke in her heart, I have powered out
my soul before the Lord.
opening of the hearts desire Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble,
and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Iam. 1.5.
unto God in the Ioh. 16.23. Verily, verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye ask
the Father in my name, he will give it you. Dan. 9.17.
name of Christ.

18. Q. After what manner ought you to pray?

A. As Christ taught his Disciples in that form, commonly called the Lords
Prayer. Our Father which art in heaven,

I. Hallowed be thy Name.

II. Thy kingdom come.

III. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.

IV. Give us this day our daily bread.

V. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.

VI. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.

For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever, and for
ever. Amen.

(...), The Doctrine of the Sacraments.
19. Q. What be Sacraments?

A. Sacraments are Genesis 17.11. Ye shall circumcise the fore skin of your
flesh, and it shall be a sign of the covenant between me and you.
signs and Romans 4.11. after he received the sign of circumcision is the seal
of the righteousness of the faith which he had when he was uncircumcised.
seals ordained Genesis 17.10. This is my covenant which ye shall keep. Math.
28.19. Math. 26.26.27.
of God, for the strengthening of the faith of the remission of our sins, and
of our salvation in Christ Jesus.

20. Q. How many Sacraments be there?

A. Two only in the new Testament, 1. Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4. All our Fathers were
under the cloud, and passed through the Sea, and were all baptized unto Moses in
the cloud, and in the Sea, and did all eat the same spiritual meat; and did
all drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of the spiritual rock
that followed them* and the rock was Christ.
Baptism and the Lords Supper.

21. Q. What profit have you by Baptism?

A. I believe, that Act. 2.38. Amend your lives, and be baptized every one of
you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins.
in Baptism my sins are forgiven me, for that as the water washes away the
filth of my body; so the Ephesians. 1.7. By whom we have redemption through his
blood, ever the forgiveness of our sins, according to his rich grace.
blood of Christ Hebr. 10.22. Let us draw near with a true heart in assurance
of faith, sprinkled in our hearts from an evil conscience and washed in our
bodies with pure water.
sprinkled upon my soul, does 1. Ioh. 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ his
Son, cleanses us from all sin.
cleanse me from all sin.

22. Q. What profit have you by the use of the Lords Supper?

A. As I receive the 1. Cor. 11.23.24.25. Took bread -- and said, Take eat --,
also the Cup -- this do, as often as you drink it in remembrance of me.
bread and wine into my body, to become wholly mine: so I believe that my soul
receives withal the 1. Cor. 10.16. The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it
not the Communion of the blood of Christ? the Bread which we break, is it not
the Communion of the body of Christ?
body and blood of Christ Jesus, with his 1. Cor. 1.30. But we are of him in
Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption.
righteousness to the Ephesians. 1.13. Wherein also after that ye believed, ye
were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise.
sealing up of my everlasting salvation by the holy Spirit.

23. Q. Seeing thou receivest such great benefits by the use of the Lords
Supper, how ought thou to prepare thy self, that thou may be thought
worthy to be partaker of those great blessings?

A. I must diligently sift and 1. Cor. 11.28. Let a man therefore examine
himself, and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of this cup.
examine my self.

24. Q. Of what things ought thou to examine thy self?

A. Of three things especially. 1. As concerning my faith, whether I 2. Cor.
13.5. Prove your selves whether you are in the faith, examine your selves. 1.
Cor. 16.13.
stand strongly in the true faith. 2. Concerning my repentance, which consists
of Psalm. 51.17. The sacrifice of God is a broken spirit, a broken and a
contrite heart, O God thou will not despise, 2. Cor. 7.9.10.11.
contrition and sorrow for sin, with a hearty 1. Ioh. 1.9. If we acknowledge
our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse
us from all unrighteousness. Luke 15.18.19.
confession and acknowledgement of it, an utter detestation and Prove. 28.13. He
that hides his sins shall not prosper, but be that confesses and forsakes
them shall find mercy. Romans 7.15.16, 17.
forsaking of sin, with a Psam. 119.106. I have sworn, and am steadfastly
purposed to keep thy righteous judgments. Psalm. 119.176.
resolution and purpose to live godly hereafter. 3. Concerning my charity,
desiring to Matthew. 5, 24. Leave thine offering before the Altar, go thy way,
first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. Romans
12.18.
reconcile my self to them whom I have offended, and Coloss. 3.12.13. Now
therefore as the Elect of God, holy and beloved, put on tender mercy,
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one
another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel to another; even
as Christ forgave you, even so do you, Matthew. 18.21.22.
forgiving from the Matthew. 18.35. So likewise shall my heavenly Father do unto
you, except you forgive from your hearts, each one to his brother their
trespasses. Ephesians. 4.32.
heart those that have offended me.

The Sum of the Catechism, showing most manifestly how one Question
depends on another, all throughout.
GOd made me, and he made me to serve him, and I must serve him as he has
appointed in his Laws; and those Laws are commonly called the ten
Commandments of God. These Commandments of God I confess I am not able to
keep, but by reason of the sinfulness of my nature do break them
continually: and I acknowledge that for the breach thereof, the punishment due
is the curse of God and eternal destruction. But my hope is, though I do
violate and break Gods Precepts, to escape this punishment by Jesus Christ,
that Emanuel, God and man in one person, who to free me from this curse and
destruction, has, as he was man, suffered the torments of death in my steed.
Of these his sufferings I ^eape the benefit, because I lay hold thereon, by a
true and a lively faith, as belonging unto me. By this faith I live as I am a
Christian, and I acknowledge it not to spring from mine own power or
free will, but to be the gift of God wrought in my heart by the secret
operation of the Spirit through the ministry of the Word. And as it is thus
wrought in my heart, so it is also increased and made strong by Preaching,
which is dividing of the Word aright; by Prayer, which is the opening of the
hearts desire to God, especially in that form Christ has taught me; and by
the Sacraments, which are signs and seals ordained of God for the confirming
of faith. Of these Sacraments I acknowledge only two, to wit, Baptism,
wherein my sins are forgiven me, and whereby I am entered and admitted into
the Church; and the Lords Supper, whereby I am nourished up as a member of the
Church, by eating of Christ's body, and drinking of Christ's blood spiritually,
to the sealing up of my everlasting salvation. These so great benefits that I
receive by the use of the Lords Supper, do teach me to prepare my self to
come with all due reverence to the partaking of those holy mysteries; and that
preparation is performed by examining of my self; and that examination must be
especially about three things: 1. As concerning my faith: 2. As concerning my
repentance: 3. As concerning my charity.

The Sum of the Sum. Our Catecheticall Doctrine consists on this (...), or
five Pillars.
(...) The Doctrine of the Law. (...), The Doctrine of Faith. (...) The
Doctrine of Preaching. (...), The Doctrine of Prayer. (...), The Doctrine of
the Sacraments.
The Sum of all.
God Created me by his Power.
Christ Redeemed me by his Mercy.
The holy Spirit Sanctifies me by his Grace.
PRAYERS.
A Prayer in the morning at your rising.
I Laid me down and slept, and rose up again, for the Lord sustained me* Now I
beseech the same Lord, even for Christ's sake, who of his good grace has
preserved me this last night, and brought me safe to the light of this day, to
keep me in his fear, that I may love him heartily, and serve him since^ely
from this time forth for evermore. Amen.

Or thus.

I Laid me down, and quietly
I slept, and rose again:
For why? I know assuredly,
The Lord did me sustain.
O Lord, which now of thy good grace
Have brought me to this light,
Grant me (for Christ's sake) now and aye
To love and serve thee right.
A short Meditation or Prayer, for the whol^ fore-noone, which you may often
revolve in your mind, as you are at work, or going about your business.
PSALM 119.5.
O Lord that my ways were made so direct, that I might keep thy Statutes; so
should I not be confounded whilst I have respect unto all thy Commandments.

Or thus.

O Would to God it might thee please
my ways so to address,
That I might both in heart and voice
thy Laws keep and confess.
So should no shame my life attaint
whilst I thus set mine eyes,
And bend my mind always to muse
on thy sacred decrees.
Grace before meat for one person.
LOrd bless these good creatures of thine to my use, and sanctify me ever to
thy holy service, through Jesus Christ my Lord and only savior.

Or thus,

GOod Lord so fit me for thy self,
and these good gifts for me:
That I may daily die to sin,
and ever live to thee. Amen.
Grace before meat for more persons.
LOrd bless us and these good gifts that we are about to receive of thy
bounteous liberality, through the merits of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus.

God save his Church, our King and Realm, God send us peace of conscience and
life everlasting. Amen.

Or thus.

THou God of Glory, King of bliss,
which giv'st our bodies food;
Give it such strength Lord by thy word,
that it may may do us good.
God save his Church, and holy flock,
our gracious King defend:
Lord make us careful by thy grace
our lives for to amend. Amen.
Grace after meat for one person.
LOrd I praise thy holy name for this good refreshing; I beseech thee good Lord
make me truly thankful for all thy loving mercies in Jesus Christ.

Or thus.

AS thou have fed my body, Lord,
with these good gifts of thine:
So cause me now and evermore
to praise thy power divine. Amen.
Grace after meat for more persons.
THe Lord of heaven and earth, who has created, redeemed, and presently fed
us, be blessed and praised both now and evermore.

God save his Church, preserve the Kings Majesty, grant the Gospel a free
passage, and hasten the coming of our Lord Christ Jesus. Amen.

Or thus.

THe Lord, that has created us,
and us redeemed from thrall,
And now has fed us graciously,
be blessed and praised for all.
His Church God save, our King maintain,
and to the Gospel send
Free passage over all the earth,
unto the worlds end. Amen.
A short Meditation or Prayer for the whole afternoon, which you may often say
as you are at your work, or going about your business.
PSALM. 143.10.
TEach me (O Lord) to do the thing that pleases thee, for thou art my God: let
thy loving Spirit lead me forth into the land of righteousness. Quicken me
(O Lord) for thy names sake, and for thy righteousness sake bring my soul out
of trouble.

Or thus.

TEach me to do thy will, for thou,
thou art my God, I say^
Let thy good Spirit into the land
of goodness me convey.
For thy names sake with quickening grace
alive do thou me make;
And out of trouble bring my soul,
even for thy justice sake.
A Prayer in the Evening at your going to bed.
MY bed is as a grave, and my sleep is the image of death. Thou LORD, who
only know whether I shall awake again, vouchsafe of thy gracious
goodness, even for Christ's sake, to receive me to thy mercy; that, whether I
wake or sleep, I may be thine. And in this confidence I will lay me down in
peace and take my rest, for it is thou Lord only that make me dwell in
safety.

Or thus.

I Go to bed as to my grave,
God knows when I shall wake:
But Lord for Christ's sake I thee pray
me to thy mercy take.
In peace therefore lie down will I
taking my rest and sleep,
For thou only wilt me O Lord
alone in safety keep.
A Prayer to be said before Catechizing.
OPen our eyes (O Lord) that we may see the wondrous things of thy law: that
by them, as by a glass, we may see our own weakness, and by our weakness
our wickedness, and by them both, our wretchedness. Then cause the sweet
comforts and consolations contained in thy Gospel to shine into our souls by
a true and a lively faith in Christ Jesus; beseeching thee to bless all those
thine own holy ordinances which thou have given us for the increasing of that
faith. And Lord grant that our dry and stony hearts may, by the sweet dewes and
showers of thy heavenly Spirit effectually working in those ordinances, be so
moistened and softened that as good ground they may be ever yielding forth good
fruit to the glorifying of thy Name, to the suppressing of sin, and to the
increasing of virtue, through Jesus Christ our Lord: to whom with the Father
and the holy Spirit, be all glory and praise, now and for evermore. Amen.

Or this Psalm, which is all one in effect with the Prayer, may be sung by
the company, the master of the family beginning it
Creation.
OPen our eyes (Lord) of thy Law
the wonders for to see,
And thereby know our weak estate,
and doleful misery.
Redemption.
Then Lord vouchsafe thy Spirit of grace
to send into our mind,
That in thy Son our Savior
we may redemption find.
Sanctification.
And of this grace confirm the faith
by all those means (O Lord)
Of Preaching, Prayer, and Sacraments,
which thou do u^ afford.
And grant the use of these, in us
may make thy grace to spring,
That to thee in thy glory Lord
we may for ever sing.
The Doxologie.
All glory to the Trinity
that is of mightiest most,
The living Father and the Son,
and eke the holy Ghost:
As it has been in all the time
that has been heretofore,
As it is now, and so shall be
hence forth for evermore.
A Prayer to be said after Catechizing.
O Almighty Lord God, which have taught us in thy holy Word how that thou have
Created us for thy service: we pray thee give us grace to remember thee our
Maker, even all our days, committing our souls unto thee in well-doing, as
unto a faithful Creator. Lord knit our hearts unto thee, that we may for ever
fear thy Name.

And thou, most gracious Savior, which have wrought such a plentiful
redemption for us: we pray thee give us grace to live so much time as
remains in the flesh, not to our selves, but to thee that have redeemed us;
knowing that we were delivered out of the hands of our enemies, that we might
serve thee in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life.

And thou, O blessed Spirit, the Lord and giver of life, which bestowest that
precious gift of faith upon us by which we live, and for the confirmation of
that faith, have set up the holy ordinances of Preaching, Prayers and
Sacraments in the Church: we humbly beseech thee give us grace to make such a
conscience in the use thereof, that our faith being thereby settled, we may have
peace toward God through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: that so waiting
upon thee in those holy means thou have afforded us for our growth in piety
here, we may for ever enjoy thy comfortable presence in that everlasting
kingdom of glory hereafter. Amen and Amen.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the holy Ghost be with us all evermore. Amen.

O^ this Psalm, gathered out of the Catechism, may be sung by the Company.
Creation.
O Lord, that have us ^ade and framed
by thine almighty Word,
Grant us thy servants of thy power
the praises to record.
Lord knit our hearts so fast to thee
that we may fear thy name;
And muse on all thy wondrous works,
and spread thy worthy fame.
Redemption.
O Blessed Lord that have us plucked
from out of Satan's hands,
And wrought our full Redemption
from his accursed bands:
This goodness laid before our face
make u^ behold always,
That of thy truth we may the trac^
trea^ surely all our days.
Sanctification.
O holy Ghost, the Lord of life
and fountain of all good,
By whom our souls are Sanctified
through faith in Christ his blood:
We pray thee let thine ordinances
have such power to our mind,
That in the use of them we may
true joy and comfort find.
The Eulogie
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the love of God the Father,
The comfort of the holy Spirit
be with us now and ever.
JAMES 5.13. Is any among you afflicted? let him pray: is any merry? let him
sing.
HEB. 10.24.25. Let us consider one another to provoke unto love and to good
workers not forsaking the fellowship that we have among our selves, to the
manner of some is; but let us exhort one another, and that so much the more,
because ye see the day draws near.
COLOSS. 3.16.17. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom,
teaching and admonishing one another; in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual
Songs, singing with a grace in your hearts to the Lord; and whatsoever ye do
in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God,
even the Father, by him.
THO. VIC

FINIS.

