historiated border IH^S
Pray

faithfully,

R

decorative cartouche containing part of author's initial (Richard Vennard) V

decorative cartouche containing part of author's initial (Richard Vennard) and
never

cease.




Englands Joy.
E
E ENglands bliss, and blessed Queen,
L Live your praises in perfection,
I In your Subjects hearts be seen
Z Zeal in humble loves subjection:
A Angels in your love attend you,
B Blessed JESUS ever bless you,
E Ever so his hand defend you:
T That no harmfull thought distress you:
H Holy powers of Heaven preserve you:
A And, all faithful subjects serve you.
R
R Royal Graces ever grace you,
E Ever true Love live about you,
G Glorious Angels arms embrace you:
I Joy in England none without you,
N None but Grace, and Virtue note you,
A And the world for wonder Cote you.


Pro patria quisque
historiated border Faith.
personification of the virtue of Faith

Loyalty.
personification of the virtue of Loyalty

Valor.
personification of the virtue of Valor

Wisdom.
personification of the virtue of Wisdom

Hosts vt serpentem.
depiction of St. George slaying the dragon

Englands Joy.
E
E ENglands bliss, and blessed Queen,
L Live your praises in perfection,
I In your Subjects hearts be seen
Z Zeal in humble loves subjection:
A Angels in your love attend you:
B Blessed JESUS ever bless you,
E Ever so his hand defend you:
T That no harmfull thought distress you:
H Holy powers of Heaven preserve you:
A And, all faithful subjects serve you.
R
R Royal Graces ever grace you,
E Ever true Love live about you,
G Glorious Angels arms embrace you:
I Joy in England none without you,
N None but Grace, and Virtue note you,
A And the world for wonder Cote you.
Rejoice O England, sing, and clap thy hands:
For, God himself, does for thy safety fight:
No foe so great, but that thy force withstands:
It is so strengthened by the heavenly might.
The Irish Rebel and the Spaniardes pride:
Before thy face do fall on every side.
The Noble Lord, Mount Joy that Champion true:
Of honors choice, in Virtues Chivalry:
Has put to flight, that coward Rebel Crew
Of proud Tyrone, and made the Spaniards fly.
Don John de Aquila with all his train:
With little comfort are returned to Spain.
The Irish Rebels, now do keep their Caves:
Amidde the woods; like Wolves or ravening beasts:
Where all like out-lawes, or uncivil slaves:
on grass and shamrocks, now they make their feasts:
O England, never, better news can be:
Then thus to hear, how God does fight for thee.
Now shall thou hear of nothing but confusion:
Upon the head of all thy harmefull foes:
Now shall the Rebels find the full conclusion,
That in the end of all Rebellion grows.
And Spain shall fret, to see his pride pulled down:
And God preserve, thy Sovereign and her Crown.
Now shall the Pope with all his practice fail:
The hope of Traitors all be overthrown:
Nor Pope, nor Spaniard now shall none prevail:
To do thee hurt, that but defend'st thine own:
Now serve thy God, and give him thanks for all:
And keep thy faith, and thou shall never fall.
Be true I say, and faithful to thy God:
And ever loyal to thy Sovereign Queen:
For whose loves sake, he does forbear his rod.
That has been long in other countries seen:
He will not suffer any to destroy thee:
But overthrow their forces that annoy thee.
In Eighty Eight, how did he by his hand,
Scatter the Navy of the Spanish fleet?
And now in Ireland, in their hoped land,
How has he trodden their forces under feet?
Where noble Mount Joy in deserved fame:
Eternized has the honor of his name.
He bears the Sun, and like the Sun he drives:
Proud swelling clouds to wander with the wind:
And under our bright Sun of light he lives:
Who gives a gracious light to such a mind.
As, so deserves her Grace, to give him light:
That he be ever gracious in her sight.
Now let all hearts of happy England pray:
Unto our God of glorious mercies power,
That he will still be our almighty stay:
Our Rock, our Castle, and our heavenly tower:
That in his mercy, we may fearelesse live:
And to his gracious love all glory give.
Let us still pray, that he will still preserve:
Our gracious Queen in his eternal grace:
And give us grace both him and her to serve:
And all unfaithful Traitors to deface:
To spend our lives, but in our countries cause:
And be obedient, to her blessed laws.
Rebellion is the sin of witchcraft named,
And witches are but Devils in their natures,
Oh hellish fiends, to the devil framed.
Which so deceive but the accursed creatures.
Oh cursed sin that ever man should know thee,
God bless all English, and good Christians fro thee.
And, since that truth, does try out every thought,
Wherein the depth of every sense is sounded,
Against that truth, who has the Treason wrought,
That, on ungracious reason has been grounded.
What ever fortune for a time do fall,
Confusions shame will be the end of all.
Which shameful end the God of endless glory,
Has given the Rebels and their wicked friends:
While valiant Mountioyes noble victory,
Truth blows abroad in fame that never ends.
While Irish shrugs, and Spaniards frowns do prove,
The bliss of England in the heavens above.
What shall I say? the Irish Rebels fled:
The Spaniards gone, with sorrow, shame and loss:
Tyrone I hope will shortly loose his head:
The Spaniards glad, to put up all their cross:
Has taken an oath, to hye them home to Spain:
And never wish to bring their Arms again.
Thus in the Rebel, all hie ruins point:
The Spaniard, staying but a wind for Spain:
Tyrone in hourly danger of a joint:
And Irelands peace, I hope will grow again:
God surely pleased in this work of peace,
Where Truth shall flourish, and Rebellion cease.
God grant it so, and in his Gracious hand:
Long bless the days, of our dear Sovereign Queen:
And make her Empress of this blessed land:
Till no more land within the world be seen:
And make her Armies, evermore victorious:
And all her Kingdoms, in thy mercy glorious.
Bless her Lord Mount-ioy, with that Mount of Joy:
That Noble Truth, in truest Nobleness:
May stand so strong, as nothing may destroy:
But, in the height of honors happiness:
May by the virtue of best valor proved,
Of God and man, be blessed and beloved.
Bless all her army with those fearelesse hearts:
I hat soon may bring the Rebel in subjection:
And make a jest of all those wooden darts:
That do not love a steeled coats complexion:
And quail the hearts, or cut off all the heads:
That so the pathe of proud Rebellion treads.
Bless all her Counsel, and her faithful friends.
Court, Cities, Countries all in such a peace:
As all the world, that sees proud Traitors ends,
May cause the root, of all rebellion cease:
Such peace, and plenty, love, and concord send:
That we may sing thy Glory without end.
Bless still I pray our gracious Sovereign Queen:
With all the blessings of thy holy Grace:
And let it never in our Land be seen:
But in thy Mercy we may have a place:
Nor Mount-ioyes fame die in obliuions pen:
To all of these, all England say, Amen.
For all Honorable, Virtuous, and Noble spirited Lords, Ladies, and all other
her Majesty's faithful Subjects whatsoever.
AL faithful Subjects of this blessed land,
That serve the only Angel of a Queen:
In whose true grace, and by whose gracious hand*
The heavenly substance of her sex is seen.
Let not your hearts, nor spirits cease to pray,
For her lives blessed everlasting day.
For in her life lives all your happiness,
She is the Sun that lights your Element
Her Majesty, your wonders worthiness,
Her Virtue, your honors ornament.
Her Favor, your best loyalties regard:
Her Grace, your service royallest reward.
Pray then, I say, and prayer never cease,
Unto the God of all eternal glory:
Her life, her health, her comfort to increase,
To Englands honor, never ending story.
That she may breathe an everlasting breath,
And they may pine in hell, that wish her death.
R. V.

AMEN.

