THE ARRAIGNMENT OF SLANDER PERIVRY Blasphemy, and other malicious Sins,
showing sundry examples of Gods Judgments against the Ofenders.

As Well by the Testimony of the Scriptures, and of the Fathers of the primative
Church as likewise out of the reports of Sir Edward Dier, Sir Edward Cook,
and other famous Lawiers of this King dome.

Published by Sir William Vaughan Knight.

LONDON. Printed for Francis Constable, and are to be sold in Paul's Church
yeard at the sign of the Crane. 1630.

TO THE LORDS OF HIS MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy Counsel.
INImitation of that Burgundian Boo^c, that saluted the French King with a
present of Radish roots, and also of the Persians, who by reason of their
countrey-custome durst not Ire salutatum Satrapes sine muner^ magnos, Greet
their great Lords without some grateful gift:

Right prudent ^^dpr^^^dent Lords, I present a mean object to your indicious
sights. A mean object indeed, if ye regard the worth of the person that
presents it, or the person whom it concerns, being the spiteful Spirit of
Detraction, yet tolerable perhaps, if ye receive the presentours ready will
with the reflection of your comfortable countenance: but most noble, and worthy
to be ennobled with your patronage, if ye respect the means and Circles, (as
I know you do) whereby this Spirit is Coniured and Convicted, even by the
sword of Angels, the mystical sword, the word of God: and also by the sword of
man, Alexanders sword, the decider of our Gordian doubts. With the former
sword Michea confuted the false Prophets of Samaria, Michael confounded the
detracting Dragon, and Michaels followers here on earth the false Prophet of
our Christian Church, that d^ceiuer, that deprauer of the holy Ghost, and of
his precious properties. With the latter sword men punish men malicious men.
With this sword a King plagued Midas for his doltish Detractio^: and a Queen
plagued Niobe for her courtizan comparison. Whether these objects be noble,
tolerable, mean, or as waste leaves good for nothing, save for Apothecaries
to wrap about their drugs, I submit them, and compromit them together with my
self to your Honors grave arbitrament, in hope that ye will ascribe all
imperfections to my want of perfections, to the brevity of time, and to the
sodainnesse of the accident.

For the worlds great Thunderer having lately taken unto him my dear wife by a
sulphurous dampe of lightning, and shaken some part of my house with a
thunderclap, has likewise struck me with such an amazement in mine
understanding, with beholding out of my tabernacle of flesh and blood the
glorious gleames of his power, that truly I must needs confess my self to be
somewhat backward in penning and painting out this handy-worke of his, almost
as ominous to me, as his hand writing was to Balthazar in Babylon. To this I
may adioyne multitudes of impediments as well of public causes and suites
abroad, as also of mine own private affairs at home. All which concurring
upon me in confused heaps, some by importunity of office, some of necessity,
and some by Satan's suggestion commmonly every day since that fatal blast,
caused such unpolished points, as in the reading may occur to your learned
view.

And yet for all this, Right honorable, I had not so abruptly at this time
hastened on mine abortiue work to your presence, were it not, because I would
stay betimes the forward steps of Satan, and also because I would stop the
vnpure mouths of prattling Momes, and tatling Niobes, who inter Bacchanalia
amidst their pots of drink, their pipes of Tobacco, and idle fits of iollity
establishing the shallow foundation of their reports upon the flying and lying
rumors of licentious libellers, do blasphemously blaze abroad to the
derogation and prejudice of the powerful Lord of lightnings, that the Devil
our spiritual Tempter acted this terrible tragedy. Some other times they give
out, that the same Devil coniured up at mortal men's commands, took her away
body and all, or at leastwise some principal part of her body. Which
sacrilegious imputation as I know Gods elect do already both loath and laugh
to scorn: so I doubt not but all others shall by this present Treatise learn
to leave it off as a poisoned paradoxe.

Again, there is not wanting a sort of suspicious Critickes, who arrogating to
themselves the gift of Prophecy, or revelation from above, do make a taunting
table-talke of this heavenly visitation in lieu of a grace or salt to season
their meats withal, by attributing this unexpected chance to some secret
sins of hers. Which Scrthian censure all her acquaintance will contradict,
and condemn of calumniation. All her familiar acquaintance will consent with
one voice, with one mind in the scrutinie of her trial, that she lived as
innocently, as industriously, as honestly, and as humbly toward God and man,
as any whatsoever in all her country, without deceit, without Detraction. And
if this be a Demonstration infallible, that out of sure premises we infer a
sure conclusion, that none dies ill, who has lived well, (for a good tree
ever bears good fruit) and that we must judge men by their lives, and not by
their deaths, then dare I assuredly assume, that she died as guiltless as
those, on whom the Tower of Siloc fell. By the stayres of hell she swiftly
climed above the stars of heaven. By lightning flames (as Elias in fi^ry
Chariots) her soul soared up aloft into the Region of eternal light.

Othersome in mine own country more passionate, because I reform disorders,
and would redress certain misdemeanures whereof they claim prescription as
an hereditarie or necessary evil, do euaporate these uncharitable speeches
touching my proceedings, that God sent these prodigious events, as prodromes
and forerunners of his indignation conceived against me for my severity of
justice. Summum ius, summa iniuria. Extreme justice, extreme injury. Which
Detraction of theirs I will only countermine with that grave authority,
interpreting old Augustines honest mind; Rash judgment hurts not the person
that is judged, but rather him, that so rashly judges, Quia cu^nvolumus aliena
per iram coercere, grauiora committimus, by reason that when we would correct
the faults of other men in passion, our selves commit more grievous faults.

Another kind of Detractours measuring our actions by the ell of their own
guilty consciences and usurping the Popish parts of Ghostly Confessors, do
parley in private among themselves, that our just Jehovah darted this
lament^ole mishap, as a mystical scourge for some silent sins of mine. At
which accusation I will ^^t equivocate, nor endeavor to acquit my self
^hereof with the presumptuous Pharisee, for I frankly acknowledge, as one of
Adams progeny, that I am thoroughly tainted with the leprosy of sin: whereof
I expect no deliverance at all by any earthly Aesculaptus, save only by the
fiery Serpent which healed the Israelites. I am carnal as S. Paul said, and
sold under sin. Yet notwithstanding, if sin present do not please me, I
know that sins past shall never harm me. But as there be differences and
degrees in sins, wherein for the most part I shake hand with these
Detractours, so dare I partly adventure to clear my soul from one particular
sin, (like as Luther justified himself from avarice) that my nature ever
abhorred injustice or partiality, though I might have hazarded the loves of my
nearest kinsfolks. Let impious Ismael, and envious Haman (whose words are
swords) combine together, let them throw forth what Detractions they can, like
stumbling blocks in my way: I pass not for them. On the contrary I will
glory with that Gentile in Tacitus: Fulgorem bonorum a me nunquam praelatum,
excubias ac labores vt vnum ex militibus pro incolumitate Imperatoris malle.
That I never preferred bright shining goods, but chose rather watchings and
labors, as one of the common soldiers for the Emperors safety, and for the
wea^^ of my Country.

Such disgraceful libelles spurging up from the stem of blasphemous
Detraction were diuulged and dispersed abroad in all places far and nigh.
Which when I had thoroughly ruminated and reuo^ued in my mind, looking withal
into the depth of their cankred corruptions, how that our heavenly King is
highly injured thereby, as also how that his Divine titles are daily
dishonored, despised, and detracted with their wilful, wanton, and unwise
speeches, whereby that member or outward sheath wherein our thoughts are
folded, which should be the faithful Interpreter ^the soul, Oraculum animae,
speculum mentis, miraculum naturae, is commonly perverted from Christian
purity to wilful blasphemy, so that Nazianzens saying is verified in our
age, Lingua^dimidiam humanorum vitiorum partem sibi vend^cat, half the vices,
which we commit, are committed by the tongue. Nay, our whole life is full of
the tongues wickedness: Tota vita nostra linguae delictis est referta, as
Basil wrote. At this prodigious degeneration my spirit seemed to sparkle, as a
blazing star within me, portending miseries to such mischievous wretches,
yea, it burned as a blast of fire in the furnace of my body, incensing the
principal powers thereof, (as kinds of green fuel ordained for this
purpose) to consume some of those saplesse shrubbes, or at least (as smoking
firebrands) to terrific children from playing too much with sacred mysteries,
from laughing, like unnatural Cham at Noah's nakedness, from mocking at
Elishaes reverend head, and (to speak like a Poet) from plucking ouerlong at
Jupiters beard, from polluting their fathers ashes.

These, these motives, Right noble Lords, enforced me to expose abroad mine
untimely Embrion, not altogether shapt as well as I intended, nor yet grown to
that maturitie, as the Satyrist answeredin defense of Virgils Aeneads.

Vt ramale vetus vaegrandi subere coctum:

Like an old bough full ripe with bark.

But what perfect essence nature denies unto it, or what complete form Art
conceales from it, I humbly crave that all may be construed in good part by
your Honorsboundlesse bounties, whereto, as to a divine Oracle or discreet
Rhadamanthes, I fly for verdict in the behalf of this worthless work, which
once again I dedicate Dijs tutelaribus to your heroical virtues, either by
them signed ominously with print of chalk, or with coal, or (according to the
Greek custom) with the black letter (...) destinating death, to be (...).
censured worthy of immortality and of everlasting Cedar, or else to be
cancelled in perpetual oblivion and Cymmerian darkness.

To the Readers.
REaders, whether ye be men or women, kind or cursed, friendly or frumping, all
is one to me. I respect not your kinds, kindred or kindness; your kinds being
but natures instruments for propagation of mankind. And for other respects,
which are worldly, I force not at all, for Truth is spiritual, essential,
internal, and cares not for outward formalities. Only I weigh your tongues
the Detracting instruments of Satan sor both your genders, to the pretudice of
your dear souls. In your tongues I find no more distinction or denomination
of male and female then I find of your souls, which likewise are neither male
nor female, but al one, all alike in both your sexes. I find this original
accident coincident as well to tongues as souls, that there be good Aesops
tongues, and evil Aesops tongues; the good ordained to heavenly Hymmes, to
joyful Jubilees, to Angelical Alleluiahes: the evil tongues to taunt, to
detract, and with Jobs wife, to curse God and die.

Ye daughters of Eve, misconster not my simple speech. I tax not all your
tongues in general. There are voices of Angels, voices of Men, and voices of
Devils. The first are heavenly (as I said before) being sweet smelling
sacrifices of Christian Quiristers, or holy Oracles of the inward man. The
second earthly, as sounding brass or tinckling Cymbals. The third hellish, as
the roaring of a ravening Lion. The first I commend as the rare song of a
black Swanne. The second I mean to amend as the penitent cry of the
prodigal child. The third and hellish voice of the spirit of Detraction I
commit as the Parisians Mattens, or Scicilian Euen-song into the Dungeon of
hell, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth. These diversities of tongues and
voices sprang up from the same tree of good and evil. Out of the same Eve
(like Lycurgus his whelps, or whelpish twins) came Caine and Abell. Virtuous
Dames, let it suffice, that for your sakes I spare to play the Satyrist against
the Detracting Niobes of this age. Only I control them with a gentle check;
and because you plead in their excuse, that they be the weaker vessels, and
not enabled with such a noble courage as the man: therefore I give them the
milder bridle, the golden snaffle.

Courteous Readers, I speak not to you: for they that be whole, need no
Physicians. Captious Readers, on you I call. Behold, here are bridling bits for
your biting mouths. Readers, yield to your Riders, show your selves pliable,
peaceable, and ready to receive convenient chastisements. Let not your
customary hold of f^asting fellowship, of giddy gossipping, or of Tobacco
taking, withold your minds from our Cursory Lectures. Resist the Devil, and
he will fly from you.

But I pray, what fantasy draws your wits astry, ^ee sharp tongued
soldiers of the forlorn hope? Ye that were wont to daunt your foes bravely
in the field, to conquer Kingdoms, and beat down the enemies of Christ in
foreign soiles, why become ye now-adaies so effeminate, as to convert your
swords into words, your powerful prowess into prattling parlance? Why
degenerate ye from your famous Ancestors? Too true it is, that overmuch ease
mars your generous spirits, welfare makes you wanton, and prou^nder pricks you
forwards to turn deeds into Detractions, and in stead of Christian resolution,
to wage war with your tongues, (...), to incline to swinish companying,
carousing, and Tobacconizing: where many foul faults flock together, and (as
the nature of sin is to multiply) according to our Savior Christ's words,
where one wicked spirit is suffered to inhabit, there he brings in other
in-mates, worse spirits then himself; specially the spirit of Detraction first
gets in his head like a cunning Fox, and then by little and little enters in
with his whole body, to the utter over throw of man's little world; So that
Christians fall out to be Antichristians, Apostles Apostates, and manly
soldiers scoldes and scoffers.

To come nearer unto you, what is the reason that this renowned people, who
claim themselves from Brutus, are become so brutish, as to be addicted to
gossip-ales, Bride-ales, and to bacchanales, and consequently to Detractions
and descanning of other men's destinies; yea, and otherwhiles to discourse of
Gods secret judgments? Omne vitium habet patrocinium: No vice without a cl^ake:
no sin without some apish Apology. These jolly fellows being driven to this
exigent, do confess, that corrupted custom brought them to such vicious
habites. O cruel custom! O hateful habites! which work the fatal and
final ruin of souls and bodies! Nevertheless, as there is no custom but
may be altered, so for mine own part I cannot believe, that custom alone
causes man (a creature enriched with Divine reason, and enf^offed with
free will and election in many things, specially in natural and humane things)
to carouse, and then to read stammering Lectures, both on the sacred power of
God, and on their simple neighbors souls. For some carouse of custom, some
of wantonness and company. Some again delight therein, being sophistically
persuaded, that the excessive use thereof auailes much for their healths sake,
as a purger of superfluous rheumes. Others favor Tobacconisme, because they
would not seem ouer-nice, melancholicke, or men by themselves in the singular
number, and also because Tobacco might serve them in stead of salt or dry
leaders to drinking, and consequently unto Detracting: but for the most part
our Caual^ers and Gentles of the first head suck in the smoakie vapor of
Tobacco, because they might counterfeit themselves gid^y or drunken (for it is
no shame to be drunk with Tobacco) when they want copy of matter or store of
discourse. Then they fame themselves so long ravished as it were in an e^tasi^;
until after a thorough per ambulation of their barren wits, and after long
houghing, halking and hacking, they have coined some strange accident worthy
the rehersall among their boon companions. Then as though they started out of
an heavenly trance, and as the Satyrist writes:

Mobile colluerint liquido cum plasmate guttur.

Having their throats well washed with dreggish drugs: They recount tales of
Robin-hood, of Rhodomonting rouers, of Donzel del Phoebo, of a new Antichrist
borne in Babylon, of lying wonders, blazing out most blasphemous news, how
that the Devil appeared at such a time with lightning and thundering Majesty,
much about that horrible manner, as the Glorious God appeared on mount Horeb,
raised tempests both on Sea and land, not inferior to those stormy
Heteroclites of the West Indies, called the Furicanoes, shook the foundation
of the earth, battered such Gentlemen's houses, and if they had not suddenly
blessed themselves better, he had carried away with him men, women, houses, and
all right into hell. These or such like feeble fables do they scatter abroad
among their foolish Auditors, while in the mean time, the Devil, the
Schoolmasters of all lewdness, appears no where more forcibly, then in the
very midst of these uncharitable Readers, yea, and perhaps his spiritual
p^yson or poisonous spirit is exhaled and exhausted with their Tobacco and
draughts of drink into their mustie minds.

O Tongue, how is thy perfection perverted, thy sense depraved, thy sound
degenerated! How comes it to pass that the souls Ambassador is become a
turne-coate Herald! Expectaui legatum, inueni Heraldum, I expected an
honorable Ambassador, but have found a huffe-cap Herald, as our late Queen
Elizabeth of famous memory sometime nickt a presumptuous Ambassador of
Polonia. I expected to hear nothing but truth out of the mouth of Gods
similitude, specially, to his neighbor in Christ, to Christ in his members.
But (alas) I find nothing but lies and libels. Omnis homo mendax. I expected
for reformation, but have met with ruinous relapses. O Tongue, tongue, how
miserable are the effects of thy motions! Being made for a watchful clapper to
the Bell of Gods Temple, to pray for Grace, to comfort the sick, to confirm
the penitent, to confute the absurd, to confound the Detractour, why ringest
thou out such paltry peales? Why ragest thou against thy Masters will, against
thy self without just cause or need? In thy youthful time thou crakest and
vauntest of thy vain worth, bursting thy lungs welnigh with windy bragges. In
thy more mellow or maturer age thou stand elated in thine own conceit, as
though thy hoarie color has added uncontrolled trust and truth unto thy stale
assertions. In all the progress of thy wagging, in all thy proceedings, thou
abusest thy proper function: for which the Lord will not hold thee guiltless
at that universal Synod, when the heavens shall be folded together, like a
book, when our consciences, the true table-bookes of our souls shall lie open
without lies against us, and we shall yield account for every idle word.

These things expended and examined by me in the balance of understanding, and
fearing least I might participate with them in their derogatory crimes, or
encurre the penalty of traiterous Misprision toward our righteous Lord for my
cowardly conccalements, if according to that measure of spirit, which he has
bestowed upon me, I reproved them not: therefore have I published this humble
Treatise, that therein, as in a glass or map, they may behold the reflection of
their filthy faults extinguished and extirped. What do I know, whether the
great God has delivered me from diverse dangers for these or such like
purposes? To this end was I b^r^e, that I should do my best to glorify God,
and edific my country. To this end I wish with all the veins of my heart,
that what ability of wel-saying and well-doing is defective in mine own person,
the same by the Divine bounty may be liberally supplied to all others in this
present book. And that the Readers hereof may learn in sparing speech to
follow the examples of the holy Prophets and Apostles, who for their honest
admonitions and humble exhortations were ouercast with a cloud of scorn among
the reprobates of this world; or at least wise, that they imitate some of the
heathenish Philosophers, namely Pythagoras, who imposed Decennale silentium,
ten years silence on his scholars, or Socrates who for many hours together
would sit silently musing on the wonderful workmanship of God, or Arcesilas,
Solon, and other enemies of Detraction. To this end I heartily wish, that all
they, which find themselves subject to this spirit of Detraction, may be
terrified from that idle use with such magical motives of Michaels mysteries,
as I have herein inserted, like as if the Vtopian Syphograunts, the Athenian
Ostracisme, the Roman Censors, the Spanish Inquisition, or as if the statute
de scandalis magnatum, being as it were naturalis feritatis mastix, the scourge
of savage nature, had straightly bridled their lavish tongues within the
precincts of their teeth and lips.

Vos O Patricius sanguis, queis viuere fas est
Occipiti coeco, posticae occurrite sannae.
TO THE CVRIOVS PAINTERS OF CIRCLES.
IF these lines or leaves of my Circles drawn from the Center to the
circumference be not all equal, or if the points and pricks of every line
answer not the Mathematical proportion of the Circle, thou know, that
Veritas non quaerit angulos, truth respects not angles, triangles, quadrangles,
nor artificial curiosity. I care not for the enticing words of worldlings
wisdom, but I covet the Spirit of evidence and power. I covet matter more
then method. And yet I labor so to link them, that the line of nature may
stand coupled with the points of Art, that both from the Center of truth be
carried to a Christian circumference: for eue^ as the gifts of the holy Ghost be
distributed diversely, and in diverse measures to Gods children, some having but
one grain of faith being converted in the evening of their lives, and yet by
grace adopted and adjudged worthy to receive the like equal crown of glory, the
like equal wages, as those, which labored longer in the Lords harvest: so (to
compare little things with great) let thy Grace (Ingenuous Reader) or gracious
construction counteruail the unequal lines of my Circles. Where they exceed in
their dimensiue quantity, there oppose their distributive quality for a
counter-ballance,

Et sic omnes lineae ductae a centro ad circumferentiam sunt aequales.

THE FIRST CIRCLE OF THE SPIRIT OF DETRACTION, CONIVRED AND CONVICTED.
Di^ided into Lineaments.

LINEAMENT. I.
1 To whose capacity the description of Spirits is difficult, and to whose it
is easy.

2 The Authors invocation to the Godhead, through whose only operation the
spirit of Detraction is to be coniured and convicted.

THAT which is invisible, transcendent, and ^
not to be understood in the land of mortal creatures, (such as is the
description of Spirits) cannot distinctly be disposed according to the
prescription of curious Artists: by reason that our knowledge here on earth is
subject to mutations, vanity of vanities, varnished only to the outward man,
and quickly vanished either through distemperature of the brain, old age, or
death: and also, by reason that a spirit in substance and subsistence is
supernaturally whole without Multiplication, Diversity, or Part, somewhat
prodigious unto Natures view. Yet notwithstanding these infirmities, we may
confer about the metaphysicall mystery of Spirits, contesting with the sword
of the Spirit, the word of God; not for haughty ostentation, but for humble
edification, comparing spiritual things with spiritual things. The natural
man perceiues not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness
unto him neither 1. Cor. cap. 2.
can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned: but he that is
spiritual, discerns all things. He that submits his knowledge to the
touchstone of knowledge, to the highest power, scorning all Peacocke-plumes of
Apocry^hall tradition, and of old Adams impurities, discerns all things. The
Clerks of China say, that themselves do see with two eyes, the Europeans with
one eye; and that all the rest of the world are stark blind, not having any
eyes at all. Even so the souls of the supernall China, the Church truly
triumphant, by looking on him, which ouerlooketh all things, do spiritually
discern all things, and do know as they are known. The regenerated Christian
1. Cor. cap. 13.
discerns (though glimmering wise, or winking through a dark glass with one
eye) many things apperteyning to the lowly works and lovely fruits of the new
man, which is renewed into knowledge after the Image of him that made Col. cap.
3.
him. But the natural man confined within natures compass, can never
discourse, no nor dream once of Divine affairs. While the flesh preuailes
against the Spirit, our knowledge is as it were stifled with a deadly earthly
dampe, and cannot appear in that conspicuous manner, as when our Epicurean
natures become curbed or crucified. There is such iustling and bustling, such
strining and struggling betwixt the flesh and the soul, that Gods peace is
oftentimes to both their miseries infringed. The Mistress therefore must
straightly correct her servant, and that betimes, before she attain unto her
stubborn age, left then she choose rather to break, then to bow unto her
wholesome will.

The austere consideration of this our humane fragility, caused the Apostle to
write after this manner: I tame 1. Cor. 9.
my body, and bring it into subjection, lest while I preach to others, I my
self become a castaway: For the soul that walloweth in sensuality, in fat,
blood, and gross humors, can never enter into the speculation of spiritual
comfort. The smokie vapors, which breathe from thence into the brain, do
interpose a darksome mist of blockishnes before her eyes of understanding;
whereof let a fat paunch bear me instance. How cau'st thou (says the
Satyrist) meditate on any thing praiseworthy, which have such a large Ewer
hanging forth a foot and a half from thy body?

-- Cum tibi, Calue,
Pinguis aqualiculus propenso sesquipede extat? Persius Satyr. 1.

Like as a Candle put in an earthen pot, enlightneth only the pot, but being
therhence removed into a Lantern, illuminates the whole room with a far
greater splendour then before: so the understanding spirit of man, eclipsed with
the foggie interposition of sensual pleasures, lies infatuated and besotted,
like an Abbey-lubber, not once able to cry out, Abba, Father: but thence
recalled by the holy Spirit of God, and refined with competent fasting at due
times, with contrite humility and convenient meditations, it forgets the
vanities of this cloudy world, and frames it self wholly to spiritual
contemplation. And finally, separated and singled out from the bodies prison,
it shines brighter then any star. Then Reason shines without eclipse of
error, Wisdom without ignorance, and Memory without oblivion. Then shall we
be able to contemplate with the eye of Faith, the awefull Majesty of the mighty
Trinity, the in effable and inestimable felicity of our fellows Saints. Then
shall we comprehend the mystical messages of the heavenly Spirits, ascending
and descending in Chariots of sacred fire, to the behoof of our Christian
brethren, and inuisibly instructing the Church on earth; like as themselves are
both instructed and inspired of their Prince of zeal.

But what am I, that presume to weaue a work of such wonderful forms in such
a base and broken loome? How 2
dare I, with King Vzziah, burn incense unto the Lord, that am not sanctified,
nor of the tribe of Leui? how dare I, that 2. Chron cap. 26.
am in his presence more mean then the meanest moth or Atome, more abject then
any Ant; how dare I, being so mean an abject, aspire to set forth the objects
of his wondrous works? Retire, O my soul, to the Soul of thy soul, the
Life of thy life, the Lord of life, as to the celestial center of all
perfections. The Sunshine of his mercy may dispell thy darkesome scurfe of
Leprosy, and dispense with thy Bayards boldness. Behold the^, most mighty
Monarch, thy poor Publican afraid of thine anger, ashamed of his ignorance,
conuerts himself unto thee. Correct by the inspiration of thy Spirit, this
aspiring enterprise of mine, which I intend for the discerning of Spirits, and
disabling of the maleuolent Spirit of Detraction. O Lord of incomprehensible
goodness, grant me my suit: and because I am a m^n of uncircumcised and
polluted lips, let one of thy glorious winged Seraphines touch my mouth, that
being Esa. cap. 6.
purified, I may utter nothing but truth. The way of man is not in himself
neither is it in man to walk and to direct his Iere. cap. 6.
steps Measure thou my steps o heavenly Spirit, mortify my ^o^uptuous thoughts
of flesh and blood, lighten mine internal eyes, that I may lift my lumpish
spirit to spiritual cogitations, and apply my misty mind to thine eternal
influence, which cannot be seen at all with mortal sight, but only with most
pure intellectual minds, as thy servant Augustine confessed: Trinitas
Diui^arum personaru^ non nisi purgatissimis mentius cernitur. The eye of sense
Aug. lib. 1. Trin.
and the eye of reason are both too dim for discerning thee. O illuminate my
soul with the eye of faith; so that my flesh being yoaked to my soul, my
soul unto reason, my reason unto says, I may courageously conquer and
conjure down the Scrich-Owle of darkness into the dungeon of hell. Purge me
with thy precious pills, lest in reprehending the Spirit of Detraction in
others, my self do fall into the same trains, by the she suggestions of that
Evil one, who watches hourly (like a wily wolf) to circumuent thy silly
sheep. And thou my soul, praemonita praemunita, forewarned fore-armed, do
thy best to charm this spiteful Spirit, with charitable Characters of deep
Divinity: when he ascended up on high, he led captivity Ephe cap. 4. and Psalm
6. 4.
captive, and gave gifts unto men. By virtue of these glorious gifts, the gifts
of the Spirit, by the cross of our Savior Christ, conjure him up and down,
that his cousenages and cheating craft may appear to his clawbacke Clients. To
all other charms the Adder is deaf; he stops his ears, and will not
obey, charm we never so wisely. Jesus he knows, and Paul he knows, but who
Act. cap. 19.
are we? It is impossible for any kingdom to continue long, which is at jar
and war within it self. To what purpose then stands Medaeas Magic in
firreting out of Fiends? To what end seek thou, O Sibill, to conjure down
Cerberus the hel-hound of darkness? What auailes your cunning, O Circe and
Calypso? Can Degon stand before the Ark of God? No certainly. Therefore in
vain do Medaea, Circe, Calypso, and Sibilla labor to exercise their
exorcismes and shallow sorceries within the Circle; nay within sight of that
field, where one grain offaith is sown. In vain serve Witches wreathes
where God is worshipped. In vain sings he,

-- Bacchare frontem
Cingite, ne vati noceat mala lingua future.
With Bacchar bind the Poets brow,
Lest wicked tongues him overthrow,
Though men speak never so precisely, never so pregnantly, though they speak
the words of Angels; yet if their speeches be not filed within the Circle of
Divine wisdom, nor linked within the chain of Christian charity, the Church of
God will never repute so catholic and so potent a Spirit as this of Detraction
quite coniured and convicted. For (as that Roman Critic girded a vicious
Senator, saying, Who can abide to hear thee judge like grave Cato, whom the
world knows to be as greedy as Crassus, Platarch.
and as gluttonous as Lucullus?) Truly, for my part, I cannot more fitly
compare such glozing Scholars, then to a kind of glow-wormes, which because
they gliue and shine in the nights, the weaker sort of people have mistaken for
Sprites and Bugs. They therefore, that will rightly overthrow their spiritual
foes, must not shoot outwardly into painted ceremonies, but into the source and
spring of Goodness. Descend then, ye fiery pillars of faith, and quicken our
incomposed Chaos. Disperse away our Egyptian darkness, that we may pass on our
journey by night as well as day, not only through the red Seas of Detractions,
but also through the dangerous deserts of this world, into the land of promise,
the land that flows with milk and honey of eternal life; where our
consciences shall for ever rest secured from all future furies.

LINEAMENT II.
1. That the true means to convict the Spirit of Detraction, is the Meditation
on Heavenly mysteries, and on the operation of goodness.

2. Man's curiosity in prying into Gods nature, stinted by a non vltra.

3. The description of some of Gods attributes.

4. That his description is too excellent ^or man's apprehension.

5. That Good or Evil cannot come to mankind without his will.

BEfore I sound out the poisonous power of the Spirit of Detraction, it is
necessary first, 1
that I begin with my homely talent to discourse somewhat of his immensiue
glory, who is Prima veritas in essendo, and dicendo, and primus omnium motor:
the first verity in being and speaking, and the first mouer of all; and so by
degrees to descend into the numbers and attributes both of the good Spirits,
which attend their Creator, and likewise of the bad spirits which beleaguer us
with their spiritual suggestions out of darkness. In the mean time, I adjure
and conjure thee, thou false spirit of Detraction, to be silent, and not to
interrupt my consecrated speech. Avoid Satan, auaunt taunting Tempter. Avoid I
charge thee, In the name of the great Jehovah. Auaunt, again and again I
charge thee, By the omnipotent Spirit of the Word Incarnate, by all the names
and means, which are warranted unto us in holy Writ O blessed names! O blessed
means, which prevail against the gates of Hell! O blessed Vicar of Christ's
Church; Gods Register of charitable Charters, which inrols within the book of
my soul, I mean, within my conscience, this warrant of faith, that serious
speculation on heavenly mysteries, and on the operation of goodness, (and that
with admiration rather then with affectation) treades down the head of that
old Enchanter, and quite tramples under foot his false faculties; whose
spiritual spite sophisticate with subtle spells, with Sardonicall sports, and
Siren-like songs, I doubt more then all the Papists palpable Spirits and real
Devils, devised for the most part to gull the simpler sort.

O Father of al things visible and invisible, if I presumptuously pry into the
maze of thy mystical nature (as sometimes 2
did a Philosopher of Greece) the more I muse, the more I stand amazed. I find
those ancient Characters of Non vltra sometimes engraven on Hercules his
pillars, firmly imprinted in my curious brain. My soul sees no other objects
then infinite Entity, Eternity, Immensity, Immutability, Impassibility,
Immortality, all life, all motion, all goodness, all truth, all unity, all
perfection.

O my Sovereign God, if I contemplate thine understanding, 3
my poor understanding being but a sparkle in respect of a world of fire,
fails me, and, as a candle at the flash of a strong lightning, suddenly
extinguisheth: for in thine interminate understanding there resides infinite
wisdom, omnipotency, providence, predestination, true reason, true knowledge,
and the representation of all thy workmanship. If I enter into the speculation
of thy gracious and inexhausted will, I shall want words significant to
express the singular proprieties which depend thereon, as comfortable grapes,
on one goodly cl^ster or bunch. Thy Charity, thy Justice, Mercy, Clemency
Love, Patience, Magnificence, with other attributes which we do not deserve to
know, attend on thy powerful will.

O mighty Deity of unsearchable worth, as thy Prophet David said, Such
knowledge is too wonderful and excellent 4
for me, I cannot attain unto it. Whither then shall I Psalm. 139.
go from thy Spirit, or whither shall I go from thy presence? If I climb up
to heaven, thou art there: If I go down into hell, thou art there also. Thou
beholdest all our doings with exceeding patience. Thou art wholly in the world
(as man's soul is wholly in the brain and body, and dispersed through every
part of the same) and see as in a manifest map all the world over. Thou art
present with us in our closest counsels, in our closest closets. Thou art
decked with light as it were with a garment. Thou art most Psalm. 104.
glorious in heaven, as man's soul in the head is most conspicuous, and
therehence (like the Sun with his influence) illuminatest all places, and
searchest the very secrets of our hearts and reins; for the light dwells
with thee. Thou art a most pure, perfect, and active form, without any mixture
or composition of matter or form, or distinction of parts. Thou art the
beginning and the end of all things; the beginning without beginning, and the
end without end.

To end before I have scant begun, thou art al sight, all hearing, all
understanding, all reason, the origin of all 5
goodness. Totus oculus, totus auditus, totus (...), totus ratio, fons omnium
bonorum. Thou art above all things, and Jran. l. 1. cap. 19
yet not elated. Thou art in all things, and yet not concluded. Thou art under
all things, and yet not restrained. Thou art great without quantity, good
without quality, just without wrath. All our joys, al our pleasures, al our
profits, all our welfare arise from thy fruitful bounty: as on the contrary,
all our losses, all our crosses, all our misfortunes proceed by our deserts,
from thy just conceived fury When thou sendest out thy Spirit, we are
recreated. When thou hidest thy face, we are troubled. Whither then shall Psalm.
104.
we, miserable caytiues, fly? whither? From our displeased God, to our pleased
God; from our angry Father, to our patient Father. Where shall we find
goodness, but with the Author of goodness? Omne bonum a Deo profluit, in
eundemque tanquam in causam principem and finem vltimum, Dionis. Areop. l. 1 de
Hier. caelest. cap. 1.
reflectitur. Every good springs from God, and again the same returns to him,
as to the sovereign cause and last end. He, even he it is, that subsisteth
above us through his providence; round about us he substitutes his Angels, as
it were in fiery Chariots, in us he breathes his fiery Comforter. He makes his
An gels spirits, adhis Ministers Psalm. 104.
a flaming fire.

LINEAMENT III.
1 The admirable incorporation of the three persons in Trinity.

2 Their mystical operation unfolded according to our reasonable capacities

3 How God is said to be in heaven.

4 After what manner the Trinity do differ one from another, either in
Appellation or in Operation.

5 That the Pagan Poets, like Apes, aimed at Gods mysteries by their dark
Allegories.

IF Imeditate on the admirable Hypostasis of the Deity. I am ravished with an
ecstasy, to behold 1.
their heavenly Harmony, their consort, their consonance, and their proportion.
Go, said our Savior Christ to his disciples, and teach all Nation s'
baptizing them in the name of the Father, of the Son, and Mat. cap. 28.
of the holy Ghost. The Father uncreated, the glorious Word begotten of his
euer-being substance, the holy Spirit of comfortable love out of them both
producted. All three (like wieke, wax, and light) incorporated in one glorious
Torch, as the beams and influence of one Sun, or as waters of one fountain,
or as Peter, Paul, and Barnabas, all three building upon one Rock, and
preaching the same doctrine: or as will, understanding, and memory, the
reflecting Image of the Deity in one soul, equally partakers of one undivided
Godhead, one light, one power, one beginning, one majesty, one glory, and one
authority.

Thus has this One Divine Spirit three peerless properties; the having of
every which property is called a 2
Person; a term, which we give to show the peculiar being of a reasonable
spirit: which word Person also the Gramarians have distinguished according to
men's common conference, into notorious appellations. As when God speaks of
himself, to signify his inexplicable essence, he speaks in the first person
singular, Jehovah, I am that I am. I the Lord thy God. When after deliberation,
he Exodus 3.
vtters out his determination: then the whole Godhead, with a clear
distinction of the personal functions, speaks according to man's capacity in
the plural number, Let us make man: that thereby we might note his
deliberation Genesis 3.
before his determination, and then both of them made manifest by his
omnipotent Word. And forasmuch as a peron is nothing else but a body, or a
spirit severally singled out by himself; and forasmuch as every thing in the
Godhead consists substantially by it self, without the help of any other,
therefore are his several properties or functions, to demonstrate the
particular or personal orders and operations of Gods will and being. In like
sort, there be two kinds of persons: the person of his Spirits Essence, and
the person of his Spirits properties. The person or being of his Essence is but
one, the persons or subsistences of the properties be three distinct, every one
a Spirit by himself, every one a living God by himself, and yet all one
Spirit, one living God. The Father, or the first speaker, is God by himself
and of himself, and therefore the first being or person. The Son or word is
God by himself, and not of himself, but of the Father or speaker only, and
therefore the second being. The holy Ghost, or holy love, is God by himself
and not of himself, but jointly of the Father and the Son, and therefore the
third being. There is no difference at all between the Speaker, the Word, and
this Love, but only in the reciprocal relation of one to another: for in
respect of their being and beginning, which was coeternall before al worlds,
before all times or terms of times, they are one essential, one equal, and
one transcendent Person. But in respect of order in their heawenly Hierarchies,
of their offices, operations, and effects, ordained among themselves by their
own divine decrees, and also in respect of the three records on earth, or
sacramental types and mysteries of water, the word, and the Spirit, there are
said to be three, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, which bear record
in heaven: three persons distinguished really in respect of their personal
properties, but indistinct essentially in respect of their perpetual power. I
say in respect of original order, of Christ's mystical marriage with the
freckled or spotted Spouse the militant Church on earth, in respect of his
office in mediating for sinful men; an office too mean for the sacred majesty
of God, and in respect of his humanity, that was crucified for the Elect by
Gods promise ever since Adams fall, or perhaps before his fall, lest the whole
generation of mankind had been under a just Anathema or excommunication, the
Son was and is inferior to the Father, and submits his will to the
Fathers will, as himself protested: Not as I will, but as thou will, O Father.
And so the holy Ghost is inferior to them both, in regard of his humble
function of vice-gerencie or deputation in comforting and instructing the
sinful sons of Adam. These several assignements of offices they appointed
to themselves in their own praedestinated wisdoms; wherein though they all
conspire, yet (as I said before) one of them has the name of Primate, in
regard of order, but in regard of their eternity and omnipotence, none is
greater or less then another. For this cause it is written, that the Father
created the world, the Son redeemed it, and the holy Ghost sanctifies it:
and yet they are but one in effect, in their ends one God, one omnipotent power
communicating to three persons, to three properties, as one center to three
lincs, all in all and three in all. As no man can come to the Father, but by
the Son, so no man can come to the Son, Ioh. 18.
but by the holy Ghost: for we are sanctified, because we are redeemed, and we
are redeemed, because we are elected. Pater eligit, Filius diligit, Spiritus
sanctus coniungit, and unit. The Father electeth, the Son loves, and the
Cyprian. in tract. de simplicitate pr^lator.
holy Ghost conioynes, cements, and unites together. The Father eternal in the
consubstantiall word, the word in him, both in the coessentiall Spirit, and the
Spirit in them both, do all three cooperate, co-adiute, and work according
to their own counsel for the good of their creatures, for the honor of their
heavenly Hierarchy. The Father begets in love and justice, the Son
begotten in love and righteousness, and the holy Ghost proceeding from them both
in love and grace, do mystically teach the inward man that sees with the
spiritual eyes of faith, what care the Godhead takes for the restoring and
repayring of that breach and lapse, which the imbecility of man's brittle
condition, together with Satan's subtilty, caused unto all posterities. And
thus God manifests this threefold distinction unto us, that his elect might
apprehend the mystical operation of their souls salvation, in the effects of
his Justice, Grace, and Love. Again, lest for all this I seem obscure, I will
exemplify the united substance of the Trinity more familiarly: yet with this
prouiso; that the words of Zophar to Job may be read Job. 11.
as a preamble: Can thou by searching find out God? or can thou find out
the Almighty to his perfection? That surely were to scale the heavens, or build
another Babel.

In a Spirit there is neither part, diversity, nor multiplication, but
wheresoever the spirit is, there is the whole 3
spirit; as the soul of man is not part in the head, and part in the foot,
but the same whole spirit, which is in the head, is undivided, entire, all and
the same in the foot; nevertheless it appears more eminent in the head, by
reason of the souls more notable operation there, man's head being the noblest
object, the noblest Organ of the body which the soul does like. So in this
spiritual substance of God, there is no part, diversity, nor multiplication,
but every thing in God is God, and the whole and the same substance of his
Spirit: for where one of Gods virtues are, there also himself and all his
virtues are, as the influence of the Sun. But we commonly say, Our Father
which art in heaven: not that he is altogether locally circumscribed there and
secluded from all other places, but because it pleases his glorious Majesty,
for the honor of his power, to impart his Divinity there most clearly among
his undefiled and unspotted creatures, which (as like to like, pure to pure)
do answer and satisfy the pleasure of their merciful Creator. So that God
is in heaven, (...), for the rareness and excellency of his operations, in
that purest place. And surely God dealt like himself, like a gracious Lord*
thus to communicate his soucraigne perfections to that choice place amidst his
choysest creatures, restrayning the same from us poorepilgrims, who for the
brittlenesse of our e^rthly mould, being clothed but with dust and ashes, full
of corruptions, could no more then Phaeton or Icarus stand justified before his
sunny presence. For when his heavenly Highness vouchsafed to guide and go
before the Israelites out of Egypt, his magnanimous Spirit, that could not
brook impurity, was moved to such impatience against their sins, that he was
feign to withdraw his strong and powerful presence from their weak
complexions, lest, as himself said, he should consume them in the way. Exodus
33.


To return and retire back toward the entire essence of the Trinity, I
believe that Gods properties, as I 4
wrote before, cannot be divided into parts, portions, or parcels: but that
every quality in God is God, and the whole substance of his spirit: and so the
Speaker in Gods Spirit, is Gods Spirit, of the whole substance. The Word in
Gods Spirit, is Gods Spirit of the whole substance. But herein is their
difference, that the Father is the Speaker only, as begetting the Word: the
Son is the Word only, as the Word begotten. And the holy Ghost is holy only,
as proceeding from the mutual love, and from the mutual wills of the Father,
or the Speaker begetting, and of the Son or Word begotten: So as the Speaker
in God is God, the Word in God is God, and the holy Love in God is God. But yet
the Speaker is not the Word, nor the Word the Speaker, if we regard the order
and mystery of their operative offices, though both be God: for the one is the
Father begetting, and the other, I mean, the Word, is the Son begotten. The
propagatour or producer of Sanctification or holy Love in God is love, which
love is God. And love produced in God, is Love, and is God; but the producer of
love, is not love produced, I say, the will of the Father and the Son, being
the producer of love, is not the love proceeding or produced, that is, the holy
Ghost, though all be God in substance and power, but differing in the manner of
their operation: for the Father is love only, as transferring love to the
Son; the Son is love, as transferring love to the Father; and the holy
Ghost love only, as it is transferred, produced, and proceeding from them
both. Thus the whole Trinity according to the substance of love, agree all
together in one: for every one of them partaking of one Godhead, partakes also
of the attributes thereof, of love, of wisdom, and others; only they differ
in the order and manner of their loves, or of their wisdoms productions. In
like manner, the Father is wisdom ontly, as begetting or producing wisdom;
the Son is wisdom only, as wisdom begotten or produced of the Father; and
the holy Ghost is wisdom, as it is produced from the joint and mutual will
of the Father and the Son; so that wisdom is not the Father as it is
wisdom, but as it is wisdom begetting or producing; neither is wisdom the
Son as it is wisdom, but as it is wisdom begotten and produced of the
Father; nor is the holy Ghost wisdom, as it is wisdom, but as it is
wisdom produced or proceeding from the Father and the Son. Whereby good
Christians may note the manner of the difference, how that love producing, love
produced of the Father, and love produced both from the Father and the Son,
be three distinct things. And so are wisdom begetting, wisdom begotten, and
wisdom proceeding, three personal properties, distinct in the relation of
one to another, though indistinct in respect of their essence and eternity. To
wind up this discourse in a word; when I pray to the Father, I pray with fear,
fearing his justice; when I pray to the Son I pray with hope, hoping for
mercy; when I pray to the holy Ghost, I pray with admiration, admiring Gods
love, in mitigating the severity of justice, with the sweet streams of mercy
toward the penitent sinner, through the spiritual apprehension of Jesus
Christ crucified.

This the Pagan Poets of elder ages (like guilty conscienced 5
Caiphas) were constrained to confess, when they painted out Minerua, their
Goddess of wisdom, begotten in Jupiters brain, and when they fained also,
that Bellona, their warlike Goddess, was conceived and begotten in a Goddess
fist; for indeed the origin and root of man's wisdom arises up at first out
of the brain, and his strength out of his hand. Both which serve for
isntrumental agents, to display out those worthy virtues of Strength and
Wisdom. Mark well my words, muse upon them, thou, that meanest to mortify
the outward man, and to be converted into the inward man, into a new Christian
soul. Marvel not at this distinction of mine touching Gods properties; for I
distinguish them not, but into persons only for order sake, and that to the
intent that thou may observe his manifold love toward mankind, whose
reasonable capacity his sacred Majesty inuites by such a plain distinction of
personal functions, to the mysteries of our souls salvation, namely, to know
our Election by the Father; our Redemption by the Son; and our Sanctification
equally breathed from them both in love and wisdom by the holy Ghost, who
ingraues, as with a seal, these Divine mysteries in our converted consciences.
And even as these Poets (like Apes) glaunced at Gods personal properties, by
such Allegorical examples: so did they express their descending down to men,
in varieties of shapes, after the imitation of the Scripture; where it is said,
that Jacob wrastled with an Angel, that Abraham feasted three Angels, under
the habit of Pilgrims, and that the Holy Ghost descended like a Dove, at the
Baptizing of Christ. Sometimes those Poets brought in their Gods, disguised as
men, to feast with Philemon; some other times as Heyfers, Swannes, and in a
golden shower, as Jupiter to Danae; so that this verse may wellbe his:

Non frustra dictus Bos, Ouis, Imber, Olor.

Courteous Reader, here is in explicable admiration, but no admirable
explication, nor yet any application worthy the least glimpse of his glorious
name: for the least syllable of this word Jehovah, imports a more miraculous
mystery then slesh and blood can possibly perceive. If his very name, which no
man knows but himself, contains such hidden wonders, exceeding all the
Anagrams, Arts, and Etymologies of the world; much more mystically ought we
to conceive of his vn-reuealed essence; contenting our selves only with the
Scriptures phrase: for a godly ignorance concerning such deep matters, down
poyzeth a world of Adams knowledge in good and evil.

LINEAMENT IIII.
1 The description of our Savior Christ's Incarnation. 2 In what manner he took
upon him our infirmities. 3 His terrible passion and death. 4 His Resurrection
and Ascension. 5 That he alone is our Mediator with the Father. 6 His coming
to Judgment.
FRom the vndistinct substance of this omnipotent 1
Godhead, (as fire from fire without diminution or waste) came the Light of
life, the reasonable Word, which was ever with God before the beginning of Ioh.
1.
the world, the Image of the invisible God, the first borne of all Creatures,
in whom all things consist, Col. 1.
by whom and for whom God made all things, the bright sun of our souls
Horizon, the giver of Counsel, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the
Prince of peace, Esaias 9.
the divine Oracle, the Paschall Lamb, the Woman's seed, Exodus 12. Genesis 3.
Ibid. 49.
which must tread upon the Serpents head, our heavenly Fathers Ambassador to
mortal men, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, Jacobs Shiloh, which must gather
the people to gether, the repayrer of that breach, which was made by Adams
fall, betwixt the Angels and mankind, the Prophet Deuteronomy. 18.
whom God promised to raise up like unto Moses, the Angel of the great
Counsel, the root of less, which shall stand Act. cap. 3.

Esaias. 21.

Psalm. 118.

Number. 21.

and Ioh. 3.


up for a sign to the people, and the nations shall seek unto it: the life of
the living, the death of death: The head corner stone which the foolish
builders rejected, the brazen Serpent, which the Lord commanded to be set up,
as a sign to them that were slung with fiery Serpents in the Wilderness, for
their recovery: The stone hewed out of the Dan. 2.
Mountain without hands, which break in pieces Nabuchodonozors glorious
Image, representing the Monarchies of this world. The Virgins son Emanuell,
of whom Esaias foretold King Ahaz. Esaias. 7.


This lightsome Word or Lord of peace, to fulfill his Fathers predestinate
counsel for the restitution of mankind, which fell from the state of
innocence, to the intent that the savage Wolf might co-habitate and converse
together with the silly Lamb, under the same roof of rest, that the parents
hearts might be reconciled toward their children, and the children toward
their parents, that the stony flinty heart might be taken away, and the tender
fleshie heart restored to the second Adam; that the different and
disproportioned tuncs or thoughts of our minds, molded after the diverse and
different motions of the Planets at our nat^uities, might at length, after the
manifold crosles of this world, agree in one, in the unity or uniform harmony
of the Spirit: to this end, I say, this Prince of peace, or peaceable Abel, the
only wisdom of all Divine creatures, descended down from his Fathers
bosom, and was made flesh (by the al-quickning breath of Gods own essence,
cooperating in the Virgin Mary's womb, the second Eve, but refined and
regenerated) at Bethlehem, the City of David, a poor City of Iewry, in a
vile beggarly stable, where he sucked the dugges, that ruled the stars, suxit
vbera, qui rexit sidera; about that very time, when all the world was chalked,
or rather charmed in the Circle of peace, by virtue of Augustus Caesar's
sovereignty; in token whereof the Romans did shut Ianus his double porch, Iani
tanuam, (from whence the Month January is denominated) which lay open before
in time of open or civil war.

While he lived on earth (which, as some write, was 2
three and thirty years) he labored (like a woman with child) with our
infirmities, but after a Divine manner. He was ambitious: but how? Ambitious
only to aspire up into the Theater of the Cross. He was affected with
concupiscence: but with what concupiscence? Not with sinful, but with
celestial concupiscence. He was affected, but not infected; for he only
longed and lusted after man's salvation. O Jerusalem, how willingly would he
have gathered together thy strayed young ones, even like a careful hen,
had thou repented! He was angry: but how? Not to revenge; for he requites
good for evil, and prays for his very foes: Only he was angry without sin
for zeal sake, ad detestationem peccati, non ad vindictam. He was envious; but
in what sort? Not ex vitiata natura, of corrupt nature, but for conscience
sake, that the Devils kingdom became daily augmented. He was ignorant of some
things; for he knew not of the day of Doom: but his ignorance was simple and
not sinful; harmless and not erroneous, in desiring curiously to know those
secrets, which did not befit the Son of man to know. He was troubled with
fear in his agony: but with what kind of fear? Not with fear of death
satisfactory, to repair that breach betwixt the Angels and us; but with
natural fear, which impaires the animal faculties, according to the nature of
man's sensitive appetite, which trembles at the sense of terrible torments. In
this manner did he take upon him our infirmities, not by way of inherent
spotting, but by way of necessary Esaias. 53.
influence, like unto that Prince of Stars, which pierces and passes into
impure objects, and yet himself is not subject unto impurities.

Besides these burdensome infirmities of ours, which he took upon him in his
love and charity toward the 3
sons of Adam, let us reuiew his painful Passion. Amidst the briars and
brambles of sorrows, he showed himself as the Rose of patience, he shined as
a lightning Cynosure among the thankelesse sailing Jews. He carried our
sorrows, sorrows without number, which our humane Esaias. 53.
natures could never bear. He suffered intolerable flouts, intolerable
torments, intolerable death, beyond all the degrees of comparison; dura verba,
duriora verbera, durissima fata. No torments were like his torments, for he
suffered for all our sins. Whereunto I might add the tenderness, softness,
and delicateness of his body; which being materially formed only of a pure
Virgins nature, without conjunction of the male substance, could not but feel
such tortures more grievously and gripingly then any other. What shall I speak
of other sensible motives, of his agonies, the treachery of Judas, whose feet
he disdained not to wash but a little before, the Jews ingratitude, and above
all, his Fathers anger in justice heaped upon him for our misdeedes, thoughts,
and vain words? And because it was requisite, that God in his justice should
punish sin in man, which man committed; therefore the Word of God, our
merciful Messiah, took on him man's shape (even as man in Paradise was shapt
after his spiritual nature) to suffer for man what was due for man's
transgression, even vile poverty, conflicts with the world, temptations of the
Devil, fervent wrestling with sin, bloody sweates and agonies, opprobrious
vsages by the Devils procurement, a drench of bitter gall, opposite to that
fatal juice of Adams apple, wounds in his side to the effusion of blood and
water, the mystical seals of his last will to the Church, the one prefiguring
Baptism, the other the Communion, both to bathe our sins; sorrows of death,
a second death, hellish torments both in body and soul, an Eclipse of the
Deity from his sunny soul. All these in humane pains (wherein the whole wrath
of God, due to the sin of man, was for a while included) did our Savior
Christ in this world, before he gave up the Ghost, accomplish and consummate.
And thus God to save the sons of God, like a loving Shepherd in the behalf
of Ioh. 10. 10. Zaleucus.
his sheep, or like that zealous Lawgiver, which drew out one of his own
eyes, instead of one of his sons eyes, who by the law was condemned to that
kind of punishment for his adultery; I say, thus God, voluntarily to sustain
and support the manhood (which of it self was altogether impotent) for the
vanquishing of death, and for our redemption, became man, and was put to
shameful death under Pontius Pilate, President of Jury for Tiberius Caesar the
Roman Emperor: according to that prophecy: After threescore and two weeks
shall Messiah be slain, yet not for himself. And as another recorded. Dan 9.
Jesus shall be openly declared within 400. years; and after the same years
shall my Son Christ die, and all men 4. Esd. 7*
that have life. He died for a while, that he in us, and we in him might live
for ever. He died, or rather, as an ancient Father testifies, (...). He became
a sacrifice for all sinners, Justin. Martyr in Tryphon. Esaias. 53.
that were willing by repentance to reform themselves. And, as the Prophet
foretold of him, He was wounded for our infirmities, and his soul was made an
offering for sin, for our sins, whose burden he bare upon his Divine
shoulders, which neither Sampson, Golias, Atlas, Hercules, Milo Cr^toniates,
nor all the strong-back't Porters of the world, were all their forces conjoined
together, could ever bear. So insupportable are the sins of our humane
natures.

The third day (as Jonas out of the Whales belly, or to speak Poetically, as
Arion in the deep Seas on the Dolphms 4
back) he rose up invested with his immaculate soul by his appeased Father,
who (as David prophesied) would not leave his soul in the grave, nor suffer
his holy One to see corruption. And again in another place, He would, Psalm. 16.
like a loving shepherd, feed him in a green pasture, and Psalm. 23.
lead him forth besides to the waters of comfort, yea, though he walked through
the valley of the shadow of death. He died as a Lamb, but rose as a Lion.
Heaviness endured for a night, but joy came in the morning. In the morning he
rose; he rose as the morning sun, that like a Bridegroom marches out of his
chamber. He rose to run a gallant race, as a Giant refresht with wine. He
that but a little before, as an abject among men, was crowned with a crown of
thorns in a ridiculous manner, rose up in triumph the third day, crowned with
a glorious garland, to reign for ever above all the Angels in heaven. And
after that he had conuersed with his Disciples forty days here on earth, and
showed himself to more then five hundred brethren at once, making his
resurrection manifest 1. Cor. 15.
by many signs and tokens, and palpably opening himself unto them, and
particularly unto Thomas Didymus, whom in the rest of the Apostles presence, he
caused to put his hands into his sides, that thereby he might confute his
incredulity: he then ascended up to heaven in their sight, where he sits in
his humanity, preferred at the right hand of God, having all power given him of
the Father over all things, far above all rule, power, might, and dominion,
and above every name that is named, not Ephesians. 1.
only in this world, but also in the world to come, as thousand thousands of
Angels and Saints proclaimed with a loud voice in heaven. Worthy is the Lamb
that was killed to receive power, riches, wisdom* strength, honor, Apoc. cap.
5.
glory, and praise.

Without the intercession of this revived and rightly respected Lamb, the just
Godhead will not accept the 5
prayers of flesh and blood, be they never so humble, never so urgent. On this
mystical Lamb, on this sacred flaming Serpent, fix we our internal eyes,
fix we our thoughts, that are so stung by the sinful Serpent, and our God is
pleased. As contrariwise, he is displeased, if we crave the assistance of any
other Saint, or Angel, Power, or Principality. There is no health to man, save
only by thy means and mediation, Lord Jesus; that boughtest the same full
dearly with thy blood innocently shed. There is but one God, and one
Mediator, as thy chosen vessel shows. It is far better to trust Gods word,
then 1. Tim. 2.
the bonds of Saints, who indeed are but creatures, and no Creatours. They are
Gods members, the spiritual City and Temple, wherein his works of mercy
shine, but they are not the Builders of this City or Temple, to whom Divine
honor is only due. Who can prevail more with the Father then the Son? Who
with the Son, then a penitent soul, whose conversion the whole Quire of
Heavens Inhabitants do likewise most joyfully applaude? O man, how deeply art
thou indebted unto thy Creator, which for thy deliverance out of the dark
dungeon of death and errors, has appointed this great Angel, to be thy
Redeemer, Mediator, and sovereign Judge? We should blaspemously detract from
thine omniscience, O Lord omnipotent, if we retained any other Attorney, any
other Advocate, besides thy sovereign Majesty. Or if we were so credulous, as
to use any such mediation, far be it from their submissiue thoughts, to
usurp thy puissant place; which alone have the Fathers key of favorable
Grace, the same to open or to shut at thy sovereign pleasure. Divine honor
belongs only unto thee, which thy servant Peter well acknowledged, when as he
would not suffer Cornelius the Captain to worship him; but took him up,
saying, Stand up, my self am also a man. The like disswasion used thine Angel
Act. 10.
to John: See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servant, Apoc. 22.
but worship God. Thou art jealous of thine honor, and limitest thy creatures
to their convenient functions, for the glory of thy Name. Cultus and adoratio
nulli creaturae concedi Orig. l. 1. contra Cells.
possunt, sine Diuinitatis iniuria. Worship and adoration cannot be granted to
any creature, without wrong to the Godhead, as an ancient Father testified.
And as another learned Doctor taught, Maledictus omnis homo, qui spem habet in
homine, quamuis Sanctus sit, quamuis Hier. in Ez^.
Propheta. Cursed is that man which puts his trust in men, though they be
Saints, though they be Prophets.

Is it not then a wrong, a blasphemous wrong, to the whole Majesty of the
sacred Trinity, for a man to distrust Christ's absolute Sovereignty over all
Principalities, and his Divine knowledge over all the world? And do we not
distrust these prerogatives of his, when with a blind zeal we devoutly suc
unto inferior persons, as though our Savior were otherwise occupied, or that
he loved state and pomp? Do not we distrust, when we repeat over, as Persius
his Parrots (...), often greetings to our Lady, yea, millions of Aue Mariaes?
when we read our Ladies Offices, our Ladies Psalter, or when we travel in
pilgrimage for her sake, and for satisfaction of our sins, to Lorette, to
Guardalupe, or to Montserrate? No doubt, but that herein we distrust his
Divinity, and detract first from the Father, who sent his Son in person among
his unthankful tenants, raised him from death, and set him on his right hand,
inspiring him with his omniscience, whereby he might know the very secrets of
all hearts, and refresh them that were laden with the burden of their crying
sins. Then, we detract from Jesus Christ, when we foolishly and
phantastically despise his word, not only refusing to believe in his Cross,
to be saved through his merits alone, through his saving Name alone, (for what
else betokens the name of Jesus, but an all-sufficient Savior? O Jesus esto
mihi Jesus) but also hoping by the Moone-shine in the water, by other men's
deserts to obtain remission. And lastly, we detract and wrong the holy Ghost,
when we compel him with his spiritual gifts to depart away sorrowful from
the mansion of our souls, being willing to perform and execute his office, in
testifying and wittnessing to our consciences, our salvation through Christ's
only merits.

Let me do good works, let me (like Zaccheus) give half that I have to the
poor, let me fast, let me repress the perturbations of my mind, by taming my
body with discipline, or with whipping (as some Papists do,) or by launcing
and wounding of my flesh, after the example of Baals Priests: yet if I want
faith and love, faith to believe only in Christ, and love to live as a member
of his mystical body, rejecting all other helps whatsoever; I am an Anathema,
an accursed Excommunicate out of his faithful family. Nevertheless, God
forbid, that I should prove so ungrateful unto the Mother of my Savior, that
I should forbid honest-minded Christians to yield her memory that reverence
and reverend regard, which is not repugnant to the Divine Majesty, or offensive
to his jealous Spirit. For I hold it a very laudable custom, that the
monuments of her name, virtues, and conception, be preserved from oblivion and
extinction, by an anniuersary or yearly renewing of them upon those festival
days, as our Church has destinated for the celebration thereof. As I defy
those which Deifie her memory and person, in saying unto her, O Sauuoresse,
sauue moy: O my Sauiouresse, sane me: so I defy those which defy her memory
In the French Manuell.
and person. This the Scripture warrants; This my earthly Sovereign witnesses
and confirms in these words: She is as she prophesied of her self, that is,
she is King James in his Premonition.
blessed among women, and all generations shall call her blessed. To steal
more fire with Prometheus from Gods Licutenant, I confess, that I dare not
mock her, and blaspheme Luke 1.
against God, in calling her, not only Diua but Dea, and praying her to command
and control her Son, who is her God King I am. Ibid.
and her Savior. In he auen she is in eternal glory and joy, never to be
interrupted with any worldly business.

But to return unto mine own opinion, whereto I will not bind others (the
same being no matter essential of faith) I am of the mind, that the Angels and
Saints of Heaven, in the beholding of the Godhead, do know many things here on
earth, especially, the estate of their elected fellows. For proof whereof, we
read in the Revelation of St. John, that they glorified God for judging the
great Whore: and as Christ himself said, There is joy in Apoc. 19.
Heaven among them at the conversion of sinners. (So I daily see some mortal
men from these Western parts of the world, extending their knowledge to the
proprieties of sundry minerals enwombed within the center of the earth, to both
the Poles, to the Equinoctial line, to the Tropique of Capricorn, to the
East, to the Indies: to the superior bodies, to their constellations, to
prophecy of Eclipses, and to aim at men's silent imaginations, and at their
secret inclinations.) Yea, and the Saints do pray for our repentance, though
we cannot pray to them, without detraction and blasphemy against Jesus Christ,
who is the sole and only Master of Gods Court of Requests.

Therefore let it suffice, that I honor their memory, as the chief Elders and
pillars of our Christian Corporation, as men inspired of the holy Ghost for our
edification in our Redeemer; but in no wise will I pray unto them, for fear of
that Jealous ear, which hears every word. They never died for the heavy
burden of my cole-blacke sins, (themselves being Adams sons, as well as I:)
but thou, O Christ, thou, and none but thou alone, did die for me. No man can
come to the Father but by the Son: for none but thou alone, O Son of God,
could conquer Job. 14.
death. Besides thy self, O mighty Conqueror, I trust to find none other
helper. To other helpers I may hopeless say with that Holy man; Silly
comforters are ye all. Thy Godhead is never asleep, never so cumbred with
business, Job.
but thy Grace will be ready at all times, day or night, to receive a
Chauncery bill from thy reformed Creature. This lively faith thy servant
Chrysostom commended in the woman of Canaan: See (says he) the wisdom of
this woman: She requesteth not James, she goes Chr. in Hom. 16. in Mat.
not to John she beseeches not Peter, she respects not the whole company of
the Apostles, she seeks no Mediator; but in stead of all these she takes
patience for her companion, whom she chooses to be her Advocate, and so she
comes directly to the first fountain.

To conclude this Chapter or line of my Circle, hereafter 6
in the fullness of time, I know that thou will surely descend in the clouds,
O humane God, with terrible Majesty, accompanied with multitudes of Angels, to
sever the tares from the good seed, the reprobate from the Elect, the dead in
faith from the quick in faith, and from those which thou shall find living at
thy coming: at which time the Triumphs Trumpet shall sound, and in the
twinkling of an eye all men shall rise up with eternal bodies, bodies without
maime, without deformity, without difficulty (which before were resolved from
dust into the first elements, now new like verdant trees, revived Bees, or like
the Phoenix that flourishes out of his own ashes) and every one shall receive
doom according to his own merits, in the mercy of Christ, without partiality;
and that out of his mouth, who is a perfect man himself; I say, according to
his own merits, not as merits, the Authors of his happiness, Non vt
regnandi aut mercedis causam sed vt viam regni, retributionis regulam, Not as
the proper causes of salvation, but analogically, as the way to Heaven, as
Jacobs ladder, as the Ensign or evidence of faith. This vncorrupt Judge will
pronounce sentence of damnation against stubborn sinners; and their punishment
shall be in Hell, which has varieties of torments (even as Heaven has many
Mansions of delights) all of them above man's strength, above man's patience to
endure. There, is the stinging worm, that never goes out, unquenchable fire,
fearful sights, and the absence of Gods glory; where the rich glutton sought
but a drop of cold water, and could not obtain it for the cooling of his
scorched tongue: (And yet poor caytife) nolens volens he must eternally endure
more grievous pains, more griping pains, then Phalaris his brazen bull. O
eternal time, without term or space of time. O eternal time, shall I term
thee? which caust never be mesured, never circumscribed, never comprehended by
the understanding of mortal man. O eternal Time, which after many millions of
years, after an hundred thousand thousand years, will be to the damned soul
but the beginning of his damnation. O what a terrible torment it is for a man
to imagine, that he shall burn in the bottomless pit of fire and brimstone so
huge a time, without end, without defect, without hope of redemption. O
eternal time without end, whose final term we can as soon conceive, as the
time before the worlds creation, as the beginning of Gods being. O Lord grant
us the grace to think on hel-torments lest we fall into hell torments. On the
contrary, if we conform our lives according to our Masters life, endeavoring
not only by fight, but also by flight to avoid the contagion of sinful
nature, in stead of our ragged coat of corruptions, we shall be clothed in
the robes of Angels, in long white robes, standing before the Lambs Throne, in
the heavenly paradise; where we shall shine in the same crown of dignities,
where we shall sing sweet tuned songs, and salute one another in the same
privilege of immortality. Thus will this triumphant Judge reward the
righteous with the presence of Gods glory, with glorious happiness, with happy
joys, and with a joyful perpetuity thereof for ever and ever, world without
end. All these unspeakable hopes will he fulfill at his coming; which as yet
the Father in his providence prolongs, until the just number of them which
were sealed and predestined to everlasting life be complete, until his foes
be made his footstool, and until he has subdued quite and trodden Heb. 1^.
under foot the Devil and his rebellious Angels, whose poisonous power, ever
since the first man's fall, possessed the soul of man, by man's own willing
election. When all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son
himself be subject to his Father, who did 1. Cor. cap. 15.
put all things under him, that God may be all in all* Neither do I confound
the vndiuisible substance of the Deity, or the subsistence of the person,
though it seems divided to the outward man: for I confess the unity and
identity in our Messiah: Even as the reasonable soul and flesh is one
Athanasius.
man; so God and man is one Athenagoras in Apologia pro Christian.
Christ, by the unity and virtue of the holy Ghost (...). All honor, laud, and
glory be ascribed unto thee, O Father of providence, which have made us meet
to be partakers of this heavenly vision; by whose power our sinful souls in
the blood of his Cross are regenerate and reconciled unto thee.

LINEAMENT V.
1 The description of the Holy Ghost.

2 How the Catholic Church was preserved from utter ruin in time of Popery.

3 That the misprision and contempt of the Holy Ghost, wrought the ruin, first
of the Eastern Church, and then of the Western.

4 Why this third person in Trinity is peculiarly termed Holy.

5 The manner to discern them that be possessed with the Holy Ghost, and why
S. Paul in his Epistles salutes men in the name of the Father, and the Son,
omitting the Holy Ghost.

6 What it is to sin against the holy Ghost.

7 The Authors supplication to the Trinity for his presumptuous discourse.

OVt of the incomprehensible Deity likewise issued the Spirit of spirits, the
third person in Trinity, our holy Jehovah, as the mean of the other two Divine
persons, namely, of Jehovah unbegotten, and of Jehovah begotten: I say, the
mean of the unbegotten and begotten in respect of the Elect produced,
propagated, or rather proceeding from both their wills; the oil of gladness,
the fiery Comforter, Psalm. 45.
the Messenger of zeal, the Schoolmasters of true love, the miraculous power
of God, the finger of God, which Exodus 3.
wrought miracles, and plagued the Egyptians, the Treasurer of sundry pretions
jewels, as of Prophecy, Faith, Charity, diversities of tongues, and other
divine gifts, the water of life, the well of water, springing up unto
everlasting Ioh. 4.
life: The mystical seal of love betwixt the Father and the Son; or to
speak more naturally, the Sacramental influence of both their actions,
immanent and transient. Even as it pleased God at Whitsuntide, about seven
weeks after Easter, and after the redemption of the Israelites from Exodus 19.
the bondage of Egypt, to give them the law of the ten Commandments at Mount
Sinai, and that not privately, but publicly before all the Congregation; so
it pleased his Divine Majesty at Whitsuntide, about seven weeks after Easter,
being the time of our Redemption from the bondage of Hell, to inspire his Elect
with his holy spirit openly, before many witnesses of Parthians, Medes,
Elamites, and men of diverse Nations, as it is written, Suddenly there came a
sound from heaven, as of a rushing and a mighty wind, and it filled all the
house where they Act. 2.
sat. There appeared unto them cloven tongues like fire, and it sat upon each
of them. And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with
other tongues, as the spirit gave them utterance. But here is the difference
worthy of observation, that even as there on Mount Sinay, Jehovah the Son
descended down to the Israelites with fearful thunder and lightning, to
signify thereby the wrath of God the Father, for the breach of his laws: so
here Jehovah the Holy Ghost descends (as the Angel of Christ) not in fire of
fury, but in fire of love and zeal; not with the loud voice of a Trumpet, but
with the sound of wind, making a peaceable and still noise, because the
Gospel comforts the dejected man. This is that spiritual Angel, which
inspires the Angels of heaven to honor their Creator, which breathes into them
the knowledge of all goodness, which sanctified the Virgins womb, which
revealed to the Prophets mysteries, and things to come. This holy Spirit
regenerates the inward man, quickens our dull minds, (like as the Sun with
his vegetative heat nourishes the barrennest earth) and insinuates himself
into the zealous professors of the Gospel effectually, mystically, and
miraculously. This is that Spirit of God, which moved at the creation of the
Genesis 1.
world upon the face of the waters. This is that Spirit of sanctification,
which descended down from heaven in the likeness Mat. 3.
of a Done, and sat upon our Savior Christ.

This is that spiritual Light, whose universal presence is never absent from
the Lords Spouse, the Catholic 2
Church: even as hitherunto ever since the Ascension of our Savior, his pure
power has vouchsafed to preserve her from utter damnation in some Country or
other. When Idolatry ouer-swayed these Western parts of the world, doubtless
the Lord had his Spouse either in Moscouia, Greece, Armenia, Aethiopia, or some
other Region: and perhaps in one or two households, as heretofore fell out in
Adams, Noah's, and Abraham's time. This the Apostle in the Apocalypse manifests,
when as he prophesied, that Apoc. 12.
she should fly into a Wilderness, and soiourne therefore fear of the Dragon,
or Antichristian deceit; 2. These. 2.
while faith was departed, and Apoc. 11.
Gods two testimonies lay dead and despised. O ye that go under the naked name
of Catholics, mark how well the concordance of these three places
Prophetical answers your stentorean vociferation, on Priestly succession. It
is dangerous to measure Illumination, or any other mental gift of the holy
Ghost, according to mistaking times, or men's traditions: for the Goldsmiths
that softneth, hardneth, and tempeteth the metal at his own free and secret
pleasure, may cause his old jewels to be newly in request, and distributed
again, as it were by degrees, or nurses milk by little and little, for Our
reconciliation to the Lord of life, the Lamb that leads to the living
fountains of waters, or to Apoc. 7.
these Royal Magazins and shops of the Spirit.

Even as this Spirit speaks in the hearts of true Gospellers, without any
noise of words, and moves them 3
oestro miraculoso; so the misprision of this Al-quickning Spirit, made our
forefathers subject to schisms, heresies, and superstition; and wrought the
ruin of the Eastern Church, their chief Imperial City of Constantinople
(as it is said) being taken on a Whitsunday, our festival time of the holy
Ghost. And at this day, if we strictly examine our consciences, we shall find
the original fountain of all our errors, Detractions, defamations, and other
infinite pollutions, to arise from our hardness of hearts, in not glorifying
our most glorious God, and seeking after this Spirit of consolation, who is the
third person in Trinity. As our Savior Christ said to his disciples, Go and
teach alnations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, the Son, Mat. 28.
and of the holy Ghost. And as the Apostles taught, There are three which bear
record in heaven, the Father, the Word 1. Ioh. 5.
and the holy Ghost, and these three are one.

But why is the third person in Trinity peculiarly termed the Holy Spirit? Is
not the Father Holy, and the Son 4
Holy? God forbid that I should hold the contrary. The Father is a holy Spirit,
and the Son a holy Spirit; yet notwithstanding, because Holiness or
Sanctification toward mankind proceeds from love, which love is sent or
produced from their mutual will; from the Father by election in love, and from
the Son by his word and redemption in love, this Holiness, as a Tertian or
third influence, proceeding out of two Divine respects toward, the salvation
of mankind, is rightly attributed to the third person in Trinity, as to the
Ambassador of both their wills: so that the whole Trinity partakes of the
same. Holiness, of the same Love, of the same Will, of the same Spirit, of the
same Godhead, of the same Unity; as S. Paul very manifestly expresses in these
words: Endeuourye to keep the unity of the Spirit, in the bond of peace; one
body Ephesians. 4.
and one Spirit, even as ye are called all in one hope of your calling; one
Lord, one Faith, one Baptism; one God and Father of all, which is above all,
and through all, and in you all. So that whatsoever name or power is ascribed
to anyone peculiar person of the Trinity, the same is meant of the whole
Trinity. The Father is called the Spirit of God, the Son the Spirit of God,
and the Holy Ghost the Spirit of God: yea, the Father is the Spirit of him (of
whom S. Paul speaks) that raised up Jesus from the dead; the Son is that
Spirit that raised himself, and the Holy Ghost the Romans 8.
same Spirit. The Son is the Father, and the Holy Ghost is in the Father: the
Son is the everlasting Father. This the Prophet witnesses, when as he names
Christ, the Esaias. 9.
mighty God, and everlasting Father. But when they are severally named or
distinguished into persons, that sense or moral is to be understood
parable-wise, as including the mysteries of our salvation, which our humane
capacities cannot otherwise rightly apprehend. For even as a Prince in his
prudence, love, an I wisdom; and for the more honorable establishment of his
Monarchy or Kingdom, authorizeth his son, and some other as his Chancelour,
to impart his laws unto his subjects, and to govern them in order, whereby
their power becomes equal; so let us conceive, that the glorious Trinity is
but one Divine and essential power, all alike, all equal, and of one
authority; only for the glory of the Godhead, and for the mystery of our
Redemption, the Trinity is really distinguished to the view of the inward man,
whose will is stirred up to meditate upon the personal relation of their
functions and offices, which they derive one to another.

But how shall we discern who is possessed with the Holy Ghost* To be
possessed with the Holy Ghost, is as 5
much to s^y, as to be possessed with the gifts of the Holy Ghost, namely,
with says, humility, and other Divine gifts. Of these his gifts some are
visible, some in^isible, some abundant some restrained. With the former the
Apostles and Prophets were miraculously inspired; with the latter all we, who
according to our Christian profession, do protest to fight in this life
against the world, the flesh and the Devil do hope to be possessed through
grace, according to the measure of Christ's gift. The branch that draws not
juice and life out of this spiritual Vine, is adjudged Ephesians. 4.
dead: for what amity can there be betwixt light and darkness, betwixt life
and death? The chiefest gift of the Holy Ghost is says; which is a spiritual
light, enlightening our lives with the Gospel, and with the beams of good
works, causing us to love all men after his own example, who communicates his
Sun to the just and unjust. And if we may lawfully boast of any gifts of the
Holy Ghost, ingraffed by his powerful Majesty in our hearts, then surely may
we glory of our Illummation, wherewith we are enlightened undeservedly in these
days. Neither is it possible for us in these days to obtain a more visible
measure of spiritual gifts, by reason that our minds are captiuated unto
coueteousnesse, envy, and other unclean thoughts, by reason that our bodies
are pampered with gluttony, drunkenness, eating and drinking without appetite
or necessity: and by reason that we dare not, in respect of these pollutions,
and of our unworthiness, communicate one with another the Lords holy Supper
but very seldom; whereby the gifts of the Holy Ghost might be multiplied and
increased in us. As long as we are carnal and worldly minded, our souls are
far from these gifts of the Spirit, which the Apostle likewise calls the
fruits of the Spirit, as love, joy, peace, long suffering, Gal. 5.
gentleness goodness, faith, meekness, and temperance. They that are
Christ's, do endeavor to follow his Fathers will. And what is the will of the
Father? Even our sanctification and union in the Spirit. For even as the
carnal conjunction of man and wife makes of them one flesh; so the spiritual
conjunction of Christ and the sanctified soul makes of them one spirit, so
they that are united in the Spirit, are united in their wills; and they that
are united in their wills, are united in their actions. They that follow
Christ's actions, do labor in all humility, to attain unto these gifts of the
Holy Ghost. But first, they must tame their bodies with fasting. And here I
give you one note worthy the consideration, that whereas S. Paul in all his
Epistles makes often mention* and sends often salutations in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, not joining the Holy Ghost in plain litterall words
with them, he does it, because it was the Holy Ghost himself that spoke
through the mouth of Paul in those Epistles. And whatsoever he wrote, he wrote
by commandment and inspiration of the Holy Ghost, whose office and function
was to signify unto the Church the will of the other two persons in Trinity.
So that the naming of the Holy Ghost was needless, while the Elect understand,
that it was He which spoke, and that Paul was no other then as Moses to God,
or as Baruch to Jeremy, that is, the Notary or Scribe of the Spirit; and as it
is elsewhere specified, a chosen vessel. This himself protested in these
words; If any man think himself a 1. Cor. 14.
Prophet or spiritual let him know, that the things which I write unto you are
the commandments of the Lord.

There is no sin more detestable, nor more difficult 6
to be forgiven, then the sin against this Spirit of God. Do thou wantonly
detract from God the Father, and deny thine own and the worlds creation by
his omnipotent word? Search the Scriptures, repeal thy detractions, and upon
thy recantation thou shall receive remission. Do thou blaspheme the Son of
the everliving God, and belie his Incarnation, his Passion, his Resurrection?
Read over the new Testament, remember to compare the same in an even balance,
with the Prophesies of Esaias, and the rest of the Lords holy Legates, and it may
be, thine eyes will be opened, and thou will renounce thine errors by the
bright light of the holy Spirit. But, silly soul, what will thou do, if this
glorious Spirit comes not near thee? Where then will thou expect forgiveness
of thy blaspemies? Nay, how caust thou expect, or ask forgiveness, seeing
that without his operation the fruits of repentance can no more spring in thy
faithless heart, then the Apples of Paradise could fall into the hands of
Tantalus in hell? All other sins are pardonable, and therefore termed debts
or trespasses: Only this sin against the Holy Ghost is Treason in the
highest degree, against the whole Godhead his crown and dignity, by reason
that his personal subsistence was produced both from the Father and the Son,
and propagated unto us even from our Baptism; so that to sin against his
authority, is to sin against the whole Majesty of the sacred Trinity, and
against our own souls, being created by the Father, redeemed by the Son,
and sanctified by the Holy Ghost. Chiefly, those reprobates are guilty of this
unpardonable sin, which sometimes having had great feeling, great
understanding of the word of God (and perhaps especial inspiration of the Holy
Ghost, as Ananias and Saphira had) if such persons afterward without need do
fall into malicious Apostasies, causeless Hypocrisies, and contumacious
blasphemies against the sanctified Church of Christ in their words, works, and
thoughts, ending also their lives without repentance, doubtless they incur
the penalty of this irremissible sin for this their spiritual fornication.
But to discern who they be particularly that offend in this height of sin,
in my judgment very few or none can undertake that charge in these days,
because we have not that gift of the Holy Ghost, namely, of discerning Spirits,
as apparently as the Apostles had.

To conclude these excellent exorcismes against the spiteful spirit of
Detraction, O ^riumphant Trinity* distinguished 7
really, and indistinct essentially, not into three Gods (as that holy Martyr
protested) nor into three incarnated* but into three of the same degree, of the
same honor, (...), Ignatius in Epist. ad Phi^ippenses.
whose powerful Majesty united and identified in one eternal Deity, the
celestial spirits love to contemplate, and we earthly Pilgrims long to see,
Here I your unworthy servant, prostrating my soul in all humility, do crave
remission in the dust and ashes for my simple speaking of your intellectual
substance. O God of endless bounty, direct my unskillful pen, that it stray
not too much from the rule of verity, nor lay down any thing but with reverend
shame of my blind and bluntish ignorance, concerning thy Heavenly virtues, thy
blessed Guarde, and holy Host; let them which read this Treatise, bear
nothing in their hearts away, save that, which is conformable to the square of
wholesome doctrine. Inflame my spirit with true zeal, the true seal of thy
sacred Spirit, that it may soar up like an Eagle, to the sun of thy Grace,
with feruencie founded on Divine discretion; for feruency is but foolish fury
without Divine discretion.

LINEAMENT VI.
1 Their Heresies convicted which detract from the service of God, because they
see him not with their corporal eyes.

2 The knowledge of God proved by an instance of our carthly King, who is
known throughout great Britain of all his subjects, though not of all wito
corporal sight.

3 The excellency of his spirit above the rest of his subjects.

4 Means to know God.

5 Why mortal men cannot see God?

MAny of us detract from the service of God, because his Majesty is not so
familiar, 1
as to speak unto us visibly, at convenient seasons; as though so high a
Majesty should debase himself with every sinful creature. It is reported,
that the King of China will not be seen abroad among his ordinary subjects
above once a year. And yet we wanton worldlings would limit our great Creator
to sight and daily conference. God is a Spirit, not bound to any bodily Organ,
but (to compare his Greatness after flesh and blood) even as man's soul when
it is separated from his body: his power is infinite, immensiue,
incomprehensible, and no more to be seen, or sensibly understood of flesh and
blood, then if a man should measure the waters in his fist, or the heavens with
his span, or if he should Esa. 40.
weigh the mountains in a balance. All people are in comparison of him, but
as a drop of a bucket-full, or as Grasshoppers, or as nothing, or as nothing
less then nothing. No earthly man can erect a statue, or a carved Image
according to his likeness. No Goldsmiths can cover him with Esa. ibid.
gold, or cast him into a form of silver plates. O Lord, who is like unto
thee? No man can enter into thy Counsel, no Job 11.
man can find out thy secrets, or attain unto this perfection. Thou art
higher then heaven, deeper then hell, the measure of thee is longer then the
earth, and broader then the sea. Though thou turn all things up side down,
closest them in, and gatherest them together, who will turn thee from thy
purpose? Worldly sight is one thing, and Divine knowledge another thing. The
one is subject to insumities and errors; the other is insallible, certain,
and can never sail, cyther with old age, wounds, or false specta cles. The
one is the isntrumental light of the body, to guide a man in his worldly
business: the other (I mean) mental knowledge, is the everlasting Lamp of the
soul. This latter I pray God instill into us. As for the other, it cannot
absolutely be termed perfect, before it be first sown in winters corruption,
and before (like ripe corn, grown with full and glorious ears) it rise up
glorified in the summer of immortality At which time, both lights and sights,
external and internal, being by the Divine bounty become eternal, we shall
both see and know aright in all perfection, almost even as God himself seeeth
and knows us at this present. Quid est quod non videant qui vident^m omnia
vident? What thing shall they not see and know, which always see and know the
Author of all sight and knowledge? In the time of their visitation they shall
shine, they shall shine as amiable as the Sapient. cap. 3.
Sun, more admirably glorious then Moses, who was feign to put a veil
before his face, by reason of his ouerbrightsome beauty, though he saw God but
for a moment, and that imperfectly: for all light proceeds from him. In his
light we shall see light.

But (quoth the spirit of Detraction) how can we know Psalm. 36.
him whom we never saw? O vain Spirit, if thou know 2
his laws, and fulfillest them, thou know God. As for example, let me
instant in our earthly King: for mine own part I never spoke with. King JAMES,
nor ever saw his face; yet notwithstanding I verily belecue* that I do know
him: I know him to be our King by public Proclamation, by his decrees, by the
vnifom^e consent of all his subjects. My conscience persuades me, that he is
the Diuinest and deuoutest Prince, that ever swayed the Diadem of this
Monarchy, and above all the rest of his Kingdom that he is possessed with the
gifts of the holy Ghost. The reasons that thus move me to conceive so
wonderfully of his worth, are these: first, the observation of his life
unblemished by general report, and free from suspicion of unseemly acts.
Then, the consideration of his faith, wisdom, and mild spirit, made vulgarly
manifest by his learned Books and Speeches in the Parliament house, whereof
some are extant in Print, settles my knowledge of his excellency of spirit:

Vt i^rem cala^^o fulgur inesse suo.

That I would swear his pen did lightning flash.

To these I add his miraculous preservation continually from his cradle (he
being the only child of his Parents) in such tumultuous times, until this
golden time of the Gospel. And, to omit many garboiles of civil incendiaries
for the subversion of his life and state, I will only content my meditation at
this time with the consideration of two principal Treasons, invented by
Satan, against his anointed person. The former Earl Gowry intended to
effect. The latter the Papists purposed to perfect. In the former God suffered
Satan to lead him for a moment into his castle of calamity; but presently he
sent his Angel to deliver him, as Peter out of Herod's prison. In the latter
God suffered Satan to plot, plant, and place his Ordinance in order, for the
utter suppressing and supplanting of his whole estate, but suddenly the worlds
great Watchman confounded his Boutefeux, as the builders of Babeil. In both I
observe, that the Divine Majesty respects this innocent Prince, and in his love
unto him unexpectedly rips up the very bowels of Treason, even when Satan
assures himself of his fatal harvest, and is ready to reap his Hemlockes
almost ripe: then God prepares a fervent East wind in one night to destroy his
poysonfull weeds, like unto Jonas his gourd. Jonas 3.


O mighty God, who can pry into the treasury of thy counsels? What man
purposes thou disposest. Thou reuealest 3
the deep and secret things. Thou know the thing Dan. 2.
that lies in darkness: for the light dwells with thee. We thank thee, we
praise thee. O thou God of our Fathers, that have given our King wisdom and
strength, and have showed him the thing that he desired of thee. Thou have
declared his matter unto him. When his wisest Counsel ors missed to expound
Tressams intricate letter, more intricate then Sphynx his Riddle, the Holy
Ghost lent the King himself the key of knowledge, the key on which millions of
lives depended, wherewith he unlocked the memorable moral of the aenigmaticall
letter, memorable indeed unto all posterities. All which circumstances do
certainly argue the profoundnesse of his capacity, and assuredly ascertaine my
soul, that the faculties of his soul are effectually invested with some
attributes of the Deity, for the glory of God.

After the like manner, let us comprehend the knowledge of God, who is our
spiritual King, and King of 4
Kings, (for what signifies this word God, but an omnipotent spiritual King,
Creator of all things?) and we shall spiritually attain to his Divine
knowledge, though we see him not with our bodily eyes. Let us grope after him
and we shall find him, for he is not far from every Acts 17.
one of us; in him we live, we move, and have our being. When we endeavor
with all our hearts and humble souls, to keep his commandments, we may
boldly say that we do know him. When our minds are sanctified through steadfast
says intentiuely on Jesus Christ, as the diseased Israelites became healthful
with regarding the brazen Serpent, we may assuredly affirm that we do know
him. Most happy are they which never saw Christ, and yet believe in him.

Neither do we want other cuident means, and motives to stir us up to the
knowledge of the Godhead or spiritual power: first, natural reason shows,
that some glorious soul, full of perfection and power, created the world and
the creatures thereof (for they could never make themselves) which the Prophet
David confessed in these words: The heavens declare the glory of God, and
Psalm. 19.
the firmament shows his handy work. Next, his Church or faithful
congregation, of Adam, Abell, Seth, Henock Noah, Abraham, and others,
transferred by successiue tradition his knowledge to their posterities.
Thirdly, his knowledge has been revealed by the Holy Ghost to Moses, Samuel,
the Prophets, and lastly by the Messiah himself, through apparitions,
miracles, laws, ceremonies, and temporal blessings. Fourthly, to draw nearer
unto man's capacity, which depends most upon sensible objects; mention is made
by Moses, how God caused him to stand in the cave of a Rock, and putting his
hand upon him he did show him his hinder parts, not suffering Exodus 33.
him to see his face. Whereby the secuced Saduces collect the Godhead to be
corporal. But the natural man perceiues not the things of the spirit of God.
For by his hinder parts, a^ the picture of his spiritual substance, is
shadowed the glimpse of his glorious influence. By his hand, is figured his
al-puissant power. By his face, the fullness of his sunny glory. And where Eyes
are ascribed unto him, what other sense is meant, then his providence and
knowledge? Thus God sometimes speaks naturally according to our natural
apprehension.

In conclusion, let it suffice our curious brains, that God is a powerful
Spirit, not to be felt palpably with 5
men's hands, nor seen with men's eyes (I speak not of Christ's glorified body
being humane, which Thomas Dydimus felt after his refurrection) by reason that
the light of his Spirit is too conspicuous, glorious, and ouer-bright for such
weak, terrestrial, and brittle senses. Nevertheless it pleased him to
appear unto Ezechael in the similitude of fire from his loins downwards, and
of brightness Eze. ^.
like unto Amber from his loins upwards. S. John in the Island of Pathmos on
the Lords day ravished in spirit, saw one like the Son of man, with his head
and hairs as white as woolor snow, with his eyes as flames of fire. His feet
were like unto fire brass, burning in a furnace, and his voice Apoc. 1.
as the sound of many waters. His face shone as bright as the Sun in his
strength. Whereby we may gather, that God is a spirit, not able to be seen of
dust and ashes, until the same be better purified or purged from worldly
concupiscence (for flesh and blood cannot enter into heaven) and until our
souls become refined and regenerated, not with Purgatory flames, but with the
spirit of God the fiery Comfirter. This is the reason, that the Elect of God
do stoutly maintain, that his Divine Majesty being a spirit cannot rightly be
worshipped but in spirit and mind, which in truth falls out most rightly, when
the spirit through faith becomes eminent, and when the body through fasting
lies vanquished.

LINEAMENT VII.
1 The description of some of the good spirits, which attend on their Creator
in heaven.

2 Their Offices.

3 Names.

4 Greatness.

Leaving aside Dionysius Areopagitaes nine orders of Heavenly Hierarchies, 1
which he terms (...), as an ouer-curious work for our weak capacities, I
will relate the differences of such good Spirits, as we find registered in the
word of God, to the intent that the spirit of Detraction may tremble the more,
when he hears their energie and efficacy expressed, their energie and efficacy
which they possess by the sight and light of the heavenly Sun. Michael the
Archangell is the great Prince which stands for the Lords people. Dan. 12.
And, as St. John records in his Divine mysteries, there was a battle in
Heaven: Michael and his Angels Apoc. 12.
fought against the Dragon, and his Angels, whom they overcame by the blood of
the Lamb, that is, by Christ's innocence. This Michael (as many suppose) is no
other then our Savior Christ. For even as by the Dragon, the Arch-spirit of
sin is parable-wise included: so by this Michael, the Archangel of salvation
might very well be figured. By Michaels Angels I understand his glorious
spirit, his Oracles comprehended in the Scripture, the intercessions of Saints
for our conuersions, zealous books published by many good men for our
edification in Christ, besides our faithful hearts prepared to heaven by
devout prayers, and necessary mortifications of our lustful bodies. By the
Dragon the Serpent, or Devil I expound the contempt of the Holy Ghost, the
deprauing of his precious gifts, the spirit of Detraction, the spirit of envy,
the spirit of uncleanness, and other sinful spirits repugnant to the pure
spirit of God. For (as S. Paul confirms the self same) because they regarded
not God, therefore God delivered them up into a reprobate mind, to do those
Romans 1.
things which are not convenient being full of all unrighteousness,
fornication, coueteousnesse, malitiousnesse, full of envy, etc.

In some places Angels are termed the stars of God: 2
for even as stars do show the light of Heaven unto us, Esaias 14.
shining only to our outward sight; so Angels signify to the inward man, the
heavenly light of the sunshine of grace.

Where mention is made of the Seraphins, we may conjecture, that for our
weakness in nature and easy instruction, they appeared with wings to the
Prophet, crying one to another, Holy, Holy, Holy, the Lord of Hosts; The Esaias.
6.
whole world is full of his glory; as a prefiguratiue reuelatition, that the
word of God, the Gospel of Christ should fly over all the world, and fill the
same with his glorious power. In like manner, their description with wings
portends their cele^ity, and swift readiness to succor us in extremity.
Another Prophet lays down the form of the Cherubins in this manner; Every
one of them had four faces, and every one four wings, and the likeness of a
man's Eze. 10.
hand was under their wings. Under which vision we may contain the similitude
of the four Evangelists, with Christ's hand, or with his holy Spirit
transported into the four quarters of the world, into the East, West, North,
and South, according unto the four ages of the world, under Irenaeus l. 3. c.
11
Adam, Noah, Moses, and Christ, which is the last, and renueth us to
everlasting life.

Among others of Gods spiritual ministers, which his Majesty sent to mankind,
one is named Gabriel, an Angel 3
that appeared first to Daniel, when he prayed to have that performed of God,
which he had promised touching the return of the people from their captivity
in Babylon. While he was speaking and praying, even the man Gabriel, whom he
had seen before in a vision came flying and touched Dan. 9.
him: The said Gabriel came afterward to Zacharias the Priest, to show him the
Nativity of S. John Baptist, and was also sent to Mary the mother of Christ.

An Angel called Vriel reproved Esdras, because he seemed to enter into the
profound judgments of: God. And there Ieremiel an Archangell confirms the
words 2. Esd. 4.
of Vriel.

Raphael one of the seven holy Angels, which go forth before the Lord, took
the shape of a man, and fellowlike, conuersed with young Tobias, until he
brought Tob. lib.
him home safely from his great journey; bound Asmodeus the lustful spirit,
and restored to old Tobith his sight.

Now it remains, that I show what Angels be: Angels are ministering spirits
sent forth to minister for their sakes 4
Hebr. 1.
which shall be heirs of salvation. The Holy Ghost in the Scripture expresses
their outward forms, particular names, and numbers in plain terms, to make
their Embassages and messages of greater reckoning to our terrestrial senses
and simple understanding. Their mansions be diverse, as our Savior testified:
My Fathers house has many Mansions. Their multitudes infinite: Think thou
(said Christ to his Disciple, which smote the High Priests servant) that I
cannot now pray to my Father, and he will Mat. 26.
give me more then twelve legions of Angels? These be they, whose loud voices
that profound Divine heard, saying, Praise, honor* glory, and power be unto
him that s^teth upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for evermore. These be Apoc.
4.
they, whom our Savior Christ prophesied to send against the day of Judgment,
to gather together his Elect from the four winds, and from the one end of the
Heaven to the other. These likewise be those divine Ministers, which at the end
of the world shall go forth, and sever the bad from among the just, and shall
cast them into a Furnace of fire, where there shall be wayling and gnashing of
teeth. In the holy Scriptures we read, that holy men, such as Aaron, the
Prophets, and Priests were called Gods or Angels, because they resembled them
in proprieties and perfections: for even as it is the office of Angels to
praise God in purity of mind and sanctification; so likewise it is the duty of
Ministers to preach and teach the word of God without hypocrisy, negligence,
or worldly craft.

THE SECOND CIRCLE OF THE SPIRIT OF DETRACTION, CO NIVRED AND CONVICTED.
LINEAMENT I.
1. The true application of the abouesa^d Coniurations:

2 That the names of other good spirits be manifold and diuerfly taken in the
holy Scripture.

3 After what manner Sin, the messenger of Satan stings us.

4 By what means we may repel the stings of Satan.

5 That it is hard to judge of our spiritual stings, and from whence they come.

THe meditation of these 1
mysteries (I hope) will shake the power of our spiritual Tempters, and shape
our humane wills after the refined mould of the Inward man: so that we prostrate
our selves before our Heavenly Lord, humbly prying into our own unworthiness,
and putting off our unclean s^oes before we touch his holy Mount; so that we
employ our knowledge, in testimonium very, non in adiutorium falsi, for the
glory of God, and T^rtul. in libr. de Resur. Carnis.
not for the support of sin: so that also we apply our contemplation of his
Saints, for admiration and not for adoration, applauding their happy estates,
with the acknowledgement of our own unhappiness. For who can thrust Peter
into Gods Throne, were he never so glorious a Saint, without apparent Treason?
Down then ye Detracting souls, into your earthly caves. Without the
mediation of Christ, God is a consuming flame; wherefore approach not near
this Flame, lest ye be consumed. Diue rather into your own weakness, and
think on nothing so often, then on Christ lying in a vile manger, or on Christ
crowned with a crown of thorns, or on his guiltless body nailed to the
cross of infamy; and no doubt but the effects of Grace will follow.

Where other good Spirits are mentioned in the word of God, and how one rested
upon many, and many upon 2
one, I am not of the mind that they were real, corporal, and palpable
spirits, but rather Divine gifts or supernatural virtues* conferred upon the
souls of the Elect by the Lord for his glory. God took off the spirit that
was upon Moses, and put it upon the seventy Elders; and when the spirit rested
upon them, they prophesied. In sundry places of the Scripture we read, that
the spirit of the Lord possessed many, where they became notable either for
prophesies, valor, or other rare properties: which Spirits must not be
balanced by proportionable quantity, but spiritually construed by operation
and quality. Which exposition I have laid down (as I have some of the
premises) of set purpose that the Reader may not be mistaken in conceiving the
spirit of Detraction, and other sinful Spirits to possess mankind really.
The holy Ghost fell at one time upon many of the Apostles and others; which is
as much to say, that the precious Gifts of the holy Ghost, of prophecy, of
diversities of tongues, of faith, patience, and other virtues inspired these
servants of God, whom his Wisdom selected and sealed to that degree of
sanctification, as the potters vessels, for such honorable services.

Contrariorum cadem est ratio. By the knowledge of Goodness, let us gather the
knowledge of the opposite, 3
how the Devil by his spiritual Nuncioes of Sin, as by Detraction, malice,
and such others, possesses the negligent sons of Adam, not with real
forms, but with spiritual suggestions and spiritual operations. God turns
away the influence of his countenance from his degenerate children; then Satan
embraces that advantage of opportunity, and with his pestilent breath blows
into the principal parts of man's body and soul. He impoysoneth the humors of
melancholy, choler, and gail, enuenometh the lodge of imagination: then the
possessed is sranticke or lunaticke. The blood and seed he tickleth and
tainteth with honied lechery, and hateful luxury: then the patient becomes
passionate in his body, prodigal of his blood and seed, and proud of his
supposed power. For how can it otherwise be, when the body is tempted to
receive into it superabundance of juice, of immoderate meats and drinks? Must
not consequently every natural body vent out what is supersluously gathered
within it?

But, O thou great Governor of the world, whose will is unsearchable! no
mortal man can mortify his longing 4
conceits, his lustful concupiscence, without the mortification of his body by
fasting, neither can he mortify his body by fasting, without pouring out many
piteous petitions before the seat of thy mercy. Nor yet can man (O sinful
man) power out his petitions intentiuely before thee, except it were given him
from above, and except he were in his conscience compelled by the operation of
thy spirit, to crave daily for perscuetance in his prayers and petitions.

To finish the abouesaid point of Satan's stinging, whether these plaguey
temptations be verily, or figuratively, 5
the Devils spiritual power, or the wrath of God enclosed in vials, as is
allegorically specified in the Apocalypse, it is hard for man to judge; for both
might well be inflicted on us, seeing the ungodly is a sword of his, and
Nabuchadonozor is termed his servant, or executioner to Psalm. Jerem.
revenge his just conceived anger against the Israelites. The wind blows, and
with his furious force ouerturnes a Forest of wood, and overthrows whatsoever
it meets; yet no man knows whence it comes, or whither it goes. Even so it
fares with these turbulent spirits: well may we aim at their mediate manner of
infections; but it is a very difficult matter to discourse iudicially of their
immediate stinging. Sure we are, that none escape without them.

LINEAMENT. II.
1 The original ro^te of Detractions and other pollutions; and whether the
spirit of Detroction and other sinful spirits, which possess mankind, be
real spirits or stings of the Devil?

2 The fight betwixt the knowledge of Good, and the knowledge of Evil.

3 That the Good gets the victory over the Evil.

4 That the Devil cannot harm a man really.

IN the beginning God made all creatures I
good and perfect, though afterward through presumption, arrogance, and
Detraction they became sinful. His omnipotent Majesty being righteous, and
dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing vexed his righteous 2. Pet. 2.
soul with their unlawful deeds; and at length finding no stedfastnes in his
servants, and laying folly in his Angels, Job 4.
most justly condemned them, and threw them down into 2. Pet. 2.
hell, where he has reserved them in everlasting chains, under darkness, unto
the judgment of the great day: Where, Iud. 6.
in stead of eternal glory, they live tortured with eternal infamy, in stead
of happy light they see nothing but horrid night, in stead of holy knowledge
they feel nothing but hellish ignorance, in stead of perpetual joys
perpetual pains. How greatly then are our superstitious worldlings bewitched,
that authorize Devils in multitudes, and with corporal shapes, that is, with
bodies subject to handling, having of necessity longitude, latitude, and
profundity, otherwise called thicknes, presently to appear at the lure of
mortal men, and to command the heavenly powers for satisfaction of their
fantasies? Let it suffice, that we belecue the Holy Ghost has omitted nothing
pertinent to our salvation; let it suffice, that we arm our souls with the
spiritual Corcelets of faith and charity, against the most terrible encounters
of Devilish sins, propagated unto the children of Adam, from the Archspirit
of sin. Vt mures in muris, sic satellites Sathanae in cordibus nostris delight
scunt: as Mice in walls, so lurk the messengers of Satan in our hearts. Let
it suffice our curiosity, that sin is a roaring Lion, a spiritual Devil, and
that a reprobate mind fraught with vile affections, like canckred poison,
killes both body and soul. There Ecclus. 10.
is a seed of man, which is an honorable seed: the honorable seed are they
that fear the Lord. There is a seed of man which is without honor: the seed
without honor are they that transgress the commandments of the Lord. This
latter seed is the Devils sting, spiritual temptation, spiritual Detraction
springing of melancholy and corruption of humors, which can never possess us,
while we observe that golden rule: Watch and pray, that is, praying always in
all supplication, and watching for the same purpose Ephesians. 6.
with all instance for all Saints.

The chiefest Devil on earth, Viceroy to the chief 2
Serpent of hell, is the knowledge of Evil, even as the chiefest God on earth
Viceroy to the Arch-spirit of heaven is the knowledge of goodness; both which
Good and Evil we know ever since the eating of the forbidden fruit, which man
had not lusted, except God had commanded the contrary. Deteriora sequor: Sin
took^ occasion by the commandment, and deceived us. So that we left the tree
of life, and took the worst. The knowledge of evil is sin, Romans 7.
or worldly craft. The knowledge of the good is the service of God or
innocence. As Soon as Adam had eaten the Apple in the garden of trial, his
eyes were opened, and he knew the differences both of the Good and Evil, yea,
he was made partaker of Evils and miseries, as well of equity, happiness, and
innocence. O what a Divine mystery is this! Man's body and soul stands almost
in suspense, in an equal balance betwixt God and the Serpent, betwixt
innocence and sin. Or more mystically to compare our states; we stand in this
world like our Savior Christ, cruelly crucified betwixt two thieves, the one
penitent, the other desperate; the one acknowledging his Deity, the other
blasphemously detracting from his innocent life. Even so do we wade betwixt
Good and Evil, betwixt the spirit and the flesh, betwixt peace and war,
betwixt heaven and hell, betwixt life and death, betwixt virtue and vice
(Xenophons paths for Hercules in his youth) betwixt light and darkness,
betwixt truth and falsehood, betwixt love and hatred, betwixt joy and sorrow,
betwixt eternity and time. Gods spirit of Goodness seeks to win us by
infusing into our intellectual senses, faith, love, truth, and other
vnderspirits of his. Our Ghostly tempter, wicked sin, the old Serpents sting
inwardly pricks our souls to know evil as well as good (for malum cognitum
facilius euitatur, evil being known is the more easily avoided) to permit
wantonn^sse, licentiousness, Detraction, and other petty petulant spirits of
sin unto our children in their tender age, that they may leave them of the
sooner in their riper years, according to the proverb, A wild colt will
prove a good horse, a rude youth a good man, and a young Devil an old Saint.
God labors to mortify the body, that the soul may see his Godhead. The
Devil by sin his earthly substitute, deceitfully advises to pamper the body
with daiaty delicaci^s, that the soul being stupefied may behold nothing but
perpetual darkness. God pronounces rigorousnesse unto them which fall, but
toward thee kindness, if thou continue in kindness. The Devil Romans 11.
whispereth into thy heedlesse heart, Sisaluaberis, saluaberis, If thou shall
be saved, thou shall be saved. If thou be reserved among the remnant of Baals
seven thousand, according to the election of Grace, what need thou make this
world thy hell, thy body thy cross, thy contentment thy coffeehouse? If
thou be not predestined unto salvation, will thou enjoy a double holy?
Therefore while thou have time, cheerish up thy body with all kinds of sports
and pleasures. Laugh and b^fat:

I am veniet tacito curua sexecta pede.

Anon old age with stealing pace will come.

Ah poor soul, how art thou entangled, being created after the image of God
composed for his Spouse, endowred 3
with his spirit, redeemed with his blood, accompanied with his Angels, capable
of happiness, and partaker of reason, as a learned Spaniard in imitation of
Father Bernard, broke out into admiration: O Alma hecha a laimagen de Dios,
compucsta como para esposa, dotada consu Sanctiago sobre Euang.
espiritu, redimida consu sangre, accompanadae consus Angeles, capaz de
bienauenturanza, participante derazon. Why do thou follow thine enemy, and
forsake thy Maker, O heavenly soul? Why do thou offer unto the Devil the
fairest, and the sartest of thy flock, and leauest unto God a lean and a lame
sacrifice? Will thou draw unto the Devil thy sweetest drinks, and unto God
thy sowrest dregs? O careless creature! Say not, God has Ecclus. 25.
caused thee to err for he has no need of the sinful man. He made thee from
the beginning, and left thee in the hand of thy counsel, and gave thee his
commandments and precepts. He has set water and fire before thee stretch out
thy ^and unto which thou will. Before thee was life and death, good and evil.
What liked thee, was given. Which excellent doctrine another confirmed: Thus
says the Lord, Behold I set before you the way of life, and the way of death.
Say not thou, I am besieged with Devils, with real spirits out of hell.

For in thy center, O intellectual soul, is imprinted the very character of
Gods own essence and three persons 4
in Trinity; insomuch, that thou resemblest the Divine Hypostasis, and
indivisible unity, and also possessest immortality from the Father,
understanding from the Son, and sanctification from the Holy Ghost. All which
concurring in one identified essential union, make thee a perfect soul,
without blemish. Let not thy fall from that blessed state discomfort thee. The
blood of Christ (if the fault be not thine own) does (like a lauer) purify
thy sins, though they become as red as scarlet. These thieves of the Deity
(...), as a very ancient Father terms Titianus in Oration. aduersus gent.
them, can never harm thee really, howsoever their spirit of Detraction, as
false spectacles to multiply thy fears, lays down that humourous tradition
before thy simple sight. See not thou, how those spirits, which dallied with
the holy water, dare not once come near our reformed Church? As there be
degrees of sins, so in my judgment these deluding spirits never appear but
to the grossest sinner. Where a man has but one honest man in his house, there
that house prospers better then if that one were absent; for that he
terrifieth the rest from cousenages and conspiracies; so where one Godly man
dwells, there the Devil dares not draw near.

LINEAMENT III.
1 That all wicked Spirits ordinary and extraordinary do issue from the same
head.

2 That they cannot harm a man really, without his own natural or wanton
motion.

3 Their varieties proved out of the Scripture, where Saules lunacie is
censured.

4 That the Spirit of Detraction attends on all the said spirits.

EVen as good spirits or virtuous motions issue from the Godhead, as from the 1
clear fountain of goodness; so wicked spirits and unbridled affections,
fetch their pedigree from the deceitful Serpent, w^h allured Eve to insring
the Lords commandment. For his malicious spirit repining, that man, a new made
creature, found more favor then himself (belike long before an outcast from
Gods presence) turned about the weaker vessel, the simple woman, and makes her
an instrument for all their overthrows together. They were all of them
accursed, mankind destinated to death, the Serpent to darkness. Since which
time, continual calamities and fantastical spirits, the black guard of
sin pursue mankind, till death gets the upper hand, and loses the soul
out of her prison of flesh and blood. I say, until death, as Gods Sergeant,
do attach our bodies upon debt due unto nature, and our souls upon sins
committed against the Author of nature. These sinful spirits like baits of
sweet poison, or sugared gals, possess old Adams progeny, according to the
variable and voluble dispositions of the patient. These, not unlike to Mice,
Lice, lawless Lawiers, or noisome vermin, by Satan's spiritual suggestion
do endeavor to infest, molest, and sift us as wheat. They had their beginning
at the fall of the Devil and his Angels, who are thoroughly possessed with all
the said qualities, working diversely by the means of the same spirit. The
spirit of Detraction, the spirit of Envy, the spirit of Pride, and such like
vicious spirits, proceed from one root, from one Serpent, that old Impostor.
I am settled in this opinion by the Apostle, who proved the identity of the Holy
Spirit by the like reason. The body is one, and has many members. And again,
There are diversities of gifts, but the same spirit. 1. Cor. 12.
To one is given by the spirit, the word of wisdom, to another the word of
knowledge by the same spirit. To another the operations of great works, to
another prophecy, to another the discerning of spirits, to another the
diversities of tongues. All these things works the same spirit, distributing
to every man, as it pleases him. From one Tree came many branches of evil: by
the inticement of one Serpent came all these spirits of ^rrours, which (like
venomous stings) incite us to ungodly acts. And yet for all this, I deny not,
but there are malicious spirits as well as ministering spirits, Devils as well
as Angels, the one attending on Lucifer the Prince of Devils, the other on
Michael the Lords chief Angel, both inuisibly attempting to work upon the
Will of man vehemently, or by leisure, as God commands them, either for the
knowledge of Goodness, or for the knowledge of Evil.

Neither will I here omit to interpose another opinion of mine, concerning the
Devils force, which is, that God 2
the revenger of iniquity, commands the Devil, as his executioner, to pursue
the reprobate sometimes by immediate causes, and sometimes by mediate and second
causes; by immediate, when the faculties of the soul are by his spiritual
spurs extraordinarily possessed with frenzy, sury, and such like; by mediate
causes, when the instruments of the body are by his spiritual enticements
tempted to receive into them more then suffice nature; so that the veins
ouerflow with blood, the gall with choler adust, and the liver with lust. But
in my judgment, with the former extraordinary or miraculous causes the Devil
cannot harm a Christian man's body really, (howsoever I think of the souls
immediate obsession) or harm the least part of his body. Surely I belecue,
that God reserues that palpable real power, as a prerogative to himself, to
his own Angels, and to his second causes in this world; to himself, as when
Pharaoh and his Egyptians were miraculously plagued with Lice, and other
annoyances by the singer of God or when he caused his Angel for David's fault to
smite the Israelites with p^stilence. But thou will ask me, how can a
Christian be frantic by the Devils means, and yet not really hurt by him? By
him, by the Devils immediate real force? Nay, principally by themselves, and
by their own filthy bodies, which suffered themselves at first, to be
gluttonously carried by their own appetites, and by the Devils spiritual
suggestion. If they had eaten less, and drunk less, such corruption of
humors could never taint them, neither could consequently frenzy possess
them. And also if they had in time sought for grace by daily prayers (fasting
being a coadiutour unto them) God would have hearkened unto them, and healed
their indispositions. But on the contrary it pleased his Majesty to harden
some, to lead them into temptation because they might acknowledge his justice
and omnipotency, and also serve for monuments to terrify the wavering minded.

To return unto my former matter, as all wicked spirits and vicious
purt^rbations sprung in mortal men, 3
by means of the said Arch-spirit of sin, so likewise by him they work many
and sundry operations. Moses made mention of the spirit of Jealousy. Esaias of
the spirit of Error. The Lord permitted alying spirit to go out, and Number. 5.
be in the mouth of all Ahabs Prophets, to en^ice him into the battle against
the Sirians. Another Prophet relates Esaias. 19.

2. Reg. 10.

Holea 4.

Romans 10.


of the spirit of fornication. And as S. Paul records: God gave them the spirit
of slumber. The spirit of God departed from Saeul, and an evil spirit was sent
from God, to vex him. Therefore his servants advised him to seek a cunning
player upon the Harp, whereby he might be refreshed and eased. What sense more
natural to our capacities can we gather by this evil spirit, and the easy
cure thereof, then that it was either a kind of Lunacy usual in that hot
country, a fit of melancholy, or a falling sickness? For the cure whereof,
his servants (by whom I understand his Phisittans) having experimented belike,
that none other medicine then music could avail him, or perhaps not having
such insight in Physic as we have, wished him only to comfort his heart with
joys, and (as we vulgarly speak) to keep Doctor Merriman company. To this
opinion of mine I adioyne another reason (whereof we must not descant
ouer-curiously) that God predestined purposely this extraordinary accident
upon Saul for the advancement of David, who upon this occasion happily composed
many of his Psalms, and confirmed the virtues of his spirit, and also by this
access into the Kings Palace, he gained unto him the minds of his chief
Captains and Officers; besides he got by this familiar frequency in the Court
his education, and experience in matters of civil policy, which otherwise he
could hardly in humane probability obtain, by reason that he was brought up
but simply among Sheepheards. This I write not of any blasphemous purpose to
restrain the Lords miraculous power, but that we may observe his providence in
vouchsafing to work by ordinary and natural means. But admit, that the
literal sense be admitted; what absurdity can ensue thereof? For the Devil in
his fall having wholly lost the musical consent, and melodious concord which
was ensused in his soul at his creation, could hardly digest David's Hymmes and
Harp, the same being quite disagreeable to his discording and disproportioned
nature, I say such Divine music reduced the extrauagant thoughts of Saules
soul to such an excellent harmony and quiet tune, that the Devil durst not
abide that sweet tempered sound.

Over all the abouesaid wicked spirits, the spirit of Detraction awaiteth. Does
the Lord send his terrible thunder, 4
his glorious lightnings, as warlike alarums to rouse us up from our sleepy
sins? Behold the spirit of Detraction at hand, and attributes those strange
signs to the Prince of this world, his Lord and Master the Devil God (quoth
he) is the Author of goodness, quiet, and never int^rmedles with
thunderclaps, storms, or tempests.

Non illi imperium pelagi sc^ptrumque tridentis,
Sed mihi sort: datum -- Virg. l. 1. Aencid.

That great command with triple forked mace,
By lot to me, and not to him be ell.
As Neptune spoke of himself to Aeolus, Such Heretical paradoxes as these he
inspires men's brains withal, and rams them, as with a strong beetle, into
their shallow hearts. Lives a man in love and charity with his neighbor?
Again, the same spirit of Detraction appears, sowes idle tales of dilgrace,
whereby they may go together by the ears, and empty their virulen: galls
with most violent revenge, the one against the other. Art thou chole^cke?
Beware of Saules spirit of lunacie? Art thou merrily disposed at games and
sports? Thou shall be sure of Satan's spiritual sting, and be thoroughly
possessed both with the spirits of blasphemy and Detraction, although thou
perceiuest them not visibly with mortal eyes. To be brief, he will never be
spiritually wanting to any man. To a man in prosperity he sends his spirit of
pride, to a sinner despair, to married soikes the spirit of jealousy, to
children the spirit of disobedience, to Courtiers the gliuing pompes or vanity,
to Preachers the spirit of false prophecy, to the subject the spirit of
rebellion, to friends the spirit of inconstancy, to servants the spirit of
ingratitude, so that there be few men in the world, but their wills are
possessed with some spirit or other. I pass over many other spirits, which
bear dominion among us, as the spirit of lechery, the spirit of drunkenness,
the spirit of gluttony, and the damnable spirit of avarice. All which as
rotten branches, I know to be descended and derived from one tree the tree of
the knowledge of good and evil, by the subtle temptations of the sneaking
Snake of sin, the Angel of Perdition.

LINEAMENT IIII.
1 Why God gives us over to be tempted by Satan. 2 After what manner the
Devil uses now a-dayes to ensnare us. 3 The Devils policy for the
circumuenting of souls.
AMong us in this reformed Realm, the Devil dares not appear in outward
forms of illusion (like the man in the Moon) 1
by reason that the Sunshine of Gods word is too strong for his faithless
spirit; yet notwithstanding, because we might call to memory our sraile natures,
together with our souls stupidity, ouer-whelmed with gross humors,
ouer-mastered with perturbations, winking and looking through carnal windows,
and spectacles of error: and because we might implore our Creators assistance
according to our bounden duties, God permits Satan in respect of old Adams
transgression, spiritually to inter^use necessary pricks into our fleshly
thoughts, yea, and to interrupt us in our most zealous offices. Which moved a
reverend Elder of the Church to complain after this manner: In my prayers I
repeat oftentimes what I gain, and oftentimes I am distracted with some
filthy imagination, to do those things which I blush to speak. But, me
thinks, Hier. in Dialog. contra Luciferia.
here I hear one of his Disciples disputing, that God seeing he is the Author
and Imparter of Goodness, will not suffer any of his adopted children to be
enchanted and entrapped by Satan. For the solution of this presumptuou^
scruple; (which I take to be but a knot in a rush) I constantly aucrre, that
God is all Goodness, and as he is most good and merciful, so is he most just.
His unspotted Majesty could do no less then inflict punishment upon his new
creature (albeit with anguish of spirit, like a pitiful earthly Judge that
pronounces judgment with tears against malefactors) he could do no less
because of his future glory, and because of his former commandment to Adam,
then give verdict of death against them; which advisedly being referred to
their own counsel, they being at that time (...), Theophil Antiochen. lib. 2.
ad Antolycum.
free, and at their own liberty, preferred death before life. God did well
therefore to try man's faith betimes, before he graced him with further
favors. The Procurer he more severely punished. And because the Devils
familiarity with the woman occasioned man's fall; for this cause did God set
perpetual enmity and hatred, ever since the beginning til the worlds end,
betwixt the woman's seed and the Devil: yet with a limitation, that the Devil
should continue his illusions toward us, that he should exhale his poysonfull
puissance against the reprobate, and with might and maine pursue all
excommunicated rebels. Thus the Devil according to Gods curse rages against
us, and, as it were famished with hunger of our Damnation, like a roaring Lion,
he lies in wait to devour us. But as long as we endeavor to serve God in love
and humility, he can but bruise our earthly heels, and sting us with necessary
temptations for the souls edifying. Our Savior Christ treads down his
malicious head and hellish force, so that we shall at last prevail and triumph
in the celestial Paradise, which is a thousand times more glorious then that
Hortus conclusus, the Garden empaled, the Paradise of proof, where we were
content to be bewitched in hope or worldly wisdom.

Since Printing sprang up (which perhaps is a worldly 2
instrument of the fiery spirit of life, that after three days Apoc. 11.
and a half came from God, and entered into the Lords two Martyrs, the old
Testament and the new, I mean into their Preachers, whose bodies were laid in
the streets of spiritual Sodom, and Egypt, and yet not quite buried nor
abolished) and since we had the use of books, wherein man's manifold knowledge
of good and evil is apparently decyphered, and the Devils deceitful tricks
discovered to persons of all condition: now, as a subt^e Statesman, he works
another course to bring our souls in thrall; by stratagems, by politic
practices under hand he inspires indulgent parents to make their children free
in their nonage, before they be poudred with heavenly prudence, that the
Proverb might be verified of them; Soon ripe, soon rotten.

Scilicet ingenium and rerum prudentia velox ante pilos venit. -- Persius in
Satyr. 4.

Too soon before their beards bud forth,
They come to be Statesmen of worth.
Having thus obtained the Parents consent, he turns about his free-made
youths, and trains them (as Sertorius 3
the children of the Portingalles) after his own mould to detract, to lash out
fearful oaths at every other word, to read baudy ballads, books of his own
Apostles, even of Aretine, of Machiauell, of Rabelais, and of our English
cast-awayes; and afterward he confirms them with spiritual suggestions in
all abominations to the loss of their souls and bodies. The best of us
sometimes he possesses, with Chymerizing pleddings, like ayri^ castles, and
^^bbles (as a Mouse) on our malignant hearts, tanquam mus Ponticus, as
^ertullian terms Martian. And although we have both Moses, the Prophets*and
firmiorem sermonem Propheticum yet he rufsles among the robes, and inaudita
fundu Oracula, as my L. of Northamp^on said of the Devils pouder-plot. To
continue my subject, seeing I have adventured in some places of these Circles
to borrow Caesar's inimitable Muse to grace this worthless work of mine, l^nd
also (Heroycall Lord) your judicious The Earl of Northampton.
spirit for a season to your deeply devoted Suppliant in his greatest need.
Lo, how my poor Muse pants, eclipsed with your heavenly interposition; and
bids me, as a daily Orator to the Rays of your Nobility, betimes to betake my
self unto Epicharmus his ancient Oracle:

-- (...)
(...)
(...)
That is,

To whom Dame nature does deny
To give her gifts abundantly,
They out of hand to Auncestry,
And to their noble Kin do fly.
In the beginning of the Christian Church the very name of Christ was
sufficient to make Satan pack, and to quite the possession of tormented men,
but he learned a more cunning The Earl of Northampton.
trick of late under the banner of Christ to fight against the Lieuetenant of
his Imperial Majesty. In one point I find no change, that is, in laboring and
working by all means to draw men from their trust in Gods directions to a
tickle kind of confidence in themselves, and in their own weak knowledge of
Good and Evil, which our first parents so greedily preferred, non ex
necessitate and fato, sed ex libero eligentium proposito, not by necessity not
by destiny, but by their own freedom of choice, as an ancient Father writes*

LINEAMENT V.
1 Man's fall from the state of innocence is censured.

2 Curiosity curbed for intermedling with Gods secrets.

3 The first reason why man was not left altogether persect and incapable of
sin.

4 The latter reason.

WHerehence it comes to pass, that in wicked 1
men there shines some goodness, and in Good men is found some wickedness. In
pessimis inuenitur aliquid boni, and in optimis aliquid pessimi. In the
beginning Tertullian. in lib de Anima.
God made us all good, he made us honest, simple, and pure, but through our
ouer-scrupulous search after his secrets, through an ouer-curious oftentation
of our own worth, and of our own righteousness, through our ungrateful
negligence toward our heavenly Father, and also through our sliding and
slippery carnal condition, which could not be like the Creator in glory, we
followed our enemies counsel, who likewise was created innocent, and an Angel
of glory, though afterward he became a Detracting Devil; so that God made him
not a Devil, but an Angel. No more made he us sinful but simple. His
al-secing Majesty foreknew these tragic events; and yet for his honor, for
the behoof of elected souls, and for the replenishing of his Kingdom he
formed both Angels and men by Grace and nature, and endowed them with free will
and election for his greater glory. How should the good be known, if there
were no evil? What needs a Monarch prescribe jaws and commandments to his
subjects, were it not for the avoiding of vice? By the fall of the wicked the
Good take exemplary fears. The fall of the Devil and his associates caused
the rest, that remained incorrupt to look more narrowly to their ways, even
as the punish ments of some Traitors make others true, who otherwise might have
erred in the like degree: yea, Good men are confirmed in goodness by
observation of the contrary, which is, evil. No marvel then, that God in his
omniscience created man, whom he knew would afterward rebel: for (as I said
before) every creature is corroborated in virtue, by noting the effects of the
contrary, which is vice, Whereby we may gather, that no wicked thing was
immediately created by God, and that we happened upon wickedness by the fragility
and weakness of our natures; which is also signified by that ancient Father:
(...). Tatianv in l. aduersus gentes.


For all this curious brains will not leave off plodding 2
and practizing of profound problemes. Why (say they) did God fashion man of
such a brittle State? Wherefore made be not all men of the same manners and
condition? Why did he create man so imperfect of such a tender ticklish form?
O foolish fondlings, who are ye that presume to dispute with God? Was it not
enough for your souls to be shaped after his Divinity, both in unity and in
Trinity, with absolute and elective power to sly from the wrath to come? I
tell you, there was no reason, that petulant children should possess all their
Fathers goods. Which of you I pray, will disrobe himself of his temporal
glory, or divide it with your inferiors? Worldly Potentates can endure no
corriuals, nor by their good wills any equals. And should God share with his
creatures his most sovereign perfection, which they could as well moderate, as
Phaet on the chariot of the Sun? But to yield some satisfaction to your
curiosities, I believe that God framed man after this manner for two respects:

First, because that the creature might differ from his Creator, who alone is
perfect. The soul therefore must 3
content her self with that vocation, which God has limited unto her. Seeing
that she knows her own weakness, she must not presume on her imperfect
strength; seeing that she has experience of errors, she must wholly with fear
and trembling rely on the mercy of God, who like a tender mother, attends on
his crazed creature, and like a mild Phisician, out of her relapse works an
Antidote to preserve her from falling. She may be shadowed because she is not
God, but she can never be extinguished, because she came from God. Potest
obumbrari, quia non est Deus, extinguinon potest quia est a Deo. Well may we
stumble, but through the Grace Tertul. in. l. de Anima.
of God we rise up quickly. We may be as black as jet, but as true as steel.
We may be black, but yet comely, as the Tents of Cedar, and as the curtames of
Solomon. Cant: 1.
Though we be rebellious by nature, yet we may be regenerate by faith. Though
we be excommunicated, we may be absolved by the mediation of our Savior
Christ, and obtain again our former simplicity and state of freewill, which
in that first golden age, and time of famous memory we most wilfully lost.
Though we be but babes, we may grow up to be perfect men in strength and
understanding, and so at last to a greater measure of sanctification. Though we
enjoy not perfection, we retoyce in our redemption. And though our minds in
natural faculties do follow the temperature of our bodies, yet in
supernatural speculations we abandon and abhor it.

Another reason why God created man so imperfect (if I dare call him so) was,
because that man's soul, like mortal 4
eyes, which cannot behold the Summers Sun at noone; or like the Owl, which
is bedazeled with the daylight; I say, because the soul being ^ncarcerated
and enchamed in the massy substance of the flesh, was not capable of that
excellent perfection. Therefore we must not impute our imbecility and
imperfection to Gods want of power or impotency, but to his unsearchable will
(who after Adams creation left him to himself, puris naturalibus, to the
capacity of his own nature) and to our own earthly Tabernacles; which could
not participate, by reason of our weakness and wantonness of flesh and blood
all the glorious attributes of the Deity. For this cause did Christ descend
into the flesh with lowliness of spirit, and not with lofty glory. So that his
Kingdom, as himself answered Pilate, was not of this Ioh. 18.
world. For this cause the Israelites could not away with the Lords lightning
thunders, and glorious voice on Mount Sinai, but requested Moses to stand
betwixt them. Let not God talk with us, said they, least we die. Exodus 30.
For this cause S. Paul wrote to the Corinthians: I gave you milk to drink
and not meat, for you were not yet able 1. Cor. cap. 3.
to bear it, neither yet now are ye able: ye are yet carnal; Nay such is our
sottishness, that we endeavor not to attain unto a glimpse of the Lords
glory: we presume upon delays: we procrastinate the time, and never care for
mortifications of the flesh, being the ladder to heaven and chief means to
obtain faith, love, and charity at the hands of God. A Preacher is but a
bookish fellow: Sanctification is but curiosity: to do well or ill is allone.
Thus do the sinful sons of Adam trust too much unto predestination, as
though they were made privy of Gods inuestigable will. But to wind up the
truth in a word, the preaching of Christ's cross is foolishnes unto them that
perish, but unto them, which are saved, it is the power of God, and wisdom.
As there is no fool to the old 1. Cor. 1.
fool: that is, to the worldly selfe-wise; so contrariwise there is no
wisdom comparable to Christian simplicity, which through faith thinks it
enough, that God calls him to his Court, though not to his Council.

LINEAMENT. VI.
1 A meditation upon Satan's stinges, occasioned by an unsoined dream of the
Authors.

2 Whether the Dragon which S. John saw fighting with the Ar^bangell, was real
or spiritual.

3 Whether the Serpent which deceived Hue was real, or spiritual, or both;
wherein the manner of her deceiving is laid down.

THus are the very best, like beasts, subject unto these spiritual flings,
some more, 1
some less, according to the quality of their fleshly vessels. To this purpose
it will not be immateriall, if I insert a meditatiue conceit of mine, wherewith
I was unfeignedly possessed of late: Upon Sunday night, being the fourteenth day
of January last, 1609. I fell into a deep study concerning our knowledge of
good and evil, procured by the Infernal Snake. I lamented mine own
weakness of nature, that multitudes of sins should tread and trample down
my Christian virtue. I sorrowed in spirit, that I could not free my soul from
worldly concupiscence. At the last, after much striving and struggling, the
Lords comfortable speech to St. Paul came into my mind, My grace is sufficient
for thee. Whereupon considering my 2. Cor. 14.
repenting heart, I resolved, that God suffered me to be thus buffeted and
beaten with Sardonicall sins, because I might acknowledge mine own
imbecility, and submit the same to the perfection of Christ, the propitiation
for sins, who alone is Righteous and Holy. For the confirmation of this
meditation, I was strongly assisted by this unfeigned dream. On that very night
I dreamed, that I lay upon the floor without stockins or shoes, and suddenly
me thought one warned me, that I should look unto my self, for a Snake lurked
very near me; with which words being affrighted, I bestirred my self, and
beheld the said Snake about a yard or more in length, almost crept under me;
whereupon I vehemently cried for help to him, that warned me thereof: who
presently, as it were in a moment, with a weapon, which he had in his hand,
hewed the Snake in three or four pieces. For all that, I was not delivered
from sear, I doubted his stinging part; but he which smote him willed me in
any case not to fear, by reason that his sting was of no sense, now that he
had chopped him in pieces. With that I might see a smoke or breath arising out
of the Snakes divided body. At which strange sight, I prepared to hasten me
away, lest this smoke being infectious, should (like a pesulence) empoyson my
body: But notwithstanding all this my preparation, before I could get together
my stockins and shoes, which were the impediments of my remove, the smoke
ceased on a sudden. Whereupon I bewailed somewhat with my self, that I went no
sooner away from that poisonous smoke, or smoakie exhalation, and because I
preferred such trisling impediments before the security of my life; which I
imagined to be in some hazard, by reason of that my small stay.

Charitable Reader, pardon me, if in rehearsal of this dream I disquiet thy
delicate mind; notwithstanding that our whole life is little better then a
dream. No man living can attribute less credit, then I do, unto dreams:
yet nevertheless, forasmuch as now and then it pleased God to reveal secrets
and things to come unto his servants by dreams, as sometime he did unto Joseph
and Nabuchadonozor, we must not altogether neglect to make reasonable use of
them. As for example, The man which admonished me, I compare to our Savior
Christ, who of his unspeakable mercy toward mankind defends us (while we
prostrate our selves in all humility, as in my dream I lay upon the floor)
from the Hellish Snake, who watches daily to undermine our wills. And yet
though his Godhead has trodden upon Satan's head, he permits him for his
glory, for our trial, and also for some satisfaction of his justice, to
enuenom our humane wills, by reason of our tarditie and remistnesse in his
service, but certainly afterward he embraces his Elect again. And, like as I
played loath to depart with my stockins and shoes, for all that I saw the imminent
danger of the poisonous Snake; so does mankind attend to the toyish bables and
triuiall fables of this world, while Satan bruizeth our worldly heels, and
casts out of his mouth whole floods of spiritual venom, to surround and
surprise our spiritual part with passions of envy, malice, fury, and other
infections, whereof the smoakie exhalation of my dreamed Snake, might well be
the representing Image and Idaea. And the rather I am inrooted in this opinion,
because I know my reasonable will to be oftentimes tainted with the said
spiritual smoakie venom, as I supposed in my dream that I sucked the feeling,
palpable, and sensible smoaky poison of the mangled Snake into my corporal
breath. But herein consists my comfort, that even as I sucked this last full
sore against my will; so nol^ns volens, whether I will or no, I am constrained
to suck into my humane soul the other smoky poison of the passionate Snake,
which I pray the victorious Treader down of his malicious head, by virtue of
his Crown of victory to convert into the best; so that my spotted spirit may
be accepted in his presence for a contrite spirit. AMEN.

As concerning that place of Genesis, where the Devil is said to appear in
the similitude of a Serpent unto Eve, 2
and where in the Revelation of Saint John, the Dragon fought with Michael in
heaven, we must not judge both of them to be real Serpents or Dragons, but we
must think that this latter Dragon, which Saint John saw in a vision, might
well be the spiritual sinful sting, which the Devilish Serpent left behind
him, in our fore-parents memories (but there allegorically or mystically
applied to the Antichrist) when we incurred the curse of God in that earthly
Paradise, which (as I take it) was but the figurative touchstone of old Adams
faith.

And the former Serpent in Genesis was a real Serpent, 3
the subtillest beast of the field, which God had made, abused by the Captain
of subtilty, who not content himself to have transgressed in Heaven against
his Creator, did also according to the corruption of his spiritual nature,
devise to draw mankind like unto himself, to be partaker of his knowledge in
good and evil, that is, of his worldly craft, and of his v^nemous. subtilty,
for he was double subtle, subtle as the subtlest beast of the field, and
subtle in his Devilish nature, which in truth is the same which we call the
maladies of the soul, or perturbations of the mind, by our Philosophers named
Concupiscible and Irascible, whereof the reward or rather revenge was that
threatening clause of God: Thou shall die the death. To this dcuise of the
Serpent the woman yielded body and soul with her Will she longed, the same
being depraved by the creeping Tempter, who by this time had likewise won her
understanding to incline; the attributes of her soul thus seduced, the senses
of her body presently consented. For the tree being pleasant to the eyes, and
the desire of wisdom another moving object, thoroughly persuaded poor Eve to
follow the Serpents counsel. O cursed Serpent, how subtle were thy practices!
First, thou chosest the subtlest beast, which God created; then, thou creptst
into his heart, spakest through his mouth, and seeing mankind too simple for
this world, altogether innocent, holy, devour, having his thoughts intentive on
his Maker, and also seeing him like a child newly borne, bedazeled with
varieties of objects, and prospects, and admiring at the wonderful
workmanship of God, which seemed the more strange unto his senses, in regard
that he was then unexperienced, raw, and newly come into the world; thou
set upon the weaker vessel, knowing that the woman was as yet more simple
then the man, as a creature formed somewhat after the man, and consequently of
less experience, and of less perfection. But what gainest thou? Thy spirit
limited to thy former home of darkning errors, and thy fatal instrument
metamorphozed into a sneaking Snake, to creep upon the earth, as thou did
creep into his wit, and into the woman's conscience. This is the righ: reward
of disobedience, which afterward Lots wife received, though in some different
manner. For her bodily form was changed from a woman into a pillar of salt,
like as the Serpent was converted from the comliest shape among beasts, into
the most contemptible creature which this world affoords; I say, a creature, a
monstrous creature in general words, for a special or specificqe name can no
Logician rightly attribute unto a Serpent, which is fully grown. It is
reported, that in the Indies he flies, in Noua Zembla he fisheth at Sea, and is
there many yardes in length. Whereby we must note, that the spiritual Serpent
houereth, fisheth, creeps, compasses the earth to and fro, and suiteth his
power manifoldly; all to the intent, that he may circumuent man's heedlesse Will.

LINEAMENT. VII.
1 That the Holy Ghost applies the Scripture unto man's capacity. 2 An
admonition to the Readers of the Scripture.
THus from the breach of the commandment came in the Devil, from the Devil 1
came sin, and from sin came Detraction, and other infinite errors. Thus
it pleased the Holy Ghost to speak parables, intermixed with palpable subjects,
to use metaphores and figures, to apply his key of knowledge toward the ward
of man's crooked and crabbed lock. Thus it pleased God to permit mankind to
fall, that some may rise again, and that in real and corporal forms after
the manner of men, according to our weak capacities, which could not otherwise
comprehend such mystical revelations, then by sensible apparitions and worldly
examples. Let us then modestly content our selves with such knowledge, as the
Holy Ghost has inserted in the Scripture for our admonishment, and not presume
to enter into his spiritual secrets, no more then we would that our neighbors
enter into the knowledge of our silent thoughts; or no more then we dare break
into the privy chamber of our earthly King, except we be called.

Howbeit for all this, I would not counsel you, that be 2
Preachers and seachers of Christ's flock, to misconster these speeches of
mine, or to use them as ye use your stirrops, in shortn^ng or lengthning them,
according to your pleasures and fantasies, by collecting, that I dissuade you
or yours from searching out the depth of such m^steries and parabies, as the
Holy Ghost has left in the holy Scripture ^or our monition in these latter
days. In Gods name, as he has given utterance unto you, and revelations in
your spirits, labor to reap that spiritual benefit, to the edification of
your Churches. But above all things, before ye attempt such Divine Prophesies,
humble your thoughts with sear and reverence, humble your bodies with
abstinence and fasting at convenient seasons; seeing that bookish learning,
self-conceit, and pampering cheer have been the chief obstacles, that
carnal Courtiers, presumptuous Papists, and pompuous people could never
attain to the right knowledge of the Scriptures, nor arrive aright at the
haven of truth: that, that saying might be fulfilled: The simple o^ foolish
things 1. Cor. ^.
of the world he has chosen to confound the wise. Their hearts are indurate,
their understanding darkened.

LINEAMENT VIII.
1 The Election o^ the Protestants after the imitation of S. Paul's graffing in
of the Gentles.

2 Means to discern the Antichrist by Prophesies out of the Scripture.

3 Means to discern the Antichrist by his pompous manner of living, and also
by his Detractions.

But (ye beloved of the Lord) detract not from the word of God, neither descant
I
ye much upon the bare letter. For I would not, that ye Ministers, mistake
this mystery; how blindness is partly happened in the Church of Rome Romans 11.
until the fullness of the Elect be come in. And again, Ibid.
through their fall. salvation is come unto you to provoke them withal, Ibid.
Through their unbelief ye have obtained mercy. Thus has God reserved you
and your flocks as a remnant according to his own unsearchable pleasure, and
election of grace, without any deserts of yours at all. Thus it has pleased
him, because he would have his power known, to take compassion upon some, and
to harden Romans 9.
some. And all this happily, because the man of sin, the son of Detraction
might be revealed in his time. Confer therefore one place of the Scripture
with another (as I have done here for the calling and graffing in of the
Protestants, and hardening of the Papists) confer, I say, the conformity of
the present state with the state past of the Church (old age being another
infancy) and ye shall see, as clear as at noone-tide, the true meaning of
dark places; which no man that stands upon his own high mind, and his own
merits can possibly perceive.

In like manner, do ye desire to discern the Antichrist? Compare those things
which are prophesied of 2
him one with another, and ye shall firret him out: ye shall find him
cunningly crept into our Christian Church. Even as Christ was a mystery to the
Pharisees, so Antichrist is a mystery to the Papists; I say, a mystery, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
a mystery, the mystery of iniquity, which cannot distinctly be discerned,
without the spiritual eyes of faith in the inward man. Look on him with your
bodily eyes, and this Alcimus will deceive the very Elect, if it were possible.
In outward show an Angel of light, a sanctimonious Elder, but inwardly a
sacrilegious Serpent, or a Fox in a Lambs skin. O Antichrist, thy Dragon is
destroyed by Daniels art, by the blood of the Lamb thy beast is conquered. O
false Prophet, thy Babylonian whore is become Apoc.
wrinckled, her beauty is faded, her wich-craft discovered, her force decayed,
her superstitions defaced. What remains? Thou art driven to a narrow straight,
to thy nearest shifts. Post over thy title to another. Persuade thy subjects,
that a new Antichrist (but no mystical) is even now borne in Babylon. Let John
Doleta with all expedition publish this in Print. It is a point of policy to
temporize, and to bear thy credulous Catholics in hand, least suddenly they
flinch from thy yoke, and of Romanists fall to be Apostolickes.

By the mystical allusion of Michea, that saw the Lord putting a false and a
lying spirit in the mouth of Ahabs 3
Prophets, that claymed themselves (like the Pharisees and Papists) to be
within the Church; ye shall gather with this, and with the Revelation of S.
John, that these terms of Decemer, salfe Prophet, the worker of false
miracles, Apoc.
which set to sale the bodies and souls of men, cannot be applied more
significantly to any other then to him, who 1. Ioh. 2.
went out from us, but was not of us. Would ye answer their objection, which
allege that the Pope cannot be that great Antichrist, because his Holiness
denies not the Father and the Son, nor exalts himself above that 1. Ioh.
2.
which is called God? Turn them to the Etymology of these words, Jesus Christ,
that is, the All-sufficient and anointed Saniour of the world, and tell them
that the entire and whole virtue of the Godhead is wounded, it besides him they
use any Mediator to salvation. Turn them to S. Paul, and read that the
Antichrist must sit in the Temple of God. The Pope sits (not with Peter's
humility, 2. These. 2.
but with pomp and Majesty) in Peter's chair, in the mother Church of the
West* being now become a cruel stepmother, and a common harlot, showing that
he has authority to grant Indulgences and Pardons, to release the pains of
Purga^ory, peremptorily to advance his Standard above the Church, which is to
magnify himself above the Holy Ghost, by whom it is ruled under Christ; to
consecrate beads, water, crucifixes, yea and the glorious body of Christ,
which is already consecrated in Heaven. In which prerogatives he extolleth
himself above God, doing those spiritual offices which are flat contrary to
Gods word and law. Likewise it is prodigious that such things be sanctified by
sinful man, specially since the ceremonial law and partition wall betwixt the
Jews and us, is broken down after the resurrection of Christ. It is
derogatory (I say) to his sacred Majesty that a mortal man usurp that
Promethean pre-eminence: for he that commits such sacrilege above mentioned,
does undoubtedly usurp the power of God in a high degree. He that usurps
after this manner, detracts from faith only in Christ Jesus and from other
gifts of the Holy Ghost* He that detracts from these gifts of the Holy Ghost
blasphemes, and he that blasphemes so high a Majesty, sins irremissibly,
except the Lords mercy left out some other exception, unknown unto us. Thus
(Christian Reader) shall thou ponder other points of the Bibles mysteries.

And now seeing I have sore-armed my* soul with sufficient exorcismes, and
methodically fished out the great Leuiathan, let me anathomize the Monsters
principal members.

LINEAMENT IX.
1 The Conclusion of this second Circle, showing that the Spirit of Detraction
can never confound us* while we meditate with says on Christ's passion.

2 That we become guilty of his death, when we detract from his name or works.

3 The Authors supplication against the spirit of Detractum.

SHut fast thy mouth from lies and vanity,
Shoot in thine eyes to love and verity, 1

Thou soul of mine, which every day do fall
Through Satan's web into pollutions thrall.
Let faith inflame thy will to meditate
Upon that Flame in flesh incorporate,
To see those wounds, which thou have made so wide
With dint of Spear in his blood* gored side.
Cantic. 2.
Doves build in holes of rocks: but thou, my Dove,
Bernard super Cantic. Christ is the Rock, his wounds the holes, and the
faithful soul the Dove, according to that Beye simple as Doves.
In holes of bloudied Rock must build thy love.
For while thou look with faith and zealous fear,
How that his head a thorny crown did wear,
How Pilates scourge his holy skin did tear*
How his meek soul both mockes and flouts did bear,
And how his hands and feet were nailed to the Cross
To ransom* thee, and to repair the loss,
Which Lucifer with Adders sting did cause
To thee, when Eve first brake her Makers laws.
While thou with faith do view this mystery,
The fiery Serpent of Mount Caluary
No wile, no guile, no black tongues archery, Number 21. Ioh. 3.

Nor self-conceit of fancies flattery.
Can flesh and blood, the world or Satan work
Against thy life. Though Pope conspire with Turk,
Though Haman with his Counselors combine:
Though Machiauell complot with Aretine
To blow thee up, vet thy essential parts
Shall stand vnshak't in spite of all their arts.
Wherefore ye winds of praise, ye wings of pride, 2

Pack hence, all sins, which virtues sons deride,
Ye grinning dogs, ye grunting hogs away, Romans 13.

The night is past, and wel-come is the day.
The day is come, to day without delay
I must contemn such lust, vile dust, and clay.
The bell rings out, the Drummer sounds Alarm,
I must rise up for fear of future harm. Ambros. in Oration. ad Mediolanens.

Tears and prayers are my arms* I must pray,
And speak the truth without all fail to day.
All hail, clear day, long may thy Sunshine last
Without eclipse, or cloud, or winters blast.
All hail clear day, through whose reflecting beams
Broad waking I do see truths open glcames.
I see my Lord (alas, what do I see?)
My Lord and Savior hurt. By whom? By me.
By me he lies with thoughts, misdecdes, and words
Wounded, as with sharp thorns, or edged swords.
I crucified my Christ, I rent his name,
I crowned thee with obloquie and shame,
O Lord of life, when I should worship thee,
But blessed art thou for all my blasphemy.
All honor be to thee, O verity, 3

Bright light of love, one God in unity.
And persons three in orders Trinity,
Which can me free from all such vanity,
When it shall please thy gracious Majesty,
My soul to veil with thy boundless bounty.
Though speech be wind, and Schoolemens quantity, Arist in Categor de
quantitate.

Void of true sense, void of true quality:
Yet when the same does thy sweet laws transcend,
Lord, let my babbling light on Babels end.
But for my soul, let no fond Oracles
Her substance spill, nor stand as obstacles,
Eternally to blind her spectacles,
Which thou have cleared by thy words miracles.
THE THIRD CIRCLE OF THE SPIRIT OF DETRACTION, CONIVRED AND CONVICTED.
LINEAMENT. I.
1 The nature of the spirit of Detraction. 2 His objections. 3 The Authors
answer. 4 The description of Detraction. 5 His Companions. 6 His Paradoxes. 7
Abriese consutation.


AMong such troops of wicked spirits, which 1
beleaguer the sinful sons of Adam none of them is so pernicious as this
viperous spirit of Detraction; for by this turbulent motion Pluto himself,
being an Angel of glory, lost his former state, and likewise we worldly
weakelings deserve our Creators curse upon your selves and posterities. Behold,
ye brainsicke blabs, licentious libertines, behold your famous familiar, your
spirit of Detraction, coniured and conn^cted in a Circle without crosses,
without Masses, without holy water, without pots of good liquor, or pipes of
Tobacco, (the only modern motive of malicious Detraction) and that by no
meaner weapons, then by the mystical weapons of Michaell and Michea, the
powerful Oracles of the great God.

O what an unaccustomed coniuration is this? New Lords new laws; masse-monging
manacled; Devils 2
discovered; And dare you c^nuict the ancient spirit of Detraction, which by
successiue tradition descended unto us well nigh a thousand years ago, even
about the very time, when the Pope and Mahomet bought their puissant patents
this for the East from the detracting Dragon, the other for the West from his
Eagles wing, the Emperor Phocas? Dare you vilify the sovereignty of Bacchus
and Tobacco? and adventure to conjure up such an omnipotent Spirit as that of
Detraction without these belching belly-Gods? Which our swintsh swaggerers
extol now-a days on the behalf of this spirit, as chief purgers of
superf^uous rheumes, preparatiues of heavenly dreams, visions, oracles, and
supernatural revelations? Then farewell kind neighborhood, farewell good
fellowship, farewell table-talke, farewell descanning of destinies, farewell
all trencher-knights, and readers of other men's actions. As the body is
nourished with good liquor, the bones with marrow; so is the soul of man with
the perfume of Divine Tobacco, and with the perfusion of Detracting taunts.
Take away these two, the cause and the effect, the substance and the shadow:
what is man's life but a dry discourse, a solitary Ghost, mortified with
melancholy?

Veritas non quaerit angulos. The way of truth is plain 3
without turnings. I fear not to lay down the truth, were my brother a
Tobacconist, a Wine-bibber, or a false Prophet. Amicus Socrates, amicus Plato,
sed magis amica veritas, Socrates is my friend, Plato is my friend; but Truth
is my chiefest friend. The excessive taking of Tobacco, together with drunken
fellowship, renew the forces of the Detracting spirit, and likewise do kindle
the fire that was covertly raked before under the ashes, for his malicious
humor.

Which (to describe) is an embezeling of another glory, a wrongful
withdrawing of another power, and a 4
blasphemous censure invented and blazed abroad touching the Creator or his
creature; which either may be termed a kind of scurrility, or knauish carping,
carpendi effusa licentia, (...), or else a doubling of the Dogs letter Rout of
their snarling nostrils. To this I might add, that they offend against the
third Commandment, namely, Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in
vain: and also against the ninth Commandment, Thou shall not bear false
witness against thy neighbor; which subject themselves unto this kind of
Spirit.

In the company of this wicked spirit (as I said before) many other spirits
consort, such as our Contrymen call 5
boon companions, yea more spirits then ever molested Mary Magdalen. The
spirit of blasphemy (as the shadow upon the body) chiefly awaites upon him,
and shares with him for the precious soul of man. So do the spirit of envy,
the spirit of hatred, and sundry other poisonous messengers of the common enemy
the Devil, all ready sophistically to prove the idle phantasics and
imaginations of shallow brains.

Would you coelo deducere Lunam, draw the Moon down from heaven, or the
stars from the sky? The spirit 6
of Detraction with his mates make for you. The Moon is descended, and has
kissed Endimion, while he lay asleep. The stars be fallen, and a company of
drunkards at their taking of Tobacco beheld them. According to that of the Poet:

Cum bibitir conchis hinc iam vertigine coelum --
Ambulat, and geminis exurgit mensa lucernis. Iuuenal. in Satyr

When wines are drunk, then heaven whirleth round,
And candles two on board for one abound.
There are Incubi, which have lien with fair women, and tempted them ere now
to plant Actaeons badge on their husbands foreheads. Merlin your British
Bardh, sometimes possested with the spirit of prophecy, was a bastard,
begotten betwixt a goodly young Devil and a goodly young Gentlewoman

At old Carmarthen Merlins famous town. Drayton in Epist Heroic.


Nay more, the Arch-Diuel has gotten the Popes power, he has gotten the keys
of Heaven: he has authority to bind, to loose, to diminish the pains of
hell, to grant Indulgences and Pardons for one and twenty years of all manner
of mortal sins: he powers down rain amain at his pleasure: he terrifies
the world with thunders, lightnings, and earthquakes: Cornelius Agrippa is a
great man in his books, uses him for his familiar, and by coniurations
commands the clouds, and makes the Planets executioners to plague his
adversaries.

O monstrous blasphemy! O preposterous absurdity! Will any man of
understanding give credit to these Idolatrous 7
Detractions? God himself questioning with Job out of the Whirle-winde,
utterly denies that Divine authority to any creature. Can thou (said he) send
the lightnings that they may walk, and say unto thee; Lo, here Job 38. 1. Reg.
18.
we are? If Baal be God then go after him, but if the Lord be God, why tempt
you his patient Spirit, in ascribing his dreadful power unto his Enemy, that
darkesome deadly Fiend, which cannot help himself, or act the least matter of
importance? Elias in annulling of Baals power, manifested him only to be God,
which answered by heavenly fire. The Devil fights with none other weapons
then with deceit. With deceitful malice he stung Christ, while he was on
earth; and with the self same weapons he stinges Christians. Christ in his
members, now that he is in Heaven. With deceit he tempted Eve, and with deceit
he persecuteth the woman of God, the Church of Christ: For even as Michaels
weapons were the blood of the Lamb and righteous deeds; so the Dragons
weapons are lies and deceit. When lecherous Churchmen knew not how to cloak
their lewd acts: and when noble Floraes, that went current for Puritan Nuns,
could no longer cover their impure debauchments and notorious baudries, then
forsooth to salve their credites, they divulged abroad, either that the Devil
(who repined at their chaste) blinded their sights with supposed bodies lives,
much like unto their lovers, or else with surreptitious carcases out of graves,
he committed carnal copulation with them.

LINEAMENT. II.
1 Notes to discern the spirit of Detraction. 2 A limitation of speeches.


EVen as the well manured earth brings forth seeds and grain for man's
reiiefe; 1
and unmanured gathers weeds, moss, and brambles: so the soul of man, if it
be well erected toward God, and directed by his holy Spirit, becomes divinely
disposed, but ill looked unto, and let as a restless rogue, to straggle abroad
among Satan's sinful spirits, is quickly surprised with the witty workema^ship
of the wily Serpent, and in a moment corrupted with the bane of heretic all
doctrine. An Heretic I account him, who being a Christian, contumaciously
maintains err^nceus opinions, or peremptory Paradoxes, contrary to the best
part of the Church, as when you hear a creature abuse and abase his Creators
glory in fatl^ering his forcible works upon his enemy the Devil then expend
and examine in the balance of even reason his unreasonable detracting
sentence; and no doubt but the Spirit of spirits will open your eyes, that you
may perceive the wicked spirit which haunteth him, and hunteth after his soul.

Secondly, observe the quality of the person, which detracteth: seeing that it
is a thing rare in a wise man to make the toyish tongue the Oracle of
preiudicate conceit, who from his cradle is otherwise taught to smother up in
silence both his own ouer-curious inventions conceived of supernatural
operations, and also what he knows or hears exorbitant, frivolous, and
redounding either to the dishonor of Gods power, to the disparagement of his
laws, or to the disgrace of his neighbors same. And for the vulgar sort,
their judgment is crooked and confused, that they extol shows and shadows
of truth, and cannot distinguish between necessary and superfluous speeches.

Thirdly, ponder his manner of speaking, whether as a passionate person in his
furious mood, or in the bitter and incited anguish of his soul: whether the
spirit of Detraction tickles the possessed party at tableboord, at
Tobacco-taking, at gossipping (for at those times people wax giddy headed and
fantastical, by reason of the moving of the blood and humors) or whether his
speeches tend for his own vtility and profit, or for revenge of supposed
wrongs or emulous concurrence in worldly affairs. Ex abundantia cordis os
loquitur. Out of the hearts abundance the tongue speaks. And as abundance of
rain causes rivers to ouerflow their natural meeres, bounds, and banks, and
to break with a violent deluge over into meadows and plain fields: so the
heart boiling over with surious motions, will run quite out of course and
temper, except it be suffered to cuaporate and vent out by the mouth (which
stands like an open Sepulcher, or a roaring gulf) whatsoever is internally
conceived and consopited. Yea, I have known some (like women with child)
sick to the heart, till they were delivered of their suspicious Detractions or
monstrous embrions.

But thou, which art the Pupil of silence, note, that a reuiler is a lier, and
a lier is forgetful, as the Italian teaches 2
thee: Maldicente e bugiardo, bugiardo, e smemorato. It is not my purpose by
these observations, altogether to debar discourses, and neighbourly
confabulations, but my meaning is to disclose some means, whereby we might
discern the nature of this Spirit, which tempts our common readers to utter
before God and man, such contemptuous contradictions derogatory to his Majesty,
who hears with infinite patience every word they speak. As my soul cannot
brook these false aspersions, and flying lies touching ones honor, ones
honesty, ones life: so on the contrary, I cannot choose but approve Christian
and civil conference sugared and seasoned with charity, love, and humility,
tending to the glory of God, the weal of our Country, or the welfare of our
neighbors. Nay, I applaude with both hands all such confabulations, which are
relished Atticis aut Socraticis leporibus, with the sauorie smacke of pleasant
conceits, not vitiated with the extremes of rude scur^ility, or of rough
austerity, but richly refined with the golden mean, Vrbanity or Ciuility,
which the Grecians call (...). Let the distressed (in Gods name) pour out his
grecuances familiarly to his friend, for that eases the mind, and by talking
in counsel with a faithful friend, the Spirits recover Commin. l. 5. c. 5
their former virtue and strength. Let Preachers reprove their Parishioners
infirmities in private, and in any case let them not reprehend particular men's
faults openly in the Pulpit: for that place being general, requires general
speeches. Let them not rebuke any, but exhort an Elder as a Father, the younger
men as brethren: for there 1. Tim. 5.
is difference betwixt exhortation and rebuking, and so there is difference
betwixt rebuking men's persons, and rebuking men's vices; rebuking to
edification, and rebuking to desperation; rebuking in patience, and rebuking in
passion; rebuking in private, and rebuking in public: the one is proper to
the temperate spirit of God, the other to the turbulent spirit of Satan.
Wherefore dear Christian, refrain thy tongue as it were with a bridle; for to
what use will thy house serve without a door, or thy purse without strings?

LINEAMENT III.
1 That the imbecility of our natural dispositions tainted through the first
Maits sin with curiosity, inconstancy, and negligence is the prime cause of
the spirit of Detraction.

2 That our curious search after the supernatural beginning of time works
our confusion.

3 Of our Curiosity.

4 Of our Inconstancy.

5 And of our Negligence.

Our humane natures stained through original 1
concupiscence, cannot but be tossed and turmoiled with many impediments;
first, with curiosity to pry into other men's actions, and in the mean space
to neglect Aesops hindermost wallet, wherein our own faults are registered.
Secondly, we are spotted with fickleness to change our purposes, as the
Chameleon at the sight of every glozing object. Lastly, through original
wantonness we become infatuated and stupefied, that we forget what we read,
or hear pertinent to our instruction in Christ.

Here I could digress and show, that our philosophical scanning of times and
seasons, is the prime point of curiosity, 2
and so the chief cause of our worldly sottishnes. We run upon things
imagined to be done before the beginning of time, of Adams time, whereas in
truth this computation of time is only humane, according to man's natural
understanding, which otherwise could not comprehend this worlds creation.
Surely (in my judgment) there is no respect in the other world of time, by
reason that the excess and abundance of heavenly joys drownes all the memory
of time, like as a man that is spectator of a Comedy, with the extremity of
delight thinks three hours no longer then one hour. The ioies of heaven are
infinite, and cannot be circumscribed by time. There, dwells the great Ichouah,
who is Alpha, and Omega, the beginning and last, who will teach us to measure
time after another manner; after a metaphysicall manner. This moved the Angel
to swear, that there should be no more time. This moved the Psalmist to say; A
thousand years in thy sight, are but as yesterday. Go too then, ye
Astrologicall Scribes, leave off your curious computations: the time will come
(like Platees wonderful year) wherein mankind shall need none of your
Almanackes. But in the mean time, ye complain (and this complaint will last
as long as your Almanacks) that there be other Chronographers, or rather
temporizers beside your selves. I grant that there be two sorts of temporizing
companions, which abuse the natural quality of precious time; the one an
hypocrite, which under the humble habit of a Lamb, for luere sake deceiues
his dearest friend, an intelligeneer, the disciple of Machiauel, a Jew that
loves no man but for advantage, that detracts from him, who has best
befriended him in his need, an A theist, a dissembler, a neutrall; that with
the wind and time changes his Religion, Amicus omnium, amicus nullorum, every
man's friend and no man's friend, a busy medler in other men's causes, a
Polypragmon, an Apparitor that (like a Iudaes or Simoniake) lives by extortion,
by the price of blood, by enquiring from time to time after the sins of the
people. The other temporizer is a Philosophical dunce, this year a Thomist,
the next year a Sco^ist, an earnest plodder of supernatural reasons,

Obstipo capite, infigens and lumine terram,

With downe-bent head, and eyes upon the ground, an obseruer of the least
minute in horologie, and one that would feign intrude himself into the Lords
privy Counsel. The former kind of Temporizers inhabit in public places
about Princes Palaces, and (like false Achithophels) long to manage matters of
policy. The latter, as people addicted to more melancholy, retire themselves to
monastical habitations, where they meditate on their curious problemes,
grinding the world as it were into Oaten-meale in the Winde-mill of their
brains.

And now to re-iterate Curiosity, the primary cause of Detraction, begotten by
Original corruption, our incorrigible 3
natures being let at random, left arbitrary to do what seems good in our
own eyes, tandem Custode romoto, without Orbilites our tutors crabbed
countenance, without checkes or correction, encourage us to wax lawless and
licentious libertines, worse then the busieheaded French, at whose dissolute
carriage and audacious Detraction I was much amazed, when in every town and
village I heard them scot-free revile and rail at their chief Magistrates,
with taikatiue Curiosity, scanning their honest deeds. From whom, even as we
borrow newfangled dresses, and courtly-complements, so do we (like curious
Apes) receive their poisonous Adder of Detraction. We see motes in other men's
eyes, but perceive not beams in our own eyes. We note acutely with Argus
sight, one sinister act perpetrated by another, but will not discern our own
great and gross crrours, though all others discover them as easily, as huge,
rocks or notorious shelfes. Our own transgressions we compare to mole-hils,
our neighbors to the Alps or Pirenaean mountains. The reason is, because our
muddy minds shoot altogether outward, and wind not inwardly into themselves,
according to the Poet:

Tecum habita and noris quam sit tibi curta supellex.
Dwell with thy self, and thou shall know, Persius in Sat. 4.

How that thy store at home is low.
Next, we wander up and down through our frailty in the Maze or Labyrinth of
unsteadfastness, betwixt God 4
and his enemies, the pompes of this world and carnal pleasures. God seeks to
win us by inspiring men to write books for our conuersions, by sending
zealous Preachers into sundry quarters of the world, as loud trumpets to awake
us out of sin and pr^uarication, and likewise to live in louc and charity one
with another. Our inconstancy defaceth all with forgetfulness, we return to
our old vomit, and choose with foolish Gryllus to retain still the shapes of
effeminate Epicures and Swine, rather then to be metamorphosed into men's
forms, with the rest of Ulysses his companions. We are carried about in the
voluble spheres of our own waucring imaginations. To day we praise a man, to
morrow we dispraise him. To day we pray to God for grace, to morrow we
blaspheme his power with words of disgrace. To day our souls are calm and
temperate, to morrow ouer-clouded with unruly passions. Nay more, we alter our
opinions in one moment of an hour.

Romae Tybur amo ventosus, Tybure Romam.
At Rome I long old Tyburs Town to see, Horat.

And there I long again in Rome to be.
Ouer-cloyed in towns by reason of the vnwholesomnes and stricknes of the
air, we long to live in the delectable coun^rey, free from those
inconveniences, which annoy the towns: But presently tired in the country for
want of pleasant company, we retire and return back again into the town,
where with doubts of some infectious sickness, with disgust and
coffeehouse to see daily factions, seeds of dissension, and other dislikes
common to company, we wish our selves again in the country. How soddenly do
our imaginations chop and change? How in the twinkling of an eye we suppose
our selves at London, at Oxford, at home, from home. Yea, in a short time we
imagine our selves safely arrived at the East Indies for spice, in Barbary for
sugar, in China for silks, in France for wines and salts: and all these
Merchandises bought, brought home, and sold away in as small a space, as a man
might repeat over the Lords prayer. O fickle men, how are your brains and
minds thus intoxicated? One while ye look as amiable, as if ye had
swallowed up a hare, another while fleering, as if ye had swallowed up a gull;
one while heavenly, another while earthly; one while devout, another while
Detracting; not one day in one mood or mind, but as the wind, wavering both
in words and thoughts.

The last impediment, which the first Man's transgression subjected us unto, is
a kind of dullness or negligence; 5
with which we are so besotted, that we cannot open our eyes to behold what
arms our Savior Christ left us, not only able to encounter this spirit of
Detraction, but also the Arch spirit of all vicious spirits. By Baptism with
future repentance he washed us from original corruption. By shedding his
innocent blood he ransomed our souls from hell: only in recompense he expects
thankful minds of us, with continual exercise of prayers, with often
communicating his mystical Body in reverence, love, and charity one with
another, after that moralizing manner, which St. Paul himself quotes down to
the quite confusion of poore-blinde Papists, namely, in remembrance of him, in
remembrance of him, for as often as 1. Cor. 11.
ye eat his bread and drink his cup, ye do show the Lords death till he
comes; so that joining together, as loving members of one body, we might
skirmish against our spiritual Enemy, and against his spirits of sin, which
he hatcheth and fostereth for our bane, fall, and perdition. In a word, let us
account it a foul sin for any man to be either ignorant or partial in his
own infirmities. And let us censure other men's faults with fearful
consciences, or rather suspend our hasty judgments, because we cannot
distinctly discern of spirits; but let us diue into our own without doubts or
scruples, because God gave us a mindful monitrix within to look our.

LINEAMENT. IIII.
1 That ill Education is another cause of malicious Detraction.

2 That want of maintenance in the Clergy is the cause of ill Education.

3 Certain modern abuses taxed in some remote angles of this Kingdom.

THou mortal man, in thy young and tender years, being pliable and apt to
receive 1
any impression, must out of hand be fashioned in the sharp turning wheel of
instruction.

Vdum and molle lutum es, nunc nunc properandus and acri
Fingendus six fine rota --
In youth thou art as moist and softened clay, Persius in Sat. 5.

And must by teachers wheel make have away.
This counsell^ direct to honest parents, my brethren in Christ, whereby they
may beware how they cocker and dandle their children in licentious folly. Roses
must needs wither, when they are ouer-growne with briars and thorns, and
children that are assailed with whole legions of affections must fall at the
last, if they be not accordingly s^ccoured. Which likewise that Divine
Philosopher ratifieth: A youth not as yet having fully and absolutely Plato
Dialog. 7. de legib.
disposed himself to goodness is a deceitful, cruel, and a most proud
beast, unless he be bound betimes with a Schoolmaster, as with a streng
bridle. Certainly good education is the chiefest ebstacle and ba^re to the
diuell^sh spirit of Detraction. For when have you heard any man ingenuously
brought up to detract from his Creator, or from his neighbor? He that touches
pitch cannot but be defiled therewith: one scabbed sheep may infect a whole
flock. And as the Royal Prophet says; With the Psam.
clean thou shall be clean, and with the froward thou shall learn
frowardness.

As for you of the nobler and prouder sort, (...), Cousens to the Gods of the
earth, you that stand upon fantastical Genealogies, bringing your pedegrees
by a thousand lines and branches from Gog and Magog, measuring your deserts by
descent, and not by virtues worth, ye, I mean (queijs vinere fas est occipiti
coeco, which persuade your selves, that it is lawful for you to lead your
Persius Sat. 1.
lives careless, and to speak what you please concerning God or man) ye are
too high for my humble pen: I dare not admonish you for fear of an action on
the case. Nay few that understand any thing must be admitted to your presence,
and if any one be, yet dare he not instruct you for Commin. l. 5. c. 5
fear of displeasure, or if happily at any time he put you in mind thereof,
no man will abide him.

But why do I wish men in their prime, in their growing 2
time to be pruned with virtue, polished with learning, and strongly armed
against the stormy spirit of Detraction? Seeing they lack profitable Teachers
to edify their souls? Seeing our Ghostly Pastors in this remote place of the
Kingdom be ignorant themselves? No other reason can be alleged of this their
ignorance then pure penury; whereof the Clergy (especially) here in our
Country languisheth. Let me look but in the neighborhood, where I dwell,
and I find within this one Hundred twelve parishes, whose tithes and
emoluments amount to a deep sum in the year: Some parishes yield eight
score or nine score pounds a year: yea, the tithes of the least parish arise
yearly to one hundred pounds: and yet notwithstanding all this, the poor
Curates receive not above twenty nobles a piece in the year: Out of which they
be compelled to pay yearly fifteenthes, pro curations, and other exactions, as
high as thirty shillings. So that the Ministers pension is little more then
five pounds. Which beggarly annuity cannot maintain him, no nor supply him
with necessary raiment. Neither will any Scholar of worth accept of such a
mean rate. For who will rest content with dross, while he may have gold? Who
will inhabit in a mudwall cottage, if he may have better? Nay, if some zealous
men were willing to extend the talents of their spirits for our instruction,
how can such poor pittances serve to keep soul and body together? Venture nec
aures, neque linguam habet. It agrees with reason, that the industrious
Labourer, chiefly in the Lords vineyard, should enjoy his competent hire: for
if maintenance and reward of travel were taken away, learning must needs fall
to ruin. Tacitus lib. 1. Annal.
This certainly is the cause, which marreth nurture, and consequently leaves
our minds barren, untilled, and unfurnished with true knowledge, insomuch that
spacious room is left for our spiritual Enemy to enter, and to beleaguer with
easy force the feeble forts of our souls.

I will pass over with secret grief and silence, how that thousands within
this our Country of Wales resort 3
not to Church above once a year, their towneships or hamlets being distant
from the Church seven or eight English miles. I could likewise produce many
parishes which were not partakers of Sermons in any man's memory, no nor, as
far as I can learn, their Curates never graced them with one poor Homily or
Catechism. But because this latter point is a matter out of my element,
neither inquirable nor determinable by my Commission, and for fear least these
Ecclesiastics of the positive degree procure the Thunderbolt of
Excommunication against me, for intermedling with their frothy dregs, and for
putting my strange Oar into their Bark, though it be to save it from wrack,
like unto zealous V^zza, who rashly touched God's Ark, to stay it from falling:
I will surcease my pen, and suspend my censure of their dregs and lees, in
hope that they will convert the same to better purposes, and distill their lees
in the Limbecke of reformation, to a precious oil of Tartar, with which they
being anointed and affected, may vent out godly doctrine, and goodly
discipline, far better then with the holy water, wherewith our
missopecunifices, our masse-mongers think to chase away the spirit of
Detraction and other hellish spirits. To wind up this discontented discourse of
my Countries Levites, I pray God that the French proverb, whereby they tax a
thing hard to be brought about, fall not our just upon some of their heads,
that is, Ily a plus de difficulte qu' a tirer un Prestre de la tavern, That's
harder, then to draw a Priest from the Tavern. More yet could I insert
concerning the impediments of Education in the land where I live, which because
the curiosity of our hodiernall wits will sooner help to rebound with
fr^mpes, then to redress or pity, I will forbear them with a wary caution;
lest the envious enueigh against my zealous Muse; lest also I seem to kick
against the pricks, and strive against the Heavenly power, which perhaps has
decreed such fatal fortune upon these parts of the Island, for our fore-parents
faults, and for our own filthy facts.

LINEAMENT V.
1 That the secret and spiritual suggestion of the Devil is the third cause
of the Spirit of Detraction.

2 The cunning reasons of the Devil to confirm finne.

3 There Consutation.

THe Devil being a spirit invisible to any mortali eye, by close and cunning
mean 1
blows with his pestilent breath into the foremost seat of our brains, when we
be excommunicated from Gods presence, and there wheeleth and circleth about our
fantasies with a thousand colorable objects, able to entrap another Eve.
Thence gradatim by degrees his virulent breath, like the Dragons venom,
steals into our hearts, where he moves the blood, peruerteth the humors,
corrupts them with sensuality, in such wise, that we detract (like unto
wanton children) our best benefactors, we long and lust after innumerable
toys, after varieties of women, wines, meats, apparel, caualeering
companions, and other wordly vanities, openly repugnant to the laws of God and
true nature.

Among many sly stratagems, which he daily inuents to subdue our souls to his
slavish yoke, this is not the meanest nor the slowest, that he enchants our
wills with charms of selfe-liking, such as go beyond all the Magic spells
of Medea, Circe, and Calypso. As Soon as we attain unto years of discerning
good from evil, by his spiritual insinuarions we flatter our sond selves
with some imaginatiue excuse or other for every particular sin, which we
commit. Are we swollen up with pride and ambition? Lo, Satan a friendly
Sophister, an Advocate without fees, out of our mouths pleades, that the
sons of Zebedee sought for seats of highest honor; and also shows, that
familiarity breeds contempt, that it graceth much a Gentleman to show some
stately port, or portly state, that every abject treades upon humilities back,
and that men must behave themselves according to the times. Ambition is an
honorable thought of high spirits, a point of magnanimity, a lofty step unto
virtues chair. Are we angry, choleric or frantic? Our bad Angel says, it
is but heat of blood, a short vanishing vapor, a short fury. Ira furor breuis
est. Patience is but a Poets fancy to be practiced by ignoble grooms, and
dunghilled spirits. A choleric man has an honest heart.

Does the spirit of fornication tempt thee to defile thy vessel with foreign
seed, and to convert the temple of the holy Ghost into a den of devilish
sports with venereous thoughts? Alas, poor brother, it is but a venial sin,
a sin of flesh and blood, the least of a thousand sins, to which all the
world is subject. Age will tame this sinful spirit. Is it possible for us to
be chaste, when Jacob, Sampson, and other Patriarchs could not live without
their Paramours? Does the Envious man pine away by reason of another
prosperity? Is he sick at the heart with grief to see his neighbor flourish
like a Palm tree?

Inuidus alterius rebus macrescit opimis? Horat in Epist.


Behold a friend in a corner, a friend at need. Satan himself transformed
into an Angel of light protests, that it would move a Saint, yea, another
Caine to see his 2. Cor. 11.
younger brothers oblation accepted, and his grave eldership rejected. We are
all borne of one father, Terraesilij, all sons out of the same mould, all
worthy to participate the like equal immunities, privileges, and fortunes Job
33.
one as well as the other. If thou delight in Company and do wallow in
pleasure, as the Sow in the mire: There Is One within thee, which will wrestle
alone with many bookish Preachers. He lays out in colors the sweetness of
pleasure, the contentment of company, the avoiding of melancholy, the
shortness of life, and therefore hang sorrow, kill care.

Let the spirit of coueteousnes possess thee; and he will settle his
possession (which is as strong as eleven points of law) by teaching thee
Sophistry in stead of true Logic, by persuading thee that thou carriest an
Atlanticke burden upon thy poor shoulders. Euristeus never imposed half such
a cumbersome charge on Hercules as God has laid restless cares on thee, for
an exceeding great household of wife, children, and lazy servants, how caust
thou cherish thy self in thy old age, or arm thy self against worldly
practices, without a large stock?

Et genus and formam regina pecunia donat. Horat. in Epist.


Queen coin does give both kin and shape.

Does truth lay in their dish, that their Teachers are dumb dogs, their
Preachers illiterate, or their companions detracting? Zachary was dumb, the
Apostles unlearned, and Peter detracted in denying his Savior. Does thy
Pilades, thy friend, thy second self reprove thee again for Detraction and
calummation? Thou have more friends then one. Thy genius, thy old familiar tells
thee, that this other friend is malicious, he rebukes thee of hatred, and not
of good will. A true friend will labor to conceal in the cap-case of silence
the covert secrets of his friend, be thy just or unjust, lawful or unlawful,
as that Italian Poet has well advised:

-- vn' vero amico
A dritto a torto dove esser preposto, Ariosto.

Se tutto il mundo lui fosse opposto.
A trusty friend must stand with wrong or right,
Though all the world oppose his friend with might.
Wherefore was the tongue given to man, but to vent out what the heart
conceiues? All men are not learned in Lullius his Art, that they can discourse
of every extemporary matter. Each man has his proper gift: some men be apt to
invent, some other to control, some to speak, as if their tongues were on
wheels, and some dare not speak, without precise deliberation: yea, some
cannot find matter to speak, unless their wits were refined with Tobacco
good sack* and sugar, or their senses rubbed over with other men's relations,
tending to novelties and strange reports. Among which rank range thou thy
self, deceitful Satan's darling, and believe it from the most experienced
politic, that if a man disclose unto thee the secrets of his heart, it is a
kind of morality or moral kindness in thee to pour out likewise the affects
of thy heart, and to answer him in like proportionable measure. It is no
wrong, while thou speak by surmise, or by hearsay. Admit it were true,
then how can these Critical Catoes bend their brows against thee? how can they
m^^ly tax thee, or commence suite, de libellis famosis, de scand alis
magnatum, in the Star chamber, or recover damages by way of an action on the
case at the Common law? It is not amiss to brute and blaze abroad doubtful
detracting news, for it may be thou may be the motive of his repentance and
reformation. These spiteful spurious seeds of the Spirit of Detraction a
devout School ^a^ points out in this ma^er: Si paup^res vilem and ab^ectum ^e
reputat; si D^ues ambit ^os^m, B^rnard. in Sermon
auarum and cupidum; si Affabilts dissolutum; si Praedicator vel Docter ^^moris
vel humani fauoris quaesuorem: si (...) inu^^l^m; s^^cum us hypocritam: si
comedens vrc^rem. Tha^ is, if thou be poor, he reputes thee vile and object;
if rich amb^tions a ^^ggard, or covetous; if affa^^e (...); if thou be a
Preacher, or a Doctor then he accou^t^, thee a hunter after honor or
popularity; if silent, unprofitable; if fasting, an hypocrite; if eating, a
gl^tton.

With these or such like mantles of subtleties the Devil uses to shrou^ his
inueterate malice toward mankind; so that we presuming on selfe-wit and
self-will, care not what wickedness we contriue, nor what vanity we utter
with our lips. Nor do we think that our most patient Lord beholds us,
hears us, yea, and knows the very cogitations of our hearts, before we have
time to speak them. But because when we knew God. we glorify him not as God*
neither are thankful, therefore God Romans 1.
gives us up to reprobate mind: That is he gives us over to our own lusts,
to si^ne, tradimur Sathanae, we are delivered over to be tempted and seduced by
Satan, we are excommunicated with Caine from Gods lightsome presence, barred
out of the doors of heaven, and banished from bl^sle. And if it were lawful
for me to diue in the Lords secrets, I would say, that the Arch-diuell, that
old Serpent is let loose out of hell for a time to confirm us in our reprobate
natures.

LINEAMENT. VI.
1 The natural manner, how the Spirit of Detraction enters into a man and
possesses him.

2 Another reason to confirm the premises.

HOw so vile a spirit as this of Detraction can possess a man pertaker of
divine reason, 1
I cannot keep close from my friends the natural means: First, Will being
Lady over the soul, over reason, over sense and imagination, loath to minister
causes of coffeehouse to any of her subjects, lest her Dominion through
civil discord might become enfeebled, resolves to please all hands, sometimes
bearing with one, sometimes with another, at last she is glad her self to
yield her suffrage unto the strongest party, in such wise that the spirit of
Detraction gets footing with other spirits of error. Wherein she resembles the
Machiauellian Princes of this world, who complot by their peoples factions for
their private gain; one while with the Gnelfes, another while with the
Gibellines; one while with the white Rose, another while with the red Rose; one
while with the Vrsini, another while with the house of Columna: until at
length themselves by the just judgment of God feel equal smart, their own
estates turned topsie-turuy; and until the triple crowned Monarch be chased
(like the Fox out of his hole) from Rome to Auinion.

To add another natural reason for the enabling of the premises, the spirit
of Detraction at the first by bribing of memory and sense has access to the
brain, which is the lodge of the Imaginatiue Lady, and by his double diligence
insinuates himself into her amity. She a Princess of estimation and favor
with the Heart, commends this spirit of Detraction to her protection, as a
minion or play-fellow to deceive the time (or rather her self) and to discover
unto her the diversities of Spirits, which might harm her either in detracting
her credit, or in disposing her subjects to insurrection. Here the spiritual
Hermaphrodite is let in at first by secret conuayances as a thief (for as yet
he dares not openly enter into the hearts palace for fear of the envious
Nobles). But in process of time having thoroughly (like Absolon or Seianus)
stolen away the good consent of the Heart, and now strongly befriended by her
extraordinary favors in this microcosme of man, he enduceth other humorous
spirits to regard him, and in fine enticeth unto him in the hearts metropoly,
the greatest number of the purer vital spirits, where he besotteth them and
bewitcheth them with melancholy, rage, choler, malice, and other disordinate
passions: insomuch that the Soul, the hearts tutrix is likewise enforced
nolens volens, will she nill she, to obey this unworthy Spirit.

LINEAMENT VII.
1 Corollaries for the explanation of the premises. 2 Where wicked Spirits
reside in man.


WIcked Spirits inhabit both in the soul and body: some, as the spirit of
malicious 1
Detraction, the spirit of hatred, the spirit of envy, lodge in the highest
and chiefest part of the soul, called the reasonable will (which is seated
between reason and sensuality, and apt to be applied to either) and these are
spiritual, material, not knit to any corporal Organ or instrument.

Other some there be that dwell in the inseriour part of the soul, now Will
being altogether become sensual, as the spirit of g^uttony, the spirit of
lechery, and these are material, bodily, and apprendants to some corporal
subject, as rightly belonging to the sensitive appetite.

The former spirits are apprehended in the soul, before they descend to the
bodies appetite. The latter two are conceived with sensual appetite, before it
be thoroughly scanned in the reasonable will or soul, whether the act
committed be good or evil. This the ancient Philosophers harp^d upon, when
they acknowledged in every man three several parts proceeding from spiritual
and corporal fountains namely, the Intellectual, which issues from the
soul in the brain, the Irascible which issues from the heart, and the
Concupiscible or longing part, which flows from the liver. Of these the
Intellectual while it remains incorrupted, may be termed celestial, being
the little and lively looking-glasle of Gods own attributes. The other two
being brutail may rightly be ascribed to the sensitive constitution; specially,
when either through custom* complexion, or through some accidental course
they become material members for the knowledge of Evil.

In like manner both these spirits Irascible, and Concupiscible, linckt in
affinity with flesh and blood, may also 2
proportionably challenge one universal lodge in the body, as well as the soul
apart unto themselves, I mean when they usurp a predominance over the rest of
the passions; and this is the heart: for who calumniates his neighbors good
name and same and has not the heart burning? Who is possessed with the spirit
of lust, and seeles not his heart consenting? Who hates his neighbor, and
perceiues not his heart panting for revenge? In the heart is the most concourse
of humors, and there abounds much fiery heat, seeing that it digesteth the
blood, which is sent from the liver; for even as the eyes of maids look up to
the hands of their Mistress, and as the lesser wheels in the watch wait upon
the greatest wheel: so all the members of the body depend upon the heart their
punctual wheel and mistress.

LINEAMENT VIII.
1 That the spirit of Detraction has two principal instruments, the Hand and
the tongue.

2 Their apish tricks:

3 Their monstrous effects.

4 A brief dehortation from Detraction.

EVen as wise Philosophers by signs and effects do find out natural causes,
by 1
properties they found out essences; and by leading sparres do aim at leaden
mines; so must we by some external operations apprehend the isntrumental
means, by which the froathy spirit of Detraction manageth whole rablements of
wrangling and ^angling actions. And these are two, the Hand and the Tongue:
with the hand Satan procures a man to wri^e infamous libels, inuectiues,
Satyrs, and disgraceful letters and times (not inferior to the Popes
thundering Bulls) against his powerful. Makers name, or at least wise against
his honest neighbors fame, yea though he be an hundred miles distant from him,
with such violent and insupportable fury, that one knows not, which is more
dreadful the pike o^ the pen. Such a one might well be called a Calamoboas,
that is, the lusty or lofty Crier with the pen, as Antipater in Plutarch termed
Carneades the libeller.

Some other times a dumb spirit possesses our outlawed outcasts; so that
with dumb shows, winking 2
eyes, wry mouths, bended brows, pointed fingers, touch of fee^e, and other
apish tricks, they tempt the patience of the godliest man. Which beast-like
usage a modern Poet thus painteth out:

Me digitis monstant, subsannant dentibus omnes:
Hic aures Asini, fingit and ille canem.
With fingers point, with grinning teeth they flout me, Pauper Henric'.

One Asses ears, he dogs tongue makes about me.
The other and common instrument of The spirit of Detraction 3
is the Tongue, which being ill ordered and Tutourlesse may be termed a
leprous sin, a contagious sin, spreading far and near the hyperbolical
devises of the Devil by the mouth of the detracting spirit toward the
credulous ears of mortal men. Wherein it is a thing remarkable, and worthy
of graphicall observation to see how this small member can work such turbulent
tumults, throughout all the circuit of man's little world.

The repercussion of it stirs the gall, enflameth the blood, netries the
heart, and musters together all the mutinous powers of the body in revenge of
the other opposite spirit. But when all comes to all: Truth is great and must
prevail. In cold blood men of understanding will grow to this conclusion, that
the tongue endamageth three souls, the absent whom it backe-biteth, the
present person which is attentive, and the Detractor himself, which blows
the dust, and it reuerteth back unto his own eyes. Evil words corrupt good
manners, and also bewray the motions of the heart: for even as the tree of the
field is known by his fruit, so is the thought of Ecclesiast. 27.
man's heart known by his words.

Where is Charity? Where is Taciturnity? While the 4
tongue becomes the Devils Trumpeter, to sound out his malicious words of
defiance? O imprudent age! O careless folk, which suffer themselves to be
allured by hellish Nighting-galles!

Fistula dulce canit, volucrem dum decipit auceps.

The Fowler lures melodiously, Cato.

While he takes birds deceitfully.
In regard of which circumstances, Let thy words be Ecclesiast. ^.
few, for as a dream comes by the multitude of business; so the voice of a
fool is in the multitude of words. And let those golden sayings of the
Apostle be firmly imprinted within the closet of thine heart: G^^ue not (quoth
he) Ephesians. 5.
the holy spirit of God, by whom thou art sealed unto the day of redemption.
Let all but ernesse, anger, and evil speaking be put away with all
maliciousness.

LINEAMENT. IX.
1 The Authors censure of certain English Pamphleters, and Ballad writers,
with an invocation to my L. of Canterbury for a reformation, not only of these
abuses in writing, but also of other enormuus committed against the
Church-Can^ts.

2 A Description of good and evil writers.

3 That there is a mixed moral kind of writing, serving as the lesser ^ight for
the conversion of the natural man.

HErein I cannot choose but somewhat touch the apish spleen of certain English
Pamphleters, 1
who to gain themselves windy applauses and popular praises among Satan's
posterity (like unto Erostratus who fired Dianaes famous Temple at Ephe, sus,
to the intent he might be spoken of in after ages) do publish daily the puffed
leaven of their fantasies, which the Poet otherwise calls Ingenij caprisicum,
The wild Fig Tree of their green wits, or as we vulgarly Persius in Sa^. 1.
say, their wild seed Oats. These bastard Books, begotten in an evil hour
upon the effeminate aspect of Venus and Mars, I could wish to be suddenly
suppressed, as Monsters opposite to the sacred spirit of Regeneration. And for
this purpose I humbly invoke on you (my judicious Lord, Great Britains
Metropolitan) entreating your further vigilance in rooting out those vain
Vines, which according to the nature of ill weeds will in time ouer-grow your
pruned plants.

But who am I, that dare admonish the Ambrose of our age, who with your
heavenly food of Ambrosia, Manna, and Nectar, do nourish the souls of our
Christian Church providing milk for their young ones, medicine for their
sick, and meat for their strong. Right reverend Lord, I know it is
presumption in me to discourse with so great and grave a Personage. Yet
notwithstanding, because our English Adage taught me this uncontrolled rule,
spare to speak and spare to speed; I will not spare to inform your Grace,
what wicked weeds do ouer-top the grain of my native soil. Beside those
rotten roots of writing, the neglect of your Constitutions and experimented
Orders, whereby our Commissaries must not call to question the sincerer sort of
people upon bare and naked fame, for every slight and slanderous imputation:
whereby they are forbidden to prouounce definitive sentence, without the advice
of discreet Advocates: whereby our Proctors are charged not to frame their
libelles without the opinions and hands of Advocates: and whereby their
wrangling noise in Court is stinted: I say, the contempts of these and other
your Canonical commandments by your meaner Officials; which now in your
first Visitation may more acutely be espied, are the principal causes, that
they of the layer and lower sort become more careless in their carriage, more
addicted unto Detraction. For surely there is nothing in this spacious Round or
Universe of nature, which more resists the execution of laws, then the
ordinary heap of frivolous and froward suites, then the disobedience and
breach of civil customs in men of higher note. These, and many other
enormious crimes enuring the popular rank to peremptory and pecuish thoughts,
deeds, and speeches, your providence may expel for a time, if not quite
extinguish and extirpe. Your fame eternized through your euer-shining books,
through your neuer-spotted actions may work some miracles in the conversion of
our Detractors. Yea, your noble Name, illustrious ABBOT, a Name (I confess)
somewhat ominous among the adverse side, the admirers of ancient Abbeyes, I
say, your very Name etymologized from that Abba of Adoption, the sounding voice
of a sighing spirit, may serve as an instrument of the holy Ghost, to transmute
roaring Lions into lowly Lambs.

By our Civil law we hold that all monsters may be freely slain. Among the
ancient Romans they burned their Monsters with fire, composed of those woods
commonly called unlucky, namely, with briars, brambles, thorns, hauthornes,
and with others such like unfruitful and vnfertile shrubbes. After this manner
ought our monstrous Books and Ballads to be used and interdicted, which
licentiously detract from the Evangelical gravity. For to what purpose did the
Spirit of spirits, the spirit of eternal life enable us to regeneration? But
only because we should show our selves thankful for so sovereign a favor.
And do we prove thankful unto him, when we abuse the talent which he has
lent us, as provident Oeconomickes or Stewards, to lay it out for his best
behoof? No certainly, we are but loose and lavish Stewards, when we beget and
bring up such monstrous embrions of Books, like unto our jolly hunters, which
convert their childrens portion to the use of dogs. Let industrious
Inquisitors critickly examine over most of such books, as are yearly
imprinted in this famous City of London, and they shall find them fitter for
Vulcans fiery furnace, then for Mercuries learned Library. For my part I have
experimented, that when I labored (like the Be) to suck out some
substantial juice out of many of these books, I could not get one drop to
distill down my painful pen. When I would have gathered golden grains out of
Cherilus his doung, in stead of gold I collected dross. Such detracting and
deluding Alchymists are our Pamphleters. When I had employed the uttermost of
my deuoir analytically to draw the material points of a whole printed quire of
paper into short springs and heads, in stead of matter I foundm alice, in stead
of marrow detractions, in stead of method neither rhyme nor reason. In a word, I
found Chaerilus to be a cursing Barretour, and a common brawler, more worthy to
receive a thousand fillips or buffets, rather then one Phillippine or Rose
noble of gold.

There is a kind of writing unfolding the knowledge of Goodness, full of
viuacity, full of vigor, full of that lively virtue, 2
which the Poets termed salem and leporem, salt and serious substance to season
our wanton wits withal. This kind of writing is the reflecting Image of
those two Testaments, into whose despised corpse the spirit of life after three
days and a half entered, whose validity is so vehement, that they bring down
floods of blood from heaven, yea, and many sorts of plagues and vengeance upon
all malicious mortals. Likewise there is a profane kind of writing, serving
only as the instrument of the knowledge of evil, for taunts and temptations
fraught with Satyricall scoffs, with scurrility, with Scogins sports, with
amorous allurements, devised by the Devil for the replenishing of his
Kingdom, and for open evidence of condemnation against the reprobate before
the grand Jury of Heaven at the latter day. The former kind of writing has
but small amity and alliance with flesh and blood; it is spiritual and
proceeds from the inward man. He that reads a book of this style and
stamp, shall never hunger nor thirst: It heateth the heart, it heals the
passions, it quickneth the spirit, and (like the Sun) disperseth the thickest
clouds of sinful nature. The other kind of writing communicates with flesh
and blood, causes men (as malefactors) to shun the light, to live in the
darkesome valley of death and damnation; and being like brute beasts, bereaved
of reason and Divine knowledge, it makes them alive to be enrowled in the
Calender of the Dead.

Out of both these kinds there flows a mixed or moral manner of writing,
inconstantly partaking of the indifferent 3
knowledge of good and evil. For man having lost his original happiness, was
left here on earth to soiourne in a middle State betwixt heaven and hell. With
this mixed morality, Plato, Plutarch, Pliny, Seneca, and other Pagan
Philosophers were endowed, to the end that Gods mercy might be the more
glorified, and that the Gentiles should be inexcusable in their conuersions,
when they were confuted by their own rules. For even as his Omnipotent Majesty
vouchsased out of his magnificence to bestow a special privilege and
prerogative upon the 4
Israelites, to anoint them with oil of gladness above their fellows, to
direct them by extraordinary means, to feed them with Manna, with the purest
bread: So at length by reason of their hardness of hearts, out of his mere
mercy sithence toward the Gentiles, he sent the Sunshine of his grace, to
enlighten their Horizon by such ordinary and mixed moral means included in
their own books to introduce them to the knowledge of Goodness, to the
reading of the Scripture, which (as I said before) is the reflecting image and
inferior light; so that the Gentiles enjoy the same at the second hand, as
crummes rejected and relicted by the luxurious Israelites.

LINEAMENT X.
1 Certain Detractions of our common Stage players are taxed.

2 How God distributes his gifts diversely to every particular man.

3 The Authors brief Apology concerning his own imprinted works.

But how comes it to pass in this flourishing 1
time of the Gospel, that our Nasones Nasuti, are permitted to publish in
print their dreams, and shallow conceits, which tend to the dishonor of Gods
name, and to the disgrace of their neighbors fame? Verily, the judgment is
just: that they should be led into temptation, and become attentive to lies
and libels, because they glorified not his hallowed name, nor listened to the
words of truth, whereby they might be saved. Herein our common Stage Players
and Comicke-writers have as many witnesses as the world has eyes, that all
kind of persons, without respect of sex or degree are nickt and nipped, rayled
and reviled by these snarling curre-dogs. For let a man endeavor to walk
uprightly in the sight of God, separating himself as near as he can from
tatling tospots and Tobacconists, loath to sit in the seat of the scornful and
unrighteous, lest he become like will to like, and especially loath to
communicate in the Eucharist with such notorious and profane persons;
presently these Ganders gagle, that such a one is an hypocrite, or a pecuish
puritan. Let a man be silent, putting the bar of discretion before his lips,
lest his tongue trippe, and procure hurt: according to that:

-- Null^ tacuisse nocet, nocet esse locutum.

No hurt by silence comes: but speech brings hurt: These muttering Momes paint
out, that he is a meacocke, a melancholicke Mummer, or a simple sot. Let an
ingenuous scholar salted with experience, seasoned with Christian doctrine,
having his heart feared and sealed with zeal and charity, let him but broach
forth the barrel of his wit, which God has given him; they cry out that his
brain is but an empty barrel, his wit but barren, his matter borrowed out of
other men's books.

At which last imputation, though I confess this ancient saying makes for
them: nihil dictum, quod non est dictum prius: that nothing can be spoken, but
what is spoken of before; yet notwichstanding I must needs tell them, that
there be other circumstances also fit to be considered, as the importunity of
the times, the multiplicity of novel inventions, the extraordinary gifts of
the spirit, the nature of the Readers composed and disposed by measure, number,
and weight, for the glory of the Giver, cuen as the Holy Ghost has given them
utterance and capacity. Thus rages Satan, raising up his instruments, and
causing them to scatter abroad such scandalous rumors under hand against good
men's credites for fear lest his customs quail, and lest his Mill, which
hitherto never wanted moulture, should suddenly stand still without cmolument,
or gain of souls.

All men write not the same matter, nor after the same manner, after the same
method, after the same mould. For 2
if all men manured the spacious field of Rh^toricke, what should become of
the succinct and material substance of Logic? If all men were Auditors, who
should teach or preach? If the body of man were all Eye, what place were left
for the rest of the senses? If the faculties of the soul were all Memory,
where were the other Intellectual attributes? For these reasons it has
pleased God to distribute diversely his Divine virtues, as nuptial dowries to
every particular man. Some he inspires with one kind of knowledge, some with
another, and all for his honor. Some persons according to their knowledge of
good and evil, are fitter to write Prose, rather then Verse, some to
interpret, some artificially to invent out of their own brains, some other
to collect cursorily or analytically out of other men's hiues. And that I may
instant in my self, as I derived a book of mine called Natural and
Artificial Directions for health from Philosophers, as well modern as
ancient: Which also I manifested in these verses, now of late omitted by the
Printer in the third and last Edition of the said book:

Furtiuis olim varijsque superbijt Oscen
Plumis; ex multis fit liber iste libris. Obiectio.

Read cuique suum: vilescit protinus oscen,
Hic sine Natura foetet and Arteliber.
Ex herbis sit mel, hominis ce^ simia T^x^n
Aemula naturae est, Maeonidisque Maro.
Sit licet exmultis opus hoc, tamen vtile quouis Solutio.

Test, volummibus candidiusque tuis.
As for my other works, which I set out in Prose and Verse, I confess they
were composed by me as pueriles pupae as the froathy fruits of mine
adolescency, and as one writes of Ramus his Logic, they were invented ardore
i^uenili, upon a youthful spleen or sting. As there is nothing comprehended
in them worthy of immortality, or of Homers buski^, as they say: so I am sure
there is no great harm in them, whereby Apothecaries or Fishmongers should
challenge them for waste leaves to wrap about their drugges and Macarelles,
pipero and scombris digna. Let them then be taken as St. John's herb, which
(as our Cooks report) being put into the pot, will neither do good nor hurt
to the pottage. But for this present book of mine, wherein the Spirit of
Detraction is Coniured and Convicted, I dare inuit the whole crew of
Archilochian Cynickes with their Satyrs, Iambickes, and Libels, with their So
and So, with their vies and revies, with their phi^fie upon it* sie upon it, to
dash and blurre it over, to taunt, to tear it, to fling their caps at it, to
make Tennis-balles, and to bandy it away if they can. For I cannot do withal,
if fools will be fools still, and so live and die in their foolish fantasies.

LINEAMENT XI.
1 What kind of persons the spirit of Detraction does soonest possess: with a
description of the common people.

2 That wise men and of resolution must not fear the Detractions of the common
people.

3 That it is necessary for Envy to be the companion of virtue, and for the
spirit of Detraction to follow Magistrates, as the shadow the body for the
corroborating of their virtues.

THe spirit of Detraction very seldom approaches 1
nigh to learned men, I mean, to them whose lives differ not from the rules of
learning. For hardly will they be infected with erroneous vices, whom learning
Cassiodor. lib. 8. Epist. 18.
has purged. Commonly he watches about the ignorant and common sort of
people, to inueigle their understanding, to so we vanity and malice in their
hearts, that afterward they may continually vary, and as rotten vapors
disperse them for novelties into the open ears of their neighbors. These be
they, whose first salutation in all meetings, is to ask, What news? These be
they, which live by news as the Salamander by the fire. These jolly fellows,
as if our government in Great Britain were a confused Anarchy, or a petulant
Democracie do descant and deliberate on wise men's deeds; yea, and now and then
on their lives. Whatsoever a wise man does considerately or moderately, they
argue it a kind of slothful cowardice. What is circumspectly forewarned, that
they hold to be curiosity, but what soever is rash, hasty, and precipitate,
Thucid. lib. 3. Histor.
that is thought by them to be courageously determined. These monstrous Hydraes
of many heads, Belluae multorum capitum, do ground their opinions upon sandy
foundations: they are stout when dangers are a far off, and very irresolute
when they are imminent and at hand. Unhappy is he, which reposeth any
confidence in their assertions. Admit a man is by them justly extolled, what
thing more augmenteth it to the conscience of a wise man, that measures not
his good by common rumors and reports, but by the infallible truth of the
conscience? He that is praised unworthily, ought to be ashamed of his Boethius
lib. 3. de consol. Philosoph. pros. 6.
praise.

On the contrary, suppose that the indiscreet multitude rages against thee
with book, bell, and candle for thy 2
vigilance, service, and pains taken in the behalf of the Weal public,
what harm I pray thee, may redound thereof? Let the security of thy conscience
mitigate thy grief. If thou were badde and like unto thy Detractors, thy
company would be much more precious unto them. Every like loves his like: as a
certain Athenian answeswered one that asked him, why he subscribed to the
banishing of Aristides the just? for none other reason (quoth he) then because
he is just. But thou that carest more for the precepts of the Lord then for the
prescriptions of man, esteem none otherwise of the spirit of Detraction, then
of an idle brain, or a talkatiue tongue. Tollat sua munera cerdo, let the
popular sort keep their applauses and corruptions with themselves. While thou
walk uprightly in the sight of God, it is not their confused Detractions
which can impair thy credit. Justice shines on thy side with undefiled
honors: she will patronize thy fame, and shelter thy good name under her
virtuous wings. But for all this, thou murmurest, that the spirit of
Detraction, provoke; many privy adversaries against thine innocence, whose
chief study is to register thy daily speeches in folio with a misshapen tail,
and to calender thy proceedings, as if they were solemn acts and monuments,
with an intent sometime or otherto rippe up a whole volume or legend of
transgressions against thee before the Higher powers. O simple animal, O
liuer-hearted man. An Heathenish Embasladour could answer great Alexander,
that his Contrymen feared no earthly thing at all but only one, namely,
lest the sky would fall. And yet thou a Christian, which know the
uncertainty of this world, fear (like a crauen) every craking companion.
Whereas contrariwise thou ought to fore-arme thy spirit with an undaunted
resolution, after the example of an elderly Judge in this our Commonwealth,
who being admonished by his friends not to go abroad so carelessely without
company for fear of many enemies, whom he had stirred up through his severity,
thus constantly answered: Alas, what can they do, unless they will shorten
some few days of my life, whereof I expect daily to be rid by the hands of
God? Let them ban, let them curse, let them yell, let them fume; for mine own
part, were the case mine, I would retort and return back upon them none other
counter-note, none other revenge, then mine humble prayers to God for their
amendment.

An honest man ought to rejoice that envy awaites 3
upon him, that the spirit of Detraction attends upon him: for how shall it be
known that he is honest if he be without temptation? Jobs patience had not
beone so illustrious, if Satan had not repined at his godly living. Susannaes
chastity had not shined so conspicuous, if the two Elders had not urged her to
villainy. Neither had the power of the great Jehovah extended with such
Maiesticall terror among his creatures, if he had not left some to be hardened
and led astray. The light is most apparent in the darkest Chaos. Even so does
the Protestants faith appear most bright in respect of blind Papists. A fair
woman's beauty shows never more gallant, then when she stands among deformed
Dowdes, nor can a generous spirit be discerned more clearly then in
temptations. In temptation, in adversity, a wise man shall quickly see of what
metal or stuff the tempted is composed. Surely it is requisite for the
strengthening of our faith, and for the glory of God, that the Elect (like gold
that is seven times purified in the fire) be purged from the froathy dregs of
flesh and blood, either by sensible stings in their own persons, or else by
exemplary animadue^sions of other men's errors. Even as that woman, whom her
husband apprehends in adultery stands in greatest awe and subjection, and
commonly from that time forwards esteems her husbands commandment most
precious, as it were the legal rule of her life; so the sinful soul that
acknowledges her own guiltiness, stands in greatest fear of Gods
judgments, and ever after her conversion watches, as it were with Linceus
eyes, lest Satan's messengers, namely, the spirit of Detraction, the spirit of
malice, or such like fiends do find a hole in her coat, or a breach in her
fort. St. Paul writes, that he had been exalted above measure with the
abundance of revelations, if the messenger of Satan had not buffeted him, and
given him a prick in the flesh, which I take to be adversity or persecution.
And so likewise should we wax too proud with prosperity, if we never tasted of
the cup of adversity. This moved the Samian Tyrant, to cast into the Sea an
inestimable Jewel, because he might seem to change his rich fortunes. Which
superstitious custom the Venetians took up, their Duke throwing into the Sea
a gold ring: though now-a-dayes they allege that ceremony only at their
Dukes installing, to be a foolish marriage betwixt their state and the Sea.
Without doubt it is expedient that the spirit of Detraction attend on
Magistrates as their shadow, lest their pompuous authority puff up their minds
aloft to the highest altitude of the Zodiac, or lest, as the Lyricke vaunteth:

Sublimi feriant fidera vertice,
With lofty heads they strike the starry sky;
and so with ambitious Phaeton they forget God and themselves. These things
considered, Magistrates must look somewhat nearer unto their ways, if not for
the love of virtue, yet formidine poenae, for fear of punishment, for fear of
Detraction. Nevertheless, I exhort wise men to make more account of them that
be detracted and envied, and to countenance them in their authorities against
such furious tempests; for they know that neither themselves, not yet their
Prince are exempt from Satan's srownes and stings; and also they know that the
multitude (who, as Lipsius interpretes, is vere vulgus faex and limus) have
ever opposed themselves to the true passage of virtue. Which caused a great
Lord of France thus to comfort Monsieur du Chesne, that complained unto him,
how he was Detracted and envied by some in his country: You complain (quoth
this Nobleman) of a matter, whereof you have cause rather to triumph, and to
erect unto your self a Trophee: for in that you are envied, it is a very
certain token and argument, that there is some virtuous thing in you, which
deserves to be praised: Vous vous plaignez d'vne chose, don't vous La Portract
de la Sante. Sect. 1. cap. 1.
deuriez fair trophee: car estant en^ie, c'^est un sign and argument
trescertain, qu' il^y a quelque chose en vous de veriueux, qui merit d'estre
love.

LINEAMENT. XII.
1 Why mensoiourne with the spirit of Detraction, and will not be dislodged
from him.

2 That no worldly causes ought to dispose a man unto Detractions.

THat which is once inueterate in the bone will hardly out of the flesh: every
creature 1
loves his natural home, be it never so homely, and will not depart therehence
voluntarily, no more then our Northen Nations will be drawn to Virginia,
Norimbega, or some other country in the West Indies, where abound far richer
commodities, richer grounds, and ampler scope for the fruition thereof then
they have in Europe. So that I may boldly say unto them, as once I said unto a
worthy friend of mine, which preferred his mountanous lands before our fertile
fields: O infoelix auis, qui nasceris in obscoeno loco. O wretched bird, which
were bred in a wretched place. Such is our folly, that we cannot exchange our
barren solaecismes for refined syllogismes, our barbarous mumpsimus, for a
reformed sumpsimus. We cannot leave off our cancred customs for a regenerous
virtue. Our constitutions are queasie; and so inured to malicious Detractions,
as a certain woman of India to strong poisons, that we cannot without a
perilous distemperature reclaim our selves from that poisoned usage.

Yet notwithstanding all thy customs, O heedlesse man, thou art weighed in the
balance, and found too 2
light. Better it is to dwell in Mesech, in the Tents of Cedar, nay in the
strangest country among the Cannibals, then to soiourne among such cursed
copi-holders or villainous vassals under the spirit of Detraction. Wherefore
weane thy mind from Detractions, while thou have store of time. Give every man
his due, or hold thy peace, and let Gods providence alone. If the world like
thee not, detract not from the vilest wretch, but rather rejoice that others
yet delight in charity, in distributing alms. Or does thy neighbor disquiet
thee, because he is not as bountiful as thy self? Look thou only to thine
own talent. It may be, that of himself without thy carping, he will become a
liberal convert, like that Terenan Demea: Though thou be strong, he may be more
active: though thou be strong and active, he may be wiser or more pregnant in
wit: though thou be nobly borne, he may have a better face: though thou have an
amiable face, he may be better bodied: yea and perhaps, though thou and he be
as charitable as Tobias, as bountiful as Maecaenas, as strong as Hercules, as
nimble as Asahel, as wise as Solomon, as well descended as Ajax, as beautiful
as Absolon; there may come a gouty Crassus, and a greedy Craesus only with
earthy excrements to bereave you both of your hearts contentment, your amourous
Saints. For this cause embrace patience and taciturnity, and never detract from
Tobias his charity; from Maecaenas his bounty; from Hercules his strength; from
Asahel his actiuity; from Solomon his wisdom; from A^ax his birthright; from
Absolon his beauty; nor from misers their golden trash: though the want of them
or of worldly pleasures discontent thy wordly thoughts. If one Sparrow cannot
light upon the ground, if one hair cannot fall from our heads without the
appointment of God; why do thou, O simple man, sometimes swell with anger,
sometimes scoff and scolde, some other times pine away with envy, and at all
times raise up a tumultuous hurly-burly, and a confused combustion within thine
own body, against thine own soul, because this world sorts not altogether
according to thy will and wish? Remember the fable of the foolish Frogge, that
maliciously repined at the Ox, because he drank more then himself, and so
striving to match him, burst his own belly. After the same sort,

Dum mendicantes plures videt, ore dicaci
Persequitur mendicus, acri marcetque dolor.
One beggar frets with railing and with woe
Because he sees near him more beggars go.
LINEAMENT. XIII.
The Conclusion showing that all persons from the Prince his Scepter to the
Cobblers naulc, are subject to Detracting tongues.

WHat Prince ever flourished without Calumniation? What state ever stood
without Enuies sting? What Trade without interruptions of malicious Sycophants?
Figulus figulo. One Mechanical person repines at the other. One neighbor
speaks ill of the other. Moses had his Corah, David his Semei, Achilles his
Thersites, Homer his Zoilus, Philip his Demades, Alexander his Clytus,
Mardocheus his Haman, Socrates his Anitus, Cicero his Salust. Neither lived our
Savior Christ without thousands of slanders. Did he cast out Devils out of
unclean bodies? No, says the Jew, he could not cast out Devils, but by
invocation on Baalzebub Prince of Devils. Did he cure the blind? Let us
examine his Parents and try the truth. Did Father Abraham believe in Christ?
That could not he, when Christ was not yet borne. Did Christ protest himself
to be the Messiah, the King of the Jews? As false as the rest; Elias must
first come; and he that names himself King, sins against Caesar. Such was
the malice of this monstrous* Fiend* that he caused his Ministers to rail at
Christ, to rend his Divinity in his last distress. Some yelled, If thou be the
Son of God come down from the Cross. Others mocked, He saved others,
himself he cannot save. Others, Thou that destroyest the Temple and buildest
it in three days, save thy self, Thus was the Son of God reviled as long as
he lived; Yet opened he not his mouth, but sat still like a Lamb before the
shearer. After his glorious resurrection, these ungrateful Jews affirmed,
Esaias 53.
that his disciples stole away his body, for all that their Centurion watched
about his tomb. In like manner the Corinthians back-bited S. Paul for his
charitable care on the behalf of the poor Saints at Jerusalem: Though
himself was not chargeable unto them: nevertheless, being crafty he caught
them with guile. And again, his letters were sore and strong, but his bodily
presence weak, and his 2. Cor. 12. 2. Cor. 10.
speech nothing worth. Thus rages Satan by his detracting deputy over persons
of all conditions, over Nobles, and ignobles, over the Clergy and the Laity,
from the Prince his Scepter to the Cobblers naule, from the crown to the foot,
yea even from the Kings crown to the poor man's spade.

THE FOVRTH CIRCLE OF THE SPIRIT OF DETRACTION, CONIVRED AND CONVICTED.
LINEAMENT I.
1 The felicity and infelicity of our Country of Great Britain.

2 The Authors supplication to the high and mighty Court of Parliament for
suppressing of common Swearing, Blasphemies, Slannders, Periuries, and other
Detractions offensive to God and their Countries weal.

3 That they crucify Christ anew, which swear either wantonly or wilfully by
his blood, etc.

4 The Authors motion for more Additions to the Statute of Perjury.

5 The necessity if these Additions, and of likely circumstances to lead our
common Jurors.

O Noble Island, our native land, how happy art thou, that art so famous among 1
thy neighbors, among the nations, for thy faith unto thy spiritual Spouse,
for the good and pleasant savor of thy most precious Cant. 1. Ibid.
balmes! O noble Island of great and gracious Britain, whose name is a sweet
smelling ointment, when it is shed forth! How happy art thou that excellest all
the Isles of the Ocean, Indian, and Mediterranean Seas as far as the light of
life exceeds dullness, death, and darkness! And how unhappy art thou, which
notwithstanding this thy happiness, this exceeding excellency, and famous
faith, that enlightens thy soul above the noone-tide Sun? How unhappy, I say,
art thou, which being humane as well as Divine, partaker of Good and Evil
knowledge, have thy night as well as day, thy winter as well as Summer, thy
darkesome eclipses as well as the Deities glorious glimpses? How unhappy art
thou, that hold the Dragons detracting stinges, and the Eagles Esd^.
horrible wings, as well as the Doves simplicity and the Lambs integrity! How
unhappy art thou, that hidest within thee nests of nasty and noisome foul,
Cages of every unclean and hateful birds, and that harborest within Apoc.
thy bosom Hypocrites, Blasphemers, Periurers, and Antichristians, as vile
venomous vermin, as Foxes in Lambs skins, Foxes that hurt thy Vines, Vines
which bear blossoms. Thy Wolves are long sithence worn Cant. 2.
and weeded out by the policy of a provident and prudent Prince. And why may
not likewise thy Dragons, thy foul birds and filthy Foxes be rooted out of
this united Realm, seeing that our present Prince surmounts all his
Progenitors in policy, providence, and prudence?

It is high time, my Sovereign Liege, that you bestirre 2
your powerful Scepter, proclayming out strong thundering threats from S.
Michacls Mount, to the furthest bounds of Calydone, against all licentious and
lying libellers, against detractors of their neighbors names; or at least wise
against such profane persons, which presume to wound the Majesty of their
great Creator by their malicious or wanton words. To this end like unto that
Clown of Danubius, who spared not to speak the truth from his very heart
before the Emperor Aurelius, and the whole Senate of Rome, an obedient and
obsequious servant of yours, borne under Cambriaes climate, does here inform
your patient Highness, that the Sun can no longer shine in your Christian
Kingdom upon truth and blasphemy, without a most terrible eclipse of
coffeehouse. Psalm. 69.
Arise therefore, O King, and cause these noisome Foxes to be both slain and
slain. Let their habitation Act. ^.
be desolate, and no man dwelling therein. For they that be Traitors to their
Heavenly King can never be true to their earthly King. They that wittingly and
wilfully tear in pieces the Titles of the great Jehovah, will also prove
railing Semeies, and reuiling Satan's against your royal Highness. Their
tongues like sharp pointed arrows, will pass and pierce through your hard
steely armor, your armor of proof, my Lords both spiritual and temporal.
Their throats like open Sepulchers, do threaten to bury your wounded bodies, O
ye Knights, Burgesses, and Commons. Yea, these Knights of the Post, these
common swearers and detractors will conspire some time or other to blow us all
up one after another with the gunpowder of their blasphemies.

O then let not such Atheistical Agags be spared, but 3
let them perish by the hands of Samuel; let them perish in the pit of
perdition, as persons fair worse then murderers: for these kill but the body,
whereas the perjured kill themselves totally, both body and soul. And as an
ancient Father writes, They that blaspheme Christ now reigning in heaven, do
sin no less then they, that crucified Aug. in psath.
him here on earth. When they forswear themselves, (whether it be by
compulsion, or of custom, or of some worldly respect, all is one) either by
Gods body, by his blood, or by his wounds, they spiritually pierce his sides
with their bloody weapons (for a wicked tongue is worse then any weapon) and
like pitilesse Pilate, they scourge his sanctified body again. When they
swear by his head, as our swaggering swil-bowles will swear by any part, they
plaite another Crown of thorns upon his hallowed head. When they swear by
his foot, they nail his innocent feet to the Cross anew. When they swear
by Gods death, by Gods heart, they put him to death, and being worse then Judas
Iscariot, they plot to supplant the heart of life. When they swear by senseles
blocks and stocks, by the Mass, by Gog or magog, they detract from Gods
honor, in attributing his due to dumb and deaf Idols. But when they wilfully
swear betwixt party and party in judicial proceedings, by Gods Sacraments,
or forswear themselves upon his lovely Legates, the Testament either old or
new, they blasphemously detract from the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost,
by reason that Gods word comprehended in those holy Oracles is the right record
on earth, resembling the word incarnate now in heaven, who redeemed the
penitent from Satan's thrall; even as the other two mystical records of water
and the spirit, or of Baptism and the Lords Supper, represent the Father and
the holy Ghost, the one signifying our Election by Baptism and repentance from
the Father before all worlds, and the other witnessing and sealing the same
into our consciences, and also breathing faith, love, charity, and other Divine
gifts into our barren wills, as is most evidently testified in those Testaments:
so that wilful perjury and blasphemous Detraction, either to the derogation of
Gods honor, or to the detriment of his creatures (if without commission I may
discern of spirits) may be termed a sin against the holy Ghost, or against
the whole Majesty of the sacred Trinity. No less also sin the suborners of
perjury, then Periurers themselves: nay, they encurre a far greater
punishment, because they occasion the loss of other men's souls, namely, of
the suborned persons, besides the loss of their own souls. And to detain
them more surely and safely in hell, the injured parties, against whom such
perjury was committed, will continually crave and cry for vengeance.

In respect of which abominable abuses, and for that the Devil is now-a-dayes
most spiritually busy at the 4
shutting up of this last tragical seen of the world, may it please your
Soueraignties to join together, as mystical members of one undivided and
unblemished corporation, for the extirping out of such profane sins, which
being begun in youth, continued in manhood, and confirmed in old age, do
continually reign among us (as it were by destiny): so that likewise other
blasphemies in manner of branches begin to ouer-spread their leaves of lies
and libels, above the plants* of truth, only by the slight and too too light
stocking up of that sinful and saplesse tree of perjury. Or if your wisdoms
judge it not expedient to promulge and put out any new Act against this
manifolded spirit of malignant Detraction: yet notwithstanding, for the
preventing of perjury, and for the protection of innocence, that Naboth may
not sustain damage by Iezabels false witnesses, and that all other sincere
subjects may walk dreadlesse in their vocations, it were a work of charity,
and very likely to hinder the future budding up of innumerable inconveniences,
if you would but add one material clause more to the Statue of perjury, viz.
That none be admitted to bear witness against honest men, but honest men, men
of some sufficiency and substance, untouched, uncorrupted, and unsuspected; I
mean not, that they should be void of sin, for then we must go out of this
world, to fetch in the Angels of heaven, but I mean, sober men, unattained of
notorious crimes, those whom the common law terms probos and legales; so that
common drunkards, haunters of Alehouses, hunters of whores, Barretours,
beggars, rogues, and light persons, whom the Londoners call Knights of the
Post, may be excluded from deposing against substantial subjects. For to what
end requires the law to have witnesses produced? Is it not to try the truth?
And what truth can there be found in such notorious lewd livers, whose thoughts
are altogether dulled with sensual pleasures? What true proof can there be
expected from them, who differ but very little from bruit beasts? Therefore it
were sit that Judges and Jurors regard circumstances as well as witnesses.
Does a common drunkard or a common whore-hunter depose? such must have means
to maintain their vices. Does a beggar or a prisoner swear? believe him not,
for pinching penu^ie will persuade persons to testify that the crow is white.
Need will make the old wise trot.

-- Quid non mortalia pectora cogis,
Auri sacra fames? --
Is a common Barretour produced to testify his knowledge? A Barretour is ever
malicious, litigious, and full of mischief. Is a a Rogue brought in to give
evidence? His wit runs a wool-gathering, and with the above named persons, he
ought rather to be sent into Bridewell, then to stain the judicial
proceedings of an honorable Court. But how is it possible for avoiding of
confusion and delays in suites, to sound out the certainty and ability of the
proofs and persons? Every man cannot equally discern of spirits; every man is
not a Solomon, a Nathan, a Peter, a Paul? Therefore our Jury men had need of
further instruction, that they accept not witnesses of all sorts, tag and rag,
without exception. It were good for the Commonwealth that Commissions were
awarded to examine their carriage and behauiours. In the Ecclesiastical Court
men may in some sort except against false and infamous witnesses: and so out of
the Courts of Star Chamber, Chancery, and Council of the Marches, upon
urgent motions there are granted extraordinary Commissions, with cross and
witty articles, like Daniels Interrogatories to intrappe suborned witnesses.
But this course is costly, painful, and very seldom followed or allowed.

Whether this latter motion do not deserve your furtherance, 3
I appeal to every subject in particular, even from the Bench of justice to
the poor shepherds Cottage. The Papists vaunt, that the reason of this
falsehood of witnesses, proceeds through the contempt of their Romish Religion.
For (say they) this special benefit fell out by their policy of auricular
confession, that by means of it men's consciences were humbled and held in such
severe subjection, that they durst not forswear themselves upon premeditation.
But whosoever does more deeply weigh their licentious dispensations, and our
licentious education, shall find both Religions sick of the same disease. For
indeed we had need in this declining and drooping age of the world, to
observe circumstances as well as proofs, and to imitate the discreet
Phisician, who giving no credit to the rules of raw and rude Empirickes for
the sick man's health, betakes himself to a higher contemplation, to judiciary
Astrology, observing the signs, constellations, and other remarkable
accidents.

LINEAMENT. II.
1 That Licentiousnes is the cause of Detractions, defamations, periuries, and
blasphemies.

2 That Tauernes are the causes of licentiousnes; whereby the Author t^keth an
occasion to admon^sh Magistrates of their duty in this importent case.

WHen I sit silently musing with my self, what might be the reason that
Detractions, 1
defamations, periuries, and idle speeches become now-a-dayes more rife then in
former times, I protest unto thee, O ingenuous Reader, that my soul is sore
disquieted within me. The zeal of Gods glory, which these Titans, Encelades,
and their monstrous factions go about to batter by their beastly behauiours,
does solicit this soul of mine to soldiourize in this exigent under the
Archangels banner, coniuring and conuicting the Detractours of our time, the
deprauers of precious time; whose tongues and voices declining from their
souls reasonable faculties, from the spiritual similitude of the Deity, and
perverted by the judgment of the just Jehovah into brutish sounds, they are
metamorphozed with Gryllus and the rest of Ulysses his companions into grinning
dogs, grunting Hogs, grumbling Foxes, into squeaking apish Squaules, and into
bellowing Bulls of Basan. Because that when they knew their God, they gave him
not that honor, that thankful honor, that obedience, that dutiful
obedience, with trembling reverence, as was convenient for so great a Majesty,
so great a Savior, so great a Lawgiver: And because that when they were
enlightened with the fire of his spirit, according to the quality of their
bodies, that could not receive a greater quantity of his grace, by reason of
their gluttonous affections and earthly affectations; because, I say, they did
not watch, fast, and pray in meekness and mildness of mind, for their
crying and cruel sins: therefore has that Righteous One delivered them over
to their own natural dispose, to Satan, to sin, to beastiall behauiours,
to diversities of Detractions, and to all the contraries or adversaries of the
knowledge of Goodness. In regard of all these Detractions, contempts,
inconveniences and abuses, I will not spare to display out in colors the prime
cause of such abominations, which in very deed is none other then
Licentiousness. This is that unbridled vice, which beginning in youth, grows
up to an habit in old age; which being once rooted in, cannot with all
Hercules his labors be removed out. A Captain may sooner conquer the
strongest Fort in Hungaria then conquer this wanton affection. What then,
Experience, the graund and grave mother of worldly wisdom, art thou put to
thy nonplus with all thy travels, with all thy trials? Have thou no stratageme
in store, no witty engine to expel this giddy headed gallant? Alas, the
worlds Oracle is suddenly dumb. But though heaven and earth do pass away,
Truth is great, and must prevail, Truth is great, and will not quail. Me
thinks, I here a voice descending down from the heavenly places:

(Nec vox hominem sonat, o Dea certe,
(Nor is this voice humane, a goddess sure thou art.)
Take away (cries the truth) the cause, and take away 2
the effect; Get thee (quoth she) an exquisite map of all this Island, and view
whether there be not ten Tauernes for one Church, ten devils for one Saint, ten
tospots for one temperate. These pa^try Cottages be they, which minister matter
and fuel to the fire of licentiousness. Here, breed conspiracies,
combinations, common coniurations, detractions, defamations. Here, a man shall
meet at all times, day or night, yea, in the dawning, twilight, and midnight
with drunken dissolutes, who for maintenance of their trade will be content to
sell oaths at a prodigal rate. If you want means to vent and blaze out false
news, blasphemous news, runnagate reports, slanderous reports, tending to
their Gods dishonor, or to their neighbors disgrace: here, you shall find
many mercenaries ready to be pressed at your command. Thus do these alehouse
knights, knights of the post, or posting knaves attend on the Spirit of
Detraction, intending to set their tongues and souls to sale, to swear and
forswear whatsoever the Devil or his adherentes will enjoin them, not only
against their neighbors name and fame, against their rights and liuelyhoode,
but also against their dearest lives, which, as Tenants at will, they hold of
God himself. Thus like drunken men do these blasphemous wretches reele too
and fro, as the Psalmist speaks, thus do they stagger, and are at their wits
end, not knowing the ways of the Lord, but inclining themselves that way where
the staff falls, where hapless hazard leads them: so uncertain are our
detractours in their thoughts, words, and works, even in their decrepite age,
being then through their dissoluteness become crazed, without either head or
foot, without hope of remorce, without hope of mercy. Heretosore (as we read
in Chronicles) a King of this land was same to stop and stint his Danes, that
they might not exceed a prescribed measure in their drinking. The like laudable
custom did our present King impose by consent of his Parliament upon our
lourdanes, or disguised travelers, which resorted to tauernes, namely, that
they should not drink above a quart at a meal, nor stay above an hour in
these infamous houses. But, as those laws, which concern many, are commonly
neglected of many: so notwithstanding his Majesty's wholesome laws, people now
adays through licentiousness having almost gotten a habit of disobedience,
few or none adventure to execute the same. Or if perhaps any one more forward
then the rest fearing the shipwreck of his conscience, for waxing slothful
in his charge against these Centaurs, or for winking at such enormities of
these his Countries Cyclops, should chance to extend the rod of his authority
in suppressing them; presently Satan suggesteth some of his darlings,
detracting Barretours, to countenance these lewd livers; and rather then
fail, he subornes them to molest those zealous magistrates by hook or by
crook to the Star Chamber, or to some other principal Court two or three
hundred miles off, for trifling matters not worth the speaking: and all to the
intent, to terrify and tire them with tedious traveling too and fro; so that
few officers dare put in execution what the law requires them, being loath to
hazard their goods and persons in so wearisome a journey, in so cumbersome a
suite. These, these bulbeggars (I say) be the only obstacles, that Justice is
not executed against the malefactors of our country. Herehence it comes to
pass that Justices of mild and moderate spirits do swallow down many a bit
of bitter injuries, rather then they will adventure their fortunes in law upon
such vile vermin.

Yet notwithstanding these crosses, which overthwart your honest purposes, it
behoues you (my Masters) whom his Maiestic or his Chauncellor has commissioned
by Iethroes counsel as Rulers over hundreds, over fifties, to lay aside your
panicke fears, to look unto your places, and not to prefer your private
weal before the public, in intending so nearly the temporal goods of blind
fortune, whereof the Eye of justice in revenge of your remissness and
periuries will suddenly bereave you with a heavier scourge. For this cause I
could wish, that this golden saying were firmly engraven in your thoughts: Qui
non impedit facinus, cum possit, facinori consentit. He that hinders not a
sin, when he may hinder it, consents unto the sin. For no doubt, but this
saying is already verified in many of us, whom God forgive; specially, when we
spare Gods enemies, of what nature soever they be, either for indulgence,
importunate friendship, or for fear of the Devil, or of his detracting
followers. Therefore be ye stout as Lions, fighting the Lords battles. The
cause is the Lords, the judgment is the Lords: and the Lord will be with you
in the cause and judgment. Now show your selves whose 2. Chron. cap. 19.
champions ye are; and with your impartial hands subscribe to pull and put
down these licentious Brothelries, down with these Tauernes, down with these
Seminaries of corruption, down with the cause, and down with the effects, if
ye have any spark of Gods Spirit shining in you. The prodigious effects
hatched and fostered in these drunken Cottages (as I said before) is
licentiousness, the diabolical dame of detractions, periuries, blasphemies,
and of a number of other base brats.

LINEAMENT III.
That the Spirit of Detraction is sooner convicted through the bright light,
and testimony of the Scripture then through men's real sorce or worldly
devices.

EVen as Aarons rod in Pharaoh his presence consumed all the Magicians rods,
that were put before it: so words grounded upon the touchstone of Truth, do at
the last consume to nothing all the bubling dregs of babbling Detraction. For by
how much that Michael the Archangel is more mighty then the detracting Dragon,
by so much does the speech of Truth bear a greater sway over the misshapen
monsters of falsehood; which like foolish Apes by their vain and uncharitable
chattering would feign obtain the Christian surname of Truth. But the word of
life, the light of understanding will not abide such derogations and
detractions. And therefore he has of his special and superabundant grace sent
forth the spirit of his mouth, 2 Thessalonians. cap. 2.
the brightness of his coming to consute these hidious heresies and
peremptory paradoxes, which with the Antichrist were conceived and begotten
among us. Out of this light or lightsome word, out of the right resembling
Image of the Fathers eternal virtues, as his pledge to the Catholic Church,
issued his written image, the sacred Scripture, whose efficacy is so excellent,
that the testimonies thereof suffice to conjure down all the spirits of hell
into their own bottomless home. Being an army of armed men against the
spirit of Detraction, and he will entreat them wo^se then that possessed
person did the seven sons of Scaeua the Jew, against whom he Act. Apost. cap.
19.
ran and prevailed, that they were forced to fly out of the house naked and
wounded. Besprinkle him with whole buckets full of holy water, chant millions
of masses unto him; his spiritual substance cares not for wetting; and for
your masses, Surdo canis, he will not hear them for your good; but gladly
hears them for your hurt and hindrance. Only a few material sentences
extracted out of the heavenly book, and given in evidence by an humble-minded
Christian with prayer and contrition, do certainly conjure, convince, and
confound all his darts, stings, and forces. To this end I will repeat some
prouerbiall lessons selected by me out of that Book of Life, with hope that
their energy and viuacitie will convert my countrymen, that are any thing
towardly inclined to follow truth and integrity, to become virtuously forward,
and not viciously froward. And first I will briefly rebuke and refute the use
of idle speeches, before I descend to the reprehension of deeper Detractions.
Wherein I will follow the example of expert Physicians, who are wont at first
to prescribe gentle preparatiues to attenuate and mollify the stubborn and
inueterate humors of their patients body, before they attempt to purge the
same substantially.

LINEAMENT. IIII.
The Spirit of Detraction coniured and convicted by the Prophet David's
Testimony.

THey talk of vanity every one with his Psalm. 12.
neighbor: they do but flatter with their lips, and dissemble with their
heart. But the Lord shall root out all deceitful lips, and the tongue that
speaks proud things, which have said, with our tongue we will prevail: we
are they that ought to speak, who is Lord over us?

Their throat is an open Scpulchre, with their tongues have they deceived; the
poison of Aspes is under their lips. Their mouth is full of cursing and Psalm.
14.
bitterness.

Lord, who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle? Or who shall rest upon thy holy hill?
Even he, that leads an incorrupt life; and does the thing that is right, and
Psalm. 15.
speaks the truth from his heart. He that has used no deceit in his tongue,
nor done evil to his neighbor, and has not sl^undered his neighbors.

They are enclosed in their own fat: and their mouth speaks proud things.
Like as a Lion that is greedy of his prey; and as it were a Lions whelpe
lurking Psalm. 17.
in secret places: Up Lord, disappoint them, and cast them down: deliver my
soul from the ungodly, which is a sword of thine.

Let the lying lips be put to silence, which cruelly, disdainefully, Psalm. 31.
and despitefully speak against the Righteous.

The mouth of the righteous is exercised in wisdom, Psalm. 37.
and his tongue will be talking of judgment.

Thy tongue imagines wickedness, and with lies thou cuttest like a Rasor:
thou have loved unrighteousness more then goodness, and to talk of lies more
Psalm. 62.
then righteousnesie: thou have loved to speak al words, that may do hurt, O
thou false tongue. Therefore shall God destroy thee for ever: he shall take
thee and pluck thee out of thy dwelling, and root thee out of the land of the
living.

Destroy their tongues, O Lord, and divide them, for I have espied
unrighteousness and strife in the City. Psalm. 55.


God shall send forth his mercy and truth: my soul Psalm. 57.
is among Lions: and I lie among the children of men, that are set on fire,
whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword.

They go too and fro in the evening, they grinne Psalm. 59.
like a dog, and run about through the City. Behold, they speak with their
mouths, and swords are in their lips: for who does hear? But thou, O Lord,
shall have them in derision, and thou shall laugh all the Heathen to scorn.

For the sin of their mouth, and for the words of Ibid.
their lips they shall be taken in their pride. And why? their preaching is of
cursing and lies.

Hide me from the gathering together of the froward, and from the insurrection
of wicked doers, which Psalm. 64.
have whet their tongues like a sword, and shot out their arrows, even bitter
words; that they may privily shoot at him which is perfect. Suddenly do they
hit and fear not.

They corrupt others, and speak of wicked blasphemy; Psalm. 73.
their talking is against the most high: for they stretch forth their mouth
unto the heavens, and their tongue goes through the world.

Remember this, O Lord, how the enemy has rebuked, Psalm. 74.
and how the foolish people have blasphemed thy Name.

As for the blasphemy wherewith our neighbors have blasphemed thee; reward
thou them, O Lord, seven Psalm 79.
fold into their bosom.

Who so privily slaundereth his neighbor, him will Psalm. 101.
I destroy.

Hold not thy tongue, O God of my praise: for the Psalm. 109.
mouth of the ungodly, yea and the mouth of the deceitful is opened upon me.
They have spoken against me with false tongues: they compassed me about also
with words of hatred, and fought against me without a cause.

Deliver my soul, O Lord, from lying lips, and from a deceit full tongue. What
reward shall be given or done unto thee, thou false tongue? Even might and
sharp Psalm. 120.
arrows, with hot burning coals.

They have sharpened their tongues like a Serpent: Adders poison is under their
lips. Psalm. 140.


Let the mischief of their own lips fall upon the head of them, that compass
me about. Let hot burning Ibid.
coals fall upon them: let them be cast into the fire and into the pit, that
they never rise again. A man full of words shall not prosper upon the earth.

Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth, and keep the Psalm. 141.
door of my lips.

LINEAMENT. V.
The spirit of Detraction coniured and convicted by King Solomon's testimony.

AS for the scornful, does not the Lord laugh them to scorn? Cap. 3. Put
away from thee a froward mouth; and let the lips of slander be far from
thee. Prou. 4.

These six things does the Lord hate, and theseuenth he utterly abhors: a
proud look, a lying tongue, hands that shed innocent blood, an heart that
goes about wicked imaginations, feet that be swift in running to mischief, a
false witness that brings up lies, and him that sows discord among
Brethren. cap. 6. ibid.

He that winketh with his eye will cause sorrow, but he that has a foolish
mouth shall be beaten: the mouth of a righteous man is a well of life, but the
mouth of the ungodly keeps mischief in his heart. cap. 10.

He that hides hatred with lying lips, and that speaks slander is a
fool. ibid.

Where much babbling is must needs be offense: but he that refraineth his lips
is wise. Ibid.

The mouth of the righteous will be talking of wisdom; but the mouth of the
ungodly speaks froward things. Ibid.

A fool slaundereth his neighbor, but a wise man holds his peace.

A dissembling fellow will discover privy things; but he that is of a faithful
heart, keeps counsel. cap. 11.

A fool utters his wrath in all have, but a discreet man covers his own
shame. cap. 12.

A slanderous person pricketh like a sword, but a wise man's tongue is wholesome.
The lips of truth shall be stable for ever, but a dissembling tongue is soon
changed. Ibid.

The Lord abhors lying lips: but they that deal truly please him. Ibid.

A discreet man does hide knowledge: but the heart of fools bableth out
foolishness. Ibid.

He that keeps his mouth, keeps his life; but who rashly opens his lips,
destroys himself. cap. 13

In the mouth of the foolish is the rod of pride, but the lips of the wise will
preserve them. cap. 4.

A faithful witness will not dissemble, but a false record will invent lies.
Ibid.

A faithful witness delivers souls, but a deceitful witness brings
forth lies. Ibid.

A soft answer appeaseth wrath, but rough words stir up anger. cap. 15.

A wholesome tongue is the tree of life, but the frowardness thereof does make
sad the spirit. Ibid.

The heart of the righteous sludieth his answer before, but the wicked man's
mouth spieth out mischief. Ibid.

A wise heart orders his mouth wisely, and ministers learning unto his lips.
cap. 16.

An ungodly person stirs up evil, and in his lips is an hot burning fire.
ibid.

A froward body causes strife, and he that is blabbe of his tongue makes
division among Princes. ibid.

Speech of authority becomes not a fool; much less then does a lying mouth
beseem a Prince. cap. 17.

A wise man uses few words, and a man of understanding is of a patient spirit;
yea a very fool when he holds his peace is accounted wise, and he that
stops his lips is esteemed prudent. ibid.

The words of a wise man's mouth are like deep waters. cap. 18.

A sooles lips come with brawling, and his mouth provoke unto stripes. A
fools mouth is his own destruction, and his lips are the snare of his own
soul ib.

The words of a slaunderer are very wounds, and go through the innermost parts
of the body. ibid.

Death and life are in the power of the tongue, and they that love it shall
eat the fruit thereof. ibid.

A false witness shall not be unpunished, and he that speaks lies shall
perish. cap. 19.

A wicked witness mocketh at judgment, and the mouth of the ungodly deuoureth
wickedness. ibid.

Cast out the scornful man, and so shall strife go out with him; yea variance
and slander shall cease. ca. 22.

Be not a false witness against thy neighbor, and speak no falsehood with thy
lips. cap. 24.

The North wind drtueth away the rain, even so does an angry countenance a
backbiters tongue. cap. 25

Give not the fool an answer after his foolishness, lest thou become like
unto him. cap. 6.

As he that counterfeits himself mad, casts firebrands, deadly arrows, and
darts; so does the dissembler with his neighbor, and says, Am not I in
sport?

Where no wood is, there the fire goes out; even so where the talebearer is
taken away, there the strife cease.

As coals kindle heat, and wood the fire; even so does a brawling fellow
stir up variance.

A tale-bearers words are like men that strike with hammers, and they pierce
the inward parts of the body.

Burning lips and a wicked heart are like a pot shard covered with silver
dross.

A lying tongue hates the afflicted, and a flattering mouth works mischief.
Ibid. in cap. 26.

A brawling woman and the roof of a house dropping in a rainy day, may well be
compared together, for he that stilleth her stilleth the wind, and stops
the smell of oinments in his hand. cap. 27.

If a Prince delight in lies, all his servants are ungodly cap. 29.

See thou a man that is hasty to speak unadvisedly? There is more hope in a
soole then in him. ibid.

Be not hasty with thy mouth, and let not thine heart speak any thing rashly
before God, for God is in heaven, and thou upon earth; therefore let thy words
be few. Eccles. cap. 5.

Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin. ibid.

The spirit of wisdom is loving, and will not absolve him that blasphemeth
with his lips; for God is witness of his reins, a true beholder of his heart,
and an hearer of his tongue: for the spirit of the Lord that fills the round
compass of the world, and the same that vpholdeth all things, has knowledge
also of the voice. Therefore he that speaks unrighteous things cannot be hid,
neither shall the judgment of reproof let him escape. And why? In quisition
shall be made for the thoughts of the ungodly, and the sound of his words
shall come unto God; so that his wickedness shall be punished.

The ear of jealousy hears all things, and the noise of g^udging shall not
be hid: therefore beware of murmuring, which is nothing worth; and refrain
your tongue from slander, for there is no word so secret that it shall go for
naught, and the mouth that speaks lies slays the soul. Wisd. cap. 1.

LINEAMENT VI.
The spirit of Detraction coniured and convicted by Jesus the son of Siraches
testimony.

IN the tongue is wisdom known, so is understanding, knowledge, and learning
in the talking of the wise, and steadfastness in the works of righteousness.

In no wise speak against the words of truth, but be ashamed of the lies of
thine own ignorance.

Be not hasty in thy tongue, neither slack and negligent in thy works. cap 4.

Be s^ift to hear, but slow and patient in giving answer.

If thou have understanding, shape thy neighbor an answer; if no, lay thy hand
upon thy mouth, lest thou be trapped in an indiscreet word, and so confounded.
Honor and shame is in the talk, but the tongue of the indiscreet is his own
destruction.

Be not a privy accuser as long as thou live, and use no slander with thy
tongue; for shame and sorrow goes over the thief, and an evil name over him
that is double tongued: but he that is a privy accuser of other men shall be
hated, envied, and confounded. cap. 5.

A man full of words is perilous in his City; and he that is rash in his
talking shall be abhorred. cap. 9.

Rehearse not a wicked and churlish word twice, and thou shall not be hindered.

If thou have heard a word against thy neighbor, let it be dead within thee;
and be sure thou shall have no harm thereby.

A fool trauelleth with a word, like as a woman that is pained with bearing of
a child.

Like as an arrow shot in a thigh of flesh, so is a word in a fools heart.

Reprove thy neighbor, that he keep his tongue; and if he have spoken, that
he say it no more.

A man falls with his tongue sometime, but not with his will: for what is he
that has not offended with his tongue? cap. 19.

A wise man will hold his tongue till he see opportunity, but a wanton and
indiscreet body shall regard no time.

He that uses many words shall hurt his own soul, and he that takes
authority upon him unrighteously shall be hated.

In the mouth of him that is untaught are many inconvenient and unmeet words.

A lie is a wicked shame in a man, yet shall it be never in the mouth of the
wise.

A thief is better then a man that is accustomed to lie.

The conditions of liers are dishonest, and their shame is ever with them. cap.
20.

A fool lifts up his voice with laughter, but a wise man shall scarce laugh
secretly.

The lips of the wise will be talking foolish things, but the words of such as
have understanding, shall be waighed in the balance.

The heart of fools is in their mouth, but the mouth of the wise is in his
heart.

A privy accuser of other men shall defile his own soul, and be hated of
every man; but he that keeps his tongue and is discreet, shall come to honor.
cap. 21.

If thou be among the discreet, keep thy words to a convenient time, but among
such as be wise speak on hardly.

The talking of fools is abomination, and their sport is voluptuousness and
mis-nurture.

The proud do blaspheme and are scornful, but vengeance lurketh for them as
a Lion. cap. 27.

An hasty browling kindles fire, and an hasty strife sheddeth blood: a tongue
also that bears false witness brings death.

If thou blow the spark it shall burn, if thou spit upon it, it shall go
forth, and both these come out of the mouth.

The slaunderer and double tongued is cursed, for many one that be friends
sets he at variance.

The stroke of the rod makes prints in the skin, but the stroke of the
tongue smites the bones in sunder.

There be many that have perished with the sword, but many more through the
tongue.

Well is he that is kept from an evil tongue, and comes not in the anger
thereof, which draws not the yoke of such, and is not bound in the bonds of
it.

For the yoke thereof is of iron, and the band of it of steel.

The death of it is a very evil death, hell were better for one then such a
tongue.

But the fire of it may not oppress them that fear God, and the flame thereof
may not burn them.

Thou hedgest thy goods with thorns, why do thou not rather make doors and
bars for thy mouth?

Thou waighest thy silver; why do thou not weigh thy words also upon the
balance, and make a door and abarre, and a sure bridle for thy mouth?

Beware that thou slide not in thy tongue, and so fall before thine enemies
that lay wait for thee, and thy fall be incurable, even unto death. cap. 28.

Thou young man speak that becomes thee, and that is profitable; and yet
scarce when thou art twice asked.

Comprehend much with few words, in many things be as one that is ignorant:
give care, and hold thy tongue withal.

If thou be among men of high authority, desire not to compare thy self unto
them; and when an elder speaks, make not thou many words therein. cap. 32.

Like as a wild horse that neigheth under every one that sits upon him, so
is it with a scornful friend. cap. 33.

LINEAMENT. VII.
The spirit of Detraction and Perjury coniured and convicted by other
testimonies of the Scripture.

THou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord Exodus
20.
will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

Thou shall not have to do with any Exodus 23.
false report, neither shall thou put thine hand with the wicked to be an
unrighteous witness.

Thou shall not swear by my name falsely, neither shall thou defile the name
of thy God: I am the Lord. Leuit. 19.


Remember this, O Lord, how the enemy has rebuked, and how the foolish people
have blasphemed thy Psalm 74.
Name.

Thy Name is wonderful, O Lord, and only to had in reverence.

I see a flying book of twenty cubits long, and ten cubits broad, which
contains the curse that goes over Zach. 5.
the whole earth: for all thieves shall be judged after this book, and all
perjured persons shall be judged according to the same.

And I will bring it forth, says the Lord of Hosts, so that it shall enter
into the house of a thief, and into the house of him that falsely swears by
my name, and shall remain in the midst of his house, and consume it with the
timber and stones thereof.

Let none of you imagine evil in his heart against Ibidem. cap. 8
his neighbor, or love false oaths, for these are the things which I hate,
says the Lord.

Let not thy mouth be accustomed to swearing, for n it there are many falls: let
not the naming of God be Eecles. 23.
icontinually in thy mouth, and meddle not with the names of Saints, for thou
shall not be excused of them.

For like a servant which is often punished, can not be without some sore: even
so, what soever he be that swears, and names God, shall not be clean purged
from sin.

A man that uses much swearing, shall be filled with wickedness, and the
plague shall never go from his house, if he beguile his brother, his fault
shall be upon him, if he aknowledge not his sin he makes a double offense,
and if he swear in vain, he shall not be found righteous, for his house shall
be full of plagues.

The words of the swearer bring death, God grant that it be not found in the
house of Jacob; but they that fear God, eschew all such, and lie not waltering
in sin.

Use not thy mouth to dishonest and filthy talking, for in it is the word of
sin.

Ye have heard that it has been said to them of old time, Thou shall not
forswear thy self, but shall perform Matthew. 5.
unto the Lord thine oaths.

But I say unto you, Swear not at all, neither by heaven, for it is Gods
seat, nor by the earth, for it is his foot stool, neither by Jerusalem, for
it is the city of the great King.

Neither shall thou swear by thy head, because thou can not make one hair
white or black.

But let your communication be yea, yea; nay, nay: for whatsoever is more then
these comes of evil.

Woe be unto you ye blind guides, for ye say, Whosoever shall swear by the
Temple it is nothing, but whosoever Matthew 23.
shall swear by the gold of the Temple he is a debtor.

Ye fools and blind, for whether is greater, the gold or the Temple that
sanctifies the gold?

And whosoever swears by the Altar, it is nothing; but whosoever swears by
the gift that is upon the Altar, he is a debtor.

Ye fools and blind, for whether is greater the gift or the altar that
sanctifies the gift?

Who so therefore shall swear by the altar, swears by it, and by all things
thereon.

And who so shall swear by the Temple, swears by it, and him that dwells
therein.

And he that shall swear by heaven, swears by the seat of God, and him that
sits thereon.

Above all things, my brethren, swear not, neither James. 5.
by heaven, neither by earth, nor by any other oath; Let your yea be yea, and
your nay, nay; lest you fall into condemnation.

These being deceived by dreams defile the flesh, despise Rulers, and speak
evil of them which are in authority. Iud. Epist.
Yet Michael the Archangell, when he strove against the Devil, and disputed
about the body of Moses, durst not give railing sentence, but said, The Lord
rebuke thee. But these speak evil of those things which they know not.

If a man sin not in word, the same is a perfect man, and able also to bridle
all the body: Behold we put Iam 3.
Bittes in the horses mouths, that they may obey us, and we turn about their
whole body. Behold also the Ships, which though they be so great, and are
driven of fierce winds, yet are they turned about with a very small helm,
whither soever the lust of the Governor will: even so the tongue is a little
member also, and b^asteth great things. Behold how great a matter a little fire
kindles. And the tongue is fire, ^u^n a world of wickedness; so is the tongue
set among our members, that it defiles the whole body, and sets on fire the
course of nature, and it is set on fire of hell.

All the nature of beasts, and of birds, and of Serpents, and things of the
Sea is meeked and tamed by the nature of man; but the tongue can no man tame.
it is an unruly evil, full of deadly porson; therewith bless we our GOD and
Father, and therewith curse we men which are made after the similitude of GOD:
Out of one mouth proceed blessing and cursing. My brethren, these things ought
not so to be: Does a Fountain send forth at one hole, sweet water and bitter
also? Can the Fig tree, my brethren, bear Olive berries? Or a Vine bear
Figs? So can no Fountain give both salt water and also fresh.

LINEAMENT. VIII.
The Authors advise to Iury-men, wishing them to proceed uprightly according
to their oaths, and also to meditate on the future discourse.

THE elder that the world grows, the more grow the corruptions thereof, by
reason that Satan now toward the dissolution of the worlds Chronicle,
spitteth his spiritual spite and venomous vengeance in most abundant measure.
And also because our stiff steely hearts will not relent nor receive remorce
though the brightness of Gods word, of his sacred word, which by his preachers
and teachers has been diffused supereminently amongst us. For this cause,
and because we do not watch and pray, our Enemy does watch to prey, to poll
and pill, to spoil and spill the goodiiest harvest of our souls. No sooner
can we convert our tongues to truth, but Satan diuerts our thoughts from
truth; so that now and then we speak the words of Angels, but within we
conceal the foxes subtilties, and are as sounding brass or tinckling Cymbals.
Our common Jurors do both protest and contest upon the book of life, the
book of eternal life, which brings blood and vengeance down from heaven on
the blasphemers thereof, to present with effect, and without affection, the
desects of their country. And yet with a mental reservation they go about to
cloak them, so that it is to be doubted that this Royal Monarchy will in
process of time receive a Cicatrix or an ugly scaire, by their petulance and
democraticad looseness; not much unlike to those wanton Athenians, of whom it
was said that their wise men propounded cases, and ignorant people resolved
the^. Generous Britains, remember your selves, remember your oaths, which are
no complements of Court, but sacramental words binding your consciences,
engaging your souls, yea and obliging both your souls and bodies with such a
strong and indissoluble chain, as can never be undone in this world, nor in
the world to come. Say therefore with the faithful spouse; I have washed my
feet, how shall I again defile them? Dear countrymen, ye are the temple
Cantic.
of the holy Ghost, which you must not deface, ye are hallowed unto God, and
are not your own, ye are the children of light, and must not become eclipsed
through the interposition of darksome perjury: Ye cannot spare your dearest
friends, your kinsmen, nor yet your selves, if there be testimony to accuse
your selves: ye cannot respect the quality of men's persons, nor regard him that
wears gay clothing (as the Apostle warned) nor say unto James cap. 2.
him sit thou here in a good place: and on the other side ye ibid.
cannot say to the poor stand thou there, lest, as the Apostle witnessed, ye
prove partial in your selves, and be made indges of evil thoughts. The eye of
inquisition is so severely straight, that it must endict the very heart of man,
and all his secret purposes, if men's mortal eyes or spiritual eyes could
extend so far. But I would to God, that our Jury men would consent (as I hope
they will) to find out those things, which are palpable, and to be felt with
hands, as the proverb is, and not to sit as Chancery Judges, debating and
deliberating on matters out of their element, which properly belong to Judges,
and not to Jurors. If two substantial witnesses, or if one sufficient witness
with inward-leading circumstances appear before your understanding sight, ye
must conioyne, as with one mouth or Oracle, to subscribe him guilty. And this
ye must perform as well for fear of Gods law as of your countries laws,
which have censured periuries, and detractours in such a high degree, as I have
already showed, and as again I will show in this subsequent discourse for the
further satisfaction of your empanelled rank.

LINEAMENT. IX.
The Spirit of Detraction coniured and convicted by the Civil laws
Constitutions.

THE ancient Romans had a law, that he which was convicted of perjury should
be flung down headlong from the Tarpeian rock.

In the civil law books there is extant a constitution of Justinian the
Emperor, to the Citizens of Constantinople unto this effect:

Forasmuch (says he) as many among you do misuse with detestable oaths and
speeches the holy name of God, through which his grievous indignation is
kindled: We counsel you that ye refrain from railing and reuiling, and from
swearing either by your beard, by your hair, or by any such like oaths. For
if wrongs and contumelies, perpetrated against man be not unrevenged and
unpunished: much more deserves he great punishment that dishonors the name
of God. In revenge of such sins do famine, earthquakes, and plagues fall
upon us. Wherefore we mildly advise you that ye abstain^ from such heinous
faults.

But if any man will not be admonished by this our exhortation, as first he
shall be sure to encurre Gods wrath, so certainly shall not he escape without
punishment by us: for we have authorized the right honorable ruler of this our
Royal City, that he shall cause such as offend against this law to be
forthwith apprehended, and to suffer death; for fear lest God himself shauld
plague both this City, and the whole Empire for letting such heinous crimes
unpunished.

A King of France commonly called S. Jews, by chance hearing a Baron of his
Realm at dice to blaspheme the reverent name of God in lashing out many
fearful oaths, caused him presently to be taken, and his lips to be feared
with a hot burning iron.

LINEAMENT, X.
The Spirit of blasphemous Detraction convicted by Gods judgments executed on
some of our own Countries inhabitants.

ELfred a Duke of this Realm suspected of treason against his sovereign King
Athelstan was urged to clear himself upon his oath. And therefore he went to
Rome, where forswearing himself in S. Peter's Church, he suddenly fell down
dead in the place, immediately as soon as he had perjured himself.

Earl Goodwin sitting at dinner with his Prince King Edward at Windsore, and
seeing a son of his that was the kings Cupbearer, in bringing a cup of wine
toward the King, to trippe on the one foot, and yet to recover by the help
of the other foot, so that the wine was vn-shed, laughed and said: How well
has the one brother assisted the other? Even so said the King should my
brother Alphred have helped me, had not Earl Goodwin been. At which words
Goodwin to excuse himself falsely forsware the fact, and taking a morsel of
bread in his hand, wished that that piece of bread might choke him, if he
were guilty of that deed: but so soon as he had received the bread:
forthwith he was choked and fell down dead: whereat, the King said, Have away
this perjured Traitor.

But because that these examples have happened so many years ago, that men's
hardened hearts will except against them, I will rehearse some examples of
perjury that chanced of late years, even such as will be justified by many
yet living.

One Richard Long at Caleis in France willing to vex one Smith and Brook,
took his oath upon a book that they did eat flesh together in Lent time at
the said Brooks house, whereas the said Smith was not at the said Brooks house
during the said Lent at all. After this perjury committed he drowned himself
at the iutty end of the haven in Caleis.

Grimwood of Hitcham in the County of Suffolk, against John Cooper of Watsam
in the said County, at an Assise holden at Bury, wilfully forsware himself:
at harvest after, feeling no pain, complaining of no disease, judging himself
strong and able to labor, as he was stacking up a Goffe of corn, suddenly his
bowels fell out of his body, and immediately he died most miserably.

In the time and reign of King Edward the sixth, there was in Cornwall, a lusty
young Gentleman, who did ride together with other more Gentlement, and their
servants in number about twenty horsemen, amongst whom this lusty yonker
entering into talk began to swear most horribly: unto whom one of the company
not able to abide such blasphemous abomination in gentle words said to him,
that he should give account for every idle word. The Gentleman taking snuff
thereat, why, quoth he, take thou thought for me? Take thought for thy
winding sheet. Well, quoth the other, amend for death gives no warning: As
soon comes a Lambs skin to the market as an old sheep. Gods blood (said
he) care not for me: raging still after this swearing manner worse and worse
in words, till at length, passing on their journey, they came riding over a
great bridge, which stands over a piece of an arm of the Sea, upon which
bridge this Gentleman swearer spurred his horse in such sort, as he sprang
clean over the bridge with the man on his back: who as he was goingcried
aloud, Horse, man and all to the devil.

A woman commonly named the widow Barnes, to defeat an Orphane of some
inheritance, forsware her self, and being therefore rebuked by some well
disposed persons utterly refused their good admonitions. But within four days
after she threw her self out at a window in Cornehill, and brake her neck.
This was done at London in the year 1574.

In the year 1575. one Anne Aueries widow, which at that time dwelt in
Ducklane in London without Aldersgate ran to the shop of one Williamson in
Woodstreete, and there having bought six pound of course towe forsware her
self that she had paid for it, whereas she had paid none. And being very
gently reprehended, for her said ungodly deed she still continued terribly
swering, and auouching the payment: But behold a miraculous thing that mouth of
hers, with which she blasphemed the hallowed name of her glorious Maker, was
put to a most vile office, she was forced presently to void at her mouth the
self same filthiness which nature should have expelled downwards, and so
most miserably died.

One Father Lea a man aged about four score years, was hired for a small
sum of money to forswear himself; but such was the privy pain and
grievous griping of his groaning conscience, that like a festred wound it did
so disquiet him, that he must needs discover it, and so at Foster Lane in
London this Lea meeting the party against whom he forsware himself, very
earnestly and humbly craved forgiveness of this said offense: but ten weeks
after his said confession, so greatly did the power of the devil prevail over
him, that with an old rustie knife he ripped his own belly, and embracing his
guts with his own hands, he let them fall from him into an earthen vessel.
But by the interruption of company that came in upon him, he was prevented from
killing himself utterly at that time, yet the next day after his said
desperate fact, showing some token of repentance he ended his life.

To these periuries I add one more, a Countryman of mine (and I would to God I
could name none else of that impious consort) who having committed perjury in a
cause depending in suite at the Counsel of the Marches, was presently and
suddenly grieved in his great toe, so that the said grief becoming festred
and worse and worse, he ever after halted and limped as long as he lived. I
could likewise produce others, who notwithstanding that they were Gentlemen of
sort and substance in their Country, did commonly suborne false witnesses. But
such was the just judgment of God, who from his heavenly seat knows the
secrets of all hearts, and whatsoever is done in the darkest place, such I say,
was his just revenge, that themselves during their lives were never free from
some casual cross or other. They always lived pestred and perplexed with
some unexpected accidents, and their posterity after the^ are brought to that
misery that they stand at men's devotion, for all that their said impious
Fathers had left them some store of possessions: according to which agrees that
ancient verse;

De male quaesitis non gaudet tertius haeres.
Ill gotten goods their heirs do seldom joy.
LINEAMENT. XI.
The Spirit of Detraction and Perjury convicted by sentence of our own laws
executed on corrupted Jurours.

Diverse of the county of Middlesex took money to be favorable unto Lodowicke
Greuell then prisoner in the Tower upon suspicion of being accessory to
murder, if it fortuned that they should be returned in the Jury against him,
and for this upon sufficient proofs they were convicted, and fined in the
Star Chamber. Likewise three of them did wear papers from the Fleet unto
Westminster hall, and there also back again to the Fleet. 31. Eliza.
Crompton.

Another took five Marks to be of the Jury for the delivery of a thief that
was indicted of felony, and was fined to the King. Vide sines pur contempt.
Fitzherbert. 33. 43. Lib. Assis. 43.

A Jury of London who acquitted Sir Nicholas Throgmorton Knight about the first
year of Queen Marie for high treason were called into the Star Chamber.
Anno. 15 44. because that the matter was held to be sufficiently proved against
him, whereof eight of them were fined to five hundred pounds a piece, and also
awarded back again to prison there to continue, until further order would be
taken for their punishment. Hollinshed. fol. 1759.

Eleven of the Jury which acquitted on Hodis of felony before Sir Roger Manwood
chief Baron in his circuit of the County of Somerset against apparent
evidence, were fined in the Star Chamber, and did wear papers in Westminster
hall. circa. 22. Eliz. Report Crompton.

One G. wrote his letter to a Iurer to appear betwixt Lane and one G. D. and
to do his conscience according to his evidence, and was fined in the Sarre
Chamber to twenty pound, because he had nothing to do with the matter. Circa.
27. Eliz. Note this, that none ought to meddle in any matter depending in suit,
wherewith he has nothing to do.

One G. of the county of Lancaster for the false and malicious procuring of
one to be endited for the death of another, was fined in the Star Chamber to
a great sum. Circa. 31. Eliz.

If perjury be committed by a Jury in a Court Baron, he shall be punished in
the Star chamber upon a bill there exhibited, for no attaint lies in the
base Court. But if any error be committed in that Court, the party shall have a
writ of false judgment. And it seems that he may sue in the Star Chamber
for a false verdict.

A man takes money to give his verdict, he shall be punished, though he keeps
not the said promise. Dier. 95. Fitzherb. na. bre. 171. 21. H. 6. 2.

Jurors took money after they had given their verdict without any covenant
before hand, whereof they were convicted, and every one of them fined. And this
case is out of the statute of Decies Tantum. 39. L. Assis. 19. It seems that
Embrasers shall be punished for taking money, and for laboring a Jury to pass
one way or other, although they do not give their verdict as they should.

LINEAMENT XII.
The Spirit of Detraction convicted by the statute De scandalis magnatum, and
also by the Sovereign authority of the Court of Star Chamber.

Here I doubt me, some nice stomachs ouerlarded with sacietie and surfeite,
(whose mildest censure after an Italian nodde is but so and so) will condemn
me for enterlacing these modern models among sacred Relickes. But these
Critics I will cross with their own lessons: that variety delights: change of
pastures makes fat cattle. And there is a time to prick Flies with Domitian.
The Duke of Buckingham brought an action upon the Statute De scandalis magnatum
against Lucas, for that he said, that the Duke had no more conscience then a
Dog, and so that he might have goods, he cared not how he came by them: And
recovered ten pounds. Michael. 4. H. 8. Rot. 659. He might well have sued
him in the Star chamber upon the same words. Crompton reports that he saw the
copy of the Record.

The Lord of Abergue-venny brought an action upon the said statute against
Cartwright, for that the defendant uttered, and nouellement counterfeit falsa
noua del plaintiff, to weete, that the Plaintiff would wind the defendants
guts about his neck. The defendant pleaded non culp. and in evidence the
Plantiffes showed a matter written to one B. wherein the defendant said, that
he understood by report, that the Lord spoke the above named words. Which was
held for good evidence, and so it was found for the Plaintiff. Whereby we may
note, that to speak and to write is all one, for it is public. Vide libr.
intra. 13. that the fixing of a slanderous libell in an open place gives an
action. Crompton report.

If a man speaks slanderous words of the Prince, and is not punished within
the time limited by the statute. 23 Eliz. cap. 2. he shall be punished by the
statute of West. 1. viz. he shall be imprisoned until he finds the first
Author that spoke them: according to W. 1. cap. 33. not according to the advice
of the Council, for that is, when the slander touches Noblemen, and great
officers expressed in the statutes made. 2. R. 2. cap. 5. 12. R. 2. cap. 11.
and not the King, for he is a person exempt, and not implied within those
words: Great men or Nobles. One who had reported in the Country, that
certainly wars were toward, so that wool might not be transported over Sea
that year, by which rumor the price of wool fell, and was sold at a less
rate, was summoned to appear before the Kings Council, and was fined and
ransomed to the King. 43. libr. Ass. 38.

If any makes a suggestion to the King himself, which is false, and some are
thereby indemnified or hindered, they that make such false suggestions, shall be
sent with the suggestion before the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Tresurer, and his
chief Council, and shall find surety to prosecute the said suggestion. And
if he cannot prove this intent against the defendant by process of law, he shall
be imprisoned, and there remain, until he satisfy the party grieved his
damages, and for the slander which he has incurred through such occasion, and
then he shall be fined to the King. Report ex 37. Edwardi 3. cap. 18.

One O. who had spoken slanderous and horrible words of Queen Mary, was of
them indicted, mentioning in the indictment, that he had spoken them contra
formam diuersorum statutorum, without touching any in specie, and without
saying, vnde scandalum in Regno inter Reg. and magnates vel populum suum oriri
poterit, and was convicted of them upon his arraignement, and had judgment of
imprisonment, and to be fined at the Queens will, until he had found his
Author, according to West. 1. cap. 34.

One Smith of the County of Somerset Esquire, was fined in the Star Chamber for
slanderous words, which he had spoken of one Sir John Young Knight, which
touched his life, and which the said Smith could not prove, he was committed to
the Fleet, and paid great damages unto the Knight: and yet notwithstanding
he might have had an action upon the case at the Common law. Report Crompton.

One L. of Kent Gentleman was punished in this Court, for falsely and
maliciously going about to prove one that was his Cousin to be a Traitor;
wherefore he was ordered to ride about Westminster hall, with his face at the
Horse tail. Circa. 27. Elizab.

A Knight of the County of North. was fined at a great sum in the
Star Chamber, because he permitted a seditious book, called Martin
Marreprelate to be imprinted in his house. 32. Eliz.

If one speak scandalous words of an Archbishop or Bishop, he may sue him in
this Court to have him punished; or else he may have an action upon the Statute
de Scandalis Magnatum, as happened in Sands his case, Archbishop of York,
betwixt him and one Sir Robert Stapleton Knight, in the Star Chamber.

One parleyed of Dyer, Lord chief Justice of the Kings Bench, that he was a
corrupt Judge; for which he was convicted in this Court of Star Chamber, and
adjudged to stand upon the Pillory.

One had cast abroad slanderous libels of the Bishop of C. circa 20. Eliz. and
was punished in the Star Chamber.

The said Crompt on makes a Quaere, whether a man having spoken slanderous
words of a Noblewoman may be sued upon the Statute de Scandalis Magnatum, but
doubts not of his punishment in the Star Chamber. And I have heard it of
credible persons, that in the last Queens time of famous memory, a Master of
Art, sometimes fellow of Martin College in Oxford, lost both his ears by
order of the said Court of Star Chamber sor his percmptory speeches, that he
had used his Mistres, a great Lady carnally, and was secretly contracted unto
her. For proof whereof, he offered to disclose certain privy marks on her
body.

It was resolved by the whole Court of the Kings Bench, that for any matter
contained in any Bill, which was examinable in the Star Chamber, no action lay,
although the matter was merely false, because it was done in the course of
justice. But if one exhibites a Bill in the said Court, for matters not
determinable there, as for murder, or pyracie, which cannot be by English
Bill, but by way of indictment in Latin, then he may be sued for the
Detraction, and pay damages. Report. Cook. 34. Eliz. inter Sir Richard Buckley
pl. and Owen Wood def. en Bank le Roy.

LINEAMENT. XIII.
1 Of the Jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastical Court, touching words of
Detraction and defamation.

2 Where the Kings writ of Prohibition lies against such actions commenced in
that Court.

3 That mixed actions belong to the Common law.

NOw let me draw near to a more resplendant light, to your rich magazin of
laws, Right learned Cook, Englands admired Bartole, in whose profound
intelligence concur the spirits of many famous wights, not after the
Pythagorean transmigration, but after the transmutation of Elisha, which
received the spirit of Elias. For who knows not, that the obscurest and
doubtful Reports of Dier, Brook, Plowden, and of many other sage Writers, are
most plainly reconciled in your Reports, with mellifluous judgments of your
own conceits? I will therefore adventure (like Noah's Dove) to crop some of
your choysest O lives.

Touching Defamations determinable in the Ecclesiastical Court, it was
resolved in the Kings Bench, betwixt Palmer and Thorpe, according to the right
learned collections of Sir Edward Cook Knight, Lord chief Justice of the
common pleas, en le quart part de ses reports, that such defamations ought to
have three things incident. First, that they concern matters merely
spiritual and determinable in the Ecclesiastical Court, as to call a man
Heretic, Schismaticke, Aduowtrer, Fornicator, etc. Secondly, they must
concern matters merely, and only spiritual; for if such defamations touch
any or some thing determinable at the common Law, the Ecclesiastical Judge
shall not take knowledge thereof. Thirdly, although that such defamations be
merely and only spiritual, yet notwithstanding he that is defamed cannot sue
him there for amends and damages, but the suit ought to be only for the
punishment of sin, pro salute animae, for the souls health. And for the
first and second, which is incident, the case en 2 2. Edward. 4. 20. was
recited to this effect.

The Abbot of S. Albons sent his servant for a woman covert to come and speak
with him. The servant performed his Masters commandment. And thereupon the
woman came with him to the Abbot. And when the Abbot and the woman were
together (the servant which knew his Masters will) retired from them, and left
them together in the chamber alone. Then the Abbot said unto the woman, that
her apparel was gross and course; to which the woman answered, that her
apparel was according to her ability, and according to her husbands ability.
The Abbot knowing in what things women repose their delight, replied unto her,
If she would be ruled by him, that she should have as good apparel as any
woman in that Parish, and solicited her chastity. When the woman would not
consent unto him, the Abbot assaulted her, and would have made her a lewd woman
against her will; the which the woman would not suffer. Whereupon the Abbot
detained her in his chamber against her will, to the intent, etc. The husband
having notice of this abuse done to his wife, spoke of all this matter, and
said, that he would have an action of false imprisonment against the Abbot, for
that he had imprisoned his wife; upon which the Abbot adding one sin to
another, sued the innocent and poor husband for defamation in Court Christian,
because the husband had published that my Lord Abbot had solicited her
chastity, and would have made her a naughty woman. But upon all this matter
disclosed to the Kings Court, the husband had a Prohibition, by reason that the
husband might have had an action at the common law, for this affault and
imprisonment of his wife; although then at the first he had not any action, nor
peradventure at any time would have had. Yet because the scandal determinable
in the Ecclesiastical Court, was upon all the matter being disclosed, mixed
with a matter determinable at the common law; for this cause upon motion made
by the Abbots Council to have a consultation, in this case that was denied him
by the Court.

For the third point, which is incident, viz. That the Defamed cannot sue for
amends and damage in Court 3
Christian, though it be merely and only spiritual. It was enacted Articul.
cleri. cap. 1. 2. and 3. that the Kings Prohibition should hold place, if a
Prelate enjoined a penance pecuniary to any man for his offense, and it were
demanded. Notwithstanding if Prelates enjoin a penance corporal, and the
party will redeem such penance by money, if the money be demanded before a
Judge spiritual, Prohibition shall hold no place. But leaving the Statutes at
large to be considered by the Reader, that desires to know them, I will return
to the Reports of that rare Treasurer of the common law Sir Edward Cook, for
words of detraction actionable, and forth explanation of the Ecclesiastical
power in such cases.

Anno 35. Eliz. Anne Dauies plaintiff declared, that she was a Virgin of good
fame, etc. Whereas one Anthony Elcocke, Citizen and Mercer of London, of the
substance and value of three thousand pounds, desired her for his wife; and for
that cause had communication with John Dauies Father of the said Anne, and was
ready to conclude it: John Gardener defendant (premissorum non ignarus) to
defame the said Anne, and to distaste the said Anthony from proceeding forward,
uttered and published of the said Anne these words: I know Dauies daughter
well, mentioning the said Anne, she dwelt in Cheapside, and there was a Grocer
that did get her with child. And being admonished by some that were present
and heard him, that he should be advised what he spoke of the said Anne, he
said further of her, I know very well what I say, I know her father, mother,
and sister; and she is the youngest sister, and had the child by the Grocer.
By reason of which words the plaintiff was greatly defamed, so that the said
Anthony utterly refused to take her to his wife. To this the defendant pleaded
not guilty, and by a Nisiprius in the County of Buckingham the Jurors found for
the plaintiff, and assessed damages to two hundred marks; Then it was moved
in arrest of judgment by the Counsel of the defendant, that the said defamation
of incontinencie concerned the spiritual and not the temporal jurisdiction.
And therefore as the offense should be punished in Court Christian; so the
remedy for such defamation ought also to be there. For cognitio causae non
spectat ad forum Regium. Even so, if a man be called a Bastard, an Heretic, a
Miscreant or an Aduowterer (because they appertain to the Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction) no action lies at the common law. But it was answered by the
plaintiffes counsel, and resolved by the whole Court, that the action was main
teynable for two causes: first because that she was punishable by the Statute,
de 18. Eliz. cap. 3. if she had a bastard. And although that fornication or
aduowtry be not examinable by the common law, for that they are done in secret,
and peradventure are uncomely to be openly examined; yet nevertheless the
having of a bastard is a thing apparent, examinable and punishable by the said
act. Secondly it was resolved, that the action was maintainable if the
defendant had charged the plaintiff but with bare incontinencie. For in this
case the ground of the action is temporal; that is, she was to be advanced in
marriage, and that she was defeated of it, and the means whereby she was
defeated, was the said slander, which means tending to such an end, should be
tried by the country.

So if a Divine be to be presented to a Benefice, and one to defeat him of it,
says to the Patron, that he is an Heretic or a Bastard, or that he is under
excommunication; whereby the Patron refuses to present (as he might very well,
if the imputation were true) and, he loses his preserment, he shall have an
action upon the case for the scandals tending to such an end.

Likewise if a woman be bound, that she shall live continent and chaste; or if
a lease be made unto her, Quamdiu casta vixerit, as long as she remains
chaste, in these cases incontinency shall be tried by the common law. P^pham
chief Justice said, that if one speaks of a woman, which is an Inne-holder,
that she has a great and infectious disease, by which she loses her guestes,
she shall have an action upon the case.

In the Kings Bench betwixt Banister and Banister, it was resolved, where the
defendant speaks of the plaintiff (being son and heir to his father) that
he is a Bastard, an action lies upon the case; for that tendes to the
disinhe^iting of the land, which descends unto him from his father: but it was
resolved* if the defendant pretends, that the plaintiff is a bastard, and that
himself is next heir, there no action lies; and that the defendant may show
by way of bar, if the Plaintiff omits it in his bill.

LINEAMENT. XVI.
Observations concerning words of Detraction and Defamation fit to be perused
of Sheriff^s and Stewards, or of other Judges of inferior Courts, extracted
out of the Reports of Sir Edward Cook Knight, Lord chief Justice of the
common Pleas.

SEnsus verborum est duplex, mitis and asper; and verba accipienda sunt in
meliore sensu. 1
The meaning of words is twofold, mild and rough, or uncharitable: and words
are always to be accepted in the milder sense. As for example, Edward Danney
vicar of Northelingham sued upon the statute de scandalis magnatum by Henry
Lord Cromwell Plaintiff, for his choleric answering him being a Baron of the
Realm, in these words: It is no marvel that you like not of me; for you like
of those, that maintain sedition against the Queens proceeding. The defendant
construed this word sedition, seditiosam doctrinam or factious Preachers, which
by the said Lords countenance (as he supposed) inueighed against the book of
common prayer established anno primo Eliz. though the strict sense of this word
Seditio is as much to say, as seorsim itio magni populi, quando itur ad manus:
Sedition properly is public and violent. But God forbid that the words of one
being like unto wind should be taken by parcels against the intention of the
party by such a strict and Grammatical construction, Quia quae ad vnum sine^
loqu^t a sunt non debent ad alium detorqueri, What are spoken to one end, ought
not to be wrested to another end. Therefore a Judge must enter into the
consideration of all the pr^cedent parlance and words, which import the true
cause and occasion, and which manifest their true sense, According to that
saying: Sensus verborum ex causa dicendi accipiendus est, and sermones semper
accipiendi sunt secundum subiectam materiam. The meaning of words is to be
taken out of the occasion of speech, and speeches are always to be taken
according to the subject or matter in hand.

In actions for scandalous detractions the Defendant may justify the words, or
confess then, or show by special 2
matter, that the words be not actionable, and then the Defendant shall not be
urged at any time to a general issue. For albeit he does vary from the
Plaintiff in the sense and quality of the words, yet notwithstanding that is
no cause to chase him to a general issue. As for example, the Plaintiff
charge the Defendant with unlawful maintenance, the Defendant may justify
by way of lawful maintenance, and may plead the general issue. In like manner
one charge a man with these words: Thou art a murderer. The Defendant may
justify the words, and declare how that the Plaintiff told him, that he
killed diverse hares with certain engines: and thereupon the Defendant said
unto him; Thou art a murderer, meaning the hares, which he killed.

Out of these observations the Reporter Sir Edward Cook, that peerless
Phoenix of the Common law, gives 3
us two excellent points of learning in actions of slanders. First, to observe
the occasion and cause of their parlance, and how that may be pleaded in the
Defendants excuse. Secondly, although your opinion be, that your Clients case
is clear, and his matter in fact plain, yet hazard not the matter upon a
demurre, wherein perhaps, upon pleading or otherwise more matters will arise,
then you knew before. But first take advantage of special matters in facto, by
which the true sense and coherence of the words may be gathered in favor of
the Defendant, and reserve matters de iure, which always arise upon matters in
fact unto the last, and never demurre at the first in law. Seeing that after
the trial of matters in facto the matter de iure shall be safe unto you.

It was adjudged en Bank le Roy enter Cutler et Dixon. 28. Eliz. that if one
exhibits Articles to Justices of peace 4
against a certain person containing great abuses and misdemeanures, not only
touching the Petitioner himself, but many others, and all to the intent, that
he might be bound to his good behavior: In this case the party accused shall
not have any action upon the case for any matter comprehended in those
Articles; for in that case they pursued but the ordinary course of justice. And
if actions were permitted in such cases, they who had good cuase of complaint
durst not complain for fear of infinite vexations.

Master Stanhope being a Justice of Peace, and Surueyour of the Duchy of
Lancaster was detracted with these 5
words: Master Stanhope has but one Manor, and that he has gotten by
swearing and forswearing. It was adjudged, that these words were not
actionable. First, because that they were too general; and those words, which
shall charge any man with an action, on which damages shall be recovered, must
have a convenient certainty. Secondly, the Defendant charged not the Plaintiff
with swearing or forswearing, for he might obtain a Manor by swearing and
forswearing, and yet he did not procure nor assent unto it. Also, words which
maintain an action must be directly applied to the Plaintiff in regard of the
damage, which he sustained by the scandal.

If one impeach another, that he has forsworn or perjured himself; that
bears no action for two causes. First he 6
might be forsworn in usual communication, Quia benig nior sententia in rebus
generalibus seu dubijs praeferenda est. A mild interpretation is to be
preferred in general or doubtful matters. Secondly it is an usual word in
our passion and choler for one to say to another, thou art* a Vilaine, a
Rogue, or a Varlet, etc. These or the like words will not maintain an Action.
For Boni Iudicis est lites dirimere. It is the part of a good Judge to take
away strife, and causes of strife. But if one speaks to another, that he is
forsworn or perjured in such a case; for such words the Action is good,
because that it appears by these words, that he has forsworn himself in
judicial proceedings.

Sir Christopher Wray Lord Chief Justice said, that although slanders and
false imputations are to be repressed, 7
for that many times a verbis ad verbera perue^tum est, from words men come to
blows; yet he said, that the Judges have resolved, that Actions for scandals
must not be maintained by any strained construction or argument, nor must they
extend any favor for their support. Seeing they abound in these days more
then in times past; and the intemperance together with men's malice increases.
Et malicijs hominum est obuiandum. They must meet and prevent men's malice.
Besides in our Law Books, Actions for scandalles are very rare; And those
which are reported are for words of eminent slander, and of great importance.

This moved the Court of the Kings Bench to deny a Procedendo to have an
Action of slander for calling one 8
a whore, tried in London. For the Defendant had removed it thence by an Habeas
Corpus into that Court. And it was affirmed by the whole Court of the Kings
Bench, that a custom to maintain actions for such brabling speeches is
against law. Licet consuetudo sit magnae authoritatis, nunquam tamen
praeiudicat manifestae veritati. Although that custom be of great authority,
notwithstanding it does never prejudice manifest truth.

To say, that a man is detected for perjury in any Court is not actionable: for
an honest man may be detected, 9
but not convicted. And every man which has a Bill of perjury against him
exhibited, is detected. 37. Eliz. inter Weauer Plaintiff, and Cariden
defendant.

To report, that a man has killed his wife, and she alive, 10
the Defendant may therefore demurre and no action lies. But it is otherwise if
she be dead. 39. Eliz. in commune Banco inter Snag. arm. Plantiffe, and Gee
Attorney de mesme le Court, Defend. So one Allen having spoken these words of
Eaton Plaintiff: He is a brabler and a quarreller, for he gave his champion
counsel to make a deed of gift of his goods to kill me, and then to sly out of
the country: but God preserved me. Upon great deliberation and advise, it was
adjudged, that in this case the words were not actionable, for the purpose and
intent of a man without an act is not punishable by law. Ubi non est lex ibi
non est transgressio quo ad mundum. Where there is no law, there is no
transgression in the sight of the world. And although that for such a
Conspiracy a man may be punished in the Court of Star Chamber, that comes to
pass by the absolute power of that Court, and not by the ordinary course of
law.

In every Action upon the case for slanderous words, two things are requisite:
first, that the person which is 11
scandalized be certain. Secondly, that the scandal be apparent by the words
themselves. And therefore if any one says without any precedent communication,
that one of the servants of I. S. (he having diverse) is a notorious felon or
Traitor; there, for the uncertainty of the person, no action lies: and an
innuendo an iteration or repetition of words cannot make him, certain. As he
is sick of the pockes the French pockes, this innuendo and iterating of the
same words makes not the proper office which it ought; for it contends to
extend the general words being the Pockes to the French Pockes by an
imagination of an intent, which is not apparent by any precedent words, whereto
the iteration might be referred. And the words themselves must be construed in
mitiore sensu, in the milder sense. To conclude, 42. Eliz. en Bank le Roy enter
John James, Pl. and Alexander Rutlech Def. it was so resolved that the office
of an innuendo a reiterating is to contain and design the person himself, or
the very word which was certainly named before, and in effect was in place of a
(praedict) the aforesaid thing, or the above named person. But a reiterating or
repeating cannot make a person certain, which was uncertain before, for it
would be an inconvenience, if actions were maintained by an imagination of an
intent, which appears not by the words, upon which the Action is founded, but
all is uncertain, and subject to deceivable conjecture.

The Judge must note the very words of Detraction, whether they be Adictiues or
Substantives, for sometimes 12
Adjectives will maintain actions, and sometimes not. They are actionable,
first, when the Adjective presumes an act committed. Secondly, when they
scandalize any in his office, function or trade, whereby he gets his living. As
if one says, that such a man is a per^ured knave, there, it behooues an Act to
have been committed, otherwise he could not be termed perjured. So if a man
says of an Officer or Judge, that he is a corrupt Officer or Judge, an action
lies for both causes. First, because it implies an Act done. Secondly, it is
slanderous unto him in respect of his Office. But if one calls another a
sedicious fellow, a theeuish knave, there, no action lies, because the words
import not, that he has committed sedition or felony, but they are Adjectives,
which import an inclination thereto.

Likewise, though the former words of a man's speech were actionable uttered
alone, yet if there follow after, a subsequ n^ explanation of the said words by
the Defendant without delay or interlocution, they be not actionable, for the
latter words extenuate and qualify the former, and also expound the speakers
meaning, as thou art a thief, for thou have stolen my Apples or Hops out of
my orchard, which latter words mitigate the proper sense of this word thief,
which of it self (though generally spoken) would maintain a brabling action.
And it is the office of Judges upon consideration of all the words, to collect
the true hope and intention of him that speaks them, without partiality or
favor, Per Popham chiese Justice and totam curiam 44. Eliz. en Bank le Roy.
Brittridge case.

LINEAMENT. XV.
Observations concerning detracting Libels given in the Star Chamber, and
collected out of Sir Edward Cooks Reports.

IN the case of L. P. in the Star Chamber Paschae. 3. Regis Iacobi. against
whom the Kings Attorney, proceeded on his own confession, Ore tenus, for the
composing and publishing of a certain Libel in meeter, wherein John then
Archbishop of Canterbury, who was a Prelate of singular piety, gravity, and
knowledge, and also Richard late Archbishop of Canterbury, were both of them
traduced and scandalized by descriptions and circumlocutions, and not in
express terms. In the said case these points were resolved.

Every Libell which is called famosus libellus, or Infama^oria Scriptura, is
made either against a private man or against a Magistrate, or public person.
If it be made against a private person, that deserves a severe punishment. For
though the Libell be made but against one, yet notwithstanding it incites all
them of the same family, kindred, or society to revenge, and so tends
consequently to quarrels, and to the breach of the peace, and may be the cause
of effusion of blood, and of great inconveniences. If it be made against a
Magistrate, or any other public person, that is a greater offense; for that
concerns not only the breach of the peace, but the scandal of the
government: for what greater scandal of the government can there be then to
have corrupt or wicked Magistrates appointed and constituted by the King to
govern his subjects under him? And there cannot be a greater imputation to the
State, then to permit such corrupt fellows to sit in the sacred scate of
Justice, or to have any meddling in, or concerning the administration of Justice.

Albeit that the private man or Magistrate be dead at the time when the Libell
was made, yet that is punishable: for in the one case it prouokes others of the
same family, blood, or society to revenge and to break the peace. And in the
other case the Libeller traduceth and slaundereth the State and Government,
which dies not at all.

A Libeller that is called famosus defamator shall be punished either by
indictment at the common law, or by Bill if he denies it, or Ore tenus by his
confession, in the Star Chamber: and according to the quality of his offense he
may be punished by fine or imprisonment, and if the case be exorbitant, by
Pillory and less of his cares.

It matters not, whether the Libell be true, or whether the party against whom
it was made be of good report, or of ill report: for in a settled State of
Government the party grieved ought to complain for every injury done unto him
by ordinary course of law, and not by any means to revenge himself, either by
the (...) course of Libe^ling, or other ways. He that kills a man with his
sword in combat, is a great offender: but he is a greater offender, that
poysoneth one; for in the one case h^ that is openly ^slaulted can defend
himself, he knows his adversary, and may dee his endeavor to pr^u^ut him: but
poisoning may be done so secretly, that no man can defend him self against it.
Wherefore the effence is more dangerous, by reason that the ^ffender cannot be
easily known. And of the same nature is Libelli^g. It is secret, and
dispoiles a man of his fame, which ought to be more precious un to him then his
life: and it is very hard to find out the Author of an infamous writing.
Difficillimum est inucnire Authorem infamatoriae scripturae; and therefore when
the offender is known, he ought to be severely punished.

Every in famous Libell is either written or unwritten, aut est in scriptis,
aut sine scriptis. A scandalous Libell, which is written in scriptis, is when
an Epigram, Rhyme, or other writing is composed or published, to the note or
contumely of another, through which his same or dignity might be prejudiced.
And such a Libell may be published. 1. verbis aut cantilenis, by words or
songs, as when it is maliciously repeated or sung in the presence of others. 2.
Traditione by delinerie, when the Libell or any copy of it is delivered over to
scandalize the party. Famosius libellus sine scriptis, an unwritten Libell may
be made first by pictures, as to paint the party out in any shameful and
ignominious manner. Secondly by signs, signis, as to fasten a gallows or
other reproachful signs at the parties door, or elsewhere.

And it was res^lued, Michaell. 43. and 44 Elizabeth. in the Star Chamber in
Hally woods case, that if any one finds a Libell, and would preserve himself
from danger, if it be composed against a private man, the finder ought either
to burn it, or sorthwith to deliver it to a Magistrate: but if it concerns a
Magistrate, or any other public person, the finder must cut of hand deliver
it to a Magistrate, to the ^nt^nt that by examination and industry the Author
may be sound and punished.

Libelling and calumniation is an offense against the law of God.

For it is written No^ facies calumniam, proximo, thou (...). 17.
shall not revile thy neighbor.

Thou shall not have to do with any false report. Exodus 23. Eccles.: 0.

a In cogitatione ^uane detrabas Regi, nee in secreto cubiculi tui diuiti
maledices, quia volucres coeli portabunt vocem tuam, and qui habet pennas
anunciabit sententiam. Psalm. 68. 13.
Aduersus me loquebantur qui sedebant in porta and in me psallebant qui
bibebant vinum. Job 30.
Filij stultorum and ignobilium and in terra penitus non parents, nunc in
eorum canticum versus sum, and factus sum eis in prouerbium.

It is observed, that Job was the mirror of patience, as appears by his
intemperate words, and became Quodammodo, after a sort impatient, when Libels
were made of him. Whereby it appears, how forcible they were to provoke
impatience and contention. Likewise there are certain notes whereby a Libeller
may be known, Quia tria sequuntur defamatorem famosum, because three things
do follow a notorious Libeller. 1. Prauitatis incrementum, increase of
lewdness. 2. Bursae de crementum, euacuation of the purse and beggerie. 3.
Conscientiae detrimentum, shipwreck of conscience.

LINEAMENT. XVI.
The conclusion of the fourth Circle, containing the Authors pareneticall
Charge to common Iuries.

COurteous contrymen, understanding spirits, whose hap it is to be enrankt
into impanelles, according to the ancient laws and liberties of this our
flourishing Commonwealth, ye have heard with your external cares (and I pray
God that the same may be internally enrowled in your consciences with eternal
characters) even Princes, Judges, Prophets, Apostles, yea, and our Savior
Christ himself, all of them possessed with the powerful gifts of the holy
Ghost, to proclaim, to declaime, and to denounce (as Gods Heralds with holy
Trumpets) decrees of death and defiance, of damnation with euerflaming
vengeance against the Diabolical Detractors of the Heavenly Deity, and of his
Divine similitude here on earth. Ye have likewise heard, nay, ye have been
oculati testes, clear eye witnesses, that the modern laws of our Country
have condemned periuries and scandals with excommunication, the most grievous
and greatest censure, that the Church can give, with mulcts and fines, with
imprisonment, with pillories, with disgraces worse then death it self. (...).
The fool becomes wise and wary after miscrie, or as our English proverb
teaches, The burnt child will take heed of the fire. Let the precedent
examples of other men's falls and follies exhort you to remember your Christian
duties, and specially now at this instant, since that ye are called and sworn
as precise Patriots, as chosen vessels of honor, of an honorable corporation,
to edify, to do your best endeavor toward the repairing of the Lords Temple,
though it were but by tempering of Lime (whereto the Noblest is unfit) by
transferring of stones, by carrying of clay, sand, hair, wool, or rather then
nothing, in conuaying of Oystershels: so that ye be industrious in your charge,
it suffices for your discharge. But how is it possible for you to perform any
such service without presumption, when as ye sacrilegiously conceal your
Countries cockle, your darnell, your droanes, your drunkards, and your
Detractours? How is it possible for you to build up Solymi Rudera clara soli,
the ruinous walls of the Church Militant, when as ye offend the Arch-builder of
the world with disloyal thoughts, words, and works? with exercising
Spiritualem nequitiam in coelestibus, Spiritual wickedness in heavenly matters?
with committing spiritual fornication against the Majesty of Gods spirit? How
is it possible for you to escape unpunished, or not to be principal partakers
of their faults and fines, of their finnes and penalties, whom ye wantonly
spare for worldly respects? Alas, It is pity* you say, to present poor silly
wretches, who transgress of mere necessity. It is more noble to give then to
take away, to spare then to spill. And sor the great Ones, ye pretend that your
cobweb is too thin to cub them in.

Foolish Pity
Marres the City,
It is a saying not so old as true. Beloved Christians, beware of this
Alchymie, beware of this sophistry: for believe it as an Article of your
Creed, that sin is damnable under what color soever it be shrouded. Whether
it be covered with clouts and rags, or with a golden robe, let the Mo^ster be
vnstript, let Achan be accused for his theft. let Ioab be endicted for his
shedding of innocent blood, yea though he have taken Sanctuary, and caught
hold on the horns of the Altar. Let Semei be brought coram nobis, for his
^ayling and reuiling. Let Barrabas 1. Reg. 2.
be found, as a notorious felon. Enquire whether Bigthan and There Is have
committed treason against the Ester. 2.
Lords Anointed, and whether the son of Salomith, the son of Dibry has
committed the like heinous crimo against the Lord himself in blaspheming his
hallowed name. And of what nature soever the bills are, that men prefer unto
you, follow your evidence, and find out the guilty, though they be proportioned
as huge as Giants: let not their high nor huge statures dismay and defile your
undefiled consciences. The cause is none of yours. The judgment is none of
yours. But both belong unto him that made you. Ye can do no less then ^ndorce
[BILLA VERA] upon evident misdemeanures, albeit with outward tears and inward
bleeding griefs. For if Saul an Anointed King for sparing of Agag, a prisoner
Prince, had his Kingdom of Israel rent from his posterity for ever, even by
the Lords own verdict, what shall be the guerdon of your indulgence, of your
cunning concealment? The reward of sin is death, and the reward of bloody or
blasphemous sin (such as perjury is) can be no other then perpetual death.

Non est bonum ludere cum Sanctis. There is no jesting with oaths, no
dalliance with detracting from Gods word. It is not Equivocation or mental
reservation (Iurani Imgua mentem iniura tam gero, I swore an oath by tongue,
but I bear a mind unsworn, as that young man Hyppolitus in Euripedes
protested): It is not the Popes pardon or his detracting dispensation: it is
not Indian gold; it is not a self flattering suggestion, nor all this worlds
commodity, which can justify the cursed blot of blasphemy, or rectify the
cancred blossoms of blasphemous concealements. There is a sin venial, which
we call trespass; and there is a sin unto death, a sin not to be forgiven.
Such is the wilful and presumptuous sin of a man's own witting conscience,
against the open face and illumination of the holy Ghost. And what if the sin
of Perjury falls out to be this horrible and heavy sin? In what a plight are
partial Iuries? Therefore my Masters, I could wish, that ye deliberate with
Divine discretion, before ye determine your verdicts rashly in heat of flesh
and blood. And to speak more plainly to the purpose, I could wish as long as
ye enjoy this weighty place, in examining the defects and defaults of your
Country, that ye proceed not, as many now-a-dayes do, to censure presently
after drinking, or Tobacco taking; but rather that ye begin, continue, and
conclude your proceedings soberly, gravely, and advisedly without temerity,
timerousnesse, or affection. But what man, quoth the spirit of Detraction, can
be so void of passion or affection? Then farewell kindred, farewell love, nay,
farewell life it self, if I cannot help my friend in necessity, or hurt my
foe in opportunity. The Lord rebuke thee, thou foul spirit, that go about
to make Christians worse then Pagans; in whose books it is written, that
Justice has neither father nor mother. Shall we regenerated Christians, that
know Justice to be one of the chiefest Attributes of the Godhead, and so highly
regarded of his sacred Majesty, that he spared not his holy One, his own
eternal Word, but gave him over for a while to cruel death in revenge of old
Adams sins: shall we respect flesh and blood more then Gods Attribute? Shall
we forfeit both our eyes to save one of theirs? Shall we lose our own souls
and bodies to ransom other men's corruptible bodies, or temporary fortunes?
Better it is to cut off one member, then that the whole body boil in hot
scalding lead. He that loves his father and mother above me, is not worthy of
me, says our Savior Christ. Shall we being put in trust, deceive the trust
that is reposed in us? Shall we become our own caruers, and under color of
Justice injury the innocent: Vengeance is Gods, and he will requite. It is
better, O reuengfull Spirit, to conceal the guilty, then to condemn the
guiltless. But, ye beloved of the Lord, I hope will so iudiciously behave your
selves in an equal balance, without enclining to the left hand or to the
right hand, that the Right shall still take place, that the expectation of your
Judges conceived of your fidelity and integrity, shall not be void and
frustrate. Ye will demean your selves, I hope, so zealously, so sincerely in
your proceedings, that the matter and not the man shall be the object of your
internal eyes, your eyes of understanding; which I pray God to enlighten with
his knowledge, to inspire with the sparks of his spirit; whereby ye may
discern gold from copper, truth from perjury, sincerity from vanity, the
sons of God from the sons of B^lial, to the glory of his heavenly Ma^^stie,
to the comfort of his Deputy here on earth, and to the discharge of your own
consciences, which ye pawn and pledge for the security of your duty and
diligence.

Discite Iustitiam moniti: and non temnite Diuo^.

THE FIFTH CIRCLE OF THE SPIRIT OF DETRACTION, CONIVRED AND CONVICTED.
LINEAMENT. I.
1 The Authors scope in this Circle. 2 His invocation to the Godhead, against
his Ghostly Enemies.


IN the precedent Circles 1
I have affoorded the Reader a taste of my present purpose: in it I have
coniured the spirit of Detraction; forearming my self with the spirits of
Goodness, or to speak Poetically, Aegide Palladia, with Mineru^es shield, and
so by descent discried the tree of Good and Evil; wherein I have exercised my
declining will, with excellent exorcismes of Michaels mysteries; and also I
have therehence deseended, as it were by steps and degrees, to the pedigree of
those degenerate spirits, which gape after man's damnation, ever since our
deiection from that Paradise of free will, being but the mystical means of
old Adams probation; and particularly I have canuased the said spirit of
Detraction, that domineeres it in all places, at Ordinaries, at Feasts, at
Tobacchonizing, without curb or check; one while breathing forth blasphemies
against his God, that will not hold him guiltless; another while possessing
the souls of our reprobates (like unto those of Ahabs false Prophets) so that
they broach out whole pipes of poisonous periuries, paradoxes, slanders, and
ridiculous girdes in the derogation, nay, in despite of the meek and mild
spirit of God, whom they for^e to depart away out of their (quondam baptized)
consciences, being very sorrowful to see their hardened hearts, and to see his
holy gifts bestowed in vain. But our Fathers determinate will be done, in
earth as it is in heaven, that has sealed up the certainty and number of the
Elect, before this world was made by his word and wisdom. And now that the
spirit of Detraction stands forth to be arraigned at the bar of
understanding, let no man blame me, if I lay out Truth it self in evidence
against him, as well to convince him present, as also to confound his absent
adherents, acceslaries, and abertours, which together with the abouesaid
devilish evils, make no conscience in this licentious age with the Giants of
old time, to raise and roll up mounts against the Heavens, with Prometh^us to
rob God of his ^ight, to father his works of highest honor upon the Father of
lies (and according to the nature of base spirits (which cannot eleuate
themselves to the Sphere of speculation) to stand in greater fear of the
Devils supposed realty, then to become ravished with the lovely Majesty of the
everliving God, who with one blast can tumble down such detracting Clinickes
into the abisme of eternal night, where their Chemist God inhabites, without
hope of redemption.

In execution of which important charge, I doubt not 1
but Satan (whose miracles I annull) will conjure up many sulphur ous wits of
both sexs (nicking Momes and nipping Niobes) to scolde and scoff, to rail and
revile at this work of charity. Cadmus with his Serpents teeth grinnes many
menaces. Medusa with her prodigious art threatens to bang me and to stone me,
and all because I write the truth. O that I had Perseus his virtue to conquer
this terrible Gorgon. But why interpose I the fictions of Paynime Poets among
the sentences of holy Writ? O heavenly Spirit, be thou my Perseus, lend me thy
David's sling, to encounter this Ghostly Golias, and this grisly Giantesse.
Behold, how my spiritual Foe mounted on his jade of Detraction, dares me to
the field: daunt thou him with thy potent Word, and his omnipotence will be
impotent; cast forth thy Aarons rod, and his arrows will be swallowed up.
While thy Grace shines on me, I fear no Magi^ke spells, no Serpents teeth, no
Witches curse. Let them draw my picture by Pygmalions skill in the purest
Virgin wax, and revenge their wrath with sharp pointed needles, my heart
shall never quail: let them burn the same for an Heretic (as those of
Tholouza burnt their Kings) I will not fear what man or Devil can do to me;
not although they disgorge upon me their bane of Basiliskes, nor though they
discharge their Iambicke volumes, or rather vollees of their Basiliscoes; for
the God of heaven is he that reigns over all things, that rules all things,
in all places, at all times. He, even he it is, that is All in all, the Glorious
God that makes the thunder, the only worker of powerful miracles; to whom
all Principalities, all Dominions, all powers, and all creatures, as well
incorporall as corporeal, invisible as, visible must kneel for mercy with
honor, dread, and reverence.

LINEAMENT, II.
1 How the Spirit of Detraction attributes the glorious works of God unto the
Diu^ll. 2 That men's guilty consciences drive them to extol the Devil and his
supposed power.


IF men be guilty for blaspheming the name of God: If they be precisely
forbidden to have any dealings with false reports: If they must account for
every idle word, all which I have proved hithereunto, in what a grievous case
are those wretches, which commit not only all these vanities together, but
likewise diminish, derogate, and detract in peremptory, proud, and presumptuous
manner from their great Creator his glorious appurtenances, his types of
majesty, and his titles of heavenly honor? In what a forlorn estate are they,
which live in the darksome dungeon of spiritual Egypt, and in the whorish
brothelry of spiritual Sodom? How unhappy are they, which leave so
superstitiously unto the leaven of our Pharisaicall Papists, walking a
whore-hunting after strange Gods both in body and soul? with both these the
most part of the world observe the Spirit of Detraction; with the principal
members of the body, with their tongues they detract, with their ears they
lustfully listen, with their hearts they consent, sucking (like spungeous, or
hydropicke bodies) all corruptions whatsoever: with the principal faculties of
the soul, with their reasons, wills, and memories they hatch, foster and
reiterate such blasphemous paradoxes; No cross nor loss can chance but the
Devil sent it. No sign nor sigh can happen, but the Devil sent it. The
Devil (say they) is the only Emperor of hell, king of the Planets, Stars,
and Meteors, and also absolute Prince of this earthly world. These are the
ordinary speeches diuulged at our Ordinaries. No Tavern bur is full of this
hellish stuff. No conference but the Devil by stealth gets in his cursed name.

What ears could not glow at these runnagate reports? What heart would not
burn at these uncharitable conceits? What scholar of worth would not set out
his talent to advantage, his learning in print, in hearing the Archangels
honor extenuated, and the Dragons horn exalted? Truly for my part, (though
inferior to many Phinehees in zeal and devotion) I cannot silently suffer
these ignominious injuries against the Lord my Savior. O men of little faith,
nay rather of no faith! your difference and distrust in spiritual matters
wrought and brought in all these fables and foolish fopperies. The more wicked
ye be, the more ye fear, and the more ye fear, the more fantasies run to
your headless brains. Your guilty consciences seared with the scorching fire
of your iniquities become so appalled, that ye quake and shake, like aspen
leaves; ye fear the moone-shine in the water, ye fear your own shadows, and
tremble with the Majesty of Gods judgments, as malefactors going to
execution, or as that Gentleman of Padua, who over night hearing that he should
be put to death the next morning after, took such an inward conceit (though
this was but a false alarm) that the next morning his youthful hair was
suddenly committed into a silver color. Spiritual courage descendes from
heaven: spiritual cowardice springs from flesh and blood corrupted with black
melancholy, the Devils breath thickened to a pestilent exhalation. Wherehence
weak men begat that venefique verse:

Flectere si nequcam superos Acheront a mouebe.

If heaven hears me not, I Will down to hell.

LINEAMENT. III.
Proved out of the Book of Wisdom, that men's guilty consciences caused them
at first to fear Bugs and Spirits.

TO confirm the premises, I will lay down before you the opinion of that
wise man, which wrote the book of Wisdom, which likewise proves, that fear
was the chiefest inuenter of the Devils miracles and strange sights.

While they thought to be hid in the darkness of their sins, they were
scattered abroad in the very midst of the Wisd. cap. 17.
dark covering of forgetfulness, put to horrible fear and wonderously vexed.
For the corner where they lay hid, might not keep them from fear, because
sounds came round about them, and vexed them, yea many terrible and strange
visions appeared unto them.

They were sometimes chased with monstrous apparitions, and sometimes they
swoooned as their own souls had betrayed them: for an hasty fear, and that
was not looked for, came upon them.

They were all bound with one chain of darkness: whether it were a blasing
wind, or a sweet song of the birds among the thick branches of the trees, or
the vehemency of hasty running water, or great noise of the falling down of
stones, or the running of playing beasts, which they saw not, or the mighty
noise of roaring wild beasts, or the sound that answered again in the
hollownesse of the mountains: which we call Echo, these terrible things made
them swooone (for very fear.)

LINEAMENT. II II.
How men's guilty consciences made them to mistake the truth, and to become
afraid of things merely natural.

SOmetimes natural things (because they are unusual and seldom seen) do
affright and astonish our weak consciences, as if we had seen a Spirit,
specially, if they happen in the night time, when we sit darkling, or if we
pass by any Churchyard, or where any man was lately killed or hanged. Sometime
the very sudden talking about such strange apparitions in the nights does
produce a sudden alteration in our unsettled minds, and the rather, if we know
our selves guilty of some deadly sin, as of adultery, malice, or such like.
Yea, Papists by reason of their superstitious legends, which their Confessors
and grave Fathers have so firmly even with their nurses milk imprinted in
their thoughts, I say, these credulous people by Gods justice are confounded
with ridiculous toys, and otherwhiles with their own conceit, according to
that, They feared where no fear was. Because they stop their ears from
hearing the Gospel, and shut their eyes from reading the truth, therefore does
God send such light things to terrify their unrighteous hearts. When we pray
unto our Creator, they pray unto Creatures. When we crave to be helped by the
only helper and Savior of the world, Jesus Christ, they pray unto them, that
sometimes were sinners here on earth, trusting in Beads, Crucifixes and other
stocks or Idols, rejecting spiritual light and spiritual comfort. As for
example, I remember about eight years ago, in passing over the Pyrences
betwixt France and Spain, when I and others then in company having lost our
way, and also being benighted and fearing to be assaulted by wild beasts began
to draw out our weapons for fear of the worst, a certain Seminary scholar
newly come from Doway, armed himself with his Beads, putting them about his
neck, and saying unto us, that he cared not for all the Bears of the world,
as long as he had those Beads about him, which as he alleged, were consecrated
by the Popes own hands. Whereby a man may note to what superstition and
follies this sect is drawn, that from the Spirit of God they betake themselves
to earthly hopes. No marvel then that they are also blindfolded in attributing
such belief to Goblins and Sprights.

The simpler sort when they behold but a firedrake, a flaming meteor, the
shooting of the stars, or candles about dead men's sepulchers, (which indeed
are no other then sulphurous exhalations.) Presently they give out that they
saw Sprights or Devils. And if they had not suddenly crossed themselves, they
had been taken tarde and slain.

Others have been put to great fear by looking on shining worms, on bones of
newland fish, or on a kind of rotten wood, which shine very bright in the night
time.

Some again have trembled in their beds at the sudden rumbling and noise,
which Cats, Rats, or Mice have made in searching for their prey: or at the
stir and coile which disguised sprights have caused. Many pageants have been
practiced with the benefit of the night to the great terror of them, that were
not very wise: some have wrought wonders, by walking on the water upon stilts,
I mean upon deep waters, as others have walked with large soles of cork.

I have likewise heard of some Conicatchers that went current for Coniurers,
who to gain themselves estimation among fools, have purposely in the fields
placed in a dark night creuises or tortoises alive with burning candles on
their backs, only to make them believe that they were creeping Devils.

Some have taken Echoes for Sprights, as he of whom it is reported, that a
Goblin had welnigh caused him to be drowned, whereas indeed it was no other
then the rebounding or reflecting back of his own voice. For when he asked a
far off: Can I pass over? the Echo answered* pass over.

Many men have been abused by means of knaves voices entonneled in long reeds
or canes, which altered the tune of their voices.

If our judgment, understanding, and senses being sound and whole be thus
deceived and deluded with such a deep apprehension of fear; much more must we
think, that they will enduce us to blabbe out prodigies and monstrous wonders,
if they were depraved and hurt in their Organs, specially in their brains.

LINEAMENT V.
A merry story borrowed out of Peter de Loiers book of specters, showing how a
Traveler war frighted in passing by a gallows.

IN the Country of Maine, there was a fellow, a notorious thief and
murderer, well known unto all his neighbors, who by the sentence of the
Lieutenant for criminal causes was committed at Mauns, and condemned to be
hanged and strangled, and was sent from thence back to his own Uillage
wherein he dwelled to be executed, and there to be set on a Gibbet, standing
upon the high way from Mauns. Some few days after his execution, a certain
man traveling that way where his body hanged, found himself very sore
wearied, and laid to rest under a tree not far from the Gibbet. But he was
scarce well settled to his ease, when suddenly behold there comes by another
passenger that was going toward Mauns, and as he was right over against the
gallows, where the dead body hanged, (whom the party knew well when he was
alive) he called him by his name, and demanded of him, with an high and loud
voice (as ieasting at him) if he would go with him to Mauns. The man, that lay
under the tree to rest himself, being to go to Mauns likewise, was very glad
that he had sound company, and said to the other; Stay for me a little, and I
will go with you. The other to whom he spoke, thinking it was the dead thief
that spoke unto him, hasted him away as fast as he could possible. The man
under the tree arising up, ran after him as fast, with a desire to overtake
him, and still he cried, stay for me, stay for me. But the other had not the
leisure, for his fear had set him in such a heat, thinking still that the
dead thief followed him at the heels, that he never left posting till he was
quite out of breath.

But for a while I will leave off such conceited stories, least some severe
Censour suspect me for an Heretic in utterly denying the Devils power, which
our righteous Lord has left unto him, as to the execution^r of his judgments.

LINEAMENT VI.
1 Whether in time of Popery the Devil appeared to Coniurers or Witches.

2 Why now adays the Devils apparitions are ceased among the professors of
the Gospel.

3 The Authors opinion touching his visible illusions.

Nevertheless, if we may believe ancient Historiographers, the Devil commonly
1
haunted diverse simple wretches in times ^ast, when all the world wondered after
the ^e^st of the Sea upon whose seven heads Apoc. cap. 13.
was the name of blasphemis: I mean, when our fore-parents worshipped the high
Priest of the seven hilled City by the Tyrrhene Sea. And as our Royal
Phoenix records, after diligent observations of seasons, days, and hewres by
these reprobates, circles were made triangular, quadrangular, round, double, or
single according to the form of apparition which they craved. Likewise King
James in Demonolog.
two principal things in that errand might not be spared: holy water, whereby
the Devil deludes the Papists, and some present of a living thing unto him.
Here likewise (Right virtuous Prince, Great Britains Beauclerke) like as the
Moon deriues her light from the resplendant Sun, and as the Macedonian
soldiers security proceeded from their Monarchs safety, Ex Alexandri spiritu
omnes suos spiritus ducebant: so presume I to fetch the true Lamp of this
Treatise from your immortal book. For this cause I crave humble pardon of
your Imperial Mai^stie for my ambition in borrowing (like Aesops crow) some of
your ingenious plumes to grace my ragged style.

In those days it sufficed not the Devil to have indirectly the rule, and to
procure the perdition of so many souls, King James in Demonolog.
by alluring men to vices, and to the following of their appetites, but also he
abused these simple wretches, in making them directly to acknowledge him for
their master. Every man over whom he had the rule, he tempted according to his
complexion and knowledge; and so whom he found most simple, he plainliest
discovered himself unto them. For he being the enemy of man's salvation, used
all the means he could to entrap them so far in his snares, that they might
not ever after (suppose they would) rid themselves out of the same.

But now-a-dayes Popery being unmarked and uncovered to the view of all the
world, through the brightness of the Gospel, Satan is either cub'd up really
in hell in the bottomless pit for a time, or confined herehence for a while
into other habitacles, as Lapland, Finland, or into the healthful coast of
B^armia under the Northern pole, where people live in greatest Barbarism and
simplicity. Even as Apolloes Oracles in Greece, ceased at the passion of
Christ, by reason of the Apostles preaching in those parts: so doubtless in
these days, the woman clothed with the Sun, the Catholic Church (that was
fled into the Apoc. 12.
wilderness, and persecuted with a long lasting war by the Dragon and his
Angels) being now victoriously returned into these North-west parts of the
world, the Devil in despair is retired into his darkesome Cell, or far from
among us; where, notwithstanding that he lies malecontent, and perhaps fettered
that he cannot really break forth, he transports sometimes his poisonous
power, and casts out of his mouth water after the woman, as Apoc. ibid.
it were a flood to drown her: there, in hell he has his capital residence,
and ouerlookes by his spirits of sin into the souls of flesh and blood: like
as the Antichrist residing in the great City, spiritually Sodom and Egypt,
transferres by his Jesuitical spirits, unclean spirits like Apoc. 11. Ibid.
cap. 16.
frogs out of the Dragons mouth, and other messengers of false prophecy,
clouds of wonders, supposed miracles, Bulls, Indulgences, and detracting lies
for the confirmation of his forlorn flock in Aequiuocations, blasphemy, and
blindness of understanding. For as the Reprobate and natural man cannot
apprehend those things which are above nature, nor will he believe that there
are any spirits good or evil: so the simple or superstitious person, partly
with fear, partly with Popish policy is drawn to such sottish credulity and
lightness of belief, that he takes Knaves for Devils, and Coni-catchers for
Coniurers.

To end this Section of the Devils appeareance, I believe that some, yea that
many things concerning his visible forms are but lies and fictions of men,
invented either for some cause that moved them, or at least wise for their
sports and pastimes. Othersome contrariwise have been true, as appears by
many examples and events, which none can deny; as that Spaniard alleges:
Algunas y aun muchas yo creo, que deuen de ser mentiras Torquemada en iar din
de flores curiosas. Colloquio tercero.
y fictiones de gentes, inuentadas o por alguna cosa* que les mueue o alo menos
por su passatiempo. Otras ay que son verdaderas, comoparece por muchos exemplos
y successos, que no pueden negar se. No good Christian can deny, but that the
Devil did possess those men, whose bodily humors by gurmandize or their
perverse wills were depraved and infected, as is to be seen in the Scriptures,
where likewise he was suffered by our Savior Christ, to enter into the Heard
of Swine. But my question at this time is, whether that power of his be
suppressed, now that miracles are ceased? For then God caused such strange
actions to ensue, whereby his Gospel might be confirmed. Surely in my
judgment, where the Gospel flourishes, there the Devil dares not draw nigh:
and if he appeared according to the relation of such as wrote of his miracles,
he never appeared but unto them (who like unto Caine utterly dispaired of Gods
grace) to simple wretches, and to gross headed folks. His chiefest plot and
practice is to undermine the reasonable will, and to seduce men from the
operation of Goodness. For this cause he is called the Accuser, the Prince of
the air, the Prince of this world, that is, the great spiritual Tempter of
Mankind, for whose sake this world, and all the creatures therein were made.

LINEAMENT. VII.
1 How Popish Shaueling: invented the use of common Coniurations and fictions,
in policy for the greater efficacy of their Jdols, Holy water, and
Masse-mo^ging; wherein the weakness of their Holy water is sh wed.

2 That they cained lies of purpose to confirm their sect, namely, in Luthers
life time, of Luthers death.

3 A note delivered by the Author touching the Devils real power.

BUT here our Popish miraclemongers will object, that the Devil cannot be
coniured without Masses, Holy water, or charms of a consecrated person. The
Devil (say they) will not obey any of our Religion. O generation of Vipers! Is
not the fullness of your sacrilege come in before the Lord? Are not the Bulls
of Basan so fat, that they cannot hold out any longer? Yea ever since Printing
rose up by the mouths of babes and infants the Lord has confounded your
quirks, quillets, and transubstantiate quiddities. Your fat lies in the fire,
your Masses bring in but small masses of money. Your Holy water is become dead
like a stinking stange. The glorious brightness of Christ's coming, the
forerunning word of everlasting life has almost abated all your lying wonders,
your coniurations, yea, and your chief Patron of policy; only for the trial
of the Elect, ye are permitted, dispensed, and tolerated to dwell among us, as
the Chanaanites and Philistines amidst the Israelites. Ye are permitted, as the
ministers of Satan to tempt Christ's flock, that the great Judge may commend
their constancy. Nevertheless I am sorry (I speak after flesh and blood) that
your stinges, according to our Acts of Parliament, voce populi Christiani,
being voce Dei, are not quite abolished.

This sting a grave and a great man of this Kingdom felt, when he was seduced
to send over Sea his son, that lay possessed with the spirit of frenzy. The
spirit of falsehood made him believe, that holy water and masse-hearing would
chase away the Devil, if it were a Devil. At Pont y Musson in Lorraine it was
my hap to meet with the said diseased Gentleman in an English Priests house,
where he soiourned, his friends expecting his deliverance by the Spirit of
illusion, by virtue of the Mass and of the sanctified water. But all the fat
fell in the fire, and he poor Gentleman left still uncured, having formerly
bin bound in a cradle, besprinckled with holy water in time of Mass, and so
continued bound for three days together in the Church. A most fearful usage,
able to drive a whole man out of his wits. His friends hearing at length that
the matter fell not out correspondent to their expectation, they sent him to
Padua for the tempering of his brain, by the Physicians of the body, where I
met him again with his Curator, who told me the whole business and
circumstance, and how the spirit would not be dislodged for all their holy
water. Now their general opinion was, that either it was a stubborn spirit,
unremovable by exorcismes, or else the patient was sick with extreme choler
or melancholy.

Likewise to confirm their false doctrine with false miracles by the Devils
instinct, they coined many fictions, and such as the ears of the Elect would
glow to hear. These fopperies, as treacherous spirits out of the wooden horse
of Troy, our subtle Sinons conjure up for worldly respects, and chiefly, lest
their Pontificiall purple robes or scarlet habites be altered to another color
of a baser grain. Among many miracles in their lying Legends, they record,
that a Religious woman having put a sanctified host into her hiue of Bees to
make them fruitful, in steed of increase found a little Chapel of Honey and
Wax built in the hiue, with doors and windows, with an Altar, with a Steeple
of Belles, and also that the Bees had laid the host upon the Altar, with
melodious noise flying round about it. Thus the Devil sometimes plays the
part of a Mountebanke, venting out his counterfeite wares under the fair
color of sanctification, some othertimes he seems to raise up himself really
at sinful men's commands, and all for the establishment of the scarlet
colored beast, the Pope and his Cardinals, whose Kingdom he wots well cannot
choose but decline without such trash, tricks, and trumperies. And for their
concealements he beats this ambitious lesson into our Canonists heads, that it
is sacrilege to reason about the Popes deeds, whose murders (say they) are
excused like Sampsons, whose thefts like the Hebrews, whose adulteries D. 40.
Non nos Gloss. quis enim.
like Jacobs.

After men's deaths the Devil either by himself, or 2
by his agents, wicked worldlings, seems to appear under the person of a
Samuel, and will not be coniured back without such Popish bables; thereby
settling his Reprobates in their reprobate natures. But most of all I cannot but
wonder what fantasy possesses men, when they publish miraculous lies,
derogatory to their credites, that be living, and able in their lives time to
retort the whetstone upon them. Surely I can devise none other excuse on their
behalf, then that such miracles of strange sights were invented by them of
Devilish policy, to make their profession famous among the simple, and on the
other side to withdraw the Protestant from the true worship of God. As for
example; the Devil forseeing, that by Luthers preaching he was like to lose
many of his guests, even in Luthers life time, soborned one of his false
Prophets to set out a book in print of Luthers death. The same very day when
Luther died (as this Homeromastix reported) many that were possessed of Devils
in a town of Brabant (which lay distant from the place where he was supposed
to die, above three hundred miles) were suddenly delivered, and not a long time
after repossessed again. And when it was demanded of the Devils, where they
had been? They answered, that by the appointment of their Prince they were
called forth to Luthers Funcral. Which likewise was proved to be true, because
a servant of Luthers, that was in his chamber when he died, opening the
casement to take the air, saw a great number of ugly Spirits hard by the
window, leaping and dancing. Afterward when Luthers body was laid in his
grave, presently there arose a tumultuous noise and terrible sound, that the
earth seemed to move. The next night after they heard a louder noise then
before about his Tomb. For which cause in the morning they opened his Tomb,
where in stead of his corpse they found but a foul favor of brimstone.

The copy of which Pamphlet, when Luther read, he subscribed these words: I
am sorry that God is iniuried by this fiction. Otherwise I can but smile at the
Devils malice, wherewith he and his accomplices the Papists pursue me. It is
strange to see with what impudence these iugling Priests dare diuulge such a
notorious lie of him, whom his own neighbors and Countrymen know better then
they or any other forrainers. This I can testify, that throughout all Germany,
where I traveled, his memory is blessed, his birthday solemnized, and
himself reputed for a second Elias. But (as I said before) our Idolatrous
Euchanters in policy invented this fable for the glory of their Hierarchy,
which God pervert like Achitophels devises.

Hereby we gather, that most of our Countrations, lying miracles, and foolish
fables were derived from the Papists for the corrupting of the simpler sort,
and that of right Coni-catchers are termed Conturers, and wizards witches.
Only they differ in this, that the Cont-catcher and Wizard receive their
knowledge by an infolded or implicit suggestion in their brains from the
Devil; and that the Coniurer and Wtich reap with the Devils sickle more
openly; yet both of them join in the effect, to deceive and to make a prey of
our understanding.

But here I must tell you one thing worthy the observation, 3
that even as the Papists will not see their mystical Antichrist, (though that
which withheld his public reuiling 2. These. 2.
till this time be in a manner taken out of the way, to wit the glory of the
Roman Empire) no more then the Jews would see their Messiah, (though likewise
that which withheld his revealing til his destinated time was taken out of the
way, to wit, that the Scepter should not Gen 49.
depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his loins, until Shiloh
came, which was Christ): so we o^ the reformed Church besotted with childish
credulity will not believe the truth, though it be felt with hands, (as they
say) and showed us by demonstrations infallible, that Coniurers and Wiches can
act no miraculous matter of moment at all (their chief Master himself being
but a lier and impostor) howsoever Friar Bacon with his brazen head (which he
purposed to set up in Salisbury-plaine for the eighth wonder of the world) and
the Popish Idolaters with their Masse-monging and Holy water went current for
graund Coniurers in old time: Because they received 2 Thessalonians. 2.
not the love of the truth, that they might be saved* therefore God sends them
strong delusion, that they should believe lies. Wherefore let the faithful
accept this for a caveat, that when the Devil takes upon him to become
terrified with the besprinckling of Holy water, with steel, or with the
thundering Bulls of a Mass Priest, he does it only of a politic stratageme
to confirm his adherents in such vain fooleries, after the example of
Tomyris, who fained her self with all her troops to fly, that thereby she
might entangle Cirus, and give him the greater foil. Whereto alludes that
notable saying of our sage Solomon, He walked among the Papists by childish and
affraying King James l. 2. D^monol. cap. 7.
terrors, to mock and accuse their childish errors. Yea, he walked among
them the more familiarly under the bastard names of Larum, Lemu^um, Deorum
Penatum, Laruarum, Dryadum, etc. outwardly seeming to care for their temporal
profit, when as in truth his purpose was inwardly to work them harm in their
souls and consciences, that their wills and spiritual natures might be
perverted like unto his.

LINEAMENT. VIII.
1 That true miracles were but lent by the Lord to the Primitive Church for
confirmation of the Gospel which accompanied the said miracles.

2 How in their steed false miracles crept into the Church with the Antichrist
in the time of the great Apostasy.

3 The Diueli synod for employments of his hell^sh spirits.

4 The Authors digression showing that the Devils shape was not real but
delusi^e to deceive the eye sight.

5 How men by his spiritual insinuations became his agents here on earth.

6 The Devils craft to continue men in their Dettactions.

MIracles were rife in the Apostles time at 1
the first preaching of the Gospel, yea and many years after, even as
Revelations were also common at the first promulging and publishing of Moses
law. But afterward through men's curiosity, arrogance, and negligence they
ceased like as the vrime ceased for a long time after Iosuahs age. The chief
end of Miracles was lent by the Redeemer of the world to reconcile men's minds
unto the purity of the doctrine, which at the same time he sent to bear them
company. Their end, I say, was that their energy and efficacy might move men's
steely hearts to relent and repent them of their abominations; which prevailed
in all those whom his provident Father had sealed up to be saved from the
beginning. Whereby we may observe, that the virtue of true miracles sprang from
the goodness of the doctrine, which then the Lords great Ambassador gra^fed
toward the posterities of the elect. So that this godly doctrine separated
such miracles from the Devils deceits, from natures operations, and from men's
inventions. Their mutual concurrence confirmed the spectators in their
resolution, namely, that their preaching and teaching proceeded from the
glorious light.

Sithence which golden age of the Gospel it pleased Apoc. cap. 2.
the Lord according to his unsearchable will, and according to Saint John's and
Saint Paul's prophesies to leave his Church soiourning in the solitary
wilderness, persecuted by the detracting Dragon, to suffer his two witnesses
the true records on earth of the lightsome word that was incarnate for our
salvation, to be mangled, martyred, and massacred in the City of the
spiritual whore, and so to permit a general defection and departure from 2 Thessalonians. cap. 2.
the faith at the entry of the Antichrist into the World (which continued well
nigh eight hundred years) and the^ true doctrine failing, true miracles
failed. Which when the Devil noted, he laid hold on that vile opportunity of
Apostasy and general defection of faith, and in steed of those true miracles
he hatched false miracles according to his own natural dispose, lying
wonders, and brought in canonization of Saints, whereof my self was an eye
Apoc. cap. 18.
witness in Millaine in the year 1603. adoration of sinful men, masses for
the dead, marchandizes of humane souls, Gods of golden beads, of holy water,
of crucifixes, and also old wives tales, whereof the Popish Legends are as
full, as ever Diomedes his stable was of prodigious dung. Many miracles were
fathered upon giddy headed people in their death beds, when good men through
extremity of torments have spoken, they knew not what. They record, that the
Virgin Mary descended dow from heaven, to give S. Fulbecke her breasts to
suck, while he lay sick. Such another idle story old father Darbishire a
Jesuit sometimes Chancelour of London under Bishop Bonner told me in Lorraine
of one Throgmorton, whom he perverted at Paris to the Romish Religion.

False miracles thus grown in request, the Devil foreseeing, that his
buzzards might break out of his snares, 3
except he found some other stratageme to entangle them, presently conuocates a
Synod or Council of Detracting Spirits, not much unlike to the Council of
Trent or the Cardinals consistory, and there enacteth parts for several
spirits to act (yet so that the Spirit of Detraction attend on the^ all) some
he appoints to play the parts of Hobgoblins, or Robbing goodfellowes; some he
chooses to countenance the Clergy in their perking chaires, some to feast with
the foolish pezants, who of the Italians were called glifarfarrelli,
mazzapengoli, and of the English and Romans fairie folks, lares, Dryades, and
Hamadryades; some to mock monks as horned Satyrs. Some he subornes with
fained shapes to appear unto gross headed folk. Whereas in very deed such
shapes are no more real then Euridices Ghost, whom her husband Orpheus thought
to apprehend, when in the end:

Nilnisi cedentes infoelix arripit auras. Ovid. lib. 10. Metamorphi.

Unhappy he on nothing meets,
But on the air, which back resleet.
When a man fortunes to see any such such strange 4
sights, let him call to mind that they be but decept to visus a colorable
mist cast forth by the spiritual Dragon to bewitch his understanding, or that
his sight is possessed with some suffusion after sleep figured and symbolized
with false visions of small atoms manifoldly colored, or else let him call to
memory his own imbecillitie of nature, which might be mislead either with an
antipathy, or with excess of choler or melancholy, as when he is sick of a
saffronlike iaundise, or when some gross glewy matter is gathered within the
fleshy sinew of the eye. Do not we read in books of natural Sience, that
the sensible object being more exceedingly excellent does dull the sense which
is less excellent? does not snow sometimes grieve our sights? Does not a
candle of virgin wax mixed with oil of snakes alter the outward form of the
lookers faces, and cause the whole room to appear in show of snakes? have not
we in our time seen artificial looking glasses formed by cunning Optickes
representing many miraculous faces to one only object? Does not a composition
of Aqua vitae, Brimstone and Salt make the standers by to seem pale colored.
To this I add that we seem to see sometimes fiery Dragons, Bears, and
monstrous meteoures in the clouds: when as in truth the same are but moist
vapors mounted up from the earth into the air, not having any such shapes,
but only such changeable impressions as the Chameleonlike air affoordes them.
Let him also consider how diverse honest men have mistaken known ways in a
mystie day. The reflection of the Sun beams have sundry times bedazeled our
eye sights: So we see things which are near unto scarlet to shine red. Much
more must we conceive of Satan's craft, who has been experienced in policy
ever since the beginning of the world. He cannot choose but exceed the wisest
Philosopher in worldly skill, by reason that he is not clogged at all with a
massy body of flesh and blood, as we are; for this cause I say Satan
ouerlookes more easily into the secrets of nature, and practices them with
greater promptitude and agilitie against us, when for our unworthiness or
weakness God leaves our inward man naked, not vouchsafing to cloth him with
the habillements of grace. Howbeit, for all that the Devils knowledge is great,
yet we must deem it but conjectures and gesses, which God oftentimes
ouermastereth, checketh, and changes, because we might know that he alone is
powerful and true.

To return where I have digressed, Satan (because that we might see how he
has more strings to his bow 5
then one, and knows more ways into the wood then one) employeth some others
spiritually to seduce men's shallow imaginations: which agents of his he
commissioneth with special errands and articles; some he inspires to tell
fortunes, as lying Palmisters; some to observe the flying of foul, the
entrails of foul, which we term Augures; some as Salamanders, to prophecy
by fire, which we name Pyromancers, some to counterfeit the state of
Geographers, as vain Geomancers; and some he en chanteth (like Chameleons) for
spruce parasites, cunning courtiers to sooth every man in his humor, and then
with a Sardonicall laughter to cut their neighbors throats. These with many
other functions of bastard arts he insinuates into fantastical persons, and
also into them which build upon their own wisdoms.

But the most detestable of all his faculties (which I tremble to write of) is
the sacrilegious sin of Detraction against his Makers majesty, wherewith he
possesses the most part of our country men, not only in causing them to
ouerglut and ouerlade their bodies with meat, drink, and smoke of Tobacco,
(two or three consuming in one day as much as would suffice twenty honester
men then themselves) but also in the midst of those their Bacchanales to
taunt the glory of God, to gibe at his glorious signs, and to impute the
causes with the effects of thunders and lightnings unto his lying self. It is
wonderful to mark how opinionated the most part of the world are in this
poisonous paradoxe. They have been so long blinded in other superstitions, that
they will hardly suffer themselves to be lifted up out of the gulf of
ignorance. It may be likewise that the Devil, as he is an excellent enginer to
gain himself that fulgurant fame and thundering name, has sometimes appeared
in varieties of false ugly forms, even then, when these natural creatures of
God, followed their natural course and motion; and so by that iugling trick
made the world believe that it was he, which played revel rex abroad in that
terrible equipage.

Parturiunt montes, nascctur ridiculus mus.
He is with child of mounts and lofty things,
But a poor mouse and trifles he forth brings.
Well may the Dragon strive to fly, but his wings are clipped, and he according
to Gods curse must creep upon his belly, and eat the dust of the earth all
the days of his life. Well may he arrogate unto himself another operation,
Genesis cap. 3.
but, as a cursed cow has short horns, so must he in the end go naked (like
Aesops crow) when the true Owner challenges his own plumes of glory. God
works all wonders, tulit alter honores, but the Devil bears the honor for a
while.

LINEAMENT. IX.
1 What is the craft of our common Wizards.

2 That Soldiers and men of courage have been daunted with disguised Angels.

3 Examples of ordinary Wichcraft, Sorceries, and Coniurations.

Our common Wichcraft, Southsaying, consultation with spirits and Coniurations
are nothing but cousenages, legierdemaines, 1
impostures, confederacy, or coni-catching craft in making folks believe, that
they can prophecy, work miracles, tell fortunes, reveal stolen goods, heal
sicknesses and griefs with charming rimes: yea, these seducing spirits auerre,
that they walk every week with the Fayries, that they have secret conference
with Familiars. But in the end their Familiars fall out to be a pack of knaves
of their own families, resembling those ungodly familiars, whose dissembling
forms the Spanish Inquisition uses as isntrumental tortures, to wrest and
wring out the consciences of supposed Heretics.

Such cousening spirits have deluded and daunted many 2
of our worldlings, insomuch that their fame and feigned shapes terrified men
of resolution and of great renome, far more vehemently, then if Goblins or
Fayries had in very deed appeared unto them; though in truth they agree
mutually together, both meeting in one meaning, both harping on one string of
deceit. I knew a valorous young Gentleman, and one that sometimes behaved
himself very resolutely in sold^ourizing both by Sea and land, and also would
not fear to meet any man in a Monomachy or single combat, so terrified with
a disguised Spright in the night time, that he wanted but little of losing his
understanding.

Brutus that conspired against Julius Caesar, otherwise encouraged himself,
when his bad Angel appeared unto him the night before he was slain, to
dishearten and discourage him from the battle, as I suppose. Such another
familiare Angel wrote on the Duke of Norfolkes Tent the night before he was
killed with King Richard the third at Bosworths field,

Jack of Norsolke be not ^oo bold,
For Dickin thy Master is bought and sold.
Many stratagems we find in Histories to discourage and daunt men, like unto
Hannibals Bulls, which with fiery fagots tied to their horns he drove out at
midnight among his enemies, to scatter them and scare them.

But to return unto these Cunning men, who cosen our simple neighbors, I
will exemplify their miracles.

At London I heard one constantly affirm, that he would cure any infirmity
whatsoever with a dry napkin and with imposition of hands. 3


Coppinger and Arthington worse then the foolish Galathians bewiched, took one
Hacket for Christ, as many in London yet living can testify.

At Verona in Italy, one of this bewiching rout, a deceitful Mountebanke
extolled so highly a counterfeite ointment of his, singular (as he said)
against all outward griefs, that I could not dissuade a friend of mine then
present with me, from buying some of it, when as after in the experiment the
said balm became of no more force then Scoggins powder of an old rotten post.

To these Sorcerers I may add another reputed one, a poor Deuon-shire woman,
dwelling in my neighborhood, in Walsh called Swynwraig, in English a charming
woman, who about three years suhence was brought before me, and accused for
bewitching an honest man's daughter, in such sort that she languished, like to
die. Evident proofs were not wanting, that she undertook in the behalf of a
young man enamoured of the maid, either that she should be his wife, or else
never be her own woman while she lived. After due examination, the poor woman
confessed, that in regard of gain (quod dolosi spes refulserit nummi) she
gulled the youth, and promised largely to bring his desire to pass. Being
further demanded, how she cured with incantations her neighbors cattle
(another surmise by her accusers) she answered, that she healed them not by
any indirect means, but by drenches and medicinable herbs. Likewife to get
her a name and money to supply her necessity, she confessed, that she led
some ignorant persons into fools Paradises by taking upon her matters of
wonder.

About May last (as I heard by credible report) a certain Gentleman of our
Country, having missed by ^^urse of justice to find out the thief that had
stolen some goods of his, repaired to one of these Wizards, earnestly
requesting him to extend his cunning for the discrying of the said thief and
goods. But all the comsort which he could obtain for his fee, was, that he had
lent his book of knowledge unto a friend of his; so that he could not at that
instant accomplish his desire, though in time, after restitution of his book he
doubted not, but he would conjure out the thief. Whereby we may note the
scarcity of true Witches, that in very deed indent with the Di^ell really. And
Satan is so heedfull, that we can hardly find out his assured adopted
children.

Another of this forlorn crew, a runnagate Empiricke within thief few days
arrived in this Country, undertook the cure of a diseased Gentleman; which he
could as well perform as reveal stolen goods, which likewise he feigned to
the simple Gentlewomen of the house: yet notwithstanding he led many, specially
the weaker sort, into the Paradise of fools, and to esteem him for a rare
Prophet, whereas in truth he was no other then a Conicatcher; for he disclosed
no stolen goods at all, saving those, which himself hid of set purpose to
get him a name.

Heretofore in time of Popery, masters of families invented, that the Fayries
haunted Butteries and Cellers, only to make young people afraid of sitting up
late in the night. Again servants themselves sometimes would counterfeit, that
those Fayries used to suppe in their Masters houses; under which color they
covered their own wanton thefts. Herehence rose that proverb in France,

Ou sont filettes and bon vin,
Cest la ou hante le lut in.
Where fair maids are, and store of wine,
The Goblins there to haunt combine.
Let a man confer with old women (for this sex is much addicted to
novelties and lightness of belief) and he shall hear many strange fables of
such Fayrie folks. A Comicke Poet introduces such another knauish Plaut in
Mostellar.
prancke, practiced by a servant toward his Master: This servant the better to
conceal and cover the loose and lavish life of the son from his fathers
knowledge, and to color the sale of a certain house; which they had made in
his absence, invented and told the old man at his return from his farm in
the Country, that both his son and he were forced to sell the said house, by
reason that Sprights in the nights used there to haunt and to molest them. Let
this suffice for the discovery of our common witchcraft, and sorceries: Now I
must show the validity of our ordinary coniurations, exercised only by learned
men, which iump with the unlearned in the main, namely, in deceit.

Two substantial Yeomen about twenty years since having lost plate and other
moueables, and desirous to be acquainted with the these, resorted to a College
in Oxford, where meeting at the gate with a needy scholar, they enquired of him
for such a man's chamber, whom foolish fame had canonized in their credulous
ears, for a notable Coniurer. The Scholar in outward appearance somewhat
grave, after a few questions, circumstances, and verbal complements, told
them that he was the man. But for satisfaction of their requests, he took them
privily aside, declared unto them the danger of the law, if it were known, and
coyishly, like a cunning queen to her youthful nouice, seemed to repel their
suits. They loath or perhaps not daring to return homewards to their wives,
without some notice touching the stolen goods, urged him more instantly to cast
a figure, and rather then fail to conjure up a spirit, that they might learn
who was the thief. At last with some ado, the scholar in respect of his
poverty, resolved to make a purchase of these unlooked for guests, and to that
end first requiring their oath of secrecy, like a true Chemist, willed them to
resort within three hours of night, to a chamber remote from company. The
honest men with pure protestations thanked his gravity, and went home to their
Inn with gladsome hearts, judging each hour a day, til the prefixed time drew
nigh. In the mean space the adulterate Coniurer calls unto him more good
fellows, boon companions, confederates with them, that about such a time they
should likewise repair to the designed chamber, with a whole Cutlers shop of
weapons, as Proctors and Officers, to apprehend both the Coniurer and his
mates. Well, the appointed time approached, the good Yeomen missed not to come
thither, where also the Coniurer met them, locked fast the chamber door, and
having prepared before hand a great Caldron full of hot scalding water on a
good fire, caused them to cast their money therein, for fear lest the spirit
might annoy them, by reason of such profane trash. His commandment stood for
a law. As Soon as he had fashioned his Circle, crossed it, and inuocated on
these terrible spirits:

Barbara, Celarent, Darij, Ferio, Baralipton,
Celantes, Dabitis, Fapesmo, Fricesonorum,
Cesar^, Camestres, Festino, Baroco, Darapti,
Felapton, Disamis, Datisi, Bocardo, Ferizon.
In stead of spirits, the false Proctors bounced and knocked at the door,
menacing to break it open, if out of hand they opened it not. The poor men
not aduenturing to budge one inch from the center of the Circle, without their
money, and now without hope of commiseration among strange Officers, stood
amazed in a quanda^y, with great horror and dread, till the Proctors were let
in by the Coniurer. Ah villain, have we taken thee in the manner, said these
new Proctors: there is no way save one for thee, nor for these assistants of
thine. And with that in a feigned vehement rage, charged them upon their
allegiance to follow them toward the prison. The liuer-hearted Yeomen very
dutifully obeyed, went along with them, all the way begging for grace and
favor, with large promises of golden mountains, and with faithful assurances
of millions of prayers for their prosperity. The pitiful Proctors overcome at
last with their important suits, and knowing their money to be lest behind
safe in the hot Caldron, let fall the raines of their rage. Their justice
became mitigated, their authority relented, upon condition, that these honest
men would assume on their credit to come again unto them the next morning,
which they faithfully promised. But being arrived at their lodging, they took
counsel together to give the Proctors the slip, and leave the Coniurer, to go
to the gallows alone, without their fellowship. And so at midnight by the
benefit of that dark time (as they thought) they left both Proctors and
Coniurer in the lurch, posting away with great joy for their fortunate escape.

LINEAMENT. X
An example translated out of Monsieur du Ches^e his pourtrait de la sante,
declaring how one Monsieur Poena, a Physician of Paris, co^iured two spirits
out of a possessed man's body.

MOnsieur Uignier a Physician of Champaine, and the Kings Chonicler, had a
cousin Sect. 1. du Pourtr de la sante. capvlt.
of his that was a person well descended, and also learned, afflicted of such a
spiritual sickness, that he imagined and firmly believed, that a certain
fellow of his acquaintance newly come from Italy, had given him, and put within
his body two spirits, which spoke unto him and taught him many things, which
also threatened him either to cause his death, or else to vex him with some
great mischief. After that he had discovered his malady to the said Vignier,
he presently knew that it was a sickness of the spirit, and for that he loved
very well this kinseman of his, he devised and advised with himself how to
help him. For this purpose both of them resolved to go together to Paris: and
there they addressed themselves unto Monsieur Poena, who immediately understood
what sickness it was, to wit, that the patients imaginatiue faculty was hurt
and depraved, and also counseled them that they should look for spiritual
remedy for that spiritual sickness; which likewise the said Poena promised
that he would endeavor to get for his recovery. Hereof the diseased party was
very glad, and pressed on him very hard, that he should hasten him, telling him
withal, that his said spirits continually menaced to kill him, or to torment
him with some grievous sickness. Here the Physician was feign to use
stratagems and subtilties to take away these wicked impressions out of the
sicke-mans fantasy, in regard that the party being learned, and very
speculatiue (as all melancholic men are) would comprehend by reason the manner
of his cure, which after many circumstances in brief was thus: The Physician
took upon him to fashion in a little book certain characters and names of
spirits, and to make as though he must conjure up a stronger spirit then those
which were in his body; by whose forcible means the lesser spirits should be
chased therehence. The remedy was plausible to the sick man. In the mean
that all things were accommodating and making ready for the said exploit, the
Physician ministered unto him purgations to tame and moderate the humor of
melancholy.

Atlength the time approached that this feat should be put in practice. There
was a great Hall chosen out for the nonce, wherein this saigned coniuration
should be made: for the effecting whereof, an honest Surgeon was appointed
to act the person of the pretended spirit. All things thus prepared together
with the Circle and other ceremonies, which Negromancers use in such a case,
they came to the place, where the possessed party was seated in the midst of
the Circle: and to blindfolde him the more, he was encouraged not to be
astonished at what accident soever that should befall. After some counterfeit
whispering, crossing, and inuocations, the Spirit of the South was called up,
who appeared not. Then the Spirit of the East was called, who likewise came
not. In the end at the third call the Surgeon that lay hid in a certain
place there for the nonce began to appear in this hall, that was somewhat
dark. And then the Patient was again comforted and counseled more then
before, not to be afraid, who answered, that he was resolved not to fear at
all. So earnestly did he attend and repose confidence and hope in this
illusion. At last the matter passed so finely and luckily, that the poor
Patient believed that this spirit, which he took to be no fained one, had
power to overcome and chase out of his body the other two spirits, which he
imagined to be there enclosed. So that this plot served to strengthen his
imagination, and to weaken his former false persuasion. This was the principal
remedy of his malady. Nevertheless the said Monsieur Poena desisted not for
all that during the space of a month after, to minister unto him certain
medicinable things to purge and assuage melancholy; insomuch that at the
months end being thoroughly purged and cured of his sickness, the party
acknowledged himself abused, and was very much ashamed of this false
imagination, which for a long time had possessed and troubled his spirit.

LINEAMENT. XI.
An excellent example of Coniuration, translated out of Erasmus his Exorcismes,
fit to be observed of our superstitious Detractors.

ERasmus in his Dialogue called Exorcismus reports a notable story, acted in
King Henry the eights days; which because it is too prolixe and tedious to be
translated into English word by word, I will relate it as compendiously and
briefly as the substance of the matter requires.

Betwixt London and Richmond there dwelt one Poole a merry conceited Gentleman.
He at many Ordinaries diuulged, that near to his house by the high way side a
Spright haunted commonly every night. And to make it the more famous, riding on
a time toward Richmond with diverse Caualeers in his company, the sky being
clear without any clouds, Poole on a sudden crossed himself, and as one much
astonished, spoke to himself in this sort: O immortal God, what do I see!
His companions asking him what he saw, crossing himself yet more he said; I
pray God, that this sight which I see may turn to good. When they lay hard
upon him, desirous to know the matter, with his eyes fixed toward the sky, and
pointing with his finger to a place in the Element, Do not you see there
(quoth he) yonder cruel Dragon, armed with fiery horns and a wreathed tail?
At first they denied that they saw any thing. But at length because Poole,
belike a man of some reckoning, very earnestly pointed at it with his finger:
and because he should not think but they were of as perfect sight as himself,
they constantly affirmed, and said, that they also saw that wonderful strange
sight. What needs many words? Within three or four days the rumor had
passed almost over all England, that such a prodigious Monster frequented
theere, near Pooles house. Yea, it is wonderful, how the common people added
more novelties unto the fable. Neither wanted there some, that took upon them
to presage the event.

In the mean while a Canon one Hind, who also was a Priest of a neighbor
parish, happily arrived at Pooles house. This man had an ouer-weening conceit
of himself, and above all he thought himself well seen in Divinity. At
supper they discoursed of the Spright. When Poole perceived, that the Priest
had not only heard of it, but likewise believed it to be true, he began to
persuade him, that he being a learned man, and very well disposed would conjure
the spirit therhence, and succor the poor soul in durance. And if you doubt
any thing (quoth he) we will try. Walk you about ten of the clock anon by
the bridge, and you shall hear a pitiful groaning. Take unto you what company
you please, so you shall hear the safer and more certain. After supper Poole
made as though he went on hunting. About the time mentioned, the Priest walking
to the place, heard woeful lamentations, which Poole very cunningly fained,
being there hidden in a bush, complaining out of an earthen pot, broken for
the nonce for that purpose. The Priest within a little while after returned
homwards, longing to tell what he had seen and heard. There he told Poole
(who came home somewhat before him a nearer way) what was done, and likewise
some thing more of his own devising, because the matter might be the more
wonderful. At the last (Poole egging him on) he undertakes to conjure the
spirit therehence. All that night he slept not, with musing which way he might
sasely bring the matter about, for he feared and doubted very sore of
himself. Therefore he gathers together most preualent Exorcismes, joining
others unto them of his own invention, as, By the bowelles of the blessed
Virgin Mary. By the bones of Saint Winifride. The next day he chooses a place
in the plain, near to the bush; from whence he heard the voice. There, he
frames a very large Circle, with innumerable crosses and letters. By his side
he sets a vessel full of Holy water. About his neck he wore a holy robe, at
which hung the New Testament, besides an Agnus Dei, which was wont to be
consecrated by the Pope once a year. With these he arms himself, for fear
lest it might be a wicked Spirit that would assault him. Neither durst he
commit himself alone to the Circle, but determined to join another Priest
with him. Then Poole fearing lest the mystery might chance to be bewrayed, if
he got unto him one craftier then himself, discloseth out of hand the whole
story to a neighbour-Priest a friend of his, and ioynes him assistant to the
simple Canon in the acting of his conceited Comedy.

All things thus prepared, the Coniurer with the other Priest about ten of the
clock enters into the circle. Poole that went before him, cried lamentably out
of the bush. The Canon talles to his exorcismes. But Poole to have the more
sport shifted him therehence, and by and by returns with afriend of his, but
on two black steeds, throwing fire at the Canon to have him out of the circle.
The next morning the Canon bragged how he prevailed against the spirits, who
appeared on two black horses, how they were very like to draw him out of the
circle, and how he sent them away with a vengeance by means of his forcible
charms. The next night the Coniurer better encouraged returns into the
circle, and Poole with his copanion on their black horses showed themselves
with a terrible noise, as though they would break into the circle, and with a
long rope, which they brought with them, drawn along the ground, they
overthrew both Priests with their vessel of holy water to the ground, and at
last seeming to quail at the charms, they departed away for that night. This
done, the Canon comes homes, tells Poole what great danger he escaped, and how
valiantly he overcame both the wicked spirits; now he certainly persuades
himself that no Devil is so cruel nor so impudent as to break into his
Circle.

Thus far proceeded the fable, when by chance Pooles son in law a young man
delighted with such kind of mirth came thither. Him Poole makes privy of
their stage play, and appoints him the souls or spirits part to act. The young
man apparrels himself with a sheet like a coarse, and carries with him quick
coals in a pot, which through the sheet seemed as it were lightening. At
night they go to the stage play, where the soul pitifully bemones himself.
The Canon dispatcheth all his forcible coniurations, like volees of Canon shot,
until at length the soul by the bush shows it self, sometimes gliding with
fire; sometimes miserably groaning. As Soon as the Canon required the spirit to
declare who he was, Poole suddenly in a devilish shape, and with a counterfeit
roaring leapt out of the bush, saying to the Canon, Thou have no right in this
soul, it is mine, and with that runs to the very bounds of the circle, as if
he were about to assault the Coniurer, who on the other side fought lustily
with his exorcismes, and liberally besprinkled him with holy water. But here
fell out a pretty jest. As the Coniurer busied himself in this manner, the
Devil exclaimed, that he cared not a rush for all his charms, for thou have
dealt with a wench (quoth he) thou art mine: which words though Poole spoke but
in merriment, yet it seemed that he hit the nail on the head, by reason that
the Coniurer touched with that saying hastened out of hand into the center of
the circle, and whispered, I know not what confession into the other Priests
ears. But Poole ouerheard the Priest enjoining him penance, namely, to repeat
over three Pater nosters. Which accomplished, the Canon more fiercely and
furiously returns toward the meeres of the circle, and voluntarily dares and
defies the Devil, who now faining himself fearful fled back, saying, Thou
have beguiled me, if I had been wise, I had not forewarned thee. Then after the
departure of the Devil, began a conference betwixt the Canon and the soul.
The Canon coniures him upon pain of damnation) to tell him what he is, who
readily answers him, that he is a Christian man's soul. After these and the
like speeches the soul seeing him very in quisitiue, and least he should smell
out the deceit, craved pardon for that night, with promise that he would
return the next night after unto him.

Thus the Canon and the soul for a few nights communed together, the sum
grew to this pass. The Coniurer asking, whether there were any means for his
deliverance from torments, the soul answered, that he might be delivered from
torments, if the ill gotten money, which he left behind him, were restored
back. What (said the Canon) if this money were dispursed by good men, and
converted by them to godly uses? yea, that would avail me, quoth the soul.
Here, the Coniurer exhilarated with joy, demanded, how much the sum amounted
unto. The soul answered that the sum was great, and very profitable for
him, that it was so. He named the place, but far distant thence, where the
treasure lay hid under ground, withal he prescribed to what uses the said
money should be employed, first, that there honest men undertake a pilgrimage,
one to S. Peter's Church in Rome, the other to S. James of Compostella in
Galicia, the third to Tr^uires to kiss our Saviors comb there. Then his will
was, that a great number of Psalms, Masses and Dirges be celebrated in
certain monasteries pro salute animae for his souls health. The overplus
which remained, the Coniurer should defray, as he thought good. Now all the
Canons mind was occupied about the treasure, and the dispose thereof. All his
thoughts ran upon this unexpected prey, he talked of no other subject in
discouse. In all companies, at ordinaries he promised magnificent rewards to
Monasteries, and spoke of no base matters at all. He went into the place, found
the signs, yet durst he not dig for the treasure, because the soul had
given him a knot in a rush to undo, that it might redound to his great peril,
if he touched the treasure, before so many Masses were accomplished. Already
many of the wiser sort smelt out the jest: Insomuch that sundry of the Canons
friends admonished him in secret to take heed, lest the world might conceive
sinisterly of his worth, which had been generally reputed before for a very
wise man. Nevertheless the Canon continued resolute in his belief, hoped as
true as his Creed to see the matter sort out well to his liking. Which
imagination so thoroughly possessed the man's mind, that beside sights and
spirits he dreamed of nothing, he spoke of nothing. The habit of his mind
appeared in his face, which became so pale, so extenuated, so directed, that a
man would take him for a Ghost, and not a man. He wanted but little of being
out of his wits.

Poole and his son in law in their compassion toward the poor fool
invented this slight to put him from his conceits. They counterfeited an
Epistle with rare letters drawn, and that not in common paper, but in a
Goldsmithes leaf with golden characters. The contents whereof were these:
Faunus dudum captiuus nunc liber, Fauno liberatori suo optimo salutem. Non est,
amice cur te diutius in hoc negotio maceres. Respexit Deus piam animi tui
voluntatem, and illus merito me liberauit a supplicijs. Ego nunc foeliciter ago
inter Angelos. Te manet locus apud D. Augustinum, qui proximus est Apostolorum
choro. Vbiveneris ad nos, agam tibi gratias coram. Interim cura vt valeas
suauiter: Dat. e coelo Empiraeo sub sigillo annul^ mei. Which to English is
this: Faunus of late a prisoner, now free, to Faunus his best Redeemer
greeting. There is no cause, my friend, why thou should pine away thy self
any longer. God has respected the good will of thy mind, and by the merits
thereof has rid me from torments. I live now in happiness among the Angels.
Thy place is here ready at S. Augustines, which is next to the Apostles quire.
When thou shall come unto us, I will thank thee present. In the mean time
have a care to live pleasantly. Dated out of the Imperial heaven under the
seal of my ring. This letter was privily laid upon the Altar, as the Canon was
celebrating the Mass. Now he caries with him abroad this letter, and boasts of
it as a sacred thing, and believes more certainly, that it was transported unto
him from heaven by an Angel.

LIN^AMENT. XII.
1 That the Devils common drist is, spiritually to undermine the will of man.

2 That his scope and force is cousenage and deceit.

IT is a foul shame for us reformed ^
Christians, that we stop not our ears with Ulysses from these cousening
Sirenes, whose chief drift, shift, and scope is to make a prey of our
understanding, and to draw us a whorehunting after strange Gods, which have
ears and hear not, eyes and see not, mouths and speak not, and which are to
be found in no other place, but where the Sophistical Chymistes dig the
Philosophers stone, the El^xir of life. Certainly the heathen will rise up
against us at the day of judgment, and implead to be saved before us, for all
our Baptism and holy rites, unless we seal up our lips betimes from uttering
any idle positions contrary to Gods Glory in the behalf of these enchanting
hypocrites. For we derogate much from Gods glory, and omnipotency when we say,
He does but give Satan leave to do it, which is to deride and mock Gods
justice, as that worthy man Master Calvin wrote. The Devil is not at his own
liberty, nor can he (in the extremest censure) otherwise then a hangman act any
thing without the restrictiue commandment of the highest Judge, I say, his
permission must be authentickly joined with commission from God. He is not in
such favor or grace with our Almighty Lord. Only his Majesty permits his
spiritual insinuating and ghostly temptations for his glory and our
edification in Christ. He permits him as the spiritual instrument of justice
for our hardness of hearts to entrap the chief part of man, the reasonable
will, and by reason of our negligence in his service to accuse and relate our
sins before him: not that God is ignorant of our closest sins, but perhaps
because his Majesty is pleased to use ordinary means, judicial forms, and
legal proceeding to condemn the guilty. Such as the Informer or Promoter is
in our worldly Courts, such is the Devil in the heavenly Parliament. And such
a one will he be at the great judgment day, when our Messiah both God and man
shall judge mankind.

In the mean time let us persuade our selves that the 2
Devils meaning is to deceive us, whether he seems to appear in borrowed
shapes, either of himself or by the command of wicked men. Besides this
deluding force I know certainly he has none other. With this weapon he was
licensed by God in the beginning to sting us in our heels, that is, to tempt
us with legions of sins, which by degrees brings death and perpetual
darkness. Even as a man being stung in his heel or leg by reason of that
infectious venime, which with deadly tumors or swellings creepes up by little
and little into the heart, must needs did, except his leg that was so stung,
had been chopped of in time, or cured by an extraordinary balsame; so the
variable will of man being seduced by Satan, or by his substitute Sin, which
by degrees increases to legions, and as it were incurable and vnrevokeable,
must needs be condemned to hell, together with the soul her dear consort,
except she were absolved of her sins upon her repentance, bathed in Christ's
blood, and so healed by the balm of grace. With this weapon he as^aulted Eve,
with this weapon he wounded Ahabs false Prophets. And in this sort shall he go
out to Apoc. cap. 20. Ibid.
deceive the people, which are in the four quarters of the world. This is he,
the Dragon, that old serpent, which is the Devil and Satan; I say, this is
he, the great red Dragon, Apoc. cap. 12.
which deceives all the world, which fought with Michael and his Angels, which
makes spiritual war with the woman clothed with the Sun, the Church of
Christ. This Ibid.
is he, which gave the beast with the seven heads, that is, the Church of
Rome, the seven hilled City by the Tyrrhene Apoc. cap. 13.
Sea, his power, his throne, and great authority. So that great Babylon is now
become an habitation of D^uels, Ibid.
the hold of all foul spirits, and a cage of every unclean Apoc. cap. 18.
and hateful bird: and as Stigelius writes:

Imperij quondam seeds, nunc turpe lupanar,
Vix vmbram prisci Roma nitoris habet.
Rome that was once an Empires seat, is now A wolfe-stie, scarce of that
brightness shadow.
LINEAMENT. XIII.
Aphrismes collected out of the first Fathers of the Primitive Church
concerning the Devils power.

IUstine the Martyr in his Apology Justin. in defens. Christ. ad senate. Romans
for the Christians to the Roman Senate, who among other seruples objected,
that God would not suffer them to be persecuted if their doctrine were true;
answered, that the Christians were persecuted for the confirmation of their
faith by Gods permission, and also by the instinct and incitement of wicked
spirits, who at all times have persecuted the lovers of virtue, as Socrates,
Heraclitus, and Musonius, but chiefly they moved persecutions against the
Christians.

The same Martyr speaking of the virtue of the name of Jesus, which is (...),
writes: At the powerful name of Jesus Christ crucified under Pontius Pilate,
the Devils being Idem in Tryphon
adjured, even at this day with horror and trembling do obey us Christians.

The Devil is most busy against the light of the Gospel: he moves the
Infidels to detract Christ with Magic: he J^natius in Epist. ad Philippen.
provoke Heretic to falsify the truth, according to their own fantasies.

Tatianus disputing with the Grecians, because they derided and despised the
Christian Religion, said, that the motives of their derision were the
spiritual suggestions Tatian. in Orat. aduersus gents.
of the Devil, which deceived them by undertaking cures of diseases, and by
deluding them with witch craft, and Diuinations; thereby to withdraw men from
the true worship of God.

Irenaeus the Disciple of Polycarpus, who likewise was the Disciple of S. John
the Euangel^st, proved that God Irenaeus in lib. 5. aduersus Haereses.
was to be worshipped, and not the Devil: first, because the Devil could not
keep and observe any promises which he made; for himself possessed nothing:
secondly, because that the Devil has always been a liar, and is not to
determine of any earthly Kingdom^s.

Origin auerreth, that charms and sorceries are d^risions of Devils, the dregs
of Idolatry, and the besotting of Origin. in libr. 3. in Job.
souls.

Likewise he affirms, that our conflictand contention with evil spirits is
spiritual. These be the opinions of Idem. in libr. 3. (...). cap. 2.
the Greek Fathers, which flourished within three hundred years after Christ.

Tertullian the first Latin Father testifies, that the Devil is the Author
of sin, even as God is the Author Tertul. lib. 2. aduersus Marcion.
of the punishment of sin.

That which is counterfeit is the business of the Devil, even as that which
is natural is the work of God. Jdem in libr. de cultu Foemi^. Idem in lib. de
sug^ in (...). (...) lib. 2. de O^igine e^r^r. cap. 14 and 15.


Persecution immediately is sent from God, and not from the Devil.

Wicked spirits are the Authors of all wickedness, which is committed by man.
They fill all things with deceits, craft, and errors. They infinuate
themselves into men's bodies: but they cannot hurt any man, (...) him, whom they
have in their full power. They were t^^ inuentors of Astrology, Southsaying,
Oracles, N^gromancy, and Magic. Their chief endeavor is to auert men from
the worship and knowledge of the Divine Majesty. God suffers the Devil
thus to delude mankind, to the intent that the euiil might fight with the
good; that vices might be opposed to virtue; that God might have some to
punish, and some to honor him.

Augustine utterly denies the Devils real power over Aug. lib. 3. de sanci.
Trinit.
any of Gods workmanship in these words: We must not think that this material
substance of visible things do obey the Angels which transgressed, but that
they obey God alone.

Another reverend Elder of the Church, reasoning about ^thanas. in. lib. de
Humanitat. Verbi.
the cause of the desection of the Devils illusion: writes after this manner:
Heretofore Devils in vain forms did ensuare men with deceits, hiding
themselves in rivers, rocks, groves, and woods: but now-a-dayes since that
Gods word has been made manifest, those deceitful sights, spirits, and
illusions of Images are quite ceased. Note this for the Devils departure and
defection from among the Protestants in these days.

The Devils slatteries has done more hurt to the Bernard. in Ep.
Church then his threats and menaces.

The Devils practice has been to conueigh the poison Cyrill. contra ^ul.
of his drift within a cloud of ambiguity.

The Devil diverse ways infesteth mortal men: while they eat he enticeth
them to gurmandize; while they Gregor. super Job
drink, to drunkenness; while they a wake, he tempts them to idle thoughts;
while they sleep, to unclean and filthy dreams; while they be merry, he
incites them to wantonness; while they be sad, to melancholy.

LINEAMENT. XIIII.
1 The Authors Debortation from such vain detracting studies. 2 The knowledge
of Astrology stinted and censured.


NOw that I have proved Diabolical dealings to be but dens of deceit, and
that his apparitions are extinguished by the brightness and miraculous
resurrection of the Lords two witnesses, being the old Testament and the new,
which for many years lay dead, unburied, and ill sauouring through the Apoc.
11.
barbarism of our Popish Sodomites, and well nigh motheaten amidst their dark
Libraries: Let us fix the eyes of our understanding upon this bright Meridian,
let us acknowledge men's traditions for Apocrypha or indifferent. In this
decrepit age of the world, since all prophesies are winded to the bottom, we
must expect no other sign then the sign of Jonas the Prophet, that is, our
blessed Messiah, who sits at the right hand of the power of God, and will
shortly come in the clouds of heaven, to sever truth from falsehood. All other
miracles for the most part, specially those, which are supposed to be done
among the vnbeleeued, let us account for old wives fables^, and write them up
in the Wood-cockes roll, namely, all such lying wonders, which the children of
Belial have stamped concerning the Devils real greatness, and the palpable
validity of his profane creatures. Time is precious, and passes away like a
stream of water: spend not therefore your golden times in such unprofitable
studies, but redeem the same before the latter day steal upon you. Know this,
that the Devil is the Father of lies, and will be sure to leave you in the
bogge of perdition at your greatest need. If once he setle himself in the
seat of your souls, all your artilleries of exorcismes will never conjure him
therehence. For is it likely that he, which showed himself so peremptory
against the Archangell in heaven will become ^ame unto a mortal man on earth?
Can you trust him, whom God could not trust? Take heed (brethren) of this
Sophistry, beware of this Alchymistry. It renders nothing but lies, vanity,
mistes, smoke, or false spectacles to dazzle and deceive your sight. Esteem
our Coniurer no otherwise then Bulbeggers, as Devils incarnate, coni-catching
Mountebankes, crafty Iuglers, cousening priuadoes, insinuating Serpents
Aegiptian picke-purses.

Who can be cleansed of the unclean? Or what truth can be spoken of a liar?
Southsaying, Witchcraft, Sorcery, and Dreaming is but vain; like as when a
woman trauelleth Eccles. 34.
with child, and has many fantasies in her heart. Therefore beware of
spiritual lies.

Again and again I advise thee (Christian Reader) to look unto thy soul,
that it be not surprised by the subtle Tempter, the Archsorcerer of the world,
the grand worker of false miracles. Banish away from thee with Caligula
star-gazers, and Astronomers. With Cato contemn fantastical dreams, with
Horace

Laugh thou at dreams, at Magic fears,
At Hob-goblins, night-Bugges, and Bears.
Laugh also at false Witches sights,
And at the shapes of Thessales sprights.
Somnia, terrores magicos, miracula sagas,
Nocturnos lemures, portentaque Thessala ride.
I write not against honest Astrologers, while they contain themselves in
compass of natures reach, and within the Circle of their ancient rules. But I
exhort them so to esteem nature, that they neglect not their Christian
vocation, and distrust the Author of nature, by attributing his works of
glory to natural creatures. I am the Lord (says God) this is my name, and my
glory will I not give to another. Our Savior Christ himself Esaias 42.
disputed, that there is some reasonable conjecture to be gathered of the
Meteores course: when he said to the people: When ye see a cloud rise out of
the West, straight way ye say, a shower comes, and so it is: and when ye see
the Southwinde blow, ye say, it will be hot, and it comes to pass: Luc. 12.
Like as the proverb in French and English presageth unto us:

Le rouge soir, and brun matin,
Sont le desir du pellerin.
An evening red, a morning gray,
As Pilgrims say, foretell fair day.
In like manner I approve the profound doctrine of the Spheres, with the
constellations of stars and signs (a breuiary whereof my self have
published in Latin verse in my stripling years) I approve the observation of
the moist Empress the Moon, which therehence out of her Orb, transports the
operative virtue of the twelve constellations of stars and signs to all
Elementary creatures, working innouations and alterations of humors and
seasons; as we see by man's body, by the weather, by the ebbing and flowing of
the Sea. All which now of late God has diuerted for our repentance. The Sea
breaks over the ordinary bounds, and has ouerflowed many parishes. Our bodies
begin to change their temper. The weather beyond natures knowledge varies with
inconstant winds and storms. The Lords prophecy by Amos is fulfilled in our
days: I caused it to rain upon one City, and I have not caused it to rain
upon another City, yet have you not turned unto me, says the Lord: Pestilence
have I sent among you, yet have you not turned (...). 4.
unto me. I have overthrown you, as Sodom and Gomorre, and you were as a
firebrand plucked out of the burning, yet have ye not turned unto me.

LINEAMENT. XV.
1 That the Authors meaning is not to deny the Devils real subsistence.

2 His charitable application of the statute against Witchcraft, made Anno
primo Iacobi.

3 That he only denies his real power, and his palpable force over any of
Gods creatures.

4 The vanity and fondness of Wizards.

5 That the hand of God plagued Job and other creatures of his.

6 That good men never detract from Gods glory.

IT is no part of my meaning heretically with the Sadduces to deny the
eslentiall 1
subsistence of Devils; for in all my writings I affirm their being, I auerre
their fall from Angels s^ates, I avouch their captivity in hell. As on the
other side, I think that Sin is meant by the Devil in most part of the
Scripture: yet so, that I know the original to proceed from that Serpent, the
great seducing spirit, in whom God found folly, as Job said. By the Devil
then, which commonly peruerts mankind in these days, I understand a sinful
Will arising from melancholy and corruption of flesh and blood, which the
spiritual Tempter, the sneaking Snake, like a virulent infectious smoke
breaths upon us, when we be destitute of grace. I grant that in King James
in his second book of Daemonolog. cap. 7.
times past, in times of blind Papistry more Ghosts and Spirits were seen,
then tongue can tell, whereas now contrariwise a man shall scarcely all his
life time hear once of such things.

And if it were lawful for me to comment upon our 2
Act of Parliament in that case provided, Anno primo Iacobi, where it is felony
without benefit of Clergy in them, which exercise any coniuration of a wicked
spirit for any man's corporal hurt, I would affirm, that this most sovereign
Court enacted the said Statute, partly in imitation of the law of God, where
Coniuration is termed sometimes the using of poison to men's corporal hurts,
sometimes an uncharitable or inueterate malice of one neighbor to the other,
which the Apostle names man slaughter; and sometimes a whoring after strange
Gods (which is called spiritual fornication) such as the adoration of Dagon
was among the Philistines, Ieroboams golden Calfe (which he in Machiauellian
policy made to keep the Israelites from going to worship in Jerusalem) and
such as Bell was in Babylon, all as senseless blocks and stones; partly the
said Act against Coniurers was set out, to the end, that the inward man might
be reformed, that malicious devices being the causes of Treasons, Murders, and
poysonings might be suppressed, and also that Idolatry, superstition, deceits,
and cousenages, the impediments of love, unity, charity, and concord might be
quite banished out of our united Realm. For is that man worthy to live in a
civil society, which unjustly demeanes himself toward God and his
neighbors? Deserves he the title of a true subject, which inuocates on a
foreign Prince, which serves his Princes enemy? The laws of Christianity
condemns him. Let God have what belongs to God; and Caesar what belongs to
Caesar. Better kill one rotten sheep rather then the whole flock miscary.
Better it is to chop off the hand, then the whole body perish. One leads
astray this man, this man another, and at the last (as more sa^kes to the mill)
whole multitudes become preyes to the Devil.

For further explanation of the said Statute it is inserted, that supposed
Coniurers shall be punished, If they undertake by charms to find hidden
treasure, to provoke unlawful love, etc. although the same be not effected and
done. And well worthy, seeing by such indirect dealings and diabolical deceits
they become Apostataes, loosing the privilege of Baptism, and consequently of
Christianity, where they were bound by their pledges to renounce the Devil and
all his works. They become guilty before God, though the Devil appears not
at all really unto them, after that they once determine in their minds to raise
him up.

Nevertheless for all this, that I conceive so charitably of my Countrey-mens
freckled integrity, like unto that 3
Lawgiver of Greece, which decreed no Act against Parricides, because he
thought that kind of sin would never happen: I wish my Readers not to make a
strict Syntaxis or sophistical construction on my simple meaning, by their
peecemeale collecting, that I go about to seclude the Author of sin by my
construction of sin. For I acknowledge his false miracles, his illusions, his
ambiguous riddles, and his Apparitions of shadows both immediate and mediate,
ouert and covert, explicit and implicit, ordinary and extraordinary, tending
altogether to one maine point, namely, to tempt with deceit old Adams
careless progeny; as contrariwise I impugn his ommpotent greatness, supposed
to be as well real as royal. I impugn his sacrilegious power of lightning
and thundering Majesty. I impugn his real sword of authority, his paspable
force of correction, and his sensible dart of death over any of Christ's
members. God forbid that his divine Majesty should tolerate this cruel Tyrant
(whose sovereign felicity is malicious envy) in that imperious manner: for
then the life of man were in a most desperate plight. Then were we assured to
be suddenly dispatched, even in our extremity of sin. When we were occupied
about some wicked act (as the very best do sometimes fall) his remorcelesse
spirit would not lose that great advantage, he would surely (like a ravening
Lion) utterly devour us. Nay more, if God did wink at his tyranny, our whole
estate by the mediation of the Papists, who take upon them to be the
Arch-coniurers of the world, had been long sithence blown up with the
Gunpowder of his treacherous soul; but, God be thanked, we have a gracious
Lord, which has limited this Leuiathan (as Solomon limited Semei) to his
narrow home? and as the Poet spoke of Aeolus his kingdom, Stricta dominatur in
aula, he Lordeth it in his straight Virgil. lib. 1. Aeneid.
hall. And if it chance that he enter into a man, we may well doubt whether his
entrance be in the soul or body, or rather whether his spiritual nature
possesses man's spiritual nature, that is, the soul or souls faculties.
Howsoever the body or soul become possessed by the permission of God, I
certainly believe that he may be quickly dislodged by prayer and fasting, and
holy exercise; for surely the holy Ghost, and Gods ministering spirits loathe to
guard our souls, as long as we live lewdly and licentiously.

These things considered, I dare stand upon my Christian guard, and defy the
Devil with all his trumperies, 4
and reputed realty. Let him do his worst, let him cause his cogging Coniurers
to undertake false miracles, works of wonders, and tragical tempests. Our
ears are stopped with Ulysses, that we can never be surprised, charm these
Mearemaids never so melodiously. Let them feed their hopes with golden dreams,
let them bury Sage till it be quite rotten, let them fling flint stones over
their left shoulders toward the West, and when all comes to all they build
upon the sand, and themselves are esteemed but for wizards, dizards, and
dotards; howsoever that the Spirit of detraction proclaim them for
foolosophers, or foolish flies, which sitting on a waine wheel, thought that
themselves occasioned the great dust in the high way, which the moving of the
wheel raised.

Wherefore I exhort thee, that have been guilty of such detractions, to
addict thy cogitations to the power 5
of God, which indeed is only royal and real, infinite, and immensiue; and
also to imitate holy Job, who imputed his calamities to the Lord, and not to
the Devil; The Lord gave, the Lord takes away: blessed be the name of the
Job. ca. 1.
Lord. And again, when his friends hit him in the teeth with his punishment
deservedly for his sins, he protested in this manner: Know now that God has
overthrown Job. cap. 19. Ibid.
me, and compassed me with his net, and a little after: Have pity on me, O my
friends, for the hand of God has touched me. By which words of Job it appears
that the hand of God plagued him, and that the Devil exercised but the part of
a Relator or Accuser (such as he is termed in the Revelation of S. John. when
the Accuser of the brethren was cast down from heaven.) To this sense agrees
that motion of the Devil: Lay thine hand upon him, and he shall curse thee to
thy face. Whereto though God answered: Lo he is in thine hand, yet we must not
take that saying literally, Job. 1.
but parable-wise, or according to the Hebrew manner of speech. He is in thine
hand, that is, he is in the case as thou would have him, my hand shall
plague him according to thy demand. Likewise we must understand, that the holy
Ghost here, as in other places of the Scripture inserteth such familiar
conserence, as is fitting for man's capacity, and for the usage of that
language. When his Majesty is disposed really to plague offenders, commonly he
employeth his own Angels, which S. John in the Revelation plainly manifests
in these words: I saw another sign in heaven great and marvelous, seven
Angels having Apoc. cap. 15.
the last seven plagues, for by them is fulfilled the wrath of God. And again,
I heard a great voice going out of the Temple saying to the seven Angels: Go
your ways, and power Ibid. cap. 16.
out the seven golden vials of the wrath of God upon the earth. His own Angel
God sent to destroy Sodom and Gomorra, to plague the Israclites when David
caused the people to be numbered, and to overthrow Senacheribs army. His own
Angel he sent to smite ambitious Herod, Act. Apost. cap. 12.
so that he was eaten up of worms.

To conclude, this is a golden rule, and worthy to be engraven in Cedar, that
Good men never detract from the 6
Lord, or from their neighbors. To the Lord they ascribe al glory, all causes,
all effects. To Caesar they ascribe what is Caesar's, and honor to whom honor
belongs. Notwithstanding any natural notions, or idle imaginations imprinted
in their brains by the Spirit of Detraction, good men will quickly break
through such brittle cobwebs, and will pierce quite through such imaginations
with their intellectual judgments, (as the beams of the Sun pierce and
pass through the thickest clouds) inwardly building on this fort of faith,
that the Devils force, himself being spiritual, and oftentimes a prisoner, is
not really reuelling, but spiritually roguing or restrained even according to
the pleasure of the Great Jehovah, in whose power alone it consists to bruise
his head, and to bring us safely out of his tempting snares.

LINEAMENT. XVI.
The Spirit of Detraction punished by the immediate power of God, proved by
examples out of the Scripture.

EVen as the Spirit of Detraction with all other sinful spirits, as the spirit
of pride, the spirit of gluttony, the spirit of hatred and such others by the
contagious craft of the devilish serpent, like an infectious leprosy
possessed all souls since the first transgression of our foreparents (our
Savior only excepted) for in Adam we all lived: so likewise did this serpent
first detract and deprave the Lords glory in heaven, when he arrogated to
himself his immensiue power. And afterward when he seduced Eve to disobey her
Creator touching the forbidden fruit, saying unto her, ye shall not die the
death. And also when he made her believe that she should be as wise as God.

At the building of Babell they desperately detracted, in distrusting Gods
providence, in fearing another Deluge, and in saying, Let us build us a tower,
whose top may Genes.
reach unto heaven, least pe^aduenture we be scatterd abroad upon the face of
the earht.

Corah, Dathan, and Abiram were swallowed up of the earth, because they
murmured against God, and spoke Numb. cap. 16.
against his servant Moses.

Miriam the sister of Moses was stricken by the Lord Numb. cap. 12.
with leprosy, because she spoke against her brother, and against his
authority which he had from God.

The men, which Moses sent to search the land of Canaan, Ibid. cap. 14.
and which when they came again made all the people to murmur against him, and
brought up a slander upon the land, even those men, that did bring that
slander upon it, as though it had been evil, died in a great plague before
the Lord

None of the Israelites, which came out of Egypt, except Caleb, lived to enjoy
the land of promise, because Number. cap. 14.
they murmured against their Redeemer, who brought them out of servitude, and
tempted his patient spirit, therefore they perished in the wilderness.

Saul despayring of Gods mercy, and for that the Lord Samuel. cap. 28.
vouchsafed not to answer him, by dreams, nor vrim, nor yet by Prophets,
sought to the cousening witch of Endor, who against her will (like to Baalam
and Caiphas) prophesied the truth by a supposed Samuel, that the spirit of God
had quite abandoned him, and that the next day after he should be slain by the
Philistines.

The Israelites discomfited the S^rians, and killed one hundred thousand of
them in one day, according to the 1. Reg. cap. 20.
speech of the Prophet, that was sent to the King of Israel with this message:
Thus says the Lord, because the Sirians have said: The Lord is God of the
mountains, and not God of the valleys: therefore will I deliver this great
multitude into thy hands, and you shall know that I am the Lord.

Ahaziah King of Judah being sick, sent messengers to 2. Reg. cap. 1.
Baalzebub the God of Ekron concerning his discase, and his recovery. But Elias
out of the Angels mouth resolved him, saying, Is it because there is no God in
Israel, that you go to enquire of Baalzebub the God of Ekron? Wherefore thus
says the Lord: Thou shall not come down from the bed, on which thou art gone
up, but thou shall die the death.

Amaziah Priest of Bethel bad the Prophet Amos prophecy no more at Bethel,
because it was the kings Chapel, Amos cap. 7.
and the kings Court. Wherefore, and for that he controlled the Lords
messenger, thus said the Lord: Thy wife shall be an harlot in the City, and
thy sons and daughters shall fall by the sword, and thy land shall be divided
by line, and thou shall die in a polluted land.

Bears came out of the forest, and tare in pieces two and forty children,
which mocked Elisha the Prophet, 2. Reg. cap. 2.
and reviled him, with his bald head.

Senacherib king of Assyria warring with Hezekias king of Judah, sent a
blasphemous embassage unto him, Isai cap. 27.
signifying, that the Lord could no more save Jerusalem from his victorious
hand, then the counterfeit Gods or Idols of other nations, which he destroyed.
But the word of the Lord came to Esaias the Prophet against Senacherib in this
manner: Whom have thou railed on, and blasphemed? against whom have thou
exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? Even against the Holy one
of Israel. Because thou ragest against me, and thy tumult is come up into mine
ears: therefore will I put my hook into thy nosthrils, and my bridle in thy
lips, and will bring thee back again the same way thou came. So the Angel
of the Lord went out and smote in the camp one hundred, threescore, and five
thousand men in one night. And Senacherib himself at his return home was
slain by two of his sons.

One Hananiab in the time of Zedekiah king of Judah Ierem. cap. 28.
prophesied falsely among the Jews at Jerusalem, either of vain glory, for
lucre sake, or of set purpose to please the kings humor. And the word of the
Lord came to Jeremy the Prophet, who thus said unto him: Hear now, Hananiah,
the Lord has not sent thee: but thou make this people to trust in a lie.
Therefore thus says the Lord; Behold I will cast thee from off the earth: This
year thou shall die, because thou have spoken rebelliously against the Lord.
So Hananiah died the same year in the seventh month.

Holophernes offended with Achior, because he said, that the Lord of heaven had
no more power, then his Judith cap. 6.
king Nabuchodonozor, blasphemously detracted his eternal Majesty. Who is God
(quoth he) but Nabuchodonozor? he will send his power, and will destroy them
from the face of the earth, and their God shall not deliver them. Within a
while after he was slain by a woman, and his army discomfited.

Elymas the Sorcerer withstood Barnabas and Paul, and sought to turn away the
deputy from the Christian Act. Apost. ca. 13
faith. Then Paul being full of the holy Ghost set his eyes on him and said; O
man full of all subtlety and all mischief, the child of the Devil, and
enemy to all righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the straight ways
of the Lord? Now therefore behold the hand of the Lord is upon thee, and thou
shall be blind, and not see the Sun for a season.

Our Savior Christ through the Spirit of God, through profound arguments
confounded the Pharisees that detracted Matthew. cap. 12.
his glorious miracles, alleging, that he did cast out spirits no otherwise
then through Baalzebub Prince of Devils. His arguments were these: Every
kingdom (says he) divided against it self shall be brought to naught: and
every City or house divided against it self shall not stand. So if Satan
cast out Satan, he is divided against himself. How then shall his kingdom
endure? Whereby we may gather, that the chiefest fight against the Spirit of
Detraction is the irrefragable word of God, seeing that our Master Christ
himself used this kind of armor.

Herod made an eloquent Oration to them of Tire and Act. Apost. ca. 12.
Sidon, so that the people shouted, saying, It is the voice of God and not of
man. But because he arrogated the same to his own worth, and gave not glory
unto God, the Angel of the Lord smote him, that he was caten of worms.

Saint Paul the Apostle imputes men's mental punishments and infectious
sicknesses with these pestilent sins, to our ingratitude and negligence in
glorifying and serving God. When they knew God (says he) they glorified him
not as God, neithet were thankful, but became vain in their imaginations, and
their foolish heart was full of Romans cap. 1.
darkness. When they professed themselves to be wise, they became fools, for
they turned the glory of the incorruptible God, to the similitude of the image
of a corruptible man, of birds, of four footed beasts, and of creeping things.
Wherefore God gave them up to their hearts lusts, unto uncleanness. They
turned the truth into a lie, they served and worshipped the creature, forsaking
the Creator: for which cause God gave them up unto vile affections. Romans cap.
10.


The same Apostle in showing the cause of the ruin of the Jews, and the
calling of the Gentiles ascribes the same unto their Detractions: for they
going about to establish their own righteousness submitted not themselves to
the righteousness of God.

THE SIXTH CIRCLE OF THE SPIRIT OF DETRACTION, CONIVRED AND CONVICTED.
LINEAMENT. I.
1 The spirit of Detractions pleas and allegations on the behalf of his
humouring and soothing men in their vanities.

2 The said spirit sharply rebuked for his Equivocation and dissimulation.

3 The Authors purpose in this subsequent Circle.

He is no Politician (quoth Peter pleaseman) that will not pledge the world in
the cup of Detraction, chiefly in these untoward times, when men shall sit by
themselves, as forsaken and forlorn, unless they iumpe one with another in
the self same vein of discourse: whether it be in derogating from Gods
omnipotence, or in diminishing of their neighbors fame. How shall men
otherwise consume away their times. Reading occasioneth bloudshot eyes, and
moist migrims; silence ingendreth melancholy, and sleep obstupefieth the lodge
of imagination. But speeches, be they merry or malicious, jesting or gibing,
do extend the windpipes, enlarge the heartstrings, exhilarate the souls
faculties, and enduce all companies to admire a man's fluent tongue, and to
extol his filed voice. Will thou be enrolled in Gentlemen's books for one of
their principal favorites? strain thy self to humor them, scoff when they
scoff, bite when they bite, and (like Hippocrates twins) laugh and weep
together. If thou hear them blaspheme, or blazing outnouelties, endeavor thou
to verify the same, or to requite their familiar conference with some
additions of thine own invention. By this means thou shall make thy company
precious unto them, and also pry (like an insinuating intelligencer) into the
inward state of all thy country. By this means thou shall learn their
several and secret inclinations, who be (...) corrupt Magistrates, who be
carousers, fornicators, or who have encurred the danger of any penal statute.

An Romule coe^es? Art thou a Britain a Christian, and do thou faune and
wag thy tail, like a spaniell? Do thou preach the doctrine of Devils? Do
thou 2
teach men to equivocate, to dissemble, to detract, and to lash out lies? O
son of Belial, thou art in the gall of hell, and have no portion with us in
our Christian business. How can thou love God whom thou never saw, seeing
thou can not love thy brother in Christ whom thouse^st daily? And how can
thou love thy Savior Christ, when thou shamefully sharest his seamclefie coat
with Satan's soldiers, or when thou tearest his members name and fame with thy
taunting tongue? Words wound a man worse then swords. No deadly drugs of
Arsenicke or aconite are comparable to lying lips, no spirit more dangerous,
then the spirit of Detraction. Let a man observe silence, and he shall never
obtain harm; let him when he speaks, speak soberly, and all men will love
him: or if that Ismaels seed do taunt him, Isaacs seed will tender him. If
the ungodly contemn him, the godly will comfort him. And will not the
comfortable love of one godly man counterpoise the contempt of many ungodly?
Let him seldom speak, or not before a question be asked him, and he shall
never be indemnified. Let him follow the French man's counsel: Pibrac.


Parler beaucoup on ne peut sans mensonge,
Ou pour le moins sans quelque vanite.
Le parler brief convient a verite;
Et l' autre est propre ala fable et au song.
To prattle much one cannot without lies,
Or at the least without some vanity,
It well agrees with dreams and fooleries;
But pithie words belong to verity.
For this purpose that the talkatiue may be ashamed of their tatling tongues,
for the public good, and for my 3
modest memorial toward her, that rests with the Lord of rest, have I
composed and complotted this Circle, Whereby the world may conceive charitably
of those runnagate rumors which lately by Satan's long reeds (not unlike to
those of Midas his barber) have passed and pierced into their Asses ears,
which being remote from the Meridian of the climate, wherein I live, do
believe nothing more certainly, then that the Devil in his real person has
reuelled among us. These news exposed abroad with a smokie gloze have been so
vented by the Inuentor of false news, that our Aleknights, Alchymists,
Tobacconists, and such like taunting spirits with general applause do
magnify the Devils majesty in their daily detractions, and want but little of
canonizing and consecrating him for their God, and his adherents for their
Saints. Which blasting blasphemy because I have almost extinguished in the
former Circle with divine deaw, I will proceed in this present Circle to the
conviction of other partial paralogismes, wherein his earthly Agents, our
doting doltes with both hands do extol dumb creatures to the very skies, not
much unlike to those idolatrous Indians, who adore the Orient Sun, the Moon,
and other visible Stars. So when our ignorant countreimen hear but the clap
of a thunder, or see but a flash of lightning, they arm themselves forthwith
with outward shows, with crossing their profane bodies. Others again more
wise in their own conceits believe, that God predestinates no man to perish by
such heavenly means, saving wicked wretches: wherein they limit his
providence, wisdom and glory, which otherwiles he manifests by such
glorious accidents for our trials, or for some other notable effect. Some wade
yet further, in attributing a powerful prerogative to such meteorie signs,
namely, that they can harm a man of themselves without Gods extraordinary
ordinance. For (say they) he made an end of all his works in six days, and
left order that every Star should move in his place, and bring forth suitable
qualities according to men's complexions and constellations. All which prodigies
of opinions, together with other contagious conceits of men's busy brains I
will confound with the Sunshine of truth, interfusing discipline mutually
with doctrine, and both of them with Gods miracles, so that the right hand
reciprocally supporting the left hand, they may contune and continue together
as it were in a Diapazon, and afterward serve for bridling presidents to loose
and lavish tongues. As for the substance of the subject, I dare submit the same
to the learned Lydian touch; whose critic carping I countermine with that
Epigramme.

Cum tua non aedas, carpis mea opuscula Mome:
Carpere vel noli nostra, vel aede tua.
Thou put'st not out thy works, yet carp'st at mine:
Leave off to carpe at mine, or put out thine.
LINEAMENT. II.
1 How the Spirit of Detraction goes about to overthrow Predestination in
attributing our misfortunes immediately to the Planets, th^nders, lightnings,
or other natural creatures; where the Author excuses himself for writing of
such deep mysteries.

2 How God made the second causes and all other things in this world for man's
sake.

Our taunting Troianes finding no weighty 1
shifts to restore and repair up the Devils ruinated reputation and real
strength, do in their steed entertain other Hydraes of opinions: that the
Planets, thunders, lightnings, or some other natural creatures, immediately
occasioned our ill fortunes, our sudden losses, or deaths violence. Whereby
these detracting busibodies go about to overthrow predestination, to abolish
from nature the light of nature, and to subject the first cause unto his second
causes, the Creator to his creature, after the example of unnatural Jupiter,
which drove out his own Father Saturn from his kingdom of Creet. Oh unhappy
men, that ascribe such prerogatives to weak and wounded nature. Is there not
in the Lords hand a cup, and the wine red? Are not our hairs numbered? But to
confute this absurdity, I will briefly run over the springs of
Predostination. And first I will search with submissiue thoughts, under the
accustomed patience of my most patient Lord the only Creator of the world,
what were the patterns of his works, before the creation, and how he
conferred his power upon the second means. Which over curious search I do
willingly undertake for the better satisfaction of busy brains. In this
Labyrinth I humbly desire his heavenly highness to dispense with my haughty
purpose, for certainly (if it were possible) men should not question of such
profound matters, but rather they should be drawn back to the humility of not
thinking once thereon, lest that chance unto them which chanced to the
presumptuous Angels, or lest the answer of that ancient Father iumpe just upon
their fantastical pates, who being asked by a curious-headed fellow what God
did before this worlds creation, gave him this choking answer, he made (quoth
he) Hell for such curious persons as you are. An humble ignorance (I confess)
in such weighty mysteries is no way prejudicial; but the peremptory denial of
any one of them is blame worthy.

This world is a miraculous map or a table book, wherein the mysteries of Gods
nature are deciphered, so 2
that it is impossible for any man to know the particularities thereof.
Therefore we must content our selves with admiration, which is a thing most
acceptable to the Spirit. To verify this, look O mortal man, upon the azured
sky, and tell me what thou see? Admiration. Descend into the earth, and take
thy journey from the East unto the West, from the North unto the South, and
after all thy travels, after all thy trials tell me what thou say, nay what
thou saw. Admiration. Well, seeing that the vastness of this worlds
circuit does so confound thy weak and wearied senses, that the more thou
musest, the more thou maruellest: then enter into thy little world into thy
self, and comprehend thy thoughts within a certain circle. O quam durus est
hic sermo. This is a heavier task. At the least and last, look down upon the
little Ants, and learn what moves them to toil and take more care to live by
their own labors then many a man. Surely, thou can not but admire. And why?
because this world and all the works therein are the Idea, the model, the
map, the book, wherein the nature of the incomprehensible Godhead is written
with capital letters of Admiration. In every thing both great and little, how
little and light soever it be, his Divine Majesty has imprinted his wisdom,
goodness, and power. And even as in his substance he is all, so in his works
he does all.

And now to declare what God did before the creation of the world, it is
certain, that his purpose was to have a society of men as well as of Angels,
and those good and evil Angels, that the one might serve as monuments of his
mercy, the other as monuments of his justice, and that both together might
serve as instruments of his glory; for his power is no less glorified in the
one then in the other. After the determination of his purpose, for men's sake,
that they might have a place correspondent to their natures, he drew the
platform of this world. Wherein these principal things concurred, first his
purpose, next his wisdom, thirdly his goodness, fourthly his power, fifthly
his general providence, sixthly, his particular predestination. To return
back toward the first, which is his purpose or intent: There is the map of
all the world, and of every thing to be done there thoroughly contrived in his
mind before the beginning of his work. Then his wisdom, goodness, and
power animated him to go forwards, and to provide for the building of his new
place of plantation or world, for as then there wanted a mediate or second
instrument to work upon. Wherefore he was driven to create all of nothing,
that is, without any second means without the assistance or advise of any
other. In this creation he used the help of his word only, that was his
omnipote^t self, whom the natural Philosophers otherwise termed the first
mouer or supreme cause of all things. There was no power in his Angels, for
they were but creatures themselves, having their motions by his very motion. In
the power of his only will and motion it consisted to create the essence of
the material substance of the world. And so he made heaven and earth, and by
virtue of his Spirit he breathed life, form, or motion into them, and into all
the creatures thereof, so that all things were in the compass of six days
enlightened, replenished, supported and sustained by the motion of his powerful
spirit, yea all things, the firmament, the planets, stars, meteours,
elements, and all other creatures whatsoever, were united with such a perfect
union that they make up a perfect globe, map, or book, of his
neuerenough-admired nature; And which is most miraculous to man's capacity, ever
since that he moved them, they continually move one another by different
motions and do effect all things in this world either for generation,
preservation, or destruction according to his supreme direction. Some move one
another by necessary or fatal motions. Some by voluntary motions, some by
casual motions, some by natural motions: either slow or swift. What good
things come to pass, we are to attribute to himself, who is the first mouer
of all these motions. But what evil things come to pass, we must ascribe to
the second motions, which are voluntary and uncompelled by him: I say, we are
to ascribe evil things to second causes, that we detract not from his
omnipotence in making him the immediate cause, or in affirming that they
proceeded without his consent. For as goodness comes from his will: so evil
cannot come against his will, but by his sufferance and permission it comes
from secondarie motions.

LINEAMENT. III.
The Spirit of Detraction convicted for measuring Gods providence by their own
humane providence.

THose naturallists do greatly err which measure the divine providence by
their own humane providence, or rather by their wanton affections. Little do
they think that their natural computation of time causes this unnatural
imputation, for with God all times be one, and a thousand years in his sight
are but as yesterday. With him who is the beginning and end of all things there
is no time past, nor time to come, in respect of his foresight, by reason that
his foresight is his present sight, so as he beholds at once, at one instant
which instant with him is always and eternal, not only all things which ever
happened or ever shall happen, but also every particular thing as then
presently done; and looks so earnestly, so clearly upon it, as though his
eye were fixed intentiuely on that thing, and on nothing else. The reason is,
because there is no distinct differences of time in the eternity, seeing that
at one look he sees all the world over. And his intent to do a thing, and
his doing of a thing, is all one and the selfsame, in respect of his eternal
knowledge, though it be otherwise in respect of man's natural knowledge. Let
this suffice for Gods general foresight or purpose of all things, which we
call his Providence that extends universally to all the world, and to all the
creatures thereof. Now it remains that I discourse somewhat of Predestination,
which is not a thing severed from his Providence, but only that noble part
thereof, which belongs to his noblest creature under the come of heaven, for
whose sake he created all the world, making him his Deputy or Bayliffe to use
the same for his glory, and not to abuse the same for his own luxuriousness.

LINEAMENT. IIII.
1 The Authors censure of Predestination.

2 That all second causes do work their effects according to the first causes
direction, which is God.

3 How God endowed some with free will through grace to enable them unto faith.

4 The Spirit of Detraction conu^cted for imputing the cause of men's damnation
to Gods decree.

GOod and evil were certainly predestined unto us in our several estates,
ever since the beginning of the world by our Creator, not 1
according to any evil deserts, or virtuous motives of ours, but only
according to his own free pleasure, according to the absolute counsel of his
own sovereign will, and according to the universal power which his
omnipotence has over the workmanship of his hands. Neither yet constraines he
any of his second causes to commit good or evil by any forcible operation or
necessity of nature, but by disposing unto effects suitable to their several
conditions: Whereby both good and evil actions shall flow out of the said
second causes according to their own dispositions, even as a voluntary quality
proceeds from a voluntary cause, and a casual quality from a casual cause.
His omnipotent Majesty (I say) as the first mouer, the first cause, is the
immediate mouer, and cause of all effects whatsoever the second cause brings
forth, and also the cause of all their inclinations.

Even as Deliberation (which is the chiefest act of our understanding in the
knowledge of good and evil) and the 2
Gospel of Christ are the mediate and secondary causes in the first act of the
conversion of our humane wills (now passive) toward the will of God being the
first and supreme cause of our deliberation, of this Gospel, and of our
wills; and even as these two causes (the second depending on the first) must
join together before that we can resolve on any good or evil word, thought,
or deed: so the Planets, Meteors, or other natural creatures of God, in respect
of him being second causes, cannot produce any effect whatsoever good or evil
for our benefit or harm, without his supreme direction. Both causes work
naturally in this world, when both conioyne in a natural effect against a
natural creature. And yet sometimes it pleases his soueraign Majesty to
wound nature without any such second or natural causes which gulf because it
is perilous to sail through, I will modestly content my self by the shore,
or on this side of that great Sea, following Du Bartas his advise, having Faith
for my sails, the holy Ghost for my P^lot, and the Bible for my star.

Qui voudra seurement par ce goussre ramer
Sage, n'atlie iamais cingler en haute mer.
Ains costoye la riue, aiant la foy pour voile,
L'Esp^it saint pour nocher, la Bible pour estoile.
But (quoth the reprobate) then may I do whatsoever my will enduceth me unto.
It is all one whether I commit good or evil. For if goodness be already
predestined unto me, I shall surely light upon it; neither can all the
prouocations of the world, the flesh, or the devil, cause me to err.

O curuae in terras animae, coelestiura inanes!
O stooping souls to earthly trumperies,
And quite deuoide of heavenly mysteries!
Though God foresaw before the ground work of the world was laid, that such
and such might be saved: yet notwithstanding he knew in his wisdom that they
could not by reason of their affections, and of themselves without his
assistance, attain to that perfect state. And therefore he interpoled his
mercy together with his justice, he sent his own spirit among them incarnated
to ease them of that grievous yoke which flesh and blood found insupportable,
whereby he foresawe that men might please him, if they were endowed with as
much free will, as they might choose for their enabling thereunto. To this end
he inspired some with faith, and some he rejected: yet with this caveat and
condition did he predestinate them to faith, that this faith should serve as a
badge or cognizance to discern them from the reprobate; so that their election
being conditional, they should not wax presumptuous, cowardes, nor Apostates.

Thus all our actions, all our goodness, all our misfortunes, yea and our
lives, wills, and destinies are subordinate without coaction or constraint
unto Gods directions, whose supreme will being above our wills, and flowing
into our wills, takes not away the judgments of our understanding, nor
enforces us, but so rules us, that we in choosing or refusing do somewhat
follow our own reasonable wills. For he that made us, without us will not
sanctify us without us, that is, without our cooperation and consent. Much
less can the influence of the Stars or Meteours induce a necessity of
destiny, and master our complexions without our consent. The very beginning of
all our operations was infused by our Creator in our selves with freedom of
will. So that no constellations or meteours, if being corporal substances they
triumph other whiles over our bodies by Gods direction, yet cannot they sway
our minds, because they are divine, spiritual, and of a purer substance then
themselves.

And surely they are strongly possessed with the spirit of Error, which
ascribe the cause of their damnation immediately 4
unto Gods inevitable decree, for the certainty of his decree does no way force
them of necessity to be saved or damned, as they please. And though the intent
of God himself be certain and immutable, yet notwithstanding the means of
bringing the effects of salvation or damnation to pass, do not proceed from
necessary but from voluntary motions: for Gods providence or foresight, which
as I wrote in the former discourse, is always present, eternal, and at once,
observing that such effects would follow, and seeing as it were at the same
instant such to follow his commandments as lively, as if they had already
fulfilled them, and cont^arywise seeing such and such to commit sin, as if he
had seen them then already committed, knew certainly who would be his elect,
and who would be rebellious. Weercupon, he ordained eternal rewards and
eternal punishments for them. As for example, a man sick of a Calentura or
burning ague is charged by his Physician not to drink wine. The patient
notwithstanding the strictness of his charge by reason of his continual
custom, and former disordered life carouseth wine, and dies. Which that Poet
well remembered:

Et tremor inter vina subit, calidumque trientem
Excutit e manibus: dentes crepuere retecti. Persius Satyr. 3.

In drinking wine the panges of death
From him the cup do wrest:
His members quake, his teeth do shake,
His life can find no rest.
Now the cause of this man's death was himself, for if he had obeyed the
Physician he had recovered his health. After this fatal accident we cannot
deny, but it might have otherwise happened, but the thing being once done, we
certainly know it was done, and what was done must needs be done: for now it
cannot be undone. Howbeit that in the doing or drinking of the wine, the sick
party might have chosen whether he would drink it or no. So in our actions
concerning salvation or damnation, there is no necessity or restraint, but we
may choose in time whether we will be saved or no, neither ought we justly to
accuse God for our damnation if we be damned, or blame his immutable and
inevitable decree, but lay the fault where it ought. Seeing that God is
content, that his will should concur with ours, let us lay the fault on our
stubborn selves, who through a customarie delight in sinning have wittingly
and wilfully deserved it. For his divine Majesty to free himself, did tender
his grace to all, and every man might by acceptance there of avoid the
punishment, and fly from the wrath to come, if he would; so that it is not the
necessity or constraint of Gods decree, which inferred our damnation, but our
contempt of Gods commandments, which albeit we need not commit, unless we
would: yet being once committed must needs be committed; which his provident
Majesty perceiving thus to proceed and chance as already proceeded and
chanced, decreed eternal reward for the righteous, and eternal punishment for
the reprobate. Concerning this last point, we may justify the certainty of
his decree. But to charge his Providence with the occasion of our sins, as by
the necessity of his decree, is damnable; for it is one thing to enquire
whether God knew that such and such would be damned; and another thing to
enquire whether he forced them to sin, and so to work their own damnation.
And it is another thing to affirm, that God knowing such and such would sin
according to their natures did decree eternal punishment for them.

LINEAMENT. V.
That God is not the Author of Temptation, but an Actor therein.

Neither tempts God any man: but gives the wicked man over to his own
concupiscence, Ia. cap. 1.
and consequently to sin, and Satan's alluring baits. He tempts no man
immediately, but according to his unsearchable pleasure, he turns away his
countenance, withdraws the influe^ce of his grace from him, and then is man's
heart hardened by reason of his own natural imbecillitie, lead into
temptation, and left (as corpus opacum) either for a while eclipsed, or for
ever enticed with the world, the flesh, and the Devil. And yet God is not the
Author of our corruptions, though he be an Actour in corrupting. The doing of a
thing proceeds from the Creator, and the evil doing from the Creature. That
the harp sounds, the harper is the cause, that it sounds ^ll, the harp it
self is the cause. In all natural bodies their own brittlenesse is the cause
of their corruptions. Not the agents, but the patients work their ill
sauouring. That we talk, that we walk, God is the cause; that we talk
amiss, and walk awrie, our own wantonness with our weakness is the cause.
Our tongues were made to glorify our Creator, our hearts to meditate before we
talk, that both consenting and concurring together in a joyful embassage
toward God, the soul may deserve a joyful welcome in heaven. In regard of
which circumstances, O mortal men, Let your dead bodies be embaulmed, your
meats perboyled or poudered. Let your tongues, hearts, and steps be directed
by the bridle, lamp, and line of Gods holy word; For with the heart, man
believes unto righteousness, and with the Romans cap. 10.
mouth confession is made unto salvation, according to that divine Disticke:

Non vox, sed votum: non Musica chordula, sed cor:
Non clamor, sed amor cantat in aure Dei.
Not flattring words, but fervent vows of mind:
Not Musickes sound, but souls by faith refined:
Not outward cries, but inward flaming zeal,
Within Gods ears ring out a pleasing peale.
LINEAMENT. VI.
1 How God predestined some to be saved.

2 Why all men were not elected.

3 That men's own wills by Gods sufferance occasion their reprobation and
harm.

4 The Authors sentence concerning himself, whether he be one of the elect.

5 That Good and Evil cannot come without Gods consent.

OUR heavenly Father, whose providence or foresight is no other then his
present sight, 1
before the beginning of the world seeing men at that time (though uncreated
and unborn) all present in his sight, as if they were already created and
borne, ready to receive doom or judgment, and seeing them at that instant to
refuse his grace, as lively as if they had already refused the same, observing
withal the corruption of their nature continued by custom, to produce corrupt
fruits and effects accordingly, elected the purer molded spirits apart from
the rest, enabled them with his grace as with a special gift or pardon (for
indeed the very purest had deserved death and damnation) and freely of mere
favor gave them their lives at the mediation of their Redeemer, and also their
liberty, which their first parents have since wittingly forfeited. The rest, as
reprobates, refusing his charter of grace, and already in his foresight (which
is eternal, and always present) condemned and standing before him in the
state of damnation, he suffered still to persevere and to be as he found and saw
them. Cry for mercy they could not, because his instice required equality or
satisfaction. Beg for liberty they could not, by reason that their sins had
entangled and tongue-tied them. And so for want of speaking and suing with
remorce of conscience (which we call repentance) unto the Savior of the world
(by whom I understand Gods mercy, which ^ince was made flesh and shined before
his Justice) they sustained the punishment, that was due unto them. Wherein
they were not to blame God, but rather themselves, that foolishly delayed their
suites. I heard that of late days a prisoner well lettered, after condemnation
having gotten the benefit of his Clergy according to the laws of this land,
and referred to his trial whether he could read or no, was suddenly so bed
azeled and bereaved of his eye sight, that for want of reading he lost his
life. Now who can blame the Judge in this case? Surely no man. For he was
justly hanged through his own default. The Judge did what he could justify,
yea and perhaps was forced to shead tears, when he pronounced the judgment.
Much more fault are we to find with those sinners, which can read and beg for
remission, and yet of set contu^acie (like a cursed child wholly addicted to
frowardness) will not be persuaded once to say Abba, Father.

To return unto my former matter of Election, God 2
finds men evil, and leaves them so, for he is not tied to give them grace,
except it please himself. To confirm this, I regard many creatures, and do
find them all diversely disposed, some to good, some to evil, some to riches,
some to poverty; I find this diversity in our very grounds. Here, is good
arable land, good pasture: there, grows neither corn nor pasture, but briers,
brambles, tares, cockle, furs, heath, or stones.

-- Non omnis fert omnia tellus,
Hic segetes, illic crescunt foelicuis vuae.
All grounds bear not alike all kind of things:
Here, grows grain, there the grape more fruitful springs.
But why all grounds yield not the same commodities, we must leave that secrecy
to Gods unsearchable will. I like manner I see our earthly kings bestowing
titles of honor upon diverse persons, and upon diverse occasions. Some they
dubbe knights before the battle, and some after the battle. Some others they
grace of their own sesecrete judgment, or for some cause unknown unto us.
After the like manner (to compare great things with small) (O eternal Father)
thou disposest of thy sinful creatures. Some thou call, some thou electest,
some thou reiectest. Of those which thou call, some thou reseruest for one
purpose, some for another; and all for thy glory. Neither ought we to marvel
or murmr at this, that we be not all called and chosen, considering what was
our beginning, our fragility, our stubborn natures, and that we deserved no
favor at all. Seeing our first Parents both man and woman tasted the fruit of
good and evil, it is but discreet severity, or rather divine mercy, that thy
sovereign Majesty electeth some (as good persons) of their seed to honor
thee, and leauest the rest (as evil) to their own appetites in satisfaction
of thy justice. To the one thou give heaven for the honor of thy mercy, to
the other hell for the honor of thy justice. And yet dare not I always
justify the elect, in exempting them quite from the thraldom of sin, seeing
that they are but brittle flesh and blood, who might commit follies in their
youth being subject to the knowledge of evil, and nevertheless become
reformed in the midst of their age, as capable by the divine bounty of the
knowledge of goodness.

Now it remains, that I touch a little, as I sail by the shore of
curiosity, wherefore God suffers the 3
workmanship of his hands to be damned? For the solution of this triuiall and
idle question, it is written, that the Potter may ordain his own vessels to
what use himself pleases. For no doubt, but God is glorified in the damnation
of the reprobate (as in the Revelation he is honored for judging the whore of
Babylon) albeit that he be no cause of their wickedness. Commonly he suffers
evil to chance by that means as he brings goodness to pass, extolling his
own glory out of their errors, and in effect his sufferance of evil is
nothing else but his destination and decree of goodness. So that the cause of
men's reprobation proceeded not from the ordinance of Gods will, but from their
own wills by Gods sufferance.

In a word, it is not good to be ouerbusie with this eternal purpose of God;
for it is the mark of a Reprobate 4
to intrude himself ouerboldly into the secrets of his Maker. Let us then
modestly content our selves with the Apostles Counsel: I say (through the
grace that is Romans 12.
given unto me) to every one that is among you, that no man presume to
understand above that which is meet to be understood; but that he understand
according to sobriety. Let us like infants content our selves with milk, pap,
and such tender meat, as serve fittest to nourish our tender constitutions.
And let us not covet or rather wantonly long after any food of a stronger
quality, able to overcome our weak natures, lest we be confounded. For they
that gaze too long upon the Sun beams, will become blinded with the glory or
majesty thereof. We must not pry into Gods secrets; but pray unto Gods Son,
our all-sufficient Savior. For do not we strictly censure him, that enters
uncalled into a Great Man's chamber, vpbrayding him, as an unmannerly saucy
Jack? What avails it me to enquire whether another man be in the state of
salvation or damnation, while my self have more need to pry into mine own
state, to live Moss tenus propria, within mine own lot, and (for my further
knowledge, Quam sit mihicurta suppellex) like a snaile, to shoot into mine
own home? Is not he unwise that rogues abroad for strange and curious news,
leaving his own house unsettled, and as a prey to his mortal enemy? God give
me the grace to muse and meditate with my self from day to day, whether my
self am in the state of salvation or no, and to do my best endeavor to please
God, whereby I may become one of his elected number, leaving off such f^iuolous
questions and foolish inquisitio^s. For although that the number of the Elect
and R^probate be certainly known in the eternal purpose of God: yet
considering the causes of salvation and damnation to be incertaine, variable,
and voluble in mine own conscience, I am driven to submit my self with fear
and trembling to Gods mercy, hoping for the one, and fearing the other; lest
his number of the elect in respect of me be not certain. For I find by
experience, that sometimes being penitent and pensive for my sins, I am in
the state of salvation, and that some other times seduced by Satan, the world,
or the flesh, I am in a most doubtful and desperate estate, which I pray God
to suspend and turn to the best for my Redeemers sake, that became a sacrifice
for my sins. With this hope or faith I was fed ever since my baptism, that
being thought worthy of so great a grace, and of many more blessings besides, I
may believe and build upon it, that I am elected. Therefore I will not faint
like a coward, but glory that I am a Christian, protesting to continue
faithful; as one sometime gloried that he was borne a man, and not a beast, a
Protestant and not a Papist.

Thus far have I adventured to wade in the depth of Predestination,
Free Will, and Election: Whereupon, as 5
on a most sure foundation, I establish this Proposition: Psalm. 75.
that promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from any
where else, then from the first Cause, for he alone puts down one, and
sets up another; and that no calamity, nor cross can chance without the
Ibid.
same first cause, the God of endless glory, power, strength, wisdom, mercy,
and bounty, whose name be blessed and praised for ever and ever, world without
end.

Amen.
LINEAMENT. VII.
1 The causes why God ordained thunder and lightning. 2 The natural nutriments
of lightning. 3 Why thunder and lightning be most dangerous in Winter. 4 Where
they work their operations more ^^hemently. 5 An admonition to build low.


WE must leave unto nature her peculiar office, 1
because she effects nothing without the predestinate counsel of the eternal
Mouer. The Winters dirt, the Summers dust, the ayrie clouds, all of them spring
from natures motion. The ayrie Regions are moved, and thereupon stormy blasts
of wind arise. The vapors turn and toss, then duskie clouds appear. At
last both winds and clouds carried about in the wheel of violence engender
tempests, thunders, and lightnings. All which though they issue from natural
causes, yet we must note them, as tokens sent from the Author of nature, who
being bound to no causes is himself the original cause of all causes. Like as
the partie-coloured Rainebow prognosticates the divine league indented betwixt
his supreme Majesty and sinful men: even so let us judge, that thunders be
volees of Canon shot to rouse us up from our drowsy defiled dreams. To this
end it lightens, that besides our sense of seeing, our other affrighted senses
may solicit the sluggish Queen to save her self, and her snaily house before
the general day of doom.

Do out your candles, away with your oils, remove your Lard, take away the
nutrime^t of lightnings, lest they 2
overthrow your weaker lights, yea and extinguish your chief delight, the
light of your bodies, the image of everlasting light. Omne simile nutrit sibi
simile. Every like nourishes his like: no marvel then, if lightnings endowed
with an unctuous substance approach naturally to oil, tallow, bacon, gross
bodies, and to hot moistened wares.

Thunder is most dangerous in Winter, according to those vulgar rythmes: 3


A foul Winters thunder
A fair Summers wonder.
Because the Ruler of nature at that unseasonable time is disposed to make his
Deity manifest to miscreant Atheists, who limit such Meteory signs only to
the Spring and Autumn, and also because his Majesty means to awake his
rebellious children out of the Lethean Lethargy of carnal voluptuousness.

The places where oftnest thunders strike, and lightenings flash, be high
trees, high houses, high hills, not 4
only because they are nearest to the Region of the air where fiery
exhalations do always wrestle and war with congealed vapors (as every
Agent works most fiercely upon his nearest matter) but likewise because the
Lord would have us humble our selves before him by such terrible admonitions:
which the Satyriste also touches:

Ignouisse putas? quia cum tonat, oeius Ilex Persius in Sa. tyra 2.

Sulphur discutitur sacro, quam tuque domusque?
Think thou, that God has quite forgiven thee?
Because thou see the highest oaken tree
Sooner, then thee or thy fair house, defa'st
With thunder claps and sacred sulphurs blast?
And as a more ancient Poet in more lively colors paints out the extremity of
meteores against the loftiest seats:

-- Uentis agitatur ingens
Pinus, and celsae grauiore casu Horatius.

Decidunt turres, feriuntque summos
Fulgura montes.
The hugest Pine with wind is shaken down;
The highest tower is soonest overthrown;
The loftiest mount with lightning is o'rblowne.
In respect of which inconveniences a wise Emperor 5
of Rome forbad (by an express decree) any Citizen in Rome to build a house
above forty or fifty foot high. And thou dear Christian, which read this
humble book, I admonish thee to build low, to carry a low sail, to lay aside
thy Peacocks plumes, to behold thy feet, I mean the earth, from whence thou
came; and lastly I warn thee to prostrate thy thoughts before thy heavenly
Father, the worlds great Thunderer, following the Poets counsel:

Vi^e tibi, quantumque potes praelustria vita:
Saeuum praelustri fulmen ab arce venit.
Live to thy self, and shun the stateliest room;
For thunder does from highest Castle come.
LINEAMENT. VIII.
1 How God sendes thunder and lightening either for his glory, for men's trial,
(...) for their punishment.

2 Examples asw^ll modern as ancient of forcible thunders and lightening.

IN all ages it pleased God to manifest his ^aiesticall power of thunder and
lightenings 1
among mortal men either for his glory, or for monition sake, or for their
punishment. At Mount Sina^ to show the Israe^^^^ is glorious strength and
Majesty, he appeared Exodus cap. 19. Psalm. 18. Job. cap. 1. 1. Reg. cap. 18.
with exceeding loud Trumpets, with terrible thunders and lightnings, which the
Prophet David thus expressed: The Lord thundered out of heaven, and the most
High gave out his voice, hailestones and coals of fi^e. Another time to try
Jobs faith, and to make the Devil a liar in impeaching his innocence and
integrity, God caused his heavenly fire to descend, and to consume his
servants and 1. Reg. cap. 1. Genes. cap. 19.
flocks of sheep. Likewise for the conversion of the Israelites at the
prayers of Elias he sent fire from heaven to consume the sacrifice. The like
did he again at the prayer of the said Elias send down to destroy Ahaz^as
men. And this very weapon of lightning and sulphurous fire used he against
Sodom and Gomorrhe.

Alladius an ancient King of the Latins (who reigned Dionys. Haliea. lib. 1.
Anti. 2.
before Romulus) had his Palace set on fire with lightning from heaven, and
perished himself therein.

A king of Clide was stricke^ with a thunderbolt from heaven. D^odor. Sicu.
lib. 4.


A maid of Rome traveling to Apulis was killed with lightning (no harm
outwardly appearing in her body) and at the same instant her garments were
also shaken Eutropius.
off without any rent, and her horse also killed, and his bridle and girthes
shaken off without any breach.

It is reported of King Mithridates, when he was a very infant lying in his
cradle, that the lightning caught the swaddling clothes, and set them on fire,
but never touched or hurt his body, save only there remained a little Plutar.
lib. 1. Sympos. quaest 6.
mark of the fire upon his forehead, again when he was grown, it chanced
that the lightning pierced into the bedchamber where he was asleep; and for
his own person it was not so much as singed therewith, but it blasted a quiver
of arrows that hung at his bed side, went through it, and burnt the arrows
within.

There was at Rome a soldier, who keeping the Centinell upon one of the
temples of the City chanced to have a flash of lightning to fall very near
unto him, Plutar. Sympos. lib. 4. quaeston. 3
which did him no hurt at all in his body, but only burnt the ^atchet of his
shoes: and about the same time, whereas there were certain small boxes and
cruets of silver within wooden cases, the silver within was found all melted
unto a mass in the bottom, and the wood not injured at all, but continued
entire and found.

Many have died by reason of thunder or lightning without any mark or stroke,
wound, scorch, or burning seen Jbid.
upon them, whose life and soul for very fear has flowed out of their
bodies, like a bird out of a cage.

Olimpius an Arrian Bishop had his body suddenly burnt with lightning at
Carthage: which judgment of God Paulus Diaconus
fell upon him, as many thought, for blaspheming the blessed Trinity.

One Prester the son of Hyppomenes for blaspheming God was stricken with a
thunder, and perished. Sabelli.


Anastasius the Emperor in the year of Christ 499. being addicted to Magic
and the Manichean heresy, Zonar. tom. 2. Annal.
did perse cute such Christians as reproved his finnes and wickedness. But at
the last lightning came fearfully about his house called Tholotum, he crept
from chamber to chamber to seek where he might be safest: but nothing would
prevail. The flashes in the end ouertooke him, and he perished miserably.

Hatto the Bishop of Mentz, when in the year of Christ 918, by the instigation
of Conrade the Emperor, he endeavored to murder Henry Duke of Saxony, was
suddenly slain with a stroke of lightning. In the year of our Lord 653. at
Frisazium a town of Saxony a great number both of houses and people were
destroyed by lightnings.

It is written, that the mother of Hierom Fracastorius (who afterward became
one of the most learned and famous Physicians of Christendom) having the said
Hierome in her arms then an infant, was her self killed with lightning. But
her child was not hurt at all.

In the year of our Lord 15^4. the City of Claraualla in France, being
stricken with lightning about noone days did so fiercely burn, that in three
hours space their town, castles, and Churches were utterly consumed.

In the year of our Lord 1551. an honest Citizen of Gar^^us in met^orolog.
Crentzburge standing by his table, and a dog lying by his feet, were both of
them suddenly slain by a lightning: yet a young child, which stood hard by his
Father, was preserved safe.

It is not long since Paul's proudsteeple ouercrowing all the spires in England
felt the blows of divine justice with her sister Babell; the one by lightning,
the other by confusion.

One Wyman a Citizen of Gloucester, as many there yet living can testify, about
forty years past, having a son called Arthur Wyman at the University in
Oxford, very earnestly required another son of his, one William Wyman to
carry some provision of victuals upon a Whitsonday to his said son in Oxford.
This younger son, after many excuses, was at the last forced upon that high
day nolens volens to go forwards on his iourny to Oxford. But by the way in a
thicket of wood he was found stricke^ dead with lightning: yet his body in
outward appearance was without any mark. The mare whereon he rode was also
smitted dead, and sauored very strong of brimstone. And the meat which he
carried, as Kid, Lamb, etc. were so corrupted with blackish sent, and stunke so
ill fauouredly, that no man could abide the smell thereof.

Mistress Lowbell a Gentlewoman of Colchester yet living, about two and
twenty years ago or there abouts was suddenly stricken down with lightning,
and so scorched and singed in her body with the sulphurous slame, that she
could hardly be cured within a quarter of a year after.

About the said time at a place called Croes-Askurne in the County of
Carmarthen, upon the day of a Gentleman's marriage, as they were making merry
there, a very strange accident happened. There came a thunderbolt, and pierced
quite through the said house, and also a certain woman's head-tires were rent
and torn from her head with a blast of lightning at that instant, without any
other harm.

Likewise about that time a whole household at a place called Talley in the said
County, were burnt with wildfire. There perished at that time by report five
or six little children in the said house. Whereby it appears, that the
innocent is sometimes smitten with such strange ends as well as nocents.

There was a fearful lightning on the seventeenth day of November 1606. which
in very short time burnt up the steeple of Bleachingley in Surrey, and in the
same melted into infinite fragments a good ring of Belles. Which accident,
because it was so lately done, I will rehearse the same more at large,
according to the discourse of one Simon Harward, who wrote thereof
compendiously and learnedly. When I came (quoth he) to visit the town of
Bleachingley, I found their cause to be equal (if not worse) then the rumor
or report, which was before published: I found that by the lightning (which
came with the terible thunder on Monday being the seventeenth of this instant
November, about ten of the clock in the night) the spire steeple of the said
Bleachingley, having been lately new covered to the great charges of the
parish, in three hours space was utterly consumed with fire. The steeple was
about twelve fade me high above the battlements of the square stone work: but
it was a steeple spreading downward very large in circumference. The same
work which bare it (being also about twelve fadome high) is a long square of
one and twenty feet one side, and eighteen feet the other side. It is
thought by good workmen, that two hundred loades of timber will not suffice
for the erecting of such a steeple, as that stoneworke did lately bear.

I found also the belles (being before a sweet ring, and so large, that the
Tenor waighed twenty hundred weight) partly melted into such fragments, and
partly burnt into such cinders, or intermingled with such huge heaps of
cinders, as it will never hereafter serve to the former uses thereof.

This lightning did not only this harm in Surrey, but also it afflicted
Sussex, and diverse other places about the very same time. It was very strange
when it fired Bleachingley steeple, it entered also into the house of one
Stephen L^gsford of Buckstead in Sussex almost twenmiles from Bleachingley, and
melting the lead of his glass windows, did with great violence break
through, and rent in sunder a strong brick chimney.

What shall I write of mine own tragical events upon the third of January
1608. which are nothing inferior to any of the accidents here recited? But
because I intend to set the same out more distinctly by it self, I will
suspend the story only during the space of an hours reading from my Readers
view. About the same time there happened in Dors^tshire at Winburne Minster a
very strange accident. About four a clock in the afternoon, as they were at
Euensong, the steeple spire being strongly built of lime, stone, and sand, and
beset with iron bars, was suddenly stricken down with thunder and lightning,
the leads were rent and torn, yea and which was most miraculous, the singing
men's books were torn in their hands, and the seats before their faces
likewise rent and broken. And this the glorious God has done, because the
mouths of the wicked may be stopped, who injuriously detract from his
providence in imputing my misfortunes only singled out above all others; as
though the same miraculous Mouer, which moved these heavenly creatures of his
against me, did not also extend his power in the like degree upon others in
this Realm. Howsoever, welcome be his Angel unto me, whether he brings me
tidings of peace, or of tribulation.

LINEAMENT. IX.
1 That they detract from the glorious Maiestic of God, which attribute his
thunders, lightnings, and other mercory signs to the Devil or his adherents.

2 Proofs out of the word of God, that God alone sends forth such terrible
signs.

Servants must obey their masters as well courteous 1
as cursed, Children must honor their Malachia cap. 1. and Exodus cap. 20.
parents, though otherwhiles they chastise them severely, Subjects must pray
for their Prince, and serve him, though he exceeds Couarru. 2. part. decret.
cap. 3. 94.
the limits of law. Even so ought we being the servants, children, and subjects
of the Almighty, brook patiently all visitations whatsoever the Lord sends,
either deservedly for our sins, or momentary for our trial to confirm our
virtues, lest prosperity puff up our minds with pride. Upon our submission
our gracious Lord will stay his hand as he did with the Ninevites; upon our
repentance he will rebuke the wind, and say to the Sea, Peace and be still.
But nowadaies a contrary superstitious spirit possesses many of our
Pharisaicall Mar^. cap. 4.
Critickes.

They are not content to detract one mortal man from the other, either their
goods of body, their goods of mind, or their goods of fortune (though in this
case they are inexcusable) but they must detract from the only glorious God
his glorious appurtenances, and his goodly types of maiestic. Yea, they go
about by such absurd Detractions to annihilate his infinite authority, to
abridge his incomprehensible motion, who at one beck can bar them of all
motion. Romulides saturi inter poc^la, Our carping Troianes, whose GOD is their
belly, amiddest their Bacchannales and Tobachanales do blasphemously brute
abroad, that the Devil raises winds, tempests, thunders, lightnings, and
earthquakes either immediately of himself, or else by the means and mediation
of some omnipotent Coniurer. If sickness oppress them, out of hand, they post
with Ahaziah to a cousening coniurer, or wizard as wise as themselves, to know
whether they be bewitched, or whether they shall recover of their disease. This
is their faithless wont, as though there were not a God in Israel. If the Lord
sends his Angel, or descends 2. Reg. cap. 1.
himself in glory, with thunder and lightening, as he did sometimes on Mount
Sinai, they blasphemously impugn, saying, that God is locally circumscribed in
heaven. None can work miracles in these latter days save the Devil. He, even
he it is, that appears in varieties of shapes, more then are specified in
Ouids Metamorphosis, sometimes a Centaure, sometimes a black dog, some other
times a winged foul of the air.

All this while (thou most merciful Judge) grieuest thy patient spirit at
their perrish, petulant, and proud assertions. Thou make as though thou
hear them not, scorning to extend thy justice against such silly wretches,
before the predestined time; for thou art as void of perturbations as they
are subject unto Detractions: yet will not they refrain their tongues, because
that their runnagate babbling, being not restrained with fear nor shame,
wandereth up and down scotfree without punishment. Rise up O Lord, and let
them pay the price of their Detractions, or let them know that thou can not
endure any competitour of thy glory. But what knowledge need they further?
what other light expect they to illuminate their darksome minds? They have
Moses, the Prophets, and the Gospel, as bright shining lanternes to guide
their sensual understanding. They have ancient Fathers to expound them. Thy
servant Augustine might satisfy their curious positions, who about twelve
hundred years sithence wrote, Non est putandum istis transgressoribus Angelis
seruire hanc rerum visibilium materiem, sed soli Deo, That is, we Aug. lib. 3.
de Sanct. Trin.
must not think, that the substance of these visible things in this world do
obey the Angels, which fell, but that they obey God alone. Thou art a jealous
God, and can not abide that thy enemy should vaunt himself on thy Majesty;
Thou art slow to anger, but great in power, thou Nahum. 1.
have thy way in the whirlewinde and in the storm: the clouds are the dust of
thy feet, the mountains tremble before thee, the hills melt, and the earth is
burnt up at thy sight. O peerlesse Paragon of unsearchable worth, what nobler
instance need I produce, then thine incomprehensible self for thine own
immensiue and inexhausted power. When thou communest with Job, most profoundly
thou bewrayest man's infirmity, and infallibly concludest, that no creature
whatsoever can diue into the deep consideration of thy secret works. Out of
the whirlewinde thou spakest, and demaundest of him, Have thou entered into the
treasures Job. 38.
of the Snow? Or have thou seen the treasures of the hail? Who has divided
the spouts for the rame, or a way for the lightnings of the thunders? These
questions surpass our capacities. Holy and wonderful is God in all his
workmanship. The earth trembles at the presence of the Lord, at Psalm. 114.
the presence of the God of Jacob. Let it snow, let it hail, let it thunder,
let it lighten, let the earth move, I acknowledge no other supernatural cause
then the first cause, the first mouer, one God world without end. I do
faithfully believe, that through his commandment the Lord makes Eccles. 43.
the Snow to hasten, and sends forth swiftly the thunder of his lightning;
also that he turns the heavens about, that Job. 37.
they may do whatsoever he commands them upon the whole world, and that he
causes rain to come, whether it be for punishment, or for his land, or to do
good to them that seek him. The heavens, the elements, and whatsoever is under
the moon, attend the command of their great Creator: some for his glory, some
for their trial, some others for their sins he scourges and smites.
Against these he arms his natural creatures as piercing arrows. Then shall
the thunderbolts go straight out of the lightnings, and shall fly to the
mark, as to the bent bow of the clouds. Sometimes he smites us gently,
expecting our Sapient. 5.
conuersions, as he spoke by the Prophet, I smote you with blasting, with mil
deaw, and with hail in all the labors of your hands, and yet you turned not
unto me. Unto his Majesty Hag. 2.
alone will I complain, when any hurt befalls me: O Lord unto thee will I cry,
for the fire has devoured the Io^l. 1.
Pasture of the Wilderness, and the flame has burnt up all the trees of the
field. Vbi nunc facundus Ulisses? Where now is the wizard with the Devils real
force? Stand at your cause, and bring forth your strongest ground, says the
Isa. 41.
Lord of Hosts, show us things to come, and tell us what shall be done
hereafter, so shall we know that ye are Gods. But indeed your knowledge is
vain, your power poor, not worth the speaking, Behold ye are Gods of naught,
and your making is of naught: yea abominable is the man that Ibid.
has chosen you, and abominable is he, that ascribes the works of the
glorious God unto his enemy the Devil.

LINEAMENT. X.
1 Probable pro^ses out of Civil policy, that God is jealous of his glory, and
glorious signs, and therefore not prebable that he would lend his real power
to the Devil

2 Examples of worldly states, which could not endure usurpers of their
transitory titles and p^^rogatiu^s.

3 That God hates Coniurers, Witches, Antichristians, and other Detractors and
(...) worse then Athe^sts or ignorant Infidels.

THough I proved out of holy writ, that the Lord is jealous of his inexplicable
power, and cannot tolerate with everlasting patience, that any creature,
specially a wicked creature, visible or invisible, Devil or man, Ph^^ton or
Medea, Coni^rer or Witch should pry into his secret treasury, or soar up
into the Eclipticke line, and command the Sun and Moon to stand still with
Iosuah, or cause fire to descend down from heaven with Elias, or dry the Sea
with Moses, or rebuke the stormy winds with Christ: yet notwithstanding for
the hardness of worldly hearts, I will illustrate the self same argument,
with familiar and domestical examples of mortal states, who likewise cannot
brook, that any other make use of their transitory incidents.

Do not we see that earthly Potentates be more agreeued 2
with their own subjects rebellions, with their injuries and vsurpings, then
with the dishonest attempts of their open foes? At whose hands they expect
nothing but extremity of war and bloody massacres? Do not we find that the
Pope and other Princes of his faction bear deeper hatred, rancour, and
emulation toward the Protestants, then toward the Turks, Mahumetans, or
Jews, whose vicinity might work them far greater scath and damage? Their
malignant reason they ground upon the comparison of two corriuals in love whose
wrath can never be appeased, but with the utter subversion of the opposite
party. O what a disconsorted policy is this, that Christians agreeing together
in the foundation of religion prosecute one another with such capital enmity,
worse then ever the Pharisees the Saduces, or both of them, like Pilate and
Herod, combined together to put to death our Savior Christ! The Pope at Rome,
at Bologna, and at other Cities; the Emperor at Vienna, and at diverse
imperial Cities in Germany; the Venetians at Venice, at Verona, and other
places do tolerate Jewish Synagogues, banks of usury, and noisome Iakes of
pocky baudry, in respect of private interest. And yet they cannot suffer one
Church of Protestants among them, no nor one single man of the same profession:
or if they do but suspect a man addicted that way, they exclaim with the
stiff-necked Jews, Dimitte nobis Barabam, loose unto us Barabas, loose unto
us thieves, usurers, Jews and stews. Crucify these Lutherans, Lutherano al
fuego, ad ignem, fire and faggot for these heretic dogs. Thus do they rage
together and imagine vanity against the Lord and his An ointed. They like wise
send away their posts, usurpers of the name of Iesis, as the flies which issued
out of the Dragons mouth, to enuenome our Springs, to infect our minds, to
kill our Kings, and to blow up at once our whole estates. This is their usual
complot, while the common enemy of Christendom lies close by their noses,
ready to dispossess them of their lives, living and liberty, as was likely of
late days to fall out, when the Pope after the winning of Otranto by the
Turks, doubting his safeguard, resolved once to translate the Papacy to Auinion
in France, if that a certain Cardinal, wiser then himself had not dissuaded
him. The original cause of all this hatred is jealousy, together with a false
persuading humor, that our Church vsurps his holy power, which sometimes he
pretends from the Emperor Constantine, and some other times from S. Peter.

Whether this exercising of another man's authority be legitimate or spurious;
let them, who think themselves injured, redreste the injury how they can. In
the mean time we perceive the mind of man impatient of usurpers and
Detractors, to boil for revenge, as if an euerflaming Torch were set under it.
No marvel then if Princes punish forgery, and other detracting crimes. He that
detracts his Kings Prerogative with a malicious purpose, to attribute the same
to himself, is Laesae Maiestatis r^^s guilty for wounding the Royal Majesty,
and to be attainted of high treason. Will King JAMES our dread Sovereign
suffer any subject of his to wear a crown of gold, to de^ act his royal
authority, to levy arms at pleasure, to encampe himself, to hang a man
without due course of law, or to coin gold? No: it is against his
prerogative, against his Jurisdiction. The world abides not two Suns: No more
can the united Empire of great Britain endure but one supreme Monarch. He that
sueth into the Court of Rome detracts Prook. tit. Praemunire.
from the Kingly glory, and therefore encuires the danger of Praemunire. Even so
if a subject of this Realm bring in a Bull of Excommunication from Rome,
against another subject, it is by the ancient common law, high treason against
the King, his crown and dignity; as has been adjudged in the Reign of
Edward the first. For the King of England is the Vicar of the ^^ghest King. In
a Leg. Sancti Edward. cap. 19.
Constable or any other, it is forgery and detraction to write a warrant in a
Justice of Peace his name, without his consent. Yea, and a Justice himself was
fined in the Star Chamber, circa. 30. Elizab. Reg. for sending his warrant upon
suspicion of felony, with a blanke or window to put in ones name, which he knew
not, at his friends request without certainly acquainting him with the matter
before.

What a tedious quarrel continued with unsheathed swords between the Turkish
Ottoman and the Persian Sophy, about the very color of the Turbant, which both
were bound by their ceremonious law to wear? Such another frivolous iatre
happened among the Friars touching the color of their frizen weeds. One stood
upon black, betokening mourning: another upon white, the displayed ensign of
innocence. This busy body claimed it to be gray, that their weeds being like
unto ashes might move them to repentance. That hare-brain'd Scholar proved out
of Schoolmen and profound Dunces, that all the rest of the Disputants were
arrand Heretics, for their sins being as red as Scarlet or as purple,
they ought not to hold with any other color. Many brawles, many factions, yea
and bloud-sheds arose about these Idly usurped colors; till after diverse
commotions, decrees and orders on all sides infringed, a final end with much
ado was established by the general Council of Christendom.

There was a dangerous tumult in France, very like to chance betwixt a famous
Auncestour of mine out of Wales, and the Lord Norris concerning their arms.
Both gave the Raven, both challenged it from the same house, from one Vrian
Prince of Rheged, otherwise called Carict in Scotland, who either by conquest
or marriage seated himself in our country of West-Wales. My said Auncestour
(as our Walsh nature relies overmuch upon Genealogies and Heraldry) and his
Walsh company, being no less then fifteen hundred horsemen and footmen,
could by no means be dissuaded from the quarrel, until the Duke of Nors^lke
(whose daughter, sithence Countess of Bridgewater, was married unto his heir)
solicited King Henry the eight then in camp, to take up the Controversy, and
order the Lord Norris to give it flying, and the others as he did before.

If men's mortal feuds conceived against their emulous concurrents for light
occasions, and, as the Proverb 3
terms them, for a Goats hair be so heinous, hereditary, so frequent, so
customary in all Countries, why do we tempt the Lord our God, and doubt, that
his eternal Majesty, in whom there is not the least spot of sinful
perturbation, hates Detractours of his euer-shining glory, and also them, which
attribute his miraculous deeds to his creatures or enemies; I say, why do we
doubt that he detesteth them in a fair higher degree, then if they were
profested Atheists blinded with ignorance? He that knows his Masters will and
does it not, is worthy of many stripes. Wherefore I constantly auerre, that the
Lord hates Antichristians, Euchanters, Coniurers and Witches, for their
detractions, forgeries, delusions, and false miracles, worse then the Heathen
with all their Idolatries. To this end that ancient Father affirms, If any
that went before us either of ignorance or simplicity has not observed that
which the Lord commanded, his simplicity through the Cypr. Epist. 3.
Lords indulgence may be pardoned; but we, whom the Lord has taught and
instructed, cannot be pardoned. Where the Spiritual Steward lends one talent,
there he looks the interest of one again; but where he exposes out twenty
talents, there he justly expects the increase of twenty again. Like as a
simple servant sent out in a darkesome night, and misseth his way, deserves his
pardon more freely then he, which purposely gaddes and goes out of his way in
the clear day light, preferring his own wanton pleasures before his Masters
profit: so the ignorant Christian, sinning of mere simplicity is far more
tolerable then the enlightened Gospeller, which afterward dissembles and
detracts upon a greedy or gaudic hope of golden mountains.

LINEAMENT. XII.
1 Wherefore God diuerteth his natural creatures against mankind.

2 That all crosses and misfortunes proceed only from God.

3 That in any wise we must not delay repentance.

4 An objection against sudden death by the spirit of Detraction out of the
Letany, with a consutation thereof.

THus the stars have their ordinary ^
motions, the Elements their courses, and the Metcors their voluble
dispositions: except otherwhiles it please their Arch-mouer to divert some of
them as terrible alarums for our admonishment. Then every thing fights against
us: Our native air strangles our wearied winde-pipes: Our nourishment through
gluttony works our latter end. Fire and water conspire against us: One dies by
fire, another by water. Thus arms he nature against nature, creature against
creature, and man against man, either for his glory, (...), that mortal men
may know his strength and acknowledge their own weakness: or for men's
trial, (...), to try their integrity, to mollify their stony hearts, and to
shape their inward man to regeneration. Others he smites (...), 33 vessels of
wrath, to perpetual punishment; though commonly he lets them flourish in this
world like Palm trees, reserving them to damnation in the world to come; even
as he lasheth some for their reformation, and not for their ruin, ad
correctionem non ad ruinam, as Queen Elizabeth of famous memory spoke touching
a subject of hers then in durance. This kind of punishment, called (...), the
Lord himself names the rod of men, the plagues of the children of men, such as
the Father uses to his child, he likewise uses to his elected child, to the
intent that man might not wax ouer-wanton in affections, or seem righteous in
his own conceit, (for no flesh stands instified in his sight) and as that holy
man alleged, that he might deliver him from pride, that he might keep his
soul from the grave, and his life from the sword. Whereto Job 33.
agrees that Proverb:

Dulcia non meruit, qui non gustauit amara.
Who tasted not the sour deserves not sweet.
God foreseeing that some of his children might sin in many things, scourges
them with infirinity of body, lest they should sin, Vt ijs vtilius sit frang^
languoribus ad salutem, quam remanere incolumes ad damnationem. That Hugo libr.
2. de Amma.
it might be more profitable for them to be broken with diseases for
salvation, then to remain whole and in health for damnation. This another
ancient Father confirms: Magis intus dolemus per hoc, quod foris patimur. We
grieve in wardly the more for that, which we Greg. ^. part curae pastor.
submu. 13.
suffer outwardly. And again, While we are outwardly stricken, we are
secretly and woefully recalled to the remembrance of our sins. Our fleshly
fathers corrected us, and we gave them reverence, and shall we not patiently
endure our heavenly Fathers scourge? They for a few days chastned us after
their own pleasure: but he for our profit, Heb. 12.
that we might be partakers of his holiness.

When any Plague, Murren, loss, cross, or misfortune befalls us, that
proceeds not from the devil, but 3
from our Father in heaven. It is he that created light and Esai. 45.
darkness, that makes peace and trouble. It is he that orders this worlds
globe, and turns the wheel of all our fortunes. And again, as himself
promises, If we will walk in his Ordinances, he will send peace in the land,
but if Leuit. 25.
we despise his commandments he will send a sword upon us. His provident
Majesty knows best what befits our frail natures. He will have mercy on them,
who deserve mercy at his hands. And he will punish those that deserve
punishment. Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and Job 2.
not receive evil? Shall we rejoice when the Sun shines, and when it lowres,
shall we lowre and frown likewise? Know then, O worldly men, that no evil can
chance unto you without the appointment of God. Out of his mouth goes both
evil and good, as the Prophet lamented. And as Iere. in Lament. cap. 3. Amos 3.
another Prophet testified, Shall there be evil, that is, calamity in a City,
and the Lord has not done it?

Great reason it is, that he which sent us into this 4
world, should take us out of the world, after what manner soever it pleases
him. Whether it be by ordinary or extraordinary means, by death natural or
violent, lingering or sudden, welcome be death unto us that be borne to die. For
this cause while we have time to repent, let us begin instantly out of hand,
to amend our lives, before his darts do hit us, before the dark night of
tribulation comes upon us. Repentance, which is done upon the la^^ hour, is
commonly done upon fear of future torments. Then it is hard by reason of our
prrsumptuous delays to find grace and mercy, as a Spanish Divine very well
observes. Malse hallan los remedios en el trabaio, que en^e descansoy paz no se
buscaron, Ill do they find remedies in Hernando de Sanctiago sobre Euang.
time of trouble, when they sought for none in time of peace. In this case the
counsel of the wise man is very good, Get thee righteousness, before thou come
to judgment, and use Physic before thou be sick: Examine thy self before
Eccl. 18.
thou be judged, and in the day of destruction thou shall find mercy: humble
thy self before thou be sick, and while thou may yet sin show thy
conversion. Most certain it is, that Satan tyrannizeth most furiously at the
shutting up of our lives, when we are least able to resist by reason of our
extreme pains and panges both in body and mind. Then the very best have
enough to do. A man has not two souls, that he may adventure one of them.
Therefore O Christian, stand to thy tacklings, stand stout, always prepared to
prevent all future evils, O lim haec meminisse iuuabit. The time will come,
when the remembrance of thy fore past crosses will avail the repeating. In the
mean time,

Mors tua, mors Christi-fraus mundi-gloria coeli,
Et dolor Infor^i sunt meditanda tibi.
Think on thine own, and Christ his death,
And on false worldly trains.
Think also on sweet heavens joys,
And on Infernal pains.
God help us, if we shall do nothing else in this world but live in continual
care, pensiveness, and perplexity of mind, as in truth we must, if we live in
fear of deaths suddaines. But the case is otherwise, for the Church has
provided in the Letany, that we pray God to deliver us from lightning and
tempest from plague, pestilence, and famine, from battle and murder, and from
sudden death. O man full of Detractions, how long will thou tempt the Lord thy
God? This earthly world was not given thee for a Paradise, but for a Purgatory.
It was not made thee to build in, but rather to pull down, to crucify and to
mortify thy couet^ous thoughts, that in the other world thou might live for
ever with Christ and his Angels. This world is indeed a place of trial, a
warfare, a maze of troubles, and a seat to soiourne in for a time, for short
time. Wherefore, and because this time later or sooner, serius aut citius is
not limited by Patent to any mortal creature, whereby we might foreknow or
prevent the brunts of nature, fortune, or destiny, (which three I hold to be
the inevitable will of God) let us stand watchful against sudden death, seeing
it is for a great prize, for a great purchase (that none can be greater) even
for the salvation of our dear souls. I grant, that old Adam prays against
the suddenness of death, but (alas poor man) it is for doubt of the worst. It
is the nature of a sinful soul, to become so enamoured with this enchanting
world, that it loathes, as the horror of hell, all sudaine mischiefs, and
chiesly a mischievous death. We would feign die the death of the righteous but
in no wise would we live the lise of the righteous. And yet how dare we judge
of them that die so suddenly? May not the lord dislodge his tenants at will
specially, for their advancement without warning at any time? Did not he after
this sudden manner, as it were in the twinkling of an eye, translate Henoch
and Elias in their souls and bodies up into heaven? Many good men have died
suddenly. Abell, Josias, Onias, and others had no long warning to prepare
themselves. God knows best what besits our humane natures. It may be, he
causes some to die suddenly, because of their crazed brains, lest in their
lingering disease they fall according to the constitution of their bodies into
despair, or to railing and reuiling, whereby they might leave behind them in
this world an infamous memorial. Therefore to case them of their torments, and
for avoiding of so soul a scandal he suddenly sends for his selected
servants. Some others he send for suddenly and terribly to terrify them which
remain behind; for if Gods servants die such a fearful death, what hope
has the sinner? In a word, good men never pray against sudden death, but to
the intent they might order their worldly business before their deaths, as
the said to Hezechias, Set thy house in order for thou must die. Esaias. 38.


LINEAMENT XII.
1 That we must not judge by men's misfortunes, or sudden death, that they be
forsaken of God.

2 Charitable censures, which a good Christian may yield touching those that
die suddenly.

3 The Spirit of Detraction convicted for censuring over cruelly of the Authors
wife, who was stricken dead with lightning the (...) of January, 1600 where ^er
comm^ndation and assumption are moralized.

WHen the Lord is disposed extraordinarily to extend his glorious power, why
do 1
thou, o foolish man, presume to enter into his hidden power? Why do thou
labor (like Lucifer) to climb up into his chair of secrets? Shall the thing
formed check him that formed it? Can the Pottervse his vessels as he thinks
good? and shall not the Lord dispose of his own creatures? Who ar^ thou which
iudgest another man's servant? Romans 14.


What can thou tell, whether God has predestined them to salvation, and
accepted of their submission, as of 2
the thief which was crucified with him, at the last gasp, and as they say,
betwixt the bridge and the brook?

Betwixt the stirrup and the ground,
Mercy I thought, mercy I found:
As one ^pitaphed upon the tomb of him, that fell dead suddenly from his
horse. Sometimes it pleases his Majesty out of our error to raise his own
honor, and to make virtue perfect and complete by infirmity. And therefore it
is very uncharitable for one sinner to judge of another sinner. Let him who is
without sin throw the first stone at him, as Christ said. ^^et the sinner
draw out the beam out of his own eye, before ^e remove the mote out of his
brothers eye. It is Gods office only to judge the event and end of things.
Therefore judge nothing before the tr^e, until the Lord comes who will lighten
the hidden 1 C^^. 9.
things of darkness, and open the counsels of the hearts. Saint Paul was made
a gazing sto^ke unto this world, he was defamed, yea, he was made as the
filihinesse of the world and as the offscouring of all things, yet a chosen
vessel and Apostle of Christ. When it was told our Savior, that Pilate had
massacred the Galilaeans, even as they sacrificed, he willed us not to judge of
their lives and sins, but by their example to amend our lives. For neither
those poor Galilaeans, nor yet these eighteen upon whom Luke. 13.
the tower in Siloc fell, were greater sinners then all ohers which dwelt at
Jerusalem. Josias was one of the godliest kings, that ever reigned in Judah, yet
was he killed with darts in the battle against the king of Egypt. Zachariah
the Prophet, Stephen the martyr, with other servants of God were tyrannously
put to death. Yea, and Christ himself being without sin endured worldly
sorrows without number, and also died a most terrible death: yet did they
judge him as though he were plagued and cast down of God, according to that
which was prophesied Esaias. 53.
of him. The Lord is righteous in all his ways, the Lord is holy in all his
works, as the Prophet David confessed, and as Maurice the Emperor protested,
when he saw his wife and children murdered before his face by his servant
Phocas. How then dare thou which art unrighteous and unholy, sit and read on
the secret deeds of the righteous God, and on the wondrous proceedings of the
holy one of Israel? Sometimes it pleases him to fulfill in our days that
Prophecy of his concerning the taking of the godly from among the wicked. The
righteous perishes, and no man regards it in his heart. Good godly Esaias. 57
men are taken away, and no man considers it, namely, that the righteous is
conveyed away from the wicked who heap up treasures and pleasures for this
world, as the godly do for the world to come. It may be also, that his mercy is
so great, that respecting not our sins, his abundant grace will vouchsafe to
pronounce that answer concerning Lazarus in our behalf: This sickness is not
unto death, but for the glory of God. Correspondent to which is likewise the
satisfaction, which our Savior Christ yielded to his disciples demand, when
they asked him about the blind man: Master, who did sin, this man or his
parents, that he was borne blind? Jesus answered, neither John. cap. 9.
has this man sinned, nor his parents, but that the works of God should be
showed in him. Perhaps the Lord sends extraordinary accidents upon his servants
to the intent, that they should serve for a Parable or warning piece to the
rest of his people in this country, from whom he means shortly to take away
their power, the joy of their honor, the pleasure of their eyes, and the
desire of their hearts, except out of hand they become watchful and repentant
with the Ninevites. For if judgment begin at the just what shall be the end of
them, which obey not the Gospel 1. Pet. cap. 4.
of God? And if the righteous be scarcely saved, where shall the ungodly and
sinner appear? If there be no difference between the innocent and reprrobate
in the manner of their deaths and worldly crosses, why do we join field to
field, land to land, and make account to see long lasting days in this
transitory world, or to die in our soft down beds? The word of the Lord came
to Ezechiel: Behold, I take away from thee the pleasure Ezech. cap. 24.
of thine eyes with a plague, yet shall thou neither mourn nor weep. So
Ezechiel spoke unto the people in the morning, and in the evening his wife
died. The Parable was this: thus says the Lord God, behold, I will pollute my
sanctuary, even the pride of your power, the pleasure of your eyes, and your
hearts desire. And you shall do as I have done, ye shall neither mourn nor
weep, but ye shall pine away for your iniquities, and mourn one toward
another. Thus Ezechiel is unto you a sign. And thus perhaps am I a sign unto
you, O worldly wizards, whose tongues are hired by the detracting spirit to
blaspheme the powerful Lord of lightnings, to curse God and die with Jobs wife
Job. cap. 2.
and to lay an ambush for your neighbors good name, fame, and reputation.
Learn by these exemplary crosses to be vigilant, for in the hour which you
think not, as a these in the night, will death steal upon you. It is high
time for you to prepare your selves, to prevent the Tempter. Already it begins
to smoke, and as the Poet forewarnes:

Tunc tua res agitur, paries cum proximus ardet. Horace.

When the next wall unto thy house does burn,
Look to thy self betimes, next is thy turn.
These reasons considered, I dare boldly auou^h (for no earthly creature can
judge her conscience more freely then my self) that my well-beloved wife, whom
God of late has taken to his mercy by an unexpected accident, by the lightning
power of his fearful thunder rests in the Lord as concerning her soul, and
rests on earth as concerning her memory: both which, (I trust) by the divine
bounty scorn all the brauadoes, scaladoes, and engines, which either envy, or
Satan can invent for their assaults. This is the chiefest solace I embrace
after so great a cross. This Christian hope richer then any temporal or
golden harvest I reap to my self after my fatal loss. For my light
affliction which is but momentary, causes unto me a far more excellent 2.
Cor. cap. 4.
and eternal weight of glory, while I look not on the things which are seen,
but on the things which are not seen I look not so s^rupulously on the manner
of her death as I look on the manner of her life, which God received as a
burnt offering. Pack hence therefore ye Enthusians, and be not like unto
Curdogs, that bark at a dead Lion. Though she fell she shall rise again,
though she sat in darkness, the Lord will be a light unto her.

MY tongue is no hireling Herald, to coin her a new pedegre, nor yet a
merc^nari^ Advocate to extol her shadow in steed of substance; only in steed
of Popish pos^humes or Purgatory trentals, I will sacrifice this
cacomtasticall oblation, as seralem coe^am, a funeral banquet to her well
deserving memory. Holy Augustine never conceived more divinely of his mother
Monica, then I do of thy felicity. O happy soul, partaker of celestial
joys, thou need no praise of mine, seeing that thy God has transported
thee in the year of lubily to this port of tranquillity and converted thy
pilgrimage to the haven, or rather heaven of everlasting health: Where though
thou abound with unspeakable pleasures, yet pardon me if I strive to canonize
thy peerless fame. The pleasant sounds of thy verdant virtues (like so many
resounding Echoes) shall never vanish from mine insatiable ears. Thy
extraardinary love, the lively Jdaea of a spotless life shall always dwell
within the mansion of my restless mind. At all times whether it be morning or
evening, noonetide or midnight, while I soiourne in this house of clay, I will
congratulate thy high fortunes. All hail immortal spirit, thou spouse of
Christ, wrapped up in his holy arms, full of transcendent grace, full of
transeendent glory. All hail, full of health, full of happiness, which art
translated from mortal men to immortal Saints, from sorrow to solace.
Yesterday thou wentest enta^gled with the thorny cares of this world, now thou
triumphest among the Angels of heaven. Yesterday thou were here, where Job
himself complained, that he was placed as a But to be shot at, where Gods
enuenomed arrows stuck in him, where the Prophet David's bones were consumed,
that he roared all day long. Now thou florishest in the harmony of Gods Spirit,
minding on nothing but on divine virtues, on spiritual melody. Yesterday thou
wentest drooping in an earthen cote, shaken with the frowns of Envy, with the
frumps of Detraction: to day thou walk (and this day shines alwaie, never
sets) in a temple not built with hands, in the line of the living God, without
Envy, without Deraction. Here is thy habitation assigned thee, thy lot is
fallen in a fair ground. Live for ever. And this as a looking glass shall
glister unto thy friends on earth:

Dorcadis hic dotes, miti cum mente Rebecchae,
Priscillaeque fides: men's tam^n vna tribus.
Corpus humas, mundus lauds, tenet igneus Eliae,
Elisias tua men's, Elizabetha, rotas.
Here Dorcas deeds (as stars) do shine,
Priscillaes faith here does combine
With mild and kind Rebecca^s mind,
Yet but one soul to three assigned.
Thy body earth, the world thy name,
Thy soul by faith Elisian fame.
Elizabeth eternized gains.
Elias-like in lightning waines.
LINEAMENT. XIII.
1 The Authors gratulation for his late fortunate deliverance.

2 His description of the Lightning tragedy, the third day of January, 1608.
at what time God took away his wife.

3 His description of other Crosses at the very same time.

4 How God fore-shewed by mysteryes the said crosses before they happened unto
the Author: wherein his censure of Dreams is interlaced.

5 His description of his miraculous escape out of the Sea, wherein he fell by
force of a cruel tempest on a Christmas day. 1602.

GOD forbid that I should charge all 1
my Countrymen with the branded mark of blasphemy: for there be many good
men which never kneeled unto Baal, which never worshipped the spirit of
Detraction, all ready viua voce, as the Proverb says, with both hands to hold
up the roof of my opinion. They allege simply and charitably that this great
Accident upon my wife and house came from God, as a fair warning for me and
them to prepare our selves for his heavenly kingdom: which charitable conceit,
I cannot cancel with oblivion or ingratitude, but rather confirm the same
with an applauding Alleluiah. The Lord gave, Job 1.
the Lord takes away: blessed be the name of the Lord. No man alive this day
stands more indebted then my self for matters of life, unto the Author of
life. Daniel was wonderfully delivered from the Lions claws; Ananias, Azarias
and Misael from the fiery furnace; Jonas in the Whales belly, from the stormy
sea; and Paul with his Pilots, Mariners and Companions from perishing in the
Mediterranean seas: but what am I vile wretched sinner, whom thou have saved as
strangely from fire and water? O glorious God, is it because thy provident
majesty has predestined me to some worthy service tending to thy glory. O
bountiful Lord, of unsearchable wisdom, grant that my faith may be signed
with the seal of thy mercy. Let my spirit become regenerated and renewed, as
the Potters vessel, marked to an honest purpose. Whatsoever I am, whether
tolerably toward or untoward, tolerably clean or unclean, I wholly submit my
self at the feet of thy mercy, altogether depending on thy Sons merits, from
whence I will not depart, though I were sure with Asahel to be slain by Abner,
and as Job protested, if thou would kill me, yet will I trust in thee.

On the third of January 1608. about the third hour of the night, or
thereabouts, as I lay solitary 2
upon my bed, what with torment of a sudden toothache, and what with an
extraordinary pensiuenes of mind, presaging (as afterward ehanced) some
future evils; and also somewhat terrified with the great lightning, which then
flashed most extremely: Behold, a forcible lightning in form of a fiery
pillar, extinguished the Candlelight burning before me, and with that, as it
were in the twinkling of an eye, strikes me with a most violent blast, that I
verily thought my brains had been dashed out, and that I was at deaths door.
To confirm this imagination of mine, in the self same instant it thundered in
such impetuous and extreme manner, that the earth moved (as sithence appeared
in sundry other parts of this Realm) my house shook, in so much that I am
persuaded no canon no basilisco, nor any other artillery could make the like
terrible report. With this fearful volee together with the former lightning
flash, I fell into a kind of trance or confused thought, and (as Saint Paul
speaks of his assumption into paradise: if it be lawful for me so to say)
whether I were in the body, or out of the body, I cannot tell, God knows; but
I verily supposed to have 2 Corinthians. 12.
seen in spirit the warning-peece shot off for this worlds dissolution, or
final alteration against the general day of doom. Within half a quarter of
an hour or thereabouts (as I conjecture) I returned to my self, and to my
troubled senses at the loud cry, which two of my household, then being newly
awaked out of their senseless trance raised, in seeing my wife fallen on the
ground and dead among them. At this noise which they made, changing my
thoughts, I made full account, that my house had been thrown down with the
thunder clap or earthquake, and therefore astonished as I was, to save my life,
(being as I imagined, in that great ieopardy,) I rose up, and hastened me down
into the lower room or kitchen, where I had heard the cry. By the way, her
daughter, being one of the two, whose cry I had heard in my chamber, met me,
and told me that her mother was suddenly stricken dead. At my coming thither
into the kitchen, I found my wife quite deprived of life, in a blackish sweat,
strongly sauouring of brimstone, which the Poets call, sacrum Sulphur, holy
Sulphur, yet notwithstanding, least it might be a faint or swowne, I called for
help to my servants to have her body bent forewards: but at the first, none
directly understood me, excepting the two aboue-named, until afterward upon
our vehement lamentations and cries, the other three (for there were in all,
five, two men and three maids, besides my wife, in that room,) began by
little and little to come unto themselves, having been all in one instant
thrown down to the ground as dead with the lightning and thunder. Two of
these three last, at my first call and coming down, revived: but the other,
being a seruing-man of mine, lay longer in the trance. All of them stood as
deaf and distracted, not able for their lives a long while to lift up her dead
body. Some of them could neither hear nor understand what I spoke, nor what I
would have them do: their brains were so confusedly shaken in their heads,
that they could not for a long time answer me in reason. When this fatal blow
was given, my wife sat on a stool, ouer-seeing her maids melting of tallow.
And for this purpose, the Seruing-man of whom I spoke before, stood by her with
a candle in his hand. The Kettle of tallow lay very near unto her. Above the
place where she sat, just above her head, hung Bacon in the roof of the
house. All which being natural nutriments of lightnings, by reason of their
unctuous substances, increased the virtue thereof, and doubtless by the
predestinate will of our heavenly Father, occasioned this foreible dampe, and
perhaps augmented the earthquake. Her body was entire and whole without
diminution of any part, saving a little of her hair, which was rent or
snatched off with the attyres of her head, and her fillet, which were likewise
somewhat burnt, and also sauoured of brimstone. In like manner her stomacher,
her whale-bone bodies, and her smock near about her heart, where there was a
small mark somewhat black, were burnt, rent, and torn with the heavenly flame.
Perhaps her corpulence (she being very gross) caused her thus to be singled
and selected out from among the rest of the company. But leaving that
Philosophical opinion alone to the unsearchable knowledge of God, without
whose providence one hair cannot fall from our heads, I will proceed further
in declaring the tragical events which we found the next morning inflicted by
the lightning, thunder and earthquake.

The next morning (for all that night we durst not bouge from the same room,
so greatly had fear 3
seized on us) we saw all the tiles fallen for the most part from the house,
and some dispersed in heaps upon the house. We found the chimney top of the
chamber where I lay, quite cast down: part of the waightier stones tumbled
through the chimney down into my chamber, yea, and round about the bed where I
lay at the time of this fatal blast, to the great astonishment of all that saw
it: and surely it is miraculous how I escaped alive, unhurt, or vnscorcht in
this terrible time of horror. Two glasse-windowes were also burnt with the
lightning, whereof the one was a window by my beds feet: the other on the loft
right above my chamber, and above my bed. Besides, three other glassewindowes
were battred and bruised with the thunder or earthquake. Above a dozen breaches
or rents were found pierced through the walls of the house, being almost four
foot thick, and as strongly built, as could be of lime and stone. Also one of
the beams was somewhat removed from the place. And that which seems as
strange, a fat Cow amidst many other Kine in the stable, was culled out and
killed, or rather stifled with the Lightning: which induces me (as I said
before) to think, that this dampe took strength and power according to the
nature thereof, from such fat, liquide, and oily substances or bodies. This
opinion her self verified unto me about a fortnight before she dyed, when she
caused all the candles in her house to be done out, for fear least the
lightning, which at that time was somewhat fearful, should increase and
receive force from the candle light. Yet with this limitation do I attribute
such matter of vnctuositie and virtue to lightnings from these inferior
bodies, that God who works by measure, number, and weight, sends these or such
like kinds of fate upon us to admonish us not to make reckoning of this world,
as of a perpetual Paradise, nor to sleep ouer-long in the voluptuous bosom
of careless negligence.

Neither ought I (seeing I have gone so far) to 4
conceal another wonder, to wit, that she fore-tolde in her life time, as well
to diverse others, as to my self the shortness of her life in this world: for
this was an usual speech of hers sundry times within the same quarter of the
year that she dyed: I know very well (quoth she) I cannot live till the first
of March. Another time, being (as I remember) not above three weeks before her
death, descending down from her chamber, where then she had been at prayers,
she came smiling unto me with these words: Husband, I bring you good tidings,
you shall be rid of me, and you shall have another wife: for I am fully
assured, that I shall dye very shortly, and that before the first of March. And
I thank God, I am prepared; let him send when he will. Which words of hers
being by me accepted in jest; she replied, as if she had seen a vision, or
felt some extraordinary motion in her spirit: you think I speak in jest, but
mark the end.

Neither did the Lord (I speak it to his glory) send this glorious alarm unto
me without an implicit or mystical premonition, for about two Months
before, or thereabouts (as far as I remember) in a dream I saw the very like
accident. Me thought I was at a Knight my brothers house, and there lying upon
my bed, I imagined to have seen and heard upon the sudden in the night time a
most terrible lightning and thunder, in such wise, that I made full account the
whole house had been burnt or cast down, and therefore to save my life, with
much ado I hastened out of doors, where I supposed to have beheld the inner
part of the house terribly flaming with fire, and presently after I might see
one conueying out of doors a Chest; whereupon I bewailed, that a black
Truncke of mine, stored with money was left behind, consumed with the flame.
This dream I related to my said Brother, being at my house about three weeks
before the accident, and wished him in my brotherly love to look somewhat more
warily to his house, least night fires might endanger him, by reason of the
height of his house (the same not inferior for height to any house which I
have seen) and likewise by reason of the partitions being timber-worke
Nevertheless for all this, I advise not the Reader to embrace this dream of
mine for an infallible president, because that dreams sort our commonly
according to the diet, temperate, or intemperate, sparing, or gluttonous, which
men use. And yet I believe, God seldom uses to inflict any notable accident
upon a charitable Christian, that mortifies his body with competent fasting,
and moderates his soul with contemplation of heavenly mysteries, without some
secret prodrome, or fore-running glimpse of his powerful purpose. Nor do I
advise my Reader to surmise, that I conceive over credulously or
superstitiously of Morph^us or Phobetor, the Poetical Gods of dreams, as
necessary causes of notorious effects. For my sentence is none otherwise of
dreams, then of Comets, and Eclipses, which likewise are not the causes of
remarkable events; but only such signs and tokens are as smoke at the top of
a chimney, or as an Iuie bush, put forth at a vintrie, the one prognosticating
fire within, the other the sale of wine.

Thus it pleased the glorious Lord of lightnings, to extend his miraculous
mercy toward me, and perhaps 5.
to leave me (as a firebrand taken out of the burning, or as Ezechiels sign)
for a testimony of his lightning glory Am^s 4.
to hardened hearts. This is the second miracle, whereby as a virbius or
Rediuiu^s, I acknowledge my self twice restored from death to life, within the
compass of seven years, even about the self same season of the year, when
our Savior Christ became flesh for the salvation of flesh. The first time of
my deliverance was upon a Christmas day, 1602. This latter time on the third
of January, 1608. and both upon a Tuesday. In France betwixt Tremblado and
Marena, a passage of two leagues over, it was my chance, on a Christmas day to
be stricken into the surging Sea with the boistrous force of a cruel tempest,
where I had no sooner fallen, and cried to the Lord for help but suddenly
beyond all expectation I found an Oar between my hands to defend, or rather
defer my life. And to this hour I cannot devise where-hence the said Oar
should chance unto me. In this doleful sort I floated almost a quarter of an
hour very often tossed and ouerturned with the furious rolling of the stormy
waves: until it pleased God at length of his exceeding bounty in that rough
tempestuous weather, when the proudest ship became humbled as the weakest reed,
to direct the course of that small Bark from whence I fell, toward me, and
to guide the Mariners hands (as a man would say against wind and weather,
against Oars and Sails) for the haling me up in a manner dead and ready to
forsake the Oar. So that I may boldly say, that I have been miraculously
preserved both from fire and water.

Sic coniurati veniunt ad classica venti. Claudian. detertio Consulatu Honorij.

So winds coniur'd descended to our sails.
And if it were lawful for me to apply those Meeters in the Psalter destinated
to our Savior Christ's resurrection, I would sound out with joyful cheer:

Thus from above the Lord sent down
to fetch me from below: Psalm. 18.

And pluck^ me out of waters great,
which would me ouerflowe.
I would also with Jonas the Prophet, exhibit my submissiue petition unto the
Lord my Savior: Thou did Iona. 3.
cast me down into the deep, into the midst of the sea, and the floods
compassed me about: all thy billows and waves passed over mec. And I said, I
am cast away out of thy sight, yet will I look again toward thine holy
Temple. Here, I could lay down how his omnipotent Majesty respected me in all
my travails both by land and water. Twice I passed the Pyrenaean Mountains
betwixt France and Spain, and that in the dead of Winter. Twice I travailed
over the Alps, I escaped the Banditi in Italy, robberies in Hungary, and in
other foreign Countries. All which deliverances

Per varios casus, per to^ discrimina r^rum. Virg. Aenaeid. 1.


Through diverse straights, through dangers infinite.

Ordinary and extraordinary I ascribe to no other destenie or fortune, then
to the great Redeemer of the Exodus 24.
world, the mighite Lord, strong, merciful, gracious, slow to anger, abundant
in goodness and truth, reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity,
transgression, and sin. From whom I confess this last lightning Tragedy to
be sent, as a preparatiue for me and others. In like manner I confess, it was
profitable for my souls health, that God after this dreadful fashion, rouzed
me up out of my Tent of security. For indeed I lived almost as careless, as
Sardanapalus, bewitched with worldly ease; but now I thank my gracious Lord,
mine eyes begin to open, my soul begins to see her faults. God give me grace
to persevere in this acknowledgement, and to ascribe the glory unto him alone.

LINEAMENT. XIIII.
1 The spirit of Detraction connicted for censuring the Lords secret judgments.

2 The Authors imperfections acknowledged.

3 His meditation on his late crosses.

NOtwithstanding the premises, the spirit of Detraction is ready to read a
cruel 1
lecture to prattling Momes and tatling Niobes, that doubtless the punished
party was either very vicious himself, or else his wife or parents had
offended God in the highest degree. O my Friends, be not so curious in your
censures. In that ye judge others ye condemn your selves, for ye that judge
do the same Romans 2.
things. Judge not least ye be judged. And as for the scornful, does not the
Lord laugh them to s^^rne? Why Proverb. 3.
then do ye scorn and scoff at your neighbors harms, whereof God is the
Author? who is he that blesses, that curses, that rewards, that punishes?
Is it not he the Lord? why then detract ye from his unsearchable secrets? Why
endeavor ye to usurp his peculiar prerogative? We are persecuted, but not
forsaken, 2 Corinthians. 4.
we are cast down, but we perish not. Our mortal bodies for a time return to
dust, but our souls rest in Abraham's bosom. It pleased the Lord to smite his
righteous Esai. 53. 54.
servant with infirmity, to forsake him, and to be angry with him for a
little season: but at last he pardoned him, as the Prophet forespake of Christ.

For all this my defense, the spiteful spirit of Detraction 2
relents not at all. By reason of another extraordinary judgment, he
charge me strictly with impiety. Is not (quoth he) thy wickedness great,
and thine iniquities Job 22.
innumerable? Therefore snares are round about thee, fear suddenly troubles
thee. Does not God revenge the Fathers sins upon the children to the third
and fourth descent? O menstruous or rather monstrous absurdity! Though my
talk be this day in bitterness, and my plagues Job 23.
greater then my groaning: yet will I undertake to control thine error, and
confute thine heresy. All souls Ezechiel 18.
are mine, says the Lord, both the soul of the Father and the soul of the
Son. The same soul that sins shall dye, The Son shall not bear the
iniquities of the Father, neither shall the Father bear the iniquity of the
Son. For Ibid.
mine own part, I confess my self to be chief among sinners, but yet much
wronged to become subject unto your detracting judgments. Ye are none of my
Judges: I appeal to Caesar's judgment seat. I appeal to the King of Kings,
the King of Mercy, who will reuerse by a writ of error your false usurped
judgments. Psalm. 130.
If thou Lord wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss: O Lord who may
abide it? Woe be unto us, August. lib. 9. Confess. cap. 13. Proverb. 20.
woe, W^e, be to the most laudable life that we lead, if thou O Lord, setting
thy mercy aside should examine it. Who can say, I have made my heart clean,
I am pure from many sins? Does the blind accuse the blind? Does an old
senex fornicatour accuse another fornicatour? Number Luscus accusat Luscum,
Clod^us M^^chum? And does the spirit of Detraction the most sinful spirit of
all spirits, detect me for sinning? Well, my confession is not auricular, but
openly reiterated: If I wash my self in snow water, and purge my hands most
clean, yet shall thou Job 9.
plaegue me in the pit, and mine own clothes will make me silihie. Mine own
fleshly vveedes being tainted with longing thoughts, must sing a sorrowful
peccaui, to the tune of stoop gallant. And unfeignedly to use Saint Paul's
words: I allow not that which I do, for what I would, that Romans 7.
I do not, but what I hate that do I. Albeit that oftentimes I have a will to
do well, yet the nature of my flesh not any wise able to be expelled with the
forke of mine own naked reason, confounds this ready will of mine, and
causes me to commit more sins in number then the sands of the sea. All which
with a contrite mind I submit to the mercy of God, craving most humbly on the
knees of my heart in the lowest degree of reverence, my Redeemers merits as the
veil of grace, to stand betwixt his divine Justice, and their gore-bloud
guiltiness.

But certainly in my poor judgment God took away mine innocent wife after
the aboue-said manner (for 3
though I say it, and all her acquaintance will say as much as I, that she lived
as godly and as honestly as any whatsoever in all her Country) not so much for
my sins, though the same might be grievous, as for that all others might
prepare themselves against their nuptials with Christ Jesus, remembering that
prophecy concerning Babylon, who said in her heart: I shall be a Lady for
ever, I am, and none else, I shall not sit as a widow, neither shall I know
the Esai. 47.
loss of Children. But thus said the Lord, These two things shall come unto
thee suddenly in one day, the loss of children and widdowhood. O Lord of
infinite judgment, widdowhood is suddenly come unto me, thou have justly
visited me, and bercaued me of my chiefest comfort. Thou knew she was too
good for me. Thy will be done, O mighty Lord. Let the infusion of thy grace
into mine untoward soul recompense my grief and loss. Thy grace is
sufficient for me, thy power is made perfect through weakness. When we are
most 2 Corinthians. 14.
perplexed with worldly crosses, then is thy spirit strongest in us. And even
as the souls virtue is strengthened with infirmity, so certainly it is
necessary for our licentious natures now and then to be curbed with
infirmities. It is necessary for us, that sin the messenger of Satan, do
other whiles buffet us, and bruise our earthly heels. It is necessary that
malice bridle or rather prick, as with sharp pointed Needles, our detracting
wanton thoughts: whereby we might remember our own weak condition, and turn
to God, who alone is without infirmity. Let me do what good I can, let me
endeavor as much as is possible for flesh and blood to endeavor, yet I shall
prove but an unprofitable servant, I am black like an Ethiopian, nay I am
more black, my very teeth are black; My soul is all spotted, all guilty of
uncleanness. Only my belief is that thy Grace is more abundant then tongue
can speak, or heart can think, or pen can paint.

LINEAMENT. XV.
The Authors gratulatorie Prayer unto the Lord for the aboue-said wondrous
effects.

O Lovely Light, O Lord of Majesty, how ouer-late do I begin to know thee?
My well-beloved put in his hand by the Cant. 5.
hole of my door, offering to breath faith into my soul. But such was my
dulnes, such my drowsinesse, that I could not once sigh, sobbe, nor say, Abba
Father, O my Father, Romans 8.
I have sinned against heaven and against thee. Yea, thou were in the superior
part of my heart, and I neglected thee. Thou did call me both within and
without, and I rejected thee. I rejected the Wellspring of living water, and
resorted to noisome cisternes of puddle worte, full of wormwood comforts, full
of tickling hopes, which were speedily spent: for all worldly comforts and
vain hopes do vanish away like wind. And yet, it pleased thy lightsome
Spirit, O Lord of life, after many a scorching Summers attendance, after many a
frozen Winters watching, expecting my conversion, to knock again most
patiently at the door of my soul, and thus to call unto her while she slept
so carelessly: Open unto me, my sister, my love, my dove: for my head is full
Cant. 5.
of d^^r, and my locks with the drops of the night. Again, and again, it
pleased thee to inuit me after this manner: Return, O thou rebellious
child, and I will heal thy Ierem. 3.
rebellions: for even as a woman has rebelled against her Ierem 20.
husband, so have thou rebelled against me. How dease is he that hears not
such a voice? A voice more vehement then the sound of many waters. How deeply
sleeps he, Apot. 11.
that is not wakened with such a morning vvatch, with such a melody? A
melody more musical then ever Tuball, Amphion, or Arion could possibly
conceive, When all thy creatures combined against me, in revenge of my
disloyalty toward thy sacred sovereignty, thou did temper their fiery
fury, thou did moderate their biting bitterness. The four Elements, which
thou made for my conservation, conspired all to root my being out of the
Land of the living. The Air threatened to taint my breathing with contagious
smells, with Stigian stinckes. The Fire assayed to burn my brutish body. The
Water strove with might and maine to ouerwhelme me utterly. The Earth
endeavored before her time to abridge my luxurious life; And all because I had
offended their great Creator. But thou more merciful then thy creatures, for
the love of thy Name, and for the love of thy Son, did control all their
practices, and confound the devises of the Devil himself. How happy am I, that
thou prolongst my days? how kind art thou that sparest to spill the blood of
thy very foes? O kindness without desert! O courtesy without comparison!

Behold behold, ye mortals all, how the Lord has delivered me from the
danger, nay, from the dungeon of death, from sudden death. The God of glory
has defended me from Thunder and Lightning, from water and fire. O what
oblation can the poor Samaritan^ sacrifice unto his sacred Majesty, for these
his wondrous works?

Ille magis gratae laetatur mentis odore
Quam consecrato sanguine mill boum:
Nam prece non alio gaudet honor Deus.
God better loves a thankful mind,
then many Oxens blood:
For poor men's prayers he preferres
before the rich and proud.
Seeing thankfulness is such a sweet smelling odor in his sacred no strils,
let me proclaim his glorious Name, Alleluiah, Osanna in the Highest. Blessed
be the name of his heavenly Highness, blessed in heaven, blessed on earth, and
blessed throughout all ages. The Lord be blessed for evermore, which has
enlightened me in the darksome shadow of errors, which has enlarged me from
a world of perils, which has recalled me failing, which has raised me
falling, which has recovered me running almost out of breath, from falling
and fainting. Let all Nations perform their duties, let them praise the Lord:
for it is he, that commands Psaime 29.
the waters: It is the glorious God that makes the Thunder: It is the Lord
that rules the sea: The voice of the Psalm 77.
Lord is a glorious voice: the voice of the Lord breaks the Cedar trees; yea,
the voice of his thunder was heard round about, the lightning shone upon the
ground. The Earth was moved and shook withal: his way is in the sea, and his
paths in the great waters. Applaud him, O my soul, applaud his magnificent
Majesty. Let his laud be ever in thy thoughts. Let all thy faculties, all thy
attributes and operations spread themselves as blooming Vines round about my
heart, my brain, my tongue, that the same may become as the pen of a ready
writer, to sound out and resound his most puissant power.

Others according to the altitude of his judgments, he cutteth off by untimely
death: but me he spares alive, as a monument of his living mercy. O what had
become of me, if thou had cited me likewise at that horrible hour before
thy tribunal throne of Justice? O my Savior, I thank thee for thy peerlesse
patience, I praise thee, though basely and barely in respect of thy benefits, I
adore thee, I honor thee, I humble my self before thee all the days of my
life: I return, I repair unto thee, not haltingly, not hollowly, but holily
(I would I could say wholy) all the days of my life. O give me grace, help
my weakness heal mine unbelief.

LINEAMENT. XVI.
1 The Conclusion of this present Circle, consecrated by the Author to his
Wives memory.

2 The Application of her memorable death.

3 The Authors Apology against the Spirit of Detraction, on the be^a^se of
this present Circle, where his Wives memory is saluted with a Christian
Farewell.

INgenuous Reader, hitherto after the example of Antimachus, who composed a
Book in the commendations of his wife Lydia, have I labored to eternize my
dear wives memory, to the end and intent that when the Spirit of 'Detraction
(as the Sorcerers rod was swallowed up by Aarons rod) is consumed to nothing,
and when his lying mates do dye, and lie ingloriously in rotten earth, the
world shall find, that she lives for ever among the living inuita inuidia,
in despite of envy, that she flourishes like a Palm tree, which the more it
is suppressed, the more returns upwards, consonant to that of the Wiseman;
The memorial of the just shall be blessed, but the name of the wicked shall
rot. Her memorable end anatomized and Proverbs 10.
embalmed in this my bookish coffin, shall yield odoriferous perfumes of her
mild, meek, and modest life, to the sence-pleasing comfort of the elected
innocent. And that I may record the memory of her end Allegorically with the
Poet:

Etumulo vi^lae, fortunat aque fauilla
Nascentur, cippusque, leuis sua cont^get ossa.
Out of her grave fine Violets shall bloome,
And a light stone shall her sweet bones entombe.
Thus out of my miseries, as out of the ashes of a burnt Phoenix, is built a
beacon of living miracles, which I humbly pray his heavenly Highness, among
other suppliants of his, that they may effect in me, what a more radiant light
effected in Saint Paul, namely, the illumination of a dark conscience. For
when my body (like a bowl) was carried about with the bias of concupiscence
and my soul rockt a sleep in the cradle of worldly security, by Satan's
enchanting lullabies, then my Lord, that saw me so misse-led, like unto
Salomons fool, laughing, when indeed I had more cause to weep: then my loving
Lord, I say, took compassion on my foolish falls, and gave me a sound pinch, or
prick in the flesh, that started and stirred up all my reasonable faculties to
consider more iudiciously, in what a case I stood both body and soul. What
better use of this temptation can I produce, then that thy death dear wife,
like Elishaes bones, which revived a dead corse, has wrought a double
miracle; the one in thy translation, the other in my conversion? then that this
lightning Accident has enlightened both our souls. Thine it preferred into
Paradise; mine it prepares for Paradise: thy soul (as a type of zeales
flame,) it purified actually, secundum passionem; mine it purifieth
potentially, secundum propassionem. Thus both of us do stand as monuments to
the Church here on earth; the one as a relicke richer then Mausolus his Tomb,
the other as a public notarie, reserved to sound out the wonders of the great
God, and to transcribe unto after-ages thy extraordinary end.

If the Spirit of Detraction reply, that I intend a needless labor to embalme
a dead carcass with such costly 3
ointment; saying, what needed this waste? Lo, I return his envious demand
this vnparalel'd answer of our Savior: I did it to bury her. It is to
perform the last obsequies of her funeral: that wheresoever the Gospel is
sincerely preached throughout this Land, there also these Circles of mine
(whereof her memory, next under God, was the motive) may be read, as a mirror
of Gods miracles, as a memorial of her living virtues, and as a monument
toward her of my kind affection. It is the last solemnity, the last precious
ointment which I can pour upon her head, the last Adieu, the last office of
good will, which I can accomplish for her sake. This kind of Epitaphes in
honor of the dead, an holy Father highly commends: It is piety (says he)
to publish the deceaseds virtues, yea, it is a means to increase grace in our
Nazian. in monod. Basil.
own selves. Therefore let no man blame me, because I erect these
paper-statues to the glory of my deceased wife, seeing that many others of
nobler endowments have endeavored to illustrate their dead friends. It is not
long since that famous Gentleman, Phillip Mornay Lord of Plessis, mourned in
the like manner for the death of his only son, who of late was slain with a
musket shot at the siege of the City Geldre, under Grave Maurice: which
doleful Catastrophe he set out in a little book called Du Plessis tears,
written to his wife Charlotte Baliste; why then should I fear thy shadowie
prickles, O spiteful Spirit? In praising her, from whom have I detracted?
Down therefore, down with thy malicious stings, and interrupt me not in my
zealous offices; while I betake my self to the mournful accents of a voice
almost stopped with throbs of grief, while also I sacrifice my last gratuities
unto her sacred spirit, interrupt me not: Adieu thou servant of Christ, thou
pattern of piety. Adieu thou map of Gods miracles. Adieu my love, my joy, my
comfort. Adieu, and rest thee henceforth among the heavenly roses, rest in
peace for ever free from the thorns of malice. Adieu again and again. Adieu
Elizabeth my wife for a while, and welcome sweet Jesus my Savior for ever.

THE SEVENTH CIRCLE OF THE SPIRIT OF DETRACTION, CONIVRED AND CONVICTED.
LINEAMENT. I.
1 That the spirit of Detraction can never annoy us, while the Majesty of
Justice shines upon us.

2 The Authors supplication to the Lord Chancellor of England, the Lord
President of Wales, and to all other his Maiestics Judges of Record within this
Monarchy of Great Britain, for the extirping out of notorious Blasphemics.

3 The Spirit of Detractions craft in molesting his Majesty's inferior
Officers.

4 His diabolical craft in wronging of private persons.

5 The Authors Conclusion to the aboue-sayd Lords, for reformation of the said
abuses.

HOW amiable shows thy face (O Queen of Uertues) when the 1
light of Majesty shines upon thee! Even as amiable shows thy face as the
face of an Angel, as the face of Moses, which he was feign to veil by reason
of his bright-shining beauty, after he had seen a glimpse of Gods glory.
When thou sit equally in thy throne of state, with the balance in one
hand, and the sword in the other hand: how worthy then to beadored, being so
adorned, so transfigured in glory, with the three Apostles on Mount Tabor!
While this balance lasts even the Lamb may dwell with the Wolf without
dread or doubt. While this sword of Justice hangs over Caines head, as it
sometimes hung over Damocles his head by a slender thread, his younger brother
Abell may walk innocent in his vocation, and cheerfully sacrifice his
oblation of thanksgiving, sounding out this dittie of the princely Psalmist: I
will sing of Mercy and Judgment, unto thee, O Lord, will I sing. The careful
Magistrate need not fear the sword Psalm. 101.
of Ismael, which is a reuiling tongue. Jacob after his three apprentiships
under Laban, may travel upon the Kings highway toward his native home,
secured from his eldest brother Esaus sword. Moses may exercise his office with
alacrity and courage, notwithstanding the rebellious muttering of Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram. In this golden age of Justice, 'Dauid may manifest his
zeal, and joyfully dance before the Lord's Ark for all the scornful flouts
of Michol, or the scolding speeches of Semci. Now he cares not for his emulous
and envious adversaries, who to some out the dregs of their minds subborned
false witnesses, laying to his charge those Psalm. 35.
things which he never knew. In this flourishing time Mephibosheth triumphs
over his servant Zibaes scandalous accusation. While this thy balance, O
sacred Justice, or this thy sword, the one as a cause indented to lead the use
of thy fine, the other as a final concomitance or statute staple to establish
thy euer-stable Judgments, or while both of them together, as Causa and
Causatum, two friendly Correlatiues do follow the strict contents of their
Commission of Oier and Terminer, the injurious imputations of Potiphars wife
can never impeach chaste Joseph; nor can the snarling and doggish letter R,
redoubled out of Doegs nostrils impair the credit of Abimelech. Neither can
Iezabels letter produce seduced testimony against Naboth, nor can the Rulers
of Babylon work the ruin of Daniel. Rejoice, thou daughter of Israel,
renowned Susanna, for the Elders which accused thee are overtaken in their own
snares; they are found in contrary tales. While this seat of Justice stands
sincere, without stain, without sicklenesse, Stephen may boldly reprove the
sins of our lawless Libertines without fear of forged witnesses, or
clamorous suggestions, that he blasphemed God and Moses. So full of efficacy
is the influence of Justice, when her bright beauteous body is countenanced
with the glorious aspects of Prudence and Magnanimity, the attributes of the
Eternal Majesty, that presently the Spirit of Detraction with all his black
Guard of sin will disperse themselves to nothing, as a company of bragging
Waspes at the violence of Northren wind. There flocked sometimes out of this
fluttering swarm innumerable, to bear down the reputation of Ionathas with
his Prince: but what became of them, and of their runnagate slanders? as soon
as they heard the sound of King Alexanders Trumpet, proclaiming Ionathas to be
the Kings friend, and him for this cause to be clothed in purple, and to wear
a collar of gold, they vanished away, like Waspes or Bees, leaving not so much
as one of their stings behind to offend that renowned Macchabee.

Right Honorable, and prudent Senators, (to whom the Sun of this mighty
Monarchy has imparted 2
part of his powerful authority, to judge the Tribes thereof) I have
purposely framed this preface toward your patient spirits, that thereby your
Honors may discern the anguish of my sick soul, which labors (like a woman
intrauaile) to discharge her long and toilesome load. Non quaero quod mih^
v^ile, sed quod multis. I sue not only for my self, though (perhaps) my
particular grief is such that it may cry for vengeance unto the highest
heaven, but on the behalf of many thousands, who moan and groan under the
weight of a little Devil, the Tongue of Sin. In what measure this Tyrant
lauisheth and lordeth, I am not able to express in words significant, seeing
that it passes the power of any one modest Writer to comprehend the sway and
swing of spiritual monsters. Amidst the incessant complaints of so many
Subjects, who continually (like Jobs messengers) solicit your wisdoms with
their frequent informations, besides your own trials, your Honors may enquire
from one to one, and observe from day to day, how many zealous persons find
themselves agrieued out of Court, and in Court, even from his Majesty's starrie
Court, to the least and base Court. Out of Court at Ordinaries, at gossipping,
at Tauernes, at Tobacco-taking, a man shall hear nothing but Detractions,
nothing but contumelies and lies, nothing but captious and carping speeches.
When they are wantonly weary with iearing, with ieasting one at another, with
tearing their neighbors good name and fame with their taunting tongues, like
unto Delphick swords, and with diversities of scandals worse then the prints of
scourges: then they fall to swearing, to swaggering, and to blaspheming of
their Lord and Father in Heaven, in stead of hallowing his holy name. O times!
O iniquity! If God be their Father, where is his honor? If he be their Lord,
where is his reverence?

To you (judicious Lords) as the watchful Sentinels, or rather the wise
Surgeons of our State, it belongs betimes, even before the darkest night of
errors steals upon us, to provide for corrosiues and cauterismes against
these ugly ulcers, which ranckle within the body of our Commonweal. Since it
has pleased his Royal Highness to communicate part of his light unto you,
whereby every one of you might move in his place, not naturally ab orient ad
occasum, but supernaturally from Nature to the Author of Nature, I beseech
your Lordships in the lowest degree of reverence, by virtue of this your
heavenly motion, your vertuall Influence, and irradiation, to dissolve such
clouds of Detractions, into dismal showers upon the Detractours heads,
according to that of the Princely Prophet: they have dug a pit for others,
and have fallen into the m^ast of it themselves. They sought to bemire and beray
their honest neighbors with their legends nay, with their legions of lies,
intending to set them upon the stage of scorn on the scaffold of scurrility,
and there to cloth them with reproach and shame, not unlike those spiteful
Jews, which plaited on our Saviors head a Crown of th^rnes, crown to delude
him, thornie prickles to torment him. By virtue of your authorities, your
starrie motions, let such clouds and vapors be dispersed into whole floods of
vengeance upon the Spirit of Detraction. Let their bodies feel the smart of
your sword, whose wilful Wills will not relent with the weight of your
balance. If other men's examples serve not to bridle their untoward tongues,
let their own estates pay the ransom of their contempts.

While such monstrous sins bear dominion among us, never let your wisdoms
think, that your Officers 3
of inferior ranks dare execute in that proportionable expectation your
monitorie directions, your wholesome rules for the repressing of ryots, for the
restraining of unruliness, as otherwise they would, were they assured of
protection. While Periurers and petti^ogging Promootors range up and down at
their pleasure, never let your Honors look but for unequal proceedings, and
unjust presentiments at our neighbors hands. But some one will object, that the
Courts of Justice lie open as well for the basest as for the noblest Subject;
neither will our laws permit a private person to lay violent hands on an
Outlaw, or on him which is attainted of Praemunire: so equal a reference
bears Justice toward subjects of all conditions. By these reasons Perjury
fortifies it self against the open face of Truth. Yet notwithstanding,
whosoever ponders more pregnantly the present state of our public weal,
comparing the same with that of the old world, shall find that our present
policy had need of further muniments to underprop it; least also your
Atlantic shoulders become weary, or to speak more properly, least your
vp-streatch'd hands (like those of Moses) might fail at length in their
important charge. Though God (I confess) has ordained the Sun to shine upon
the ungodly, as upon the Godly, and as the Preacher wrote, All things come alike
to all. The same condition is to the Ecclesiast. 9.
just and the wicked, to the pure and impure, to him that sacrifices, and to
him that does not sacrifice. Though the Lord created them all alike, in respect
of outward endowments or accidental means, yet notwithstanding he has
severed them, specially in the second life, entitling the Innocent as Lambs,
and the reprobate as Goats, the one as good seed, the other as tares, the one
for Heaven, the other for Hell. The like distinction I could wish to be
practiced among those Judges, which either take or hope themselves to be
partakers of that second life; so that all notorious lewd members might be
excluded (if it were possible) from molesting of quiet spirits. To this
purpose, after a sort our late Parliament provided a countermining order for
the speedy dispatch and trial of suites commenced against Officers at the
Common law. But so it is (Right Honorable) that these Caterpillars implead a
bar in this final concordance: for if your Officers come accompanied with
honest neighbors, to search or suppress suspicious people, or else to
apprehend disturbers of his Majesty's peace: these wicked ones apparel
themselves in the robes of subtlety, and with the help of mercenarie tongues,
laying an ambush for Justice, they surmise with Aesops Wolf, that the poor
Lamb in forcible and riotous manner mudded the Well, where water was usually
drawn for their Lordly mouths. This offense by their Sathanicall inventions
being exorbitant, and beyond the capacity of the Common law, they frame their
suggestions before your Honors, in hope that their suites by reason of the
manifold affairs, which distract your diligent minds, shall hang unheard for
two or three years space; within which term they will work means to
compromit their said frivolous suites, or else by tossing and tiring their
Adversaries too and fro with tedious travailing, to end them at home for their
credit and advantage.

If an honest man has a sum of money due unto him by Obligation, the Party
indebted not able to 4
spare it by reason of his ouer-lau^sh expenses in apparel, wenches, and such
inordinate vanities, and seeing no shift at the Common law to avoid the
payment, confederates with two or three of the Devils consort, bare legged
vagrants (those whom Homer termed houselesse and Tribelesse) and uses the
forfeit of their souls for his temporal advantage, and for the hindrance of
his Creditours in his Majesty's Court of Chauncerie. Does a Landlord demand the
occupation of his own and native freehold, requiring the Tenant either to
compound for a longer term, or to leave it unto his dispose? Presently these
wrangling wretches with bread and cheese in their scrips run headlong to the
Counsel of the Marches, where upon affidauit of their three years possession,
and afterward upon proof by some of these damned crew, that they contracted
with their Landlord for a lease paroll, though such an Act was never done, or
perhaps done for some other consideration of import, they procure either orders
to continue their possessions for the said supposed and deposed term, or
until they be expulsed by virtue of verdict at the Common law: where also by
reason of these vilipendious varlets testimonies, they win the garland of their
forged suits. O the perfidiousnesse of false and faithless hearts, that thus
rashly run into the lake of fire and brimstone! These inconveniences happen
daily, to the impairing and impeaching of our temporal fortunes. Yea and which
is most detestable among Christians, these treacherous Iudasses and impious
Impes of Satan combine together against our credites, which some of us value
beyond Craessus his treasury, and some other times against our lives, which as
Tenants in capite we hold from the King of Kings.

These abominations of my native Country here I 5
submit before your eyes of Justice, that the same may serve as additions of
examples unto your manifold experience, whereby your Honors may conceive or
rather recall to memory, what terrible tempests do daily encounter your
inferior Ministers and others his Majesty's well disposed subjects;
notwithstanding that you know already better then a thousand such as I am,
that there is no sign more certain, that men are virtuous, then to see them
hated of the vicious; for imminent envy ever persecutes eminent virtue. Good
my Lords, employ your uttermost endeauours for the extirping of these accursed
actions. The more pains ye take in this weighty business, the more
conspicuous crown of Honor shall you wear in the Heavenly City, even by His
appointment, who (though invisible to the eyes of flesh and blood) stands in
the assembly of the Gods, and Psalm. 82.
judges among the Gods, that is, in the midst of you, O earthly Judges, which
likewise that Holy man protested, saying, that his eyes are with Kings and
Princes in the Job 36.
throne. And another confirms the same with a reason: for ye execute not
the judgments of man, but of God. 2 Chr^n.
To this end, that the laws of this land may not further be injured by the
Spirit of Detraction, let his counterfaite Castor and Pollux be crushed in the
egg, his rancour repelled, and his rage repressed in the beginning of his
reign: for if Satan's surmised suites were blasted in the blossom, the rest
of his snakie Spirits would presently sneake away into their bottomless home.
If the lips of our Satyrciall Semeies were seared as a subjects lips in
France were seared with a hot Iron for his petulant speeches, when they
transgress, and transcend the bounds of obedience, then surely would they
yield their hearts with greater awe and civility to the Balance and Sword of
Justice. If their tongues were tempered toward your subordinate Ministers,
they would with greater reverence respect your higher authorities, as the
resemblance of his Majesty's person, yea, of God himself.

But some will say, that these sons of Detraction, cannot so soon cashiere there
blasphemies, periuries, and slanderous suggestions, by reason of a continual
cankred custom, which they derive into their wills ever from their cradle in
their education and conversation. For confirmation of this fallacy, they
insist on the Locrensian law, on the state of our bodies, which may not brook
innovation nor breach of custom, the same being (as Physicians hold) another
nature. With the sophistry of this untempered mortar (Right prudent Lords) our
Momists use to daube over their gross errors as though the conversion of a
corrupted custom were the peruersion of an authenticke Law. The alteration of
our customarie diet (I confess) seems raw and rough at first unto our crabbed
natures, but within a while after, it turns to the benefit of the Patient,
where the custom is refined or reduced into a better; for what is Custom
without Truth? none other then as meat without salt; an old wives fable, and
an old doting sin. Whatsoever savors not of Faith is sin. The word of God
admits not of wrangling policy; neither may we wrest it according to our
vvorldly devises. It is primitive, and contemnes mixture; it is pure, and hates
hypocrisy. The Lord has spoken, and his speeches shall stand for ever: Heaven
and Earth shall pass away, but the word of God shall never pass. Yea, one
day tells another, and one night certifieth another, that his spotless Spirit
abhorres those refractaryes, which blaspheme his hallowed Name, which bear
false testimonies against their neighbors.

But what am I that thus audaciously go about to confront your experience,
whose books of Judgments I am not worthy to open? What am I that seem (as
sus Mineruam) to instruct Nathans in Justice, Nestors in Counsels? Pardon my
trespass (virtuous Judges) as the Highest Judge has pardoned yours. As many
pieces of flesh (I speak it under your accustomed patience) do better the
pottage: so these aduisoes of mine, though ambitiously elated, (I know) cannot
hinder your grave proceedings. Let them go then, as little looking glasses for
Abcedarie nouices, whose ability perhaps in wit or purse will not serve to
get them mirroirs of a firmer substance.

LINEAMENT. II.
1 That after Controulement Instruction is necessary for them, that be
possessed with the Spirit of Detraction.

2 That Taciturnitie and Patience do conjure him down into hell.

FOrasmuch as the Detracting Spirit, and his 1
false feathered Eagles are unmasked, and discovered through the vvinde of Gods
Word, which before in this age of ours was (like an unfortunate Planet)
predominant over the Horoscope of our natiuities: it is high time that I
minister an Antidote or preservative against the precedent mischiefs, and
after controulement that I adioyne instruction* seeing both together are as
necessary for the variable will of man, as Phlebotomy for a Pleurisy or
Calenture. Every evil at the first budding is quickly extirped, but being
suffered for a while to run a lawless race vncurbed or uncorrected, it
becomes past cure. Even as wilde-fire or lightning having received
nourishment or matter to work upon by candlelight, tallow, or oily
substances, increases in a house, and there-hence would break into the next
house, and at last into the whole town, unless at the first inflaming it be
quenched with milk: so the Spirit of Detraction being suffered to creep into
an honest man's house (like Aesops unthankful Snake, which the innocent
husbandman saved from the chilling cold) and there, by negligence permitted to
infect some of the household, will at length not only enuenome the head of the
Family himself, but also empoyson the whole neighborhood, except at the
first his fiery force be extinguished with the milk of Taciturnitie and
Patience. Of this kind of milk, among other ingredients, is that Ointment
made, which the Apostle mentioned: ye have an ointment of him that is holy, and
ye know all things. Though 1 John 2.
Truth has taken off this false vizard, yet we must apply the fruits of
Truth for his further condemnation, and that other wicked Spirits may likewise
be kept back from planting themselves in the little world.

With Taciturnitie the Spirit of Detraction is choakt: with Patience the
Detracted conquereth the Detractour. 2
vincit qui patitur. In old time this kind of Spirit was coniured up by
unhallowed holy water, by massemonging miracles: now our Contrymen raise
him up by pots of good liquour, and pipes of Tobacco, therewith both day and
night profaining their bodies, which rather they ought to purify with
mortification, as the Temples of the Holy Ghost: for wanton flesh and blood
cannot inherit heaven. In old time his malice was sometimes allayed by
simplicity and superstitious singleness of mind: now he can never be put
down, and packt into hell without Taciturnitie and Patience: both which, if
thou. who read this Circle, do obtain at thy heavenly Fathers hand, thou
need not doubt of thy souls salvation, nor of silent sobriety.

LINEAMENT. III.
1 The description of Taciturnitie.

2 That the nature and quality of a man may be discerned by speech or writing.

3 That wise men in private may descant of their neighbors faults, so that the
same tend to edification.

ALbeit that Taciturnitie be a kind of 1
milk far more delicious then the Parac^lsians lac virginis, or false
Mahemets heavenly iunkets hard to come by, known but of very few, and those
sons of Art, whose chief Aphorism is to keep close their sovereign
receipts from vicious persons; I will notwithstanding adventure to disclose
what it is, borrowing the description thereof, out of Monsieur du Chesue his
Portraict de la sancte. Taciturnity is to hear and premeditate a thing well
and long, to be brief and short in his answers, that is, to speak little or
nothing. Taciturnite est bien and longuement oscouter, and premediter, estre
briese and court on ses responses, ascauoir, dire peu ou rien. This rare
medicine makes the Patient which takes it, to carry his mouth in his heart,
whereas Detraction causes men to bear their hearts in their mouths, to
deliver dregs with drink and to shoot their foolish boltes before that
discretion wills them. Which moved a certain wise man, that on a time was asked
by his Prince at a banquet, why he alone sat still like a fool without
parleying, thus pithily to answer: A fool (be it spoken under your Matesties
correction) can hardly hold his peace at a banquet: for as Solomon says, the
fool puts forth all his spirit, but a wise man deferreth Proverbs 29.
it afterward. O divine virtue! O discreet Taciturnitie! which resemblest the
patient Deity, which repellest hunger and thirst, which never renderest
grief, blame, nor shame.

Surely the best conjecture, which may be made of men's inclinations is by
speech or writing. Loquere vt te videam, speak that I may know thee, quoth
Socrates to a nouice of his: as for example, if thou hear one discourse
immoderately of fair women, fine apparel, of hauking, hunting and gaming; or
if thou hear him vaunt ouer-gloriously of his own vvorth, or speaking in
print, in inck-horne terms, thundering out sesquipedales, and
hornificabustulated metaphors, verborum bullas and ampullas, words of his own
bubled, or botled stamp; or if thou see him scribble disioynted phrases, and
lame Hyperboles, then note him for a vaineglorious fellow, a fantastical
Parrot, a golden Ass, led too much with the imaginatiue faculty. If his
common talk be of law cases, of lying Chronicles, of old wives fables, or if
he rips up pedegrees, repeating his own or his Kinsmans genealogy to
Cadwalader, to Brutus, to Saturn, to Noah, in all companies, and at all times
of honest mirth, observe him for an excellent memory, and vvithall for a
notable fool. If he waighs his words by the ounce, if he speaks seldom, or
not before a question be asked him, and if he regards circumstances, as the
dignity of the person with whom he talks, the place, the time, the nature of
the hearers, and the matter of speech, always using Gods name and authority
with submissiue reverence, knowing that his omnipotent Majesty hears every
word he speaks, then mark him for a man of understanding. He that will
learn to speak, must first learn to be silent: for as the Italian Proverb
teaches, l'huomo parlando poco e' annumerato fra i sauij. The man which
speaks little* is accounted among the wise. And as the Frenchman says, les
foullies plus courts sont les meilleures, the briefest sheets are the best.
Be a man never so vvitty, yet if he parleyes much, his tongue cannot choose but
err, and trip in some principal points: which (as another Italiaen writes)
will trouble the stomach more then ten grains of Antimoni^ or Stibium.
Conturbano piu lo stomacho que farebbon^ ^^eci grani de Antimonio. So that one
word out of square may blemish a man's whole reputation, and cause Zoylists to
descant and sit upon him perhaps while he lives. Neither can I excuse the
wisest Clerks, that they likewise be not sometimes subject unto the spirit of
Detraction, as that Learned Lord demonstrates: Men though otherwise grave and
learned, may err, either by mistaking principles, The Earl of North-hampton.
or giving too light ear unto false informations, which are rightly termed the
spectacles of Error: for God only searches the heart and raines. But what
censure will their own inckpot Senate yield of such jesting and Iybing,
nicking and nipping Paedantes, which cannot bridle their vvide mouthed
hackneys, namely, that such persons be but parliamenting Parasites, Pungitopian
peevish Momes, ridiculous Readers, Bacchanalian Parolistes, super-ingenious
Iayes, superficial flaunting fools, letting their tongues run before their
wits, without rhyme or reason, without matter or method: for as the Wiseman
writes, In many words there cannot Proverbs 10.
want iniquity. Notwithstanding all this, I am not so severe a Cynicke, neque
mihi cornea sibra est, nor are Persius in Satyr. 1.
my heart-stings so horny and hard-laced, as to banish all manner of
delightful discourses, to deceive away the time vvithall, for I grant that a
friend, an alter ego, may without impeachment of Detraction, or doubt of
Libelling, unlock the cabinet of closest counsels, and secretly confer with
his friend about those matters, which to report openly were flat against the
rules of Christian Charity, or Civil modesty. Yea, such is the sugared
torture, the sweet tormenting force, the natural influence of true Love, that
the Husband cannot conceal from his virtuous Wife, nor the wife from the
virtuous Husband, what novelties or rumors run, revel, and range abroad in
their neighborhood. According to which agrees that Italian saying; Ilcaldo
del letto dilegua souuente il ghiaccio della taciturnita, the heat of the bed
thawes oftentimes the ice of secrecy or Taciturnitie.

To conclude, with this indented covenant I approve the secret scanning of
other men's actions among 3
wise friends, provided that the same may redound to their mutual example,
that it may serve them for a president or booke-case for the souls edifying,
and afterward that such speeches lie privily entombed within the coffin of
their hearts.

LINEAMENT. IIII.
1 That Patience is policy in Detractions. 2 An exhortation to patience. 3 An
objection of the Detracted. 4 A confutation.


HE that is detracted can never anger his Detractour more, then when he holds 1
his peace with patience, and answers not again his slanderous speeches. Time
wears out the greatest scandal. Therefore wise politickes have patiently
dissembled backbitings, making as though they heard them not. For even as fire
under the ashes consumes away, but being stirred it kindles, and may do harm
as well as good: so let the man which is deeply and without cause back-bited
by the spirit of Detraction, and his lying crew take open notice, and noise
abroad the undeserved slander, it may turn to his discredit, as well as to his
credit, by reason that men's natures are so corrupt, suspicious, and guilty in
themselves, that they will easily judge the worst, and imagine all others to be
like unto themselves; but in process of time they will be weary of one man's
object, and therefore when other calumniations come in place the former are
forgotten, and: (as fire covered with ashes) lie quite extinguished. If an Ass
or Colt kick thee, will thou recalcitrate and spurn him again? Or if another
does torment thee, will thou torment thy self? The remembrance of injuries
hurts a man more then the receiving of injuries. Therefore let not the Sun
go down upon thine impatience. And though thou suffer Satan to look in
at the keyhole of thy heart, yet keep him out from lodging there.

Let us then bear with men's infirmities, if they be 2
not too outrageous, let us bless them that curse us, and desire GOD to
convert their enmity into amity. I say, let us endeavor to convert them by
converting their enmity into a Chrisitan-like use. By this means, we shall
work miracles, and cause the vnbelieueds hardened heart to relent and receive
remorce in conscience. A Spanish homilist relates out of another Author, whom
he terms el gran Cassiano, a notable example tending to this purpose. An
honest Hermit on a time being iniuried by an Infidel with this exprobration
and blasphemous detraction against his Christian profession: Que milagros
extraordina^ios hize esse tu Christo en el mundo? What extraordinary miracles
did this thy Hernando Sanctiago sobre Euangelios.
Christ so in the world? he answered, no es harto milagro, que tus blasfemias e
iniurias no me offendan, ni me alboreten tus am^naeas? Is not this a sufficient
miracle of his, that thy blasphemies and iniurics do not offend me, nor thy
threatenings move me? The vtility which we get by meditating on our Savior
Christ is so admirable, that the remembrance of his miraculous patience enduce
us to tolerate with humility the infirmities of our fleshly brethren. Wherefore
let us stop our itching ears from these Detractions, even at the first bound,
before they be thoroughly ingraffed in our hearts. For as there would be no
thieves, if there were no receivers: so there would not be half so many
chattering mouthcs to detract, if there were not so many charmed ears to soke
and suck them in.

But notwithstanding these pareneticall caueats of mine, thou stumblest again
on the plain, exclaiming, 3
that it is impossible for flesh and blood to endure such scandalous
detractions. Thou can not tarry the Lords leisure. The clouds hide him, that
he cannot see, he walks in the circle of heaven. Job 22.


O crazed soul, why deprauest thou his eternal 4
knowledge? If thou be railed upon for the name of Christ, Peter 4.
blessed art thou: for the time is come, that punishment must begin at the
house of God. If thou suffer detractions by Ibid.
reason of worldly crosses', thou art worse then mad, if thou set those
things by thy heart, which thou ought rather to set by thy heels. Thou art
not thine own man nor at liberty, if thou make such reckoning of transitory
accidents here on earth. It is no marvel, that the dogs of this world do
bark at thee, for what are we in it but strangers and Pilgrims, expecting
daily to be sent for. Seges altera in herba est. Here we have no continuing
^itie, but we look for one to come. We look Heb. 13.
for an everlasting Harvest, for an heavenly Jerusalem, the foundations of
whose walls are garnished with precious Apocap. 21.
stones, whose gates are pearls, whose street is pure gold, as shining glass,
which has no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it, for the
greater light extinguisheth the lesser; the glory of God for ever lightens it,
far brighter then a thousand Suns and a thousand Moons. Into which
everlasting City no malicious Detractour, no lier, no impatient spirit, nor
any other unclean thing shall enter.

LINEAMENT. V.
1 That the Spirit of Detraction begins to shrink through the influence of
Taciturnitie and Patience.

2 The Spirit of Detraction convicted for broaching out questions of Princes
Soueraignties.

3 That private persons ought not to dispute of their Prince his dealings.

SEe, how the Spirit of Detraction begins 1
to shrink and to sound a retraict (like Socrates his scolding Wife, now that
the virtues of Taciturnitie and Patience do bar thy grave mouth from
answer, letting his malice to have the last word. See, how he stands mute,
shaking and quaking at the glimpse of these glorious Gifts. His lightning is
vanished into smoke, and his slanders on a sudden slackned. To detract from
Iehouahs name with vain swearing, or from his works with men's poisoned
paradoxes, he confesses it Blasphemy worthy of his bottomless pit. No
misfortune can happen without our Creatours providence, nor one hair from our
heads without his predestination. The Stars thou alone do stint, most
mighty God, even by Satan's own confession: the meteours thou alone do
sway, in ordering their effects, as it pleases thy secret wisdom. When thou
sendest out thy thunder and lightning, as harbingers of thy power, who can
control thee? When thou take a prey: who can enforce thee to restore it?
who shall say Job 9.
unto thee, why did thou thus? Where are ye Wizards now, with your witless
wonders? while ye auerre some of your Constellations and Meteours to be kind
unto us, and some unkind, ye open your mouths against heaven it self,
according to that of Origin: Dum alij stellas beneficas faciunt, alij
maleficas, os suum in coelum aperiunt. For all this, our spiteful Spirit
houers in the Air over the heads of our malcontents, and as yet will not
descend into his dark home, pretending himself privileged by the Devils
sanctuary until the great Day, to tempt the flexible souls of flesh and
blood. True, Satan, true, thou art licensed (I grant) to pervert our faith for
a while, but not to subvert the same for ever. Thy perverting is but
momentanie, as a corrosiue to convert and to cure the dead rankled flesh. But
if this seducing Serpent persist to eat into the bone, resist his biting
bitterness, ye servants of the Highest, resist his power, though his words
seem colored and covered with the purest gold of Ophir, though he come
disguised unto you (like Ieroboams wife) to entrap you by reason of your
blindness.

If he insinuates into you slanderous suggestions concerning your Prince his
sovereignty, aduising you to 2
vent them out at your mouths, least wanting vent, they burst your
straight-laced hearts, like unto the embotteled Air; conjure him in your
Saviors name, and boldly say unto him, Avoid Satan: We must not rail at our
Superiors, for there is no power but of God, and the powers that be are
ordained of God. Cursed be he which curses the Lords anointed. Cursed be he
which detracteth from Gods Lientenant. But Mariana, and his detracting Jesuits
do laugh at these positions. It is lawful (say they) to curse and curb our
Princes, if private men's acts be warranted by public judgment, that is, if
Ipse dixit my Lord the Pope, that cannot err, do lock them out of the doors
of heaven. O heathenish infidelity! Laugh on ye Kingkillars, laugh on for a
little while in this earthly world, and ye shall surely weep in the world to
come. David's heart smote within him, because he cut but the lap of King Saul's
garment. And yet our mortified Schoolmen, our Ghostly Romish Fathers make no
conscience to cut off the heads of our anointed Kings, to compare these
Regicides with renowned Judith. If reucrent Bid were living in these days,
how deadly would he defy their profane deeds, separating himself from their
Communion? This action of David (quoth this honest Clerk) does morally
instruct us, that we must Bed. libr. 4. Ex. posit. in Samuel.
not smite our Princes (though they wrong us) with the sword of our lips, that
we must not in detracting-wise adventure to tear the hemme of their
superfluous deeds. If we approve not the holiness of their lives, let us
applaud the holiness of their unctions.

But in my judgment such questions of Princes Scepters ought not to be
disputed nor called into controversy, 3
no more then the Eternal purpose of God, which is inscrutable, and
incomprehensible by mortal men. Chiefly, we of the Reformed Church, to whom
God has sent an vnparalel'd Prince, ought not once to conceive amiss of his
Royal purpose. Or if it otherwise chance, must not we brook his spots with
the like patience, as we brook an unseasonable shower of rain, a storm, or
an abortiue birth? The dishonorable things, which a Prince does must be
esteemed honorable, or else observed Plautus.
but with half an eye. If we had any just cause of such complaints, we ought
rather to have recourse to lacobs ladder, to the Spirit of Prayer, and so by
repentance to rectify our depraved wills, that God may take away his scourge,
according to that Schoole-mans counsel: Tollenda est culpa, vt cesset
Tyrannorum plaga. In a peaceable Thomas Aquin. de Regimin. Princip. lib. 1.
Commonwealth to set out problemes of this muddie nature, argues no profound
policy; specially, it becomes not mean Ministers, or vtopian Chymerizing
Scholars, to busy their brains with Princes matters, whose ears and hands
are stretched out at the longest size:

Auriculas Asini Mida Rex habet -- Persius in Satyr. 1. Ouidius in Epist.

An nescis longas Regibus esse manus?
In this case, as in many other, Theodore Beza ought to be highly magnified,
for that being seriously consulted by some seditious Sectaries, whether
inferior Officers might not lawfully raise Arms against their Prince, that
violates his Oath made unto his Subjects, that infringeth their liberties and
immunities, that turns Tyrant unto them, he teturned this circumspect demur
unto them: We must demur upon this point, not only because it is dangerous,
specially in this age, to lay open such Beza in Epistol. 24.
a window, but also because that we may not determine the state of this
question simply as you propose it; but herein we must consider many weighty
circumstances: And therefore (...) we defer our full answer unto your demand
at this instant. But this grave answer suffiseth not the spirit of
'Detraction. He broacheth it further: what if such things come to pass? what
if the Prince becomes an Apostate? Which is as much to say, what if Atlas his
shoulders should wax weary of supporting the Sky? Capi^mis alaudas. Then we
shall have our labor for our pains. O vanity of vanities! Does our Heavenly
Father for his Sons Righteousness deliver private persons from Satan's
slavery, and shall we distrust his divine providence, that he will not defend
his Church both from Satan, and all his Instruments, visible and invisible? Or
if our sins be so grievous in his sight, that his wisdom judges it
expedient to chastise our wanton wills, to season our luxurious natures with
sour sauce, and by tribulations to prepare room for the Holy Ghost in the
Temple of our Souls, shall we grudge or grieve at his discreet corrections?
Is it not his own saying, that through the briars of troubles we must pass
into his heavenly world? Let us therefore content our selves with sober
knowledge, and not cauell and travel about such mutinous arguments, which,
were they in actual presence, we may sooner wish to avoid, then salve it any
other way but by tears and prayers. Man proposes, but God disposes. He, even
he it is, that treades and tramples down all tyrannies, that orders them for
his own glory: he that abridged Queen Mary's life for the propagation of his
Gospel: that sithence confounded so many attempts of Jesuits and Traitors,
and that now of late suddenly and miraculously discovered the transcendent
Pouder-plor; no doubt but he will still continue his care over us in the midst
of our worldly waves, in the heat of our worldly warfare.

Amen.
LINEAMENT. VI.
1 The Authors scope in this subsequent discourse.

2 The Spirit of Detraction convicted in Protestants, for exasperating of
Puritanes in their perverse humors.

3 The Spirit of Detraction convicted in Puritanes, for their obstinacy
against our Ecclesiastical Canons.

IN the former Circles I have coniured 1
and convicted the Spirit of Detraction for the breach of the third
commandment: thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain.
Wherein I have promiscuously touched the principal branches of this Blaphemous
sin, I have taxed outrageous and vain swearing, together with such foul
faults, as seem derogatory to Gods titles, attributes, and works; to the
scandal of our Christian liberty: which seem also to confirm the reprobate in
their hardness of heart. Now in this present Circle I will proceed to such
common vices, that concern our neighbors, namely, their railing, their
runnagate reports, rash suspicions, misconstructions, ostentations, and false
verdicts. And specially, I will reprove public calumnies.

Above all things, I exhort the Reformed Catholic, 2
that protests to fight against the Spirit of Detraction, not to give the
least occasion of scandal to Schismatickes, whether they be Tapists or
Puritanes, either by frumping speeches, or by froward writing. Rather pity
their obstinacy, and pray for their conuersions: specially, spare to speak
spitefully against these sick Brethren of ours, whom we nickname Puritanes,
or holy Separatists (as the Ancients used to call the impostors of Logic,
Sophisters, and as we call Papists, Catholics) for what know thou, whether
God has not separated them in their Mothers womb to be his adopted servants
in their latter days, notwithstanding their crabbed zeal? What know thou,
whether the calm dew, which awaiteth on the age of maturitie, may by Gods
grace cool that ouer-feruent humor of theirs, if they survive to see that
siluer-age of maturitie? Or if their perverseness be such, that they will not
then relent, to what end serves thy railing passion, but to exasperate their
peevish minds, and to confirm them in their errors? It is noted, that
Michael the Archangell in striving for the body of Moses with the Devil, durst
not detract nor dare him by exprobration. Gods Spirit is meek, loving,
patient, void of temeritie, and by these holy marks his servants are
discerned: which Doctor Whitegift, late Archbishop of Canterbury very
discreetly observed against Cartwright, urging thereby the nature of his
impatient spirit. Which infallible marks Antichrist himself out of the heard
of swine is forced to confess, as Cardinal Baronius of late years verified,
when he inuaighed against the petulance and factions of our English Seminaries
at Rome: They brag much (says he) of Martyrdom, but for ought I see, they
bear not the signs of Martyrs, of obedience, mildness, and humility. It is
the part of a Brother to endeavor his Brothers conversion into the unity of
peace by gentle means, as Abraham did to Lot; let there be no strife betwixt
thee and me, for we be brethren. Even so likewise, seeing that we agree
together in the pure and indivisible essence of our Faith, let not temporal
Accidents disseuer the same which the holy Ghost has joined together; let us
not grieve this holy Spirit of God with our litigious speeches or writings, in
comparing those, whom we name Puritanes with Jesuits, Christ's members with
the members of Antichrist; nor let us broach this late surmised Detraction,
that these our crazed brethren do conspire with those of the Dragons Angels,
like Pilate and Herod reconciled, for the coercion and dethroning of Kings: for
surely such venom never issued out of Caluins School, except they pervert and
deprave the same as Saint Peter speaks of Saint Paul's Epistles. Well it may
be, that some seditious sectaries to flatter their own ambition, during the
present time, to temporize, and to bleare old Jacobs eyes, have dipped Joseph's
coat in beasts blood, but I never heard, that they ever imbrued their hands in
Joseph's own blood. Well it may be, that they being flesh and blood as well as
others, have repined, fretted and uttered some slanderous speeches in their
malecontented moodes against their superiors in authority, only about
Church-policie, not sticking to affirm, that notwithstanding their Canonical
constitutions, they would still persevere in their peevish positions: but I
never heard, that they complotted to commit any crying sin, to strangle a
man's being in nature.

But what? shall the Puritan then detract at his pleasure without
contradiction? No, God forbid: he must 3
conform himself to the identitie of the Spirit, to the uniform harmony of
Heavens Music, least otherwise in following the self-opinion of his own
unexperienced brain, not gathering with his Master Christ, he scatter, and
sincke in the midst of his muddy pond. To this end I beseech thee (dear
Christian Brother) in the presence of God that gave his Sons body among us,
not peremptorily to be slain again, nor to be divided into parcels, but
spiritually, heavenly, and entire to communicate the same to the poorest as
well as to the greatest: that thou, O diseased soul, do hearken unto thy
Physicians voice, that thou humble thy thoughts and words toward thy Brother
in Christ, not usurping to thy self alone, as a selfe-seeming Saint, his
undivided body, which was also crucified for other Penitents. God help us, the
very best of us all, from the Prince to the Beggar is full of uncleanness.
Yea, the Angels of heaven are unclean in his sight, and in respect of his
perfection. The Worm of Conscience tells me, that my purity consists rather in
the forgiveness of my sins, then in the purity of my virtues. Submit
therefore thy sturdy man unto thy inward man. Subdue thy Golias, Calonem illum
carnosum, thy massy and proud tower of flesh unto thy little Lord, thy
spiritual David; and then submit both of them in things Apocryphal and
indifferent, not concerning thy souls salvation, unto the Scepter of men's
authority. Offer up thy soul unto God by Faith, as an holy priesthood, and a
spiritual sacrifice in Jesus 1 Pet. 2.
Christ. Offer up thy body in temporal matters, in civil policy to the Gods
of the earth.

LINEAMENT. VII.
1 The Spirit of Detraction convicted for repining at our Christian neighbors
of Scotland.

2 The said Spirit convicted for detracting from our Contrymen of Wales.

Ye noble Saxon spirits tell me, what is the reason, that ye bear some
secret emulation 1
in the closets of your hearts toward your Christian brethren, borne in the
same Island, under the same Prince, the same faith? was it not enough for you to
bereave them of the fertile fields of Loegria, and to banish them amidst the
craggie mountes, amidst the horride rocks of this Northren Zone, but ye must
deride and defame them with your ironicall items, your ridiculous girdes? Now
all conjectures are winded to the bottom. The Fatal Chair of Scotland, which
your victorious Edward transported to the Abbey of Westminster is restored
again into the possession of a Scottish Prince, nay of a British Prince, of a
right Christian Prince, and that with your consent, with Gods assent. Now there
is no cause to reedifie that famous wall from sea to sea, which the Roman
Emperor built upon the frontiers of both kingdoms. Applaud, ye English, this
happy union. Congratulate this luckie lot. Henceforth ye need not keep watch
and ward at your posterne gate. Detract not therefore from your Christian
neighbors for his glorious sake, whom the Father has appointed to be the head
of your Corporation Whether they be Jews or Gentiles, Scottish, Walsh, or
Irish, bond or free, so that they concur with you in the same Religion, see
that ye love them as your selves; and let not the Devil separate those, whom
God has joined together. Perhaps the Idiome of their speech their thick
pronounciation displeases your delicate cares, because (like Ephramites) they
cannot so distinctly utter your filed shibboleth, because they cannot run
away with their words so glib^, so smooth, nor so elegantly as your selves.
After this manner did the Athenians inuaigh against Anacharsis that famous
S^ythian: but what answer did he retort them? Speeches ought not to be termed
bad, while they comprehended good counsels, while honest deeds accompanied
their words. This also the Apostle corroborates, requiring Preachers not to
come with excellency of words, to show the testimony of God unto the people.
And this he proves by 2 Corinthians. 2
a divine reason, intimating, that the word of God consists not in the
enticing words of men's wised^me, but in the evidence of the spirit and of
power. But these scruples are too triuiall for men of understanding. Away then
with such idle fantasies: Away with such Panick peevish doubts. Bless we the
Author of our Union, which has incorporated two Christian Kingdoms,
constituting an eternal league of amity betwixt us by his own personal
presence, by the Majesty of his birth: so that we may boldly bid S. George,
S. Andrew, S. David, S. 'Patricke to auaunt. Auaunt, Adieu ye sinful Saints,
and in their stead, come, come thou the only true and sacred Saint, Lord
Jesus, to whom all other Saints do crowch and kneel for mercy.

Our Cambrian cause comes next. For the same reason 2
embrace our plain society; speak well of us, the poor remnants of the
ancient Britains: and let not the Prophecies of our Bardhs dismay your
generous minds, that we one day shall Lord it in Troy-nouant, measuring your
silken Stuffes upon our warlike 'Pikes: that we shall work our full revenge,
for that dismal and bloody long-kniu'd day. These Prophecies are already
expired, but in a mystical manner. Have not diverse of our Nation been elected
Mayors in your chief Cities, and so triumphed for their due deserts? I will
not say, how Austen the Monk subjected your Ancestors to the Romis^ yoke; how
Swain with his Danes, and William with his Normanes swayed over your persons,
goods, and lands; how your own members have been torn among your selves
through civil discord, when York and Lancaster set up their flags of red and
white Roses:

Ambo pares rosulas, and pila minantia pilis.

Though these misfortunes of yours might well satisfy a reuengefull spirit,
yet will not I insist on such cruel Augurismes; but rather rejoice, that under
the same Prince, under the same Laws, the same Liberties, we join together
in our spiritual offices: I rejoice, that the memorial of Offaes Ditch is
extinguished with love and Charity; that our green Leekes, sometimes
offensive to your dainty nostrils, are now tempred with your fragrant Roses:
that (like the Gibeonites) we are united and graffed into Israel. God give us
grace to dwell together without envy, without Detractions.

LINEAMENT. VIII.
1 The Spirit of Detraction convicted in Advocates and Counselors at Law, for
putting on a good face on bad causes.

2 The Authors resolution on the behalf of honest Lawyers.

IT is no small slander in our Christian Corporation, when our Advocates and
Counselors 1
at Law, for the greediness of a little worldly mucke, do put their tongues
to sale, and polish their wits, purposely to color a foul cause with fair
speeches, to make that seem tolerable before the Tribunal seat of Justice,
which they in their Consciences know to be intolerable. This in very deed is a
scandal to the Weale-publike, to the Spirit of God, which through the Prophets
mouth thundered out this terrible curse against such lewd practisers, Cursed be
ye which speak good of evil, and evil of good. Esaias 5.
This kind of dealing is likewise rebuked by the Wiseman: He that justifies
the wicked, and he that condemns Prou. 17.
the just; they both are abominable unto God. For certainly, were it not,
that these Instruments of Satan did patronize our envious adversaries by
backing them in their base proiects, they durst not beard the Sons of Justice
so long as they doe^nay, were it not that they so boldly bolster and bear out
ill matters, the reverend Judges of this Land need not lose half so many
nights of sleep, turmoyling their brains in the search of truth, least they
wrong the party innocent. Whereto I might add, how these wainescot Lawyers in
concealing and covering the carriage of such lewd members, do aggrauate and
augment the nature of their sins, which otherwise through the prickles of
flesh and blood, through the smart of shame they would forgo, submitting
themselves to the rod of correction. For there is no better remedy to kill
sin and cure the soul, then to suffer the sinner to sustain for his sin
some punishment by shame, grief, or other means.

What auailes it me to gain a world of wealth, and within a short while after
to leave behind me both my 2
wealth and this world? Better it is to sup a mess of pottage with security,
then to feed on the daintiest cates with hazard. Admit that Clients load me
with golden fees for setting out a brazen face on damned causes: Admit that all
my life time I have glutted my gut with fruit of Paradise: yet if I dare not
appear in the presence of God, but am forced to hide my self (as, where can I
hide my self from his All seeing Majesty) and to howl for very fear and
anguish ye mountains fall upon me, ye Rocks cover me, what shall my fees
and fruit then profit me? what good shall I get by them, when Death dogs me
at the heels? when my pulses shall faintly beat, my senses fail, and my
eyelids shut, never more to open, until they shall see the gates of new
Jerusalem shut fast against their wretched Master? O remember this, all ye,
that lean to Mamm^n, all ye, that love shadows better then substance, and
falsehood better then Truth. For mine own part, though I am but young, yet I
have observed somewhat; I know as many tricks and quillets to entangle men, as
another does; I know diverse means to circumuent them, that happily think
themselves as wise as my self, like unto that Italian, which boasted he knew
so many devises to get money, as there be days in the year; but I protest
before him that made me, I would choose to be murdered, rather then to use them
in my greatest need. Such is the resolution of my soul, or as a friend of mine
lately termed it, the tenderness of my Conscience, that I foully scorn to play
the part of a mercenarie Mechani^ke with my brother in Christ. I foully scorn
to nourish contentions for mine own advantage. For how dare I claim my self
to be of the same fraternity, within the Circle of charity, within the union
of the Holy Ghost, if I deal not plainly with my neighbor, if I speak not
the truth from my heart without equivocation; nay, if I mean not plainly unto
him? Let this resolution of mine serve as an Apology, to excuse my
retiredness for not exercising that profession, in whose titles I sometimes
gloried, though most unworthily.

LINEAMENT IX.
1 The Authors invocation to the Deity for pardoning the p^^alance of his
spleen in this present Lineament.

2 That Judges and Executioners of justice of all others, are most wanton'y
detracted by our swaggering Libertines; wherein their vanity is censured by
the Author; and also their craking genealogies are controuled.

3 The carriage of Judges toward such detracting Sycophants.

4 An admonition to Judges, not to respect taunting tongues.

5 Another admonition unto them not to rail and revile at their inferiors.

OThers galled to the quick with the multiplicitie of their own enormities, 1
by the instigation of this spirit of Detraction, do in their merriment
scatter abroad many Alehouse-iests, and gibes, against the Fathers of their
Country, which spare no pains in the foulest night, to keep watch and ward
(as vigilant Sentinels) for their safety and success. These detestable
Detractions destilling from the stream of their unruly passions, I will
moderately taunt and attaint of empoisoned malice, mixtis veneno sontibus, all
their Well-springs being already tainted with noisome venom. Wherein if I
exceed after the manner of flesh and blood, bar thou the inundation of my
running brain, bridle the mouth of mine understanding, and manacle my
swift-offending hand, O fiery Influence of the incomprehensible Deity, by
whose impulsive inspiration all humble wits are moved to raise up their
stumbling neighbors out of the bogs and mire, yea though they were fallen up to
their very necks.

Time out of memory they claim prescription of 2
swinish shapes. Why may not they do that which seems good in their own eyes?
Being borne free, true Troianes, true Gentlemen, lineally descended without
disparagement from great Garagantua, whose old Auncestour (as that Lucian of
France scoffing Rabelais reported) was the first that ever played at Dice with
spectacles on his nose. Why should these Puritan Justices direct forth their
Warrants for men as good as themselves every day of the week, as well working
days as Sundays? It is a strange case to hear how the spirit of Detraction
domineeres it like a Braggadochian Caualeere, and how his foolish followers
swagger it through the whole cloth with swearing and forswearing by no beggars
brats, that if they had some store of coin, they would shoulder half a dozen
Justices out of the Commission. Their lips are their own, they say, and they
may use their tongues to many purposes, like the Papists spirit of
Aequinocation, or like the Delphick sword, to cut, to hack, to file, to saw, to
wound a man, and again to heal the same wound, conformable to that: Lingua
canis medicus, the dogs tongue is a Surgeon. It is a strange case to hear
these roisting Ruffians amidst their Tobachanales, and bidale banquets,
boasting of their greazie Gentry without controulement or contradiction: when
as (perhaps) they cannot name one Knight, Esquire, or any Gentleman of degree
in their petty pedigree to the third or fourth generation. At the period of
which time (even by the consent of Clarentius, or of any other Prince at Arms)
their imaginary or Chymerizing patent of gentilitie wears out of date, like
unto guilt spurs, unless the same be renewed, regilt, varnisht, or enam^l'd
for some virtuous cause by the King; from whom, as the Moon and Stars become
enlightened from the Sun, as the Sun from God: so receive they their
original, confirmation, and comprobation of Nobility from the Prince of their
Country.

But this is certain, no man whatsoever builds or babbles of such outward
ornaments of nature or fortune, which indeed are none of his, but his
Ancestors, as Sir Phillip Sidneyes Moate implied out of Ovid: Vix ea nostra
voco, I say no man boasts of such temporal he^reloomes, but only he, which
lackes the inward man in his heart, or some moral motion in his soul. Or put
the case they could by some reputed record of an hireling Herald, derive
themselves by so many lines and branches, as there be days in the year, to
La^celot du Lake, King Arthurs famous Champion, to Rodericke the great, or to
some noble British Prince before the Roman, Saxon, or Norman conquest: What
other additions among the sons of virtue, deserve such detracting Dawes of
Aesope, then ofscald Squires, or of plain Gentlemen in the positive degree
without either welt or guard, cross or pile. True Gentry scorns to brag, to
bark, to backbite, to brave it out in time of peace, when Cloakes do yield to
Gowns, when civil conference is expected, and cruel vaunts exil^d into
Satan's cell, there to rest, until the warre-like Drums summon them to try
their quarrels in the open field against their Countries enemies, with hands
and not with tongues, with swords and not with words, with pikes and not with
pens. A Gentleman is discerned by his gentle manners, and a wise man by his
sparing speech. Noble is that French saying, La vert^ seulement sait la
noblesse, car il y a de nobles v^laines, ^t de vilains nobles. Virtue only
makes nobility, for there are noble Clownes and clownish Nobles. There is no
beggar but he is descended from some Prince, nor any Prince but he is descended
from some beggar or plowman. For

When Adam delu'd and Eve span,
Where was then the Gentleman?
God gave to all men one and the same beginning, and the same end, dust in
their creation, dust in their graves, frailety in the womb, frailety in the
tomb. To make a complete conclusion to these gentlemen Detractours (for you
must understand, that the spirit of Detraction stands very much upon his
gentry) it may be also, that within these two or three hundred years one* of
their great Ancestors, whom by the way they repeat in their Genealogies from
their Demigorgons, I would say Demigods, might come in at the window
indirectly: for many gross and grievous alterations have happened within the
compass of that time unto great Potentates and states, much more to private
families. And this is very likely to be true, when Antichrist and infidelity
usurped throughout all this Country, that Baal Priests being flesh and blood*
as other men, and also having men's consciences superstitiously at command,
might likewise have the body of Cambrian Candaules his wife at their unchaste
command, as well as that holy-seeming Hermit, who under the color and
opportunity of auricular confession, compelled his own Prince and the
chiefest Nobles of his Court, to sing and sound out the old Cuckoes note to
all the worlds hearing. Therefore let Christians contemn such childish
comparisons of Gentilities. And let them glory in nothing more then in the
cross of their Redemption, whereto the nearer that they be, the nobler is
their birth, as men newly borne and pertakers of love, charity, faith, and of
other spiritual ornaments, that go beyond all the symbolized ensigns of
temporal Heralds. Out of which circumstances collect, O Christian soul, this
one Emblem divinely embellished:

The nearer to true Charity,
The nearer to Nobility.
Howsoever these fly-blowes of the spirit of Detraction 3
be allowed or disallowed to blazon arms, it is the part of a Magistrate to
bear a Lions heart, that he shrink not in just causes, nor respect the
magnificall thunders of the spirit of Detraction, more then the prostrate
petitions of the spirit of humility. Be he Midas, or be he Codrus, be he
noble or be he base, Justice must take place. Therefore the Poets record, that
Justice has neither father nor mother: likewise, they report, that Juno
through her wealth, Venus through her beauty, Mars through his threats, and
Mercury through his eloquence, having all of them conspired against Jupiter,
and yet not able to thrust him out of heaven, implied no other sense or moral
thereby, then that a man of virtue could by no means, either for wealth,
beauty, threats, or eloquence, be diuerted or turned aside from Justice. It
is the part of a Magistrate to use that Royal virtue Magnanimity for his
chiefest support against detracting Hamans, and deprauing Semeies, and as a
learned Bishop of Portugal describes, a magnanimous man Osorius lib. 3.
Christian. nobilitat.
though he see all the world eagerly bent against him, and though he see every
thing round about set on fire, yet he through an assured confidence will
continue constant. It is the part of a Magistrate to imitate that resolute
Judge in Henry the fourths time, which feared not to commit into the Kings
Bench victorious Henry Prince of Wales, rather then those Officers of
injustice, whom, another King of England upon his return from outlandish
Countries, displaced from their high commands, after their examinations by
virtuous Earls; or then these corrupt Judges, whom Cambyses caused to be
flayed, and their skins, as monuments of terror to be hanged up in the
forefront of his Palace. It is the part of a Magistrate to esteem the vvindie
detractions of licentious Libertines, who with presumptuous language dare brute
abroad, that they can by their supposed familiarity with noble personages
vncommission (or to use their own words vnsaddle) any Justice of his Justice
ship, I say it is his part to esteem such derogatorie speeches, no otherwise
then for brauadoes of a brided brain, or bragging vaunts of vpstart grooms,
only to daunt pusillanimous Meacocks, which never saw the Lions in the Tower,
nor understand the truescope, at which the state of England aims. Even as I
never knew any man in all my life despised for his silence and sparing speech:
so likewise I never knew any man degraded of his authority for his zealous
endeauours on the Kings behalf. 4


Wherefore let this stand for a watchword to our Country Justices, that they
be not terrified from welldoing, with the swaggering on-sets of craking
Crocodiles. Let them put on the armor of patience, and the spirit of
Detraction will in time burst asunder like the Babilonians God. Let them but
for a while stand still, and these Thrasonicall Rhodomontes, will voluntarily
surrender up the cudgels. Their nature is to begin as men, and to end as women,
to come in as thunder, and to go out as smoke to boast of lofty things at
first, and to faint at last under their own burden. For truth is great and
will prevail. Then fear not ye proud Hamans wrath, for ye execute not the
judgments of man, but of God, as King 2 Chronicles. 19.
Iehosaphat encouraged his Judges. Ye need not doubt of your Priace his
countenance, as long as ye walk uprightly, and as long as Fame the worlds great
Trumpetour sounds out that noble distick in your commendations:

Nec prece, nec pretio, nec pondere diuitis aur^,
Nec quicquam tumidis flectitur ille minis.
Nor with fair words, nor with rich bribing gold,
They moved are, nor yet with threatenings bold.
Wherein then can they harm you? In uncharitable lectures, in railing, in
reuiling, in revealing their own dregs, and as the Apostle writes: In foming
out their own shame, like the raging waves of the sea? Let this be the vpshot
Just. Epist.
of all your thoughts, as I said before, that no man whatsoever can escape the
tempests of detracting tongues. It is an ancient adage, that a barking dog
seldom bites, and that the deepest rivers run with least noise, why will
ye therefore doubt these clattering clappers?

Above all things I could wish, that those whom the Kings Matestie by the
recommendation of his grave 5
Counsel, golden m^uthed Nestors, and sage Chrysostomes, has nominated to sit
in the tribunal throne of Justice, that they behave themselves with more
civility in their ordinary speeches toward the inferior family of Christ's
Church not nick-naming the vilest wretch, seeing that such deserve rather to be
pitied or else punished after some other way. Michaell the Archangell reviled
not the Devil, albeit that he was worthy of millions of curses, and of a world
of taunts. If we be Tyrants toward our inferiors. what savors ought we to
expect at the hands of our chief Superior, which regards an humble contrite
mind, more then all the sacrifices in the world and which confounds all
haughty hotspurres in their own imaginations and vain devises? To be short,
imprint ye this lesson firmly in your hearts:

Cum sueris Iudex, miti sis cord mem^nto:
Dicito quae possint dicta decereseneim.
Be mild and meek in Judgment seat,
And speak no words in Passions heat;
But, as a grave and ancient Judge,
Speak without wrath, speak without grudge.
LINEAMENT. X.
1 That a true Christian ought not to detract from the Judges of his Country,
though they wrong him.

2 That no mortal man lives exempted from man fold crosses.

3 What vexations besall to Judges themselves.

DEtract not from the Judges of thy 1
Country, though they behave themselves not so cleanly in their offices as
they ought. But persuade thy quiet conscience, that the highest Judge beholds
their corruptions from his heavenly Pharos or Watch-towre of knowledge, and
that sometime or other, when it shall seem best unto his provident Majesty,
he will either plague them by immediate judgments from heaven, or else he
will raise up some sinister fortune here on earth, in revenge of their
enormious lives: for this is a principal maxim in Divinity, that every
Creature is offended with us, when our Creator is offended with us. Offenso
Creatore, offenditur omnis Creatura. As long as thou sweepest and keep thine
own closet neat and clean, and carriest thy conscience without guilt or
guile, what matters it to thee, how other men demean themselves? Cannot rich
men wear what newfangled apparel best likes their frantic fancy? thou
must only account for thine own Bailiwick. The number of the unjust have ever
exceeded the number of the just; and if these be condemned by iniurye, the
other shall one day be condemned by Justice. The case thus depending, thou
ought to pit^ie the essential and eternal loss of their souls, rather
then to detract from the accidental and momentary qualities of their bribed
minds Thou ought rather to consider their future calamities, then to
commaculate their present fame with carping calumnies I am flesh and blood,
thou say, and cannot endure that the black Ox shall always tread on my
tender foot. They have shamed me with committing me to Newgate, to Bridewell,
to Bocardo, and to those lodges of infamy, which are fitter for Rogues, then
for Righteous men, for Villains, then for virtuous persons. O vvorldly
creature! wherefore came thou into this world? Came thou hither to live
for ever, or to live a life of trial or probation for a while, until thine
own merits in the merits and mercy of Christ, had purchased thee a perpetual
place in Heaven? Art thou in an earthly prison? Give God thanks, that he
respects thy soul, thy noblest part. For nothing draws man to meditate on his
duty toward God more then pinching pains, more then the imprisonment of his
body, when the mind may waike at liberty, and contemplate the rarest magazins
of Truths secrets. In my judgment, thou ought to glorify God the more, to
gratify thy foes the more (if foes they be, which send thee toward heaven)
now that thou feel with thy body and soul the true cross, which before
thou did protest, promise and profess as a Christian, but in bare words, to
follow, nay to embrace during thy probationship.

Thy detractions (as thou again alleadgest) are not causeless: for thou art
condemned causeless and unworthily to tortures, to tormenting pains. The
pitiless 2
Judges, have adjudged thee to iron bolts, to pillories, to be used like a
Rogue, to be made a spectacle unto all the world. O true cross, true
Christian Cross, which our righteous Savior has borne before us. He was
buffetted, he was scourged, his head was bloudyed with a crown of pricking
thorns; yea, and his precious body was pierced with a spear, and nailed to
the cross with cruel curses, mockes, and sloutes, and do thou repine to
imitate thy glorious Master? No servant is greater then his Master. Think
upon Joseph's state, how his body was unjustly captiuated, how his innocent
feet were galled with stocks and fetters therefore content thy self, and
God will release thee of thy smarting griefs. Do but examine aright the true
course and occurrence of this world, and thou shall find that thy tormentours
themselves are not free from some casual cross or other, and that always as
long as they live. When they were young, they complained of their parents rule
over their unruliness, they complained of aches in their heads and teeth, of
itches, of kibes, and other infirmities: They complained of their
Schoolemasters scourge, of his Fearuler, of his checks and chidings. When
Nature clothed their chinnes with beards, or hairie fleeces, their false joys
were daily salted with choler, with envy, with melancholicke fittes. Their
bodies were perplexed with maladies of sundry sorts, with burning feauers, or
such like sicknesses. Their minds were assailed with multitudes of cares,
with discontentments or discourtisies of friends, of followers, or of their
own meniall people. When their hoary age crept in, which of it self is an
incurable sickness nullis medicabilis herbis, then likewise a world of troubles
pursues them hourly at their very heels, nay I would say at their backs, in
their backs, in all the parts of their bodies. Now they groan and moan with
dolor of the Chollicke, the stone, and with continual aches in their decayed
joints, and as the Poet wrote: Persius Satyr. 5.


-- tunc cum lapidosa chiragra
Fregerit articulos, veteris ramalia Fagi.
The knottie cramping Gout
Their joints do gripe about:
Which like old Beechen boughs,
It breaks with often throws.
Another while the Ptisicke caused through a long Catarre consumes their
corrupted wind-pipes, or else their filthy mouths, which sometimes spued up
most filthy spe^ches, do now spit out whole gobbets of phlegm, like stinking
Oysters. Others again have not that benefit, but languishing with wearied
breath, they faint under their long continued oppilations, which the former
Poet painted out in this most lively verse:

Gutture sulphur as l^nte exhala^te mephitet. Persius Saetyr. 3.

Their throats exhaling lazily
Sulphurous smells full lothsomely.
What shall I speak of Promooters of pettifogging Lawyers, or of cauelling
neighbors, which like Caterpillars, Rats, and vile vermin, molest them with
wrongful suites, forcing them to travel Testaque L^t^que, through thick and
thin, in great ieopardie of their lives, to consume all their money to the
very bottom of their pu^ses, and to ^r^t them to the very bottom of their
hearts.

I will pass over, how Judges themselves are also vexed; one while their
unnatural Sons disquiet them; 3
and how another while their own Wives uphold factions in their own houses
against them. One while their credit is justly called in question by their
emulous companions, another while they are slandered with those things which
they never once thought, no nor drearned of. Thus God rewards them with the
Talion law, with like for like, after the example of Adonibezeck who sometimes
having threescore and ten Kings with their thombes and great toes cut off, and
gathering their crumbs and meat under his table, was at the last apprehended
himself by the Tribe of I^da, and had his own thombes and great toes cut off,
worthily perishing by tortures of his own invention, like as the Inuenter of
the brazen Bull was adjudged by the Tyrant Phalaris first to try the torments.
Which also moved Adonibezeck to brust out into these complaints; Iudi^. 1.
As I have done, so God has done to me again. To what end serve thy
detr^ctions, when as thou see them already tossed, toiled and turmoiled with
infinite vexations?

LINEAMENT. XI.
1 The Reply of the Spirit of Detraction, to the premises.

2 An Answer to the said Reply out of the Rules of Policy fit to be observed
of pecuish Preachers.

3 The benefit that comes to a true Christian by detracting tongues, where the
Spirit of Detraction is convicted with his own sorce.

THese words of mine, replies another 1
punie or pupil of the Detracting Spirit, savor of a Sermon style, fitter for
the Pulpet then for Geometrical Circles; for a Preacher then for a pryer into
Spirits; for the inward man, which must prepare himself for the other world,
rather then for the outward man, which must suite and sort himself to the
humorous spirits of this present world. Tread upon a worm and the worm will
turn again. Musca habet splenem, and Formicae sua bilis in^st. The little
Fly has her spleen, and the humor of choler is incident to the Emmet. How
can a man of reason brook to be continually crossed by his Colltages and
Fellow-officers in his zealous endeavors? How can a man choose but whet his
tongue to taunt their partial actions?

These Allegations, I confess, are somewhat sensible: 2
yet nevertheless Leo non capit Muscam, the Lion scorns the Fly with her
silly spleen. Men of reason must not altogether imitate Creatures without
reason, chiefly in matters of no import. Sometimes we must (whether we will
or no) gaze upon a painted wall, as Paul termed Ananias. Sometimes we must
play the Arichmeticians, employing the help of Ciphers to make up our number.
Sometimes we must dally with children to still them from whining and weeping.
And so sometimes must the wisest man conceal his wisdom, he must change his
speech (as David did before the King 1 Samuel 21.
of Gath, he must faigne himself mad, he must scrabble on the doors, and let
his spettle fall down upon his beard. Stultitiam simulare loco prudentia summa
est. Sometimes we must obey the importunity of the time: yet so that we commit
not pernicious evil, to the intent that good may ensue thereof. We must seem
to yield at first in the lesser causes unto this spirit of contradiction, that
men may yield to us in matters of greater consequence. As for example, if thou
go about to convert a Jew, thou must not begin with detractions and
inuectiues against Circumcision, against his weak conscience for abstayning
from Swines flesh or black Puddings. If thou labourest to turn a Papist from
his superstitious Heresies, rebuke not his Sect for the Divine virtue of
continence, for their vow of chastity, for the monastical or single lives of
Hermites, Monks, Friars, Nuns, and other religious votaries. Oppose not thy
speech against his abstinence from meats, seeing he that feeds only on
sallets, roots, or fruit, may be saved and justified, as well as he, which
only eats flesh or fish. In fine, cross not his gored mind with carping at
the sign of the Cross, or at any things indifferent, while they redound not
to deadly sins against his patient Majesty. Herein some Jesuits deserve to
ride in the Chariot of Ouation, of a little Triumph, namely for their
humiliation and prudent care in wearing the robes and habites of the Pagan
Priests of China, whom they term Bunzies, without which no forraigner
whatsoever might soiourne in that politic Country. But under this venerable
and unsuspected habit Father Riceius, and others may certainly reduce many of
that populous Nation to the Christian religion, as long as they seek to edify
without idolatry, and not to intermeddle with points of state, as they pretend
in Europe. In like manner, thou that grieuest thy self, for that thy fellows
in office do hinder thy just proceedings, for countenancing litigious and lewd
livers against thee, if thou can not otherwise then by passionate speeches
redress thy wrongs, be sure not to gainsay them in light or in indifferent
causes. In so doing, thy very foes will admire thy patience, and (perhaps) at
length they will join with thee to suppress common vices, which are such
eye-sores unto thy zealous conscience. Do not we daily see, that the
peevishness of a few raw, and unexperienced Ministers do scandalize the state
wherein they live, and minister an advantage to the Enemy of insulting, and
also fall themselves into greater Labyrinthes, then they are able to wind
themselves out again? Their obstinate standing out against their Elders and
Superiors for wearing of the Surplice, the outward cognizance or badge of
innocence, to separate the milke-white Lambs from the rude, rough, and unruly
Goats, what profit have they reaped by these and such like refractarie
murmurs? None at all, but confusion and opprobrious shame. There is nothing
more dangerous then to be self opinionated against the experimented rules of
the Churches reverend sheepheards whose grave and gray locks have won
authentic authority and canonical obedience to their constitutions,
customs, and wholesome documents. There is nothing more discommodious then to
build upon a man's own knowledge, as upon a Demonstration infallible, and to
gainsay an humorous spirit in the time of his fit. For these causes, O thou
whose conscience groans under a Countries weight, let thy virtue domineere
over their lukewarm labors, thy patience over their passions, and thy
taciturnitie over their Detractions, that the world and common voice may
canonize thy well-doing, and adiudge them thy inferiors in justice, though
they be thine equals in office; that whatsoever is uprightly done, they may
ascribe to thee, and what is injuriously done, they may imputet their insolent
contradictions.

Is it not then lawful to beat and bear down the spirit of Detraction with
his own enuenomed weapons? 3
May not a man repel force with force, words with words, checks with checks,
chiding with chiding? If they backbite, cannot I return the like? It is
impossible, but that the mildest natured man should become somewhat impatient,
seeing himself punished with obloquies, ignominies, and reproaches without
cause.

Immerito veniens pana d^lenda venit.

O sick soul how bitter are thy words, more bitter then wormwood and gall!
Can thou not for a while, for a little while, attend the Lords leisure?
Though Toades do croake in Summer, yet they will lie still and silent in the
Winter. Though these Rhodomontes do crake this year, they will be glad to
live at rest the next year. For those slanders, that are purchased for virtues
sake, can never last long, or ever blemish a virtuous man; nay, rather they
deserve the title of honor, chiefly, if they proceed from wicked mouths.
Regium est male audire. It is a Royal thing to be ill spoken of. Howbeit, I
confess it is burdensome to the conscience, if the slander be derived by
ungodly occasions. It is momentarie, if it spring by casualtie. But it is
joyous and welcome, if it comes for Justice sake. All hail then, O glorious
slander, right welcome be thy blazing blast unto the sons of virtue. Welcome
be thy footsteps unto the threshold of Justice. O necessary curb of
correction, which art purchased at the dearest price. For what dearer price can
there be then the loss of a good name? That, which fools repute an infamy,
reckon thou for reputation: for what nobler reputation can you reap, then to
resemble the Apostle Saint Paul, who being slandred, did nevertheless rejoice
in the testimony of his own guiltless conscience? Thy ears are vexed with
the clacking noise of a tickling tongue. And do not often ringing of bells, of
passing bells, sometimes disquiet that sense of thine? Thy heart is wounded and
stabd with a tormenting tongue. But what wound, what stab with steel the soul
can kill? such wounds, such stabs can never harm but humble thee. Mark how
the proudest man alive becomes humbled after that he receives wounds. The
like benefit comes by Detraction. By the stings thereof the haughtiness of our
natures is humbled. By the venom thereof, as by the spear of that warlike
Heroes, which healed the self same wound it gave, our spiritual wounds are
cured and abated. Through the consideration of these Antidotes against
Detractions, temper the manifold malapertnesse of thy tongue, of thy tempting
tongue, of thy tickling tongue, of thy tatling tongue, thy taunting tongue, thy
vaunting tongue. thy jesting tongue, thy gibing tongue, thy iarring tongue, thy
warring tongue, thy checking tongue, thy chiding tongue, thy clattering tongue,
thy clacking tongue, thy carping tongue, thy babbling tongue, thy boasting
tongue, thy blazing tongue, thy blaspheming tongue, thy rai^ing tongue, thy
reuiling tongue, thy scoffing tongue, thy scolding tongue, thy nicking tongue,
thy nipping tongue, thy quipping tongue thy tripping tongue, thy defaming
tongue, thy detracting tongue; temper the phreneticall fury of this little
Tyrant, of what other inclination so ever it be; and whet it not against thy
neighbor, whom Baptism has regenerated and adopted to the self same
heritage, as well as thy self. Say with that noble French man:

Du mesdisant la langue venimeuse Pibrac.

Et du flateur les propos ^mmielez,
Et du mocqueur les brocardes enfielez,
Et du maling la pursuit animeuse.
From Sycop^ an^s, and their foul pois'ned quips,
From Flatterers, and their smooth-honied lips,
From Democrites, and their gall-stinging books,
From Hypocrites, and their dissembling looks,
Good Lord deliver us.

LINEAMENT. XII.
The spirit of Detraction convicted for censuring men for their 1 Poucrtie. 2
Birth. 3 Bodily imperfections.


DEride no man for his poverty, for a man of faith is only rich. He that is 1
poor in worldly wealth, has no superfluous cares to withold his mind from
spiritual exercises. While thou gluttest with gurmandize, stalkest with state,
walk with wantons, swaggerest with swash-bucklers, swearest with swaggerers,
and detractest with Detractours, the poor man fasteth and prays, yields
every man his due, he lives not in fear of thieves, nor of oppression for his
goods

Cantabit vacuus coram Latrone viator.

The same God that made him poor, may make thee poor: for it is his Sun
that shines upon poor^ and rich. He, even he it is, that exalts the humble
and meek, and scatters the proud in the imaginations of their hearts.

If thy neighbor be not as well descended as thy self. but basely borne,
contemn him not with contumelious 2
speeches in charging his birth with contagious sin. The very best of us all
(as the Prophet David testified) was conceived in sin and borne in sin. But
through our cleansing by Baptism, our souls become purified, and so does the
bas^st borne bastard. Better it is for a man to be the head of his kin, as
^icero was, then to be the last of his kin, as Catiline was. Better it is to
be the virtuous son of a vicious father, then to be the vicious son of a
virtuous father: for a man is not accountable for his birth but for his
behavior and conversation in hi^liuing. Therefore that uncharitable detracting
distick deserves the faggot:

Spur^s ille puer nullum suadebit honestum: Pauper Henricus

Na^us adulterio, semper adulter erit.
When thou beholdest one that is crumpshouldred, lame, or otherwise distorted
and deformed in his body, 3
laugh him not to scorn, nor jest at his infirmities. For he that is deformed
in his body, may conceal a generous spirit within, like unto a tottered ship,
which contains within it more goods then ten such ships are worth.

Consilio pollet cui vim natura negauit. Cato.


Observe the contrary subject, and tell me how many proper bodies have thou
scene without defects in their minds? In my judgment, none but fools ever
gloried in their bodies constitutions, strength, or power; wherein the horse
the Ass, and other beasts go far beyond mankind. The regard whereof causes
us to require bodily force in a labourer, and wisdom of the mind in a
Commander. The body is earthly, carnal, frail. the house, nay rather the
prison of the soul, which indeed is heavenly, noble, permanent, and created
after Gods own likeness both in the essential union and in the trinarie
subsistence. A body is not to be termed crooked or crazed, as long as it
lodges an upright soul, and harbors an honest heart. Aesope was
crooke-backt, and yet admirable for his wit. Tyrtaeus the Poet was lame and yet
chosen General of the Lacedaemonians. Innumerable persons there are whose
bodily deformity God does recompense with large measure of spiritual gifts,
supplying that place one way, which wants in another way: so that this saying
is true, Deus nihil fecit frustra. God created nothing in vain, no not the
craggiest mountain made he without some profitable use for man's good. Perhaps
there lurkes a goodly mine, or at the worst milstones or quarries of tile,
lime, or such like.

Others again have imperfections in their eye-sights, whom the spirit of
Detraction follows with girdes and floutes: wherein who can but smile?

Spectatum admiss^ risum teneatis amici?

In hearing blinde-minded people mocking at blindebodied people? A man in
Divinity is not held to be blind, except he live in darkness of errors,
which altogether blindfold the understanding, and deprive the soul of the
eternal light, the knowledge of the living God. Short-sighted folks commonly
shoot inward into contemplation, the noblest operation of the soul, and
whiles the quick-sighted, I mean quick of their corporal sights, do gaze on
every idle object, either in judging of beauties, or in marking at the skipping
of Grasshoppers, or in seeing the goodly combat betwixt the Mouse and the
Frogge; The other by the benefit of his spiritual nature, wanting such
obstacles and impediments, do wholly addict themselves to reading or to musing.
From which no Spider sport, no trifling toys may withdraw their intentive
minds. And why? because their Creator has converted the infirmity of their
bodily eyes into their eyes of memory and understanding, whereby they become
sagacissimi in coniecturis, ingenious, and very studious.

LINEAMENT. XIII.
1 The Spirit of Detraction convicted for blabbing out tales concerning women's
credits.

2 Wherefore it is not lawful to speak abroad of women's causes.

LIkewise take heed how thou talk est (like a tatling tell-tale) about women's
credits, by suspicion and suppositions 1
cracked: or if in deed and evidence thy neighbors wife plays false, in
violating herfaith, in vitiating her chastity toward her honest Husband: or
if his Daughter waxes more lustily wanton then becomes a Christian virgin;
let not thy tongue be traduced, or produced as a reuiling runnagate in noysing
abroad such ribauldries and baudries, if true; or else such surmised secret
things, which no earthly creature besides themselves can prove. It is always
incident to Roysters and Ruffians to read suspicious lectures on the carriage
and behavior of the most beautiful. Some judge the worst fatally, because
themselves are guilty of adultery, and so according to the often wishes, the
shrewde and lewd nores of their own perverted fantasies, they condemn the
pure with the impure. Some again, do but gather by presumptions 2
and circumstances, that chaste women prostitute their bodies, because they go
gallantly attyred in the fashion, with strange Periwigs, with false bodies,
truncke sleeves, verdingales, and with costly Jewels belike beyond their
Husbands means: because they paint their faces with artificial drugs, and
also because they gadde to stage plays, to public daunces, and shows upon
Sundays and Holy Days, in stead of hallowing and sanctifying their souls
with thankful prayers. And in truth their reasons fall out many times current;
for that such things being devised by Devilish people, as allurements to
spiritual fornication after the pompous gods of the earth, be likewise the
forerunners of fleshly fornication even as Pride is the mother of all
mischief. Oath s again blab out scandalous impea^hments of honest women's
fame, because they would not seem alone to wear Actae^ns badge, and therefore
they se uerely censure of other men's wives. Many blaze out such detracting
speeches, because they want matters of discourse to humor other men.

But cursed might they be that begin these slanderous accusations, whereby
man and wise do vary, 2
after that God has joined them both together. Cursed might they be, who
being partial toward themselves do nevertheless pronounce sentence of
damnation against other men's incontinencie, as though themselves had never
tript: yea and cursed be those Sycophants, who with their runnag^te rumors and
reports do hinder Gentlewomen from their promotion in honest marriage. This
arrogant imputation our Sautour Christ himself refuted, when he willed those
presumptuous Jews, who inuaighed against the poor delinquent woman, that the
purest of them being void of sin, should fling the first stone at her Though
this sex (I confess) be weak, the weaker vessel, and may become seduced
with fair protestations of golden mountains as well as men, the impotence of
whose disposition is thus described by a Spaniard:

La muger hermosa es cemo la mancana
De dentro podrida y de sucra galana.
Like as thou findst an Apple foul within,
And fair without; such shall thou beauty find.
Yet nothwithstanding be thou the last that bruits abroad such tales, calling
to mind these grave rules:

En bonne part ce qu'on dit tu dots prendre,
Et imperfait du prochain supporter:
Couurir sa fault, and ne la rapporter,
'Prompt a lover et tardif a reprendre.
What men do speak in earnest or in jest,
take in good part: and if thy neighbor halt,
Excuse her slips, report them not at least,
be swist to salve, and slow to blame her fault.
For who can tell the end and use of our temptations? it may be that God
suffers some to go awry like Mary Magdalene for a little while, because the
lowly minded sinner may not despair of his euer-during mercy, and because
their own rod of experience may chastise their Iasciuiousnesse. Of this nature
is some woman's fall, that she might rise again, when her guilty heart submits
it self to Justice: for otherwise her conscience would not care for any thing,
if it were not once deeply wounded for some heinous thing, and that with an
ever feeling dint: whereby her contrite spirit might daily pour out this true
confession before his throne of mercy: I doc know mine own wickedness, and my
sins are always before me.

I could unfold many other Detractions against men's bodies, minds, and
fortunes, deu^sed by D^uellish persons in these latter days, to ransacke the
reputation of the best disposed were it not that I fear the censure of the
wise in noting my discourse to be too prolixe and ted^ous. Within this very
place I will therefore fasten the Anchor of the said discourse with this
memorable lesson, Aud^, vide, tac^, ^ivis v^uere in pace.

Hear and see, and say but the best,
If thou do love to live in rest.
LINEAMENT IX.
1 The reasons why men speak ill of learned books.

2 That superstitious persons cannot rightly connict the Spirit of detraction.

3 That the true conviction of the Spirit of Detraction consists in the
mysteries of Gods word.

TO draw now at last, to the last Scene of ^
this Comick-tragedie, I will convert my speech toward the Detractours of
learned Books, which worthy Wits by the Holy Spirits motion do daily
transcribe, as monuments of Gods glory, to all posterities. It is fatal unto
good men that their literate works be vilified in their lives time, chiefly
among their own acquaintance; for a Prophet was never as yet esteemed in his
own Country Seeing that Christ himself came among his own nation, and was
both despised and derided, what marvel is it then, that wise men are
dispraised of the present age? that the Spirit of Detraction pursues them
until their dying day? that he defiles their works with his stale and
stinking urine? What meruell is it, that

Laudamus veteres, and nostros carpimus annos,

We praise the old, and hate the present time?

What marvel, what novelty is it nowadayes, that wicked men carpe at their
wits whose Disciples or Apprentises they are not worthy to be, much less to
usurp the place of Aristarches or Censorian Catoes, over such industrious
wights?

Ye celestial Spirits, which expose abroad your sacred talents for your
Masters profit, loath to lurk in the Laechaeen cave of oblivion, fear not
this manifolded Monster. Though he assailes your younglings, the fruits of your
sanctified souls, with the wild Boares tuskes, with the Bears claws, with
the Serpents sting; his beastly force can never enter through your enchanted
armor. His envy will be abated through your modesty; his hatred, through
your kindness; his Detractions, through your perfections; his scorns, through
your virtuous influence Some kind of Al^mists their ignorance inciteth to
despise the works of the Learned, as confirms that old Rule: Scientia non
habet inimicum praeter ignorantem: Learning has no greater enemy then the
ignorant. Some detract from other men's Books, disgorging their gall upon the
absent Authors, for no other reason, then because they would seem wiser to
the standers by, then they are indeed. Some spit out infectious spite and rage
against them of very rank and mere maleuolence, for that it frets them to the
heart, that their coequals in the goods of Fortune, should become their betters
through the goods of Virtue; that the radiant rays of their Corriuals name and
fame eternized to the highest orb by a bookish monument or Colossos, should
eclipse their temporal transparence, and quite confound the memorial of their
former factions. Some for argument or cauillation sake seek a hole where no
hole is, reprehending those mysteries, which they cannot apprehend nor
comprehend.

The greatest part do ieere at their neighbors books, because they prefer
worldly profit before their souls, not able to spare one hour in the day for
holy exercise; though they can spare whole months for gain, ieasts,
pleasures, fooleries, or in debasing of noble spirits. Others discommend men's
writings, because they cannot disprove them, and yet nevertheless, by reason
that Ipse dixit, the Pythagorean, or rather Pythonicall I doll of their
consciences has prohibited them by an express Canon, not to believe the
positions of Protestants, though they issue out of Truths own mouth, therefore
because He which cannot err nor lie, no more then Socrates, if we may credit
Plato for the one, and Antichristians for the other; because his seeming
Holiness by virtue of his Eagles feathered force indictes me for an horned
beast, and my books for Heresies, I must not trauerse the indictment, nor
appeal to Caesar, nor to the general Council, but I must rest contented with
my doom, that the spirit of Detraction stands as yet stout, vnconiured and
vnconuicted.

Ascend then ye spirits of euer-darkning night, advance your selves on high,
ye spightfull spirits of Contradiction, 2
extend your stings, intend your Circles, and convict your fellow spirits, if
ye can. But why do I imagine reail Castles in the skies? why reuerberate I
the fleeting Air? The Ae^^iopian can as soon change his black skin, as ye
drive out the spirit of Detraction. Thou have loved liars, O usurping Eagle,
and thy blasphemy is come up unto the highest. Therefore appear no more 2
Esdras. 11
thou Eagle with thy horrible wings, with thy wicked feathers, thy ungracious
heads, thy sinful claws, and all thy vain body. At the least, presume not
to take in hand this important task, to confound this powerful Pantagruell,
the limme of that mighty Leu^athan, least your winged members (as Satan's
subjects) do contrary one another, and so divided through civil discord they
occasion the final subversion of your whole dominion. One grain of Faith
preuailes more then a mass of Masses, then millions of Ceremonies, of men's
Inventions, for the conuicting of Spiritual Monsters.

Go thy way then O detracting spirit, notwithstanding all these stings,
tuskes, claws, contradictions, carpings, 3
calumnations, and cauillations of savage people, of Aristarches, of Catoes, of
Momistes, of Monsters, and Usurpers; go thy way, (I say) convicted, I adjure
and conjure thee in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, the ternall and Eternal Unity, (who for the mystery of man's
salvation is really distinguished in appellation, operation, and personal
function, but indistinct in Essence, Omnipotence, and Eternity;) and venture
not hereafter to possess the sanctified souls of our newborn Britains,
nor attempt to tempt the Author of this aduenturous Arc, fraught by him but
with simple Circles in steed of Noah's necessary implements: whose spiritual
faculties I finally pray our Heavenly Lord, the Lord of Hierarchies, to fence
and fortify with the shining shield of his sunnie spirit, not only against
thy spiritual spite, O blast of Blasphemy, but also against all other
aspiring spirits whatsoever, whether they dwell in the flesh, or out of the
flesh.

Amen.
FINIS.
THE CONTENTS OF THE LINEAMENTS AND CIRCLES CONTAINED IN THIS WORK.
The first Circle.
Lineament I.
TO whose capacity the description of Spirits is difficult, and to whose it is
easy.

2 The Authors invocation to the Godhead, through whose only operation the
spirit of Detraction is to be coniured and convicted.

Lineament II.
1 That the true means to convict the Spirit of Detraction, is the Meditat^ on
Heavenly mysteries, and on the operation of goodness.

2 Man's curiosity in prying into Gods nature, stinted by a non vltra.

3 The description of some of Gods attributes.

4 That his a^seription is too excellent for man's apprehension.

5 That Good or Evil cannot come to mankind without his will.

Lineament III.
1 The admirable incorporation of the three persons in Trinity.

2 Their mystical operation unfolded according to our reasonable capacities.

3 How God is said to be in heaven.

4 After what manner the Trinity do differ one from another, either in
Appellation or in Operation.

5 That the Pagan Poets, like Apes, aimed at Gods mysteries by their dark
Allegories.

Lineament IIII.
1 The description of our Savior Christ's Incarnation. 2 In what manner he
took upon him our infirmities. 3 His terrible passion and death. 4 His
Resurrection and Ascension. 5 That he alone is our Medigtor with the Father. 6
His coming to Judgment.
Lineament V.
1 The description of the Holy Ghost.

2 How the Catholic Church was preserved from utter ruin in time of Popery.

3 That the misprision and contempt of the Holy Ghost, wrought the ruin, first
of the Eastern Church, and then of the Western.

4 Why this third person in Trinity is peculiarly termed Holy.

5 The manner to discern them that be possessed with the Holy Ghost, and why
S. Paul in his Epistles salutes men in the name of the Father, and the Son,
omitting the Holy Ghost.

6 What it is to sin against the Holy Ghost.

7 The Authors supplication to the Trinity for his presumptuous discourse.

Lineament VI.
1 Their Heresies convicted which detract from the service of God, because they
see him not with their corporal eyes.

2 The knowledge of God proved by an instance of our earthly King, who is
known throughout great Britain of all his subjects, though not of all with
corporal sight.

3 The excellency of his spirit above the rest of his subjects.

4 Means to know God.

5 Why mortal men cannot see God.

Lineament VII.
1 The description of some of the good spirits, which attend on their Creator
in heaven.

2 Their Offices.

4 Greatness.

The second Circle.
Lineament I.
1 THe true application of the above said Coniurations.

2 That the names of other good spirits be manifold and diversely taken in the
holy Scripture.

3 After what manner Sin, the messenger of Satan stings us.

4 By what means we may repel the stings of Satan.

5 That it is hard to judge of our spiritual stings, and from whence they come.

Lineament II.
1 The original root of Detractions and other pollutions; and whether the
spirit of Detraction and other sinful spirits, which possess mankind, be
real spirits or stings of the Devil?

2 The sight betwixt the knowledge of Good, and the knowledge of Evil.

3 That the Good gets the victory over the Evil.

4 That the Devil cannot harm a man really.

Lineament III.
1 That all wicked Spirit: ordinary and extraordinary do issue from the same
head.

2 That they cannot harm a man really, without his own natural or wanton
motion.

3 Their varieties proved out of the Scripture, where Saul's lunacie is censured.

4 That the Spirit of Detraction attends on all the said spirits.

Lineament IIII.
1 Why God gives us over to be tempted by Satan.

2 After what manner the Devil uses now a-dayes to ensnare us.

3 The Devils policy for the circumuenting of souls.

Lineament V.
1 Man's fall from the state of innocence is censured.

2 Curiosity curbed for intermedling with Gods secrets.

3 The first reason why man was not left altogether perfect and incapable of
sin.

4 The latter reason.

Lineament VI.
1 A meditation upon Satan's stings, occasioned by an unfeigned dream of the
Authors.

2 Whether the Dragon which S. John saw fighting with the Archangell, was real
or spiritual.

3 Whether the Serpent which deceived Eve was real, or spiritual, or both;
wherein the manner of her deceiving is laid down.

Lineament VII.
1 That the Holy Ghost applies the Scripture unto man's capacity.

2 An admonition to the Readers of the Scripture.

Lineament VIII.
1 The Election of the Protestants after the imitation of S. Paul's graffing in
of the Gentiles.

2 Means to discern the Antichrist by Prophesies out of the Scripture.

3 M^anes to discern the Antichrist by his pompous manner of living, and also
by his Detractions.

The third Circle.
Lineament I.
1 THe nature of the spirit of Detraction. 2 His objections. 3 The Authors
answer. 4 The description of Detraction. 5 His Companions. 6 His Paradoxes. 7
A brief Confutation.
Lineament II.
1 Notes to discern the spirit of Detraction. 2 A limitation of speeches.
Lineament III.
1 That the imbecility of our natural dispositions tainted through the first
Man's sin with curiosity, inconstancy, and negligence, is the prime cause of
the spirit of Detraction.

2 That our curious search after the supernatural beginning of time, works
our confusion.

3 Of our Curiosity.

4 Of our Inconstancy.

5 And of cur Negligence.

Lineament IIII.
1 That ill Education is another cause of malicious Detraction.

2 That want of maintenance in the Clergy, is the cause of ill Education.

3 Certain modern abuses taxed in some remote angles of this Kingdom.

Lineament V.
1 That the secret and spiritual suggestion of the Devil, is the third cause
of the Spirit of Detraction.

2 The cunning reasons of the Devil to confirm sin.

3 Their Confutation.

Lineament VI.
1 The natural manner, how the Spirit of Detraction enters into a man and
possesses him.

2 Another reason to confirm the premises.

Lineament VII.
1 Corollaries for the explanation of the premises. 2 Where wicked Spirits
reside in man.
Lineament VIII.
1 That the spirit of Detraction has two principal instruments, the Hand and
the Tongue.

2 Their apish tricks.

3 Their monstrous effects.

4 A brief dehortation from Detraction.

Lineament IX.
1 The Authors censure of certain English Pamphleters, and Ballad-writers,
with an invocation to my Lord of Canterbury for a reformation, not only of
these abuses in writing, but also of other enormities committed against the
Church-Canons.

2 A Description of good and evil Writers.

3 That there is a mixed moral kind of writing, serving as the lesser light
for the conversion of the natural man.

Lineament X.
1 Certain Detractions of our common Stage Players are taxed.

2 How God distributes his gifts diversely to every particular man.

3 The Authors brief Apology concerning his own imprinted works.

Lineament XI.
1 What kind of persons the spirit of Detraction does soonest possess: with a
description of the common people.

2 That wise men and of resolution must not fear the Detractions of the common
people.

3 That it is necessary for Envy to be the companion of Virtue, and for the
spirit of Detraction to follow Magistrates, as the shadow the body for the
corroborating of their virtues.

Lineament XII.
1 Why men soiourne with the spirit of Detraction, and will not be dislodged
from him.

2 That no worldly causes ought to dispose a man unto Detraction.

Lineament XIII.
1 The Conclusion, showing that all persons from the Prince his Scepter, to the
Cobblers naule, are subject to Detracting tongues.

The fourth Circle.
Lineament I.
1 THe felicity and infelicitie of our Country of Great Britain.

2 The Authors supplication to the high and mighty Court of Parliament for
suppressing of common Swearing, Blasphemies, Slanders, Per^urtes, and other
Detractions offensive to God and their Countries weal.

3 That they crucisie Christ anew, which swear either want only or wilfully by
his blood, etc.

4 The Authors motion for more Additions to the Statute of Perjury.

5 The necessity of these Additions, and of likely circumstances to lead our
common Jurors.

Lineament II.
1 That Licentiousness is the cause of Detractions, defamations, periuries,
and blasphemies.

2 That Tauernes are the causes of licentiousness; whereby the Author takes
an occasion to admonish Magistrates of their duty in this important case.

Lineament III.
That the Spirit of Detraction is sooner convicted through the bright light and
testimony of the Scripture, then through men's real force or worldly devices.

Lineament IIII.
The Spirit of Detraction coniured and convicted by the Prophet David's
testimony.

Lineament V.
The spirit of Detraction coniured and convicted by King Salomons testimony.

Lineament VI.
The spirit of Detraction coniured and convicted by Jesus the son of Syraches
testimony.

Lineament VII.
The spirit of Detraction and Perjury coniured and convicted by other
testimonies of the Scripture.

Lineament VIII.
The Authors advise to lury-men, wishing them to proceed uprightly according
to their oaths, and also to meditate on the future discourse.

Lineament IX.
The Spirit of Detraction coniured and convicted by the Civil laws
Constitutions.

Lineament X.
The Spirit of blasphemous Detraction convicted by Gods judgments executed on
some of our own Countries inhabitants.

Lineament XI.
The Spirit of Detraction and Perturie convicted by sentence of our own laws
executed on corrupted lurours.

Lineament XII.
The Spirit of Detraction convicted by the statute De scandalis magnatum, and
also by the Sovereign authority of the Court of Star Chamber.

Lineament XIII.
1 Of the Jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastical Court, touching words of
Detraction and defamation.

2 Where the Kings writ of Prohibition lies against such actions commenced in
that Court.

3 That mixed actions belong to the Common law.

Lineament XIIII.
Observations concerning words of Detraction and Defamation, fit to be perused
of Sheriffs and Stewards, or of other Judges of inferior Courts, extracted
out of the Reports of Sir Edward Cook Knight, Lord chief Justice of the
common Pleas.

Lineament XV.
Observations concerning detracting Libels given in the Star Chamber, and
collected out of Sir Edward Cooks Reports.

Lineament XVI.
The conclusion of the fourth Circle, containing the Authors pareneticall
Charge to common Iuries.

The fifth Circle.
Lineament I.
1 THe Authors scope in this Circle.

2 His invocation to the Godhead, against his Ghostly Enemies.

Lineament II.
1 How the Spirit of Detraction attributes the glorious works of God unto the
Devil.

2 That men's guilty consciences drive them to ex^o^^ the Devil and his
supposed power.

Lineament III.
Proved out of the Book of Wisdom, that men's guilty consciences caused them
at first to fear Bugs and Spirits.

Lineament IIII.
How men's guilty consc^ences made them to mistake the truth, and to become
afraid of things merely natural.

Lineament V.
A merry story borrowed out of Peter de Loiers book of Specters, showing how
a Trauailer was frighted in passing by a Gallows.

Lineament VI.
1 Whether in time of Popery the Devil appeared to Coniurers or Witches.

2 Why now adays the Devils apparitions are ceased among the professors of
the Gospel.

3 The Authors opinion touching his visible illusions.

Lineament VII.
1 How Popish Shauelings inuen^ed the use of common Coniurations and fictions,
in policy for the greater efficacy of their Idols, Holy Water, and
Masse-monging; wherein the weakness of their Holy Water is showed.

2 That they coined lies of purpose to confirm their sect, namely, in Luthers
life time, of Luthers death.

3 A note delivered by the Author touching the Devils real power.

Lineament VIII.
1 That true miracles were but lent by the Lord to the Primitive Church, for
confirmation of the Gospel which accompanied the said miracles.

2 How in their stead false miracles crept into the Church with the Antichrist
in the time of the great Apostasy.

3 The Devils Synod for employments of his hellish spirits.

4 The Authors digression, showing that the Devils shape was not real, but
delusiue to deceive the eyesight.

5 How men by his spiritual insinuations bec^me his agents here on earth.

6 The Devils craft to continue men in their Detractions.

Lineament IX.
1 What is the craft of our common Wizards.

2 That Soldiers and men of courage have been daunted with disgu^sed Angels.

3 Examples of ordinary Witchcraft, Sorceries, and Coniurations.

Lineament X.
An example translated out of Monsieur du Chesne his pourtait de la sante,
declaring how one Monsieur Poena, a Physician of Paris, coniared two spirits
out of a possessed man's body.

Lineament XI.
An excellent example of Con^uration, translated out of Erasmus his
Exorcisines, fit to be observed of our superstitious Detractors.

Lineament XII.
1 That the Devils common dr^ft is, spiritually to undermine the will of man.

2 That his scope and force is cousenage and deceit.

Lineament XIII.
Apborismes collected out of the first Fathers of the Primitive Church
concerning the Devils power.

Lineament XIIII.
1 The Authors Dehortation from such vain detracting studies.

2 The knowledge of Astrology stinted and censured.

Lineament XV.
1 That the Authors meaning is not to deny the Devils real subsistence.

2 His charitable application of the statute against Witchcraft, made Anno
primo Iacobi.

3 That he only denies his real power, and his palpable force over any of
Gods creatures.

4 The vanity and fondness of Wizards.

5 That the hand of God plagued Job and other creatures of his.

6 That good men never detract from Gods glory.

Lineament XVI.
The Spirit of Detraction punished by the immediate power of God, proved by
examples out of the Scripture.

The sixth Circle.
Lineament I.
1 THe spirit of Detractions pleas and allegations on the behalf of his
humouring and soothing men in their vanities.

2 The said spirit sharply rebuked for his Equivocation and dissimulation.

3 The Authors purpose in this subsequent Circle.

Lineament II.
1 How the Spirit of Detraction goes about to overthrow Predestination in
attributing our misfortunes immediately to the Planets, thunders, lightnings,
or other natural creatures; where the Author excuses himself for writing of
such deep mysteries.

2 How God made the second causes and all other things in this world for man's
sake.

Lineament III.
The Spirit of Detraction conu^cted for measuring Gods providence by their own
humane providence.

Lineament IIII.
1 The Authors censure of Predestination.

2 That all second causes do work their effects according to the first causes
direction, which is God.

3 How God endowed some with free will through grace to enable them unto faith.

4 The Spirit of Detraction con^^cted for imputing the cause of men's damnation
to Gods decree.

Lineament V.
That God is not the Author of Temptation, but an Actor therein.

Lineament VI.
1 How God predestined some to be saved.

2 Why all men were not elected.

3 That men's own wills by Gods sufferance occasion their reprobation and harm.

4 The Authors sentence concerning himself, whether he be one of the elect.

5 That Good and Evil cannot come without Gods consent.

Lineament VII.
1 The causes why God ordained thunder and lightning.

2 The natural nutriments of lightning.

3 Why thunder and lightning be most dangerous in Winter.

4 Where they work their operations more vehemently.

5 An admon^tion to build low.

Lineament VIII.
1 How God sends thunder and lightning either for his glory, for men's trial,
or for their punishment.

2 Examples as well modern as ancient offorcible thunders and lightning.

Lineament IX.
1 That they detract from the glorious Majesty of God, which attribute his
thunders, lightnings, and other meteorly signs to the Devil or his adherents.

2 Proofs out of the word of God, that God alone sends forth such terrible
sign.

Lineament X.
1 Probable proofs out of Civil policy, that God is iealo^s of his glory,
and glorious signs, and therefore not probable that he would lend his real
power to the Devil.

2 Examples of worldly states, which could not endure usurpers of their
transitory titles and prerogatives.

3 That God hates Coniurers, Witches, Antichristians, and other Detractors and
usurpers, worse then Atheists or ignorant I^fidels.

Lineament XI.
1 Wherefore God diuerteth his natural creatures against mankind.

2 That all crosses and misfortunes proceed only from God.

3 That in any wise we must not delay repentance.

4 An objection against sudden death by the spirit of Detraction out of the
Letany, with a confutation thereof.

Lineament XII.
1 That we must not judge by men's misfortunes, or sudden death, that they be
forsaken of God.

2 Charitable censures, which a good Christian may yield touching those that
die suddenly.

3 The Spirit of Detraction convicted for censuring ouer-cruelly of the Authors
wife, who was sticken dead with lightning the third of January, 1603. where her
commendation and assumption are moralized.

Lineament XIII.
1 The Authors gratulation for his late fortunate deliverance.

2 His description of the lightning tragedy, the third day of January, 1608. at
what time God ^ooke away his wife.

3 His description of other crosses at the very same time.

4 How God fore-shewed by mysteries the said crosses before they happened unto
the Author: wherein his censure of Dreams is interlaced.

5 His description of his miraculous escape out of the Sea, wherein he fell by
force of a cruel tempest on a Christmasse day, 1602.

Lineament XIIII.
1 The spirit of Detraction convicted for censuring the Lords secret judgments.

2 The Authors imperfections acknowledged.

3 His meditation on his late crosses.

Lineament XV.
The Authors gratulatorie Prayer unto the Lord for the aboue-said wondrous
effects.

Lineament XVI.
1 The Conclusion of this present Circle, consecrated by the Author to his
Wives memory.

2 The Application of her memorable death.

3 The Authors Apology against the Spirit of Detraction, on the behalf of
this present Circle, where his Wives memory is saluted with a Christian
farewell.

The seventh Circle.
Lincament I.
1 THat the spirit of Detraction can never annoy us, while the Majesty of
Justice shines upon us.

2 The Authors supplication to the Lord Chancellor of England, the Lord
President of Wales, and to all other his Majesty's Judges of Record within this
Monarchy of Great Britain, for the ex^^rping out of notorious blasphemies.

3 The Spirit of Detractions craft in molesting his Majesty's inferior
Officers.

4 His diabolical craft in wronging of private persons.

5 The Authors Conclusion to the aboue-said Lords, for reformation of the said
abuses.

Lineament II.
1 That after Controulement, Instruction is necessary for them, that be
possessed with the Spirit of Detraction.

2 That Taciturnitie and Patience do conjure him down into hell.

Lineament III.
1 The description of Taciturnitie.

2 That the nature and quality of a man may be discerned by speech or writing.

3 That wise men in private may descant of their neighbors faults, so that the
same tend to edification.

Lineament IIII.
1 That Patience is policy in Detractions. 2 An exhortation to patience. 3 An
objection of the Detracted. 4 A confutation.
Lineament V.
1 That the Spirit of Detraction begins to shrink through the influence of
Taciturnitie and Patience.

2 The Spirit of Detraction convicted for broaching out questions of Princes
Soueraignties.

3 That private persons ought not to dispute of their Prince his dealings.

Lineament VI.
1 The Authors scope in this subsequent discourse.

2 The Spirit of Detraction convicted in Protestants, for exasperating of
Puritanes in their perverse humors.

3 The Spirit of Detraction convicted in Puritanes, for their obstinacy
against our Ecclesiastical Canons.

Lineament VII.
1 The Spirit of D^traction convicted for repining at our Christian neighbors
of Scotland.

2 ^he said Spirit conu^cted for detracting from our Contrymen of Wales.

Lineament VIII.
1 The Spirit of Detraction convicted in Advocates and Counselors at Law, for
putting on a goodface on bad causes.

2 The Authors resolution on the behalf of honest Lawyers.

Lineament IX.
1 The Authors ^nuocation to the Deity for pardoning the petulance of his
spleen in this present Lineament.

2 That Judges and Executioners of justice of all others, are most wan^ only
detracted by our swaggering Libertines; wherein their vanity is censured by the
Author; and also their cr^^ing G^^ealogics are controuled.

3 The cartage of Judges toward such detracting Sycophants.

4 An admonition to Judges, not to respect taunting tongues.

5 Another admonition unto them not to rail and revile at their inferiors.

Lineament X.
1 That a true Christian ought not to detract from the Judges of his Country,
though they wrong (...).

2 That no mortal man lives exempted from manifold crosses.

3 What vexations befall to Judges themselves.

Lineament XI.
1 The Reply of the Spirit of Detraction, to the premises.

2 An Answer to the said Reply out of the Rules of Policy, fit to be observed
of peevish Preachers.

3 The benefit that comes to a true Christian by detracting tongues, where the
Spirit of Detraction is convicted with his own force.

Lineament XII.
The spirit of Detraction convicted for censuring men for their

1 Poverty.

2 Birth.

3 Bodily imperfections.

Lineament XIII.
1 The Spirit of Detraction convicted for blabbing out tales concerning women
credits.

2 Wherefore it is not lawful to speak abroad of women's causes.

Lineament XIIII.
1 The reasons why men speak ^ll (...) learned books.

2 That superstitious persons cannot rightly con^ict the Spirit of detraction.

3 That the true conviction of the Spirit of Detraction consists in the
mysteries of Gods word.

FINIS.

