THE ENGLISHEMANS TREASVRE, OR TREASOR FOR ENGLISHMEN:

With the true Anatomye of Man's Body, Compiled by that excellent surgeon
Master Thomas Vicary Esquire Sergeant Surgeon to King Henry the 8. To King
Edward the 6.

To Queen Mary. And to our Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth.

And also chief Surgeon to S. Bartholomewes hospital.

Whereunto are annexed many secrets appertaining to Chirur gery, with diverse
excellent approved Remedies for all diseases the which are in man or woman,
with emplasters of special cure with other potions and drinks approved in
Phisike.

Also the rare treasor of the English Bathes, Written by William Turner, Doctor
in Physic.

Gathered and set forth for the benefit of his friends and countrymen in
England by William Bremer Practitioner in Physic and Surgery.

AT LONDON,

Imprinted by John VVindet for John Perin dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the
sign of the Angel, and are there to be sold. 1586.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIP FVLL SIR ROVLAND HAYWARD KNIGHT, PRESIDENT OF LITTLE
SAINT BARTHOLOMEVVS in West Smithfeilde, Sir Ambrose Nicolas Knight Sir Thomas
Ramesay knight, with the rest of the worshipful Masters and governors of the
same: William Clowes, William Beton, Richard Story and Edward Bailey,
Chirurgions of the same hospital, wishes health and prosperity.
THE people in times past did praise and extol by Pictures and Epigrammes the
famous deeds of all such persons, whosoever in any verteous qualitye or
liberal science excelled. Sulpitius Gallus among the Romans was highly
renowned for his singular cunning in Astronomy, by whose means Lucius Paulus
obtained the victory in his wars against Persius. Pericles also among the
Athenians was had in great admiration and honor for his profound knowledge in
Philosophy, by whom the whole city of Athens was from care and woe delivered,
when they supposed their destruction to be near at hand, by a black dareknes
of some admiration hanging over their city. How honorably was Apelles the
Painter esteemed of mighty king Alexander by whom only he desired to be
painted. But amongst all other arts and Sciences, whose praise in times past
flourished and shined most brightly, Surgery among the wise Grecians lacked
not his praise, honor and estimation. For did not that worthy and famous
captain of the Greeks Agamemnon love dearly and reward bountifully both
Podalerius and Machaon through whose cunnings skill in Surgery, thousands of
worthy Greeks were saved alive and healed, who else had died and perished. And
further here to speak of Philoneter, of Attalus, of Hiero, of Archelaus, and of
Iuba kings of famous memory, who purchased eternal praise by their study and
cunning in Physic and Surgery. But now in these our days envy so rules the
roste, that Physic should be condemned, and Surgery desp^sed for ever but
that sometime pain bids battle, and care keeps skirmish, in such bitter
sort, that at the last this Alarm is sounded out, Now come Physic, and
then help Surgery. Then is remembered the saying of Jesus the son of Sirach:
which is notable, Honor the Physician and Surgeon for necessity, whom the
almighty God has created because from the highest comes medicine, and they
shall receive gifts of the King. Wherefore we exhort the wise man that he in
notime of prosperity and health, neglect these noble arts and mysteries of
Physic and Surgery, because no age, no person, no country can long time
lack their helps and remedies. What is it to have lands and houses, to
abound in silver and gold to be decked with pearls and diamondes, yea and to
possess the whole world, to rule over nations and contreys: and to lack
health, the cheifest Jewel and greatest treasure of man's life and delight.

Consider then we beseech your Worships, what praises are due to such noble
Sciences, which only work the causes of this aforesaid health, and how much
the wealepublike are bound to all them, whose cares and studies daily tends
to this end. Amongst whom here is to be remembered Master Vicary Esquire,
Sergeant Surgeon to Kings and Queens of famous memory: Whose learned work
of Anatomye is by us the forenamed Surgions of Saint Bartholomewes in
Smithfeild, newly revived, corrected and published abroad to the commodity of
others, who be students in Surgery: not without our great studies, pains
and charges, And although we do lack the profound knowledge, and sugared
eloquence of the Latin and Greek tongues, to deck and beautify this work,
yet we hope the studious reader shall thereby reap singular commodity and
fruit, by reading this little treatise of the Anatomy of man's body, the which is
only grounded upon reason and experience which are two principal roots of
physic and Surgery. As it is granted by Galen in his third book De methodo
medendi: and we who daily work and practice in Surgery, according to the
deepnesse of the Art, as well in grievous wounds, ulcers, and Fistules, as
other hyd and secret diseases upon the body of man, daily used by us in S.
Bartholomewes hospital, and other places, etc. Those poor and grieved
creatures, as well men and weomen, as children do know the profitte of this
art, to be manifold, and the lack of the same to be lamented. Therefore Galen
truly writes, saying, That no man ca^ work so perfectly, as aforesaid,
without the knowledge of the Anatomy: For (says he) it is as possible for a
blind man to carue and make an image perfect, as a Chirurgian to work without
error in man's body not knowing the Anatomy. And further, for as much as your
Worships are very careful for those poor and grieved creaturs within the
Hospital of S. Bartholomewes. etc. whereof Master Vicary was a member: We are
therefore now encouraged to dedicate this little work of the Anatomy, being his
and our trauells, to you as Patrons of this book to defend against the
ravening Jaws of enuyous Backbyters, which never cease by all unlawful means
to blemish and deface the works of the learned, expert, and well disposed
persons. Finally, we do humbly crave of your goodnesses, to accept in good part
this treatise concerning the Anatomy, as the fruits of our studies and
labors, whereby we shall be much better encouraged to set forth hereafter
other profitable works for the common wealth. Herein if your Wisdoms do
vouchsafe to hear our requests, and to allow these our doings, as did noble
Amasius king of Aegipt accept the labors of his painful Artificers, We
have not only to thank your Worshipes for so doing, but also to pray unto the
almighty God to requite your goodnesses, receiving you into his protection and
keeping.

Amen.
To the Reader.
Dear Brethren, and fren dly Readeres, we have here according to the truth
and meaning of the Author, set forth this needful and necessary work
concerning the Anatomy of man's body, being collected and gathered by Master
Thomas Vicary, and now by us the Chirurgions of S. Bartholomevves Hospital
revived, corrected, and published. And albeit this treatise be small in volume,
yet in commodity it is great and profitable. Notvvithstanding if the things
therein contained be not discreetely and vvisely studied and applied, according
to the true meaning of the Author, we have to tell you heerof, that therein is
great peril, because through ignorant practitioners, not knovving the Ana
tomy, commonly does ensue death, and sepa ration of soul and body. Furthermore
vvheras many good and learned men in these our days, do cease to publishe
abroad in the English tongue their works and trauelles, it is for that if
any one fault or blemish by fortune be committed, either by them or the
printer escaped, they are blamed, yea and condemned for ignorant men, and error
holders. But now we cease here from these points, to trouble the gentle
readervvith longer discoursing, for whose sakes and commodities we have taken
these pains: vvishing that men more skillful and better learned would have
bome this burden for us. Craving only this much at your hands, for to correct
our faults favorably, and to report of the Author courteouslye, who sought (no
doubt) your commodities only and the profit of the common wealth without
praise and vaineglory of him self. Thus we the Chirurgions aforesaid, commit
you to the blessed keeping of Almighty God, who alvvayes defend and increase
your studies and ours.

Amen.
THOMAS VICARY TO HIS Brethren practicing surgery
HEreaf^er follows a little treatise (...) Trea^ure for Englishmen of ^he
Anatomy of man: Made by Thomas Vicarie Citizen and Surgeon of London, for
all such young ^rethren of his fellowship practicing Surgery: Not for them
that be expertly see^e in the Anatomy: for to them Galen the (...) of all
(...), has set it forth in his Canons, to the high glory of God, and to the
erudition and knowledge of all those that be expertly seen and learned in the
noble science of Surgery. And because all the noble Philosophers writing
upon Surgery, do condemn all such persons as practice in Surgery not
kno^ing the (...). Therefore (...) have drawn into certain lessons and small
Chapt^rs, a part of the Anatomy, ^ut touching a part of every member
particulerly: Requiring every man that shall read this little treatise, to
correct and amend it where it shall be need, and hold me excused for my bold
enterprise, and accept my goodwill toward the same.

O Lord which ^ade the loftye Skies,
Work in our Rulers hearts,
Always to have before their eyes
Safeguard to godly Arts.
Now he that is the perfect guide,
does know our helps were here alone
By homely style it may be spyde
for rules in Rhetoric have we none.
Our heads do lack that filed phrase,
Whereon fine wits delight to gase.
If any say we deserve here blame,
We pray you then amend the same.
A TREASVRE FOR English men, containing the Anatomy of man's body: Compyled by
Thomas Vycarie, Esquire, and Sergeant Surgeon to King Henry the eight, to K.
Edward the sixth, to Queen Marie, and to our most gracious Sovereign Lady
Queen Elizabeth. And also chief Chyrurgion of S Bartholomewes Hospital. for
the use and commodity of all unlearned practicioners in Chirurgerie.
HEre I shall declare unto you, shortly and briefly, the sayings, and the
determinations of diverse ancient Authors, in three points, very expedient for
all men to know, that entend to use or exercise the mystery or art of
Chirurgerie. The first is, to know what thing Chirurgerie is: The second is,
how that a Surgeon should be chosen: And the third is, with what properties
a Surgion should be endued.

The first is to know what thing Chirurgerie is. Herein I do note the saying
of Lamfranke, whereas he says: All things that man would know, may be known
by one of these three things: That is to say, by his name, or by his working,
or else by his very being and showing of his own properties. So then it
follows, that in the same manner we may know what Chirurgerie is by three
things. First, by his name, as thus: The Interpreters write, that Surgerie is
derived out of these words, Apo tes chiros, cai tou ergou, that is to be
understood: a hand working, and so it may be taken for all handie arts. But
noble Ipocras says, that Surgerie is hand working in man's body, for the
very end and profit of Chirurgerie is hand working.

Now the second manner of knowinge what thing Chirurgerie is, it is the
saying of Auicen to be known by his being, for it is verelye a medecinall
science: and as Galen says: he that will know the certainty of a thing,
let him not busy him self to know only the name of that thing, but also the
working and the effect of the same thing.

Now the third way to know what thing Chirurgerie is, It is also to be
known by his beeinge or declaring of his own properties, the which teaches
us to work in man's body with hands: as thus: In cuttinge or openinge those
parts that be whole, and in healing those parts that be broken or cut, and
in taking away that that is superfluous, as Warts, Wennes, Skurfulas, and other
like. But further to declare what Galen says Surgerie is. It is the last
instrument of medicine: that is to say, Diet, Pocion, and Chirurgerie: of the
which three, says he, Diet is the noblest, and the most virtuous. And thus
he says, whereas a man may be cured with Diet only, let therebee given no
manner of medicine. The second instrument is Pocion: for and if a man may be
cured with Diet and Pocion, let there not be ministered any Chirurgerie. The
third and last instrument, is Chirurgerie, through whose virtue and goodness
is removed and put away many grievous infirmities and diseases, which might
not have been removed nor yet put away, neither with Diet, nor with Pocion.
And by these three means it is known what thing Chirurgerie is. And this
suffiseth for us for that point. Now it is known what thing Chirurgerie is,
there must also be chosen a man apt and meet to minister Surgerie, or to be
a Surgeon. And in this point all Authors do agree, that a Surgeon
should be chosen by his complexion, and that his complexion be veri^
temperate, and all his members well proportioned^. For Rasis says: Whose face
is not seemly, it is impossible for him for to have good manners. And
Aristotle the great Philosopher writes in his Epistles to the noble King
Alexander (as in those Epistles more plainly does appear) how he should
choose all such persons as should serve him, by the form and shape of the
face, and all other members of the body. And furthermore they say, he that
is of an evil complexion, there must needs follow like c^nditions. Wherefore
it agrees that a Surgeon must be both of a good and temperate complexion,
as is before rehearsed. And principally, that he be a good liver, and a keeper
of the holy commandments of God, of whom comes all cunning and grace,
and that his body be^ not quaking, and his hands ^tedfast, his fingers long
and small, and not tremblinge: and that his left hand be as ready as his
right hand, with all his lymmes able to fulfill the good works of the soul.
Now here is a man meet to be made a Surgeon. And though he have all
these good qualities before rehearsed, yet is he no good Surgeon, but a man
very fit and meet therefore. Now then to know what properties and
conditions this man must have before he be a perfect Surgeon.

And I do note four things most specially that every Chir^rgion ought for
to have: The first, that he be learned: The second, that he be expert:
The third, that he be ing^nious: The fourth, that he be well mannered. The
first (I said) he ought to be learned, and that he know his principles,
not only in Chirurgerie, but also in Physic, that he may the (...) defend
his Surgeri^. Also he ought to be seen^ in natural Philosophy, and in
Grammar, that he speak congruitie in Logike, that teaches him to prove his
proportions with good reason. In Rhethorike, that teaches him to speak
seemly and eloquently: also in Theorike, that teaches him to know things
natural, and not natural, and things against nature. Also he must know the
Anatomy, for all authors write against those Surgeons that work in man's
body, not knowing the Anatomy: For they be likened to a blind man, that
cutteth in a Uine tree, for he takes more or less then he ought to do. And
here note well the saying of Galen the prince of Philosophers, in his Estoris,
that it is as possible for a Surgion not knowing the Anatomy, to work in man's
body without error, as it is for a blind man to carue an Image and make it
perfect. The second, I said, he must be expert: For Rasus says, he ought to
know and to see other men work, and after to have use and exercise. The
third, that he be ingenious or witty: for all things belonging to Chirurgerie
may not be written, nor with letters set forth. The fourth, I said, that he
must be well manered, and that he have all these good conditions here following:
First, that he be no spousbreaker, nor no drunkarde. For the Philosophers say,
amongst all other things, beware of those persons that follow drunkenness, for
they be accounted for no men, because they live a life bestial: wherefore
amongst al other sorts of people, they ought to be sequestered from the
ministering of medicine. Likewise a Surgeon must take heed that he deceive
no man with his vain promises, for to make of a small matter a great, because
he would be counted the more famous. And amongst other things, they may
neither be flatterers, nor mockers, nor privy backbyters of other men.
Likewise they must not be proud, nor presumptuous, nor detracters of other
men. Likewise they ought not to be too covetous, ^nor no nigarde, and namely
amongst their friends, or men of worship, but let them be honest, courteous,
and free, both in word and (...). Likewise they shall giu^ (...) counsel
exce^t they (...), and then say their adui^e by good delib^ration, and that
they be well advised a^ore they speak, ch^efely in the presence of wise men.
Likewise they mu^t be as privy and as secret as any Confessor, of all
things that they shall either hear or see in the house of their Pacient. They
shall not take into their cure any manner of person, except he will be obedient
unto their precepts, for he can not be called a pacient, unless he be a
sufferer. Also that they do their diligence as well to the poor as to the
rich. They shall never discomfort their Pacient, and shall command all that
be about him that they (...) the same, but to his ^riends speak truth as the
^ase (...). They must also be bold in those things whereof they be certain,
and as dreadful in all perilles. They may not ^hide with the (...), but be
always pleasant and merry. They must not covet any woman by way of vilanie,
and specially in the house of their Pacient. They shall not for covetousness
of money take in hand those cures that be incurable; nor never set any
certain day of the sickmans health, for it lies not in their power: following
the distinct counsel of Galen, in the amphorisme of Ipocras, saying: Oportet
seipsum non solum. By this Galen means, that to the cure of euerysore there
belongs four things: of which, the first and principal belongs to God,
the second to the Surgion, the third to the Medicine, and the fourth to the
Pacient. Of the which four and if any one do fail, the Pacient can not be
healed: then they, to whom belongs but the fourth part, shall not promise
the whole, but be first well advised. They must also be gracious and good to
the poor, and of the rich take liberally for both. And see they never praise
them selves, for that redoundeth more to their shame and discredit, then to
their fame and worship: For a cunning and skillful Surgeon need never vaunt
of his doings, for his works will ever get (...). Likewise that they despise no
other Surgeon without a great cause: for it is meet^ that ^ne Surgeon
should love another, as Christ loves us al. And in thus doing they shall
increase both in virtue and cunning, to the honor of God and worldly fame. To
whom he bring us all. Amen.

The Anatomy of the simple members.
ANd if it be, asked you how many simple members therebe, it is to be
answered, eleven and two that be but super (...) of members: and th^se be they,
Bones, Cartilages, Nerves, Pannicles, Lygame^ts, Cords, Arteirs, Ueynes,
Fatnes, Flesh and Skin: and the superfluities be the hears and the nails. I
shall begin at the bone, because it is the foundation, and the hardest member of
all the body. The Bone is a c^nsimile member, simple and spermaticke, and cold
and dry of complexion, insensible, and inflexible: and has diverse forms in
man's body, for the diversity of helpings. The cause why there be many bones in
man's body is this: Sometime it is needeful that one member or one lymme should
move without another. Another cause is, that some defend the principal
members, as does the bone of the breast, and of the head: and some to be the
foundation of diverse parts of the body, as the bones of the Ridge, and of the
legs: and some to fulfill the hollow places, as in the hands and feet, etc.

The Grystle is a member simple and spermaticke, next in hardness to the bone,
and is of complexion cold and dry, and insen^ible. The grystle was ^rdeyned
for ^ixe ^auses, or profits that I fin^e in it: The first is, that the
continual moving of the hard bone might not be done in a iuncture but that the
grystle should be a mean between the Lygament and him: The second is, that
in the time of concussion or oppression, the soft members or limbs should not
be hurt of the hard^: The third is, that the extremity of bones and Joints
that be grystly, might the (...) be folded and moved together without hurt: the
fourth is, for that it is necessary in some mean places to put a grystle, as
in the throat bowel for the sound: The fifth is, for that it is needful that
some members be holden up with a grystle, as the l^ds of the eyes: The sixth
is; that some limbs have a susteyning and a drawing abroad, as in the nose
and the ears, etc.

The Lygament is a member consimple, simple, and spermaticke, next in hardness
hardness (...) the grystle and of com^lexion cold and dry, and is fle^ible
and in^ensible, and bi^deth the bones together. The cause why h^ is flexible
and insensible is this: If it had been sensible, he might not have suffered the
labor and moving of the joints: and if it had not been flexible of his
bowing, one lymme should not have moved without another. The second profit
is, that he be joined with sinew^s, for to (...) Cords and Brawnes: The
third help is, that he be a resting pla^e to some synews: The fourth profit
is, that by him the members that be within the body be sustained, as the matrix
and kidneis, and diverse other, etc.

The Sinew is a (...) member, simple and spermaticke, mean between har^ and
soft, and in complexion cold and dry, and he is both flexible an^ sensible,
strong and tough, having his beginning from the brain, or from Mynuca, which
is the (...) of the back. And from the brain comes, (...) pair ^f Nerves
se^satiues, an^ from Mynuca comes xxx. pair of Nerves moti^s, and one that
is by himself, that springs of the last spondell. All these senewes have
both feeling and moving, in ^ome more and in some less. etc.

A Cord or Tendon is a consimple or official member, compounde and
spermaticke, synowy, strong, and tough, meanly between hardness and softness,
and meanly sensible, and flexible, and in complexion cold and dry. And the
Cord or Tendon is thus made: The synewes that come from the brain and from
Mynuca, and go to move the members, is intermingled with the Lygamentes, and
when the synewes and Lygamentes are intermingled together, then is made a
Cord. And three causes I perceive why the Cords were made: The first is, that
the Synewe alone is so sensible that he may not suffer the great labor and
travel of moving, without the fellowshippe and strength of the Lygament that
is insensible, and that lets his great feeling, and brings him to a
perfect temperaunce, and so the Cords move the limbs to the will of the
soul. And this Cord is associated with a simple flesh, and so thereof is
made a brawne or a Muskle, on whom he might rest after his travel. And this
Brawne is called a Muskle. Then when this Cord is entered into this brawne, he
is departed into many small threedes, the which be called will. And this will
has three properties. The first is in length, by whose virtue that draws it
has might: The second in breadth, by whom the virtue that casts out has
might: The third in thwartnes, in whom the vert^e that holds has might: and
at the end of the Brawne those threedes be gathered together to make an other
Muskle. etc.

Now I will begin at the Artere. This Artere is a member cons^myle, simple
and spermaticke, hollow and synowye, having his springing from the heart,
bringing from the heart to every mem^er blood and spirit of life. It is of
complexion cold and dry. And all these Arteres have two cotes, except one
that goes to the Lunges, and he has but one cote that spreads abroad in the
Lungs, and brings with him to the Lungs blood, with the spirit of life to
nourish the Lungs withal: and also that Artere brings with him from the
lungs air to temper the fumous heat that is in the heart. And this Artere is
he that is called Arteria venalis, because he has but one cote as a vain, and
is more obedient to be delated abroad through ^l the lungs, because that the
blood might the sooner sweat through him: whereas all other Arters have two
cotes, because one cote may not withstand the might and power of the spirit
of life. Diverse other causes there be, which shall be declared in the Anatomy
of the breast. etc.

The Ueyne is a simple member in complexion cold and dry, and spermaticke,
like to the Artere, having his beginning from the Liver, and bringing from the
Liver nutritive blood, to nourish every member of the body with. And it is so
to be understood that there is no more difference between these two vessels
of blood, but that the Artere is a vessel of blood spiritual or vital. And
the Ueine is a vessel of blood nutrimentall, of the which Ueines there is
noted two most principal, of the which one is called Vena porta, the other is
called venacelis, of whom it is too much to treat of now, until we come to
the Anatomy of the womb. etc.

The flesh is a consimiler member, simple, not spermaticke, and is engendered of
blood congeled by heat, and is in complexion hot and moist. Of the which is
noted three kinds of fleshes: that is to say, one is soft (...) pure flesh:
the second is muskulus, or hard and brawny flesh: the third is glandulus,
knotty, or kurnelly flesh. Also the commodities of the flesh be indifferent,
for some be common to every kind of flesh, and some be proper to one manner of
flesh alone. The profits of the flesh be many, for some defend the body from
cold as does clothes: also it defends the body from hard things coming
against it: also through his moisture he rectifieth the body in summer, in time
of great heat. Wherefore it is to be considered what profitablenesse is in
every kind of flesh by himself. And first of simple and pure flesh, which
fulfilleth the concauities of void places, and causes good form and shape:
and this flesh is found between the teeth, and on the end of the yard. The
profit of the Brawny flesh or muskulus flesh, shall be spoken of in the
Anatomy of the arms. The profits of the Glandulus flesh are these: First,
that it turns the blood into a color like to himself, as does the flesh
of a woman's paps turn the menstruall blood into milk: secondly, the Glandulus
flesh of the Testikles, turns the blood into sparme: thirdly, the Glandulus
flesh of the cheeks, that ingendreth the spittle. etc.

The next is of Fatnes, of the which I find three kinds: The first is Pinguedo,
and it is a consimilar member, not spermatike, and it is made of a subtle
portion of blood congeled by cold: and it is of complexion cold and moist,
insensible, and is intermedled amongst the parts of the flesh. The second is
Adeppes, and is of the same kind as is Pinguedo, but it is departed from the
flesh besides the skin, and it is as an oil heating and moysting the skin.
The third is Auxingia, and it is of kind as the others be, but he is departed
from the flesh within forth about the kidneys, and in the intrayles, and it
helps both the kidneys and the intrayles from drying by his vnctiositie. etc.

Then come we to the skin. The Skin is a consimile member or official,
partly spermatike, strong and tough, flexible and sensible, thin and
temperate, Whereof there be two kinds: One is the Skin that covers the
^utward members: and the other the inner members, which is called a Pannicle,
the profitablenesse of whom was spoken of in the last Lesson: But the Skin is
properly wouen of Threedes, Nerves, Ueynes, and Arteirs. And he is made (...),
because he should be a good deemer of heat from cold, and of moystnesse from
dryness, that there should nothing noy nor hurt the body, but it gives
warning to the common wits thereof. etc.

The Hayres of every part of man's body are but a superfluity of members, made
of the gross fume or smoke passing out of the viscoues matter, thickened to the
form of hair. The profitablenesse of him is declared in the Anatomy of the
head. etc.

The Nails likewise are a superfluity of members, engendered of great earthly
smoke or fume resolved through the natural heat of humors, and is softer
then the Bone, and harder then the Flesh. In complexion they be cold and dry,
and are always waxing in the extremity of the fingers and toes. The utility
of them are, that by them a man shall take the better hold: also they help to
clawe the body when it needs: Lastly, they help to divide things for lack
of other tools, etc.

The Anatomy of the compound members, and first of the head.
BEcause the head of man is the habitation or dwelling place of the reasonable
soul of man, therefore with the grace of God. I shall first speak of the
Anatomy of the head. Galen says in the 2. Chapter De iuuamentes, and Auicen
rehearses the same in his first preposition and third chapter, proving that
the Head of man was made neither for wits, nor yet for the Brains, but only
for the eyes For beasts that have no heads, have the orgayne or instruments
of Wits in their breasts. Therefore God and nature have reared up the head of
man only for the eyes, for it is the highest member of man: and as a beholder or
watchman stands in a high Tower to give warning of the enemies, so does the
eye of man give warning unto the common Wits, for the defense of all other
members of the body. Now to our purpose. If the question be asked, how many
things be there containing on the head, and how many things contained within
the head? As it is rehearsed by Guydo, there be but five containing, and as
many contained: as th^s, The ^ayre, the Skin, the Flesh, the Pannicles, and
the Bone, neither rehearsing Ueyne nor Artere. The which Anatomy can not be
truly without them both, as thou shall well perceive both in this Chapter, but
specially in the next. And now in this lesson I shall speak but of Hair,
Skin, Flesh, Ueynes, Pannicles, and Bones, what profitte they do to man,
every of them in his kind. Of the Hair of the head (whose creation is known
in the Anatomy of the simple members) I do note four vtilities why it was
ordained: the first is, that it defends the Brain from too much heat, and
too much cold, and many other outward noyances: The second is, it makes the
form or shape of the head to seem more seemelier or beautifuller. For if the
head were not heyred, the face and the head should seem but one thing, and
therefore the heir forms and shapeth the head from the face: The third is,
that by the color of the heir is witnessed and known the complexion of the
Brain: The fourth is, that the fumosities of the Brain might assende and
pass lightlyer out by them. For if there were a sad thing, as the skin or
other, of the same nature as the heir is, the fumosities of the brain might
not have passed through it so lightly, as it does by the hair.

The Skin of the head is more lazartus, thicker, and more porrus, than any
other Skin of any other member of the body. And two causes I note why, One
is, that it keeps or defends the brain from too much heat and cold, as
does the hair: The other, it discusseth to the common wits of all things
that noyeth out wardly, sor the heir is insencible: The third cause, why the
Skin of the head is more thicker then any other Skin of the body, is this,
that it keeps the brain the more warm, and is the better fence for the
brain, and it binds and keeps the bones of the head the faster together.

Next follows the Flesh, the which is al Musculus or Lazartus flesh, lying
upon pericranium without mean. And it is made of subtle Will, and of simple
flesh, Synewes, Ueines, and Arteirs. And why the flesh that is all musculus or
lazartus in every member of a man's body was made is for three causes: the first
is, that by his thicknes, he should comfort the digestion of other members that
lie by him: The second is, that through him every member is made the more
formelyer, and takes the better shape: The third is, that by his means every
member of the body draws to him nourishing, the which others withold to put
forth from them, as it shall be more plainlyer spoken of in the Anatomy of the
womb.

Next follows Pericranium, or the covering of the bones of the head. But here
it is to be noted of a Ueyne and an Artere that comes between the flesh and
this Pericranium, that nourishes the utter part of the head, and so enters
privily through the commissaries of the skull, bearing to the Brain and to his
Pannicles nourishing: of whose substance is made both Duramater, and also
Pericranium, as shall be declared in the parts contained in the head. Here it
is to be noted of this Pannicle Pericranium, that it binds or compasses all
the bones of the head, unto whom is adjoined the Duramater, and is also a part
of his substance, howbeit they be separated, for Duramater is nearer the
brain, and is under the skull. This Pericranium was made principally for two
causes: one is, that for his strong binding together he should make firm and
stable the feeble commissaries or seames of the bones of the head: The other
cause is, that it should be a mean between the hard bone and the soft flesh.

Next is the Bone of the Pot of the head keeping in the Brains, of which it
were too long to declare their names after all Authors, as they number them and
their names, for some name them after the Greek tongue, and some after the
Arabian, but in conclusion al is to one purpose. And they be numbered seven
bones in the pan or skul of the head: the first is called the Coronal bone, in
which is the Orbyts or holes of the Eyes, and it reaches from the brows unto
the midst of the head, and there it meets with the second bone called
Occipissial, a bone of the hinder part of the head called the Noddel of the
head, which two bones Coronal and Occipissial be divided by the Commissaries in
the mids of the head. The third and fourth bones be called Parietales, and
they be the bones of the sideling parts of the head, and they be divided by
the Commissories both from the foresaid Coronal and Occipissial. The fifth and
sixth bones be called Petrosa or Mendosa: and these two bones lie over the
bones called Parietales, on every side of the head one, like skales, in whom
be the holes of the ears. The seventh and last of the head is called
Paxillarie, or Bazillarie, the which bone is as it were a wedge unto all the
other seven bones of the head, and does fasten them together. And thus be all
numbered: the first is the Coronal bone: The second is the Occipissiall: The
third and the fourth is Parietales: The fifth and the sixth is Petrosa or
Mendosa: and the seventh is Parillari, or Bazillari. And this suffiseth for the
five things containing.

In this Chapter is declared the five things contained within the head.
NExt under the bones of the head withinfoorth, the first thing that appears
is Duramater, then is Piamater, then the substance of the Brain, and then
Uermy forms and Retemirabile. But first to speak of Duramater, whereof, and
how it is sprung and made: First it is to be noted of the Ueine and Arteire
that was spoken of in the last Chapter before, how privily they entered through
the Commissoris or seames of the head, and there by their union together, they
do not only bring and give the spirit of life and nutriment, but also do
weaue themselves so together, that they make this pannicle Duramater. It is
holden up by certain threedes of himself coming through the said
commissoris, running in to Pericranium or pannicle that covers the bones of
the head. And with the foresaid Ueyne and Arteire, and these threedes coming
from Duramater, is wouen and made this Pericranium. And why this panicle
Duramater is set from the skul, I note two causes: the first is, that if the
Duramater should have touched the skul, it should lightly have been hurt with
the hardness of the bone: The second cause is, that the matter that comes of
wounds made in the head pearsing the skul, should by it the better be
defended and kept from Piamater, and hurting of the brain. And next unto
this pannicle there is another pannicle called Piamater, or meek mother,
because it is so soft and tender unto the brain. Of whose creation it is to
be noted as of Duramater, for the original of their first creation is of one
kind, both from the Heart and the Liver, and is mother of the very substance of
the brain. Why it is called Piamater, is, for because it is so soft and tender
over the brain, that it nourishes the brain and feeds it, as does a loving
mother unto her tender child or babe, for it is not so tough and hard as is
Duramater. In this pannicle Pia matter is much to be noted of the great number
of Ueynes and Arteirs that are planted, ramefying throughout all his substance,
giving to the brain both spirit and life. And this Pa^nicle does (...) or
lap all the substance of the brain: and in some places of the brain the
Ueines and the Arteirs go forth of him, and enter into the divisions of the
brain, and there drinks of the brain substance into them, asking of the
heart to them the spirit of life or breath, and of the Liver nutriment. And
the aforesaid spirit or breath takes a further digestion, and there it is
made animal, by the eleboration of the spirit vital is turned and made
animal. Furthermore, why there be mo pannicles over the brain then one, is
this, If there had been but one pannicle only, either it must have been
hard, or soft or mean between both: If it had been hard, it should have
hurt the brain by his hardness: if it had been soft, it should have been
hurt of the hard bone: and if it had been but meanly neither hard nor soft,
it should have hurt the brain by his roughness, and also have been hurt of
the hard bone. Therefore God and nature has ordained two pannicles, the one
hard, and the other soft, the harder to be a mean between the soft and the
bone: and the softer to be a mean between the harder and the brain it self.
Also these Pannicles be cold and dry of complexion, and spermaticke.

Next is the Brain, of which it is marvelous to be considered and noted, how
this Piamater deuideth the substance of the Brain, and lappeth it into
certain selles or diuis^ons, as thus: The substance of the Brain is divided
into three parts, or ventrikles, of which the foremost part is the most: the
second or middlemost is less: the third or hindermost is the least. And from
each one to other be issues or passages that are called Meats, through whom
passes the spirit of life too and fro. But here ye shall note that every
Uentrikle is divided into two parts, and in every part God has ordained and
set singular and several virtues, as thus: First in the foremost Uentrikle God
has founded and set the common Wits, otherwise called the five Wits, as
Hearing, Seeing, Feeling, Smelling, and Lasting. And also there is in one part
of t^is Uentrikle, the virtue that is called Fantasy, and he takes all the
forms or ordinances that be disposed of the five Wits, after the meaning of
sensible things: In the other part of the same Uentrikle is (...) and founded
the Imaginatiue virtue, the which receives of the common Wits the form or
shape of sensitive things, as they were received of the common wits
withoutfoorth representing their own shape and ordinances unto the memoratiue
virtue. In the midst sell or ventrikle there is ^ounded and ordained the
Cogitatiue or estimatiue virtue: for he rehearses, shows, declares, and
deemeth those things that be offered unto him by the other that were spoken
of before. In the third Uentrikle and last there is founded and ordained the
virtue Memoratiue: in this place is registered and kept those things that are
done and spoken with the senses, and keeps them in his treasury unto the
putting forth of the five or common wits, or orgaynes, or instruments of
animal works, out of whose extremities or lowar parts springs My^uca, or
marowe of the spondels: of whom it shall be spoken of in the Anatomy of the
neck and back. Furthermore it is to be noted, that from the foremoste
Uentrikle of the brain springs seven pair of sensatiue or feeling senewes,
the which be produced to the Eyes, the Ears, the Nose, the Tongue, and to the
Stomach, and to diverse other parts of the body: as it shall be declared in
their Anatomies. Also it is to be noted, that about the midst ventrikle is
the place of Uermi formis, with curnelly flesh that fills, and Retemirabile,
or wonderful caul under the Pannicles, is set or bounded with Arteirs only
which come from the heart, in the which the vital spirit by his great labor
is turned and made animal. And ye shall understand that these two be the
best kept parts of all the body, for a man shall rather dye, then any of
these should suffer any manner of greefes from without forth, and therefore
God has set them far from the heart. Here I note the saying of Haly Abbas,
of the coming of small Arteirs from the heart, of whom (says he) is made
a marvelous net or caul, in the which caul is enclosed the Brain, and in
that place is laid the spirit of feeling, from that place has the spirit of
feeling his first creation, and from thence passes to other members etc.
Furthermore ye shall understand that the brain is a member cold and moist
of complexion, thin, and meanly viscous, and a principal member, and an
official member and spermatik. And first, why he is a principal member, is,
because he is the governor or the treasury of the five wits: And why he is an
official member, is, because he has the effect of feeling and stering: And
why he is cold and moist, is, that he should by his coldness and
moystnesse abate and temper the exceeding heat and drought that comes from
the heart: Also why it is moist, is, that it should be the more indifferenter
and abler to every thing that should be reserved or gotten into him: Also why
it is soft, is, that it should give place and favor to the virtue of
stering: And why it is meanly viscous, is, that his senewes should be strong
and meanly tough, and that they should not be let in their woorking
through his overmuch hardness. Here Galen demands a question, which is
this, Whether that feeling and moouinge be brought to Nerves by one or by
diverse? or whether the aforesaid thing be brought substancially or radically.
The matter (says he) is so hard to search and be understood, that it were
much better to let it alone and pass over it. Aristotle entreating of the
brain, says: The Brain is a member continually moving and ruling all other
members of the body, giving unto them both feeling and moouinge: for if the
Brain he let, all other members be let: and if the Brain be well, then all
other members of the body be the better disposed. Also the Brain has this
property, that it moves and follows the moving of the Moon: for in the
waxinge of the Moon the Brain follows vpwardes, and in the wane of the
Moon the Brain discendeth downwardes, and vanishes in substance of virtue:
for then the brain shrinketh together in it self, and is not so fully
obedient to the spirit of feeling. And this is proved in men that be lunatike
or mad, and also in men that be epulentike or having the falling sickness,
that be most grieved in the beginning of the new Moon, and in the latter
quarter of the Moon. Wherefore (says Aristotle) when it happens that the
Brain is either too dry, or too moist, then can it not work his kind: for
then is the body made cold: then are the spirits of life melted and resolved
away: and then follows feebleness of the Wits, and of all other members
of the body, and at the last death.

The Anatomy of the Face.
THE Front or the Forhead contains nothing but the Skin and Musculus flesh,
for the pannicle underneath it is of Pericranium, and the bone is of the
Coronall bone. Howbeit there it is made broad as if there were a double bone,
which makes the form of the Brows. It is called the Forhead or Front from
one ear to the other, and from the roots of the ears of the head before unto
the brows. But the cause why the brows were set and reared up, was, that they
should defend the Eyes from noyance withoutfoorth: And they be ordained with
hair to put by the humor or sweat that comes from the head. Also the
Brows do help the Eyeliddes, and do beautify and make fair the face, for
he that has not his Brows heyred, is not seemly. And Aristotle says, that
over measurable Brows betokens an envious man. Also high brows and thick
betokens hardness: and Brows with little hair betokens cowardnesse: and
meanly signi^eth gentleness^ of heart. Incisions about these parts ought to
be done according to the length of the body, for there the Muscl^ goes from
one Ear to the other. And there if any incis^on should be made with the
length of the Muscle, it might happen the Browe to hang over the Eye without
remedy, as it is many times seen, the more pity. The Brows be called
Supercilium in Latin, and under is the ^yelids, which is called Cilium, and is
garnished with hairs. Two causes I find why the eyelids were ordained: the first
is, that they should keep and defend the Eye from du^t and other outward
noyances: the second is, when the eye is weary or heavy, then they should be
covered and take rest underneath the^. Why the hairs were ordained in the^, is,
that by them is addressed the (...) or (...) of vi^ble things unto the apple of
the ey^. The ear is a member seemly and grystly, able to be folden without,
and is the orgaine or instrument of hearing: It is of complexion cold and
dry. But why the (...) was set up out of the ^ad, is this, that the soundes
that be very f^itiue, should lurk and abide under his shadow, till it were
taken of the instruments of hearing: Another cause is, that it should keep
the hole that it stands over from things falling in that might hinder the
hearing. The synewes that are the Orgaynes or Instruments of h^aring, spring
each from the Brain, from whence the seven pair of synewes do spring, and
when they come to the h^le of the Care, there they writh like a wine press,
and at the ends of them there be like the head of a worm, or like a little
^eate, in which is received the sound, and so carried to the common wits. The
Eyes be next of nature unto the s^le: for in the Eye is seen and known the
disturbances and griefs, gladness and joys of the Soul, as love, wrath, and
other pa^ions. The Eyes be the instruments of fight. And they be compounde and
made of ten things: that is to say, of seven Tunicles or Cotes, and of three
humors. Of the which (says Galen) the Brain and the head were made for the
Eye, that they might be in the hyghe^ place, as a beholder in a tower, as it
was rehearsed in the Anatomy of the head. But diverse men hold diverse opinions
of the Anatomy of the Eyes: for some men account but three tunicles and some
six^. But in conclusion they mean^ all one thing: For the very truth is, that
there be counted and reckoned seven Tunicles, that is to say, Sclirotica,
Secondyna, Retyna, Vnia, Cornua, Arania, and Coniuncti^a: and these three
humors, That is to say, humor Vitrus, humor Albigynus, and humor Crystallinus.
It is to be known how and after what manner they spring: You shall understand
that there springs of the brayny substance of his foremost Uentrikles, two
senewes, the one from the right side, and the other from the left, and they be
called the first pair, for in the Anatamie they be the first^ pair of
senewes that appear of all seven. And it is showed ^y Galen, that these
senewes be hollow as a reed, for two causes: The first is, that the visible
spirit might pass freely to the Eyes: The second is, that the form of
visible things might freely be presented to the common wits. Now mark the
going forth of these senewes: When these senewes go out from the substance of
the Brain, he comes through the Piamater, of whose substance he takes a
Pannicle or a Cote: and the cause why he takes that Pannicle is to keep him
from noying, and before they enter into the skull, they meet and are united
into one senewe the length of half an inche: and then they depart again into
two, and each goes into one eye, entering through the brain pan, and these
senewes be called Nerui optici. And three causes I find why these Nerves are
joined in one before they pass into the Eye: First, if it happen any diseases
in one eye, the other should receive all the visible spirit that before came
to both: The second is, that all things that we see should not seem two:
for if they had not been joined together, every thing should have seemed two,
as it does to a worm, and to other beasts: The third is, that the Senewe
might stay and help the other. But here upon Lamfranke accords much, saying,
that these two Senewes come together to the Eyes, and take a Pannikle both of
Piamater and of Duramafer, and when they enter into the Orbyt of the Eye, there
the extremities are spread abroad, the which are made of three substances: that
is to say, of Duramater of Piamater, and of Nerui-optici. There be engendered
three Tunikles or Cotes, as thus: Of the substance that is taken from Our
amater is engendered the first cote that is called Secondina: and of Nerui
optici is engendered the third cote that is called Retina: and each of them is
more subtitler then other, and goes about the humors without mean. And it is
to be understood, that each of these three Tunicles be divided, and so they
make six: that is to say, iij. of the par^s of the brain, and three of the
parts outward, and one of Pericranium that covers the bones of the head,
which is called Coniun^iua. And thus you may perceive the springing of them:
as thus, of Duramater springs Sclirotica and Cornua: of Piamater springs
Secondina and Unia: and of Nerui optici springs Coniunctiua. Now to speak of
the humors which be three, and their places are the middle of the Eyes: of the
which the first is Humor Uitrus, because he is like glass, in color very
clear, red, liquit, or thin, and he is in the inward side next unto the
brain: and it is thin, because the nutritive blood of the Christalin might
pass, as water through a sponge should be cleansed and made pure, and also that
the visible spirit might the lightlyer pass through him from the brain. And
he goes about the Cristaline humor, until he meet with Albuginus humor,
which is set in the uttermost part of the Eye. And in the midst of these
humors Uitrus, and Albuginus, is set the Crystaline humor, in which is set
principally the sight of the Eye. And these huinors be separated and inuolued
with the Pannicles aforesaid, between every Humor a Pannicle. And thus is the
Eye compound and made. But to speak of every Humor and every Pannicle in his
due order and course, it would ask a long process, and a long Chapter, and
this is suffici^nt for a Chiru^gion. Now to begin (...) the Nose: You shall
understand that from the brayn there comes two senewes to the holes of the
braiupan, where begins the concauitie of the Nose, and these two be (...)
properly synewes, but orgaynes or instruments of smelling, and have heads
like teates or paps, in which is received the virtue of smelling, and
representing it to the common wits. Over these two is set Colatorium, that we
call the Nosethrils: and it is set between the Eyes, under the upper part of
the Nose. And it is to be noted, that this concauitie or ditch was made for two
causes: The first is, that the air that brings forth the spirit of
smelling might rest in it, till it were taken of the orgaine or instrument of
smelling: The second cause is, that the super ^uities of the Brain might be
hidden under it, until it were cleansed: And from his concauitie there goes
two holes down into the mouth, of which there is to be noted three profits:.
The first is, that when a man's mouth is close, or when he eats or sleeps,
that then the air might come through them to the Lunges, or else a man's mouth
should always be open: The second cause is, that they help to the relation
of the form of the Nose: for it is said, a man speaks in his Nose when any
of these holes be stopped: The third cause is, that the concauitie might be
^ensed by them when a man snuffeth the Nose, or draws into his mouth
inwardly. The Nose is a member consimple or official, appearing without the
face, somewhat plicable, because it should the better be cleansed. And it is to
be perceived that it is compound and made of skin and lazartus flesh, and of
two bones standing in manner trianglewise, whose extremities be joined in one
part of the Nose with the Coronall bone, and the nether extremities are joined
with two grystles, and another that divides the Nosethrilles within, and
holds up the nose: Also there be two concauities or holes, that if one were
stopped the other should serve: Also there is in the Nose two Muskles, to help
the working of his office. And Galen says, that the Nose shapeth the Face
most: for where the Nose lacks (says he) all the rest of the face is the
more unseemly. The Nose should be of a mean bigness, and not to exceed in
length, or breadth, nor in highness. For Aristotle says, if the Nosethrilles be
too thin, or too wide, by great drawing in of air. it betokens great
straightness of heart, and indignation of thought. And therefore it is to be
noted, that the shape of the members of the body, betokens and judges the
affections and will of the Soul of man, as the Philosopher says. The temples
be called the members of the head, and they have that name because of
continual moving. And as the science of the Anatomy means, the spirit
vital is sent from the heart to the brain by Arteirs, and by veins and
nutrimentall blood, where the vessels pulsati^es in the temples be lightly
hurt. Also the temples have dents or holes inwardly, wherein he takes the
humor that comes from the brain, and brings the eyes asleep, and if the
said holes or dentes be pressed and wroung, then by trapping of the humor
that continues, he makes the tears to fall from the Eye. The Cheeks are the
sideling parts of the face, and they conteyne in them Musculus flesh, with
Ueynes and Arteirs, and about these parts be many Muscles. Guido makes
mention of vij. about the cheeks and over lip. And Haly Abbas says, there be
twelve muscles that move the nether Iawe, some of them in opening, and other
some in closing or shutting, passing under the bones of the temples, And they
be called Temporales: And they be right noble and sensatiue, of whose hurt is
much peril. Also there be other Muskles for to grind and to chewe. And to all
these Muscles comes Nerves from the brain to give them feeling and moving:
and also there comes to them many Arteirs and Ueines, and chiefly about the
temples, and the angles or corners of the Eyes and the Lips. And as the
Philosophers say, the chief beauty in man is in the cheeks, and there the
complexion of man is most known, as thus: If they be full, ruddy and meddled
with temperate whiteness and not fat in substance, but meanly fleshly, it
betokens hot and moist of complexion, that is, Sanguin and temperat in
collar. And if they be white colored, without meddling of redness, and in
substance fat and soft, quauering, it betokens excess and superfluity of
cold and moist, that is flegmatike: And if they be brown in color, or cytrin,
yelowe, read, and thin, and lean in substance betokens great drying and
heat, that is cholerike: And if they be as it were blown in color, and of
little flesh in substance, it betokens excess and superfluity of drynes and
cold, and that is Melancholy. And as Auicen says, the Cheeks do not only
show the diversities of complexions, but also the affection and will of the
heart: for by the affection of the heart, by sudden joy or dread, he waxes
either pale or read. The bones or bonye parts, first of the cheeks be two:
of the Nose outwardly, two: of the upper Mandible, two: within the Nose three:
as thus, one dividing the Nosethrils within, and in each Nosthrill one, and they
seem to be rolled like a wafer, and have a hollownesse in them, by which the
air is respyred and drawed to the Lungs, and the superfluity of the Brain is
purged into the mouthwardes, as is before rehearsed. But Guydo and Galen say,
that there be in the face nine bones, yet I cannot find that the nether
Mandible should be of the number of those nine: for the nether Mandible
accounted there, proves them to be ten in number. Of which thing I will hold
no argument, but remit it to the sight of your eyes. The parts of the mouth
are five, that is to say, the Lips, the teeth, the tongue the Uuila, and the
Pallet of the mouth. And first to speak of the lips, they are members
consimile or official, full of Musculus flesh, as is aforesaid, and they were
ordained for two causes, one is, that they should be to the mouth as a door
to a house, and to keep the mouth close til the meat were kindly chewed: The
other cause is, that they should be helpers to the pronouncing of the
speech. The teeth are members consimile or official, spermatike, and hardest
of any other members, and are fastened in the cheek bones, and were ordained
for three causes: First that they should chewe a man's meat, er it should pass
down, that it might be the sooner digested: The second, that they should be a
help to the speech, for they that lack their teeth do not perfectly
pronounce their words: the third is, that they should serve to beasts as
weapons. The number of them is uncertain, for some men have mo, and some
less, they that have the whole number have xxxij. that is to say, xvi. above,
and as many beneath, as thus: two Dwallies, two Quadripulles, two Cannines,
eight Morales, and two Cansales. The Tongue is a carnous member, compounde and
made of many Nerves, Lygaments, Ueynes, and Arteirs, ordained principally for
three causes: The first is, that when a man eats, the Tongue might help to
turn the meat til it were well chewed: The second cause is, that by him is
received the taste of sweet and sower, and presented by him to the common
wits: The third is, that by him is pronounced every speech. The fleshly
part of the tongue is white, and has in him nine muskles, and about the root
of him is Glandulus, in the which be two wells, and they be ever full of
spittle to temper and keep moist the tongue, or else it would wax dry by
reason of h^s labor, etc. The Uuila is a member made of a spongeous flesh,
hanging down from the end of the Pallet over the gullet of the throat, and is
a member in complexion cold and dry, and often times when there falls
rawnesse or much moystnesse into it from the head, then it hangs down in the
throat, and lets a man to swallowe, and it is broad at the upper end, and
small at the nether. It was ordained for diverse causes, One is, that by him is
helped the sound of speech, for where the Uuila i^ lacking, there lacks the
perfect sound of speech. Another is, that it might help the prolation of
vomites: Another is, that by him is tempered and abated the distemperance of
the air that passes to the Lungs: Another is, that by him is guided the
superfluities of the brain that comes from the coletures of the Nose, or
else the superfluities should fall down soudenly into the mouth, the which
were a displeasure. The Pallet of the mouth contains nothing else but a
carnous Pannikle, and the bones that be underneath it have two divisions, One
along the Pallet from the division of the Nose, and from the opening of the
other Mandible unto the nether end of the Pallet, lacking half an inche, and
there it deuideth overthwart, and the first division is of the Mandible, and
the second is of the bone called Paxillarie or Bazillarie, that sustayneth and
byndeth all other bones of the head together. The skin of the Pallet of the
mouth is of the inner part of the stomach and of Mire, and of Ysofagus, that
is the way of the meat into the stomach. The way how to know that such a
pannicle is of that part of the stomach, may be known when that a man is
touched within the mouth, anon he begins to tickle in the stomach, and the
nearer that he shall couche unto the throat, the more it abhors the
stomach, and often times it causes the ^omacke to yield from him that is
within him, as when a man does vomit. Also in the mouth is ended the
uppermost extremity of the Wesande, which is called Mire or Isofagus. And with
him is contained Trachia arteria, that is, the way of the air whose holes be
covered with a lap like a tongue, and is gristly, that the meat and drink
might slide over him into Isofagus: The which grystle when a man speaks it is
reared up, and covers the way of the meat: and when a man swalloweth the
meat, then it covers the way of the air, so that when the one is covered
the other is discovered. For if a man open the way of the air when he
swalloweth, if there fall a crum into it, he shall never cease coughing until
it be up again. And this suffiseth for the face.

The Anatomy of the Neck.
THE Neck follows next to be spoken of. Galen proves that the neck was
made for no other cause but for the Lungs, for all things that have no Lungs
have neither neck nor voice, except ^sh. And you shall understand, that the
neck is all that is contained between the head and the shoulders, and
between the chin and the breast. It is compounde and made of four things, that
is to say, of Spondillus, of Seruicibus, of Gula, and of Gutture, the which
shall be declared more plainly hereafter, and through these pass the way of
the meat and of the air, but they be not of the substance of the neck. The
Spondels of the neck be seven: The first is joined unto the lower part of the
head, called Paxillarie or Bazillarie, and in the same wise are joined every
Spondel with other, and the last of the seven with the first of the Back or
Ridge: and the Lygamentes that keep these Spondels together are not so hard
and tough as those of the back: for why? those of the neck be more feebler
and subtiller: The cause is this, for it is necessary other w^ile that the
head move without the neck, and the neck without the hea^, the which might not
well have been done i^ they had been strong and boystrous. Of these
aforesaid seven Spondels of the neck, there springs seven pair of Senewes,
the which be divided into the head and into the Uysage, to the shoulders, and
to the arms. From the hole of the first spondel springs the first pair of
Senewes, between the first spondel and the second, and so forth of all the
rest in like manner as of these. Also these senewes receive subtle will of the
senewes of the Brayn, of the which will, and senewes, and flesh, with a
pannicle, make the composition of Muskels, Lazartes, and Brawnes, the which
three things are all one, and be the instruments of voluntary moving of every
member. The Muskels of the neck after Galen are numbered to be xx. moving the
head and the neck. Likewise it is to be noted, that there be three manner of
fleshes in the neck: the first is Pixwex or Seruisis, and it is called of
Children Gold hair, or yellowe hair, the which are certain longitudinales
lying on the sides of the Spondels from the head down to the latter Spondel.
And they are ordained for this cause, that when the Senewes be weary of
overmuch labor with moving and travail, that they might rest upon them as
upon a bed. The second flesh is musculus, from whom springs the Tendons
and cords that move the head and the neck, which be numbered twenty, as is
before declared: The third flesh replenisheth the void places, etc. The third
part of the neck is called Gutture, and it is the standing out of the Throat
boll. The fourth part is called Gula, and the hinder part Ceruix, and has
that name of the Philosophers because of the marrowe coming to the Ridge
bones. It is so called, because it is as it were a servant to the Brain: For
the neck receives and takes of the Brain influence of virtue of moving, and
sends it by Senewes to other parts of the body downwardes, and to all
members of the body. Here you shall understand, that the way of the meat,
and Mire, or Isofagus is all one thing, and it is to be noted, that it
stretches from the mouth to the stomach, by the hinder part of the neck
inwardlye, fastened to the spo^dels of the neck, until he come to the fifth
spondel, and there he leans the spondel and stretches til he come to the
foremost part of the breast, and passes through D^afragina til it come to the
mouth of the stomach, and there he is ended. Furthermore, it is to be noted,
that this Wesande is compounde and made of two Tunikles or Cotes, that is to
say, of the inner, and of the utter. The utter Tunikle is but simple, for he
needs no retentio^ but only for his own nourishing: but the inner Tunikle
is compounde and made of Muscuius Longitudinall Will, by which he may draw the
meat from the mouth into the stomach, as it shall be more plainly declared in
the Anatomy of the stomach. Furthermore, Cana pulmonis via trachia arteria,
all these be one thing, that is to say^, the throat boll, and it is set within
the neck besides the Wesande toward Gula, and is compounde of the grystle
knitte each with other. And that pannikle that is mean between the Wesande
and the throat boll, is called Ismon. Also ye shall understand, that the great
Ueines which rame^e by the sides of the neck to the upper part of the head, is
of some men called Gwidege, and of others Vena organices, the incision of whom
is perilous. And thus it is to be considered, that the Neck of man is
compounde and made of skinny flesh, Ligaments and bones. And this suffices for
the Neck and the throat.

The Anatomy of the Shoulders and Arms.
AND first to speak of the bones: It is to be noted, that in the shoulder
there be two bones, that is to say, the shoulder bone, and the Cannel bone,
and also the adiutor bone of the arm are joined with the shoulder bones, but
they are not numbered among them, but amongst the bones of the arms. In the
composition of the shoulder, the first bone is Os spatula, or shoulder blade,
whose hinder part is declined toward the chinne, and in that end it is broad
and thin, and in the upper part it is round, in whose roundnesse is a
concauitie, which is called the box or coope of the shoulder, into which
enters the Adiutor bones, and they have a bynding together with strong
flexible Seen was, and are contained fast with the bone called Clauicula, or
the Cannel bone: and this Cannel bone stretches to both the shoulders, one
end to the one shoulder, and another to the other, and there they make the
composition of the shoulders. The bones of the great arm, that is to say, from
the shoulder to the ^ngers e^des, be xxx. The first is the Adiutor bone, whose
upper end enters into the concauitie or box of the shoulder bone: It is but
one bone having no fellow, and it is hollow and full of marowe, and it is also
crooked because it should be the more habler to grype things, and it is
hollow because it should be lighter and more obedient to the steering or
moving of the Brawnes. Furthermore, this bone has two emynences, or two knobs
in his nether extremity, or in the iuncture of the Elbowe, of the which the
one is more rising than the other, and are made like unto a Polly to draw
Water with, and the ends of these bones enter into a concauitie proportioned
in the uppermost ends of the the two Focel bones, of which two bones, the
less goes from the Elbowe ^o the Thumb, by the vppermoste part of the arm,
and the greater is the nether bone from the Elbowe to the little finger. And
these two bones be con^eyned with the Adiutor bone, and be bound with strong
Ligamentes, and in like manner with the bones of the hand. The which bones be
numbered. viii. the four uppermost be joined with the four nethermost most
toward the hands: and in the third ward of bones, be five, and t^y are
call^ Ossa patinis, and they are in the palm of the h^nd (...) to them be
joined the bones of the fingers, and the (...), as thus, in every finger in
bones, and in the Thombe two bones, that is to say, in the fingers and thombe
of every hand, xiiii. called Ossa digitorum, in the palm of the hand^, called
Patinis, and between the hand and the (...) Racete, and from the wriste to y^
shoulder iij. (...) all which being accounted together, y^ shall (...) bones in
(...) hand and arm^. To speak of Senewes, Lega^ntes, C^rdes, and Braunes:
Heer^ ^rst ye shall understand that there comes from My^-ca thorough the
(...) of the neck ii^ senewes, which (...) in (...) comes in to the (...) of
the (...), (...) into the (...) part and one into (...), (...) another into the
utter (...) of the (...), and they bring from the brain and from (...) both
feeling and (...) into (...) arms, as thus: The (...) that (...) from (...)
brain and from the Marrow of the (...), when (...) come to the (...) of the
(...) they are (...) with the Lygaments of the self (...), and there the
Lygamentes receive both feeling and moving of them, and also in their meddling
together they are made a (...) or a Tendo^. Three causes I find (...) the
(...) with the Lygaments, The (...) is, (...) the (...) of the (...), which
(...) made (...) by their continual (...), should be (...) the (...) of the
(...): (...) is, that the littleness of the (...) be (...) through the
quantitye of (...): The (...), the (...) of the Senewe (...) And thus it is to
be understood, that of vena Sephalica springs vena occularis, and of vena
Bazilica springs ve na Saluatella, and of the two veins that meet springs
ve na Mediana, and in rame^ing from these five principal Weines springs
innumerable, of the which a Surgeon has no great charge, for it suffiseth
us to know the principals.

To speak of Artiers, you shall under stand, that where soever there is found
a Ueine, there is an Arteir under him: and if there be found a great Ueyne,
there is found: a great Arteir, and whereas is a little Ueyne there is a little
Artier: For whersoeuer there goes a Ueine to give nutrime^t, there goes an
Artier to bring the spirit of life. Where fore it is to be noted, that the
Artiers lie more deeper in the ^eshe then the Ueynes do: for they carry and
keep in them more precious blood then does the Ueyne, and therefore he has
need to be further from dangers outwardly: and therefore God and nature have
ordained for him to be closed in two cotes, where the Ueyne has but one etc.

The beast or Thorar is the Arc or che^ of the spiritu^ll members of man, as
says the Philosopher: where it is to be noted, that there be ^oure things
containing, and viij. contained, as thus, The four (...), are, the Skin,
Musculus flesh, the Pappes, and the bones: The parts contained, are, the
Har^e, the Lunges, Pa^icles, Ligame^tes, Nerves, Ueynes, Artiers, Mire or
Iso^agus. Now the skin and the flesh are known in their Anatomye: It is to
be noted, that the flesh of the Pappes, differs from the other flesh of the
body, for it is white, glandulus, and spo^geous: and there is in them does
Nerves, Ueines and Arteirs, and by them they have Coliganes with the heart, the
Liver, the brain, and the generasiue members. Also there is in the breast, as
old Authors make mention, lxxx. or xc. (...), for some of them be (...) to the
Neeke, some to the shoulderes, and to the Spades, some to diafragma or the
My^riffe, some to the Kibbes, some to the back and some to the Breast it self.
But I find certain profitablenesse in the creation of the Pap^, as well in man
as in woman: for in (...) it defends the spirituals from annoyaunce
outwardly: and another, by their thick^s they com fort the natural h^te in
^nce of the spirits. And in women there is the (...) of milk: for in weo^en
there comes from the Matrix into their Breasts many veyns which bring into
them (...) blood, the which is tour ned through the (...) from red (...) into
white like the color of (...), even as Chylley coming from the (...) to the
Liver is turned into the color of the Liver. Now to speak of the bones of
the breast: they be said to be triple or (...), and they be numbered to be
seven in the Breaste before, and their (...) is according to the breadth of
the breast, and their extremeties or ends be gristlye, as the (...) be And in
the upper end of Thorax is an hole or a contauitie, in which is set the
foot of the Furklebone or Canel bo^e, and in the nether end of Thorax,
against the mouth of the stomach, hangs a gristle called Ensiforme, and this
gristle was ordained for two causes: One is, that it should defend the stomach
from hurt outwardly: The second is, that in time of fullness it should give
place to the stomach in time of need when it de sireth. etc.

Now to speak of the parts of the back behyndefoorth: There be twelve
Sp^ndels, through whom passes Mynu ca, of whom springs xij. pair of Nerves,
bringing both feeling and moving to the Muskles of the Breast aforesaid. And
here it is to be noted that in every side there be twelve Kibbes, that it is to
say. vij. true and v. false, hecause these (...) the Brain, and there he is
turned into a further digestion, and there he takes another spirit, and so is
made animal, and at the Liver nutrimentall, and atthe te^ticles generatiue: and
thus it is made a Spirit of every kind, so that he being mean of al manner
operations and workings takes effect. Two causes I find why these Artiers
have two cotes, One is, that one cote is not sufficient nor^ble to withstand
the violent moving and steering of the spirit of life that is carried in them:
The second cause i^: that the thing that is carried about from p^ace to place,
is of so precious a treasure that it had the more need of good (...). And of
some Doctors, this Artier is called the Pulsatiue vein, or the beating vein,:
for by him is perceived the power and might of the Heart. etc. Wherefore God and
Nature have ordained that the Artiers have two cotes, Also there is in the
Heart three Pelikeles, opening and closing the going in of the Heart blood and
spirit in convenient time. Also the heart has two lit^e Ears, by whom comes
inand passes out the air that is prepared for the Longes. Also there is found
in the Heart a Cartilaginus Auditament, To help and strength the self Heart.
Also the Heart is covered with a strong Pannicle, which is called of some
Capsula Cords, or Pericordium, the which is a strong case, unto whom comes
Ner^es, as to other inward members. And this Panicle Pericordiu^ springs of
the upper Pannicle of yt Midriffe. And of him springs an other Pannicle
called Mediastinum, the which departs the breast in the midst, and keeps
that the Lunges fall not over the Heart. Also there is another Pannicle that
covers the ^ibbes inwardlye, that is called Plura, of whom the Midriffe
takes his beginning. And it is said of many Doctors, that Duramater is the
original of all the Pannicles within the body: and thus one takes of an other,

The Anatomy of the Lungs.
THE Lungs is a member spcrmatike of his first creation, and his natural
complexion is cold and dry, and in his accidental complexion he is cold and
moist, lapped in a Neruous Pannicle, because it should gather together the
softer substance of the Lungs, and that the Lungs might feel by the means of
the pannicle, that which he might not feel in him self. Now to prove the
Lungs to be cold and dry of kind, it appears by his swift steering, for he
lies ever wauing over the heart, and about the heart. And that he is cold and
moist in reward, it appears well, that he receives of the brain many
cold matters, as Cataries, and Rumes, whose substance is thin. Also I find
in the Lungs three kinds of substance: One is a Ueyne coming from the Liver,
bringing with him the Crude or raw part of the Chytle to feed the Lungs:
Another is Arterea venealis, coming from the heart, bringing with him the
spirit of life to nourish him with: The third is Trachia arteria, that
brings in air to the Lungs, and it passes through all the left part of them
to do his office. The Lungs is divided into five Lobbes or Pellikels, or five
portions, that is to say, three in the right side, and two in the l^fte side.
And it was don for this cause that if there fell any hurt in the one part, the
others should serve and do their office. And three causes I find why the Lungs
were principallye ordained: First, that they should draw cold wind, and refresh
the heart: The second, that they should change and alter, and purify the air
before it come to the heart, least the heart were hurt and noyed with the
quantity of the air: The third cause is, that they should receive from the
heart the fumous superstuities that he puts forth with his breathing, etc.
Behind the Lungs toward the Spondels, passes Mire or Isofagus, of whom it is
spoken of in the Anatomy of the neck. And also there passes both Ueynes and
Arteirs, and al these with Trachia arteria, do make a Stoke, replete unto the
Gullet with Pannikles, and strong Lygaments, and glandulus flesh to fulfill the
void places. And last of al is the Midriffe, and it is an official member,
made of two Pannikles, and Lazartus flesh, and his place is in the midst of
the body, overthwart or in breadth under the region of the spiritual members,
departing them from the matrix. And three causes I find why the Midriffe was
ordained: First, that it should divide the spirituals from the nutrates: The
second, that it should keep the vital color or heat to dissend down to the
nutrates: The last is, that the malicious fumes reared up from the nutrates,
should not noy the spirituals or vitals etc.

The womb is the region or the city of all the Intrails, the which reaches
from the Midriffe down unto the share inwardly, and outwardly from the Keynes
or Kydnes, down to the bone Pecten, about the privy parts. And this womb is
compound and made of two things, that is to say, of Syfac and Myrac. Syfac is
a Pannicle, and a member spermatik, official, sensible, senowy, compound of
subtle will, and in complexion cold and dry, having his beginning at the inner
Pannicle of the Midriffe. And it was ordained because it should contain and
bind together all the Intrals, and that he defend the Musculus so that he
oppress not the natural members. And that he is strong and tough, it is
because he should not be lightly broken, and that those things that are
contained go not forth, as it happens to them that are broken, etc. Myrac is
compound and made of four things, that is, of skin outwardly, of fatnes, of a
carnous pannicle, and of Musculus flesh. And that it is to be understood,
that all the whole from Syfac outward is called Myrac, it appears well by the
words of Galen, where he commands, that in all wounds of the womb to sewe
the Sifac with the Myrac, and by that it proves that there is nothing without
the Sifac but Myrac. And in this Myrac or utter part of the womb, there is
noted eight Muscles, two Longitudinals. proceeding from the sheeld of the
Stomach unto Os Pecten: two Latitudinals coming from the backwardes to the
womb: and four transuerse, of the which two of them spring from the Ribs on
the right side, and go to the left side, to the bones of the Hanches, or of
Pecten: and the other two spring from the ribs on the left, and come over the
womb to the right parts, as the other before does. Here it is to be noted,
that by the virtue of the subtle will that is in the Musculus longitudinal, is
made perfect the virtue attractiue: and by the Musculus transuerse is made the
virtue retentiue: and by the Musculus latitudinal is made the virtue expulsive.
It is thus to be understood, that by the virtue attractiue is ^rawen down into
the Intrals al superstuities, both wa^r, wynd, and dyrt: By the virtue
retentiue all things are withholden and kept, until nature have wrought his
kind: And by the virtue expulsive is put forth al things, when Nature
provoke any thing to be done. Galen says, that wounds or incisions be
more perilous in the midst of the womb then about the sides, for there the
parts be more tractable than any other parts be. Also he says, that in
wounds persing the womb there shall not be made good incarnation, except
Sifac be sewed with Mirac. Now to come to the parts contained within: First,
that which appears next under the Sifac is Omentum, or Zirbus, the which is a
Pannicle covering the stomach and the Intrals, implanted with many Ueines and
Arteirs, and not a little fatnes ordained to keep moist the inward parts. This
Zirbus is an official member, and is co^pound of a vein and an Arteir, the
which enters and makes a line of the utter tunikle of the stomach, unto
which tunikle hangs the Zirbus, and covers all the guts down to the
shayre. Two causes I find why they were ordained: one is that they should
defend the nutratiues outwardly: the second is, that through his own power
and virtue he should strength and ^omfort the digestion of all the Nutrates,
because they are more feebler then other members be because they have but a
thin womb or skin etc. Next Zirbus apeareth the Intrals or guts, of which
Galen says, that the Guts were ordained in the first creation to convey the
dross of the meat and drink, and to cleanse the body of their superfluities.
And here i^ (...) ^o be^ noted that there be six portions of one whole gutie,
which both in man and beast begins at the nether mouth of the stomach, and
so continues forth to the end of the fundament. Never the less he has
diverse shapes and forms, and diverse operations in the body, and therefore he
has diverse names. And here upon the Philosophers say, that the lower womb of
a man is like unto the womb of a swin^. And like as the stomach has two
tunikles, in like manner have all the Buttes two tunikles. The first portion of
the Guts is called Duodenum, for he is xij. inches of length, and covers
the nether part of the stomach, and receives all the dross of the stomach:
The second portion of the Guts is called Ieiunium, for he is evermore
empty, for to him lies evermore the chest of the Gal, beating him sore, and
draws forth of him all the dross, and cleanses him clean: The third
portion or gutte is called Yleon, or small gutte, and is in length xv. or xvi.
Cubits. In this gutt oftentimes falls a disease called Yleaca passio. The
iiij. gut is called Monoculus, or blind gutte, and it seems to have but one
hole or mouth, but it has two, one near unto the other, for by the one all
things go in, and by the other they go out again: The fifth is called Colon,
and receives all the dross deprived from al profitablenes, and therefore there
comes not to him any veins Miseraices, as to the other: The sixth and last is
called Rectum, or Longaon, and he is ended in the Fundament, and has in his
^ether end four Muscles, to hold, to open, to shutt, and to put out, etc. Next
is to be noted of Mesenterium, the which is nothing else but a texture of
innumerable veins Mifer aices, ramefied of one vein called Porta epates,
covered and defended of Pannicles and Ligamentes coming to the Intrals, with
the back full of fatnes and glandulus flesh, etc.

The stomach is a member compound and spermatike, seno^ (...) sensible, and
there in is made perfect the first digestion of Chile. This is a necessary
member to all the body, for if it fail in his working, all the members of the
body shall corrupt. Wherefore Galen says, that the stomach was ordained
principally for two causes: The first, that it should be to all the members
of the body, as the earth is to all that are engendered of the earth, that is;
that it should desire sufficient meat for all the whole body: The second is,
that the stomach should be a sack or ^hest to all the body for the meat, and
as a Cook to all the members of the body. The stomach is made of (...)
panmcles, of which the inner is Nerueous, and the utter Carneous. This inner
pannicle has m^sculus lo^gitudinales that stretches along from the stomach
to the mouth, by the which he draws to him meat and drink, as it were
hands. And he has Tranuers will, for to witholde or make retention. And also
the utter pannicle has Latitudinall will, to expulse and (...) ou^: and that by
his heat he should help the diges^iue virtue of the Stomach, and by other
heates given by hie neighbors, as thus. It has the Liver on the right side,
cha^ing and heating him with his lobes or figures: and the Splen on the left
side with his fatnes, and veins sending to him melancholy, to exercise his
appetites: and above him is the Heart, quickening him with his Arteirs: Also the
brain, sending to him a branch of Nerves to give him feeling. And he has on
the hinder part, dissending of the parts of the back many Lygaments, with
the which he is bound to the Spondels of the back: The form or figure of the
stomock is long, in likeness of a gowrde, crooked: and that both boles be in the
upper part of the body of it, is, because there should be no going out of it
unadvisedly of those things that are received into it. The quantity of the
stomach commonly holds two pitchers of water, and it may suffer many
passions, and the nether mouth of the stomach is narrower than the upper, and
that for three causes: the first cause is, that the upper receives meat great
and boystrous in substance, that there being made subtle it might pass into
the nether: The second is, for by him passes all the meats, with their
chilositie from the stomach to the Liver: The third is, for that through him
passes all the dross of the stomach to the guts. And this suffiseth for the
Stomach etc.

The Liver is a principal member, and official, and of his first creation
spermatike, co^plete in quantity of blood, of himself insencible, but by
accidence he is sencible, and in him is made the second digestion, and is
lapped in a Senowy pannicle. And that he is a principal member, it appears
openly by the Philosophers, by Auicen and Galen. And it is official as is the
stomach, and it is of spermatik matter, and senowy of the which is engendered
his veins. And because it was little in quantity, nature has added to it
crudded blood, to (...) ^omplishment of sufficient quantity, and is lapped in
a senowy pannicle. And why the Liver is cruded, is, because that Chile which
comes from the Stomach to the Liver, should be turned into the color
ofbloud. And why the Liver was ordained, was, because that all the nutrimentall
blood should be engendered in him. The proper place of the Liver is under the
false Kibbes in the right side. The form of the Liver is gibbous or bunchie on
the backeside, and it is some what hollow like the insyde of an hand. And ^hy
it is so shapen, is, that it should be plyeable to the stomach, like as a
hand does to an apple, to comfort her digestion, for his heat is to the
stomach as the heat of the fire is to the Pocte or ^auldron that hang eth
over it.

Also the Liver is bound with his p^llikles to the Diafragma, and with str^nge
Lygamentes. And also he has Colyg^s with the Stomach and the Intrals, and
with the Heart and the ^ynes, the Testicles and other members. And (...) in him
five Pellikles like five fingers. Galen calls the Liver Massasanguinaria,
containing in it self fo^e substances, Natural and Nutrimental The naturals
is sent with the blood to all parts of the body to he engendered and
nouri^hed. And the (...) and sent to places ordained for (...) These are the
places of the humors, the (...), (...) in the chest of gal, Melancoli^ to the
(...), (...) to the Lungs and the Iun^ures, the (...) to the (...) and the
Uesike. And (...). (...), and sometime they putrifle and (...), (...) put (...)
the skin, and (...) by (...), by (...), or by (...) all (...), that is to
(...), (...), (...), (...), and Phlegm, be (...) and (...) in this manner:
First (...) shall understand that (...) the Spermatike, matter of the Liver
(...), there is (...) two great veins, of the which the first, and the
greatest is called Porta an^d comes from the concauitie of the Liver, of
whom springs all the small veins Miseraices, and these Miseraices be to
Vena porta as the branches of a tree be to the stock or tree For some of them
be contained with the botome of the stomach some with Duodenum, some with
Ieiunium, some with Yleon, and some with Monoculus, or Saccus. And from all
these guts they bring to Vena porta the succozitie of Chiley going from the
stomach, and distribute it into the substance of the Liver. And these veins
Miseraices be innumerable. And in these veins is begone the second digestion,
and ended in the Liver, like as is in the Stomach the first digestion. So it
proves that Vena porta and Vena Miseraices serve to bring all the succozitie
of the meat and drink that passes the Stomach to the Liver, and they spread
themselves thorough the substance of the Liver inwardly, and all they stretche
toward the gibbos or bowing part of the Liver, and there they meet and go al
into one unity, and make the second great vein called Venaculis or Concaua,
or Vena ramosa, al is one, and he with his roots draws out all the blood
engendered from the Liver, and with his branches ramefying vpwardes and
downwards, carries and conueyeth it to all other members of the body to be
nourished with, where is made perfect the third digestion. And also there goes
from the Liver veins bearing the super^uities of the third dig^tion to their
proper places, as it shall be declared hereafter.

Now to speak of the ^al, or the chest of the ^al: it is an official member,
and it is spermatike and (...), and has in it a sub^ will, and it is as a purse
or a pa^cular ^esike in the holownesse of the Liver; about the middle peric^ or
lobe, ordained to receive the Cholerike superfluities which are engendered in
the Liver. The which purse or bag has three holes or necks: by the first
he draws to him from the Liver the choler, that the blood be not hurt by the
choler: by the second neck he sends to the bottom of the stomach Choler
to further the digestion of the stomach: And by the third neck be sends
the choler regularly from one gutte to another to cleanse them of their
superfluities and dross: and the quantity of the purse may contain in it
half a pint, etc.

And next is the Splen, or the Milte, the which is a spermatike member, as are
other members, and official, and is the receptorie of the melancolious super
fluities that are engendered in the Liver. And his place is on the l^fte side,
transuersly linked to the stomach, and his substance is thin. And two causes
I find why he was ordained there: The first is, that by the melancolious
superfluities that are engendered of the Liver which he draws to him, he is
nourished with: The second cause is, that the nutritive blood should by him be
made the more purer and clean, from the dross and thicking of melancholy, etc.

And next of the Reins and Kidnes: It is to be understood, that within the
region of the Nutrites backwards, are ordained the Kidnes, to cleanse the blood
from the waterie superfluities, and they have each of them two passages, or
holes, or necks: by the one is drawn the water from Uenakelis by two veins,
which are called vena emulgentes, the length of a finger of a man, and issues
from the Liver: and by the other is sent the same water to the Bladder, and is
called Poros vrithides. The substance of the Kidnes is Lazattus flesh, having
longitudinal will. And their place is behind on each side of the Spondels, and
they are two in number, and the right Kidney lies somewhat higher than the
left, and is bound fast to the back with Lygaments. The Philosopher says,
that man's Kidneys are like to the Kidneys of a Cow, full of hard knottes,
having in him many hard concauities, and therefore the sores of them be hard
to cure. Also they are more harder in substance then any other fleshly Member
ber, and that for two causes, one is: that he be not much hurt of the
sharpness of the urine: The other is, that the same urine that passes from
him might the better be altered and cleansed through the same. Also there
comes from the heart to each of the kidneys an arteire, that brings with
him blood, heat, spirit, and life. And in the same manner there comes a vein
from the. Liver, that brings blood to nourishe the kydeneys. called blood
nutrimentall, The grease of these kydneys or fatnes is as of other inward
members, but it is an official member, made of thin blood, congeled and
cruded through cold, and there is ordained the greater quantity in his place,
because it should receive and temper the heat of the kydneys, which they have
of the biting sharpness of the water. Now by the kydneys upon the Spondels
passes Venakelis, or venacaua, which is a vein of great substance, for he
receives all the nutrimentall blood from the Liver, and from him passes many
small pypes on every side, and at the Spondell between the sholders he
deuideth him self whole into two great branches the one goes into the one
arm, and the other into the other, and there they divide them selves into
many veins, and branches: as is declared in the arms.

The Anatomy of the Haunches, and their parts.
THe Haunches are the lower part of the womb, joining to the Thyes,, and the
secret members. And three things there are to be noted thereof, the first is
of the parts containing: the second is of the parts contained: and the third
is of the parts proceeding outwardes, The parts containing outwardly, be
Myrac and Sifac, the Zirbus and the bones. The parts contained inwardly, are
the Vezike, or bladder, the spermatike vessels, the Matrir in women Longaon,
Nerves, Ueynes, and artiers, dissending downewardes, The parts proceeding
outwardes, are The Buttockes, and the Muscles discending to the Thies of which
it is to be spoken of in order. And first of the parts containing: as of Myrac,
Sifac, and Zirbus, there is enough spoken of in the Anatomy of the womb. But
as for the bones of the Hanches, There be of the parts of the back three
Spondels of Ossa sacri, or of the Hanches, and three cartaliginis spondeles of
Ossa caude, called, The Tail bonne. And thus it is proved, that there is in
every man xxx. spondels, and thus they are to be numbered: In the neck seven,
in the Ridge twelve: In the Reins five: and in the Hanches six, And it is to
be noted, that every Spondell is hollow in the midst: through which
hollowenesse passes Nuca from the brain, or the marrowe of the back. And
some Authors say, that Mynuca is of the substance that the Brain is of, for
it is like in substance, and in it self gives to the Nerves both the virtue
of moving and feeling. And also every Spondell is holed on every side,
through the which holes both artiers and veins, do bring from the Heart and
the Liver both life and nourishement, like as they do to the Brain: and from
the pannicle of Mynuca or the Marrowe of the back, through the holes of the
sides of the Spondels, springs forth Nerves motives and there they
intermeddle themselves with the strong Lygaments that be insencible, and so the
Lygamentes rece^ue that feeling of the Nerve, which the Nerve takes of Mynuca.
And by this reason many Authors prove, that Mynuca is of the same Substance
that the Brain is of, and the Pannicles of the Nuca is of the same Substance
of the Pannicles of the Brain. etc. And each of these spondels be bound fast
one with an other, so that one of them may not well be moved without another.
And so al these spondels together, contained one by another are called the
Ridgebone, which is the foundation of all the shape of the body. They with the
last spondel be contained or joined to the bones of the Hanches, and they be
the vpholders of all the spondels. And these bones be small toward the tail
bone, and broad toward the Hanches, and before they join and make Os
pectinis. And so they be broad in the parts of the Isles, and therefore some
Authors calls it Ilea. And each of these two bones toward the Liver has a
great round hole, into the which is received the bone called Vertebra, or, The
whorle bone, Also besides that place there is a great hole or way, through the
which passes from above Musculus, veins, and Arteirs, and go into the Thyes.
And thus it is to be noted, that of this bone Pecten, and the bone Vertebra, is
made the iuncture of the Thye.

Now to speak of the parts contained, the first thing that comes to sight,
is the bladder, the which is an official member, compound of two neruous
Pa^nicles, in complexion cold and dry, whose neck is carnous, and has
muscles to withholde, and to let go: and in men it is long, and is contained
with the yard, passing through Peritoneum, but in women it is shorter, and is
contained within the Vulua. The place of the bladder is between the bone of
the Share and the tail gutte called Longaon, and in women it is between the
foresaid bone and the Matrix. And in it is implanted two long vessels coming
from the Kidneis, whose names be Porri vrichides, bringing with them the Urin
or water from the Kidnes to the Bladder, which privily enters into the holes
of the pannicles of the bladder, by a natural moving between tunicle and
tunicle, and there the vrin finds the hole of the nether tunicle, and there
it enters privily into the concauitie of the bladder, and the more that the
bladder is filled with vrin, the straiter be the two tunicles comprised
togeether, for the holes of the tunicles be not even one against another, and
therefore if the bladder be never so full, there may none go back again.
The form of it is round, the quantity of it is a pitcher full, in some more,
and in some less, etc. Also there is found two other vessels called vaza
seminaria, or the spermatike vessels. And they come from Uenakelis, bringing
blood to the Testikles, as well in man, as in woman, in the which by his further
digestion it is made sparme or nature in men. They be put outward, for the
Testikles be without, but in women it abides within, for their Testikles
stand within, as it shall be declared hereafter.

Next follows the Matrix in women: The Matrix in woman is an official
member, compounde and Nerueous and in complexion cold and dry. And it is the
feelde of man's generation, and it is an instrument susceptiue, that is to say a
thing receiving or taking: and her proper place is between the bladder and the
gutte Longaon, the likeness of it, is as it were a yard reuersed or turned
inward: having testicles likewise, as aforesaid, Also the Matrix has two
concauities or selles, and no more, but all beasts have as many selles as they
have pappes heads. Also it has a long neck like an vrinall, and in every
neck it has a mouth, that is to say, one within, and an other without. The
inner in the time of the conception is shut, and the utter part is open as
it was before: and it has in the midst a Lazartus pannicle, which is called
in Latin Tentigo. And in the creation of this Pannicle, is found two
vtilities: The first is, that by it goes forth the urine, or else it should be
shed throughout all the Vulua: The second is, that when a woman does set her
thies abroad it alters the air that com meth to the matrix for to temper
the heat. Furthermore (...) Furthermore, it is said, that of this Embreon is
engendered the Heart, the Liver, the Brain, Nerves, veins, Arteirs, Cords,
Lygaments, Skins, Gristles and bones, receiving to them by kindly virtue the
menstruall blood, of which is engendered both flesh and fatnes. And as writers
say, the first thing that is shapen be the principals, as is the Heart, Liver,
and Brain. For of the Heart springs the Arteirs, of the Liver the Ueines, and
of the Brain the Nerves: and when these are made, Nature makes and shapeth
bones and grystles to keep and save them, as the bones of the head for the
Brain, the Breast bones and the Ribs for the Heart and the Liver. And after
these springs all other members one after another. And thus is the child bred
forth in four degrees, as thus: The first is, when the said sparme or seed
is at the first as 'it were milk: The second is, when it is turned from that
kind into another kind, is yet but as a lump of blood, and this is called of
Ypocras, Fettus: The third degree is, when the principals be shapen, as the
Heart, Liver, and Brain: The fourth and last, as when all the other members
be perfectly shapen, then it receives the soul with life and breath, and
then it begins to move it self alone. Now in these four degrees aforesaid,
in the first as milk it continues vii. days: in the second as Fettus ix.
days: in the third, as a lump of flesh ingendring the principals the space
of ix. days: and the fourth unto the time of full perfection of all the whole
members, is the space of, xviii. days: So is there, xlvi. days from the day
of conception unto the day of full perfection and receiving of the soul, as
God best knows.

Now to come again to the Anatomy of the Hanches: Then come we to Longaon,
otherwise called, The tail gutte, whose substance is panniculer, as of all the
other bowels, the length of it is of a span long, stretching nigh to Raynes,
his nether part is called Annis, that is to say, the Towell. And about him is
found two Muscles, the one to open, the other to shut. Also there is found
in him fyu^ veins or branches, of veins, called Vena Emoraidales, and they
have colliganes with the bladder. wherefore they are parteners in their
greenes. And when this Longaon is raised up, then ye may see the veins and
arteires, and senewes, how they be braunched and bound down to the ne there
parts. The parts proceeding outwardly, are, Didimus, Peritoneum, the Yard,
the Testicles, and the Buttockes, And first it shall be spoken of the Yard, or o
fmans generatiue members, the which dureth unto tha t part that is called
Peritoneum, the which place is from the Coddes unto the Fundament, whereupon is
a seame. Wherefore says the Philosopher, Man's yard is in the end and term of
the share. The yard is an official member, and the tiller of man's generation,
compounde and made of skin, brawnes, Tendo^, veins, arteirs, senewes and
great Lygamentes: and it has in it two passages, or principal issues, one
for the sparme, and an other for the urine. And as the Philosophers say, the
quantity of a common Yard is, viii, or, ix. inches, with mesurable bigenesse
proportioned to the quantity of the matrix. This member has, as says Auicen,
three holes, through one passes incensible polissions and wind, that causes
the yard to rise: the other two holes is declared before. Also the yard has
a skin, and about the head thereof, it is double, and that men call
Prepusium, and this skin is moveable, for through his consecration the
spermaticke matter is the better and sooner gathered together, and sooner cast
forth from the Testicles: for by him is had the more delectation in the ^ing.
And the foremost part of the head of the yard before is made of a Brawny
flesh, the which if it be once lost, it is never restored again, but it may
be well s^nned. etc. (...) he is without a fellow, and he is full of Marrowe,
and is round at either end: The roundnesse that is at the upper end is
called Vertebrum, or Whorle bone, and boweth inwardes, and is received into the
box or hole of the hanche bone: and at the lower and toward the Knee there it
has two roundes, which be received into the concauities of the bone of the
leg, at the knee, called the great Fossels. There is also at the knee a round
bone called, The knee pan. Then follows the leg, wherein is two bones,
called Focile mayor, and Focile minor, the bigger of them passes before,
making the shape of the shinne, and it is called the shinne bone, and passes
down making the inner ancle. The less passes from the knee backwards,
dissending down to the utter ankle, and there forms that ankle. etc. The
bones of the foot are, xxvj. as thus, First, next the ankle bone is one,
called in Latin Orabalistus: next under that toward the Heel is one,
called Calcany: and between them is an other bone called Os Nauculare: In the
second ward there be four bones, called Raceti, as be in the hands. In the
third and fourth ward be, xiiij. called Digitori: and v. called Pectens at the
extremities of the Toes, next to the nails. And thus be there in the foot,
xxvj. bones with the Leg from the Ankle to the Knee, two in the Knee, and one
round and flat bone, and in the Thye one. And thus shall you find in the
whole Leg and Foot, xxx. bones. And this suffiseth for young Practicioners.


