EDOM AND BABYLON Against JERUSALEM, OR, Meditations on Psalm. 137. 7.
Occasioned by the most happy Deliverance of our Church and State (on November
5. 1605.) from the most bloody Design of the Papists-Gunpowder-Treason. Being
the sum of diverse Sermons, delivered by Thomas Uicars B. D. Pastor of
Cockfield in South-Sex. This our Deliverance was such a mavelous work of
God, that it ought to be had in an everlasting remembrance; and the rather for
that the Papists in blind corners, most shamelesly give out, and go about to
persuade simple people, that there was never any such thing intended by them,
as the Gunpowder-treason, but that it is athing merely put upon them to make
their religion more odious.

Printed at London by E. P. for Henry Seyle, dwelling in St. Paul's Churchyard
at the sign of the Tigers head. 1633.

On the 5. of November.
Prospera lux oritur; linguis animisque favete:
Nunc dicenda bona sunt bona verba die.
Ex Ovid. Fast, lib. 1. Psalm. 31. 23. O love the Lord all ye his Saints, for
the Lord preserves the Faithful, and plentifully rewards the Proud-doer.

Psalm. 9. 16. Higgaion. Selah. i. e. Res meditanda sum. according to Iunius.
This is a thing most worthy our serious consideration.

A Summary, or, The most remarkable points delivered in these Sermons.
THe Gunpowder-treason-day is a Festival appropriate to the Church of England,
page 1, 2, 3. The divellish devise of the Gunpowder-plot exaggerated, page 6.
The effects, likely to have ensued upon the treason, if the hand of God had not
dashed it, page 10. What we are to think of those imprecations in Scripture
used by the Saints against their enemies, p. 13, 14 etc. Whether it be lawful
for us to curse our enemies in the name of the Lord, according to the example
of the Saints, p. 17. The persecutors of the Church, and namely the
Gunpowder-Traytors are the children of Edom by moral imitation, p. 21. The
enemies of Gods Church, Worldlings in general, and the Popish-faction in
particular are a company of carnal fleshly minded men, p. 23. The enemies of
Gods church, Worldlings in general, and the Popish faction in particular are
most cruel and bloody-minded men, like their father Edom, p. 29. The wicked
are ready to join hand in hand to vex the church, and to effect wicked
matters, p. 50. Neither affinity nor neerenesse of kin, nor any bond of love
can quench that hatred which the enemies of the church bear unto it, p. 58. It
is the property of wicked men to rejoice in evil, p. 62. The Lords name (who
is the keeper of our Israel) is to be blessed and praised for our most
miraculous deliverance, p. 70.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS, LORD COVENTRY, Baron of Alesborough, Lord
Keeper of the great Seal of England, and one of his Majesty's most honorable
privy Counsel.
RIght Noble Lord, The fame of your Honors most religious and righteous
proceedings in that high place of authority, wherein his sacred Majesty has
most worthily seated you, does so spread it self far and near, that he is
very envious that does not acknowledge it, very impious that does not heartily
thank God for it. The assurance of your Honors sincere love and affection you
show to Gods cause and true religion, that continual countenance and
encouragement you give both to the professors and publishers of the Gospel,
that facile ear you lend to all honest suppliants has drawn me on (though I
be the meanest of ten thousand) to make so far bold as to present unto you
these few leaves of paper, which I was desirous should come abroad under your
name, both that I might thereby find shelter against the virulent tongues of
that (...)
viperous brood, the jesuited Papists, enemies of our Church and state, to whom
I believe these Sermons will Veritas odium (...) Terent.
not be very welcome; and also that I might hereby show my self thankful in
some poor measure to your Honor in the behalf of my uncle, who by your good
means next under God enjoys that means of living he has, for which he is
ever bound as your Honors Bid is an old Saxon word and signifies, praying so
that, Bedeman in the language of our Ancestors is a Praying man, or a man
addicted to prayer.
Bede-man to pray for your peace and prosperity even as long as he draws
breath.

Go on, Nobilitas sola estatque vnica virtus.
right noble Lord, to be a pillar of piety and equity, a patron of the
distressed and needy, a worthy Mecaenas to learned men, and a religious Obadiah
to Gods Ministers. And I heartily pray God to think upon you in mercy and to
remember all the good you have done to the house of God and the officers
thereof. So prays

Your Honors most devoted in all observance, Thom: a Vicars.

EDOM AND BABYLON Against JERUSALEM.
PSALM. 137. 7. Remember the Children of Edom (O Lord) in the day of Jerusalem,
how they said, Down with it, Down with it, even to the ground.
GIve me leave to begin the exercise of * this day with the words of S.
Bernard, Novem.
Sermon. 5. de dedicat eccles. Hodierna die, fratres, solemnitate^ agimus, eamque
praeclaram; Praeloq^^
Today, Beloved, we celebrate a Festival and that a great one. D. D. (...)
For whether we consider the great danger, wherewith we were compassed, as
upon this day, or that great deliverance which God has wrought for us out of
that danger, as upon this day; Solennitate^ agimus eamque praeclaram, it is a
Festival we celebrate and a great one too. Quae tanto nobis debet esse
devotior, quanto est familiarior; as the same Bernard has it in his first
Sermon; which of all other Festivals is more solemnly and more devoutly to be
observed by us, for that it is more proper and peculiar to our Nation than to
any other. Nam caeteras quidem sanctorum solennitates (as he goes on there)
cum ecclesiis aliis habemus communes. The other Festivals and Holy days in
memory of the Saints are common to us with many other Churches; Haec vero sic
nobis est propria, ut necesse sit vel a nobis eam vel a nemine celebrari, but
the solemnity of this day is so appropriate to the Church and state of this
Kingdom, that I know not any Country in the world that has so great cause to
keep it Holy Day, as we of this Nation have. The Israelites, in memory of
their deliverance out of Egypt, from the bondage of Pharaoh King of Egypt, were
to keep a solemn Holy Day. And Moses gives them a memento to think on that
day, Remember this day in the which ye came out of Egypt, Exodus 13 3. And the
Jews afterward, in memory of their delivery from the malice and wrath of
wicked Haman, who had appointed them all to the slaughter, kept a Holy Day with
feasting and much joy, yea, and they promised that the days of that
anniversary solemnity, called the days of Purim, should be remembered and kept
throughout every generation. and every family, and every Province, and every
City, even those days of Purim should not fail among the Jews, and the
memorial of them should not perish from their seed, Hest. 9. 28. Beloved, this
days deliverance, which Gods right hand has wrought for this Land, is much
like to the delivery of Israel out of Egypt; for Rome is Egypt mystically, and
so it is called in the Revelation, and we were delivered from the bondage of
Rome this day, and we were delivered from the tyranny of the Pope of Rome,
which yoke some of our friends would have put upon our necks this day, if they
could have had their will; and shall we not then remember this day, wherein we
came out of Egypt? This days deliverance is much like the deliverance of the
Jews from the wicked devise of Haman, the Jews Adversary. For was there not
powder prepared to blow us up? was there not Fire and Faggot provided to burn
us up? were we not all of us as sheep appointed to the slaughter? and shall
not then this day be remembered? shall we suffer the memorial of it to perish
from us or our seed for ever? Oh no, The Lord has so done his marvelous works
as upon this day, that they ought to be had in everlasting remembrance. This is
the day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it, Psalm. 118.
This is a day of the Lords own making; not as though the Lord did not make all
the other days as well as this. Yes, (to speak with Cassiodore) Fecit omnes,
sed hanc singulariter, he has made all the days in the year, and one day
tells to another the goodness of God their Maker; but he has made this
after a singular manner, because this day makes report of a singular favor the
Lord has wrought for us upon it; fecit totos, sed non tales, he has made all
the other days, but he has not made them such as this: and therefore, seeing
God has set a mark upon this day, and given it a pre-eminence above it is
fellows, the (...) of the days of the week, I except always the Sabbath as
the Lords day, but I mean the rest of the days of the week; D. D. C^
seeing (I say) God has set the print of his own finger upon it above the
night, there is reason that we should celebrate this day above the nights. To
observe days and years and new Moons, and to make every day a feast day, this
is supra, it is above all heathenish superstition. To observe no days at all
but the Sabbath only, this is infra, it is below a Christian profession. I
confess time and place, both are quantities; and (...) nuila est vis, nulla
efficacia, there is no virtue nor (...) in quantities, so we are taught in
Philosophy; notwithstanding* yo^ know we give respect to the place for the
persons sake that sits in it; and why then should we not give respect to the
time for the work that is wrought in it?

Let no man think my speech superfluous, or account this Preface I have made
as impertinent. For it serves both to rouse up the (...) and untowardlinesse
of some, who have neither good conceit of this or any other (...); and it
serves likewise to commend (...) and readiness to assemble your selves (all
other business set apart) at this time in Gods: House, to keep this day holy
unto the Lord, as the wisdom of our state has decreed and the piety of our
Church has well ordered.

There is none here present, I take it, that can be ignorant of the business
of this day, and for what we are met together at this time in the House of God.
It is to give God thanks, and to continue a thankful remembrance of his mercy
in the deliverance of the whole Church and Kingdom of England, from the most
barbarous and bloody intended massacre in the Gunpowder Treason. A Treason! (
horresco referens) which I can never think upon, but it makes my hair to
stand on an end, not conceiving in the word^ by what name to express it,
whether I should call it the miracle, or rather the monster of all treachery,
the marrow, or rather the quintessence of all villainy. A Treason, so uncouth
and unheard of; so matchless, and unpareleled; so prodigious and divellish in
each respect, that after-ages may peradventure be so amazed at the reading of
it in our Chronicle, that they will have hardly any faith to believe i^ for a
true story, but take it only for some (...) Poeticum, a devise to express
some matchless masterpiece of treason; it will scarce sink into their heads,
or settle in their hearts, that ever there should such a divellish plot have
been attempted or acted by any that call themselves the sons of Adam. A
treason, quam nec sol, qui omnia intuetur, aspicere D D. Co^k
which neither the Heaven, which beholds all things, could look upon without
blushing; nec terra, quae omnia sustinet, nisi eviscerata suscipere, nor the
Earth which bears up all things could admit of without violent digging into
her bowels; nec Nox, quae monstrorum matter est, tegere and occultare sustinuit,
nor the Night which is the mother of monsters and midwife of wickedness,
could endure to cover or keep close, but must needs vent shame and confusion
to the Authors and Actors in it. Quid tale immanes unquam gessisse feruntur.
Look upon Turks and Jews, revolve the Annals, and search into the manners of
the most fierce and furious Nations, and tell me you that are conversant in
History, if ever you met with such a bloody practice? you that have spent some
time abroad in foreign parts, tell me if ever you heard of such a barbarous
plot?

O mites Diomedis equi Busiridis arae. Clementes! if they be compared to this
prodigious tragic Gunpowder stratageme, of which we are now to speak. If
the grapegatherers come unto thee, would they not leave some grapes? if thieves
come by night, they will destroy till they have enough; and but till they have
enough, Ierem. 49. 9. But these merciless men, M. Dunster.
playing the parts of furies in the shapes of men, these Ignatian Pyrachmons
will down with all at one blow, they will bury in one common fire rem regem
Regimen, Regionem, Religionem; Root and Branch, Head and Tail, the Government
of the Region, and the Substance of Religion, Patrem and Patriam, our Country
and the Father of our Country, the King and hi^ Peers, the Reverend Clergy,
the Renowne^ Nobility, the Sages of all Cities, and Flowe^ of the whole
Communalty, and only, I think, to see an image of Tophet and Hell in thi^
World. I would gladly set forth the horriblenesse of that same (...) that
universally intended destruction and desolation of thi^ Land, that seeing the
greatness of the danger toward, we may the better consider of the greatness
of our Adversaries malice in ploting, and the greatness of Gods mercy in
discovering the plot. But I am not able to depaint it out unto you in lively
colors, according as my desire is, neither will the nature of the thing suffer
it; only, because we are more sensible of such things by the event, give me
leave in a Sciagraphie to set before your eyes the events that were likely to
have ensued upon this horrible treason, by which, the treason may be, if not
fully deciphered, yet in some ^ort at lea^t shadowed and represented.

Suppose the King and Queen with all the Nobles, Bishops and Judges were
assembled together in the house of Parliament to consult and deliberate
touching the weighty affairs of this Kingdom, as indeed it was appointed. And
suppose then under this house in a Vault there were laid thirty Barrels and
four Hogsheads of Gunpowder with Faggots and iron Bars upon them, as there
were indeed. But now go on, and imagine the train to be laid the powder
fired, the terrible blow given, and on a sudden imagine the whole building to
crack asunder, the plankes all on a flame, the beams and stones flying in the
air, the joints and members of all the worthies of our Land, rent and torn
and scattered one from another the walls of the street bedawbed with men's
brains, the ways bedewed with men's blood, scarcely so much as one bone left
of a great many for burial. Then imagine you see the Church adjoining as with
an earthquake dejected, the Monuments of the dead defaced, the Hall of Justice
demolished, the Records and Charters of the Kingdom perished, the whole
circuit thereabouts turned into smoke and rubbish. Then imagine you see the
City in an uprore, the Country in perplexity, the Papists every where up in
arms, the Spaniard with his forces landing upon your coasts ready to join
with them, your houses rifled, your goods spoiled, your Maidens ravished, your
Wives abused, your Children slaughtered; Gods Temple profaned, the Kings
authority debased, the Popes power advanced, the pure preaching of the Word
abolished, the Idolatrous superstition of the Mass established. Truly all
these consequents, and far worse, if I were able to express them, would have
followed upon that vile and transcendent treason, if it had taken effect. The
face of all things would have been quite altered, and the whole Kingdom turned
topsy turvy. Caligula wished that all the people of Rome had had but one neck,
that he might have smit it asunder at one blow. Truly in this Treason the
neck of our whole State, Mr. Bolt^
both of Church and Commonwealth, the glory of this famous and flourishing
Kingdom (the hope of posterity) was laid as it were upon the block. The
instrument of death was lifted up by the damned instruments of the Pope of
Rome, and was ready to give us all the mortal stroke, or, as they called it,
the deadly blow; had not the Angel of GOD stepped in in the very nicke; had
not our merciful God by his most miraculous and immediate providence put to
his helping hand and awarded the blow, and turned the edge of the Axe upon the
neck of our Adversaries themselves. The net was spread, and the snare was
laid, and the pit was dug, and the Hunters were gone out to drive us into
their gins, and they had the game fair before them; but the net was broken by
the finger of God, and the snare was discovered by the eye of God, and the pit
that they had dug for us, they fell into it themselves, and were taken with
their own mischief. If the Lord himself had not been on our side, now may
Israel say, if the Lord himself had not been on our side when men rose up
against us, they had swallowed us up quick when they were so wrathfully
displeased with us; the waters had drowned us, and the streams had gone over
our souls, the deep waters of the proud had gone even over our soul. But
praised be God which has not given us over as a prey unto their tee^h. Our
soul is escaped even as the Bird out of the snare of the Fowler; the snare is
broken and our soul is delivered, and our help stands in the Name of the
LORD which made Heaven and earth, Psalm. 124. a most sit Psalm to be sung at
this solemnity.

So now, having prepared your hearts and possessed your minds with the proper
business of this day, I will with your favor descend to the handling of this
place of Scripture which I have read for my Text, suitable, as I take it, (...).
for the time. The sum whereof is nothing else but a prayer of the Church
against her malicious and implacable enemies Remember the Children of Edom, o
Lord, etc.

This Psalm is very patheticall, full of passions and affectionate passages.
(...).
I may reduce them all not unfitly to these two ^eads in ^espect of their
several objects; for either they respect the Church her self, for they
respect the enemies of the Church. In the verses going before my Text you have
laid down those passions and passages which respect the Church, and that both
in her misery which is deplored, and in her prosperity, which is desired; but
of these we have not now to speak. In the seventh verse and the rest of the
Psalm there are laid down these passions and passages which respect the
enemies of the Church. where ye have first an imprecation of evil: 2. An
intermination of judgment. The imprecation in this, the interminatio^ in the
next. In the imprecation (which we have chosen for our theme) we are to
consider these 2. things. 1. How the Psalmist in the person of Gods servants
devoves the enemies of the Church to destruction; and 2. how he describes and
most lively depaints out unto us their condition. Of these in order, 1. how
they are devoved: 2. How they are described.

For the first, he prays God to remember them. Remember the Children of Edom,
O Lord. Interpretatio.
Remember them? that is, when thou powrest out thy judgments upon sinners, let
the vials of thy wrath fall full upon them; remember them, that is, repay them
as they have rewarded us, requite their extreme malice with extreme
punishment, and for their spite against the Church, let them feel the weight of
thy displeasure: this is meant by Remember them. Thus we see the Psalmist
prays in diverse Psalms, as Psalm. 69. 22. Let their Table be a snare unto
them, and let their prosperity be their ruin. Let their eyes be dark, and
power out them again, etc. and so in the 54. Psalm. 5. He shall reward evil unto
mine enemies, destroy thou them in thy truth: and so, in many other Psalms you
have the like direful imprecations. Whereupon there falls in here a question
to be answered: Quaestio.
What we are to think of these imprecations and execrations used by the Saints
against their enemies, and whether it be lawful for us to imitate them in
this? The question has two branches, I will answer to both distinctly. To Mat.
5. 44. where he bids us, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good
to them that hate you, and pray for them that persecute you. If we must pray
for our enemies, why do the Saints pray against them? if we must do them
good, why do the Saints wish them evil? if we must bless them, why do the
Saints so eagerly curse them? if we must love them, why do the Saints
express such an extreme and deadly hatred against them? Subject^^.
I answer it is true, the imprecations used by the Saints in Scripture against
wicked men are very grievous and fearful, but we are not to think
notwithstanding, that either they transgressed herein against the rule of
charity, or sinned against the precep^ of Christ Jesus. For, first, themselves
and their own preservation, as the glory of God and the conservation thereof;
the quarrel that they have with these men is not private but public; neither
do they curse them because they are their enemies, but because they are Gods
enemies, and the enemies of GODS Church. Secondly, in all enemies out of any
spite or spleen or thirsty desire of revenge, but because they understand by
this means the glory of GODS Justice is to be made manifest before the faces
of the children of men. God will have his glory even of sinners; either in
their salvation, if they turn unto him; or in their confusion, if they
continue obstinate. In the salvation of sinners the mercy of GOD carries away
the glory, (...) the confusion of sinners the glory reflects upon Gods justice.
It is true, GOD delights not in the death of any sinner; neither will he
have any of his Saints to take delight in the destruction of any wicked man:
but God desires the glory of his justice to be manifest, and the Saints of God
may desire that the glory of GODS justice may be made manifest, though it be by
the death and destruction of wretched and unrepentant sinners. Caine, and
utterly rejected from the society and company of his Elect Children. Lastly,
we must know, as Augustine has observed, that these imprecations are not
only prayers but prophecies, being indeed prophetical denuntiations of those
fearful judgments which should certainly overtake and overthrow all the
enemies of God and his Church without repentance; and therefore in all these
imprecations, as the affection is not at all distempered, so neither is there
any violation of patience, any branch of charity, any neglect of the precept of
Christ.

Now for the second branch of the question, Fabritius
whether we may imitate the Saints in this, I doubt not but that we may, if we
admit these limitations, and take a few distinctions along with ush: 1. We
must diligently distinguish betwixt the cause and the person that maintains
cause, if it be an evil cause, we may condemn it and lawfully pray against
it, whatsoever the persons be that maintain it. It is clear by the example of
David, who prayed against the wicked counsel of Achitophel, 2. Sam. 15. 31.
And by the example of the blessed Apostles, who prayed against the plots and
practices of Herod, and Pilate and the Pharisees to stop the current Acts 4.
29. As touching the persons of our enemies, we are to note this distinction:
Some are private enemies, some are public. If they be private enemies only,
we must distinguish betwixt their nature and their sin: Their sin we may
pray against; Yea, I will pray yet against their wickedness; but their nature,
we must not wish evil unto it, we may love the man and hate his sin; and
howsoever it is a man a sinner that I hate and pray against, yet it is not qu^
homo, as he is a man, but qua peccator, as he is a sinner. For here Saint
Augustines rule is good, Omnis peccator, in quantum peccator, non es^
diligendus; no sinful person, as he is sinful, is to be loved of us; De
Doctrine. Christian. lib. 1. cap. 27. The sin even of our private enemy we
may hate and pray against, but for his nature, the man himself, we must be so
far from hating him, that we must love him, and we must be so far from
wishing him evil, that we must be ready to do him all the good we can, as
our Savior commanded in his Sermon upon the Mount, Mat. 5. 44. and the blessed
Apostle injoyneth Romans 12. 14. 20. These are our private enemies. But if our
enemies be public, that is, if they be not only our enemies, but the enemies
and his Church, the enemies of the truth of God, and of the Religion in the
Church, then we may curse them in the name of the Lord, and pray against them,
according to the example of the Saints of God, but yet I pray you here take
this Proviso. Those public enemies incorrigible, and incurable: or they be
curable, and such whereof ther^ may be some good hope of amendment, where there
is hope of repentance and amendment, we must not pray against such, but for
such, we must beg of God their conversion, as we see Christ prayed for his
enemies upon the Cross Father, forgive them, Luke 23. 34. and the Protomartyr
Saint Stephen prayed for his enemies at the last gasp, Lord, lay not this si^
to their charge, Acts 7. 60. And so does the Prophet David in diverse Psalms;
in one he says, Fill their faces with shame, O Lord, that they may seek thy
name, he prays that God would let them come to a sight of their sin, and be
ashamed thereat, and so be driven to seek unto God for mercy; and in another
(...) he says, Let their Judges be everthrowne in stony places, that they may
hear my words, for they are sweet; he prays that God would send some
fatherly chastisement and correction upon the chiefest of his enemies, that by
the consideration of Gods Ro^ displing of them, they may be made to hearken
unto Gods Word obediently, and to relish it well in their palates. All this
must be done, where there is any hope; but where there is no hope left of
amendment, when they are become obstinate and obdurate in sin, desperate and
incorrigible, when men are given up of God to a reprobate sense, as the Apostle
says, and to offend of mere malic^o^s wickedness, as the Psalmist speaks;
(...) this case we may pray against them, and be seech God to bring them to a
speedy confusion and destruction, both for the ma^^festatio^ of the Glory of
his justice, and the deliveran^ of his poor Church from their divellish man
chinations. And such were these enemies spoken of in the Text, as shall appear
by the description, which is the second general, and which we are now by the
help of GOD (...) enter upon, Remember the Children of Edom, etc.

There is in this Psalm mention made (...) two sorts of enemies, the Children
of Edom and the Daughter of Babylon. Talibus n^minibus c^^venientissi me
sigura^tur verita^ inimici. Id^ m^ ae ^ quipp^ interpreta^tur velsa^ ^uinei vel
t^reni. A^^ in Psalm. 8 And again Interpretatur Edom sanguis; (...) and pumce
Edom dicitu^ August. in Psalm. 136.
And I grant that the Text is principally meant of the Edomites and Babylonians
which afflicted Jerusalem, or the Church of the Jews then, in their sore
captivity; for to those days this Psalm has reference: But yet, as I take
it, it reaches farther, and may very fitly be applied even to all such as
bandy themselves against the Church of God in any age, or at any time
whatsoever. So that upon this reckoning, the Powder-Traytors, above twenty
years ago, were these Edomites, and that scarlet Whore of Rome, was this
Daughter of Babylon; as both our Church signifies not obscurely in the first
Collect of the Service for this day, having relation to this Psalm, and as I
trust to make it plain unto you in my following discourse.

For the better conceiving of this, take a distinction: There are three sorts
of Children I meet withal in holy Writ. 1. Children by natural generation. 2.
Children by spiritual adoption. 3. Children by moral imitation. 1. By the
natural course of generation, so we are the Children of our natural parents
which begat us. 2. By the grace of spiritual adoption, so the Elect and
servants of GOD are called the Children of God. 3. By the likeness of moral
imitation, and that two ways, either in good, or in evil; in good, so the
faithful are said to be the Children of Abraham; being followers of the faith
of Abraham; in evil, so the wicked miscreants of the world and enemies of the
Church may be said to be the Children of Edom, being imitators of Edoms sins
and wretched courses. Now there are two things in Edom, especially to be
observed, wherein his posterity do imitate him, and walk directly in his
steps; the first is carnality, the second is cruelty; of both these in their
order.

For the first; Edom which is Esau you carnal man, a man al^gether addicted to
his belly cheer, prefer^ing it to his Birthright, for he sold his
Birthright for a mess of Pottage; and upon this the Author of the Epistle to
the Hebrews gives him the Title of (...), a profane fellow, Heb. 12. 16. So
these Children of Edom, they are a company of carnal men, little careful of
the maine, but altogether taken up with the profits and pleasures of this life.
This is true whether we understand it of Worldlings in general, who are out
of the Church, and so are enemies unto it, or of the Popish faction in
particular, who, under the cloak and color of the Church, do persecute the
Church and waste it extremely.

As for Worldlings generally their carnality is too well known, they are just
of the humor of the rich Glutton in the Gospel, to climb to great wealth,
and to be richly clad, and to fare deliciously every day, and to say to their
soul, Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years; Ede, bibe, lud^,
post mortem nulla voluptas, Eat, drink, and take thy pastime. God fills their
bellies with his hid treasure, and in these earthly things they hug themselves,
little caring to enter into the heavenly Canaan, they plant themselves here,
and set up their rest on this side the River, for they have their portion in
this life; whereas contrarily the Saints of God are Citizens of heaven, in this
world they are but strangers and pilgrims. And this is the reason why the world
hates them, and why these carnal men of the wo^ld persecute them; even
because they are contrary unto them, because they are strangers to their
sinful courses. So says our Savior, If you were of the world, the world
would love his own, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world
hates you, Ioh. 15. 19.

As touching the Popish faction, I mean those that addict themselves to the
Pope and make it there only study to hold up and enlarge the Sathanicall pomp
and pride, the Sardanapalicall riot and luxury of that man of sin and his
rablement; I say they are carnal and fleshly minded men. What other manner of
persons I pray you were those, that had their hands ^oule in the
gunpowder-treason? I come not here to blazon their works, or to set ou^ the
story of their lives. This I am sure of, that the arch-Traytor Garnet, the
Priest, was noted for an ambitious fellow, aiming at a Cardinals Hat, and such
an one as did indulgere genio, love his belly too well, and such an one as would
often use to sacrifice to Bacchus, being very usually cup shotten; yea, the
very night before he was to be executed, (mark the holiness of this stramineous
Saint) the very night, I say, before his execution, he was observed to be as
drunk as a beggar, and so sottish that he could not speak a wise word, D D.
Ab^o^
as the worthy Bishop of Salisbury relates it out of the mouth of faithful
witnesses in his Antilogia, written against Eudaemon Johannes, the Grecian
Bishop. The Religion of Popery, as it is most agreeable to the corrupt nature
of man, so I verily think, there is not any religion in the world, except it
be Mahometisme, the younger sister to Papisme that gives more way to the flesh,
and opens 2 greater gap to sensuality and carnality and all manner of
licentiousness, than the Doctrine of Popery does, as it is taught in these
days. Witness first, their doctrine of dispensations, whereby they teach that
the Pope has power to dispense with the Word of God, D D. Bear
and with every Commandment of the Law; and not only with the Law, but with
the Gospel too, and the Epistles of S. Paul. Now to what horrible looseness
and lewdness of life does this tend! and what sin is there, be it never so
heinous, which a carnal man will not be encouraged to commit by this
licentious doctrine? incest, sodomy, adultery, perjury, rebellion, all these
have bin dispensed with by the Popes holiness; there are such evident and
apparent instancesto prove this, that it cannot be denied. Witness 2. their
doctrine of Pardons and indulgences, which are impudent and shameless. Their
taxa poenitentaria Apostolica, whereby impurity is granted to every sinner and
pardon for every sin, be it never so grievous, so be that the party pays
according to the rate of absolution he is taxed upon that score, shall stand
as a sufficient witness against them in this point. Now is not this a doctrine
of licentiousness? when they make sin but a money-matter, nay more, when for
bowing the head, or saying over a short prayer, visiting a Church, creeping to
a cross, wearing a crucifixe, and the like, pardon may be purchased for sins
without number, and that for years without number. Witness thirdly, their
doctrine of auricular confession, the practice whereof what a gap to
uncleanness it opened, Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople saw well, when he
banished it out of his Church, as the Tripartite story shows, and Agrippa
likewise testifies, when he calls it genus quoddam lenocinii, a Bawd to
uncleanness; for that Priests and Friars, having hereby under pretense of
Religion free access unto women, it falls out many times that whose souls
they should gain to God, their bodies they do sacrifice to the devil.
Witness fourthly, their doctrine of constrained chastity and prohibiting of
marriage, which Saint Paul calls the doctrine of of Devils. Paphnutius a good
Bishop saw well what cause of horrible impurity and (...) it was like to be,
and therefore he very stoutly opposed the decree of constrained single life
made in the Nicene Council, and all the Fathers in that Council, pondring his
reasons, were willing to forgo their own and yield to his judgment, and so
revoked the decree, as is plain by the story. But Gregorius Magnus had a more
full insight into this matter, when the heads of more than 6000. Infants were
raked out of a pond before his face, which made him confess his error in
tying Priests to a single life, and commend the Apostles advice, It is better
to marry than to burn; and he added moreover, It is better to marry than to
give occasion to such abominable murder. Witness fifthly, their doctrine of
venial sins, giving manifest occasion of liberty to the professors thereof. It
is too plain it needs no proving. Witness sixthly, their doctrine of implicit
faith and ignorance, which they call the mother of devotion, and debarring of
the people from reading the holy Word of God. This cannot choose but be
occasion of great licentiousness; for as Chrysostom ^aith well, Scripturarum
ignoratio baereses peperit, vitam corruptam invexit, sursum and deorsum omnia
miscuit, the ignorance of the Scriptures has bred heresies, brought in
corruption of life, and turned all things up side down. What should I tell you
of Rome it self, the holy mother of these holy doctrines? In what place of the
world is there more impiety, cruelty, atheism, impurity, poisoning, treachery,
and all manner of villainy reigning, than in Rome under his Holiness his nose?
Did not Mantuan one of their Poets say of old, Vrbs est jam tota lupanar? Did
not the smell of Romes filthiness offend Saint Katharines nose, when she
complained that in the Court of Rome, where should be a delicate paradise of
virtues, she found a stink of hellish vices? But you will say, this was in
diebus illis, the times are now changed, and perhaps there is a change and
reformation in Rome. No such matter, but rather worse; did not D D. Redman, in
the Book of Martyrs, being demanded his judgment of Rome, say it was sentina
malorum, the very sink of all sin! The Trent Council indeed did promise a
reformation; but after that was broke up, see how Claud. Espencaeus a Bishop of
their own complains; Al hope of reformation, says he, is taken away; where
under the Sun is greater licentiousness, cl^mour, impurity, I will not say
madness and impudence, than in the City of Rome? Such and so great, as none
can believe, but he which has seen it, none can deny but he which has not
seen it. The Romanists quarrel with us, and complain much against the
profanenes and uncleanness of our Religion. But if the Whore of Babylon and
her adherents had not brazen foreheads, they would for shame cease to accuse
us, and assume the aspersion upon themselves, being far more guilty, and
their Religion directly tending thereunto, as I trust I have sufficiently
proved. And so from the carnality of these Edomites, I come to their cruelty,
II.
which is the second quality wherein they resemble their father. Of this (God
willing) we will speak two ways: 1. generally. 2. in particular.

In general note but this: Edom, that is, Esa^ was a cruel man, the Text
says, He took heart against his Brother Jacob and sought to kill him. As
Edom dealt with Israel, so dealt the Edomites with the Israelites, we find they
were always bent against them, they bore the^ a deadly grudge, and when they
got an opportunity they would vent it. What cruel and bloody hearted men the
whole race of the Edomites were, 1. Sam. 2 18.
you may guess by that notorious butcher of Gods Priests Doeg the Edomit when
he had most maliciously accused the Priests for succouring David, and had
brought them before Saul to be slain, and Saul would have had his servants,
his guard, to fall upon the Priests, and they refused to imbrue their hands in
their innocent blood; Doeg, like a dog, as he was, turned and ran upon the
Priests, and slew the same day 85. persons that wore a linen Ephod, and not
content herewith, like a greedy dog, that never could have enough, he entered
the City of the Priests, and smote it with the sword, and man and woman, and
child, and suckling, and Ox, and Ass, and Sheep, he spared none but put all
to the Sword. Here was the right-tricke of an Edomite indeed. Note, says Lyra,
the exceeding great cruelty of this wretched fellow, in vastatione tot bonorum
and in jugula^tione tot innocentium, which appears in these two things, the
spoiling of so much goods, and the slaughtering of so many innocents. But you
will say, tus homo Doecb, ^genus (...) Doech. ^lugust. in ^al. 51.
one particular proves not a general. Was the whole Nation of the Idumaeans
like this man? were they of the same humor with him? Just of the very same
humor, which you will most liberally grant, if you do but read the prophecy
of Obadiah; when the Lord does a-purpose reprove and threaten them for their
blood-thirsty malice and malicious cruelty against his people, (...) 12. and so
forth out. Now this is true not only of the Idumaeans, the sons of Edom in
naturality, but it is true of all other Idumaeans, the enemies of Gods Church,
which are the sons of Edom in morality; whether they be mere Atheistical
worldlings, or wretched Antichristian Papists, they are a company of malicious,
bloody, cruel hearted people against Gods servants.

First, for the men of this world, how hardhearted and cruelly fierce they have
been against the children of the Church, the stories of all ages do most
sufficiently witness; but especially the holy Scriptures; wherein by certain
resemblances of them to the most fierce and revengefull beaits and creatures
that are, the holy Ghost would not obscurely lay open the malice and wrathful
cruelty of these men. Sometime they are called Bulls, Many young Bulls are come
about me, fat Bulls of Basan close me in; sometime Lions, They came upon me
with open mouth, as it had been a ramping and a roaring Lion; sometime Dogs,
Deliver my Darling from the power of the dog; sometime Bees, They came about
me like Bees; sometime Scorpions, Now thy habitation is among Scorpions. All
these are wrathful, fierce, revengefull, cruel creatures. Such are the wicked
of the world what should I tell you of the primitive time, and that fiery trial
of Gods Saints under the most barbarous and bloody persecutions? what rewards
were proposed to them that could invent and devise the most uncouth and cruel
torments? and what tortures could either man or devil devise which were not
put upon the faithful Christians, who then in a manner dyed all most glorious
witnesses of the truth, which they sealed with their blood. Some of them were
racked, some were tried by mockings and scourgings, by bond and imprisonment;
they were stoned, they were hewn a-sunder, they were slain with the sword,
etc. Heb. 11. 35. etc. There you have even a brief map of these torments,
which the miscreants of the world powered like haile-shot on the heads of Gods
servants. Saint Gregory has enlarged the bed-roll of these tortures, writing
of the persecution under Nero, that wretched blood-hound, who as he was fed
with sops dipped in blood, being a child: so when he became a man he took a
delight to wash his hands and imbrue his heart in the blood of GODS Saints. So
cruel a wretch was he, and so witty in cruelties, that it was the opinion of
diverse Christians then living, that Nero was that Antichrist, as Saint
Augustine relates, lib. 20. de civitat. Dei, cap. 19. I cannot stand upon all
particulars. Let it be enough that Tacitus writes of him, how that
Quaesitissimis poenis affecit Christianos, he did afflict the Christians with
most exquisite and strangelydevised torments.

That Author relates how that wretched Emperor would have Christians covered
and sowed up in Bears skins, and the skins of other wild beasts, and so
expose them to be worried and eaten up of fierce and cruel Dogs. All the
four Elements are witnesses of his cruelty; for the earth, he made great
deep pits and holes in the earth, and would throw them down headlong to
perish there; for the water, he made diverse be bound hands and feet and head
altogether and cast into the Sea to be choked there; for the air, he made
diver be hung up a-loft in chains to feed the Birds of the air; for the
fire, he made diverse be tied to the stake, and tumbled others bound into the
fire to burn to ashes; not only so, but he was wont to take a great number
of the bodies of Christians and make piles of them, and so set them on fire in
u^um nocturni luminis, that they might serve as Beacons or Bone-fires to give
light in the night time to common passengers. O savage cruelty! I should but
weary you quite to tell you of the cruelty of Domitian, whom Tertullian calls
Neronis portionem, a limb of Nero; Eusebius, Neronis haeredem, Nero's heir in
Savagenesse; or of Maximinus who for his wonderful cruelty some called another
Cyciops, some Busiris, some Scyron, some Phalaris, some Tryphon or Gyges; Neque
enim erat ^rudelius animal in terris, says Julius Capitolinus; or of Julian
the Apostata, Omnes qui praecesserunt impietate vincens, says Chrysostom.
NaZianZene calls him a mixture made up of Jeroboam, Ahab, Pharaoh, and
NabuchadneZZar, all famous for cruelty and impiety, or of the rest of that
branne: men shall I call them? I cannot, for they put off all humanity, but
rather monsters of men and incarnate devils. I must refer you to the stories.

But you may say these were Pagans, professed enemies to Christ and
Christianity, and therefore no wonder, if they maligned Gods Children, and
drove them from City to City, and hated them extremely, and persecuted them
even unto death; but we hope there are none that call themselves Christians
who are guilty of so great cruelty as you speak of: Yes, Beloved, I say it, and
I will say it again, that the Popish faction are as guilty of this cruelty
against GODS Church, as the very Pagans were, and that Popish Rome is as
thirsty of blood as ever Heat henish Rome was, and therefore in the Revelation
she is called that Scarlet whore which has made her self drunk with the
blood of GODS Saints.

Because this matter will lie hard upon the Papists, among whom I verily think
there are many honest men, that I may not do them wrong, nor my speech wrongly
interpreted, I pray you observe with me this distinction. There is great
difference betwixt these two, the Church of Rome, and the Court of Rome, Those
worthies and men of renown, whom God stirred up to be reformers of the Church
abused by Popelings, we had them all from the Church of Rome, and I doubt not
but that God, as in every age from Christ's time has had, so he has at this
day like wise a true Church even in Rome it self, which groneth under the
tyranny of the Man of sin, and de^ireth a reformation, and seeks it of GOD
by prayer to make a purgation of his Church. We speak not of these, but we
speak of the Court of Rome, that is, the Hierarchy consisting of the Pope and
his Cardinals and the rest of his shavelings, and professed votaries, which
worship the Beast, and have taken the mark of the Beast in their foreheads.
These I call the Popish faction, and these I can prove to be as deeply stained
with the blood of the children of God, as ever heathenish Rome was. They call
themselves indeed the Church, the only Church, the Catholic, the mother
Church; but I say they are not of the Church, nay, enemies to the Church, and
that very Antichrist St. Paul speaks of was breeding in his time; briefly, I
say of them as our Church has taught me most pithily and truly, their faith
is faction, their religion is rebellion, their practice is murdering both of
soul and body. They murder the souls of those that depend upon them
withtheir false and erroneous doctrine; they murder the bodies of those that
stand against them either by poison, or by poynard, or by pistol, or by
powder, or by some other more cruel, t^echerous, and bloody practice: First,
by poison, witness Lopez, that stinking Jew, who was hired by the Popish
faction to poison Queen Elizabeth: but that took no effect, being discovered
before it could be acted; but the Monk that poisoned King John in a wassayling
Bowl at Swinsted Abbey hit right upon it, and the Emperor that was poisoned in
the Sacrament felt by woeful experience how cunning these men are in
poyso^ing. Secondly, by poynards, witness the massacre in Paris, wherein the
Protestants in most barbarous and beastly manner were stabbed, and in that
abundance, that the very streets ran with the blood that was shed on that
dismal Bartholomewes Even; and the two last Kings of France, that were stabbed
both of them, the one by Clement, which deed was commended by the Pope for
heroicke, and little in feriour to Christ's incarnation, in a solemn
panegyricke at Rome made in his praise; the other by Ravilliacke, that forlorn
wretch, can testify unto the world how fruitful their doctrine is in stabbing
and killing, yea even of kings themselves. Thirdly, by pistol, witness that
pistol that was provided to make Queen Elizabeth away, and though the traitor
failed in the performance, yet the malice of the adversary was never the less;
witness that bloody Minerius, that set a young man of Merindol against a tree,
and made him be shot through with harquebushes. Witness that pistol that was
discharged in the breast of that worthy Admiral of France, of who it was said,
BARTH O L O MEVS FLET Q VIA GALLICV S O CCVBAT AT LAS, the numerall letters of
which verse make up the number of 1572. the year of the bloody massacre of
Protestants in France. Lastly witnes^e, that late attempt at the court upon the
Minister of Tichfield, a French man borne, and an able Scholar, who was shot at
as he was walking in his garden with a pistol, but was preserved by GODS most
merciful and immediate providence. All these show since the black Monk
invented this deadly instrument, that they have been very much delighted with
his invention to work their bloody feats. Fourthly, by powder, witness that
barbarous and bloody intended massacre in the Gunpowder Treason, a Treason that
cannot be named without horror, nor thought upon without astonishment; no age
in the world affording a parallel and like example of such savage cruelty. Let
some rotten-hearted runnagates from us score us up in their books for
Schismaticke and puritanPreachers, for exaggerating and setting out the
heinousness of that divellish Treason, yet we will not leave to speak
against it, yea to cry and thunder against it, being, as his sacred Majesty
that last lived has rightly observed, not only a crying sin of blood, but a
roaring and a thundering sin of fire and brimstone. And as we will not cease
to exaggerate their vill^ny, so neither will we cease to extol Gods mercy, who
is the keeper of our Israel, and never slumbers nor sleeps, but is always
ready at hand to shend and defend his people whom ^ee has set his love upon,
even for his own mercy and goodness sake, howsoever we by reason of our
rebellions against him have des^rved the contrary. And therefore let us ever
confess and say, as our Church ^^th taught us; From this unnat^rall conspiracy
(O Lord) not our merit but thy mercy, not our foresight but thy providence has
delivered us, not our love to thee, but thy love to thine anointed servant and
thy poor Church with whom thou have promised to be present to the end of the
world. And therefore not unto us, o Lord, not unto us, but to thy name be
ascribed all honor and glory in all the Churches of the Saints throug^out all
generations. And ever loved and blessed be Gods merciful patience and
providence, that has not given us over as a prey unto their teeth. Our soul
is escaped, even as a Bird out of the sna^e of the Fowler, the snare is broken
and we are delivered. Our help stands in the name of the Lord, which made
heaven and earth, from this time forth for evermore.

Now that I have named the Powder Plot, the top of all treason and quinte^sence
of all cruelty, me thinks I should need to say no more of the cruelty of
these ^ ^umaeans; but because I have promised to make you acquainted with other
bloody, cruel, malicious, and violent practices of the Popish faction, I must
be as good as my word; and I think indeed I owe this service both to Christ
and his Church, to discover, as much as in me lies, the tyranny of
Antichrist, and the malice of the malignant Church, which has terribly ^aged
in this Land, and does yet fearfully reign in diverse quarters of the world.
But here, where shall I begin? abroad or at home? with foreign or domesticke
examples? with the Pope or popelings? the head or his members? If you will with
the Pope himself, because he loves to have the pre-eminence, he shall have
it in pride and cruelty. To give you ^ taste of the spirit that rules in this
holy father: Homili^s.
what shall we say of him that made the noble Prince Dandalus to be tied by
the ^eck with a chain, and to lie flat under his ta^le there to gnaw bones like
a dog? such a ^yrant was Pope Clement the sixth, as Sabel^icus writes,
inclemens Clemens! in name gentle, in nature cruel, Clement by an anti^^rasis;
what shall we say of him that ^roudly and contemptuously trod Frederick the
Emperor under his feet, applying that ^erse of the Psalm to himself, Thou
shall go upon the Lion and the Dragon, the young Li^^ and the Dragon shall thou
tread under thy ^et? such a tyrant was Alexander the third, what shall we say
of him that armed and ani^ated the son against the father, causing him to be
taken, and to be cruelly famished to death, contrary to the law of God and of
nature too? Such a tyrant was Pope Paschalis the second, what shall we say of
him that made Henry the emperor with his wife and child stand at his gates in
the rough winter, bare foot, and bare leg, eating nothing from morning to
night, and that for three days together? Such a tyrant was Pope Hildebrand,
that brand of hell, if we shall so term him as he has best deserved, what
shall we say of him, that having his enemy delivered into his hands, caused
him first to be stripped stark naked, his beard to be shaven in disgrace, and
to be hanged up by the hair of his head, then to be set upon an ass with his
face backward to the tail, to be carried round about the city in despite, to
be miserably beaten with rods, and at last to be thrust and banished out of his
country for ever? Such a tyrant was Pope John the foureteenth of that name. To
come from the head of the faction to his members; (...)
was not that a bloody practice of Minerius against the poor Merindolians
about the beginning of the reformation, when he made a number of their
innocent infants to be mu^hered like another Herod, and cut off the paps or
nipples of women that had sucking children, by that means to destroy both the
women and the fruit of their womb, as you shall read in the history of the
Waldenses and the poor men of Lions. In which story I read likewise of another
bloodhound, one Johannes de Roma, a Monk; whose common and ordinary practice
was to take the profe^sors of the Gospel, and fill boots full of boiling
grease, and put in the feet and leg^ of Gods Saints in them, and bind them to
a form, and fet a soft fire under them, and so to examine them about their
faith, sitting in most grievous torments, and afterward cruelly to put them to
death. What should I tell you of the barbarous cruelty of papists against the
poor people of India? Bartholomaeus a Casa, one of their own side has
related the story and the manner of it, which shall remain as a blot upon them
for ever. They say they have converted that people, I say, they have killed
more than they have converted. I might likewise discourse and tell you of the
Spanish Inquisition, the common blockehouse of popery; it was set up first to
take Jews, now it is used to ensnare Christians; and (...) snare, it holds
fast, there is no mercy in it, it will not let go without blood, he that is
taken in it, twenty to one he shall never escape, but pine and perish with
lingering torments, that is just the nature of it. But to leave foreign stories
and instances, and come nearer home. I could tell you long stories of the
merciless racking and torturing of mistress Anne Askew, the barbarous burning
of the hand of Thomas Thomkins, the drawing of an arrow through the fingers of
Cuthbert Simpson fast tied together, so that the blood sprang out again. the
feeding of Edw. Freese and others with manchet made of saw-dust, the displing
of Gods saints by bloody Bonner in his garden at Fulham in such pitteous
manner, that his servant that assisted him was feign to turn away his eyes,
shaming at his cruelty; his bloody butchering of the servants of God merely in
the matter of religion. But I must not trouble you with long stories now, I
refer you to the faithful relation of M. Fox in his Acts and Monuments,
which shall stand as a monument of popish tyrannical and barbarous cruelty to
al generations. And although I know there are some of the Romishrout, that call
them Fox his saints, and that call his story a Legend of lies, yet they that
know the temper of those men, know also well enough from what humor these
words proceed, which being spoken out of spleen and spite, do not impeach the
truth of the story, but (...) cover the malice of their hearts against a leaur
c^and painful scholar, who has not only collected things together, but
confirmed his collections with such sufficient proofs either of eyewitnesses,
which saw the things done, or of public records of courts wherein those
matters were transacted, or of both; that none of moderate and impartial
judgment can doubt of the truth of the stories or his faithfulness in
relating of them. Now there you shall find, I say, how that in those Marian
days none were spared that opposed the pride and tyranny of the popish bishop,
of what condition or age soever they were, but all went to the pot, learned and
unlearned, men and women, old and young, boys and girls, clergy and laity,
bishops and archbishops. Some of the martyrs they scourged with rods, some
they pulled their tongues out of their heads, nay their hearts out of their
bodies, some they racked and tortured, some they hanged, some they beheaded,
some they burned, and that with a soft and lingering fire to prolong their
pain^; nay, I will tell you one thing more, they took a young infant springing
out of the mothers belly as she was at the stake burning, they (...) it I say
and threw it into the fire to bu^orr^ith the mother; ^ D. Whi^ak.
was there ever such cruelty heard of as this? Neither has their cruelty
stayed here to exercise it self upon them that were alive, but their bloody
practices have proceeded further to wreake themselves upon the bodies of the
d^ad Saints which lay in their graves in peace. These they have dug out of
their graves where they lay in christian burial, and buried them in dunghils,
others they have dug out of their graves, being quite rotten and nothing
remaining but bones and dust, and have cited them to appear before judges,
have set upon them judicially, condemned them of here^ie, and so cast them into
the fire to be burned; was there ever such cruelty heard of even among the
heathen tyrants and pagan persecutors?

I have stood the longer upon these cruel practices of Papists for these
reasons: 1. Because I thought it was my duty and a service that I owe to the
Church of Christ to lay open the damnable practices and plots of Antichrist,
that he has to keep himself up in the fellows of his company in the
college, being to travel abroad, Commendo vos dilectioni Dei and odio
papatus, I commend you all to the love of God and the hatred of popery. And let
us learn further as our church has taught us, to pray against these
bloodthirsty and divellish men, that God would be pleased to protect us from
their rage, and to scatter these our cruel enemies that delight in blood, to
infatuate their counsels, and confound their devices, and to root out that
Babylonish and Antichristian sect, which say of Jerusalem, Down with it, Down
with it, even to the ground. And let every true-hearted Englishman say, Amen.

This shall suffice to be spoken in general of the cruelty of these Idumaeans.
Now I come to speak of their cruelty more particularly. In which discourse
diverse things will reflect upon our selves by way of edefication, to teach us
some profitable lessons, and many things will reflect upon papists by way of
detestation and utter condemnation of their wretched courses.

The particulars of the Edomites cruelty appear in these three points: First,
in conspiring with other enemies of the church in evil. Secondly, ^itio.
in egging and encouraging of their con^ederates in evil. 3. In rejoicing
themselves and taking a delight in evil. Their conspiring appears, in that
they joined themselves with the Babylonians; ^ D ^ak.
their ^ncouraging of their confederates appears in this, that they stand by
the Babylonians in laying of Jerusalem waste, and, in hatred of the church,
clapped them on the back to go thoroughly to work; their rej^y^ing in evil,
appears in their wretched and bloody cry, Down with it, Down with it, even
to the ground.

Of these particulars we will now ( cum Deo) speak distinctly, and make some
application to the time, as occasion shall be offered: and first of their
confederacy and conspiration.

The Edomites bore always a deadly hatred Israel of GOD. That is plain by the
whole tenor of the Scripture of the Old Testament; preta^
but their might was not answerable to their malice, and therefore being not
strong enough of themselves to wrong ^ods people, it was their usual mannerto
bandy themselves with the B^bylonians and other enemies of the Church, and to
join their forces together to infest ^ods children. Hence I gather this short
note: The wicked are ready to join hand in hand to vex the Church and to
effect wicked matters: Herod and Pilate will be made friends together,
Observatio Mr. B. Probatio.
if Christ be to be crucified. The text says expressly, they were enemies
before, but they will join in this, hand in hand they go to the effecting of
this cruel project. Look into Psalm. 83. (...) 3. and seq. and you shall find
a full proof of this. They have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and
consulted against thy secret ones, they have said, Come and let us cut them
off, that they be no more a people, nor that the name of Israel be no more in
remembrance; they have consul^ed together in heart, and have made a league
against thee. Mark what agreement here is among wicked men, expressed by so
many words of synonymall signification, they have taken ^raf^y counsel, they
have consulted together, they have said come and let us cut them off, they have
consulted in heart, they have made a league; then comes in the whole rout and
bed-roll of these e^^mies in the next verse, The Ta^erna^^^^ of the Ed^mites,
and the (...) (and mark that the Ed^mites march in the first rank) the
Moabites and the Hagarens; Gebal and Ammon, etc. And was it not even thus with
our Edomites, the Popish conspirators? they bore a malignant and heavy grudge
against our Church; but God made the illwil'd cow to have short horns, they
knew their power was not answerable to their purpose; and therefore they go
craftily to work and consult in heart against us, and make a league with our
foreign adversaries, Geball and Ammon and Amalecke, to afford their helping
hand to our overthrow. For did not Garnet write a letter to the Pope of Rome,
to acquaint him with the treason, and to obtain his blessing? and was not the
leigier Jesuit in the low Countries possessed with it, to provide as many
horse and as much munition as those parts would gather? and was not the
Spaniard ready to help the English Catholics at a call, and to join with
them to have laid this land desolate, who protested he loved the Papists of
England as dea^ely as he did his own Castillians? So that upon the point
look what aid either of men or munition, the Pope or Spain could have made;
their so dearly loved catholics, I had almost said, subjects here in England
should not have wanted, to have disturbed the quiet of our Church, and to have
ruinated our Commonwealth. The matter is plain, all these were ready to
assemble themselves together, like so many crows, to pick out the eyes of
GODS faithful servants.

If you desire any reasons of this conclusion why the wicked do thus join
together so unanimously in mischievous practices, Ratia.
you may take notice briefly, if you will, of these three: 1. Is because they
are swayed with one head, that is, the devil; and that makes them so jointly
conspire in evil. For as Gods spirit works unity and unanimity in good
things in the children of the church, so there is the like contrary working by
the devil in the children of disobedience. Their nature

The use of this point is, Appli^.
first for confutation Confutati^.
for they make consent and unity forsooth a note of the true Church of CHRIST.
To which I could say much, but for this time I will say but one thing with
Saint Augustine, Vt est ecclesia Dei una, si^ est Diaboli una Babylon, as there
is unity in the Church of Christ, so there is unity in the church of
Antichrist; and therefore I say that unity barely and absolutely considered
without the truth of doctrine cannot be a right distinctive note and infallible
mark of the Church. For what greater agreement and consent is there than among
thieves and robbers? Come, say they, cast in thy lot among us, we will all
have but one purse, Pro. 1. 14. So likewise among the Turks and Mahometans
there is great consent and agreement insomuch that their sect and profession is
by the^ far and near propagated; and yet it will not hereupon follow that
Mahometisme is the true Church. No more will the Papists plea hold, that
because there is great unity and consent among them (although I am able to show
the contrary) yet suppose it were so, I say, their plea will not hold that they
are the true church because of their unity; if I may call it properly unity and
not rather a conspiracy. For (as I remember) that worthy learned Lady Ian^
Gray, wrote exceeding truly and discreetly to the same purpose, Agreement
among wicked men is not unity but conspiracy; and thereupon alleges that
excellent position of Cicero in his Book of amity, Ami^itia non est nisi inter
bonos, that there can be no true unity but among good men.

The second use then of this is for exhortation unto us, beloved, to join
hearts and Ad^ortati^.
and the effecting of good things, that so we may hold the unity of the spirit
in the bond of (...), as the Apostle counsels. If the ene^ies of the Church
combine and conspire the (...) of the Church, as David says, Psalm. 2.
^^venerunt adversus Dominum: let us then ^ho are the Children of the Church
concord (...) conjoyne our selves for the good of it; if ^he children of this
world agree so well in (...), it is a shame for us not to agree in good ^^ings.
Truly there can be but small com^^rt and contentment in the life of Christians
without concord and unity; remember what David says in the Psalms, Ecce quam
bo^^^, for brethren to dwell together in unity; ^^d remember what Silurus said
to his sons upon his death bed, Si ^rit is inseparabiles, eritis
insuperabiles.

instruction, ^nstructio.
as the enemies of the Church are ready to conjoyne themselves, so let us
labor to disjoyne them. This is good policy, joined with piety and godly
prudencie, even to labor I say as much as we can to dissever and dissipate
their councels and forces, and to set the parties themselves at odds, and by
the ears together, if it be possible: Mistake me not I would not have
Christians to be sowers of dissension; but i^ it may stand with the glory of
God and the good of the Church, it is lawful to set the wicked at odds one
with another by lawful^ means. I am sure this is a stratageme i^ worldly
war, and I doubt not but it may be practiced in christian warfare. This piece
of policy Saint Paul used, as we read A (...) ^3. For standing in the council
and perce^ving that the one part were Pharisees and the other Sadduces, he
cried out straight, M^^ and brethren, I am a Pharisee, the son of ^ Pharisee,
etc. and by this means Paul w^^ delivered at that time from the rage of his
enemies, by setting the wicked together by (...) (...); and Master Beza's note
upon it is, that this may very well be done, if it breed no pre^udice to the
truth of God.

So of their conf^deracy. Interpretat.
Now come to the ^^couraging of their confederates in evil, they join
themselves with the Baby lonians, they clap them on the back, they applaud
them in ^their cruelty, they help what in them lies to ^idde sorrow to sorrow
upon Jerusalem, to ^idde cruelty to cruelty in the Babylonians; ^^en as when a
dog is set upon a poor sheep, ^^nd you should have some standing by to clap
their hands to make the dog go on more ^agerly; even thus dealt these
Idumaeans at ^^is time. The children of God were the poor ^heepe, the
Babylonians were the dogs set (...) worry them, the children of Edom in the
^eane time clap their hands to make them the ^ore eager and fierce in their
cruel practices. ^ut alas! what had these poor sheep deser^ed that they
should be thus untowardly used ^y the Edomites? was not Edom Jacobs bro^her?
were not the Edomites near a-kinne to ^he Israelites? That they should suffer
such ^^ings of the Babylonians, mere strangers unto them, it was no wonder;
but that they should suffer such indignity from their own brethren and
kindred, to be so vexed by them, of whom they should have been kindly used in
all reason, this is a wonderful thing, Yet we see it is so; the note
therefore must be this Neither affinity nor neerenesse of kin nor any bond of
love can quench that hatred which the enemies of the church bear unto it.
Observatio. Mr. B. Probatio.
Was not Caine Abels brother? and yet he rose up villanously and murdered his
own brother; and why did he murder him? but because his own works were
evil, and his brothers good. In the book of Judges we find the people of
God lie open to the insults of many enemies. One time, Judge. 6. 3. we find in
confederacy to vex Israel the Midianites, the Amalekites, and the children of
(...) East; they came upon them, eve^ they; as our last translation reads it,
with a^ emphasis. What? the Midianites, and the Amalakites, and the children of
the East? This is strange that they should set upon Israel for they were
cousins and came all of (...) stock: for the Israel^tes they came of Abraham
by his wife Sarah, and the Midianites came of the same Abraham by his wi^^
Keturah, Genesis 25. 2. they were of the sam^ blood then: further, they were
linked by ma^riage, for Moses took a woman of Midian to wife: thus were the
Midianites a kin and allied to Israel, and so were the Amalekites too; for
the Israelites came of Jacob. and the Amalekites came of Esa^, Genesis 36. 12.
they were brothers children; and for the children of the East, it is clear
they were Abraham's sons begotten on his Concubines, to whom he gave gifts
and sent them into the East country, Genesis 25. 6. So then it is evident by these
genealogies that these people all of them were a-kinne to Israel, and yet they
vex and molest, persecute and purs^e with deadly hatred. What can be the reason
of it, but the diversity, yea contrariety of their religions? There is no
hatred to that which is conceived against the true religion, it drives deep,
it is implacable* no link of love nor bond of friendship, nor neernesse of
blood can quench it. Applic.
That was our Doctrine.

The use hereof shall be a word of monition Mo^itio.
not to trust the enemies of religion, though they be never so near linked
unto us, for as the Prophet speaks, Mic. 7. 4. The best of them is but as a
bryer, the most ^pright sharper than a thorny hedge. Can Antichrist bear any
love to Christ? can the limbs of Antichrist affect the members of Christ? nay
they hate us with an inveterate and deadly hatred; so that if we should give
our daughters to them, or take their daughters to us, yet we have still reason
to suspect and fear them; for they would be the first, if they had
opportunity, to leap upon us and cut our throats. Will you hear one of their
own Doctors speak his mind freely? Fideles Anglicani excusandi s^nt, etc.
The Papists of England are to be excused that they do not raise up war against
their King, to exempt themselves from the bondage of heretical superiors,
quoniam communiter non habent facult at em ad hec bella gerenda, because
forsooth they have not means to maintain this war and to make their party
good. And GOD be thanked for that, that their means is not an^werable to their
mind; but here we see plainly what the King and we all of us might look
for at their hands, if they had long horns to push at us, if they were not
curbed and kept under by the conscience of their own weakness, and the
terror of the law against rebels. This gentle man that wrote this excuse for
the English Papists is Bannes, a schoole-Iesuite, in Thom. 2. 2. qu. 12. art.

And to come nearer the point yet; was it not thus in the Gunpowder-plot? (our
happy deliverance from which we celebrate this day) For when there was some of
the Traitors that made this scruple of conscience to Garnet the arch-traytor
and the rest of his fellow-Iehusites, that in the Parliament house there would
be many of their friends and kindred, yea diverse of their own profession,
deep Catholics, and that they thought it a very hard thing to wrap them in
the common overthrow and to blow up them with the rest, and thereupon began a
little to shrink back; it was resolved presently by those tenderhearted
fathers, the Jesuits, that they were not to stick at these things, but for
the promoving of the catholic cause they might ^tterly destroy all, yea even
their own catholic friends and acquaintance without exception. These few
words that I have spoken are sufficient unto you that are wise; I pray you let
me round you in your ears that have any popish kindred, if there be any such
here present, take mine advise, Rely not, trust not too much unto them: for let
them be never so firm unto you, let there be never so many linkes and ties
betwixt you; yet one Bull from the Pope or one little breath from a Iesui^^s
mouth will snap all these bands asunder presently.

The second use of this shall be an instruction to teach us to make much of our
spiritual kindred, those I mean that are of the same religion with us. The
old Saxons, our ancestors, called religion Yane-fastnesse, the only
fastness, the only thing that makes fast friends, and they that are firmly
joined unto us in the truth of Religion, they will not forsake us, we may be
sure of that, they will be

So of the second particular of Edomites cruelty; (...).
there remains now only the third behind, and that is their exultation and
rejoicing in evil, which is expressed by their insulting noise and cry, Down
with it, Down with it, even to the ground. This was the day of Jerusalem, that
is, the day of her captivity and calamity, wherein the Babylonians laid waste
her dwellings and destroyed her walls even to the foundation; the Edomites
seeing her fall, (...).
they had that they looked for, they liked it well, they insulted over her and
rejoiced in her ruin, the observation is shortly this. It is the property of
wicked men to rejoice in evil. This property is expressly set down by the
wise man in the description of the wicked man, Prove. 2. 14. Which rejoice in
doing evil: and in another place, he says, that he casts abroad firebrands
and deadly weapons, and says, am I not in sport? Lo, he makes it but a sport
and pastime to do evil to others, Et si non aliqua nocuisset mortuus esset
there is nothing more vexes and troubles him at the heart, than when he cannot
bring his wicked projects about to mischief others. The Prophet David had good
experience of this (...) in his malicious adversaries; for to say nothing of
that, where he complains that the drunkards made ballads and songs upon him,
making themselves merry with his misery, even as they were tippling and sitting
over their cups, or of that where he says that it pleased them exceedingly,
if they did but hear of those hurts that had befaine him, crying out, So, so,
there goes the game; if you will but look Psalm. 35. there you have a full
proof of this, there you shall find both their practices against him, and his
prayers against them, and in both these a most ample description of this evil
quality in wicked men we now speak of; their practices against him, first
verse 15, 16. In my adversity they rejoiced and gathered themselves, etc. Then
verse 21. They gaped upon me, etc. his prayer against them first, verse 19.
Let not them that are mine enemies rejoice over me, then verse 24, 25, 26. Let
them not rejoice over me, let them not say in their hearts, there there, so
would we have it, let them be confounded and put to shame together that
rejoice at my hurt. Thi^ is plain. I have read of Nero, that bloody and
barbarous tyrant that he commanded Rome to be set on fire, and while the smoke
ascended, and the houses burned, he gate him up to the top of his palace, to
look upon it and laugh at it, and taking a fiddle, minstrell as he was, played
upon it and sung all the while Rome was a burning the destruction of T^^y. Here
was a lively type of this (...) indeed. And because I have mentioned that
story, give me leave to proceed a little further in it, because it makes for
our purpose. As Soon as Nero had made Rome thus to be burnt, the blame was
presently laid upon the Christians, that they by treachery had fired the City;
even as the Powder-traytors had resolved, if the treason had taken effect, to
lay all the blame on the Puritans, that they had by treachery blown up the
Parliament house; but that by the way; when Nero^ I say^ had caused this (...)
be spread against the Christians, and this rumor was grown into a common
opinion, and this opinion became an undoubted persuasion that it was just so as
Nero had bruted it abroad, then imagine you, what deaths were devised, what
tortures threatened, what cruelties practiced upon the bodies of the poor
innocent christians; and this blood sucking tyrant and their merciless
tormentors, not content to put them to death with all manner of cruelty that
the devil could invent, they did mock and flout them in their death, and made
themselves merry with their destruction, for so much sound the words of Cornel.
Tacitus; Pereuntibus addita ludibria.

But you will say Nero was a damned wretch a monster of men, and those his
instruments you speak of were all pagans and infidels out of the Church,
without God, and therefore no wonder if they be (...) like their father the
devil re^oycing in evil, but can the divellish affection once enter into the
hearts of any that call themselves christians? peradventure thereare none
suchamong them. Are there none such? I wish I could say so, but I cannot, I
must tell you that there are such men, as delight in evil even among
christians. First, let us look over into France, and there we shall find
under Charles 9. there were slain 30000. protestants all at once, and that not
in battle, but in treachery under pretense of friendship, shadowed by the
marriage of the kings sister to aprotestant prince. And when Gregory 13. Pope
heard of this ^amous exploit, he caused the like joy to be showed in his City,
the guns to be shot off from his castle S. Angelo, the mass to be sung in
honor of this noble deed in S. Lucies church, a French Saint. This was
rejoy^ing in evil, was it not? Let me now take you by the hand and lead you
out of France into Ireland, there you shall find N. Sanders the (...)
consecrated banner displayed in the field, stirring up rebellion, and animating
the rebels in their treacherous and violent courses. Nay, there we read that
when Io. Desmond, a popish traitor, DD. C^^ ton late I shop of Chiches^^
had murdered one Henry Davil an English gentleman most dastardly in his bed,
as a taste of his faith and obedience to the Pope, and his forwardness in the
Catholic cause, as he called it; howsoever there were some even of the rebels
that condemned this desperate and bloody attempt, yet doctor Sanders commended
the action, applauded the actor for a courageous Catholic, and told him that
therein questionles he had off er^d up a sweet smelling sacrifice unto Almighty
God. Good Lord! what a wretched and abominable part was this? when an
ungracious bloody fellow shall kill a man in his bed most barbarously, and yet
that Sanders, the Popes legate should pronounce this thing to be a sweet
sacrifice to God, this pas^eth all imagination. Can any either practice these
things or commend these practices of blood, but they must be (...)? But to lead
you out of these foreign count^ies and to bring you over into our own native
soil, can we pronounceany other of the pop^sh faction in the
Gunpowder-t^eason? The Lord says of Edom that he should not have looked upon
the affliction of his brother in the day of his misery, Obad. verse 12. but
they did look upon it and laughed at it, and cried to their confederates,
Down with it, down with it, even to the ground. And were there not some of
the popish faction set upon the hill betwixt Kingstone and London, where they
might have a full prospect of West minster and the Parliament house, expecting
for that dismal desolation intended, and longing to hear the terrible blow
given, saying no doubt in their hearts not, Down with it, Down with it, even
to the ground, but Blow them up, up with them even to the clouds. Nay, and when
Guido Faux, the party appointed to give fire to the powder, was apprehended and
examined, and asked if he was not sorry and repented himself of his bloody,
design, answered with a bold heart and brazen face, that he was sorry for
nothing more in all his life, than for that the design took so ill effect,
and repented himself that he had not set fire on the powder when he was
caught, that he might have done some mischief at least upon himself and his
apprehenders.

By all which it is more then plain to be seen how the Popish faction jumpe
directly with the children of Edom in all points of carnality and cruelty,
Concl^
and especially in this their rejoicing in evil. Here is only the difference
betwixt them. The Edomites saw the ruin and desolation of jerusalem and
rejoiced over it; but the Papists did not see the ruin and desolation of our
Church but only in hope and expectation, that they might have rejoiced over
us. But their hopes were dashed, and their expectation frustrate, and their joy
was turned into shame and confusion of face, as appears this day; and all by
the merciful patience and providence of the Lord the keeper of our Israel, who
never slumbers nor sleeps, but watches overus for our good to save our King,
and defend our state, to direct his Church, and deliver his poor servants from
all the divelish machination of our implacable enemies. And therefore not unto
us, not unto us, but to his glorious name be ascribed the praise of our
deliverance. And the Lord make us truly thankful for this most miraculous
deliverance, to remember it our selves, and to be whetting of it upon our
posterity, that all true English hearted Christians may learn to praise the
Lord God of Israel for ever.

And pray we once more, that God of his mercy, and not for our merits, for his
own goodness sake, and not for any goodness that is in us, (...)
he would be pleased to scatter our cruel enemies which delight in blood, to
infatuate their counsels, and to root out that Babylonish and * Antichristian
sect which say of Jerusalem, Down with it, down with it even to the ground.
And beseech we him of his merciful goodness to protect and prosper our
sovereign Lord and King in all his godly intendments, to bless the Church
with the pure and incorrupt doctrine of his holy word and with faithful
Pastors after his own heart, to maintain the whole State and realm in peace
and prosperity, that with our heart and mo^th we may praise his holy name and
sing joyfully, that his merciful kindness is ever more and more toward us,
and that the truth of the Lord endures for ever, through jesus Christ our only
Savior and rede^^er. Amen, and again I say Amen. Hallelujah, Praise ^ee the
Lord, and sing the 148. Psalm, or Psalm. 7. beginning at the 15. verse.

BEhold, though he in travel be,
of his divellish forecast,
And of his mischief once conceived,
yet brings forth naught at last.
He diggs a ditch and delves it deep,
in hope to hurt his brother;
But he shall fall into the pit,
that he dig'd up for other.
Thus wrong returns to the hurt
of him in whom it bred;
And all the mischief, that he wrought
shall fall upon his head.
I will give thanks to God therefore,
that judges righteously;
And with my songs will praise the name
of him that is most high.
The 124. Psalm, paraphrastically applied to the Papists Powder Plot, fitted
to one of the familiar tunes of David's Psalms for the 5. of November.
IF great Jehovah had not stood
propitious on our side,
May England say most thankefully,
and been our guard and guide:
If heavens Almighty-Lord Himself,
had not our cause maintained,
When men, yea most blood-thirsty men
our downfall had ordained.
Then had their Antichristian rage
and Hellish policy,
Devoured us with greedy jaws
and swallowed suddenly.
Then, like huge overflowing floods
with furious inundation,
They, all our souls o'rewhelmed had,
and drowned in desolation.
Our royal King and Queen and Prince,
and princely Progeny,
Our prudent Counselors of State
and prime Nobility:
Our learned I^dges, Bishops grave,
best commons of this Land,
In Parliament, by powder fierce,
had perished out of hand.
Romes raging streams with roaring noise,
and popish cruelty,
Had all, at once, engulft our souls,
in matchless misery:
But, great Jehovah just and good,
thy name we praise and bless;
Who only sav'dst us from the power
of Romish wickedness.
For, as a Bird out of the snare,
by furious Fowlers made,
Does safely escape: Even so our souls
securely did evade;
Their net was broke, themselves were caught
our God that never does sleep,
In heaven did sit, and see, and smile,
and us in safety keep.
This was the Lords most worthy work,
this was the Lords own ^act;
And it is most wondrous to behold
this great and glorious Act.
This is the j^yfull day indeed,
Which God for us has wrought,
Let us be glad and joy therein,
in Word, in Deed, in Thought.
O let us never make a^ end
to magnify Gods name,
To bless the Lord our Staff and Stay
to sound abroad his fame:
To tell to all Posterity
what wonders God has wrought,
To save us from the woes which Rome
has often against us sought.
All glory (then) to God on high,
let Men and Angels sing;
Let Heaven and Earth and all therein,
give glory to heavens King:
And sing and say with heart and voice,
all honor, laud, and praise,
To God, who makes us, thus, rejoice;
So be it, Lord, always.
I. V.

FINIS.

