A Plea for Peace: OR A SERMON PREACHED in St. PAVLS Church in LONDON. July 9.
1637.

By HENRY VIRTUE, Parson of the Parish Church of Alhollowes Honey-Lane in
LONDON.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for JOHN CLARK near S. Peter's Church in Cornhill.
1637.

REcensui concionem hanc, cui Titulus est [A Plea for Peace, etc.] nec in ea
quicquam reperio quo minus cum utilitate publica, imprimatur,

October 9. 1637. Sa: Baker.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LADY SARAH Countess Dowager of Leicester.
Right Honorable,
THis Sermon was preached in St. Paul's Church by the command of Authority. The
choice of the subject was left to my own discretion: when seeing with grief
the breaches among us, and fearing to what they might come, I fell upon that,
which now presents it self to your Ladyships view, as studious to cast one
bucket on these flames, to quench them, if it were possible: for who can sit
still and keep silence, when he sees the prosperity of so famous and
flourishing a Church as this, in which we live, hazzarded by unbappy
differences raised up by unquiet spirits?

I was persuaded by some, to make this Sermon, thus preached, more public, by
committing it to the Press, who were of opinion, that it might be of use for
that end, at which (God knows) I aimed in the preaching of it, namely, the
settling of the minds of men, and the composing of them to a peaceable
conversation: which if I may see in any measure effected, it will more joy me,
then the foolish speeches of some lawless tongues against me, for my peaceable
endeavors, have been able to trouble me.

And no sooner had I resolved upon the exposing of this Sermon to public view,
but your Ladyship came to my mind, with some content to think, that now I
might have an opportunity to bring my self again to your Honors remembrance,
and to express my gratitude, for that favor and respect, which long fince
both I and my parents received at your Ladyships hands. May it please you to
accept of this poor pledge of my unfeigned and sincere respect, to pardon my
boldness thus intruding on your Honor, and to believe, that, what I have or
am, is at your Ladyships service, professing my self to be

Your Honors in all true observance, HENRY VIRTUE.

A Plea for Peace.
EPHESIANS. 4.3. Endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.


SAint Ambrose has a rule, Ambros. tom. 3. epist, 70.
which warrants my choice of this Text. Nobis Sacerdotibus id praecipue curae
sit, ut ea vitia resecemus, quae in plurimos videntur serpere, that is, The
study of us Priests, says the Father, ought to be especially to bend our
endeavors against those sins, which we see to be most frequent and
predominant. How divisions abound among us, who sees not? the more the pity:
What son of the Church may not readily acknowledge it now high time, to come
with our buckets to quench these flames, if it be possible? Who shall or can
judge it unseasonable, now to plead for peace, when we find such wide breaches
among us? Nor can I make my Plea in better words, nor can I make choice of a
better ground for it, then the passage now read: Endeavoring to keep, etc.

St. Paul in the first verse of this Chapter begins the exhortatory part of his
Epistle; and the first advice which he gives is general, and comprises all the
rest, Walk worthy of the calling, etc. but thence he descends to the
particulars included in that general: And now the first thing, that he pleads
for, is peace and unity, with the necessary prerequisites of it, which being in
the foregoing verse, humility, meekness, long-suffering, and mutual
forbearance; his maine Plea it self for unity we have in the words now read,
which he contents not himself barely to propound, but he ads to it a strong
argument for the backing of it, taken from the unparalleld neernesse of
Christians, in the verses following. But the Apostles plea it self for peace
and unity, is to be the subject of my discourse at this time, and my errand, to
you from heaven, to which I shall crave your attention for the present, and
your obedience for the future, That ye endeavor to keep, etc.

In this Plea, we find these particulars. 1. The subject of the plea, the
unity of the Spirit. 2. The thing required, with respect to it, endeavoring to
keep it. 3. The course prescribed for the preservation of this unity, In the
bond of peace.

But lest I seem to wrong my Text, offering violence to it, by pulling it in
pieces unnecessarily, or be in danger to trouble you with coincidencies and
tautologies, I shall choose rather to look at it, and so to handle it, as one
entire Proposition, which is;

That S. Paul advises his Christian Ephesians, and in them, us, and all
Christians in the whole world, to endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in
the bond of peace.

And in the handling of this Proposition, I shall observe this order; 1. To
explain the terms, 2. to prove the point, 3. to say something by way of
Application.

1. The explication concerns the Parties to whom the advice is given, and the
Advice it self.

1. For the persons, to whom the advice is given, they are, as I said, the
Christian Ephesians, and all Christians in the whole world, and in all
succeeding times of the world. If that be true which Saint Paul says: The
things, Romans 15.4.
which were written aforetime, were written for our learning: Tertull. de
Spectat.
answerably to which, Tertullian says truly, Cum Israelitas Deus disciplinae
admonet vel objurgat, ad omnes habet, that is, When God does admonish or chide
the Israelites, he has a respect to all: Cum Egypto vel Ethiopiae exitium
comminatur, in omnem Gentem peccatricem praejudicat. And when he threatens
ruin to Egypt, or Ethiopia, he gives sentence aforehand against every ungodly
Nation; then is it much more true, which the same Father affirms of the
Epistles of the holy Apostles: Ad omnes scripsit, Tertul. contra Marcion l. 5.
dum ad quosdam. The Apostle, writing to some, writ to all: Aug tom. 5. de
Civit. Dei l. 14. c. 9.
which also S. Austine affirms of our blessed Apostle in particular: For,
having by way of commendation said, that he furnished populos Dei, the people
of God with more Epistles, than any of his fellow Apostles, he adds by way of
explication: Non tantum illos, qui praesentes ab eo videbantur, sed and illos,
qui futuri praevidebantur, that is, not only those which he saw for the
present to be the people of God, but those also whom he foresaw so to be in
future times. So that here will be no scope, whereby to shift off this advice
of our holy Apostle; for it was not for them alone, to whom it was immediately
and at the first hand directed, but for us also, yea for all.

2. Now for the Advice it self: and here, to make use of the aforesaid
distribution, we have,

1. (...).
The subject of the advice, the unity of the Spirit; concerning this, two
things deserve enquiry.

1. What is unity in general, and what it is in this place. The word (...),
unity, notes the joining together of more things though diverse, yea, though
contrary, into one; as the joining together of several bricks or hewn stones,
or pieces of timber to make one house; the putting together of a body
propagated from parents, and a soul immediately created of God, to become one
man; the making of Jews and Gentiles one new man, who had been before of such
different dispositions and religions, and between whom in that respect there
had been such enmity. In all these there is, (...), unity. The unity here
spoken of, is that of which we read, under the notion of gathering together
into one all things, Ephesians. 1.10. Ephesians. 2.14, 15, 16.
both in heaven and in earth, and of making both Jews and Gentiles one new
man, one body, one Corporation, Verse 19. Verse 21, 22.
one family, one house, even one Temple, having one head, one Lord, one King,
one foundation and cornerstone, even Christ, who is all in all. This unity
then is no other, then unitas Ecclesiae, the unity of the Church, as Zanchy
says well, Zanch. in locum.
the conjunction and agreement of the body of Christ the Church, composed and
made up of diverse people and men, coupled and combined under one head, Christ,
be they Jews or Gentiles: And this is by S. Bernard, Bern. de consid. ad Eugen
l. 5. c. 8.
reckoning up sundry sorts of unity, called Vnitas consentanea, cum per
charitatem multorum hominum est cor unum, An unity of consent, when, by charity
passing mutually between diverse men, they are as if they had all, but one heart
among them all.

2. But why is this unity of the Church called (...) the unity of the Spirit?
Here Interpreters differ. Some by spirit, understand the soul of man, and so
will have this unity of the Church, to be called the unity of the spirit,
ratione subjecti, in relation to the subject of it, because the soul, not the
body is the subject of this unity; diverse bodies, one soul and heart in all,
Acts 4.32.
as S. Luke speaks: the bodies of men dispersed far and near, their souls
firmly knit together into one, so says Estius, Vnitatem spiritus, the unity
of the spirit, Estius in locum.
that is, says he, animorum inter vos conjunctionem, the conjunction of your
minds among your selves. And Mariana thus lays down the scope of the Apostle
in this place, Mariana in locum.
Non vult Apostolus suos animis and opinionibus dissentire, sed ut idem
sapiant. The Apostle (says he) would not have his Ephesians to dissent in mind
and opinion, but all to mind the same thing. To these learned Calvin assents:
Calv. in locum.
Vnitatem spiritus quidam pro spiritali accipiunt, quam in nobis efficit
Spiritus Dei, Some, says he, by the unity of the spirit understand here
spirits unity, which the Spirit of God works in us: he adds, and certe is
solus est, qui nos reddit unanimes; and indeed its he alone that makes us to be
of one mind; but yet he adds, Sed ego simplicius interpretor de animorum
concordia: But I, says he, do rather understand it simply of the concord of
our minds. And indeed he knows nothing, that knows not the soul of man to
be frequently in holy Writ, called the spirit, Eccles. 12.7. Number. 27.16.
The spirit goes to God that gave it, says the Wise man; so Moses calls God,
The God of the spirits of all flesh; and the Apostle calls him, The Father of
spirits. Heb. 12 9.
Yet others by the spirit understand the holy Ghost, the third Person of the
ever and equally glorious Trinity, who is also in Scripture, not seldom,
called the Spirit, without his attribute, holy, or any other, as by our Savior
particularly, Ioh. 3.8. Matt. 4.1.
So is every one, says he, that is born of the Spirit; and so S. Matthew
speaks, Then was Jesus led by the Spirit into the wilderness, etc. and thus
they will have this unity of the Church called the unity of the Spirit, ratione
efficientis, with respect to the efficient of it: namely because the holy Ghost
is the Author of this unity, Beza in locum.
Vnitatem Spiritus,.i. cujus vinculum sanctus Spiritus est; the unity of the
spirit, that is, that unity, whereof the holy Ghost is the bond, Zanch. in
locum.
says Beza: Vnitatem spiritus, quia per sanctum Spiritum fit; the unity of the
spirit, so called because it is caused by the holy Ghost, says Zanchy.

But these interpretations are not so cross, each to other, but that they may
well enough consist and stand together, as Musculus says well: Musc. in locum.
Anselm. in locum.
and so Saint Anselme having first expounded it, Vnitatem spiritus,.i.
unanimitatem voluntatis, ut sit in vobis cor unum and anima una; The unity of
the spirit, that is, unanimity of will, so that there be in you one heart and
one soul, does afterward add the other exposition; Soliciti servare, etc. id
est, solicit servetis, quod a vobis non habetis, scilicet, unitatem, id est,
quod vos estis facti unum, quia unitas illa est spiritus, id est, a Spiritu
sancto vobis concessa, and ideo non est negligenda, sed studiose retinenda.
Endeavoring to keep, etc. that is, carefully keep that which you have not of
your selves, namely, unity, whereby ye are all made one, because this is the
unity of the spirit, granted to you by the Holy Ghost, and therefore it is not
to be slighted, but studiously to be retained. And so this unity of the
Church is in two respects, called the unity of the spirit:

1. For that it is not bodily, but a spiritual unity: there is not corporalis
contactus, a bodily touching one of another, not the bodies of Christians
united into one, but their hearts and souls, Acts 4.32.
as appears from the forenamed passage of S. Luke.

2. For that it is the holy Ghost that is the Author of this unity: as the
soul and body are united together by the spirits, the wasting of which causes
death in the separation of soul and body asunder; so by the operation of the
Holy Ghost, working in us brotherly-love each to other, Christ has coupled all
his Elect, Jews and Gentiles, into one body in Christ, and between
themselves: and this is that which the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 12.13.
We are all by one Spirit baptized into one body.

2. The thing required with respect to this unity of the Church, (...)
Endeavoring to keep it. And here are also two things. 1. The thing to be
studied, (...) to keep the unity of the spirit. 2. The study to be employed
in and about it, (...) endeavoring it.

1. The thing to be studied, servare unitatem spiritus, to keep the unity of
the spirit: We are not put to make this unity, this is a work beyond our
sphere; it is a work of Christ and his Spirit. It is God that makes us to be
of one mind: this unity is the conjunction of hearts and minds, therefore it
must needs be acknowledged to be the work of that God, in whose hands alone
are the hearts of all men, Prove. 21.1.
even of Kings also, says Solomon, and therefore we find this work by the
Apostle ascribed to Christ, Ephesians. 2.14.
He is our peace, who has made both one, says the Apostle: of all men in the
world it is true, potius collecti sunt, quam colligunt, they are rather the
gathered, then the gatherers, the subject, not the causes of this gathering
into one. All that we can do, and all that is required of us, is, that this
unity being made by Christ, and his Spirit, we should keep it entire and
inviolable. And here we must know, that, as it concerns every particular man
for himself to keep this unity, so (though this belongs especially to public
persons) it concerns us to provide for others, and to take care for them, that
they be not rented and divided from the unity of the Church by schism and
contention. Besides also, as Christ has caused an unity between God and us,
who were before divided, and at odds and enmity through sins, Esaias 59.2.
which separate between God and us, so we must know, that it is a thing worthy
to take up the study of a Christian, to seek to maintain this unity, and to
take heed that we renew not that difference and enmity, which was formerly
between God and us, by relapsing into sin. But yet it is more properly the
scope of the Apostle, to commend to our care the preservation of that unity,
which is between particular Christians, the particular members of the Church,
the mystical body of Christ: and, about this, to exhort us, not so much to
that care, which public persons ought to have of others, with respect to this
unity, to preserve them in it, or to reduce them to it, if by any means they
be drawn from it, (though this is not altogether to be excluded) as to that
care, which every Christian ought to have of himself, to preserve himself in
this unity, and not to suffer himself to be pulled from it, much more not of
himself to make a rent in it.

2. The study, that is to be employed in, and about this thing, (...)
endeavoring to keep it. This is well added, for there is no hope, that, while
we live here, we should be able perfectly to keep this unity, in respect of
others, no, not in respect of our selves. I say not in respect of others: for
there will be unquiet men in the Church, men of factious dispositions, men
that will study parts-taking and faction, who will be ready to stir up others
to schism and contention, as earnestly, as any the most peaceably disposed can
be, to persuade to peace and unity: men, that will as busily kindle and blow
the fire of contention, as any can be ready to bring their buckets for the
quenching of it. Ambitious men, who hunting after honor and preferment in the
Church, if they miss of it; envious men, who seeing others preferred, when
themselves are passed by, spare not to sow the seeds of discord, and to set all
in a combustion: men, that are proudly conceited of their own devices, and
contend tooth and nail for them, and if all things may not be in all points,
to an hairs breadth, as they would have them, they care not how they hazard
the peace of the Church. Nor will there be wanting fit subjects, for such
blow-coales to work upon; some men, that be ignorant, that know not how to
judge of things, poor simple souls, though happily well meaning, who are easily
seduced, to whom it happens, according to that passage of Solomon, Prove. 14.15.
The simple believes every word, as not being able to judge of the devils
stratagems: as it was in the conspiracy of Absalon, with who^ went two hundred
men out of Jerusalem, 2 Samuel 15.11.
who were called and went in their simplicity, not knowing any thing: and some
men, who, having in other respects particular discontents, are easily persuaded
to join with, and to hearken to those that would seek to draw them into
faction and schism from the unity of the Church. These are as tinder ready to
take fire from every the least spark that falls on them, and as the chafe
easily blown away by every the least puff of wind. Nor will it be half so
easy for men peaceably disposed to persuade them to remain in the unity of
the Church, as for turbulent spirits to prevail with them to forsake it. Woe
to us! how have we by lamentable experience found all this to be too true
among our selves? But I say further, that there will be no hope, while we live
here below, to preserve the unity of the Church entire, in respect of our
selves, for there is not the best, nor the most holy man living, who has not
reliquias, the remainders of unruly passions contrary to the virtues mentioned
in the foregoing verse, in regard of which even the best, while they bear
about them these houses of clay, will be prone to schism and discord. How
eminent both for place and abilities were S. Paul and S. Barnabas? and yet what
a fearful breach did there happen between them? Acts 15.39.
The contention, says S. Luke, was so sharp between them, that they departed
asunder, one from the other. We are yet under the hammer, and not yet fitly and
fully coupled together; perfect unity, never to be prevailed against, nor
broken, is not to be expected in this life, but is reserved for heaven, there
to be our portion, where our love shall be perfect, and our happiness
absolute. Unity in this life cannot be perfectly kept, but that, sometimes for
a season, upon this or that occasion, there may be, there will be difference of
judgment, and likely hereupon estrangement of hearts and affections: all, that
we can do, is to endeavor to keep it, and this it is, which the Apostle
does require at our hands. (...), endeavoring to keep it, says Saint Paul.
And this word here used is emphaticall, it notes not a slight, overly, and
perfunctory endeavor, that would be (...), which signifies perfunctorie agere,
so to do a thing, as if we cared not, whether we did it or no; but in that he
uses this word, (...), its manifest, that he requires of us an earnest,
diligent, and industrious endeavor for the preservation of this unity, and so
the word is at all hands rendered, solicit servantes, solicitously keeping,
says Saint Ambrose: soliciti servare, solicitous to keep it says Saint
Hierome: satagite servare, make it your business to keep it, says the
Syriack Translator. So S. Anselme, Vnitas illa spiritus non est negligenda sed
studiose retinenda, This unity of the Spirit is not slightly, but studiously
to be kept and maintained. So that it is, as if the Apostle had said; Labor to
preserve this unity, tooth and nail; do your utmost diligence, tanquam pro
aris and foris, as if it were for your life, and livelihood, and religion, and
all.

3. The course prescribed for the preservation of this unity. The Apostle had
said, Endeavor to keep the unity of the Spirit, they might now say, But what
course shall we take, that we may preserve it? The Apostle stays not, till
they should ask him this question, he prevents and anticipates them: (...), in
the bond of peace: he does as it were with one breath tell them what they
should do, and how they may effect it. But, what is this, In the bond of peace?
(...) is put for (...); in, for, by: In the bond of peace, that is, by the bond
of peace: By the bond of peace, that is, by peace, as by a bond: so Estius;
Estius in locum.
In vinculo pacis, i. e. pace tanquam vinculo quodam animos vestros colligante.
In the bond of peace, that is, peace, as a certain bond, knitting your hearts
together. So Saint Anselme: In vinculo pacis, Ansel. in locum.
i. e. pax and concordia exterior sit quasi nexus and vinculum interioris
unitatis spiritus. In the bond of peace, that is, outward peace and concord may
serve as a tie and bond of the inward unity of the spirit. And a little after,
having said, Vnitas spiritus est studiose retinenda, The unity of the spirit is
studiously to be kept, he adds, Quam poteritis hoc modo servare, viz. in
vinculo pacis, i. e. ut pax taliter inter vos habita, vinciat vos insimul and
conglutinet: which unity of the spirit ye may thus be able to keep, namely, in
the bond of peace, that is, if peace thus had among you, tie you in, and glue
you together. And so our blessed Apostle contents not himself to teach them,
and us in them, how to keep, and maintain this unity, but also, by way of
illustration, he sets forth the nature and usefulness of peace by a similitude
fit for the purpose, comparing peace to a bond, by which diverse things, being
put together, are held together, and kept from falling asunder. Take a faggot,
and keep the band of it firm, and uncut, the faggot remains firm; cut or
burn the band asunder, and all the sticks fall each from other: of such nature
and usefulness is peace; live we peaceably, and quietly together, and the
unity of the Church is preserved and maintained; give we way to schism and
contention, and the whole is dissolved. And this office of peace is excellently
set forth by the Greek word for peace, (...), which as by some it has its
notation of (...), dico, to speak, because in time of war, silent leges, and
lites dirimuntur non verbis, sed gladiis, the laws are silent, and differences
are composed not with words, but with the sword: but in time of peace
controversies are peaceably ended by laws and by pleading; so by others, it
has its rise, from (...), necto to knit together, quia connectit dissidentes
in unum, because it linkes together parties jarring.

So that the sum of all is this, that Saint Paul exhorts us by all possible
means, and with all possible diligence to endeavor for peace one with another,
by it as by a bond to keep the unity of the Church, and not by schisms and
contentions to violate it.

2 Now to prove and demonstrate the truth of the point, that it is our duty,
so to do.

1 For the (...). Though it were in no other place of Scripture given in
charge, yet this one testimony might well suffice. Saint Paul giving this
charge, not as an ordinary man, guided by a private spirit, but as the Penman
of the holy Ghost, and immediately guided by that Spirit of truth and wisdom,
who is not liable to error and mistakes in the advice which he gives: so that
it is not so much Saint Paul, as the great God by him, that gives this in
charge; so that to any that shall in this point refuse to yield obedience, we
may well speak in the words of the Apostle, 1. These. 4.8.
He that despises, despises not man, but God: as, if any man shall refuse to
obey a charge brought him from the King, and delivered in the Kings name by any
messenger, though never so mean, he despises not the messenger, but the King
himself, from whom, and in whose name it is delivered to him. But yet, to put
all out of question, behold how, as in other particulars, so in this, both
testaments agree, breathing forth the same truth. In the old Testament hear we
David, Psalm. 34.14.
Seek peace and pursue it: seek it, as the man his stray sheep, Luke 15.4.8.
as the woman her lost groat, pursue it, as the Huntsman his game: hear the
Prophet, Zach 8.19.
love the truth and peace. In the new Testament, hear we first our blessed
Savior, the King, Counselor, and Prophet of his Church, concerning whom the
charge was given from heaven at his transfiguration, Mat. 17.5.
This is my beloved Son, hear him: and concerning whom Moses brings in God
speaking in so dreadful a tone so long before, Deuteronomy. 18.19.
Whosoever will not hearken to my words, which he shall speak in my name, I
will require it of him: and what is more express, then the charge which he
gave his Disciples? Have salt in your selves, Mar. 9.50.
and have peace one with another? Next hear we Saint Paul, with whom nothing
is more familiar, nor he more frequent in any thing, then in charges of this
kind. If it be possible, Romans 12.18.
and as much as lies in you, have peace with all men. And, Let us follow after
the things that make for peace. Rom 14 19.
Yea, where he saw this counsel most necessary, see how earnest he is. I
beseech you, 1. Cor. 1.10.
brethren, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that there be no divisions
among you, but be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same
judgment: see his earnestness in delivering this charge, I beseech you. I,
that am the Apostle of the Gentiles beseech you Gentiles. I might command you
in a business of this nature, but I forbear to use all my power, I rather
beseech you, and is there not locus precibus? are you inexorable? can you
refuse to hearken to the entreaties of him, that has done and suffered so much
for your sakes? I beseech you, brethren; you are brethren, therefore let there
be no divisions, I beseech you in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. In the
name of Christ, that is, say some, by the authority of Christ, as the officer
in the Kings name. In this name I beseech you, as if Christ by me did beseech
you, therefore let there be no divisions. Or, in the name of Christ, that is,
by the profession of Christianity, which you make, I beseech you, to which all
schisms and divisions are most contrary, therefore let there be no divisions.
Or, in the name of Christ, that is, say others, by the glory of Christ, to
which all schisms in the Church are most prejudicial: as you therefore tender
the glory of Christ, then which nothing should be more dear to us, let there
be no divisions. And in the close of his second Epistle, this is his farewell.
Be of one mind, 2 Cor. 13 11
live in peace. No less earnest is he in this kind with his Philippians.
Phil. 2.1, 2, 3.
If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any
fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill you my joy, that
ye be like-minded, having the same love, being of one mind, of one accord, let
nothing be done through strife or vainglory. And taking knowledge of some
breach between 2. Christian women, see how he applies himself to them. I
beseech Euodias, Phil 4 2.
and beseech Syntiche, that they be of the same mind in the Lord: The same
charge he gives to his Colossians. Let the peace of God rule in your hearts.
Col. 3 15.
This is spoken of peace between the members of the Church, called the peace
of God, because he commands it, and he works it. And finally to his Hebrews,
Follow peace with all men, and holiness. Hebr. 12.14.
And as he so frequently gives this in charge, so does he no less make it his
humble suit to God for the Romans. Rom 15.5.
Now the God of patience and consolation grant you to be like-minded one
toward another according to Christ Jesus.

2 For the (...), some may say, why all this? what makes the Apostle so
earnest? why should we be so studious of peace and unity, to preserve and
maintain it? Listen a while, and ye shall see good cause why.

1 Because of the incomparable nearness that is between Christians, now being
knit together by so many bands: hear the Apostle in the verses following:
There is one body, Ephesians. 4 4, 5, 6.
then we are members one of another. One spirit: one holy Ghost quickening us
all, as all the members of the natural body are enlivened by one soul: called
to one hope of our calling: the same glorious inheritance, to the joint hope of
which we are called by the Gospel; then we are all of us co-heires. One Lord,
then we are all of us fellow servants. One faith, by which we all live, one
doctrine of faith, which we all profess. One baptism, by which we are all of
us initiated into the Church, and one Lords Supper, as the common Sacrament of
our spiritual nourishment: and so in general we all of us participate in the
same Sacraments: finally, One God, whom we all worship, who is also a common
Father to us all, then we are brethren. A threefold cord, Eccl. 4.12.
says Solomon, is not easily broken. Behold, here is a sevenfold cord, and
shall not this hold us together? Aug. tom. 8. in Psalm. 65.
Sub uno capite regimur, uno spiritu vivimus, unam patriam desideramus omnes:
We are governed under one head, we live by one spirit, we all desire one
country, says Saint Austin, with respect to the three former of these bonds.
Vnius corporis membra sumus, Aug. tom. 2. Epist. 33.
unum habemus caput, una perfundimur gratia, uno pane vivimus, una incedimus
via, cadem habitamus domo. We are all members of one body, we have one head, we
are all washed with the same grace, we live by the same bread, we walk in the
same way, we dwell in the same house, says Paulinus to Saint Austin. Were it
no more, then that we are brethren, nothing were more unkindly then contention:
who knows not, how unnatural it were for brethren to fall out one with
another? It was Abraham's argument to his kinsman Lot, Genesis 13.8.
Let there be no strife between me and thee, for we are brethren. Brethren,
we are of the nearest kind, having both the same Father, God, who is the
father of all, and one mother, Ephesians. 4 6. Gal 4 26.
the Church, who is the mother of us all: therefore no counsel can better fit
us, then that, Gen 45 24
which Joseph gave his brethren, See ye fall not out by the way. By this
argument from the nee renesse of Christians, Aug. tom. 8. in Psalm. 55.
Saint Austin argues against the schism of the Donatists: fratres sumus, unum
Deum invocamus, in unum Christum credimus, unum Euangelium audimus, unum
psalmum cantamus, unum Amen respondemus, unum Alleluja resonamus, unum Pascha
celebramus, quid tu foris es? ego intus sum. We are brethren, we call upon one
God, we believe in one Christ, we hear one Gospel, we sing the same Psalms,
we answer the same Amen, we echo forth the same Hallelujah, we celebrate the
same Easter, why art thou abroad, and I within? And elsewhere, Aug. tom 7.
part 1 de Emerito ad Eccles. Caesaricus. plebem.
Qui adoramus unum Patrem, cur non agnoscimus unam matrem? Since we worship one
Father, why do we not acknowledge one mother? And by the same argument he
sets upon the Arrians Si mecum es in omnibus, Aug tom. 6. de 5. haeres. c. 6.
quare litigamus? una est nobis haereditas, possideam us simul; fratres sumus,
simul ad custodiam haereditatis nostrae vigilemus. If thou art with me in all
things, why strive we? we have one inheritance let us possess it together; we
are brethren, let us watch together for the keeping of our inheritance. In a
word therefore, seeing Christians are so nearely linked together, it stands us
in hand to endeavor to keep the unity of the Church in the bond of peace.

2 Because the devil is a great enemy to our peace, he knows, its best
fishing in troubled waters. Its his maxim, Divide and impera, set them
together by the ears, and so prevail against them, and therefore he does all
he can to divide us, and to sow the seeds of discord among us, and it is his
great content when he can effect it. Aug. tom. 10. Sermon. a Lovan. edit. Ser. 74.
Satanae triumphus est Christianorum dissentio: the disagreement of Christians
is the devils triumph, says Saint Austin. And he wants not his instruments to
fit his turn, ill-minded men, who are ready to blow the coals, to work in us
ill thoughts each of other, so to occasion private and personal breaches, yea
to inject into us harsh and uncharitable thoughts against the Church, and the
public government, so to make way for open and public discord, to make us
fall out with our Mother the Church, Aug. epist. 38. ad Latum.
which is, as Austin says well, Matter etiam patris tui, matrisque tuae quae
nos de Christo concepit, Martyrum sanguine parturivit, in sempiternam lucem
peperit, fidei lacte nutrivit and nutrit: the mother also of thy father, and
the mother of thy mother, which has conceived us of Christ, has traveled
with us by the blood of the Martyrs, has brought us forth to an everlasting
light, and has nourished and does nourish us with the milk of faith. And, if
others should be wanting, the devil knows how to make use of our selves
against our selves, our own pride, self-love, and covetousness, which are the
breeders and nurses of schism and division: how then does it stand us in hand,
(...) etc. to make it our earnest study, to endeavor it above, or at least as
much as any thing, to keep our unity and concord entire? for, who knows not,
that in places besieged, the greatest care is there to fortify, where they
find the greatest weakness, and the fiercest assaults? It is the Poets
argument, Vt jugulent homines surgunt de nocte latrones, Her. epist. lib. 1.
ep. 2.

Vt teipsum serves, non expergisceris? that is,
Thieves rise by night to kill men, wilt not thou awake to save thy self?

Certes then the devil being so industrious to interrupt our peace, and being
so sufficiently furnished against us in this kind, we had need, and it will
well become us, to be as diligent to maintain our unity, that Satan have not
cause given him by us to rejoice, and triumph over us: according to that
counsel, which Saint Austin, being now aged, gave to a young Bishop. Aug.
epist. 75. ad Auxilium.
Aufer litem and revoca pacem, ne tibi pereat homo amicus, and de vobis gaudeat
Diabolus inimicus. Take away strife, and call back peace, lest thou lose a man
thy friend, and the devil an enemy joy over you both.

3 Because of the excellency of peace: a thing it is of special worth and high
price; hear we that sweet singer of Israel, how he speaks it: Psalm. 133.1.
Behold how good and pleasant a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in
unity! Peace is comely, as an Army in good array, order and agreement. Its
delightful to the eye to see Christians at unity, as it is acceptable to the
ear to hear Bells or a Musical instrument well tuned: Aug. de Civit. Dei l.
2. c. 21.
quae a Musicis in cantu dicitur esse harmonia, ea est concordia in civitate:
concord in the City is as harmony in music, said heathen Scipio, as Saint
Austin alleges it. God delights to be styled, 2 Cor. 13.11
Deus pacis, the God of peace; Christ is princeps pacis, the Prince of peace,
and King of Salem, Esa. 9 6. Hebr. 7 1. Ephesians. 6.15. Luke 2.1.
that is, King of peace; the Gospel is Euangelium pacis, the Gospel of peace.
Its a part of the Angels heavenly ditty, on earth peace. It is that good which
our Savior taught his Disciples, to wish to those houses into which they came,
Luke 10.5.
say, peace be unto this house. Its that good, which David taught his subjects
to desire for the Church, Psalm. 122.6.
Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. It is the best legacy which our Savior could
think of, to leave to his Disciples, when he was to leave the world, John
14.26.
and to go to his Father, My peace I leave with you. And who knows not how
its at all hands desired? Aug. de Civit. Dei l. 19. c. 12.
Sicut nemo est, qui gaudere nolit, ita nemo est, qui pacem habere nolit, says
Saint Austin: As there is no man that would not rejoice, so there is no man
that would not have peace. He goes on, pacis intention and bella geruntur,
unde pacem constat esse belli optabilem finem: for peace sake, says he, wars
are undertaken, peace being the desired end of war. And yet more, Et, qui per
seditionem se ab alijs separaverint, nisi qualemcunque pacis speciem teneant,
non efficient, quod intendunt: even seditious persons, separating themselves
from others, fail in their enterprises, except they maintain some show and
semblance of peace among themselves. One word more he adds there to the same
purpose: Et latrones, ut tutius infesti sint paci caeterorum, pacem habere
volunt sociorum. Even thieves and robbers, that they may the more freely
disturb the peace of others, will preserve agreement among themselves. An
argument that there is excellency and worth in peace, which thus draws the
hearts of good and bad after it: as Saint Austin speaks of it. Nil in rebus
terrenis gratius soleat audiri, nil desiderabilius concupisci, nil melius
inveniri. So excellent a thing is peace, Aug. de Civit. Dei l. 19. c. 11.
that we can hear of nothing, among the blessings of this life, more
acceptable, we can desire nothing more desirable, we can find nothing that
is better: Nor is it a wonder, that he speaks so transcendently of the
excellency of peace, it being as the same father says, dilectionis matter, Aug
tom. 10. de Temp. sermon. 16^.
sanctitatis indicium, plebis sanitas, gloriasacerdotis, patriae laetitia, and
terror hostium: the mother of love, a token of sanctity, the health of the
people, the Priests glory, the Countries joy, the enemies terror. Nor does it
weakly argue the excellency of peace and unity, that the devil does so
strongly oppose it. So foul a fiend would never fight against it so mightily,
if he knew it not of great price, and special excellency. So deadly an enemy
to mankind would never so far bend his forces against it, if he knew not the
desires of men justly carried to it. Whereas Campian and the rest of the
Jesuits were, and are ready to lade Luther with bitter invectives. Campian
among the rest calling him flagitiosum Apostatam, a wicked apostate: Whitok.
advers. ration. 10. Camp.
learned Whitaker returns this answer, vium praestantem esse oportet, quem
homines improbi tam capitali odio insectentur. He must needs be an eminent man
whom such wicked men prosecute with such deadly hatred. No less may we thus
conclude concerning peace and unity of the Church: it must needs be of singular
excellency, that is so mightily oppugned by so foul a fiend: and since by all
these arguments peace appears to be so excellent, good cause there is that we
study to maintain it.

4 Because of the usefulness of peace and unity: it is many ways profitable,
and divisions as hurtful, and inconvenient: therefore peace and unity is
studiously to be preserved, and the contrary as carefully to be avoided.

1 In regard of God; peace and unity among Christians makes much for his
honor; and divisions among us tend no less to his dishonor: Charitas laudat
Deum, Aug. in Psalm. 149.
says Saint Austin, discordia blasphemat: Charity praises God, discord
blasphemes him. As in the family, the good agreement of children and servants
is an honor to the master of the family; but if they shall be always found
quarrelling, and contending, it will be imputed to want of government: as we
tender therefore the glory of God, which is the end of our creation, in the
attainment of which we shall provide for our happiness, it stands us in hand,
according to the point in hand, to endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in
the bond of peace.

2 In regard of the whole Church, and the several members of it, the
preservation of peace and unity makes much for safety: there is no better
means of continuing impregnable against all opposition of common foes, then is
unity and concord among our selves, whereas on the other side breaches and
divisions tend directly to ruin: maintaining unity, we shall be ready to take
part with, and to help one another: but falling out among our selves, we stand
aloof off one from another, suffering our selves to be devoured by the common
foe, while we look on: yea happily we shall be ready to act one against another,
2. Chron. 20.23.
and so to save the enemy a labor; as Moab against Ammon, and Ammon against
Moab, and Edom against both, sheathing their swords each in other, so that
Iehoshaphat and his Jews need not to strike a stroke. As Ephraim against
Manasseh, Isa. 9.21.
and Manasseh against Ephraim, and both against Judah. Saint Paul gives a hint
of this, If, says he, Gal. 5.15.
ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one of
another. Who knows not, what a weakening it was to the kingdoms of Israel and
Judah, that they were so divided? How have the divisions among the Christians
made way for, and given advantage not a little to the Turk for the making of
an inroad upon Christendom? Ulysses demonstrates it to Achilles, Hem Iliad. 1.
that the discord between him and Agamemnon would in likelihood prove the
ruin of the Greeks. It is a Dutch devise, and a good one to this purpose of
two earthen pots swimming on the water with this motto, Frangimur si
collidimur, We are broken all to pieces, if we clash one against another. If
two ships at Sea (being consorts) shall be scattered by storm each from other,
how shall the one help the other? if yet they fall foul one upon the other,
how shall they not endanger one another? To this purpose is that of Saint
Bernard. Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 29.
Quicquid foris blandiri videtur, nulla est profecto consolatio, si intus (quod
absit) seminarium discordiae germinaverit. Though the world seem never so much
to smile on us, we can have no comfort, if (which God forbid) we disagree among
our selves. Mat 12.25.
And this is avouched by our blessed Savior. Every kingdom divided against it
self is brought to desolation, and every City or house divided against it
self shall not stand. On this ground therefore it is, Aug. de 5. haeres. c. 6.
that Saint Austin gives that advice. Simul colligamus, ne dividendo perdamus,
Let us gather together, lest by division we lose all. But unity makes for
safety, we shall be insuperabiles, if we be inseparabiles: Invincible, if
inseparable, Bern. in Cant. Ser. 29.
Quid a foris vos conturbare aut contristare posset, says Saint Bernard, si
intus fraterna pace gaudeatis? What from abroad can either trouble you or make
you sad, if ye enjoy brotherly peace among your selves? Pax vobis a vobis sit,
and quicquid extrinsecus minari videtur, non terret, quia non nocet. Be at
peace among your selves, and howsoever the world may frown upon you ye need
not fear it, because it cannot hurt you. Plutar. de garrul.
And this did Scilurus that Scythian King in Plutarch, represent lively to his
80. sons, when being now ready to dye, he commanded a bundle of arrows fast
bound together to be brought unto him, which, so tied together, he gave to his
sons one after another, that they should break them, if they could; and when
they confessed, that they were not able to do it, he took them asunder, and
easily broke them one after another; hereby teaching them how discord would
undo them, but mutual agreement would make them invincible. And thus heathen
Scipio (as Saint Austin alleges it out of the Orator) calls concord, Aug. de
Civit. Dei, li. 2. c. 21.
Optimum in omni Republica vinculum incolumitatis: the best bond of safety in
every Commonwealth. If we then tender the safety and prosperity of the
Church, then which nothing should be dearer to us, it nearly concerns us to
endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace.

3 In respect of particular Christians, the members of the Church; our study to
maintain peace and unity, will be to them a matter of joy, nothing will more
cheer them, then to see mutual agreement among them, that call on the same
Father, and worship the same God, and profess the same Faith, and participate
in the same Sacraments, and are members of the same Church with themselves,
this being a sure ground, whereupon they wax confident of the safety and
impregnable estate of the Church against all opposition of foreign foes, then
which nothing can give them more content, as they desire nothing more then it:
and nothing will more spite common foes, while it puts them out of hope to
thrive in their attempts against the Church. And on the other side, this as
much as any thing sads the hearts of Christians, to see their
Fellow Christians, as Ephraim against Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim,
always biting and snarling one at another: this giving them cause to fear, the
ruin of the Church not to be far off, the very thought of which strikes them
into astonishment: for thus we know, that any ingenuous man takes content in
nothing more, then to see his common friends living friend-like together, and
nothing goes more to the heart of him, then to find them always quarrelling
and contending. Much more will the true members of the Church be so affected
with the peace or discord of their fellow members. Mutuis se vulneribus
impetentes Christiani, Bern. parab. de Christo and Eccl. inter sermon. de
diversis.
says S. Bernard, seque invicem hostiliter concidentes, hostibus a long
stantibus risum and insultationem, Ecclesiae vero luctum and incurabilem
incussere dolorem. While Christians like enemies wound and hack one another,
they give occasion to the enemies, looking on, of slaughter and insultation,
but to the Church, of incurable grief and sorrow. How deeply was Saint Austin
affected with the breach which happened between Saint Hierome and Ruffinus,
both aged men, learned men and formerly great friends? How did it make him
break forth into a passion of grief? Aug. Epist. 15. ad Hieron.
Heu mihi (says the Father) quod vos simul alicubi invenire non possum. Woe is
me that I cannot any where find you together. Forte, ut moveor, ut doleo, ut
timeo, prociderem ad pedes vestros, flerem, quantum valerem, rogarem quantum
amarem, nunc unumquemque vestrum pro seipso, nunc utrumque pro alterutro, and
pro aliis, maxim pro infirmis, pro quibus Christus mortuus est. So I am moved
at it, such is the grief and fear, which I have conceived for it, that I
should likely fall down at your feet, I should weep till I could weep no
longer, as I love you, I should entreat you, now both of you for each other,
now each of you for himself, and for others, especially for the weak, for
whom Christ dyed. Would we then not grieve, but joy the hearts of our
Fellow Christians? would we not joy, but strike sadness into the hearts of
common foes? it stands us in hand, according to the point in hand, to hearken
to Saint Paul calling upon us in his Philippians. Phil. 2.1.2.
If there be any consolation in Christ, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any
comfort of love, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye be
like-minded, having the same love, being of one mind, and of one accord.

4 In respect of those, who are yet strangers from the Church; our study to
maintain peace and unity among our selves will be useful and available to
draw them to a love and liking of the Religion professed by us, and
consequently an attractive to draw them into the Church, from which for the
present they remain strangers: all men, that are in any degree ingenuous,
liking that Religion best, the professors whereof they find to be most
peaceable among themselves and unanimous: for nothing is more available this
way, then for those that profess Christ's Religion, Ephesians 4.1.
according to Saint Paul's injunction, to walk worthy of the calling, wherewith
they are called, and answerably to it: for this is according to Saint Peter's
injunction, to have our conversation, (...), honest, 1. Pet. 2.12.
beautiful: and who knows not, what a powerful commander of affection Beauty
is? Walk then answerably to our calling, and a troop will follow, many shall,
by means of it be added to the Church: would we so walk? endeavor then to
maintain unity: for this particular here in this verse is joined to the
general exhortation in the first verse, as included in it, and a branch of it,
as if the Apostle had said, would ye walk worthy of your calling? endeavor
then to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace: And so we find
these elsewhere joined together: Phil. 1.27.
Let your conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of Christ; that is
general, and holds proportion with the exhortation in the first verse of this
Chapter: and answerably to the exhortation in this third verse, he there adds,
That ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind. Nor can this connection be
justly questioned, for we are called to be children of God, who is the God of
peace, to be members of Christ, who is the Prince of peace, and consequently to
be members one of another; and in this respect it is, that S. Paul says, We
are called to peace in one body: Col. 3.15.
And therefore how shall out co^versation better agree with our calling, then if
we be thus studious of peace and unity? nay, how shall not our carriage be
quite contrary to our calling, if we be not so? For, for fellow members not to
be at peace, who knows not, how unnatural it were? And in this respect by sad
experience we see, that nothing more holds off men from embracing of our
Religion, nothing does more stumble and scandalize men, that are wavering, then
the jarres and discords, which they see or hear to be among us. But there is
nothing more desirable, then to be instruments to win men to God, nothing
more to be avoided, then to be stumbling blocks in men's ways to hinder them
from coming to God: desire we this conveniencie? would we avoid the contrary
evil? it stands us then in hand, (...), etc. to walk worthy of our calling,
and consequently (...), etc. to endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in
the bond of peace.

5 In respect of our selves; this endeavor to keep unity and peace is
useful in outward and inward respects.

1 Outwardly, it will be useful as conducing to external prosperity, and
length of days, by virtue of Gods promise: for this is one of Gods conditions,
on which this is promised to us. Psalm 34.12.14
What man is he says the Psalmist, that desires life, and loves many days,
that he may see good? the condition in part is Seek peace and pursue it: if we
desire this conveniencie, look to fulfill this condition, else we cannot on
good grounds expect it. And indeed contentions may well and many ways occasion
the loss of these conveniences, they being often occasions to shorten life, and
always to make it uncomfortable. Besides, that God often does punish breaches
and divisions in the Church among Christians, by raising up some storm against
them, which may teach them better to agree, we being in this too like to
sheep, which on a fair Sunshine day are scattered each from other upon the
mountains, but a storm brings them together. So does Eusebius relate, Eusb.
Eccles. Hist. l. 8. c. 1.
that the Church enjoying much peace and freedom immediately before the
persecution raised against it by Dioclesian, and making no better use of it,
then to fall asunder into divisions, and factious contentions, Lam. 2.1.
instantly God took a course, by way of punishment, to cover the daughter of
Zion with a cloud in his anger, and to cast down from heaven to the earth the
beauty of Israel, Psalm. 89 42.
and not to remember his footstool in the day of his anger, setting up the
right hand of his Churches enemies, and making them to rejoice If we then
respect but external conveniences, it will stand us in hand to study peace and
unity.

2 Inwardly; we shall find this study of peace in the Church, and among our
selves to be useful three ways.

1 To be to our selves a comfortable sign of our condition: hence we may
conclude, that Christ dwells in us Vbi pax ibi Christus, quia Christus pax,
Ambr. tom. 3. Epist. 82.
says Saint Ambrose: where peace is, there Christ is, because Christ is peace.
Hence we may also conclude, that the holy Ghost is given to us, as the earnest
of our inheritance, and consequently, that we shall have the inheritance it
self at last: for among the fruits of the spirit this is reckoned by the
Apostle for one, peace, and the contrary variance, Gal. 5.22. Gal. 5.20.
strife, seditions, among the works of the flesh. Aug. tom. 9. in Jean. Euang
tract. 6.
And to this purpose Saint Austin tells us, Oportere sanctum Spiritum per
columbam demonstrari, ut intelligat unusquisque, si habeat sanctum Spiritum se
habere debere cum fratribus veram pacem. That it was requisite that the holy
Ghost should appear in the likeness of a Dove, that every man may understand,
that if he have the holy Ghost, he ought to have true peace with the brethren.
Yea hence we may conclude, that God is and will be with us, and then what good
can we want, enjoying him that is the fountain of all good? And of this the
holy Apostle gives us assurance, Be of one mind, 2 Cor. 13.11.
live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you. But if we give
our selves to live in contention and discord, woe be to us; we are strangers
from Christ, and have no interest in him: we are void of the Spirit of God.
Saint Jude joins these together. These are they that separate themselves, Jude
19.
sensual, not having the Spirit of God. Nay they are such, as walk after the
flesh, and are carnal: 1. Cor. 3.3.
while there be divisions among you, are ye not earnall? says the Apostle. And
thus wallowing in the works of the flesh, among which are reckoned contentions
and divisions, we must be content to take that which follows, that they which
do such things, Gal. 5 21.
shall not inherit the kingdom of God. And not only being factiously disposed
and addicted to contention, we can have no hope that the God of peace should be
with us, but also (since, as Solomon says, Only by pride men make
contentions, Prove. 13.10.
in respect of which every contentious person is also a proud person, and
since, as Saint Peter says, 1. Pet. 5.5.
God resists the proud, (...), he sets himself in battle array against him)
we may well conclude, that God will be surely against us, and then what safety
can we expect? Iam. 3.14. to the end.
And hear we what Saint James says. If ye have bitter envying, and strife in
your hearts, glory not, and lie not against the truth. This wisdom descends
not from above, but is carnal, sensual, divellish, for where envying and
strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work: but the wisdom that is
from above is first pure, then peaceable, etc. And the fruit of righteousness
is sown in peace of them, that love peace. By which it is manifest, that our
study to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace may certainly assure
us, that the wisdom which we have, is not carnal, sensual, divellish, but
from God, from above, and tends to God, and to heaven, and that the fruit of
righteousness, holiness here, and eternal life hereafter is sown, that is,
prepared for us, and shall be reaped and enjoyed by us, and what shall comfort
us if not this? whereas, contrariwise, he that lives in contention and strife,
though he may brag of his Christianity, or otherwise boast of his wisdom, yet
in so doing he glories falsely, and lies against the truth. Ambr. tom. 4. de
Abr. l. 2. c. 6.
That of Saint Ambrose being most true of this heavenly wisdom, Sapienti
pacis est studium, imprudenti amicajurgia. The wise man studies peace, the
fool loves brangles. As we would then provide for our comfort, it mainly
concerns us, according to this Apostolical injunction, to study unity and
peace.

2 This study to maintain peace, will be availeable to make us fit to serve God
acceptably in the duties of his worship: now we shall be fit to pray with
assurance to be heard and accepted; for this is required at our hands by the
Apostle, to lift up pure hands without wrath; Tim. 2.8.
and to such prayer assurance is given of speeding. If too of you, says our
Savior, Matthew. 18.19.
shall agree on earth as touching any thing which they shall ask, it shall be
done for them of my Father which is in heaven. Agreeable to which is that of
Saint Cyprian. Quic quid simul petitur a cunctis, Cypr. epist. 57. ad Cornel.
in exilio.
Deus pacis pacificis exhibet. Whatsoever is with an unanimous consent prayed
for by all the God of peace grants it to those that are peaceably disposed. Now
we shall be fit to hear the word of God acceptably and profitably; for this is
also required of us in this respect, to lay aside all superfluity of
maliciousness, Iam. 1.21.
and so to receive with meekness that engrafted word, that is able to save our
souls. Now no less shall we be fit to come with comfort to the holy
Communion. If thou bring, Math. 5 23.24
says our Savior, thy gift to the Altar and there remembrest that thy brother
has ought against thee, leave thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way,
first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. But,
without this peaceable disposition, nothing that thou can do, can be of any
acceptance with God. An unblameable life will not stand thee in stead, while
thou rendest thy self from the unity of the Church. Quisquis ab Ecclesia
Cathelica fuerit separatus, says Saint Austin, Aug. Epist. 15^. ad popil
f^^tion. (...).
Quantumlibet laudabiliter vivere se existimet, hoc sol^ scelere, quod ab
unitate Christi disjunctus est, non habebit vitam, sed ir^ Dei manet super eum.
Whosoever makes a rent from the Catholic Church, how commendably soever he may
seem to himself to live, for this very wickedness alone, that he is
disjoynted from the unity of Christ, he shall not have life, but the wrath of
God abides upon him. The use of the Sacraments will be of no advantage to thee,
while thou venturest to break the unity of the Church. Aug. tom. 10. (...)
Dom. (...) 11.
Corporalia Sacramenta, says the same Father, Quae portant etiam ab Ecclesia
segregati, formam possunt exhibere pietatis, virtus autem pietatis invisibilis,
ita in eis non potest esse, sicut sensus non sequitur hominis membrum a corpore
amputatum. Those bodily Sacraments which men, separating from the Church, do
receive, may yield a form of godliness, but the invisible power of godliness
can be no more in them, then sense can be in the member that is cut off from
the body. Nor in this case will thy Almsdeeds afford thee any comfort, be
they never so abundant. Aug. tom. 2. vel Fulgent. de fide ad Petr. Diacon.
Si quis remanens alienus ab Ecclesia Catholica eleemosynas largas dederit, pro
eo, quod in hac vita non tenet Ecclesiae unitatem, non habet vitam aeternam,
says the same Father, or Fulgentius: If any man remaining a stranger from the
Catholic Church, shall give large alms; even for this, that in this life he
holds not the unity of the Church, he shall miss of life eternal. Nor can
thou in this case have comfort in thy fasting, nor will it be of any acceptance
with God, If the Jews ask, Esa. 58.3.4.
Why have we fasted, and thou regardest it not? God returns answer, Behold ye
fast for strife and debate. Nay, should it so happen, that a man violating the
peace of the Church, should suffer ought, neither in this could he have
comfort, Si aliquis ex talibus (says Saint Cyprian, Cypr. epist. 57. ad
Cornelium in exilio.
that glorious Martyr, and famous Bishop of Carthage, speaking of the
Novatians) fuerit apprehensus, non est, quod sibi tanquam de confessione
nominis blandiatur, cum constet, si occisi ejusmodi extra Ecclesiam fuerint,
fidei coronam non esse, sed poenam perfidiae: If any of them, says he, shall
be apprehended, they have no cause to flatter themselves with the confession of
the name of Christ, since it is manifest, that if such should fuffer death, out
of the Church, it were not a Crown of faith, but a reward of disloyalty. And
elsewhere, Etsi oecisus propter nomen fuerit extra Ecclesiam constitutus, Cypr.
epist. 52. ad Antonian.
and ab unitate and charitate divisus, coronari in morte non poterit: Though a
man separated from the unity of the Church, should suffer death for the name of
Christ, he could not be crowned in death. Saint Austin also tells Donatus as
much, who was a Priest of the Donatists: foris ab Ecclesia constitutus, Aug
epist. 204. ad Donatum preibyt. Donat.
and a vinculo charitatis separatus, supplicio aeterno punireris, etsi pro
Christi nomine vivus comburereris. Being out of the Church, and separated from
the bond of charity, thou should be everlastingly punished, though thou
should be burned alive for the name of Christ. Nor do these holy Fathers
say all this of their own heads, but as they have learned it from Saint Paul,
who plainly says as much. 1 Cor. 13.3.
Though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and give my body to be burned,
and have not charity, it profits me nothing. Nothing can be said more plain
for this purpose: for, if all this be unavaileable without charity, then so it
is without a study of unity, charity, and the study of peace being undivided
companions. As therefore we would not lose our labor, nor strip our selves of
comfort in all that we do or suffer, it stands us in hand according to Saint
Paul's injunctinn to study peace and unity.

3 To furnish us with opportunities of doing and receiving good mutually by the
improvement of the Communion of Saints: for God has in singular wisdom
distributed his manifold graces, not giving some all, and some none at all, but
giving each man in the Church his proper share, and dividing to each man his
several gift, according to that station in the Church, to which he has
designed him, so that as no man is absolute, so there is none, but may be in
his way beneficial, there is none, but may stand in need of another; there is
none, but may be useful to another, the head cannot say to the foot, 1 Cor.
12.21. 2 Timothy 1.16.17.
I have no need of thee. Saint Paul stands in need of Onesiphorus his relief,
and Onesiphorus needs Saint Paul's prayers. The ordinary Christian stands in
need of the Ministers instruction, exhortation, and comfort, and there is not
the most eminent Minister in the Church, who needs not the prayers of the
meanest Christian: how earnest therefore, and how frequent is Saint Paul in
desiring the prayers of Christians for him? Romans 15.30.31.
I beseech you brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of
the Spirit, that ye strive together with me in your prayers to God for me, 2
These. 3.1.
etc. And, furthermore brethren pray for us. Thus Saint Austin writing to
Darius a lay man. Ora pro me, Aug. epist. 264. ad Darium.
ne deficiam, ora, fili, ora; sentio quid dicam, sentio quid petam, non tibi
videatur indignum, and quasi ultra merita tua, fraudabis me magno adjutorio, si
non feceris, etc. Pray for me, that I fail not, pray, son, pray: I know what
I say, I know what I desire: let it not seem to thee an unfitting thing, and
as it were beyond thy merits, thou shall deprive me of a special help, Tertul
de baptismo.
if thou do it not. So Tertullian. Ore, ut cum petitis, etiam Tertulliani
peccatoris memineritis. I desire that in your prayers, you would also remember
Tertullian a sinner. And so Saint Bernard, Iuvate me orationibus vestris, ut
semper possim, Bern. in Cant. Ser. 36.
and loqui quae oportet, and opere implere, quae loquor. Help me with your
prayers, that I may always both speak such things as I ought, and practice what
I speak. In this regard who sees not how useful it is to maintain unity?
For, so long as there is mutual peace, there will be society, and so an
opportunity and readiness to do good by the employment of the abilities
wherewith God has in any kind furnished us, and we shall be as ready to reap
benefit by the abilities of others. But let peace be violated, and way given to
discord and jarring, and presently there follows strangeness, we shall be
ready to fly off one from another in time of need, and one to scorn to be
beholding to another: as therefore we desire to reap the benefit of the
communion of Saints, it stands us in hand to endeavor to keep peace and unity.

Thus I have done with the proof of the point, wherein I have the more
enlarged my self, because the point is practical: but the more I have spoken
of this, the less I shall need to dwell upon the application. To which I were
now immediately to come, but that there are two questions which need resolution.

Quest. 1. How far and with whom must we mind and study peace? Answ. Hear
we the Apostle. If it be possible, and as much as lies in you, Romans 12.18.
have peace with all men. With all men, then certainly with all them that live
in the pales of the Church. If it be possible, and as much as lies in you,
says the Apostle. There are cases then, in which it is not for us to have
peace with men: hear we therefore how the Scripture limits this study of
peace. Love the truth and peace, Zach 8.19. Heb 12 14.
says the Prophet. Follow peace and holiness, says the Apostle. No further
therefore is peace to be maintained by us, then as may be without the prejudice
of truth and holiness. Therefore 1. with Heretics against the foundation we
are to have no peace, no, not to bid them, 2. Ioh. 11.
God speed; He that bids them God speed, says the Apostle, Eusebius. Inst.
Ecclis. l. 3. c. 25.
is partaker of his evil deeds. To this purpose Eusebius from Irenaeus
relates, how Saint John the beloved Disciple, going into the bath at Ephesus,
to wash himself, and finding Cerinthus the Heretic in the bath, went away
without washing, and said. Fugiamus hinc, ne balneum corruat, in quo Cerinthus
veritatis inimicus lavat. Let us fly hence, lest the bath fall on our heads,
in which Cerinthus the enemy of the truth washes himself. And that Polycarpus
meeting Marcion the Heretic, and Marcion saying to him, Eusebius. hist. Eccles.
t. c. 14.
Agnoscis nos? do thou not know us? refused to change any words with him,
only returning him that tart answer. Agnosco te primogenitum Satanae, I know
thee to be the eldest son of the devil: In this case therefore it will be
good for us to take up Saint Austins resolution. Aug. tom. 6. contra Faustun
Manich. l. 29. ca. 2.
Mancat potius nobis adversus Manichaeos pro veritate certamen quam cum illis
in falsitate concordia. Let us rather contend with the Manichees for the truth,
then agree with them in falsehood. 2. With abominable wicked persons,
blasphemers, drunkards, adulterers, and the like, in their sins, with such
maintain no peace. So says S. Austin. Pax cum bonis custodienda est, Aug tom.
10. de Temp. Ser. 166.
non cum sceleratis and iniquis, qui pacem inter se habent, in peccatis suis.
Pax cum bonis, bellum cum vitiis semper habendum est. Maintain peace with
those that are good, not at any hand with wicked and unrighteous persons,
maintaining peace among themselves in their sins: we are always to keep peace
with good men, but withal to bid battle against the vices of men. In these
cases, war is better then peace, contention then concord; agreement in error
and sin is not peace, but conspiracy: Christ had better have a troubled
Church, then none at all: It is more for the honor of God, that there be in
the Church truth and holiness with contention, then quietness with heresy
and impiety.

Quest. 2. But, does this exhortation for the study of peace and unity exclude
all going to law for the deciding of controversies happening between men about
meum and tuum, the propriety of goods? Ans. At no hand: God commands peace, he
no where forbids us to make use of the Magistrate, and his laws for the
preventing, or righting of wrongs. This may be, and peace not broken. We have,
questionless, heard of men, who having been at law together, for the
determining of some difference happening between them, have yet traveled
together from the place of their abode, up to this City, and have been at bed
and board together in a friendly manner. The Apostle therefore requiring the
studious preservation of peace and unity, forbids not the other: only this is
required by virtue of this charge, that we go not to law for every trifle, but
for matters of importance, that we try all other fairer means first, that we
make peace the end of our suits, that we be charitably affected each to other
while the cause is depending: and finally, that we rest quietly in the
determination of the Judge, howsoever the cause be ended, with, or against us,
neither insulting over the party, whom we foil, nor envying or maligning in
case we receive the foil.

And now, these questions thus cleared.

3. Come we to the application: And here,

1 The world justly deserves sharp reproof for the scarsitie of peace, and
the little care that men have to maintain the unity of the Church. In which
regard we may justly take up the complaint of S. Gregory Nazianzen in that
cause. Greg. Naz. orat. 12.
Pax ab omnibus laudatur, a paucis servatur. All men praise peace, few keep
it. The Papists in this case fly in our faces, as Schismatics, for so they
ordinarily brand us, objecting to us, that we have broken the peace, and made a
rent in the Church; A breach there is, we confess, but whether we or they be
guilty of it, let any indifferent man be judge. Only for the manifestation of
it, give me leave to represent to you a parable used by a reverend Prelate of
this Church. A man invites his friend to a feast, Jos. Exon. columba Noe.
they eat and drink together, and are merry; at last, the Master of the feast
drinks to his guest, and gives him an apple, but suddenly a spider falls into
the cup, and the apple is wormeaten, whereupon the guest for the time abstains;
the Master of the feast urges his guest to eat of the apple, and to drink of
the wine: the guest replies. It is not safe; see you not the spider in the cup?
see you not the worm in the apple? let me first take out the spider, then I
will drink; let me cut out the worm, then I will eat, I like the wine well,
and the apple, I like not these: hereupon the Master of the feast grows
choleric at his guest, as over-nice, he throws the dishes and cups at his
head, and at last shamefully thrusts him out of doors: say now whether of them
has broken the peace, and violated the laws of hospitality. It is just the
case between the Papists and us. I hope then you will be able to give the
sentence, that it is not we, but they, that have broken the peace. But the
particular application of the parable, as easy and obvious I leave to you: But
for that, which they object to us, of the breaches and divisions that are among
our selves, in regard of which they are ready to conclude, that we are not a
true Church; It were good they would consider two things. 1. That we are not
the first, between whom there have been divisions Witness Saint Paul, and
Barnabas; witness Saint Hierome, and Ruffinus; witness the Eastern and
Western Church about the celebration of Easter: yet the two former couples were
still held godly men, eminent men, and the latter couple both acknowledged
Churches of Christ. 2. That there are not wanting among themselves great
differences, and that about such points as they acknowledge fundamental points
of their Religion, as about Purgatory, the blessed Virgin, the power of the
Pope, and such like: whereas the differences among us are only in
superstructures, in less principal truths, whiles in the maine, and
fundamental points of our Religion we have (God be thanked) a firm concord,
as may appear by the harmony of confessions. They therefore are justly to go in
the forefront.

Though yet it must with grief be eonfessed, that many among our selves are
fearfully guilty of breaking the peace, and unity of the Church; the more the
pity: some contending for and about worldly things, maintaining tedious suits,
sometimes for trifles, not worthy to be named: some about Theological
Articles, as Pareus calls them. Par. Irenicon.
And the Disciplinarians about innocent ceremonies enjoined by the Church with
respect to decency and uniformity in the worship of God, concerning which God
has not in his Word given any express order, one way or other, leaving them
to be ordered by the Church, according to those general rules laid down in
the Word about indifferent things. And yet about these things what fearful
breaches are among us? Some, not contenting themselves, not to submit to the
authority of the Church, but endeavoring to set all in a combustion, not
only in private whispering against the Church, and the power of it, but also
publishing and divulging scandalous libels, by which they study to make men our
of love with the Government settled, prattling of innovations, and persuading
people that Popery must needs be creeping in, because those things, which tend
to reverence and devotion, to order and decency, are somewhat more strictly
urged now, then formerly they have been: though it might easily be manifested,
that these things were practiced by the Christian Church long before Popery was
so much as thought on; as may easily appear to any, that are in the least
manner skilled in the writings of the Ancients; and I doubt not, but the
ignorance of Antiquity is one maine cause of this violent opposition. But let
all that are guilty in this kind, not being studious of peace, but for these
things breaking the unity of the Church, let these, I say, know that they walk
unworthy of their calling, that they have an argument that they are carnal,
and that their wisdom is earthly, lensuall, devilish: they say, they are
Christians, but it were to be wished, they would walk as such, lest they be
found to lie against the truth: Just. Mort. des^^s. pro Christien. ad Anconinum
Pium.
Hear they what Saint Justin Martyr said long ago, (...). If any be found not
to live as Christ has taught, it is a certain argument that they are not
Christians, though with the tongue they confess the doctrine of Christ: for
not those which only profess, but those which second their profession with
answerable works does Christ assure of salvation. And to the same purpose
Tertullian, Tertull. Apologet. c. 45.
though more concisely: Dicet aliquis, etiam de nostris excedere quosdam a
regula disciplinae: Some will say, that even some of our own violate the rule
of Christianity: but he answers, Desinunt tunc Christiani haberi penes nos. We
then cease to acknowledge them to be Christians. Let not such judge their sin
to be small, Aug. tom 7. part 1. contra Epist. Parmen. l. 1. c. 4.
but know, as Saint Austin says, that Sacrilegium schismatis omnia scelera
supergreditur, The sacrilege of schism exceeds all sins. And for proof of
this, let them take into consideration, that other passage of the same Father.
Id. de Baptis. contra Donat. l. 2. ca. 6.
Sub veteri testamento idolum fabricatur and adoratur, liber Propheticus ira
Regis contemptoris incenditur, and schisma tentatur. Exo. 32.3, 4, 5
In the old Testament we read of an Idol made and worshipped, even a golden
calfe by the Israelites: a prophetical book burnt in a rage, by a contemptuous
King. Ier. 36.23.
Ieremiahs book first written, then read by Baruch, lastly cut in pieces, and
burnt by Iehojakim: Number. 16.
and a schism attempted, namely, by Korah and his accomplices. Idololatria
gladio punitur; exustio libri bellica caede and captivitate, schisma hiatu
terrae, authoribus vivis sepultis, and caeteris coelesti igne consumptis. The
idolatry is punished with the sword, the burning of the book with warre-like
slaughter and captivity: Number. 16.29.30.31.32.33
but for the attempters of the schism a common visitation will not serve, God
will do a new thing, the earth opens her month, and the principals go down
quick into the pit, and the confederates are confumed with fire from heaven.
Verse 35.
Quis jam dub tat, says the Father, hoc esse sceleratius, commissum, quod est
gravius vindicatum? Who can now doubt, but that the sin is the greatest, in
the punishment of which we find the greatest severitie? Nor let such men as
these, flatter themselves in their otherwise unblameable conversation, in their
prayers, in their alms, nor in ought else, it being most true of all such,
that the same Father says of the Donatists: omnia illa quae laudantur in
Ecclesia, nihil illis prosunt, quia conscindunt unitatem. Aug. in Joan Euang.
tract. 13.
All those things, (namely virginity, continency, alms) profit them nothing,
because they violate the unity of the Church. Such men are worse then those
rude Soldiers, who were the crucifiers of our Savior: In which respect we may
say of them, as Saint Austin of the Donatists. Venit persecutor and non fregit
crura Christi, venit Donatus, Aug. in Psalm. 34
and disrupit Ecclesiam Christi. Integrum corpus Christi est in cruce inter
manus persecutorum, and inter manus Christianorum non est integrum corpus
Ecclesiae. The Soldiers coming broke not the legs of Christ, Donatus coming
has made a breach in the Church of Christ. The body of Christ remains entire
on the Cross in the hands of his enemies: and the body of the Church is not
entire in the hands of Christians: finally, let not such expect peace and
comfort in the conclusion, but except they repent of their attempts against the
peace of the Church, let them be sure of it, that, as they love wrath, they
shall have wrath, and that, as Joshua spoke to Achan, so it will be done to
them, that as they have troubled Israel, Josh. 7.25.
so God shall trouble them.

2 For a close therefore, suffer a word of exhortation: in the words of Saint
Paul: 1 Cor. 1.10.
I beseech you brethren in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that there be no
divisions among us, but be perfectly joined together. At any hand, take we
heed, that we be not leaders of others into schism from the unity of the
Church: this would be in all respects as ill an office as we could possibly do
them, and of as dangerous consequence to our selves. But, because it is not
enough for us to abstain from evil, except we also set our selves to do
good, let us not content our selves not to draw others from the unity of the
Church, do we also our utmost diligence, to hold others in it, and to reduce
them to it, in case we know any drawn from it: let the peace of the Church be
dear to us: here let us use our best rhetoric, and our most powerful
persuasions: Christ has said it: Blessed are the peacemakers, Math. 5.9.
they shall be called the children of God: as we would share in this
blessedness, let this be our study. Shall we be counted pick-thanks, and
fiatterers, and time-servers, if we set our selves to this work? Regard not
such uncharitable censures, sacrifice our credit and good name to the peace of
the Church; be we regardlesse of men's lawless tongues in comparison of a
business of so high a nature, and so special advantage. May the desire or
attempting of this tend to our outward disadvantage? let not this at any hand
take us off from this endeavor. It was a good answer of Saint Austin to the
Donatists, Aug. epist. 50. ad Benisas. virum militarem.
and a holy resolution, which he therein expressed. They objected, vos
(Catholici) res nostras concupiscitis, and aufertis: ye (Catholics) covet and
take away our goods: he answers, Vtinam Catholici fiant, and non solum quae
dicunt sua, sed and nostra cum charitate and pace possideant. Would to God,
they would become Gatholike Christians, upon condition, that they possessed not
only their own goods, but ours also with peace and charity. But we may be in
danger to suffer hardship, if we thus set our selves to study the peace of the
Church: Neither is this to be regarded. Eusebius. hist. Eccles. lib. 6. ca. 44.
Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, writing to Novatus, who, having disturbed the
peace of the Church, pretend, that he was compelled by others so to do,
returns him this grave answer, Oportet nil non far, ne Ecclesiam Dei
scinderes. Thou should choose rather to suffer any thing, then so to disturb
the Church. He adds, Nec est Martyrium hoc, Ecclesiae non scindendae gratia
toleratum, minoris gloriae, quam quod fertur propter Idololatriae recusationem;
Imo meo judicio majoris gloriae est, Illic enim pro una anima martyrium
toleratur, hic vero pro universa Ecclesia. Neither is this martyrdom, suffered
for not making a rent in the Church, less glorious, then that, which is
undergone for the refusal of idolatry. Nay in my opinion it is more glorious:
for in that a man suffers for the behoof of one soul, in this for the behoof
of the whole Church. The same may no less be said of suffering ought for the
study to retain others in, or to reduce them to the unity of the Church.
Therefore all excuses laid aside, let us all in our places bend our utmost
endeavor this way. Especially, if any have been occasions of breaches in the
Church, let such seek to make amends by studying by all means to reduce those
to the unity of the Church whom they have been means to rend from it. Si
persuaseris fratribus, says Dionysius to Novatus in the aforesaid Epistle,
Eusebius. ibid.
vel coegeris etiam, ut ad concordiam redeant, majus erit hoc factum tam
eximium, quam delictum, quod praecessit, and illud quidem, non imputabitur, hoc
vero laudabitur. If thou shall persuade the brethren, or if thou shall also
compel them to come again to agreement, this good work shall be greater then
the offense, which went before, and that shall not be imputed, but this shall
be praised.

Says any, that this endeavor will be vain, and the labor lost? let no such
thoughts hinder us from this attempt: for, first, happily thou may prevail
with them by the good hand of God upon thy endeavor. Aug. epist. ^6. ad
Maximum Medicum.
Absit ut ipse, nolent tecum recta sentire, says Saint Austin, Cum quo eos
delectavit errare: absit ut resistant tibi vera dicenti, cui consenserant a
veritate devianti. God forbid that they should not join with thee in right
thoughts, who delighted to err with thee: God forbid that they should resist
thee speaking the truth, who consented to thee deviating from the truth.

2 If thou can not prevail with them, yet this will afford thee comfort,
that thou have endeavored it. Thou may say with the Prophet, I have
labored in vain, Esa. 49.4.
but my judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God. It is most true,
that Saint Austin says, Aug. tom. 7. part 1. contra Crescon. Grammat. l. 1.
c. 5.
Si cui diligentia medicinae hujus impensa non prosit, sufficit ad rationem
reddendam Deo, quod non cessavit impendi. If this my diligent endeavor
bestowed upon any, profit him not, yet it is sufficient for my comfort in
giving up my account to God, that I have not been slack, to use this
diligence: he adds, sicut enim suasor peccati malignus, etsi non persuaserit,
merito persuasor is panam incurrit, ita fidelis justitiae praedicator, etsi ab
hominibus respuatur, absit, ut apud Deum sui officij mercede defraudeiur: for,
as he that shall wickedly assay to draw another to sin, though he prevail
not, does yet deservedly incur punishment, as if he had prevailed: So God
forbid that the faithful Preacher of righteousness, though he be rejected of
men, should miss of his reward with God: for so says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.8.
And every man shall receive his own reward according to his own labor:
secundum laborem, non secundum proventum, as Saint Bernard observes: Bern. de
consid. ad Eugen. l. 4. c 2.
according to his labor not according to his success in his labor. And,
because the success of our endeavors in all kinds depends upon the blessing
of God, to our persuasions used toward them, add also our prayers to God for
them in the words of Saint Austin. Tranquillet Deus and componat animos
vestros. Aug. epist. to 9. ad (...) tumultuantes.
ut non in vobis praevaleat opu^ Diaboli sed pax, Dei vincat in cordibus. God
quiet and compose your minds, that the work of the devil may not prevail in
you but the peace of God may rule and bear sway in your hearts.

But at least let us all look to our selves that we for our own parts
endeavor to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. Suffer we not
our selves to be rent from the unity of the Church; or, if we have been by any
means drawn from it, let us at last readily return to it: Consider what has
been said and the Lord give us understanding in all things. Would we see good,
and enjoy long days? would we be sure that we have that wisdom which is from
above? be peaceable, wrangle not for trifles, contend not about uncertainties:
Resolve we with Saint Austin, that melius est dubitare de occultis, quam
litigare de incertis, Aug. tom. 3. de Genes. ad literam l. 8.
Its better to be doubtful concerning secrets, then to be contentious about
those things which are uncertain. We are brethren, let there be no strife
between us: we are travelers together toward the celestial Canaan, see that
we fall not out by the way. We have common foes, let us hold together that we
may (...) fight together for the faith of the Gospel, Phil. 1.27.
as the Apostle speaks. Let the glory of God be precious to us, obscure it not
by our jarres; let the credit of religion be respected by us, blemish it not by
our contentions: tender the safety of the Church so far, as not to hazard it
by our broils: In a word, live in peace, 2 Cor. 13.11.
and the God of love and peace shall be with us.

To this end I beseech you, that my counsel may be acceptable to you in the
following particulars.

1 Abandon pride, and labor for humility: for, only by pride, Prove. 13.10.
Bern. inter sermones de diversit. ser. 1. de verb. Apostoli. Romans 14.19.
men make contentions, says Solomon. Impossible est, says Saint Bernard; Hic
and modo pacem inter nos servari, nisi and qui in aliquo offendit fratrem,
animosam elationem, and qui offensus est, nihilominus caveat inexorabilem
obstinationem. It is impossible that here and now peace should be preserved
among us, except both he, that in some thing offends his brother, beware of
stomackfull haughtiness, and he that is offended, do no less take heed of
inexorable obstinacy. And therefore he prescribes this rule for the maintenance
of peace. Jd. ibid. ser. 2.
Si recordaris quod frater tuus habet aliquid adversus te, sis humilis ad
petendam veniam: si tu habeas adversus illum, sis facilis ad dandam, and omnia
erunt in pace. If thou remember that thy brother has ought against thee, in
humility crave pardon: If thou have ought against him, be ready to grant
pardon, and all things shall be in peace. Pride disables us for both these: a
proud person scorns to stoop to acknowledge a fault, or to ask forgiveness
of it, and by an overweening conceit of himself, is so apprehensive of any
wrong done to him, that he judges it unreasonable to pass it by: but humility
will enable a man to all this: if then we would maintain peace among our
selves, shun pride, labor for humility: for it is most true, that Saint Austin
says, answerable to the forenamed passage of the wise man: Aug. contra epist.
Parmen. l. 1. c. 4.
humilitate pax custodita est, elatione dirupta est: humility conduces to
peace, pride is a makebate.

2 Be not too vehement and impetuous in seeking either wealth or honor: Ier.
45.5.
Seek thou great things for thy self? seek them not, says God to Baruch
by the Prophet: And indeed seek them not, if we have a desire to maintain
peace: for, as Arnobius says well, non esset utique lis in seculo. si non unus
alio vellet ditior fieri, vel in opibus vel in honoribus. Arnob. in Psalm. 39.
There would be no contention in the world, except we did desire to exceed each
the other, either in wealth, or in honor. How frequently have we found
covetousuesse and ambition to usher in schism and divisions? Thus; as
Tertullian testifies; Tertul. contra Valentinianos.
Valentinus, hunting after and hoping for a Bishopric, and missing of it,
another who had suffered much for the name of Christ, being preferred before
him, being hereat discontented, became the head of a faction, who from him were
called Valentinians. Ambr. tom. 1. de paenit. l. 1. c. 15.
So Novatianus says Saint Ambrose, being displeased that he missed of a
Bishopric, which he hoped for, entered the lists against the Church, and made
a fraction in it. And so have we found it to be among our selves. As we desire
then to be armed against divisions, moderate our desires of great things in
this world.

3 Maintain righteousness in our dealings, let us be careful Suum cuique
tribuere, to give every man that, which belongs and is due to him: give Caesar
his due, according to the injunction of the Apostle, Romans 13 7.
custom, to whom custom, honor, to whom honor, fear to whom fear is due.
Give the Minister his due, his double honor of respect and maintenance
according to the laws of God and the King, and so to every one else in his
several kind. The want of this care we have found to be the occasion of
fearful breaches. In this regard it is, that the Poets have made peace the
daughter of righteousness: so heathen Scipio says Saint Austin, Aug. de
civit. Dei l. 2. c. 21.
could say, concordiam sine justitia esse non posse, that peace cannot be
without righteousness. And the same Father descanting upon those words of the
Psalmist, Aug. in Psalm. 85.
Righteousness and peace have kissed each other, speaks fully to this
purpose, Fac justitiam and habebis pacem; si non amaveris justitiam, pacem non
habebis. Amant enim se duo ista, justitia and pax; duae amicae sunt. Work
righteousness, and thou shall have peace, if thou love not righteousness,
thou shall not have peace: for these two, righteousness and peace, love each
other, they are two friends. He adds, Tuforte unam vis, and alteram non facis:
nemo enim est, qui non vnlt pacem, sed non omnes volunt operari justitiam.
Interroga omnes, vultis pacem? respondet totum genus humanum, opto, cupio. Ama
justitiam, quia duae amicae sunt, mutuo se osculantur. Happily thou would have
one, thou would not do the other: for there is no man which desires not
peace, but all have not a mind to work righteousness. Ask all men, would
ye have peace? all mankind answers with one consent: yes, with all our
hearts. Then love righteousness, for these two are great friends, they kiss
each other. He adds further, Si amicam pacis non amaveris, non te amabit ipsa
pax, nec ad te veniet; inimicus es amicae meae, inquit pax, quid me quaeris?
Amica sum justitiae, quemcunque invenero inimicum amicae meae, non ad illum
accedo: vis ergo venire ad pacem? fac justitiam: If thou love not the friend
of peace, neither will peace love thee, or come near thee. Thou art an enemy
to my friend, says peace, why do thou seek me? I am a friend of
righteousness; If I find any man a foe to my friend, I will not have to do
with him. Would thou therefore attain peace? work righteousness. And in
the same place, descanting on those words of the Psalmist, Depart from evil,
and do good, Psalm 34.14.
seek peace and pursue it, he adds further, Declina a malo and fac bonum, id
est, amajustitiam, tum quaere pacem, jam enim non diu quaeres illam, quia and
ipsa occurret tibi, ut osculetur justitiam. Depart from evil, and do good,
that is, love and practice righteousness, then seek peace, for now thou shall
not need long to seek her, but she will readily meet thee, that she may kiss
righteousness.

4 In doubtful things, avoid groundless suspicions, and make charitable
constructions, and be ready to accept of their just apologies, concerning whom
we have entertained any hard or uncharitable thoughts. The want of care this
way, has been the cause of much division between private men, and in the
Church: men do or say something, which may admit of a various construction: we
for want of charity, interpret it the worst way, and when they offer their
defense, we refuse to accept of it, or to believe it: hence issues breach of
peace between man and man. So in the Church it is, in respect of her
constitutions. She enjoynes this or that, which she judges to make for order
and decency in the service of God; we are ready to calumniate it as idolatrous
and superstitious; she makes her protestation to the contrary, we refuse to
believe her, we still continue to cry out, O Idolatry, O Popery! and hence
proceed those heavy breaches that are among us in the violent opposition of her
Orders. As therefore we would end these divisions, walk by this rule. It is a
remarkable passage to this purpose recorded in the sacred story. Josh 22.
The nine tribes and half of Israel have their possession on the one side of
Jordan; the two tribes and half on the other side; these, having according to
their promise to Moses, seen their brethren in possession of their Country,
and their enemies suppressed and vanquished, are now at last dismissed by
Joshua; and having now passed over Jordan, and being come into the Land of
their possession, they set up a great Altar by Jordan: this offends the rest of
the Tribes, and, as it might seem to them most justly, Deuteronomy. ^^.10.11.
For no sacrificing must be among them, but at some one place, which God should
choose, and consequently but one Altar is commanded, for what serves an Altar
for, but for sacrifices? For these therefore to erect a new Altar might seem
to be scandalum datum, a scandal given: they construe it as done with a mind
to turn away from following the Lord, and thereupon they resolve to make war
against them, but first they will send to them to hear what they could say for
themselves. Phineas and the ten Princes coming with him, charge them deeply
with it, as done out of a rebellious intention. But when the two Tribes and
half had made their just defense, that it was not done with any thought of
forsaking the Lord, but only to be a witness, that though they might seem to
be parted each from other by Jordan running between them, yet they were all
but one people, and had a joint interest in one God. The other Tribes accepted
of, and rested in this their defense, and laid down their purpose of warring
against them: Oh that there were such a charitable affection in men in these
days; oh that whereas we have misconstrued uncharitably the constitutions of
the Church our Mother, as superstitious, as ushering in Popery, we could at
last rest in the apologies published by authority, in which there is so clear
and serious a protestation to the contrary: how would this tend to the
conservation of peace and unity?

5 Abstain from curious search into unprofitable controversies, and be not so
much addicted and wedded to our private opinions about them, but that, being
convinced of mistakes therein, we may readily relinquish our errors, and
subscribe to the truth. This would much tend to peace, and make for it, and the
contrary is often an occasion of no small breaches. It is therefore good for us
in this case to take up S. Austins resolution, wherein he alludes to the words
of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 8.1.
Knowledge puffs up, Aug. Epist. 15. ad Hieron.
but love edifies. Minus assequatur, says the Father, illa quae inflat, modo
non offendatur illa, quae aedificat, Let that gain less, which puffes up, so
that be not prejudiced that edifies: that is, let us content our selves to know
less, so we may be more charitable.

6 In indifferent things let us not be too stiff, but yielding: In those
things, in which we have full liberty of choice, be careful, not to offend
the weak, 1. Cor. 10.32.
but follow Saint Paul's advice, Give no offense, neither to the Jew, nor to the
Greek, nor to the Church of God. And take we up his resolution. If meat make
my brother to offend, 1. Cor. 8.13.
I Will eat no flesh, while the world stands, lest I should make my brother to
offend. Hear we what he says, Romans 10.14.15.
I know and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of
it self, but to him that judges any thing to be unclean, to him it is
unclean: but if thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now thou walk not
charitably; Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ dyed. But for other
things in which being indifferent in themselves (God having given no special
order concerning them one way or other) we yet are limited by the command of
authority, in these, out of our duty to superiors, it is for us to submit to
their commands. to be regulated thereby, and by the settled custom of the
Church, if we would maintain the peace of the Church. The things themselves
God has neither commanded nor forbidden; but to obey authority in the things
which God has left free, this God has commanded; and no less has he
forbidden disobedience herein by the fifth Commandment, which requires honor
to superiors, a principal branch whereof is obedience to them in such
commands as are not contrary to the will of God. It is this, which S. Austin
says he learned from S. Ambrose: he says, that he moved this question to him,
Vtrum juxta morem Civitatis suae Sabbato jejunaret, an Ecclesiae Mediolanensis
more pranderet, Aug. Epist. 86. ad Casulan. Presbyter.
Whether according to the custom of his own City he should observe the
Saturday fast, or should dine that day according to the custom of the Church
of Millaine, and that Saint Ambrose returned him this answer. Quid possum hinc
docere amplius, quam quod ipse facio? What can I teach you concerning this,
more then that which I my self do? And whereas S. Austin thought that S.
Ambrose had enjoined him not to observe the Saturday Fast, because he saw that
he observed it not S. Ambrose explained himself thus, Quando hic sum, non
jejuno Sabbato; quando Romae sum, jejuno: When I am here, namely, at Millaine,
I observe not the Saturday Fast; when I am at Rome, I observe it. And so he
added this general rule, Ad quamcunque Ecclesiam veneritis, ejus morem
servate, si pati scandalum non vultis, nec facere. To whatsoever Church ye
come, observe the custom of it, if ye will not either take or give offense.
And thereunto S. Austin adds of his own. Quia contingit, ut una Ecclesia
habeat alios Sabbato jejunantes, alios prandentes, mos eorum mihi sequendus
videtur, quibus little populorum congregatio regenda commissa est: Quare si meo
consilio acquiescis, Episcopo tuo in hac re noli resistere, and, quod facit
ipse, sine ullo scrupulo sectare. Because it so falls out, that in one and the
same Church some may fast on Saturdayes, and others dine, the custom of those
seems to me to be followed, to whom the government of the Church is committed.
If therefore you rest in my advice, resist not thy Bishop in this thing, and
what he does, follow thou without scruple. The observation of this rule, and
care to walk according to it, would, not a little, tend to the preservation of
the peace and unity of the Church.

7 Shut out tale-bearers, if we would shun private breaches: there is a
generation of men, that go up and down from one to another, carrying the devils
pack like Pedlers, seeking to curry favor with all sides: these are
mischievous persons: A whisperer, Prove. 16.28.
says Solomon separates chief friends. If therefore we desire to maintain
peace, let us walk by Solomon's rule, Prove. 25.23.
As the North wind drives away rain, so does the angry countenance the
backbiting tongue. And the issue we shall find according to that other adage
of his. Prove. 26.20.
Where no wood is, the fire goes out, and where no talebearer is, strife
ceases. And for the preventing of public breaches, hearken to the counsel of
Saint Paul. Mark them that cause divisions, and avoid them. Romans 16.17.
There is a brood of ill-minded men, who care not what they say or write,
whereby to work in men an ill opinion of the Church, wherein they live, though
never so apparently false, and that they may the more easily insinuate and
wind themselves into the minds of well-meaning people, they will make a fair
pretense of zeal for the good of the Church, as if all that they did were
altogether for the preservation of the truth of Doctrine, and the purity of
Gods worship, when, God knows, it is, if not only, at least especially, for
their own advantage, to raise themselves a name by defaming of others, whose
preferment they envy: such as these the Apostle would have us to mark and
avoid: and according to this is the advice of Saint Cyprian that famous Bishop
of Carthage, Admoneo pariter and consulo, says he, C^pr. Epist 40 (...) plebem
de quinque Presbyter. Schismaticis factionis foelicissimi.
ne perniciosis vocibus temere credatis, ne fallacibus verbis consensum facile
commodetis, ne pro luce tenebras, pro die noctem, venenum pro remedio, mortem
pro vita sumatis, nec aet as vos little, nec authoritas fallat, etc. I admonish
and counsel you, that ye do not rashly believe pernicious words, nor hand over
head give assent to deceitful speeches, lest ye take darkness for light,
night for day, poison for remedy, and death for life: Let neither their age
nor authority deceive you, etc. Let this be our care, and we shall be well
shielded against Schism and division, and enabled to maintain unity, and to
live in peace; and so the God of love and peace shall be with us. To which God,
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, be rendered of us, and the whole Church, all
honor, and glory, praise, and power, might and majesty from this time forth
and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 3. line 24. for Apostles, read Apostle, p, 6, l, 3, for spirits, r,
spiritual. p, 20, l, 9, for dissentio, r, dissensio, p, 28, l, 4, for
slaughter, r, laughter, p, 37, l, 2^, for iniunction. r, iniunction, p, 49, l,
7, for pretend, r, did pretend, p, 51, l, 3, for defraudeiur, r, defraudetur,
l, 19, for Diaboli sed pax, Dei, r, Diaboli, sed pax Dei, p, 52. l, 23, for
Saint Bernard; Hic et, r, Saint Bernard, hic et, p, 53, l, 30, for, Thus; as
Tertullian testifies; Valentinus hunting, r, Thus, as Tertullian testifies,
Valentinus hunting, etc. p, 57. l. 27, for, God. The other, etc. r. God; the
other.


