VIAE RECTAE AD VITAM LONGAM, PARS SECVNDA.

Wherein the true use of Sleep, Exercise, Excretions, and Perturbations is,
with their effects, discussed and applied to every age, constitution of body,
and time of year.

BY TO: VENNER Doctor of Physic in Bathe.

LONDON, Printed by GEORGE ELD for GEORGE WINDER, and are to be sold at his
shop in St. Dunstans Church yard in Fleet Street. 1623.

TO THE MOST EXCELLENT, ILLUSTRIOUS, AND Mighty Prince CHARLES, Prince of
Wales, etc.
RIGHT Noble and most Illustrious Prince: Your gracious acceptance of my Via
recta ad vitam longam, formerly consecrated unto you, induced me not a little
to hast^n the perfiting of the same, with the addition of a second Part, which
I now likewise commend to your Highness patronage, being a work in regard of
the subject most befitting your Majesty, who is the chiefest hope and future
health of Great-Britaines Monarchy. If these my Labors, that I may testify my
loyal and grateful heart to your Majesty, shall any way further your health
and prosperity of body, I have my aim and contentment. For without health Quid
potest in hac vita esse gratum, quid jucundum? Non honor, non divitiae:
imperfect a quidem sunt omnia corporis bona, nisi secunda jungantur valetudine.
Health therefore is the Summum bonum in this life; quia vitam maxim jucundam
reddit and foelicem. Wherefore that it may be obtained and enjoyed, Non
tantummodo orandum, sed and enixe laborandum est. Thus referring both this
Work and myself to your Highness protection, with my daily prayers unto God
for your Majesty's safety and happy continuance of life, to the exceeding great
comfort of all true hearted Britains, I in all dutiful obedience most humbly
rest

At your Highness service and command, To: VENNER.

TO THE TRVLY GENEROUS AND Religious READERS, Health and Counsel.
GEnerous and religious Readers; to you have I heretofore written my Viam
rectam ad vitam longam; not to Rusticks, or men of vile and rusticke quality,
who savor only of the earth, and respect nothing less then the welfare of
their Bodies; nor to any profane, or seeming religious Patron of wicked and
dishonest persons: But to you, I say, that are religious and truly generous,
that maintain your blood, and reputations by your noble and virtuous lives,
have I written that Dieteticall Treatise: and now, in regard of your benign
Acceptance thereof (lightly esteeming the obliquity of some that are wise only
by inheritance, or that are of a detracting spirit) have perfected the same,
with a Second part, for the preservation of your lives and health, which if ye
will in any measure observe, Vos enim arctissimis regulis non obstringo; I
nothing doubt, but ye shall to Gods glory, your own comfort, and good of your
Country, live, a long, happy, and healthy life. But, because it may happen,
inregard of the great infirmity of Nature, in these last times, that ye may
have some conflicts with sickness, I will give you my advice therein, lest
being sick, and seeking remedy by Physic, ye fall, as the old saying is,
from Charybdis into Sylla, from one evil into another as bad, if not worse.
When ye are visited with Sickness, ye must consider that it is a symptom of
your sin; and therefore first by humble confession, and a penitent heart make
peace betwixt God and your Conscience, and then send for the Physician: But for
what Physician? not for the Mountebanke that deludes you with impostures; nor
for the audacious Surgeon, that will take away your life, I mean your blood,
upon every light occasion; nor for the arrogant, and too too dishonest
Apothecary, that against conscience, against the laws, and against laudable
and ancient customs, exercises Physic, and grows insolent with the Title of
a Physician; nor for any other such ignorant Empericke, Qui And abatarum more,
clausis oculis, cum aegrotorum morbis pugnat, facirque per mortes experimenta;
applying without any true respect had of the temperature, age, sex, or time of
year, one and the same remedy unto every one, as though every man had one and
the same nature, and state of body, or did labor in one and the same disease.
But send for such a Physician as is Phylosophically learned; that is honest,
religious; that deals faithfully and discreetly with the sick, and that
regards more the curing of the sickness, then the reward: such an one, so
often as ye have occasion, send for, love, and entertain kindly, for he will
pray unto the Lord, that he would prosper that which he gives for your ease
and remedy. I cannot but here tax some Physicians; I wish there were no such
Spurii amongst us, more base and inhumane then the basest Mechanics, who,
Canino more, abide not men of their own rank and quality, but hate and
detract them; and yet these great Worthies, A Note of baseness, if not also of
insufficiency.
out of what humor judge ye, not only Fidler-like hang after the heels of
great men, to be set a work, and insinuate with Gentlewomen (working upon
their light credulent nature) telling them, That their skill, for curing their
infirmities, transcends other men; but also become and collogue with base and
unworthy people to have their alarm of praise. Among Physicians, these I
suppose are they that respect their own gain more then the glory of God, or
the good of the Patient, and therefore very worthy to be exploded, Ex
Medicorum albo.

What shall I say of some Divines, who (Salva sanctiorum reverentia) besides
the cure of Souls, take upon them the cure of bodies, because the Ocean of
sacred Theology is not sufficient for their swelling brains, and perhaps
puffed up with Quintessences. Quid illis cum Medicina? Let them look to the
Charge that Saint PAVL gives unto them. Verily, 2 Timothy c. 4. v. 1, 2.5.
I wonder how they can be insensible of the great burden of Souls that lie
upon them, for which in the great and terrible day of accounts, they must give
account; and then, when not only the actions of all men, Exech. 28.8.
but also the very secret motions and intentions of the heart shall be made
manifest; what will these halfe-curing Physicians of Souls and bodies do,
when they shall be questioned, not so much for how many bodies they have
cured; perhaps for how many they have sent packing to Sheol by their importune
and preposterous physic, as for how many Souls they have cured and purged
from the filth of sinno and iniquity, by their diligent ministry of the sacred
Word, and converted unto God.

But as for Women that with much temerity, take upon them to give and prescribe
medicines, and the same not of the meanest rank neither, as though Physic,
the most mystical and noblest of all Arts, were subject to their shallow and
precipitate apprehension (reverence to those Gentlewomen, that bind up Lazarus
soars, and refresh them with the fragments that fall from their Tables) I must
tell them, that if they do it out of pure charity, it is sinful, because
there is error in the action; if out of any vain glory, it is more sinful; if
out of a desire of gain, it is most sinful: Of all which, our
poly-pragmaticall Ministers in all likelihood, that cannot contain themselves
within the limits of their own callings, go not free and unfaultie. Marcilius
Ficinus, Lib. de Trip. vita Apolog.
a Priest, and well learned in the mysteries of Physic, endeavoring to prove
the lawfulness for Divines to exercise Physic, concludes that they must do
it, Charitatis gratia, for charities sake. And is not this think you, the
mark that our practical Ministers aim at? I will not condemn all; but so
many of them as I know, deal in physic, as they do sometimes for a
Parsonage, they take not fees direct, like Physicians; but indirecte, under
the name of a Druggie medicine, or perhaps a strange elaborated Quintessence,
exhaust the patients purse much more then the generous and learned Physician.
And if you will look into their lives, you shall find some of them to be
profane; others, especially those whose brains swell, and are overheated with
Quintessences, to be heady, proud, contentious; and yet after a puritanicall
fury, holy. To the best of them, I say as Saint PAVL did to Archippus: Take
heed to your Ministry.

If the best learned, and such as bend their whole forces thereunto are but
sufficient to undertake the practice of Physic, what shall be judged of the
rabblement of Emperickes, and other unworthy and distracted Practicioners?
Well, the time will come, when we shall be all convented to yield an account
for all our actions, we shall not be able to conceal any of them from God,
at whose name we should tremble, the great Judge of all the world, to whom the
very secret motions of our hearts are manifest, and who will reward every man
according to his work. Know then, whatsoever thou art, that it is not all
gain that is gotten, except it be well gotten, and with a good conscience;
which I wish all men, and by name, such as usurp the practice of Physic, to
the ruin and hurt of many, to lay to their hearts, as a cordial Antidot
against all unlawful gain, and be reformed.

But is the fault altogether in them that usurp the practice of Physic? No
verily; It is as much, if not more, in the absurdity of them that expose their
bodies they care not to whom; and if they chance, through the benefit of nature
and a strong constitution, to recover; or for that, the cause of the infirmity
was formerly by some learned Physician removed, as it oftentimes happens, a
great cure is wrought, the report whereof, with the light vulgar, and other
base minded people, is so prevalent, as that it is able to raise one from being
a parish Clarke, to the title of a great Physician; and yet all this while, the
Cure, if there were any, was but accidentally, rashly, or preposterously
effected, to the great injury of nature, and shortning of the days, though the
ignorant Patient understand it not. But if the Cure, or rather the Hurt, shall
by an outlandish Empericke, or Surgeon, that apud nos, turns Physician, and
that no mean one neither, be effected, the more admirable. For verily, such
is the inconstancy, folly, and perverseness versnesse of most our people, that
a Physician, how learned and honest soever, and blessed of God in his courses,
cannot, unless he be Outlandish, or at least in his birth and education,
altogether a stranger and remote, be in any good esteem with them, for they
must have physic from far, Nihil praetiosum domi: the proverbiall saying is
not more ancient then true, Rara sunt chara: Sed mundus vult decipi, and
decipiatur.

The men of this world are, in their worldly affairs, wise, and do with the
Chinoys, see with both eyes, and will, rather then lose one foot of land,
retain the best counsel that can be had; but when their health, quae cum
omnibus mundi copiis non est commutanda, shall by sickness be called into
question, an illiterated Empericke, a peremptory usurping Apothecary, an
ambitious Surgeon, scarce the supersicies of a Physician, perhaps a parish
Clarke, or a sorcering Horse-leach, or any other of what condition soever,
whether Insidell or Christian, whether virtuous, or full of all impiety, it
matters not, is a Physician meet enough to encounter with sickness, death's
Champion. O genus hominum insulsum, quibus Helleborum porrigendum, ut purgato
cerebro desinant delirare.

Dolendum sane in Repub. literata, that the noble Art of Physic, should by
the toleration of unworthy Practicioners be disgraced, and the people hurt. We
have laws to prevent this evil, utinam vitam habuissent, I wish they had
their due execution; but I doubt not, but that our most gracious and learned
SOVEREIGN will, at length, cast an eye of reformation and respect upon the
disgraced faculty of Physic, which Kings and Princes in former times, by
their own proper studies greatly graced, and repress such, as under color of
helping, destroy many of his people, absque poenae metu; and so reduce the
noble Art of physic no its ancient splendour and dignity; as it is to be seen
at this day in some well governed Commonweals in that respect.

But, having taxed diverse, I must look to have some scandalous and malicious
imputations cast upon my self, not only from them that are taxed, but also
from a Grand Caitiffe-fordian Momus, who with his Foul Mouth, and Doggish
Teeth, has mightily defamed me, and delacerated the former Impressions of my
Via recta ad vitam longam. As for the former sort I pass not, I have delivered
my mind freely, and I know I speak the truth; and if I should be commended
of One that is full of all impiety, that is a common Rayler, Slanderer, and
Detractor, and under whose lips is the poison of Asps, I should cry out, Quid
mali feci? But I, lightly regarding the obliquity of malevolent and detracting
Spirits, conclude with the honest Reader; to whom I wish these my labors very
profitable.

APRIL 22. 1603. Vale, Et sis mihi, ut ego tibi.
VIAE RECTAE AD VITAM LONGAM PARS SECVND A.
Of Sleep and Watching. SECT. I.
That Sleep may be taken for the health of the body, how many things ought
such as are studious of their health to observe therein?
Four: First, the Time; secondly, the Place; thirdly, the Positure or lying of
the body; and fourthly, the quantity of Sleep. Of all which in their order.
But first I will set down the commodities of moderate and seasonable sleep,
which next to nourishments that sustain the body, is most profitable and
necessary: For it helps the digestion, The commodities of sleep.
recreateth the mind, repaireth the spirits, comfort and refreshes the
whole body, and is for all crudities even a present remedy: for it concocteth
not only the meats, but also the humors; and the reason of all which is,
because in all the time of sleep, the animal faculty is at rest, but the
natural is in the stronger action, by reason of the regresse of the heat into
the inner parts, and therefore it is that the best concoction is made in
sleep. Moreover, by the return of the heat into the inner parts, the vital
faculty is much strengthened, because the heart is then abundantly supplied with
blood for breeding of spirit. The three principal faculties are greatly helped
and refreshed by sleep.
From whence it appears, how sleep makes much for the three principal
faculties of the body: for by it the brain is moistened, the animal spirits
quieted and refreshed, the stomach and liver for concoction, and the heart for
ingendring of spirit, fortified and assisted.

Now for the order of sleep, wherein, as I have said, four things are to be
observed. And first concerning the time for sleeping and waking, we must
follow the course of Nature, that is, to wake in the day, and sleep in the
night: Dies enim vigilie, nox somno dicata est. Why the night is most
convenient for sleep.
For the Sun by his radiant beams illuminating our Hemisphere, opens the
pores of the body, and dilateth the humors and spirits from the Center to the
circumferent parts, which to waking and necessary actions does excite and
naturally provoke. But on the contrary, when the Sun departs from our
Hemisphere all things are coarctated, and the spirits return into the bowels
and inmost parts of the body, which naturally invite to sleep. Wherefore if we
pervert the order of Nature, as to sleep in the day, and wake in the night, we
violently resist the motion of Nature, for sleep draws the natural heat
inward, and the heat of the day draws it outward, so that there is made as it
were, a fight and combat with Nature to the ruin of the body. Yet such as, by
reason of a weak and sickly disposition of body, do take unquiet or little
rest in the night, or are otherwise by extraordinary and necessary occasions
hindered, may well sleep in the morning adprimam partem diei, that is, till
nine of the clock, but to sleep afterward is not so wholesome, especially at
afternoones, as shall be hereafter showed.

But why the night is most convenient for sleep, two other reasons also may
be well assigned. The first is the natural moisture and silence of the night,
which for sleep is very conducible. The other is the sufficiency of time, not
only for the full and absolute concoction of the meats, but also of
superfluous humors, which the night does afford, and that by reason of the
regresse of the heat and spirits into the inward and digestive parts. They
therefore that against nature vitiously use the night for the day, and the day
for the night, tanquam noctuae, are here justly to be reproved: and so are also
students, Untimely was chings most pernicious to Students.
to whom untimely watchings are most pernicious, that with night studies
macerate themselves, exhaust their spirits, and acquire a poor weak
melancholicke state of body For all parts of the body, especially the chiefest
being wearied and weakened with labor in the day, the night approaching, desire
rest; and therefore then if by study and untimely watching they are deprived of
their refreshing, and the spirits retracted from the stomach and principal
parts, weakness must needs follow, and a bad concoction, and the body
consequently repleted with crude, putride, and vaporous humors. Wherefore I
advise Students that must of necessity sometimes watch and study by night, that
they do it not till after their first sleep: for in that space the
concoctions of the stomach and liver are most commonly effected, and the
wearied parts in some measure refreshed.

Wherefore here by the way I advise all men, especially such as are charged
with public business of importance, that they carefully observe to go to
their bed with a quiet and free mind: Three things necessary to quiet sleep.
for that the sleep may be peaceable and comfortable, three things are
necessary; a temperate brain, a sweet vapor, and a quiet mind. If therefore
ye desire peaceable and comfortable rest, live soberly, eschew crudity, and
embrace tranquillity of mind.

But if honest occasions, besides an ill disposition of body, shall occasion
watching in the beginning of the night, let thy supper be slender, and make a
mends by sleeping so much the longer in the morning. But I wish such as tender
their healths, especially Students, not to addict themselves to morning sleep,
but by all means to shun and avoid the occasion thereof, for he that sleeps
in the morning when he ought to arise and stir his body that all parts may
the better expurge their exerements detained in sleep, The great discommodity
of morning sleep.
by sleeping in the morning hinders their expulsion, which occasioning
obstructions and noy some vapors, greatly offend the head, dull the senses,
and is very pernicious to the whole body.

Here some may desire to know whether it be altogether unwholesome to sleep
after dinner. Whereunto I answer, that sleeping at noones is condemned as most
hurtful to the body, because it overmoistneth the brain, The discommodities
of sleeping at noones.
and fills the head full with vaporous superfluities. And the reason why it
fills the head with superfluous moisture, is, because the night has
sufficiently moistened it, as that it needs not to be moistened again by
sleep in the day, but ought rather to be dried by watchings and motions of the
body. And from hence it is that sleeping at noones causes heaviness of the
head, dullness of wit, distillations, defluxions of humors, lethargies. and
other cold diseases of the brain, and palsies, by relaxing the sinews.
Moreover it hurts the eyes, spoileth the color, puffs up the Spleen with
wind, makes the body unlusty, and prepares it for Fevers and Impostumes. Yet
notwithstanding all these hurts which are incident to them that will needs
sleep in the day time, Sleeping at noones not to be prohibited at all times,
nor to all bodies.
sleeping at noones is not always, nor to all bodies to be prohibited, so as
it be admitted with the cautions hereafter assigned. For if the night shall be
unquiet, or without sleep, or the body wearied with extraordinary labor, or
the spirits exhausted, and the strengths dejected by immoderate and excessive
heat, as it oftentimes chances in the hot seasons of the year, it is not
amiss to sleep at noones: for by it the spirits are collected into the inner
parts, the mind freed of cogitation, and the whole body consequently very much
refreshed. Moreover, such as are lean, and of an hot and dry temperature of
body, may well sleep at noones, because it greatly refreshes their bodies by
recalling their soon vanishing spirits. And that it is lawful at any time of
the year for old men to sleep a nap at noones, by reason of their
imbecility, needs no demonstration. Sleeping at noones hurtful to all
corpulent bodies.
But the Phlegmatic, sanguine, and all corpulent bodies must beware how they
sleep at noones, for it is better for such to macerate themselves a little, by
abstaining from sleep, then by it to be turgide and puffed up. Wherefore in
the hot seasons of the year it is good for them after dinner to rest
themselves for the space of an hour in a cold bower free from all care and
cogitation, which rest verily is no less profitable to them, then an hours
sleep for dry, lean, and extenuated bodies.

But that sleeping at noones may be admitted with the greater profit and less
detriment, Five conditions to be observed in sleeping at noones.
five conditions are diligently to be observed therein. The first is that it be
not taken immediately after dinner, but an hour after, or half an hour at
the least, in which space it is good to walk a little, that the meat may the
better descend into the stomach, for then fewer vapors will ascend and offend
the head. The second is, that it be taken not lying, but rather sitting with
the body upright, because the head will be the less offended with vapors
ascending unto it. The third is, that it be not overlong, not above half an
hour, or an hour at the most, that the heat may be only collected from the
outward parts, for so short sleep cannot replete the head with vapors, and in
the mean while the concoction is sufficiently helped, the strengths refreshed,
and any heaviness of the head removed. The fourth is, that it be not taken in
an hot place, but rather enclining to cold, especially in the summer, for to
sleep in an hot place is very hurtful, as shall be by and by showed. The fifth
is, that the awakening be not sudden, but with good moderation, to prevent the
distraction of the spirits. And thus much for the time of sleep.

Concerning the place most convenient for sleep, What place is most convenient
for sleep.
it must be somewhat dark, and defended from the light, especially of the
Moon by night, which increases rheumes, temperate in heat and cold, yea
rather inclining to cold then heat; for to sleep in an hot place is very
dangerous, causing faintness, and oftentimes swounding upon the awaking, by
reason of the contrary motions of sleep, and the ambient heat of the place.
For the spirits and natural heat, which by means of sleep are drawn inward,
are by the heat without contrariwise drawn outward. Wherefore the place for
sleep ought to be very close, and above all not dampish, for that is most
pernicious to the body, and especially to the head. And although the place for
sleep must rather incline to cold then heat, yet our bodies while we sleep
must with clothes, according as the constitution of the air shall require, be
sufficiently covered, lest that while the natural heat is within about
digestion, the outward parts be offended with cold. But the chiefest care must
be of the head, that in sleep it take not cold, which will occasion palsies,
The head and neck in sleep must carefully be defended from cold.
and other affects of the brain and sinews; and yet too much covering weakens
and offends the head. The neck also in sleep must not be neglected, for the
well wrapping thereof is a special remedy against nocturnall rheumes, and
therefore I wish all Students diligently to observe the use thereof.

Concerning the manner of lying while we sleep, What positure of the body is
best in sleep.
the best is on the right side, or on the left, with the hands, legs, and
neck, yea and the whole body a little bowed, especially in the winter, for
increasing the heat of the bowels. But if you desire to know whether it be best
to lie first on the right side, or on the left: I answer, that it is best to
lie first on the left side, that the meats may the better descend to the
bottom of the stomach, which toward the left side is chiefly situated, and
the alimentary juice be the more easily conveied to the Liver: and after the
first sleep to turn to the right side; for this change does greatly ease the
body, and help the concoction and distribution. The head must be somewhat
high, well bolstred up, for the better descension and concoction of the meats.

Having set down the best positure of the body in sleep, Whether sleeping
upright upon the back, or grovelling upon the belly, be altogether unwholesome.
I will examine whether lying upright upon the back, or grovelling upon the
belly in sleep, be altogether unwholesome. As for sleeping upright upon the
back, it is altogether unwholesome, for so many as sleep after that fashion,
have unpleasant and troublesome sleeps, and are for the most part subject to
the passion which we call the Nightmare, the palsy, lethargy, crampe, and
such like diseases of the brain and sinews. And that not without cause, for
lying upon the back causes the superfluous matter of the head to incline and
fall into the hinder part of the brain, where is the original of the motory
sinews, and by that means the spirits being stopped, the aforesaid maladies
are easily engendered. Moreover, lying upon the back, heateth the reins, and
makes them subject to obstruction; and therefore I wish all such as are
subject to the stone, carefully to shun that manner of sleeping.

Concerning sleeping upon the belly, To sleep upon the belly, when, and for
what bodies profitable.
that may be sometimes tolerable, yea very necessary, when wind shall afflict
the belly, or the stomach be overcharged with meat; for by that positure, the
natural heat is retained and increased in the bowels, whereby the Stomach
for concoction is much comforted, and the torments of the belly greatly
mitigated: Wherefore it is very profitable for such as have feeble digestion,
and are troubled with wind, to lie and sleep sometimes grovelling upon the
belly; but it may hurt the sight, by causing the humors to flow unto the eyes:
and therefore such, whose eyes are feeble, or are subject to a defluxion of
humors into them, must very carefully eschew this manner of sleeping.

But it is worth the inquiry, Whether it be expedient to sleep with the
mouth a little open.
whether it be good to sleep with the mouth a little open. Some there are that
altogether deny it; But I approve the contrary, and that for three reasons. The
first is, because the breath passes more freely, and the fuliginous fumes
better breathed forth and discussed: and hence it is, that such as sleep with
their mouth open, have their breath less corrupted; whereas of the contrary,
they that sleep with their mouth close, have commonly an ill breath, and foul
teeth. The second is, because some rheumaticke moisture may in sleep pass
forth at the mouth, which if it should be shut, would fall upon the Lungs, to
their great offense. The third reason is, because through the descent of
rheum, from the head to the nostrils, the free passage of the breath through
them may be let; whereupon, unless we sleep with the mouth somewhat open,
snorings, offensive rowtings, and oftentimes untimely awakings do ensue.
Wherefore I conclude, that it is good to sleep with the mouth somewhat open,
especially, for them that are subject to the rheum. And because the tongue,
pallat, and gums of such as sleep with their mouth open, are commonly after
sleep very dry, and affected also with slimie matter adhering to them; but to
this later, those that sleep with their mouth close are most subject: The
washing and cleansing of the mouth after sleep very necessary.
I advise, that all men in the mornings after their sleep, wash well their
mouth, gums, and teeth with fountain water, rose water, and a little vinegar
mixed together, wherein a few Sage leaves, and Cloves sliced have bin steeped
all the night, by gargling it in their mouths: for it tempereth the dryness of
the mouth, cleanses away the slimie superfluities, and makes the breath
sweet, which in sleep, by reason of fuliginous vapors that arise from the
Stomach, is most commonly corrupted. Where, by the way, it is to be
advertised, that their breath is most tainted in sleep that are subject to
obstructions; wherefore such bodies ought to be purged and purified, according
as the affected parts shall require.

Concerning the quantity or time how long we should sleep, How long we
should sleep.
it cannot be certainly alike defined for all men, wherein, no doubt, a
mediocritie, as in all other things, yet limited with many circumstances, is
best. It must be measured by health and sickness, by age, by emptiness or
fullness of the body, and by the complexion. And, because the concoction, which
is the root of life, is specially furthered by sleep, we must observe to sleep
till the concoctio^s in the stomach and liver are finished. But to know when
the coconctions are complete and ended, it is to be discerned upon the awaking,
by the sensible lightness of all the body, especially of the head, and passage
down of the meat from the stomach, and the certain defire to avoid urine,
and to go to the stool, so neither of them be extraordinarily procured by
error of diet, or otherwise. Contrariwise, The whole time of sleep being
divided into 3 parts, the first is chiefly profitable to the stomach, the
second to the stomach and liver, the third, in qua segregatio fit puri ab
impuro, to the heart and the brain.
heaviness in the body and eyes, and savor of the meat before eaten, signify,
that the sleep is not sufficient. From whence it may well be concluded, that
for such as are healthful, and in their youthful and constant age, seven or
eight hours is a sufficient time for the continuance of sleep, because in
them the concoctions are in that space commonly perfected. But such as are
weak and sickly by nature, require a longer time of rest, as nine, ten, or
eleven hours, for helping the concoction, and restoring the strengths.

The like is to be said of old men, Somnus senibus vitaest, vigilia ruina.
for whom sleep verily is so profitable, that, because it chiefly helps the
concoction, whereupon plenty of nourishable moisture does follow, nothing, next
to meats of good juice, is so available for repayring their decayed state of
Body. Children also, that have not attained to the age of eighteen years,
require longer sleep then youth and middle age, that immoderate fluxion of
vaporous moisture by the pores, whereunto they are by reason of their lax and
tender skin, most subject, may be hindered, and their growth consequently
bettered and increased.

But withal, there must always in every age be special respect had of the
complexion; Why do choleric and melancholicke bodies require longer sleep
then the phlegmatic or sanguine?
for Choleric and Melancholicke Bodies need longer sleep then the
Phlegmatic or Sanguine, that the acrimonie of Choler may be tempered, and
the concoction helped: For, to dry and lean bodies such as are the Choleric
and Melancholicke, nothing is more wholesome then quiet and sound sleep,
because by it, the parts are generally moistened and refreshed, both in that it
helps the concoction, as also, because it lets the difflation and wasting
of the humors. Wholsome counsel for colericke and melancholicke bodies.
And, because that to lean Choleric and Melancholicke Bodies, nothing is
more pernicious then too much watchfulness, whereunto, by reason of their dry
disposition of body, they are very subject; I advise, that they usually
observe, especially in the hot seasons of the year, to drink at their going
to bed, a good draught of a soporiferous Almond milk, made with the decoction
of excorticated Barley well mundified and abluted, Lettuce, the flowers of
Borage and Violets, or in stead of them, the freshest leaves, and let it also
have a little choice Rose water, and be dulcorated or sweetened with the finest
sugar: for this drink excellently moisteneth and tempereth the brain,
procures sleep, and refreshes the whole body. The emulsion of the seeds of
white Poppie, may also very profitable to be added thereunto.

But, of the contrary, to the Phlegmatic and such as are drowsy through the
excess of moisture, Little sleep best for phlegmatic and gross bodies.
watchings are to be commended and enjoined, quia desiccant and attenuant,
lest that much sleep, or longer then is convenient only for concoction,
should increase their moist and cold distemperature, and make it altogether
sickly.

As for the Sanguine, their sleep must be very moderate, not above seven
hours at the most; Why must the sanguine be very wary of immoderate sleep?
for they are very apt to be gross, which much sleep, or more then is
fitting for their temperature, will soon occasion. Wherefore it is better for
them to be sparing in sleep, and to be somewhat macerated with watchings,
then to be exceedingly puffed up therewith. Do we not find by daily
experience, that those which are more indulgent of their bellies and sleep
then is meet, become so corpulent, gross and ill favored, that their breast
and chinne even meet together: wherefore it is no marvel that they become
unhealthfull and unlustie in their bodies, stupid and dull in their wits. The
discommodityes of immoderate sleep and watchings.
To conclude this Section, as Sleep, unless it be moderate, and in fit time
admitted, weakens the natural heat, burdens the head with vapors, detaines the
excrements longer then is meet; in a word, makes men sluggish, lumpish and
unhealthfull, heavy headed, of no wit or memory. So watching, except it be
with mediocrity, dries up and consumes the body, dimineth the sight, wastes
the Spirits, and destroys all the powers and faculties both of body and
mind. Let therefore both the sleep and watching be seasonable and moderate;
without which grateful and amiable vicissitude, our condition were miserable,
and life not to be preserved.

Whether drying and warming of the bed, Pelueignito, a little before the
entering thereinto, be expedient and necessary? And what is to be done after
the sleep, for the health of the body, before we betake our selves to our
ordinary and necessary business?
SOme Captious, Scoffing, and Caitiffe-sordian-like Momus, will perhaps suppose
these two Quaeres to be idle and supersluous; but I, lightly regarding His
obliquity, do, for the good of them to whom I write this Treatise, follow my
method, and add them as an Appendix to this Section. To the former therefore I
answer, that for Students, for the Aged, and all such as are weak by nature,
and that lead a tender and delicate course of life, the custom of warming the
bed, is for two reasons very expedient and necessary in the cold and moist
seasons of the year. The first is, that the Body, upon putting off the
garments, may not on a sudden be affected with the external cold. The second
is, because the interior heat is comforted by the external, the concoction
helped, and all superfluous moisture the better consumed. But I approve not
this custom to such as are healthful, and strong, because it will debilitate
their Bodies, and make them over nice and effeminate. It remains therefore,
that it is only convenient for Students, for the Aged, and all such as are
weak and tender by nature.

To the second I answer, that after you have taken sufficient and competent
rest, it is good, before you arise out of your Bed, that you gently rub and
stroke downward your breasts and sides; but your neck, shoulders, back,
arms, hand-wrists, pinbones, Frications.
thighs and legs more strongly with your own hand, or with an hot linen
cloth, doubled and heated for the purpose, or cause them to be rubbed, because
it quickens the Blood, and strengthens the parts, by exciting the natural
heat. When you are risen, and before also, extend and stretch out your arms,
legs, and whole body, that the animal spirits may be dilated to the
exterior parts; and the limbs by that means corroborated: then walk a
little up and down, that the superfluities which shall be in the stomach and
other parts, may the more speedily descend and be avoided; and be very
diligent to excrete the Urine, and depose the excrements of the Belly; and let
not with less diligence the superfluities of the nose by exsufflation, and of
the breast by expectoration be purged forth: for nothing is more hurtful to
the Body then the retention of the excrements. That done, wash and plunge your
eyes in cold water, for that not only cleanses away the filth, but also
clears and preserves the sight. And let the mouth be cleansed with cold
water, and a little vinegar added thereto, and the gummes and teeth rubbed with
a Sage leaf or two dipped therein, or washed and cleansed with the infusion
aforeshewed; and after rub the teeth hard with a course dry cloth: for this
purifieth the breath, and preserves the teeth from corruption. Then let your
head be well combed, that the pores may be opened, to avoid such vapors as
yet by sleep are not consumed. And in the cold and moist seasons of the year,
let the head also be well rubbed with a course linen cloth, somewhat heated:
for thereby the natural heat is excited, the pores opened, vaporous and
rheumaticke superfluities discussed and difflated, Rubbings of the head and
neck mornings with an hot cloth, very effectual against rheums and cold
infirmities of the sinews.
and consequently, the brain and animal spirits exceedingly comforted. Of
this therefore, as also of rubbing the neck in like manner, I wish Students,
and all such as are subject to rheumes, palsies, and such like affects of the
sinews, to have a special care.

All which being done for the body, let not your better part pass neglected,
but before you betake your self to your study, or such business as your place
shall require, consecrate half an hour at the least unto Almighty GOD, by
pouring forth your thankful soul unto him, for his gracious protecting you
from infinite dangers and calamities that might have bin befallen you until
this present time, with a true confession of your sins, with an hearty and
unfeigned repentance for them, and with a sincere and settled purpose and
determination for the amendment of your life in that poor and uncertain
pittance of time that shall remain; wherein, besides your never enough
thankfulness for blessings received, let the remembrance of your sins be
bitter unto you; and cast not away your Soul by fashioning your self after
this Pharisaicall and most sinful time; but, be holy, upright, incorrupt,
merciful, peaceable; to shut up all in a word, labor by all means to have
always a clear conscience toward God and toward man, and never forget that
all your actions how secret soever, or pharasaically cloaked, shall in that
great and fearful day of accounts be revealed. Wherefore in all your actions
remember your end, and ever bless God, and begin the day with a morning
sacrifice to him, and then he will bless the day unto you, and direct all your
actions to the glory of his most sacred name, the good of your country, and
preservation of your own souls and bodies.

O Exercise and Rest. SECT. 2.
Why ought Students, and all such as are studious of health, and that lead a
generous course of life, to have special regard of exercise, and of avoiding
immoderate rest? And as touching exercise, that it may be rightly used, how
many things ought to be observed therein?
EXercise is so necessary to the preservation of health in Students, and all
such as live a restfull and generous life, as that without it they cannot be
long healthful and without sickness: The commodities of exercise, and the
discommodities of immoderate rest.
for by exercise and moderate motions, the natural heat is increased, the
spirits excited and dilated, the concoction and distribution helped, the
humors attenuated, the expulsion of all excrements furthered, the whole body
strengthened, and youth prolonged. Of the contrary, by immoderate and sluggish
rest, the natural heat is extinguished, the concoction of the meats, and
distribution to the parts hindered, the humors corrupted, the excrements
retained, the whole body dulled and effeminated, infinite diseases occasioned,
and old age hastened, and all by reason of crudities, and great store of noisome
humors thereby engendered; and therefore idleness and immoderate rest is not
unworthily ranked among the causes of cold diseases. And this is found true by
daily experience in agresticke men, and all such as lead a laborious course of
life, who for the more part live longer, and in better health and strength,
then they that live in bodily rest, or enjoy a generous state of living.
Wherefore it is very behoveable for Students and all such as lead not a
laborious course of life, to support by exercise and voluntary motions their
health, and not by being too indulgent of their ease and rest, infringe their
strengths, and subvert their state of body.

But moderate rest, and in convenient time observed, has also its commodities:
for when the body is tired through over much labor, and strength fails, and
natural moisture decays, then rest for a time recovereth strength, reviveth
the spirits, and refreshes the limbs. So the mind wearied with cares and
studies has need of remission and relaxation, without which grateful
vicissitude, the vigor neither of mind nor body can long be preserved,
according to that of the Poet: Quod caret alterna requie, durabile non est.

Now that exercise may be rightly used for the health of the body, Three things
to be observed in exercise.
three things are to be observed therein: The Place, the Time, and the
Measure. The place where exercise is to be used does chiefly concern the air,
which must be clear and pure, not vaporous or putride, which as in habitation,
so also in exercise is greatly to be regarded: for the pores and passages of
the body being open by exercise, the ambient air cannot but enter in, and be
also, by reason of the violence of breathing, vehemently drawn to the heart,
which if it shall be gross, vaporours, or impure, cannot but very greatly
offend the head, breed rheumes, annoy the heart, and corrupt the whole body:
wherefore it is not good to exercise but in a good and wholesome air.

Now for the time fit for exercise, Hip. teaches us plainly in three words,
Labores cibum praecedant, The fittest time for exercise,
Let exercise be used before meat. The time then most convenient for exercise,
must needs be when both the first and second digestion is complete, and that
the time approaches to eat again. But from the exercise to the eating there
must always intercede a little time of rest, as half an hour or thereabout,
especially it the exercise be any thing violent, that the spirits and limbs
may be refreshed, and the humors in the body quieted and settled. Before
exercise this caution must always very carefully be observed, A caution
always carefully to be observed before exercise.
that the excrements of the belly and bladder be expulsed, that none of them by
the violence of heat kindled by exercise, be drawn into the habit of the
body, whereby the blood may be corrupted, and very perilous obstructions
occasioned. Wherefore it is not good to exercise before the meat preassumed be
well concocted, and the excrements of the belly and bladder carefully deposed.
I will not here restrain any to certain hours of the day for exercise, but
as their occasions shall give leave, so as it be done according to these three
rules, that is, After the excrements are avoided, In a wholesome air, and
before meat. Whereunto I will add a fourth, And, not in the fervent heat of
the day, Ne duplici calore afficiatur corpus, that the body be not at once
affected with the outward heat of the air, and the inward heat of the body
raised by exercise: wherefore in exercise let the fitness of time be always
observed. The discommodities of untimely exercise.
For untimely exercise does greatly hurt the body, as to exercise immediately
after meal, or before the meat be concocted, for thereby the natural heat is
drawn from the inward parts to the outward, the concoction consequently
marred, and the whole body repleted with crude and noisome superfluities. Hence
proceed obstructions, impostumes, scabs, and oftentimes ulcers, as is to be
seen in diverse that unadvisedly labor or exercise immediately after meat, or
before it be sufficiently concocted. VValking after meat very profitable.
Yet to rise up after meat, to stand and to walk softly is very good, for by
this means the meats do sooner descend to the bottom of the stomach, and
the natural heat is also somewhat stirred up, whereupon does follow the
speedier and better concoction. Wherefore I cannot but very greatly commend
walking after dinner in the Summer season in a cold arbor, and after supper in
the temperate and hot seasons of the year, in open plain fields or in sweet
meadows nigh to pleasant rivers: for the digestion is not only helped
thereby, but the spirits are also delighted, the whole body refreshed, and the
fumes arising from the stomach discussed. And if your state of body be such as
that you cannot walk after meal, yet stand at least, according to the old
verse; Post pastum stabis, passu mollive meabis.

To conclude this point, I do here therefore counsel all students, and such
as live generously, to labor neither in body nor mind immediately after meat
(for as of the body, so also of the mind ought the exercises to be seasonable,
for untimely studies do soon weaken the strengths both of body and mind) but
to spend an hour in gentle walkings, and pleasant discourse. And thus much
concerning the time convenient for exercise.

Now I come to the measure of exercise, The measure of exercise, 1. how long we
should exercise.
a mean wherein, as in all other things, is best, which by two notes may
chiefly be discerned: The first is by the bursting forth of sweat, and hot
vapors; the other, by the weariness of the limbs: for when the skin shall
be wet with swear, it shall be good to desist from exercise, lest by proceeding
therein, The discommoditie of immoderate exercise.
not only the spirits and good humors be exhausted, but also the fat annexed
to Liver, Reins, and Intestines, whereby the natural heat of those parts is
preserved, be melted, or at least caused to putrify; by means whereof, if
sudden death ensue not, as oftentimes it does, the concoction is weakened, and
the body become sickly, withered, and imparient of cold. And when the agilitie
of the limbs shall begin to fail, it shall be good to desist, lest
overmuch weariness and feebleness should ensue. Here therefore it is to be
advertised, how great and laborious exercises do evilly dispose the body, and
subvert the state thereof, and that the best and most profitable exercises, for
them that are sound and healthful, are walking, bowling, Et parvae pilae
ludus, the racket, and such like easy exercises. For it is certain, that for
such as are health full it is sufficient by exercise to increase the natural
heat, to excite the spirits, and expel the excrements, which the aforesaid
exercises do well effect, without any great trouble or lassitude of the body.
Wherefore the true measure of exercise is, not to be overwearied therewith, nor
too suddenly to sweat and raise the spirits. But a measure in exercise cannot
rightly be limited without respect had to the constitution and state of body,
because the phlegmatic, Phlegmatic and gross bodies need oftener and
stronger exercise then other.
and all such as are of a full state of body, require more often and more
laborious exercise then others, for exciting the natural heat, discussing the
superfluous moisture, and abating the grossness of the body: for by how much
fatter and grosser the body is; by so much the natural heat is diminished.
Wherefore for exciting the natural heat, and dissolving the superfluous
moisture of the body, which is the cause of grossness, I advise the
plegmaticke, and all such as are apt to be gross, to accustom themselves in
the mornings to speedy walkings, and that up against hills or other steep
places, and at other times convenient, to strong and laborious exercises; yet
with this caution therein, that they do not so much exceed the mean, as to
cause overmuch weariness and weakness to the body.

Of the contrary to the choleric, To lean and choleric bodies easy and
light exercise is convenient.
and all such as are of a dry and lean state of body, easy and light
exercise is convenient, and that also no longer to be continued, but till the
color and flesh is somewhat ruddy, and the sweat begins to break forth. For
if they should proceed further, or use more quick and vehement motions, the
spirits would be soon exhausted, the body distempered and brought into an
Atrophy or Consumption. They therefore that are of a very hot temperature, and
of a lean and dry state of body, ought not at any hand to use any strong
motions or exercise of body, but walking, bowling, and such like easy motions
are abundantly sufficient for them.

As touching exercise also, The time of the year ought to be respected in the
exercise.
the time of the year ought not altogether to be neglected, for in the summer,
by reason of the ambient heat of the air, lighter exercises are more
convenient, then at other times. In the Spring the exercise ought to be
somewhat stronger, that the superfluities, which by reason of the winter are
congested in the body, may be resolved. But in this season let such as are of
an hot temperature of body beware lest by overmuch motion they over-heat and
distemper it. But in the Autumn, and especially in the winter, strong and
laborious motion of the body is most convenient, because it dissolveth and
dissipateth gross humors, helps the breathing, by removing the obstructions
of the breast, occasioned by the moisture of the season, and is therefore
specially necessary and profitable for gross and phlegmatic bodies.

I will conclude this Section by adding one caution to be observed after
exercise, and which is of very great moment; A eaution to be observed after
exercise.
that is, that the body take not cold after the exercise, because it greatly
weakneth the natural heat, the brain, and the sinews, and induces
oftentimes swoundings by a sudden obstruction of the pores, and barring in of
vaporous moisture that should by them breathe forth. And thus much concerning
the true use and utility of exercise.

Now for those that cannot exercise their bodies at convenient times, by reason
of great weakness, frication or rubbing of the body (Quae inter exercitationi
et omni modam quietem media est.) may well be used in stead of exercise:
Frication, the necessity and utility thereof.
for it exciteth the natural heat of the parts, opens the obstructions of
the skin and flesh, draws the humors from the superior parts to the
inferior, from the inward to the outward, from the noble to the ignoble,
whereby great comfort and utility is brought to weak and sickly bodies.
Moreover it procures sleep; but the belly and the stomach must not be
perfricated, because it will trouble the concoction, offend the head, and
occasion the distribution of crudities into the body. The application of a
double cloth upon those parts, well heated for the purpose, during all the
time of frication is very necessary for the conservation of the heat of those
parts, and discussing of wind. Neither must the reins of the back be rubbed,
unless there be a sensible feeling of cold and wind in them, and then they
must be gently stroked, lest overheating them, obstruction and nephriticke
passions be occasioned. The manner of using fricacies must be with the hand,
or a course linen cloth; first, softly and easily, afterward faster and
harder, as the tenderness of the skine shall permit, until the flesh shall as
it were swell, and be somewhat ruddie: then desist, for a mediocrity even in
frication must be observed. As for the time, the morning and evening are best
for fricacies: and what parts are fittest for frication, I have showed toward
the end of the precedent Section. To conclude, fricacies are very needful and
profitable for the aged, the impotent, and such as are barred of exercise by
reason of daily and weighty business.

Of Excretions. SECT. 3.
Why does the health of the body much consist in the due and daily avoiding of
the general excrements?
THE general excrements of the body are the stool, the urine, and the sweat;
and because they are altogether unprofitable, being excrements, not only in
quantity, but also in quality, they ought every day, to the case and health of
the body, to be avoided; for, being retained longer then is fitting, they
become very troublesome and pernicious to the body. Wherefore, such as are
studious of their health, must be very careful daily and opportunely to
avoid the excrements of the belly and bladder. And if your belly shall be
naturally soluble, Health does greatly consist in a soluble belly.
account that in regard of your health, for a great felicity. For they that
have their belly naturally loose and open, so it be not immoderate, and more
then their state of body, in regard of the grosenesse or tenuity thereof, shall
require, are not easily affected with sickness: whereas, of the contrary, they
that have the same bound up, and have seldom the benefit of nature that way,
have for the most part, often conflicts with sickness, I say for the most
part, in regard of exceeding hot choleric bodies, who, in regard of their
strong natural heat, that concocteth with few superfluities, have commonly
costive bodies, and yet enjoy perfect and absolute health. Wherefore I advise
all such as are studious of their health, to have special care that their
belly expurge it self daily, twice or once at the least.

And how beneficial it is for the health, to procure sweat by exercise, I have
showed in the former Section; and therefore I shall not here need much to
insist therein. Nature verily has to no other purpose made the skin full of
pores, but that there should be free passage through it for sweat and
insensible vaporations. I shall not here need to show, that it is not
convenient for very hot and dry bodies to provoke sweat: or of the contrary,
for cold, moist, and Phlegmatic bodies very needful; nor yet, in procuring
of sweat, that there must be special care had, as in all other kinds of
evacuations, that it be not immoderate, and deject the strengths, for all this
is at large showed in the former Section.

Besides these general excrements, there are also particular, as those of the
brain, and breast, which being retained, and not liberally excreted, do
greatly annoy and affect those parts. Wherefore the excrements of the brain
must daily be avoided through the mouth by spetting, and excreation, through
the nose by exsufflation, and also sometimes by sternutation, especially in the
mornings; and those of the breast by coughing expectorated. And thus much for
excretions.

Of Perturbations, or Passions of the mind. SECT. 4.
Seeing that the Passions of the mind are inevitable, and secundum naturam
nobis succrescant, why are they reputed as morbificall causes, and hurtful to
the Body?
I Will nothere stand to discourse of the objects of Perturbations, nor how the
sensitive faculty is the fountain of them; nor how they are the natural
motions of the heart, and that by means of the spirits, which are the primary
instruments of the soul, as things altogether impertinent for this place; but
how they are to be reputed as morbificall causes, and hurtful to the body.

Animi passiones dum intra modum consistunt, and neque animam a consuetis, and
naturali moderatione and virtute dimovent, non animi perturbationes, sed actus
jure dicentur: and in this respect they are said to be inevitable, and secundam
naturam nobis succrescere: to be natural, and utiliter a natura dari. These
Passions, Cicero: Leves perturbationes optime dixit. Verum cum modum
excesserunt, and hominis decentem harmoniam, and elegantiam, ac modum naturali
debitum mutaverint, tunc quidem animi passiones seu perturbationes jure optimo
dicendae sunt, and vitandae, ut corpori and animae, noxiae. The Passions
therefore of the mind are not to be reputed hurtful, or numbered among the
causes of sickness, but when they shall exceed and be imoderate, and so
become perturbations indeed: for then they alter the body, weaken and overthrow
the faculties thereof. I will instance in some: Immoderate joy.
Immoderate joy relaxeth the heart, and causes such an effusion of the spirit,
as that oftentimes ensue fickness, and great debility of the body, sowndings;
and as we read of some pusillanimicke or faint hearted persons, Sadness and
fear.
death it self. Sadness and Fear, of the contrary, do streiten the heart,
weaken the spirits, and natural heat, and cause them to be contracted to the
heart, by means whereof, the digestion of the meats, and distribution is
hindered, and the remote parts left destitute of heat: and from hence
proceeds that vacillation or trembling of the limbs in them that are
affected with fear: Moreover, sadness and fear, in continuance, dry the body,
resolve the strengths, press the heart, and induce melancholicke sicknesses,
by exciccating the blood and spirits near the heart.

Here some may demand, that if trembling of the limbs proceed from the defect
of heat in the parts, and if fear draw the heat and spirits inward,
especially to the heart, why the heart does tremble in the^ that are affected
with fear? Whereunto it may be answered, that although fear force the heat
and spirits inward, yet it compels them not to the heart strong and lively, but
weakened and abated: Nam in metuentibus crassescunt spiritus and sanguis,
fiuntque imbecilliores frigore, and that by reason of the imagination, which is
earnestly bent and troubled in preventing and withstanding the imminent
mischief and peril. And from hence it is that the heart is not only
streitned, and does tremble in fear, but also that many swound, die, and are
exanimated with sudden fear, the heat and spirits being extinguished by
overmuch blood conglobated in the heart. Dum enim anima timore concutitur, ut
vitae consulat, sanguinem and spiritus custodiae gratia repent ad interiora
and ad cor praecipue, quod corporis quasi princeps est, invocat and contrahit.

Anger stirs up the natural heat, Anger.
breeds choler, and inflameth the blood and spirits. And here it is to be
observed, that though Anger be reputed a morbificall cause, and hurtful to the
body; yet not always and alike to all bodies: for to phlegmatic bodies it
is sometimes very necessary to the preservation of their health, because the
natural heat, being therewith stirred up and increased, does the better
concoct, discuss, and consume their crude and moist superfluities. The like
may be also said of other perturbations; whence it is manifest, Animi
passiones posse mutare corpus, and affectus ejusdem contrarietate sanare, and
ob id utiliter a natura dari. But Anger to all other, especially to hot and dry
bodies, is very hurtful, because it vehemently heateth the Body, dries it,
and resolves the strengths.

Wherefore, seeing that the affections and perturbations of the mind are of
such force for the overthrowing of the health and welfare of the Body, I
advise all such, Salubre consilium.
as are respective of their health, to bridle all irrational motions of the
mind by the reason and understanding, and labor by all means to observe a
mediocritie in their passion, wherein consists the tranquillity both of mind
and body, which of this life is the chiefest happiness. To conclude this
Section, and to add a period to this work; among all the affections of the
mind, beware chiefly of sadness, for it dries the bones; and embrace
moderate joy, for both body and mind are bettered thereby: and that your joy may
be joy indeed, strive, without halting, to enjoy with all the joy of a good
conscience, by living soberly, uprightly, and godly in this present world: Non
enim habemus hic manentem civitatem: For we have here no continuing place of
abode, but we seek one to come, whose maker and builder is GOD; who, as Peter
says: 1 Cap. 2.9.
Has called us out of darkness into his marvelous light, and destinated us
to eternity.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A.
ANger, the effects thereof. Page. 29.
B.
Belly, naturally soluble, greatly availeable to health. Page. 26.
E.
Exercise, why must Students have a special regard thereof. Page. 17. The
commodities of exercise. Page. 17. Three things to be observed in exercise.
Page. 19. The fittest time for exercise. Page. 19. A caution to be observed
before exercise, Page. 19. The discommodities of untimely exercise. Page. 20.
The measure of exercise: 1, how long we should exercise. Page. 21. The
discommodities of immoderate exercise. Page. 21. Phlegmatic and gross bodies
need oftener and stronger exercise then other. Page. 22. To lean and choleric
bodies easy and light exercise is convenient. Page. 23. The time of the year
ought to be repected in exercise. Page. 23. A caution to be observed after
exercise. Page. 24. Excrements, why does the health of the body much consist in
the due and daily avoiding of them. Page. 2^.
F.
Fear, the effects thereof. Page. 28. Frication, the necessity and utility
thereof. Page. 24.
I.
Joy, if immoderate, the effects thereof. Page. 28. Joy, that it may be joy
indeed. Page. 30.
P.
Passions, or perturbations of the mind, seeing they are inevitable, and
secundum naturam nobis succrescant, why are they reputed as morbificall causes
and hurtful to the body. Page. 27. Mediocrity in the Passion best. Page. 30.
S.
Sadness, the effects thereof 28, most hurtful of all affections. Page. ^0.
Sleep, that it may be taken for the health of the body, how many things ought
such as are studious of their health to observe therein. Page. 2. Sleep, the
commodities thereof. Page. 1. The three principal faculties of the body are
greatly helped and refreshed by sleep. Page. 2. The night, why most convenient
for sleep. ibidem. Three things necessary to quiet sleep. Page. 4. The great
discommodity of morning sleep. Page. 4. Sleeping at noones the discommodities
thereof. Page. 5 Sleeping at noones not to be prohibited at all times, nor to
all bodies. Page. 5 Sleeping at noones, hurtful to all corpulent bodies. Page.
6. Five conditions to be observed in sleeping at noones. Page. 6. What? place
most convenient for sleep. Page. 7 The head and neck in sleep must carefully
be defended from cold. Page. 7. What positure of the body is best in sleep.
Page. 8 Whether sleeping upright upon the back or grovelling upon the belly,
be altogether unwholesome. Page. 8. To sleep upon the belly, when and for what
bodies profitable. Page. 9. Whether it be expedient to sleep with the mouth a
little open. Page. 9 How long we should sleep. Page. 10. Why do choleric
and melancholicke bodies require longer sleep then the phlegmatic. Page. 12
Little sleep best for phlegmatic and gross bodies. Page. 13. Why must the
sanguine be very wary of immoderate sleep. Page. 13. The discommodities of
immoderate sleep. Page. 13. What is to be done upon the sleep for the health
of the body. Page. 14.
R
Rubbings of the head and neck mornings very effectual against theumes, and
cold infirmities of the sinews. Page. 16.
W.
Watchings, if immoderate, the hurts thereof. Page. 13. Untimely watchings most
pernicious to students. Page. 3.
FINIS.

