THE PLOT OF THE PLAY, CALLED ENGLANDS JOY.
To be Played at the Swan this 6. of November. 1602.
FIRST, there is induct by show and in Action, the civil wars of England
from Edward the third, to the end of Queen Mary's reign, with the overthrow
of Usurpation.

2 Secondly then the entrance of Englands Joy by the Coronation of our
Sovereign Lady Elizabeth; her Throne attended with peace, Plenty, and civil
Policy: A sacred Prelate standing at her right hand, betokening the Serenity
of the Gospel: At her left hand Justice: And at her feet War, with a
Scarlet Roabe of peace upon his Armor: A wreath of Bays about his temples,
and a branch of Palm in his hand.

3 Thirdly is dragd in three Furies, presenting Dissension, Famine, and
Bloodshed, which are thrown down into hell.

4 Fourthly is expressed under the person of a Tyrant, the envy of Spain, who to
show his cruelty causes his Soldiers dragge in a beautiful Lady, whom they
mangle and wound, tearing her garments and Jewels from off her: And so leave
her bloody, with her hair about her shoulders, lying upon the ground. To her
come certain Gentlemen, who seeing her pitious dispoylment, turn to the
Throne of England, from whence one descends, takes up the Lady, wipeth her
eyes, binds up her wounds, gives her treasure, and brings forth a band of
Soldiers, who attend her forth: This Lady presents Belgia.

5 Fifthly, the Tytant more enraged, takes counsel, sends forth letters,
privy Spies, and secret underminers, taking their oaths, and giving them
bags of treasure. These signify Lopus, and certain Jesuits, who afterward,
when the Tyrant looks for an answer from them, are showed to him in a glass
with halters about their necks, which makes him mad with fury.

6 Sixthly, the Tyrant seeing all secret means to fail him, intends open
violence and invasion by the hand of War, whereupon is set forth the battle
at Sea in 88. with Englands victory.

7 Seventhly, he complotteth with the Irish rebels, wherein is laid open the
base ingratitude of Tyrone, the landing there of Don John de Aguila, and their
dissipation by the wisdom and valor of the Lord Mountioy.

8 Eighthly, a great triumph is made with fighting of twelve Gentlemen at
Barriers, and sundry rewards sent from the Throne of England, to all sorts of
well deseruers.

9 Lastly, the Nine Worthyes, with several Coronets, present themselves before
the Throne, which are put back by certain in the habit of Angels, who set
upon the Ladies head, which represents her Majesty, an Imperial Crown,
garnished with the Sun, Moon and Stars; And so with Music both with
voice and Instruments she is taken up into Heaven, when presently appears, a
Throne of blessed Souls, and beneath under the Stage set forth with strange
fireworkes, diverse black and damned Souls, wonderfully discribed in their
several torments.


