ornamental border

THE TRVE TESTIMONY OF A FAITHFVLL SVBIECT: Containing several exhortations
to all estates, to continue them in their due obedience: together with the
reward of a faithful subject to his Prince.

Also a thanksgiving to God for the happy delivery of the house of Parliament
from the late horrible treason.

Imprinted at London.

portrait of James I IACOBVS REX.
Blessed be they that bless you.
And cursed be they that curse you.


TO THE KINGS most excellent Majesty, my most gracious Sovereign Lord.
MOst renowned Sovereign, as before your Majesty's coming to this Crown, I
did in your Realm of Scotland make apparent my unfeigned love to your
Highness: so do I now on bended knees most humbly beseech your royal Majesty
to accept this little handful of my hearts most faithful affection; wherein
my feeling of Gods mercies, my knowledge of your gracious goodness, and my
care of my countries well-doing, has made me take such pains. As if it may be
pleasing in your sight, shall breed no little glory to my soul: who kneeling
at your royal feet, do beseech the God of all glory to endue your Highness
with his infinite blessings, and long to preserve your royal Majesty in all
joyful health, and prosperous life. Amen.

Your Majesty's most faithful and loyal subject in the humility of all
loyalty, R. V.

What a faithful subject is, together with his reward.
A Good subject next to the diadem that adornes a Princes head, is the chiefest
ornament that decores his dignity. He is as the precious Baulme that annoints
his brows, and is nearer to his heart then his Scepter in his right hand: as
sweet in his nostrels as the groves of Gilead, and more precious in his sight
then Salomons Iuory throne covered with purest gold.

His heart is clothed with peace, like mount Oliuet: and his eyes as harmless
as the sight of a Dove.

His tongue sounds like the harp of David: and his lips deliver the happiness
of loyalty.

His ears are the portals that receive understanding: and all perfection from
thence is conducted to the heart.

His hands are ready to fight the battles of the Lord: and his feet (shunning
the steps of blood) are bent always to walk in the paths of innocence.

Thus excellent in the sight of his Prince shines a faithful subject, more
gorgeous then the Ephod of Aron, and more sumptuous then Solomon in all his
royalty.

Whosoever is thus to his Prince and country, the Lord will prosper him, and he
shall be blessed in an everlasting generation.

And for one of these benefits he receives on earth, he shall have a million in
heaven.

For one of these perfections he partakes of in this world, numbers above
number shall attend him in the world to come.

And his Prince shall thus pray for him, and bless him as Solomon did his
subjects.

And the King turned his face, and blessed all the congregation of Israel, and
said, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who spoke with his mouth to David my
father, and has with his hand fulfilled it.

And though my self may say with Esaias, I am as a worm and no man, yet (I
speak it in despite of vainglory) I would with all my heart, as an Isack in
the hands of Abraham, serve as a sacrifice to do my Prince and country good.

For surely he cannot be the true servant of God, that is not a faithful
subject to his Prince. Neither would I judge any felicity in this world
answerable to that, if once my soul might be employed to please my Prince, and
benefit my country.

For all the offices of humanity depend only upon those principal
performances.

For I know by that means there comes a blessing from a far, a reward full of
joy, which none else are worthy to obtain: which reward I heartily pray the
great Rewarder of all to send to the true loyal and faithful subject. And so
with one voice, proceeding from one unity of heart, let us all say faithfully,
God save the King.

An Exhortation to continue all subjects in their due obedience.
To the reverend Lord Bishops, and the Clergy.
FOrasmuch as your Ecclesiastical office is given you from God, as the next
principal members under the head, to govern the commonwealth of this
mystical body: and that there is required at your hands an extraordinary
duty touching the function of the soul, let me entreat you to be as vigilant
as the five wise virgins, having oil always in your lamps, against the
bridegroom comes forth of his chamber. Your office is the soul of the
laity, the heart of government, and the very Epitomie of all obedience. From you
(as the Moon borrows her light of the Sun) all inferior Ministers take
their order of perfection. Let then your doctrine be pure and steadfast, like
Moses bush, that always burned, but never consumed. Your preaching in season
and out of season: and your conversation as spotless as the sacrifice of
Turtles. You best know what plenty of Manna has rained in Israel, and how many
omers full every man ought to gather. Be not any of you the first that gather
more then is commanded, and in mistrust of Gods benefits infect the whole land
with the vice of Avarice: you ought rather to be like Pellicans in the
wilderness, who in tender love pick the blood from their breasts to feed
their young ones.

You see with your visible eyes how wonderfully Almighty God has now
preserved the Kings Majesty, and your selves, from the snare of your manifold
enemies: and in you principally lies the sacrifice of thanksgiving. It is you
that ought to dance before the Tabernacle, and to go with the people to the Ark
of Covenant: that your righteousness may bud like Aarons rod.

It is you that ought to fly forth from this tossed Arc, and like the Dove
bring the olive branch of peace in your mouths, and tell the people, that if
they return, God will be their God, and send a truce to their distressed
souls by you his Ambassadors.

Fly not to Tarshish when you are sent to Niniue, least devouring destruction
attend you; nor with the man of God, go not out of the way, least a Lion tear
you in pieces: but still be conversant with the Lord, that your faces may shine
with Moses when he came from the mount, and bring the image of Gods glory to
the people in your foreheads.

You must bear with Aaron the breast plate of judgment upon your hearts. There
must be graven upon your forefronts holiness to the Lord: and your sounds must
be heard when you go into the holy places before him.

So shall ye stand like mount Sinai, never to be removed: and your golden
Candlestickes shine in the Temples of the Lord.

Remember the charge your master Christ gave to his servant Peter, binding him
three times by his fervent love and the dear affection he bare to his master,
to feed his sheep.

To be with Paul the faithful Ambassadors of Jesus Christ, as though God did
beseech you through us: we pray you in Christ's stead that ye be reconciled unto
God: with Paul likewise to be an example of life and doctrine, as in these
words, And follow hard toward the mark, for the prize of the high calling of
God in Christ Jesus.

Let us therefore as many as be perfect be thus minded: if ye be otherwise,
God shall reveal even the same unto you.

Ye are (most Reverend) the salt of the earth; which wanting savor, is to be
trodden under foot.

Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on a hill cannot be hid:
let your lights therefore so shine, that those which see your good works may
glorify your Father which is in heaven.

Thus, unworthy to counsel so grave aduisements, as if the body should
instruct the soul, I only like a traveler in this pilgrimage, seeing some go
out of their way, tell them there is a better, a more perfect, and a
straighter. So referring you to your masters reward, who hates a hidden talent,
I beseech that God who guided Israel by day in a pillar of cloud, and by night
in a pillar of fire, to direct your earthly bodies and spiritual souls to his
service.

To the true Nobility of this Realm.
TO ye (right Honorable) that are the props and supporters of a kingdom, that
like Atlas should bear the weight of heaven on your shoulders, give me leave
to stretch forth the arteries of my heart: and as in a tempestuous time, in
peace unite you together like one body obedient to one principal head.

In that worthy member the heart, the monarke seat of our microcosmus, should
be your residence, within whose center (as in a Princes court) are diverse
receptacles for you to inhabit in. Then as branches extending from the lofty
Cedar, being fed by one root, do notwithstanding cherish one another with
their natural sap. So like the stock of Nobility, descended from your
worthy ancesters, be you combined in a conjunction of inseperable aid, that the
body of the tree may be comforted in so happy an issue, and in the proudest
blast of conspiracy keep you still unremovable.

Be you like faithful Mardocheus, spotles in your ways, when traitors like
proud Hamon shall perish in their own complots.

For if you please to peruse our histories, both Ecclesiastical and profane, ye
shall find that never traitor to his Prince and country but had his reward
threefold returned into his wicked bosom. And though it please God sometime to
suffer them, the cause best known to his sacred pleasure, to bring to pass
their hateful purposes, yet as a woe pronounced to them by whom such evils
come, their mischief has not past without greater mischiefs reguerdoned.

There is none of your honorable society but knows, that treason is the
deuider and separater of all good good things, and a fatal disioyner of
perfection, bringing with it ruin and the merciless substitutes of war: where
on the contrary, obedience is the sinews of the State, and glueth the hearts
of Nobility together, like one indivisible substance.

And as the seven lean kine in Pharaoes dream, devoured the seven fat (yet
themselves not the fatter:) so stands it with treason, like a cormorant it
deuoures all, yet is it self the better by nothing. What greater pattern of
misery can there be, then a kingdom divided in it self? It is like the
dangerous eclips of the sun: nay like the unnatural separation of heaven,
that brings all danger and destruction.

No plague of Egypt comparable to that misery: for civil dissension is the
gate to let in ruin and foreign invasion.

It is like a wedge of Iron, that entering into an oak, disseuers both sides in
several pieces, and makes them both fit for the fire.

The flourishing state of Rome was devoured by that monster, and all
tranquillity swallowed at a bit by that hideous Leuiathan. It is like the
blind Mole, that loving still to be mischieuously laboring, tosseth up her
own destruction.

Let then (right Honorable) that acceptable sacrifice of your hearts be offered
to our gracious Sovereign, which far exceeds the external office of fained
affection, who with an eye of vigilance will (no doubt) regard your virtues;
and like the cheerful comfort of the Sun, with his blessed countenance,
make your young blossoms come to pleasant fruit, and bring that fruit by
comfortable warmth to full maturitie.

God so direct your hearts to work in you unfeigned loyalty to his royal
Majesty, and deadly hatred to selfe-deuouring treason.

To the true and faithful private subject.
ANd now beloved contrymen, to you in general, that carry with you the full
current of affection, the swiftest stream of deep gliding love, not to be
reuerted or turned back by the vehement opposition of any resisting wind.

To you, as to the open mark whereto my heart leuels her pretended aim, being
the vpshot of mine exhortation, I send this loving and friendly counsel, like
to a strong city fenced about with impregnable walls, so ought you to be in
time of domestical Rebellion, or foreign invasion: for you are the maine
battle, the trust and strength of your country, and to you belongs a chief
trust in this required preservation. Even as his Highness may well be compared
to the apple of our eye, of which naturally by reason it is tender unto us, We
have a diligent care. So ought you to join your whole body of defense, both
arms, legs, feet and heart, to protect his royal person, without secret
grudging, private muttering, or unnatural controversy. You ought to be like
steadfast rocks in the sea, ready to front every storm, and to withstand,
without removing, the most bitter blasts that either winter or foul weather
affoords.

I know my most loving countrymen, that you well perceive the princely care of
his Majesty toward you his loving subjects, and the honorable disposition and
noble industry of his vigilant Council. Of which honorable society, although
now untimely deceassed, I cannot but call to mind that right honorable and most
worthily to be remembered, the late L. Burgley, and Lord high Treasurer of
England: whose fame may not be sealed up with the leade^ hand of oblivion, who
whilst he lived showed himself one of the most faithful, careful, and wise
Councellers that ever lived in any kingdom of Christendom. He was the Beacon
that discovered foreign malice and homebred mischief, the neuer-failing
watchtower of the Commonwealth, the heart of Justice, bearing up the balance
of weighty causes with an even hand, and cutting down with the sharp sword
of prevention the children of rebellion at home, and the envious intention of
the enemy abroad.

For causes in common trial, I call heaven to witness, I speak but what I
know, as he was judicial, wary and circumspect, so was he upright, discreet,
and pitiful, not leaning to any side either for favor or gift, but with an
impartial eye judging all things according to the equity of the cause.
Thanks be to God, the principal branches of that tree do now most worthily
spread their virtue in this his Majesty's garden of happy government.

In which rank of true Nobility, diligent watchmen, and worthy Councellers, I
may not omit that right honorable conditioned Lord the Earl of Nottingham,
whose true loyalty to his Majesty, never spotted with the least mistrust, may
keep even wing with the rest of that Honorable society: whose true show of a
virtuous and noble mind, is daily made apparent by his exceeding bounty toward
the poor and needy. The fruit whereof is eternal salvation.

And that reverent and careful Gentleman, Sir John Popham Knight, Lord chief
Justice of England, being another of the body of the Council, whose honorable
forwardness, with great discretion has bin now lately approved in his
Majesty's serious affairs, as also in calming the Realm with quiet, that has
bin heretofore tempestuously troubled with bloody murderers and felonious
robbers: but now (God be thanked) by his diligent and wise government, well
reformed; whose exceeding love to his Prince and country, has bin often made
apparent by his laborious endeavors.

To conclude, I beseech God in his infinite mercy, stir up in you dear
affecting love to his Majesty, who for the comfort of his chosen, and
maintenance of his truth, has defended his Highness as well in Scotland as
now in England, from many dangerous assaults, and here now settled him the
faithful President of his true Church, wherein long may his Majesty continue
many happy and peaceful days, to the great glory of God, and to the exceeding
comfort of all us his faithful and loving subjects. Amen.

A Thanksgiving to God for the happy deliverance of the Kings most excellent
Majesty, the Queen, Prince, Nobility, and Commons, from the most horrible
contrived treason, pretended against them in the high Court of Parliament,
tending to the utter desolation and ruin of all his Majesty's kingdoms; but
prevented by the almighty providence, and the only prudent foresight of the
Kings most excellent Majesty.
Rejoice O Britain, sing and clap thy hands,
For God himself does for thee safely fight:
No foe so great, but that thy force withstands,
It is so strengthened by the heavenly might.
The Popes great malice, and the Papists pride,
Before thy face do fall on every side.
Now shall thou hear of nothing but confusion
Upon the head of all thy harmefull foes:
Now shall the traitors find the full conclusion,
That in the end of all rebellion grows:
And they shall fret to see their pride pulled down,
Whilst God preserues thy sovereign and his crown.
Now shall the Pope with all his practice fail,
The hope of traitors all be overthrown:
Nor Pope nor traitor now shall none prevail,
To do thee hurt that but defendst thine own.
Now serve thy God, and give him thanks for all,
And keep thy says, and thou shall never fall.
Be true (I say) and faithful to thy God,
And ever loyal to thy sovereign King,
For whose love sake we have escapt this rod,
Which otherwise had scourged us for our sin:
He will not suffer any to destroy thee,
But overthrow their forces that annoy thee.
In Scotland late how did he in that land
Preserve the King from traitrous Gowries treason:
And by the help of worthy Ramseys hand
Did slay the traitor, as it was but reason:
Where noble Ramsey by deserved fame,
Eternized has the honor of his name.
Now let all hearts of happy Britain pray
Unto our God of glorious mercies power,
That he will still be our almighty stay,
Our rock, our castle, and our heavenly tower:
That in his mercy we may fearelesse live,
And to his gracious love all glory give.
Let us still pray that he will still preserve
Our gracious King in his eternal grace,
And give us grace him truly for to serve,
And all unfaithful traitors to deface:
To spend our lives but in our countries cause,
And be obedient to his blessed laws.
Rebellion is a sin of witchcraft named,
And witches are but devils in their natures:
O hellish fiends to the devil framed,
Which so deceive but the accursed creatures.
O cursed Sin, that ever man should know thee!
God bless King James and al his subjects fro thee.
And since that truth does try out every thought,
Whereon the depth of every sense is sounded,
Against that truth who has the treason wrought,
That on ungracious reason has been grounded.
What ever fortune for a time do fall,
Confusions shame will be the end of all.
God grant it so, and with his gracious hand
Long bless the days of our dread sovereign King,
And make him Emperor of this blessed land,
Till no more land within the world be seen:
And make his conquests evermore victorious,
And all his kingdoms in thy mercy glorious.
Bless valiant Ramsey with that mount of joy,
That noble truth in truest nobleness,
May stand so strong, as nothing may destroy:
But in the height of honors happiness
May by the virtue of best valor proved,
Of God and man be blessed and beloved.
Bless all his Council, and his faithful friends,
Court, cities, countries, all in such a peace,
As all the world that sees proud traitors ends,
May cause the root of all rebellion cease:
Such peace and plenty, love and concord send,
That we may sing thy glory without end.
Pray now with me, and prayer never cease
Unto the God of all eternal glory,
His life, his health, his comfort to increase,
To Britains bliss and never ending story,
That he may breathe an everlasting breath,
And those may pine in hell that seek his death.
A Thanksgiving to God for all our temporal blessings.
O praise the Lord for ever.
O Heavenly spirit of especial power,
That in thy hand the praise of praises hold,
And from the top of truths triumphant tower,
The hidden sense of fairest thoughts vnfoldest:
Inspire this heart and humble soul of mine,
With some sweet sparkle of thy power divine.
Teach me to think but on that only thought,
Wherein does live the grace of virtues glory,
And learn no more the^ what thy truth has taught
To those best wits that write thy worthy story,
Wherein is seen in heaven and earths preserving,
The highest point of praises due deserving.
Let not compare come near unto none such,
Heaven be my thought, and let the world go by,
And say withal, that say I never so much,
All are but trifles to thy treasury:
For all no more then what thy mercy gives,
Who can behold wherein thy glory lives?
No, I can see the shining of the Sun,
But cannot sound the essence of the light:
Then of thy face, in whom that fair begun,
How can my soul presume to have a sight?
No my dear God, thy glory has a being,
Where eye, nor heart, nor soul may have a seeing.
And therefore Lord since such thy glory is,
As cannot be but of thy self conceived:
And heaven nor earth contains that spark of bliss
But from thy hand of mercy is received,
What spirit can her sweetest passion raise,
Near to the due of thy deserved praise?
Yet since all glory does belong to thee,
Thy name in all things must be magnified:
And by thy mercy thou have made me see
How in my soul thou may be glorified:
In that sweet mercy make my soul to know
How best I may thy blessed glory show.
O gracious God, what creature can there be,
That moves, or breathes, or grows, but shows thy glory?
What art or science but does speak of thee,
And writes the wonder of thy wisdoms story?
What sound or sense can reasons soul refine,
But speaks in glory of thy grace divine?
The Sun in brightness glorifies the light
That in the beams but of thy beauty lives,
The Moon and stars amid the darkest night
Show what a light thy loving mercy gives:
So Sun and Moon, and all those shining creatures
Do show thy glory in their light some natures.
Is not the day a figure of perfection,
Wherein the creatures were created first,
And night of sin, that with a foul infection
Shows how the soul is for her sins accursed?
But night once past, the glorious day appearing
Shows sins forgiven, the joy of mercies chearing.
So Sun, and Moon, and stars, and day, and night,
Speaks of thy glory in their cause of being:
And how they serve but in obedience right
Unto thy grace, but of thy will agreeing,
While wisdom shows in state of reasons story,
They give us light that we may give thee glory.
The azure sky more clear then Christalline,
Wherein the Sune does cast his beams abroad:
How does it figure that fair hand of thine,
Wherein thy mercy makes her most abode,
Whilst to the humble souls believing eye,
Thy glory shines far brighter then the sky?
The clouds that shed those drops of blessed deawes,
That water the dry places of the earth:
What drop so small, but it thy glory shows,
To bring a plenty where was erst a dearth?
How do they figure faithful sorrows tears,
When sin-burnt souls the fruit of mercy bears?
The air that gives each living creature breath,
Speaks of thy glory in that breathing power:
And when it leaves the creature unto death,
It shows thy glory in that parting hour,
To leave the flesh, so in corruption wounded,
Till grace renew that was in sin confounded.
The earth that yields such choice of fruits and flowers
How does it show that glorious power of thine,
When all unseen do hidden lie those powers,
That art or nature never can define?
How sweets, and forms, and colors so should grow,
But that thy glorius will would have it so.
And as the spring brings forth the budding green,
With beauties dies for to adorn the field:
So in the winter few or none are seen,
That can the eye contentiue pleasure yield.
So that the earth which never silence breaks,
In her dumb speech yet of thy glory speaks.
The sea, wherein those world of fishes live,
That flote and tumble in the tossing waves:
What notice do they of thy glory give,
That from the Whale the little Herring saues?
And makes the Dolphin wound the Whale so sore,
As drives him from the sea to die on shore.
What beast so great, or creeping worm so small,
What bird so high, or of so low a flight,
But that thy name is glorifide in all?
Who having made them by thy heavenly might,
Preseru'st them so, that all the world may see,
They have their being only but in thee.
The beast his hair, the feather of the bird,
The fish his scale, and every tree his bark:
These for defense does nature all afford,
As of thy glory every one a mark,
Wherein thy hand of mercy is beheld,
That does such comfort to each creature yield.
Is not the fire a figure of thy wrath,
That soon consumes the proud assault of sin?
The air the patience that thy mercy has,
When true contrition does remission win?
The water tears that thou for sin have shed,
The earth thy death for to redeem the dead.
Since then above and in the elements,
Sun, Moon, stars, sky, fire, water, earth and air,
And what may be beneath the firmament,
Beasts, birds, fish, worm, scale, fether, hide or hair,
Nor tree, nor flower, nor herb, nor grass does grow
But some way does thy glorious mercy show.
Shall wretched man, whom God did only make
To his own image in his mercies love,
So far himself and all his good forsake,
As to forget so sweet a Turtle-doue
As his dear God, that so of nothing wrought him,
And his dear Son that has so dearly bought him?
Shall man I say, that only special creature,
Whom God has made to serve his Majesty,
In lack of grace reveal so vile a nature,
As not to seek his name to glorify?
No, heavens forbid, though sin be never such
In man should live ingratitude so much.
No, he whom God has made to monarke so
Above all creatures that do grow or breathe:
And by his wisdom makes his will to know
The good above, and evil from beneath:
And how he helps the spirit in distress,
His glorious goodness cannot but confess.
And when he sees with those in-seeing eyes,
That in the soul do give the spirit light,
In what the height of heavenly glory lies,
To whom all glory does belong of right:
His heart will write in his worths worthy story,
To him alone be given all only glory.
O he that sits above the starrie sky,
In holy seat of heavenly residence,
And at the twinkling of his glorious eye,
Commands the world to his obedience:
Leave that foul soul in sorrow ever friendlesse,
That does not sound thy name in glory endless.
All grace, all goodness, wisdom, power and peace,
All truth, true life, all bounty, mercy, love,
These altogether sing and never cease,
Unto the glory of this God above:
And can it be that man who sees all this,
Will not give glory to this God of his?
No, heavens forbid that hell should have the power
To spit her poison upon man so much,
To make him live to that unhappy hour,
Wherein to show his wicked nature such,
As to forget Gods gracious goodness so,
As not some way his glorious mercy show.
Then let our hearts amongst that world of souls,
That feel his blessings every day and hour,
While truth records in her eternal roules,
The gracious goodness of his glorious power,
Sing in our souls, and never cease to sing,
All glory to our God, and honor to our King.
A Prayer for the Kings most excellent Majesty, and our gracious Lady Queen
Anne.
O Glorious God and only King of Kings,
Whose holy eye both heaven and earth beholds:
And from whose mercy all and only springs,
The fairest life that faithful love unfolds:
Mine humble spirit I beseech thee raise,
To give thy glory all eternal praise.
O gracious God, among the many graces,
Wherewith thy mercy has this kingdom blessed,
In whom the height of all our happy cases,
Under thine only holy hand does rest:
For our Liege (Lord) and mighty Britains King,
Let our hearts humble thankfulness be seen.
Bless him (o Lord) with Nestors happy days,
Health, wealth and peace, and everlasting pleasure:
Let virtues love resound his worthy praise,
And thy true wisdom be his spirits treasure,
His greatest hopes upon thy graces grounded,
His state preserved, and his foes confounded.
Bless also (Lord) our gracious Sovereigns Queen
With all the blessings of thy holy grace,
And let it never in this land be seen,
But in thy mercy they may both have place:
Nor sweet Prince Henry's fame die in obliuions pen:
To all of these true Brittans say Amen.

