Acts of the Dispute and Conference holden at Paris, in the Months of July and
August. 1566. Between two Doctors of Sorbon, and two Ministers of the Reformed
Church.

A most excellent Tract, wherein the learned may take pleasure, and the
ignorant reap knowledge.

Translated out of French by John Golburne, and divided according to the days.

Magna est veritas and praeualet.

Ecclesiasticus. 33. 16. Behold how I have not labored only for my self, but
for all them also that seek knowledge.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed.

1602.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable Sir Thomas Egerton Knight: Lord Keeper of the great
Seal of England: Chamberlain of the County Palatine of Chester: and of her
Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel.
I. G. wishes all health, honor, and everlasting happiness.
RIght Honorable, my good Lord: If affectionate duty shall be held
presumption, or any tax me of rashness, for still troubling your Lordship
with my rude labors; I plead mine excuse, with the Poet Affranius: who (blamed
for guilt of like crime to Traian) yet dared to present him, with homely Poems:
excusing himself still, with the courtesy of the Emperor, which as Princely
accepted, as the other poorly offered: And so shrouded with the shelter of
your honorable courtesy, I shall be shielded from the storms of idle
imputations, stop (as did Affranius) the mouths of my Taxors* and adventure
once more to present unto your Lordship, my prison-night-watches, as a simple
token of my thankfulness, and pledge of further duty: then deeming my self
happy, when I may acknowledge your honorable goodness, with any performance
of duty, or acceptable service to your Lordship, to whom, both my self, and
poor endeavors, are wholly devoted. The worthy and necessary use of this
Treatise, I leave to the grave judgment of learned Censors: and in all duty
and zeal, do offer it to your Lordships Patronage, and assure me of your like
good (as former) acceptance. For a good vine yeeldes grapes, still answerable
to it nature* and an honorable mind, the fruits of an honorable disposition.
Long live, and prosper (ho. Lord). Pater sis Patriae, and Ecclesiae, and
Reipublicae charus. So in all humility, I take leave. Fleet this 25. of
March. 1602.

Your Lordships most bounden John Golburne.

The Translator to the Christian Reader.
AMongst all the means, prescribed by wisdom, to attain the perfection of
true knowledge, there is none (good Reader) in my poor conceit, more
necessary for the ignorant, next to the fountain of life, the word of God,
then the reading of Controversies; wherein the truth is debated, the reasons on
both sides deduced, and laid open to the view, and Readers judgment. For, as
by striking together of the steel and flint, the fire is out forced: even so
by disputation and conference, the truth is boulted out, and decyded. But
because it is hard for a blind man to judge of colors, and we being all
blind by nature, and ignorant of God and goodness, are of our selves
incapable of right judgment in matters of faith: for flesh and blood cannot
attain unto it; neither can the natural man discern the things of God: we
must therefore use the appointed means of our salvation; namely, hearing,
reading, and meditating of Gods sacred word: which is only able to make us
wise unto salvation, and to enlighten the eyes of the simple. So that by this
touchstone, and faithful invocation of God, in the name and sole mediation of
Christ Jesus, for the direction of his holy spirit; we shall be enabled to know
all things, and to try the true and pure Gold from the false and counterfeit:
and then (comparing the sayings and assertions of both sides, with the sincere
and undeceivable milk of Gods word) we shall be likewise able to discern the
spirit of God, from the spirit of Error: and discerning, shall perceive the
incomparable beauty of the one, and the ugly deformity of the other. Which
thing waighing with my self, and finding in this Treatise, both the deepnesse
of Satan, and the invincible force of truth, which is the power of God unto
salvation of all true believers, I resolved at the special instance of a
religious friend, who had begun the Translation, to attempt, effect, and finish
the same: which by divine assistance, I have faithfully performed, and here
present it to thy view. Read it with consideration, consider thereof with
judgment, and judge with discretion; so shall thou find not only pleasure,
but much profit, in matters discussed of greatest moment. For which, and all
things else, give God the glory, make use for thine instruction, and accept my
poor endeavor; whose desire was to do thee good. Farewell.

Thine in the Lord, I. G.

The Preface containing the occasions of the Dispute following.
FOr that I doubt not, but many persons (filled with the common brute of the
conference should be made at the house of my Lord the Duke de Montpensier,
between the Doctors of the one part, and the Ministers of the other, appointed
for that purpose) desire to know the truth: and that others speak thereof
diversely, according to the reports thereof made unto them, or their conceived
imaginations concerning the same: Me seems, that to satisfy the one, and
take from the other all occasion of lying or giving credit to lies: it should
be good to put briefly in writing all the matter as it passed: and likewise to
declare, what was the motive, and first occasion of the same.

My Lord the Duke of Montpensier, who (as each one knows) is very zealous of
his Religion, and dearly loves his children; seeing that his daughter the
Duchess of Buillon was departed from the Komish Religion, thenceforth to
follow that of Jesus Christ: and that without chilling, she still perseuered,
and more and more increased in the knowledge and fear of God: in zeal,
godliness, and all other good and commendable virtues; (his speech he had in
the beginning with her, and other means he had since assaied, to reduce and
call her back from the way wherein she was, naught prevailing): willed for a
last remedy, to attempt if he could, to win her by the means and
remonstrance of a Doctor named Vigor, whom he much esteemed. And to the end
that the said Lady should remain more satisfied, having called my Lord of
Buillon her husband, he declared unto him his mind, and said; he was
contented that the said remonstrance should be made to his daughter, in the
presence of some Ministers; as namely of Spina, and such others as she should
please to choose: to the end that had they any thing to say against the
doctrine of the said Vigor, they should allege it; And if after they had
conferred together, they were not confuted by him, and wholly vanquished, that
his daughter should then abide in her opinion; without that he, or some others
of his side would ever assay ought to divert her.

My Lord de Buillon promised to accomplish his command therein: and to show
his obedience to him. Shortly after he imparted the same to my Lord the
Admiral; by whose advice, and other Lords which he spoke too, De Spina was
suddenly sent for; who being come unto them, and having understood all that
aforesaid, said; that he hoped for little fruit of all this Conference;
considering the quality and humor of the man with whom he was to deal:
because he is much more partial for the Pope and his traditions, then zealous
for the word of God, and truth of Jesus Christ. Which thing, those that were
present did well approve. Nevertheless, he was purposed for two
considerations, to present himself at the said Conference: the one, to support
and stablish my said Lady de Buillon, against the Sophismes, and cauillations
of the said Vigor: the other, to take from him the occasion to boast (as his
custom is) that the Ministers durst not appear before him.

And then was the proceeding and order advised of, which they should hold in
the said Conference. And that the said De Spina should first require, that it
might be authorized by the Kings permission: Afterward, that to avoid all
confusion, it should be made in the presence of a few persons; Thirdly, that
there should be some certain theme and subject proposed, whereof they should
confer: Fourthly, that there should be two Moderators of the whole Action,
and two others deputed, faithfully to collect all the reasons and arguments
which should be brought forth by the parties.

All which things having been proposed to my Lord the Duke of Buillon, as well
by Monsieur the Admiral: as by the said De Spina, he found them very
reasonable, and promised to give the best order he could to all the business:
admonishing De Spina to be ready the first day of July, 1566. for after dinner
he should make the said Conference. By means whereof, the same De Spina to
prepare himself, went to find out Monsieur Barbaste, Minister to the Queen
of Navarre, whom he prayed to vouchsafe to accompany, and second him in the
said conference. Which he granting, both two, together with three other
Gentlemen, left by my said Lord de Buillon to conduct them; went after dinner,
the day and year above said, to the house of my Lord the Duke de Montpensier;
where when they were arrived, the Duke de Buillon advertised thereof by one of
the said Gentlemen, came unto them in the Hall where they were. And speaking to
De Spina, demanded of him (induced as is likely by the Doctors, assembled in
the chamber whence he came) if he were purposed and resolved to pray, after
the custom of the reformed Churches, before they began the said conference. He
answered yea: and that neither he, nor his companion, could not, nor ought to
attempt a thing of such importance, as to handle the Mysteries of Christian
Religion; without first being prepared thereunto by the invocation of Gods
name. That heard, he entered the chamber where the Doctors were assembled: and
having communicated to them the answer of the said Ministers, they appointed
Doctor Ruze, to declare unto them, that they would not be present at their
prayers, and that no more reasonable it was, that they should be there, then
they at their Mass. The Ministers answered: that they could not with good
conscience begin the conference, before they had prayed unto God: and that it
was in the Doctors choice and pleasure to be present, or absent at their
prayers; And they for their part would content themselves to pray in the place
and assembly, wherein the conference should be made. But nevertheless, that
their prayers, which are (as they themselves confess) conformable to the pure
word of God; and their Mass, wherein are many things contrary thereunto, (as
they may easily know and judge that will try and examine it by the rule of the
scripture) were not like things; And so, by means of the impiety and
Idolatry which is in their Mass, they could not any way communicate thereat,
without offense to God, and making themselves highly culpable before him: but
that he, and the other Doctors his companions could not be let by any such
difficulties to be present at their prayers: For as much as there was no
article which (by their own confession) (...) not holy, and according to God.
Hereupon replied Doctor Ruze, that the Ministers stayed on a thing of small
moment. And they answered, that the principal exercise of Christian Religion,
was prayer: and that it is a necessary mean to obtain the favor and grace of
God; without which, men cannot attain success, nor any good speed in all
their works: and that therefore the omission thereof was very pernicious. And
that they for their part were abashed, that he, which called himself a Doctor,
and Divine, should make so little account of prayer; which is the true practice,
fruit, and use, of all the knowledge which can be had of God, and his word:
and that therein one may know what was the judgment of them, which measure
divinity by Idle and vain speculations. Then said he vnthem: that the Duke de
Montpensier, would never suffer, he should so be braued in his own house: nor
that it should be said, that the Ministers had made their prayers. Whereunto
answered the Ministers, that to brave, was a thing contrary to their
profession. And that so far off were they from brauing of Princes, (to whom
they owed all honor, fear, and obedience) that they would condemn themselves
if so be they had used it, to a man of the basest quality in the world. And
added moreover, that the Doctors, and such others, which charged them with such
slanders toward Princes, to stir up, and move them against them, should be
assured they should once answer before God for the same. Hereupon spoke Doctor
Ruze, and demanded of the Ministers, why they stood so stiffly upon that point
of prayer. They f^^ answer proposed unto him; first, that the end of the
Conference, was to manifest the true meaning of the scripture, and make the
hearers understand it: which thing could not be done, without the spirit of
God; who enlightneth the mind and understanding to comprehend it; and opens
the mouths to express the same: And therefore it behooves to implore and
obtain his grace by prayers. Afterward, that God commanded all those that
want wisdom, to ask it of him; and to seek what they would find; and to
knock, if they would have him to open unto them. All which things cannot
otherwise be obtained, then by prayers. And therefore concluded, that for this
cause they were necessary. They alleged further, that all things ought to be
reduced to the glory of God: and that invocation was therefore requisite in the
beginning, and thanksgiving at the ending and consummation of all our works,
nor more, nor less, then we begin and finish our repast, in blessing and
praising the name of God.

Then said Doctor Ruze unto them, that they would not hinder them to pray unto
God: but that they should do it in their hearts. And they answered: that it was
not sufficient; but that it behooved to pray also with the mouth, as S. Paul
commands: withdraw your selves then into some place apart (said he) and make
your prayers all alone. They answered: that in such an act, it ought not so to
be done: and that they were bound by the commandment of God, to make their
light to shine before men, to the end, that seeing their good works, they might
have means to glorify God, and to be thereby edified. Also that in so doing,
they might give occasion of scandal to their neighbors, confirming the evil
opinion imprinted by their adversaries in some of their doctrine and exercises:
to wit: that by reason of the errors and blasphemies which were therein; they
dared not to publish the same: and that to quite them of this slander, meet it
was, that as they spoke in public, their prayers should be also in public. To
be brief, that they ought not, neither could they with reason refuse that
which the King had granted unto them in the Conference of Poissy: where, in
all the assemblies there made, they were always permitted to pray to GOD
publicly, before they spoke of any matter. And added for their last reason,
that it was very needful to comprehend in their prayers them, and all those
that should be present at the said conference: to the end, that God might grant
grace both to them and others, to dispoile them wholly of all their passions:
and that there should be nothing which might hinder them, to judge rightly of
whatsoever should be proposed on the one side, and on the other: And that he
would also make the hearers docible and attentive to gather to themselves some
profit thereof. I shame here to recite one word which escaped from Doctor Ruze
in this behalf: who in contempt of God, and his service, said: that if the
Ministers would go pray, he would go piss during the time of prayer.
Whereupon the Ministers cried out, saying: What resolution? what counsel? what
good word can be hoped for, of a heart filled with so an apparent contempt of
God?

My Lord the Duke of Buillon, and the said Doctor Ruze, seeing the Ministers
settled, and firm in this, not to enter into any conference before prayers were
made, in the presence of the assembly, where the same should be made: after
they had reported the same to my Lord de Montpensier, and the Doctors which
were with him; they purposed to send them back; and that on this condition
they should not confer with them.

Hereupon they departed: and as they were now arrived at the little Bridge of
our Lady, they called them back, and they forth with returned; supposing they
would grant them what they requested. But herein were they deceived. For
Doctor Ruze came toward them to the gate, and for a final resolution, said
unto them: that if they would pray, they would give them a house near at hand:
but that my Lord de Montpensier would not permit, they should make them in his
house; nor that any of his family should be present thereat. Whereunto they
answered, that they now yielded less unto them, then in the beginning they had
done: and therefore they could not answer otherwise then they had answered.

The^ Doctor Ruze addressed particularly his speech to the Minister De Spina;
to whom in scoffing manner, he said two things: that he well saw, he had no
great desire to enter disputations: and that in times past he had been of their
company; but that he was now cut off from them. Whereunto answered De Spina,
that had he fled the conference, he would not in that great heat, have come
eight long miles, nor left his Church, which was to him more dear and
acceptable then any other thing, to find them in their own houses. And as
touching his departing from them, that he thanked God he had withdrawn
himself from them: and that it was the greatest good, that ever happened to
him. And to the end that he and his companions should no way doubt but that
he was ready to confer with them, he showed them a way, by which both
parties might be satisfied: to wit; that they should confer together by
writing: showing, that it should be much more profitable; for as much as by
that mean, they should withstand all contentions: that the arguments and
answers should better be meditated and digested: that many should thereby be
edified, and in so doing, there should be no danger, that by adding or
diminishing, they should be any way altered.

Ruze answered, that they could write nothing which has not been written. And
De Spina replied; that they could not also speak ought, which has not been
spoken. This was the end and conclusion of al their speeches. Whereby may be
seen, what will the Doctors had to confer with the Ministers: to whom, at
their arrival (to stop their passage) they proposed such a condition, as they
were well assured, should never be accepted of them: namely to enter into
public conference of the scripture, before they had publicly prayed to God in
the place and assembly where it should be made.

Moreover one may also judge, what was their intention, by the order they had
given, to direct their conference. For in stead of procuring some place and
rest to the said Ministers, which were come unto them; there were at the least,
a hundred persons of all qualities about the Ministers, to astonish them: some
by scoffs: others by injuries: others by threats: So that, had it not been the
care which the three gentlemen of the Duke of Buillon had of them, and to drive
them often back, which approached too near them; they had been in danger to
have suffered outrage. One may also imagine, how the Doctors do endeavor to
serve God, and pray unto him: seeing they cannot endure him to be prayed unto
in their presence. And for conclusion, what understanding can they have of the
scripture? with what faithfulness can they handle it? And what dexterity and
faculty can they have to preach it, considering they disdain, and think it
strange, that for the obtaining of all these things, God should be prayed unto
in their presence? As though their sufficiency were in themselves, and that it
came not from him who is the wel-spring and author of all light.

It follows: of the occasions declared in the precedent Preface, and first of
the Dispute on Wednesday the ninth of July, 1566.

Albeit the Doctors by the means here before declared, had sought occasion to
hinder the conference which was to be made between them and the Ministers, in
the house of my Lord De Montpensier: Nevertheless, to avoid the evil opinion
that might be conceived of them, by reason of their refusal, to enter into the
said conference, they raised a rumor, that the Ministers, perceiving
themselves weak, and that their doctrine was uncertain, had fled the combat.
Which thing being come to the ears of the King and Queen, Mounsieur the
Admiral, seeing it might bring some scandal and damage to the reformed
Churches, if it were not presently met with: knowing also, that it was a false
reproach which they had put upon the Ministers, began to excuse them: assuring
the King and the Queen, that the Ministers would always be ready to confer
with the Doctors, and to defend by the scripture, the confession of their
Churches, in what place soever, and before such persons, as they would it
should be. So that they were permitted to pray unto God (as they had required)
in the beginning of their conference, and that they should there observe the
order and means which they had proposed, or other better, as they should
think good: to the end to avoid all wranglings, and the confusion of voice and
cries, as is ordinarily seen in schools, and disputes of Sophisters, and
contentious persons.

My Lord of Neuers having understood these words of my Lord the Admiral, found
them very reasonable; and persuaded (as it is certain) first by the spirit of
God, and afterward by a haughtiness and generositie of heart; which thrust
him forward, with a will to understand the truth of each thing, solicited the
King and Queen, that by their commission, and under their authority, the said
Conference might be established: And so wrought he, that he obtained of their
Majesty's what he demanded. By means whereof, having advertised my Lord the
Admiral of their pleasures, they consulted together, of the order should be
held in the same conference. And resolved in the end, that my Lord De Neuers,
and my Lord the Duke of Buillon, should be the chief Judges therein; and that
of the one side, and the other, should some Gentlemen be present, to be
witnesses and beholders, of whatsoever should be done in the same. And
further, that there should be two Notaries of both sides, of the little fort at
Paris, which should put in writing, and sign whatsoever should be alleged,
and proposed by the parties.

These conditions thus conceived, and agreed of among the said Lords; were also
accepted by the Doctors, Vigor and De Sanctes of the one party, and by the
Ministers De Spina, and Sureau, of the other party: Who began to assemble
themselves together on Tuesday the ninth of July, 1566. in the house of my said
Lord of Neuers: where in his presence, and of other Lords which were with him,
(after prayers made by the Ministers, in the absence of the Doctors, who
because they would not be present, had withdrawn themselves apart) Doctor Vigor
spoke, and began by protestation: That the cause why he and his companion were
entered into Conference with the Ministers, was not to be instructed in any
point of Religion: nor any way to withstand the Constitutions of the Councels,
and chiefly that of Trent, by which they are forbidden to dispute with
heretics: And that they for their part, were wholly resolved to abide in the
faith of the Romish Church: but that at the request and pursuit of the Lord de
Montpensier, (who for the reducing of his daughter Madame de Buillon, had
required the said Conference) they were come thither to the end, to satisfy
him, and declare the holy zeal they have to seek and bring back to the
flock, those which are thence departed.

Whereupon (their speeches ended) the Ministers speaking, protested likewise,
that, that which had led the^ to conference with the Doctors, was not, because
they doubted of any article contained in their confession, which they knew to
be drawn from the pure word of God: but that it was to maintain the same,
against the Sophistries and cauillations of the^ which would impugn it, and to
retain Madame de Buillon, in the good and holy institution, which she had
received by the grace which God had given her.

Thus the protestations on both sides made, the Ministers supposed that the
Doctors (the^ following the intention of my Lord de Montpensier, and the desire
of Madame de Buillon) should have begun the Conference by the Dispute of two
points, the Supper, and the Mass. But as they that will besiege and batter a
Town, begin a far off to make their Trenches, and approaches: to prepare
themselves to the deciding and conference of the said two points, they began to
lay their foundation, by the authority of the Church: whereupon they would
establish the certainty of the Articles of faith, and generally of all the
holy Scripture. And therefore the demands and objections were proposed by the
Doctors. And the answers given by the Ministers; De Saints beginning, and De
Spina answering; as follows.

Acts of the Dispute and Conference holden at Paris.
Question.
Whereupon do you ground your Religion?

Answer.
Upon the word of God.

Question.
What do you understand by the word of God?

Answer.
The writings of the Prophets and Apostles.

Question.
Do you receive for their writings all the books of the Bible, as well of the
old, as the new Testament, attributing unto all, one like authority?

Answer.
No: but following antiquity, we distinguish between the Canonical books,
and the Apocripha: calling those Canonical, upon whose doctrine, the faith and
all Christian religion is builded: And those Apocripha, which have not such
authority that we may build or establish upon them any Article of faith; but
are proper to teach and well govern the estate of life, and manners of
Christians: by reason of the goodly, and notable sentences which are comprised
in them.

Question.
By what means do you know, that the one is Canonical, the other Apocripha?

Answer.
By the spirit of God, which is a spirit of discretion, and enlightneth all
those unto whom it is communicated, to make them capable, to be able to judge,
and discern things spiritual, and to know and apprehend the truth (when to
them it is proposed) by the witness and assurance, which thereof it gives
them in their hearts. And as we discern the light from darkness by the
faculty of seeing, which is in the eye: even so may we easily separate and
acknowledge the truth from untruth, and from all things in general, which may
be false, absurd, doubtful, or indifferent, when as we are furnished with the
spirit of God, and guided by the light, which it lightneth in our hearts.

Question.
Yea: but some man may boast to have the spirit of God, which has it not. And
we see by Histories, that all heretics have ever thought to have the truth on
their side, and endeavored to authorize their doctrine by inward ^euelations,
which they feign to have received of Gods spirit: Whereby it may appear what
danger there should be to refer the censure of a book, or doctrine, to the
witness of the spirit of God, which one particular man shall imagine or feign
to have received in his heart.

Answer.
Very easy it is to avoid such danger, in following the counsel which Saint
John does give us in his first Catholic Epistle; not to believe indifferently
all spirits, but to prove and diligently to examine them, before we receive or
approve what they propose. And the trial to be made in such a case is, first
to regard the end whereunto a doctrine tends, which shall be declared unto
us: or a book that shall be presented unto us: For if it tend to establish and
advance the glory of God; it is true: as Jesus Christ says in S. John, That
he which seeks the glory of God, is truth, and there is no unrighteousness
in him.

Afterward we must consider whether being reduced to the proportion, and the
analogy of faith, (as says S. Paul) it Romans 12. 6.
well agrees and accords with the principles and foundations of Religion.

Objection.
All say, and may say as much thereof: and therefore this reason is no
sufficient argument (as I conceive by effect and other proofs) how I ought to
stay my self thereupon. Moreover, this answer passes the limits of the
proposition: For it presupposes the Scripture to be the known foundation of
Religion. And the proposition was to know the reason which should assure me,
that the Scripture was of God, and that it behooves to distinguish between
the Books thereof.

Answer.
It is easy to judge, if the end of the doctrine proposed, tends to
establish and advance the honor and glory of God. As if men were exhorted
thereby to withdraw wholly their trust from creatures, wholly to settle and
repose themselves in God; to resort to him in all their necessities, and to
depend upon his providence in all their affairs, to praise and thank him for
all the goodness they have. This presupposed, no man could doubt, that the
doctrine which tends to such an end, should not be good and receiuable. And
to that which has been proposed: that the former Answer was out of the limits
of the first proposition it seems not: for that the first thing proposed,
was: What is the foundation of our Religion? Whereunto it was answered: That it
is the writings of the Prophets and Apostles.

Objection.
This answer is common to the Lutherans and Anabaptists, yea also to the
Deistes, which say more then all others, that they seek the glory of God: and
all that which in the answer is written. And generally each man that should
use the like saying, should not cease to err in all the Articles of the Creed,
the first excepted. But to return to the point without so much wandering it
seems to us not lawful to use the foundation of the Scripture, before it be
notorious and certain that it is the holy Scripture, and that there is
difference amongst the books thereof. And before it be known that I have
particular inspiration of the holy Ghost; and that such a particular
inspiration of the holy Ghost be a sufficient foundation of Religion.

Answer.
The Deistes, and other here^iques cannot be helped (by the foresaid answer)
for confirmation of their errors: Forasmuch as the Desties, denying Jesus
Christ, cannot glorify God: seeing that to glorify the Father, it behooves
first to know and to glorify the Son; no more also other heretics: For
that, not knowing the truth, nor consequently Jesus Christ (which is the way,
the life, and the truth) they cannot know nor glorify God. And touching that
objected, that the answer was from the purpose; that may be judged by the
conference of the demand and answer. And for the latter point of the
objection, wherein it is said: that the revelation which each particular man
says he has of the Spirit of God, is to him the foundation of Religion:
that was not answered; But that the foundation of all true Religion, is the
doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles. Of the truth of which, all the Church
in general, and the members thereof in particular, are assured, by the
witnes^e and inward revelation of the Spirit of God.

Objection.
Then it behooued to add whatsoever is here said to the other answer before
it were good: and it seems, that the answer does contain (as it were) a
mockery. For it is certain: that when all truth is in the doctrine of a man,
that man is no more evil, nor an heretic. But we search out the beginning
of truth, what it should be. And touching the reply, which denies that the
particular revelation is the foundation of Religion. There is no great
difference: For if the particular revelation be a sufficient foundation for
every one to know what is of the Apostles and Prophets, that particular
revelation by consequence is the foundation of Religion. For that is the
foundation of knowledge, whereupon every particular man knows, and says his
Religion is founded.

Answer.
The answers have been made according as the demaundes have been propounded:
and it will not appear by the reading of them that they are willing to mock:
For in such a Conference as this, where the matter is to seek out the honor
and glory of God: Mockery should be joined with impiety. And as touching
revelation, that it is equal to the Scripture (which is the foundation of
Religon) we deny it, and say: they be things different, although they be
conjoined together, and that they do follow the one the other, even as
appears by that which is written in Esaias: Behold my covenant with them (says
the Esa. 59. 21.
Lord) my Spirit that is in thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth,
shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed. And that
which follows: From whence a man may judge the distinction which the Prophet
puts between the revelation of the holy Ghost, and the word.

Objection.
For conclusion of this Conference, I leave each man to judge of the agreement
of the answerers and objections. And for that which is alleged of the union of
the word, and of the holy Ghost, out of the text of Esaias: they are things from
the purpose, and new matter. And we must not compare the revelation of every
particular person (whereof was the question) unto that of the Prophet Esaias: who
had other proofs that the Spi^^t spoke by him, and had often times made
demonstration thereof* And of all that above said, I leave the judgment to
every Christian.

Answer.
We leave also the judgment of what has been spoken of the one part and the
other, to the hearers and readers. And for the passage of Esaias produced, the
question is not of the revelation of the Prophet, nor of the spirit,
communicated unto him: but of the spirit, and the words which God promised to
all his people: with whom he made his covenant. And as touching the other
pretended proofs which the Prophet had of his vocation; we make no doubt
thereof. But we say, that the principal and most assured was, that, which he
had by the testimony of God his Spirit, as appears by the sixth Chapter of his
Prophecy.

Objection.
Be it so, that by the person of Esaias be spoke to his people, it follows not
that he spoke not to Esaias first. And I allow that he promised indeed his spirit
to his people that is to say, to his Church universal. Not that he will that
every one, yea, being in this Church, may brag and usurp to have this spirit
particularly promised unto him. And as touching the particular inspiration of
Esaias, it was not founded on his only fancy, and presumption: but on the
assurance that God gave him by a work supernatural: as is said in the 6.
Chapter. And further, it was not yet sufficiently founded to be believed, as
having inspiration, had he not showed the same by other effects, and by other
Prophesies already come to Deuteronomy. 18.
pass. As it behooves every Prophet should do, before he were believed: But
leaving all those things as far fetched, and from the first proposition, I
refer the judgment as before.

Answer.
There is not one of the Church, if he be a ture member thereof, unto whom the
spirit of God is not communicated: Romans 89. 1. Ioh. 22. 27.
As S. Paul, and S. John in his first Catholic Epistle teaches. And as
touching the pretended presumption, there is great difference between the
presumption and imaginations of the spirit of man (which is but darkness, and
of it self knows nothing of the thing of God) and the revelations of the
holy Ghost, which are certain and assured. And where it is said, that the
answers are far off from the first proposition; if it be so, the dema^nds
are so also.

Objection.
The conclusion is, if each one ought to be believed in saying he has a
particular revelation of the holy Ghost, without otherwise showing, that they
are holy Scriptures: and that there is difference amongst them, let every one
judge if the demands and answers be pertinent to this difficulty, or no. And
forasmuch as some of the new doctrine do show no proof, more then others, of
their particular inspirations, whether the one ought to be more believed then
the other concerning the same.

Answer.
By the former answers it has been declared, how the revelations pretended
by particular persons, ought to be examined by the means, by which men may
judge whether they be of the spirit of God, or no.

Then spoke Doctor Vigor, saying: that in the discourse aforesaid, he had
understood many sayings contained in the answers of the Minister, which were
against the word of God: as when he said, that it behooves first to honor the
Son before the father: Which the said Vigor reproouing, the said Spyna
maintained that thing to be true: affirming, such proposition to be grounded
and contained in the holy Scripture; as in the Gospel, and first Catholic
Epistle of Ioh. 5. 23. 1. Ioh. 2. 23.
S. John.

Unto which Vigor replied; that in the said places, the word (First) is not
found. Nevertheless, least he fall on that which has been put forth and
proposed in the beginning of the conference, he will not now enter into the
confutation of that saying: reserving it to the end of all the conferences.

Answer.
The said Spyna required that Vigor should quote the places of the Scripture,
which he pretended to be contrary to that was contained in his answer. And
where it is said, that it first behooves to glorify the Son before the
Father (according as it is written in the places above noted) for confirmation
of his saying, he proposes this reason, founded on the Scripture. We cannot
know the Father, if we have not known the Son. We cannot glorify the
Father, if we have not known him. Therefore it follows; that the knowledge
and glory of the Son, is a degree to come to the knowledge and glory of the
father: which being referred by the said Vigor, to be more amply handled in the
end and conclusion of all the conference, the said Spyna is so contented.

Objection.
The said Vigor (without wading further in this dispute) obiecteth: that by the
same reason alleged by the said De Spyna, It follows: that it first
behooves to honor the Father, before the Son: for by the Father we come to
the knowledge of the Son: as it appears by that which our Lord said to
Saint Peter: Caro and sanguis non reuelauit tibi: sed pater meus qui in Coelis
est. Flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is
in the heavens. Where it is manifest, that the heanenly Father did reveal to
Saint Peter, that our Lord was the Son of the living God. Whereupon the said
Vigor does thus argue. If the reason of the said De Spyna be good: by the
Father we know the Son: it behooves then to honor the Father before the
Son.

Answer.
To follow the order of the knowledge we may have of Jesus Christ, and of his
Father proposed unto us in S. John: It behooves to begin by the Son, and
from the Son to come to the Father. For Saint Phillip, having once required
that he would show unto him* and his other companions, Ioh. 14. 9.
his Father, he said unto him: Phillip, he that has seen me, he has seen
my Father. To teach them, that the mean to come to the knowledge of the
Father, is the precedent knowledge of the Son: which may be also confirmed
by that which is else where written: where Jesus Christ says: That no man
knows the Father but the Matthew. 21 27.
Son only, and he to whom the Son will reveal him. And to answer the
authority of Saint Matthew, alleged by the said Vigor, the said De Spyna
says: that in the text by him produced, there is no mention made of the
knowledge of the Father, nor of the mean to come unto it. But only of the
revelation made by the grace of GOD, and his holy Spirit unto Saint Peter, and
his other fellows, to know JESUS CHRIST, and the Father in him. Whereupon
Vigor said: he referred himself to the hearer and reader, that his objection
is not answer, dreseruing for another Conference, to treat more amply of that
point (if he will maintain it) least he should fall upon that which has
been formerly proposed; whereunto the said De Spyna answered, that he so
agreed.

The said Vigor (upon an answer made by the said De Spina: where he puts
difference between the certain revelation made by the Lord to a particular
person, and the holy Scripture) adds: that he is abashed of the same
answer, considering that men believe not the holy Scripture: But in that they
are acertained, that the Lord is author thereof, who cannot lie. Then
likewise, that if a particular man have assurance, that the revelation is made
unto him by the Lord: or else, that one is assured of the revelation, made to
another: as much is he bound to give faith to the revelation, as to the
Scripture. The which saying also, he will not (as he may) handle and declare
at large: but come presently to the first question, which is not yet resolved.
And prays the said De Spina to set forward the same.

Answer.
Where the said Vigor is abashed, that the said De Spina should say in one of
his answers, That the revelation of the Lord and the word, were things
different, the same is befalne him for not well conceiving the sense of the
saying: For De Spina will not put difference touching the certainty, between
the true revelations of the Lord, and the Word: which (proceeding from him) is
as true, as the revelation; And the revelation reciprocally, as true, as the
Word. Yet does it not therefore follow, that the word, and the revelations of
the spirit of the Lord (by the which we may be conducted to the understanding
of the word) are not things different: and that the one does not go before the
other. And where the said Vigor prays the said De Spina to hasten to the
point, he answers: That he cannot else where ground his answers, then upon
the demaundes which be made unto him.

Reply.
Whereunto the said Vigor replied: that he referred himself touching the
sense, to that which is touched in the answer of the said De Spina. And where
he says, that the word goes before the revelation: that is of no value to
make difference upon the question proposed. And to come to the point: the said
Vigor demands, whether a man may be assured that he has revelation from the
Lord, that a book, is a book of the holy Scripture? and when he may judge
assuredly of his inward inspiration? Also, how he can assure any of this
inspiration given him of the Lord?

Answer.
Touching the first Article of the last demand: It is not a thing impertinent
to distinguish the scripture from the interpretation thereof: ina^much as they
be things diverse, and diverse gifts of the Lord. And to answer to the question
proposed, how a particular man before the revelation and inward testimony of
the spirit of God in his heart, may acknowledge that it is Canonical. The
spirit of God varieth not from himself. And abiding in one particular man, he
will acknowledge the Scripture which is come from him* and bears his marks.
And for answer to the second demand, he also says: that the self same
spirit, being likewise in a third person, will acknowledge both that the word,
and the revelation are of him, for the reasons alleged: That is to say, that
the spirit of God in diverse persons is always equal and like unto himself.

Objection.
This is no full satisfaction to the first question proposed: by the which it
was demanded, how some man may judge in himself that he has the holy Ghost,
to discern one Book to be the holy Scripture, and another not, but Apocrypha:
and how he may declare unto another, that he has his inspiration from God.

Answer.
1. Cor. I. 22.
The spirit of God, is called a seal in the scripture: therefore is it, that
the first effect which it produces in the heart of him unto whom it is
communicated, is to assure him of his presence. As for assuring a second person
of the revelation that one has received of the spirit of God, it is easy:
Forasmuch as the spirit of God which opens the mouth of the one to speak,
does also open the ears of the other to listen to his word, and the heart to
believe it, and to be persuaded thereof* So that between the master, and the
scholar, between the teacher and the hearer, when they be both furnished and
enlightened by the Spirit of God, there is always one mutual consent to
acknowledge one another.

Objection.
Such certainty, is a great incertaintie. And there is not any of what sect
soever, which does not assure himself to have the holy Ghost, and the truth
on his side: which is a foolish presumption. How can a man distinguish a
presumption, from a true inspiration?

Answer.
S. John Chrysostom says: that in vain a man boasts of the spirit, without
the word: which is a mean to repress sects and heresies, and to judge of all
things, which heretics and others would propose, under the authority and
title of the Spirit of God. For as by the spirit we know the true sense of the
word: so do we also mutually acknowledge by the word, who those be, which have
the spirit of God or no.

Objection.
This is no answer to the question; For the question is not, to examine the
doctrine by the word: but the question is to know, whether it be the word of
God, by which a man will examine and approve a doctrine. And how a man shall
judge assuredly that he has a revelation of the Lord, that, that is the word
of God.

Answer.
If he be faithful, therefore shall he judge by the Spirit of God, which is in
him: as in him, which tells the same unto him. And if he be unfaithful, as
impossible it is that he should judge thereof, as it is to a blind man to
judge and discern of colors presented unto him: Forasmuch says 1. Cor. 5. 2
S. Paul.) as the Spirit of God is he, by whom we know, and judge the things
that are of God.

Objection.
Yet is not this an answer to the question proposed, let the judgment thereof
be left to the readers and hearers. Now make they another demand, that is to
say: Whether we be not very certain by the word of God, that the Lord does
assist his Church, and will assist it, unto the end of the world. And whether
it be not a more assured thing to stay on the consent and judgment of the
Church, touching the determination of the Canonical books of the holy
Scripture, and the distinction of them, from the Apocrypha: then to lean upon
his own judgment: esteeming it to be an inward inspiration; whereof a man
can make no proof: but supposes that he has the holy Ghost.

Answer.
The Doctors do confound the opinions which fantastic men may have, with the
witnesses and revelations of the holy Ghost: although between those two, there
is as much distance, as is from heaven to earth: And as touching the consent of
the Church, suppose that it proceeds from the spirit of God: Infallable it
is, and also certain, that particular revelations may be, as of Esaias and other
Prophets. And forasmuch as the one and the other, do proceed from one self
same Author (which is the Spirit of truth) The certainty of the revelations
of God his Spirit, made unto all the Church in general, and to every member of
it in particular, is of one self same moment.

Objection.
The Minsters cannot show to the Catholics, nor to any others, that they are
not fantastical: for as much as they make no proof (more then do other sects)
of the revelation of the holy Ghost made unto them: and as touching that is
said: suppose that it proceeds from the Spirit of God. They doubt it seems
of the assistance of the holy Ghost in the Church of God: which says S. Paul)
is Columna and firmame^tu^ 1. Tim. 3. 15.
veritatis, the pillar and ground of truth. And a thing it is to be well
considered, that they are more certain of the assistance of the Lord in one
particular person, then in the Church universal. And where they say: that to
know the truth, the holy Spirit assisteth as well every member of the Church,
as the whole church: By that might a man conclude, that the particular faithful
could never err: and that, the particular faithful man should be as well the
pillar of truth, as the universal church. Moreover in making of particular
revelation, of like weight with the judgment of the church; they plainly
contradict the 4. article of their confession of faith: where it is thus
written. We acknowledge those books to be canonical, and very certain rules
of our faith, not so much by the common consent and agreement of the Church: as
by the testimony and inward persuasion of the holy Ghost: which makes us to
discern them, from other Ecclesiastical books. By the said article men may
see, how much more they attribute to themselves, then to all the universal
church. Which article, they now contradict: attributing as much to the one, as
to the other. And also in their confession of faith lastly printed, the said
article has been taken away, as is seen by that which De Spina, has now
brought hither, imprinted at Geneua, 1564. Whereby it appears, that they be
retracted: as confessing that it behooves to rest more upon the common consent
of the church, the^ upon any particular ma^s judgment. Which thing is very
reasonable: seeing the holy Ghost is promised to the church universal, and not
to every particular person.

Answer.
If men may esteem the Ministers fantastic, although they have the word of
God: more shall the Doctors be holden for such, in things they maintain and
defend without and contrary to the word of God. Touching the second point,
where the Doctors reproach the Ministers, that they do doubt (as it seems by
their answer) of the assistance of the spirit of God to the church. The answer
is: that that is not the doubt: but to know which is the true Church. And
touching the third point, whereof (say the Doctors) might be inferred, that
particular persons could not err. The consequence is naught: for as much as
the spirit of God may sometimes depart from particular persons, and in Psalm.
30,
this case they may fail and err: as David confesses to have happened to him.
To the fourth point, the Ministers do answer: that they no way contradict the
alleged Article of their confession: for that comparison is made in the
answer, of two revelations of the holy Ghost: the one made to the body, and
the other to the members: which they maintain to be of like weight, touching
the certainty thereof. And in the confession mention is made of the revelation
of GOD his spirit, which is the cause of the Churches consent, which does
follow as the effect thereof. Now so it is, that the cause being preferred
before his effect: there is great reason, that the revelation of God his
spirit, compared with the consent of his Church, be preferred unto it: as the
cause, to the effect which it produces. And touching the contrariety which
they pretend to happen in the confessions, printed at diverse times, and by
diverse Printers; they shall be answered, when it shall please them to debate
the Articles particularly.

Objection.
Where they set forth the doubt they have of the true Church: as much men may
say of pretended revelations of God his spirit unto particular persons. Of whom
likewise it may be doubted, whether they be members of the Church. For the
other point, where they deny that they contradict the fourth article of their
confession, it seems in show, that there is contradiction: for as much as
they compare the particular revelation, with the consent of the church: as by
their answer appears. Also that which is alleged, that revelation is cause
of consent; to prefer it to that, as the cause to the effect, seems to
serve to small purpose: for it is, as if one should say, that the revelation is
to be preferred to the word of God, and the holy scripture. For very certain
it is, that revelation goes before the word, and scripture. And as it
appears in the text of the Confession, (as every one may easily judge) the
authors thereof, speak of the certainty and infallibility of two
revelations: as holding themselves more assured of that they have in their own
spirit, then that which is of the judgment of the Church. And touching an
other point; where it is said, that particular persons may sometimes fail,
when the holy Ghost does leave them; By that we may conclude, that we must
not infallibly rest on the pretended inspirations of particular persons:
because we may doubt of them, whether they be destitute of God his spirit, or
no, which cannot be done of the Church. Wherefore more sure it is, to stay upon
the Church, (infallably governed by the holy Ghost) then upon private pretended
inspirations. And so do the Catholics therein, never following their private
judgment, and therefore cannot be esteemed phantasticke. But rather those,
which prefer their proper judgment, which they shrowde with the title of
particular inspiration. The Doctors require one text of the scripture, by the
which, the holy Ghost is promised unto every one in particular, as it is to the
Church universal, to know, and judge, and discern which are the scriptures.

Answer.
Touching the first point. As indeed they approve not all Churches to be true
Churches which say they be so: So do they not also approve them all faithful,
who boast themselves to be so. For the second point: the comparison of the
Doctors is not proper, which thus they have made: as who should say, that
revelation is to be preferred to the word of God, etc. Forasmuch as the word
of God, and all the writings as well of the Prophets as of the Apostles, are as
much of the revelations of the Spirit of God, and that no more difference there
is between the one and the other, then is between Genus and Species. And
touching that which is added in this article, that the revelation precedeth the
Scripture. It behooves to distinguish between the revelations made to the
Prophets before they put them in writing; and those which have been made to
them that read their writings: for the understanding of them. Touching the
first, we confess they go before the Scripture. And touching the second, we
say: that they follow the same. For the third article, the Ministers do
answer: that it is easy to judge whether the Spirit of God assist a
particular person, or whether it be withdrawn, by the things which he
proposes, when they be reduced to the word of God, and censured by the rules
which are there proposed unto us as is said. Touching the demand, it should
be too tedious a thing to allege all the places where it is written. That the
Spirit of God is communicated to the particular members of the Church only:
let them see in the 1. Cor. 2. where expressly it is said: that the Spirit of
God is communicated to the chosen, to know and discern the things which be of
God. And in Esaias 55. the Lord does promise to shed his Spirit upon the
faithful, as water upon the earth. And in Joel likewise the second, and
Jeremy 34. And the 1. Epistle of Saint John 2. under the name of Ointment, and
in many other places.

Objection.
The places heere-aboue alleged, make nothing to prove that the Spirit was
promised to all, to judge of the doctrine: otherwise, even women, and all
faithful Artificers should judge of the doctrine, as the Prophets* and
Apostles. To the contrary whereof Saint Paul says: Nunquid omnes Prophetae,
etc. Are all Prophets? he puts down expressly: that the discerning of
Spirits, is to have understanding of the Scriptures: and are gifts which are
not common to all the faithful, but particular to some.

Answer.
The consequence which the Doctors gather, is nothing worth: forasmuch as the
Spirit of God is more abundantly often times comunicated to some then to others.
And some also are better exercised in the Scripture, then others. Touching the
place of Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 12. the Ministers say, It makes nothing against
them: forasmuch as the Spirit of prophec^e, and the spirit of discretion are
different gifts: as it appears by the declaration which the Apostle makes in
the same Chapter.

The second days Dispute, being Wednesday, the tenth of July.
THE Doctors required, that their protestations the day before made, might be
registered, which was such; That they protested they would not enter into any
Dispute of things received in the universal Church, from the Apostles time
hitherto: decided and determined by holy E^umenicall and general Counsels:
holding them for certain and indubitable: and that all doctrine to the
contrary was false. But following the good and holy desire of the Lord
Montpensier, and Madam de Buillon his daughter, they were ready to make known
by the verey ex^resse word of God, interpreted by the said universal Church
and Counsels, that their doctrine, wherein the said Lady was formerly
instructed, is sound and wholesome. And that the instruction which has been
given her to the contrary* is perni^ious and damnable. And that this
Conference is by way of instruction, and not of Dispute.

The Ministers likewise protested, that they assembled not with the Doctors,
for any doubt they had, that whatsoever is contained in their confession of
faith, is not certain and true, and founded upon the word of God: as appears
by the places of scripture quoted in the margeant of the said confession. And
do believe, that whatsoever is contrary and opposite thereunto, is damnable,
and to be rejected: yea though an Angel from heaven should propose it. And as
touching themselves, they were not come thither to be instructed in other
doctrine, then such as they follow, and have learned of Jesus Christ: whom they
acknowledge to be the only master and instructor of the Church.

It was declared by my Lord of Neuers, that he desired (after the objections
and answers) there should be given a short resolution both of the one side
and the other, of that was conferred of the day before. Following which
remonstrance the Doctors say: that to judge of a book whether it be the
writing of holy scripture, or not: and likewise to discern a book Canonical,
from one Apocrypha, or Ecclesiastical, a man must not rest on his own private
opinion, or private and particular inspiration: for as much as none have
ordinary assurance, that it is a true revelation of the holy Ghost, without
reducing himself to the common consent and agreement of the Church universal.
And also that God, albeit he had power to reveal and imprint in each one the
true knowledge necessary to salvation: yet has he ordained a certain mean,
whereby faith is obtained, which is a revealed truth: that is to say, by
hearing of the word of God, preached by lawful Ministers, sent by the Pastors
of the true Church: as by the text of Saint Paul to the Romans 10. and Ephesians. 4.
appears. If then the mean to have faith and inward revelation of the
knowledge of salvation be, by the hearing of the word of God lawfully preached
by the Ministers of the same, according to the ordinary mean, to be assured
that a man has inward revelation It behooves necessarily to be assured, that
the word by which faith is obtained, has been preached by the lawful
Ministers of the true Church. And by consequence, to be first assured of the
church, before his own inward revelation, following the mean which Jesus
Christ has followed. They say further, that the true and certain mark of a
true inward revelation is, when as it is reduced to the common consent of the
Church. And contrariwise, that every pretended inward inspiration, particular
and private, is a false persuasion, if it be different from the common consent
of the Church: For the spirit of God is not particular, but common. And say
moreover, that to find out a false doctrine, it behooves to examine the same,
to know whether it be private or common, even as our Lord has given the true
mark in Saint John. 8. saying: Qui de se loquitur, mendacium loquitur. He
that says any thing of himself, and of his own proper inspiration, is a
liar. And likewise as it is written in Ezechiel; Son of man, prophecy Ezech.
13
against the Prophets of Israel, that prophecy: and say unto them that
prophecy out of their own heart, hear the word of the Lord. Thus says the
Lord God: Woe to the foolish Prophets which follow their own spirit, and have
seen nothing. And afterward, they have seen vanity, and lying divination,
saying: The Lord says it: and the Lord has not sent them: and they have made
others to hope that they would confirm the word of their prophecy. And the
verses following do serve to the purpose. Which false Prophets said, they had
an inward revelation, and the word of God.

They say also, and let it be well wayed, that the proppe of Religion, grounded
and assured upon an inward inspiration, is the foundation of many Sects in our
time, as of Anabaptists, and Suencfildians: who stay their doctrines upon
private revelations, and allege the same texts, to serve them for foundation
of their doctrine, which the Ministers yesterday alleged: that is to say,
Jeremy in the third Chapter, and Joel. 2. and Saint Paul. 1. Cor. 2. which
Brentius and Bucer considering, have confessed: that by the only tradition of
the Church, we are acertained of the books of the holy scripture, in
following the doctrine of the ancient Fathers, as Saint Jerome, who confesses
he received by the tradition of the Church, and by the same did know, that
there be four Gospels. As much thereof says Origin, recyting the Canonical
books of the new Testament, saying: I have learned by tradition, that there
be four Gospels. And you shall not find any ancient Catholic, which has
stayed his faith to discern and judge of books upon his only private and
particular inspiration. And Saint Augustine, Liber Confess. cap. 25. uses
these words: Veritas tua domine, non mea; nec illius aut illius, sed omnium
nostrum, quos ad communionem aduocas: terribiliter admonens ne priuatam
veritatem habeamus, ne priuemur ea. Thy truth o Lord, not mine, nor of him or
him, but of all us, whom thou call to communion: terribly admonishing that
we have not the truth private, least we be deprived thereof.

And touching the books of the old Testament, which the Ministers will not
receive for Canonical by the judgment of their inward revelation; the Doctors
do show, that before Saint Augustines time, or (at leastwise) in his time, in
the Church universal, all the books which are contained in the holy Bible
without distinction, were holden and received for Canonical: as witnesses the
Council of Carthage, where S. Augustine was* And also the Council of
Laodicia. Now thus say the Doctors, the Fathers which were present in these
Councels, (if by inward inspiration we must judge of books) they had it, or
at least they might persuade themselves to have it more assuredly then many
others.

The Ministers say, that they judge by their inward revelation, that they be
not Canonical. The Doctors leave it to judgment, which men ought rather
believe: whether the inspiration of the ancient Fathers, received by the
Church for so many hundred years until now: or else the private and
particular inspiration of the new Ministers. They add further: that they
submit themselves to prove, that the ancient Fathers, yea near the time of
the Apostles (as Ireneus, S. Ciprian, Origin, S. Jerome, S. Augustine* and
others) do use the testimonies of the books rejected by the Ministers: yea
for proof of the doctrine against the heretics. And Saint Augustine himself
in the 2. book of Christian doctrine, Cap. 2. does put all those books by
name among the books Canonical. And Damascen likewise in his fourth book de
Orthodoxa fide. Cap. 18.

To know then, whether a man have the spirit of God, to discern and judge of
the books of the scripture, he must be reduced to the common consent and
agreement of the Church: for this is the ordinary means left by God to that
effect: and the experience may be made, is an argument sufficient to convince,
that the faithful by inward inspiration, cannot discern the Canonical
books, from the pretended Apocrypha. Which might easily be verified, would
the cause to come at this present, some of the same pretended reformed
Religion, which have not yet been instructed in the division of the books;
unto whom should one propose the books which the Ministers hold for Apocrypha;
they would in no wise distinguish them from other books of the holy Bible. And
upon the whole they conclude, that if one person has the spirit of God, etc.
vt supra.

Answer.
Touching the first Article, the Ministers never said (as may appear by the
reading of all the former answers) that their religion is founded on their
particular revelations; but upon the word of God, as is proposed in the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles. Of the truth whereof, they have said to
be principally assured by the ^estimoni^ and revelation of the holy spirit.
They also say, that faith is not the truth (to speak properly): but the
persuasion of the truth, which in the scripture ^s ^aught us. Moreover, that
this faith is not of our own getting* but a pure gi^t of God: adding, that the
Ministers to make them lawfull^, ought to be sent not from the pretended
Pastors, which have not but the ^y^le, and only name of Pastors: but ought to
be sent from God, a it appears in Jeremy: where this mark is proposed, to
know and mark a false Pastor or Shepherd when he thrusts in himself, or
is sent of an other then of God.

Touching the article following, they add that the true mark whereby one may
certainly judge of the revelation, is rather the word of God, then the consent
of many: for as much as it often times happens, that the multitude in the
Church, declining from the word do altogether err: as in the time of Micheas,
the time of Jesus Christ, and afterward also of Constance the Emperor.

Concerning the Prophets, which do follow they^ own spirit (as be those
which leave the word of God, and depend upon the commandments and traditions
of men, or on the vanity of their own sense) there is no doubt but they are
false Prophets; and that such persons are to be shunned and rejected. But
great difference must be put between the revelations and testimonies of the
spirit of God, and the vain imaginations of the hearts of men.

Touching that which the Doctors have set forth, that heretics (as
Anabaptists and others) do use for confirmation of their errors, the texts of
scripture alleged by the Ministers. It may so be, for as much as the
scripture being common, may be produced and alleged of eue^ie one. And yet
men must not stay upon that which is alleged: but weigh and examine how and to
what end and purpose it is alleged: and in so doing, men shall know the
difference between the Ministers and heretics.

And concerning that produced of Brentius and Bucer, namely, wherein they
affirmed, that by the only tradition of the Church, the Canonical books may
be discerned from the Apocrypha. This it seems cannot well serve the Doctors,
seeing they maintain all the books of the Bible to be Canonical: and
nevertheless by that they have said of Brentius and Bucer, it appears that
the one and the other, following the tradition (as they say) put a distinction
therein: calling the one Canonical, and the other Apocrypha.

Touching the Article following, wherein the Doctors allege certain textes of
the ancient Fathers, to take away the difference between the books
Canonical and Apocrypha. The Ministers do answer, that as they have alleged
some to prove the same; so can they also for their part allege some to that
purpose: as Saint Jerome in his Prologue called Galeatus; and in an other which
begins Frater Ambrosius: unto whom, writing the sum of every book of the
Bible, he mentions those only which the Ministers call Canonical.

They may allege also two or three Catalogues recyted in Eusebius: which they
receive not for Canonical books; but those which the Ministers themselves
approve. Moreover, the Council of Laodicia, which the Doctors have alleged,
is for the Ministers: for as much as it comprehends not the books in
question. And touching the experience, they answer: that it is a question of
fact: and that it may be alleged, rather against the Doctors, then the
Ministers. And finally, that they loose not more time in often repeating of one
selfsame thing, but hasten to confer of the points of the confession, which
the Doctors will debate. The Ministers do show, that the 24. books of the old
Testament, which are in the Canon of the Hebrews, with all the books of the
new Testament, be on both sides approved Canonical. And they are wholly
sufficient to decide all the points of their confession, and all that in
general which appertains to true religion. And by means thereof, they have
no cause at all to draw back from the Conference, for the difference between
both parties, touching the distinction of the books Canonical and Apocrypha.

Objection.
Although the Ministers do affirm, that they build their Religion upon the
word of God, yet build they Gods word upon their inward revelation. So that
such a revelation is the foundation of the Word, and consequently of their
religion. For they receive not for the word of God, but that which they think
to be particularly revealed to them.

Touching the other Article, wherein they find fault that the Doctors have
said, that faith is obtained by hearing of the word of God, it seems they
will stay upon small things, because they will not go to the principal. And
where they say, that faith is the gift of God, and therefore is not gotten* it
is too plain by manifold texts of Scripture, that one selfsame thing to be
given and obtained, is not repugnant. As the kingdom of heaven, which is given
to the blessed, and notwithstanding men obtain it by true faith, working by
charity. And the scripture it self does Heb. 13.
call it a reward, and recompense of good works. And Saint Paul says: that by
liberality and almesdeeds, the grace of God is gained. Yea that which Saint
Paul says, Fides ex auditu: Faith comes by hearing, cannot otherwise be
understood, but that faith comes by hearing the word of God, which is the
obtaining thereof, by the mean of hearing the word preached; although it be a
gift of God. The like subtlety they use, willing to reprove that which has
been spoken, that faith is the truth revealed: as putting great difference
between the truth revealed, and the revelation of truth. Meet it were, that
the subtlety were vaileable I. Cor. 1. 10
against S. Paul, who says: Panis quem frangimus nonne communicatio corporis
Domini est? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of
the Lord? Which is as much to say, as Panis fractio nonne, etc. The breaking of
the bread, is it not, etc. And therefore to speak properly, it behooves that
the text of S. Paul be subject to such reprehensions. And as touching this
article, that they may not enter thereinto, albeit the Ministers do reply; the
Doctors will say no more of it: as being a thing too much impertinent. For in
the end, should we speak of Merit, and from that matter fall into an other.

It troubles them to deal with the vocation of lawful Ministers of the
Church; and to eschew that matter, would not allege (what they might without
straying) that first before we receive their doctrine, it was meet to examine,
whether they were Ministers lawfully sent from the true Church, to preach the
word of God, and in their preachings to be heard of the people, according to
the text of S. Paul Romans 10.
above alleged. Which thing, had they of the new Religion well considered, a
very sufficient argument should they have had for not receiving of their
doctrine, because it is more clear then the day, that they be not Ministers
sent by the Pastors of the Church but thrust in themselves to preach, unable to
show any sign of their calling from men, and much less from God. And were it
lawful for every one to preach the word, which says he is sent, there would
be infinite Sects: as we see at this time have happened. And they say no more
of this matter, for fear to aggrauate these things any further.

Touching the Article, where mention is made, how a man may know that a
revelation is of Ood: where it is said by the Ministers, that men should rather
know it by the word, then by the consent of many: that makes nothing to the
purpose of the Doctors. For the question is, how a man should judge a book to
contain the word of God, and not to judge of the doctrine, by the word
already received. The Doctors would willingly desire, and do pray the
Ministers to answer directly to the very point. Touching that they have said,
Of the consent of many. The Doctors said not so, but spoke of the consent of
the Church, which is also as infallible, as the word of God. For as it is
certain that the holy Ghost is author of the Word; so also is it certain,
that he is the soul of the Church: by whose conduct she can never err:
witness S. Paul, who calls her Columnam and firmamentum veritatis. The
ground and pillar of truth. But they will not enter into this question, whether
the multitude of the Church may err or not.

Nevertheless it will not be found ^ithens the Church was planted after the
death of Jesus Christ, that she has been of less number, then the Sects of
heretics. And that alleged of Constance, and of the time of the old
Testament seru^th nothing to that purpose: for there is great difference
between the Synagogue of the Jews and the Church: which is the congregation
of all Nations believing in Jesus Christ, and which cannot be or consist, but
in a most great multitude: otherwise the promises made to the Church of the
Gentiles, should be vain: for it is said to Abraham that his ^eed (this must
not be understood of the carnal) should be multiplied as the stars of
heaven, and the sand of the sea.

Concerning the Article which begins, Touching the Prophets, etc. The
Doctors do say, that they confess there is great difference between
fantastical imaginations, and the revelation of the holy Ghost: but the
Ministers do not answer how they would prove their particular persuasions, to
be revelations, rather then the vain and foolish imaginations of the Prophets,
which Ezechiel spoke of. The which notwithstanding they called inspirations:
and what they said, and preached, they called also the Word of God.

Concerning the Article which begins, Touching the Anabaptists, etc. The
Doctors say, that to one selfsame end, do the Ministers and Anabaptists
wholly produce the selfsame places, of which mention is made: that is to say,
to stay and assure their doctrine to be of God, because thereof they have
particular revelation, as God has promised them by the Prophets. And for this
selfsame cause, have the Ministers produced the said testimonies of the
scripture, to prove that every faithful man may indge by his particular
inspiration, if a book do contain the word of God: and distinguish a book
Canonical from Apocrypha: to judge and discern the true doctrine from the
false: which is the selfsame foundation of the Anabaptists and other
heretics.

To that Article which begins, touching that which is produced of Brentius,
etc. The Doctors say: that the Ministers have not well conceived their meaning.
For they bring not the saying of Brentius and Bucer, but only because they
say, that they know the Canonical books of the holy Scripture, by the
tradition of the Church, and not by particular inspiration, as the Ministers.

Touching the Article following, the Doctors say: there was a time when some
made doubt of certain books of the Scripture: as of the Apocalips, the
Canonical Epistle of S. John, and others. But in time the Church guided by the
holy Ghost, with common consent received indifferently for Canonical, all the
books that be in the Bible; which consent (continued by so many hundred
years) has more authority then the sayings of one or two: the which
nevertheless, spoke not but of their own time. And further, there is no
comparison between the sayings of one or two particular men, and the
determinations of Councels, and consent of the Church: as has already been
said. And it will be found, that S. Ierom has approved these books as
Canonical. And for the same, will refer themselves to the Prologue which he
made upon the books of the Macabees, where he says: Touching the Hebrews,
they are not Canonical histories of the Church: or other words to the like
effect. For the Council of Laodicia, they refer Inter diuinorum voluminum
anotantur Historia^.
them to that which is contained therein. It may be, they are deceived, in
cyting one Council for another. For the Article beginning, Touching the
experience, etc. Although it be a question of fact: yet it cease not to be
much auailable. And if it be found as the Doctors have proposed, (of which they
doubt nothing) the foundation of their particular revelation is overthrown.

Touching the Ministers conclusion: the Doctors do show, that they have often
times complained, they fell into by-matters. They refer themselves to the
judgment of all men, that their last resolution was deducted all of one
thread, continuing without straying, in the same matter: In which, albeit they
had found something wherein difficulty had been, had the Ministers so much
desired to proceed to the conference of the chief points; they might briefly
have admonished them of the said difficulty. The Doctors upon these articles
had verily said something: but to hasten the business for the which they be
called, they do forbear to multiply words.

Where the Ministers show, that they receive the 24. books of the old
Testament, with all the books of the New. The Doctors say: that that is not
the point. For all the conference they have made hitherto, that is to say: by
what rules men might discern some books from other some, and judge whether
they were of the Scripture or not, was to raunge them in this point, that they
received them by the tradition of the Church: which is judge of the number of
the books: and by the same means, when the question should be, of the
understanding of the word of God (even in the conference of the places of the
same Scripture) the Ministers and Doctors should have such reverence to the
Catholic Church, that she should be of both parts accepted for judge, of the
understanding of the Scripture, which they acknowledge to have received of the
same: whereof she is an infallible judge, and more certain, then the one or the
other. And notwithstanding the Doctors do make offer to the Ministers, that
they will not use at this time against them, but those books only, which they
receive for Canonical. But when they shall fall into difficulty of the
interpretation of some text, or of the conference of many: the Doctors esteem
it more reasonable to have recourse to the Catholic Church, and to the
ancient Fathers, then to their proper sense, or that of the Ministers.

Answer.
For conclusion, the Ministers do accept of the offer made them by the Doctors,
to decyde the points and articles of their Confession, by the books
Canonical, whereof they are agreed: that is to say, the 24. books of the
Hebrews, and all the books of the new Testament: protesting nevertheless,
that in the last writtings proposed by the Doctors, there be many things which
they no ways approve, and do hope to confute as occasions shall be offered:
and would presently have done it, had it not been that they will show (against
that imputed to them by the Doctors) that they will not stray, nor any way
retire from the conference of the points of their Confession.

Reply.
The Doctors reciprocally do agree to the Ministers in the said offer: with
this moderation, to ad the authority of the universal Church, and the
ancient Doctors, for the interpretation and understanding of the holy
Scripture, when they cannot agree.

The third days Dispute, on Thursday, the eleventh of July.
THE Ministers have showed what are the protestations which the Doctors have
made, not for other end to appear in this Conference, but to satisfy Madam
de Buillon, and not to be instructed, and otherwise informed of the points of
Religion then they be. And those which the Ministers have on their part made
also, not to confer with them for any doubt they have of the points of their
Confession, whereof they be wholely resolved: By reason of which
protestations, they have required that the first point, whereof they shall
confer, may be that which Madam de Buillon has publicly required to be
decyded: that is of the Supper, and of the Mass: that they may be discharged
of that also which has been imputed unto them by the Doctors: that they
wandered and would not come to the principal point, which is, that aforesaid
of the Mass: but contrariwise that they fled away and drew back from the
conference. Finally, that it may be known who do fly the decyding thereof:
They offer, after they have cleared that point, to confer with them (if they
please) of all the other points which be in controversy, as leisure and time
shall therefore be granted. And do also require, to avoid all confusion (and
such as happened in the Conference the day before) that the Doctors may propose
their arguments particularly each one apart: and that the answers also may be
made unto them particularly by the Ministers. Ir else, if they will propose all
their arguments and reasons together, that one whole day may be granted unto
them, wherein they may do that without any interruption: conditionally that
the Ministers may have the day following to answer by order to all their
arguments.

The Doctors say, by that which is above written in the behalf of the
Ministers: That it is easy to know, they have always recoyled, and yet do
recoyle from conference of the things which they have put in controversy: and
they are maruellously abashed, that they will not now permit the articles of
their confession to be examined by order: as the day of the first Conference
they had required (my Lord of Neuers, my Lord and Lady of Buillion, and other
Lords and Gentlemen being present) in presenting their said confessions,
contained in a little gilded book, making offer to the Doctors to examine
them in order (if they pleased) which they found very reasonable. And indeed
the Ministers themselves having demanded of the Doctors whereof they would
entreat, departed yesterday, contented to begin this day to examine the
Articles of the Creed. And as touching their speech of the protestation that
the assembly was made for the instruction of my Lady, who desires (as they say
in her absence) to be first instructed concerning the Mass: The Doctors say;
that the Ministers by word of mouth, have instructed the said Lady, not only
in the error which concerns their Supper: but also in many others, as they
will make it appear, when they shall handle the articles of the Confession by
them exhibited. Then willing to instruct the Lady by order in the Catholic
Religion: they purpose to follow the order held by the Fathers of the Church;
that is to say: to show unto her, how many errors against the Articles of the
faith, are contained in the Catechism of their Ghurch: although they show to
them of their religion, that they differ in these articles nothing from the
Catholics. And because to catechize and instruct one, it behooves to begin
at the foundation, and that of certain articles of the Creed (in which the
Ministers and their like do err) depends the beginning of the proof of the
real presence of the body of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar: they
will hold the order which all good teachers or instructors do keep in all
discipline, and the Ministers themselves do observe, following in their
Catechism this method. And rightly were the Doctors to be mocked (whom men
do take for instructors) if they should begin (for the Ministers pleasure)
to instruct one in that point, wherein they ought to end: as ends the same
Catechism of the Ministers upon the matter of the Supper.

Moreover, seeing the Ministers are content (as they say) that all the articles
of their confession be examined: no privilege have they, but that one begin
at the first, for as much as all order so requires: and it is always at the
choice of the Apponent to propound (in such order as seems best to him) the
questions for the Dispute, were there any. And for as much as they are bound to
give a reason of their faith, as often as they be thereof required: expedient it
were for the good of the Lady, and for the instruction of those that shall read
the Conference, to follow this method. And if they refuse what the Doctors do
offer, they cannot avoid it, but all the world will judge (by the eye) that
distrusting their own doctrine (which they dare not uphold) they confound the
Conference.

Whereas they require, that the Doctors in the Conference, put forth but one
reason at once: whereunto they may answer without confusion: or else, that in
one day the Doctors put forth all their reasons, and on an other day the
Ministers may come to answer. The Doctors do say, that the first offer is
reasonable; and to avoid length of speech, they accept it: but they never heard
say, that the second manner has been practiced: and no need it were to assemble
together in one place for that purpose, but to send their writings the one to
the other.

Answer.
Touching the exhibiting of the confession, and the offers which the Doctors
pretend to have been made by the Ministers, the Ministers do report themselves
to the Registers. And do add moreover, that it appears by the Doctors last
proposition, that it is not upon the confession which the Doctors say was
exhibited unto them, but upon the Catechism, that they will ground their
Dispute. For conclusion, the Miuisters do eftsoons protest as abouesaid, that
men may know who they be that do fly the Lists, and require that henceforth
the order of arguing and answering, may be by course, between them and the
Doctors. For as much as it behooves that things be equal, and that it is
reasonable, that the Doctors as well do render a reason of their faith, as the
Ministers.

Reply.
The Doctors do refer them to what has been put in writing in the two first
Conferences: where speech was always of examining the articles of their
confession, without making any mention of the Mass. And where they say that it
seems the Doctors would examine the Catechism, and not the articles of the
confession: the Doctors are content to examine the said articles, by conferring
them with the Catechism. This considered, that these two ought to agree
together: they make all men judges that shall read these writings, in whom is
the let, that they begin not the Conference. And for the order which the
Ministers will now change, a new fashion it is, and also a new trouble*
considering that hitherto they have holden the place of respondent, and have
presented to be examined, the articles of their confession. As for the Doctors,
they have been always arguers, and have not for their part proposed ought to
be examined. Nevertheless, they are contented after examination of the said
confession, that the Ministers do propound the difficulties they shall have
against the Catholic doctrine: whereunto by the grace of God, the Doctors will
answer.

Demand.
Whether the Ministers do believe the Creed, called the Apostles, to have been
made by the Apostles? and whether they do believe all that is contained therein?

Answer.
It is a thing in difference, whether the Apostles being together, themselves
did write it, each one of them bringing his sentence (as some do hold): or
whether it has been gathered out of diverse places of their writings. But so it
is, that in the reformed Church, men believe every point to be drawn from the
pure Prophetical and Apostolic doctrine contained in their writings: as if
one should say, that it is a Summarie of the doctrine which the Apostles have
preached, because it bears and contains the same.

Question.
Leaving (to avoid tediousness) whether it be a thing indifferent for a
Christian to believe, that a doctrine has been written by the Apostles, or no:
if it be conformable to that which shall be found in holy writ: they demand
whether all doctrine conformable to the said Letters, may take indifferently
the title of the Apostles, or other authors of the scripture?

Answer.
No man can fail to call it Apostolic doctrine: but in naming it Apostolic
writing, one might give to understand, that it was written by their own hands*
or spoken by them. But howsoever it be, where we shall acknowledge any doctrine
to savor of the spirit, wherewith the holy men of God have bin moved, that call
we Prophetical and Apostolic doctrine.

Objection.
The demand was not, whether the doctrine be Apostolic, for any such
conformity: but whether for this reason, it may be attributed to the Apostles,
and of like authority as the Scriptures, unto which it is conformable:
forasmuch as it proceeds from one self same spirit, as is said in the
answer.

Answer.
The Answer thereto is made: to wit, that such a writing does contain
Apostolic doctrine, and in some sense it may be said to be the Apostles.

Objection.
The Answer (under correction) naught pertains to the question. For it is
not demanded, whether men may esteem it Apostolic in respect of the
conformity, but whether for this conformity, men may attribute it to the
Apostles, and give unto it the title and name of the Apostles: and whether for
the said conformity, it be of like authority with the proper writtings of the
Apostles?

Answer.
The first question was, whether the Creed were made by the Apostles? Whereunto
has been rendered sufficient answer. After which it is lawful to make the
second demand, which is diverse from that.

Objection.
The second, depends on the first, and so has it been made. Whether it be
thought sufficiently answered, let the judgment thereof be referred to the
reader.

Answer.
Because it depends thereupon, it is not therefore the same.

Question.
Whether they approve the Creed only, because they know it to be conformable
to the writings of the Apostles? Or whether there any other cause, which
incyteth them to believe it?

Answer.
It is not only conformable, but the doctrine it self: and for that cause do
they believe it, and approve it.

Question.
Whether a man be not bound to receive it, but for so much as he knows it to
be the same writing, or conformable to the writings of the Apostles, as is
aforesaid.

Answer.
The principal cause that may move him that believes it, to believe it, is
the knowledge before spoken of.

Question.
Although this be the principal cause, they require an absolute answer,
whether there be not other sufficient cause to believe it, in such wise as this
first is necessary.

Answer.
For the Creed, and every other thing we believe, the principal cause is, the
knowledge we have that the same has been left in writing, or collected of the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles. And we for our part seek no other
reason but that of the faith which we have.

Objection.
They answer not (under correction) to the question: which is, whether to
receive the Creed of the Apostles this cause be necessary, to know the
co^formitie of the said Creed, with the writings of the Apostles: and that
without the same, none can or ought to receive it. The Doctors pray them to
avoid circumlocution, and answer absolutely the one or the other. And more
simply to explane the question, this it is: to wit, whether one ought not to
receive the Creed of the Apostles, but because he knows that it is
conformable to the Apostles writings?

Answer.
The matter considered after the doctrine of S. Paul, that there is no true
faith without knowledge and assurance of the word: to believe, it behooves to
know that it is the word of God.

Question.
It would be known, whether they understand this word to be written, or not
written.

Answer.
The word written and revealed by the Prophets and Apostles, which is the
foundation of the Christian faith.

Objection.
The Ministers do then maintain, that before the believing of the Creed, or
proposing it to be believed, it behooves to be instructed, or to instruct an
other, in the writings of the Apostles and Prophets. Now that is contrary to
all the order ever holden in the Church, and contrary to that which is
contained in the form, prescribed for administration of the Sacraments in the
Church at Geneua, made by Calvin, and inserted amongst his works; which
bears these words, addressed to them that have charge of the child they
baptize: For as much as the matter we have in hand, is to receive this child
into the fellowship of the Christian Church, yea do promise when it shall come
to years of discretion, to instruct it in the doctrine which is received and
approved of Gods people. And after these words, is inserted the Creed: after
which, it is said they shall proceed to the instruction of the child in all
the doctrine contained in the holy scripture of the old and new Testament: so
that before they propose the Creed to be believed, they propose not to be
believed that there is any word of God written, nor what it is, nor that
therein contained, to know the conformity of the Creed with the same. Also
they place not the foundation of the believing of the Creed, upon the knowledge
and conformity of the scripture, but upon the doctrine received and approved
by the people of God. As the ancient Church, yea before the scriptures of the
new Testament were written, did wontedly propose both to great and small, the
belief of the Creed, before they proposed the holy scriptures unto them, as by
Christian antiquities appears. And therefore the belief of a Christian
touching the Creed, depends not on the written word, but upon the word
revealed to the people and church of God.

Answer.
Touching the first article, it is very necessary that in teaching a child,
or any other ignorant person, the Creed of the Apostles, they also forthwith
teach him the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets, seeing that which is
contained in the Creed, is no other thing, but the selfsame doctrine: and
that they are things not only conjoined, but also like, if not in words, yet
at least in sense and substance.

Touching the second article, they deny that that abouesaid, is any way
contrary to the established order in the church of Geneua, or any other well
governed Church. And as touching the reason drawn from the form of the
Baptism used in the said Churches, it follows not, by the alleged words and
sayings thereof, that Calvin proposed the^ to exclude the Creed, and to
separate the same from the writings and doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles,
(which is impossible) but plainly to show, that when he added that word, he
meant therein to comprehend it, and generally (which the Doctors have omitted in
their allegation) to comprehend that which remains in the holy scriptures,
after the deduction he had made of the points of doctrine, particularly
comprised in the Creed. And for the other reason added, that the Creed was
proposed to those that were catechized, before any book of the new Testament
was written, they grant it. But it follows not therefore, that it was not
founded on the word and doctrine which the Apostles did preach: (although then
not put in writing) And likewise on the writings of the Prophets, whereupon is
founded the doctrine of the Apostles. For conclusion, the Ministers put no
difference as touching the sense between the word of God preached and written.

Objection.
The Ministers (it seems) have not well conceived the meaning of the Doctors.
For the question is not whether the Creed be conformable in it self, to the
writings Apostolic; but whether it first behooves to believe and understand,
that the Apostles and Prophets have put a doctrine in writing, unto which the
Creed is conformable: and that otherwise, the Creed cannot be believed. And
for more easy explanation, the question is, whether it be not possible for a
child, (being come to years of discretion) or any other, by the instruction
of the father and mother, or others, to believe the articles of the Creed,
without being first instructed by them, that there are certain Apostolic
writings, unto which, the Articles of the Creed are conformable. And whether to
move them so to believe, it be necessary to know that conformity; Let the
Ministers absolutely answer thereunto.

Answer.
Faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God: Romans 10.
whereunto agrees, that which Jesus Christ says: putting the hearing of the
word before the faith thereof, saying: He Ioh. 5. 24.
that hears my word, and believes in him that sent me, etc. Also that which
he commanded the Apostles, first to preach the Gospel, that the hearers
might by preaching, be disposed and brought to the faith. For these reasons,
knowledge that the doctrine which is taught, is the word of God, is necessary
to believe: And without that, it is not possible for a man to have faith, or
believe in God, except he be first assured, that what is taught him, is the
word of God. And for the demand made touching the instruction of children
grown to years of discretion, or others, whether it be requisite they should
know the word, before they believe it. The answer is, yea. And Thomas himself
says, that the faith of the articles of the Creed, ought to be expounded; that
is to say, cleared: which cannot be done without the knowledge of the word.

Objection.
In such an answer there is multiplying of words, without ought touching the
point proposed: for they doubt not but that they ought to Catechize children
and others, and to expound by the word of God, the Articles of the Creed unto
them: but the question is, whether they must understand, that this Word is
written in the books of the Prophets and Apostles: so that without the
knowledge of those writings, they cannot have the knowledge and belief of the
articles of the faith contained in the said Creed.

The Doctors pray the Ministers to answer yea or no: and after their answer,
to add what reasons they will. Which thing if they will not do, the Doctors
will proceed to an other article; after notwithstanding (for conclusion of all)
they have showed unto them, that if this knowledge of the scriptures were
necessary to understand the articles of the Creed, in examining them according
to the conformity of the same scriptures, that it behooves (since the
foundation is so necessary) to place this among the Articles of the Creed: [I
believe that there be holy scriptures.] And it is to be noted, that there is
not any mention made in the said Creed, that there are holy scriptures. So that
a man may be truly a Christian, before he understand that there is any
Christian doctrine, and word of God written. And therefore to believe and
understand the Creed, it is not necessary to know the word of God to be
written. And the Doctors do protest that they will speak no more of this
article.

Answer.
By conference of the demands and answers, it is easy to judge, who more
abound in speech, they which propound, or they that answer. Touching the
second article, the answer is as before; that to believe, and be a Christian,
the knowledge of Gods word is necessary, whether the said word be written or
revealed. And as touching the remonstrance made, the Ministers do answer, that
they for their part will in no wise allow men should ought add to the pure
word of God. And they believe that the Creed of the Apostles is nothing else
but the pure word of God, which is proposed unto us by his spirit, saying, that
it should be a breach against his commandment to add thereunto new articles.
And they do maintain, that had there been other articles which had been
necessary to salvation, the spirit of God would not have omitted nor forgotten
them. For conclusion, albeit no express mention be made of the holy scripture
in the Creed, yet so much is there covertly understood, that the Church (which
cannot stand if she be not built and founded upon the foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles) is there proposed for an article to believe.

Reply.
The Doctors say, that this answer is impertinent, and no more to the purpose
then the former. And although the Prophets and Apostles had not written, yet
had the Church bin built upon their foundation, as it was in the time of
Abraham, and before there was any scripture: which, were it necessary to
salvation, it had been put amongst the articles of faith.

Answer.
The Ministers say, that this reply is yet more impertiment: and for the reason
thereto added, that the faith was in the time of Abraham, although there were
no word written: they do agree thereunto. But it is ill inferred: there is no
written word. There is therefore no word. And it is a fallacy in argument,
which the Logicians do call, A dicto secundum quid ad dictu^ simpliciter. From
a qualified saying, to a saying simple.

The fourth days. Dispute on Friday the 12. of July.
THe Ministers do show, that they still continue their former requests,
considering the protestations aforesaid made by the Doctors: who have twice
declared, that they were not assembled, but only to satisfy the Lord
Montpensier, and my Lady of Buillon: considering also the request publicly
made by the said Lady in the assembly, to be instructed in the point of the
Supper, and not upon the others, whereof she thinks her self sufficiently
instructed, and not to need therein any further teaching. And for these causes
do the Ministers request, as before they have done, that the first thing,
whereof they shall confer, be that of the Supper* and of the Mass. And the
rather, for that they understood by some worthy of credit, that the Doctors
intend not to enter into conference upon that point.

Upon this declaration, the Doctors say, that they are ashamed to hear so
often protestations; and that the Ministers (it seems) will thus spend the
time, to flee eftsoons the Conference of the articles of their confession:
which nevertheless they have oftentimes set forth to be examined. And where
they say, that Madame de Buillon (for instruction of whom the company is
assembled) has required publicly to be instructed in the articles of the
Mass, and in no other. They say, that some mention she made for Conference of
the Mass: but they never heard say that she held her self sufficiently
instructed concerning the other articles. The Doctors do offer, that if the
said Lady will confess that she believes all the other articles proposed by
the Ministers, and their like against the doctrine of the Catholic Church, to
be e^ronious, they are presently ready to enter into Conference of the Mass.
But contrariwise, if she be seduced with errors, contrary to the doctrine of
the Church Catholic, to keep the order which appertains to instructors, and
to lay the foundation of the Mass, the Doctors have determined, according to
the good and holy des^e of my lord Montpensier, to car^chife and teach the Lady
his daughter concerning every article, and by order. And they further say, that
the Ministers do what they of their Church are accustomed; which is, always to
fly back from the Confere^ence with the Catholics, and be for^the point
proposed by them be decided, they put an other in Dispute: as did Be^a and the
Ministers with him at Poissy: who seeing the Supper was to be handled against
the^ in the chamber of the Prior of Poissy in the pre^^ce of the Queen, of the
Prinoes of blood, and of the Lords of the Council, they often requested to
leave that point undecided, hand to enter into some other which should be more
evident against the Catholics as of Images and other things. And contrariwise,
the Ministers to avoid now the great (...) which be in their interpretation of
the Creed, would set forth the point of the Supper. The Doctors beseech, as
they have (...) that there be no confusion in their doing; and (...) their
religio^e examined by order; and that it be no^ thought that the Doctors do
refuse ^o enter into the Conference of the Mass, and the Supper, as they have
always determined and never said (under correction of all persons) that they
would not confer theerof: for my Ladies brief instruction, they are ready
to dispute thereof by word of mouth, and plainly to show by the express word
of God, that Jesus Christ instituted, and said Mass, and his Apostles also.
They do also offer, that whatsoever shall be said by word of mouth upon this
matter, be put in writing the next day after, to be placed in it order: as the
instruction of my Lady does require. And do refer them for the day, to the
said Ladies opportunity.

The Ministers do answer, that all these answers are superfluous, and
unprofitable, for as much as all such Conferences are nothing but debates and
al^rications, which do^ offend and scandalize more then they edify.

The Resolution of the Doctors.
THe Doctors ensuing the order already begun, and their charge which is to
confer with the Ministers, and afterward to give a resolution for the
instruction of my Lady of Buillon, upon the two points proposed yesterday: to
wit, whether the Apostles were authors of the Creed. And why we ought to
believe it. They say, that to know whether the Apostles did make and erect the
Creed, ought no more to be esteemed a thing indifferent, then to know whether
the Apostles be authors of their own writings. For much more is the authority
of them, when a man is assured that they are certainly proceeded from the
Apostles. And contrariwise, it should be far less, if men did doubt thereof, or
esteem it a thing indifferent. Moreover they say, that it is no sufficient
reason to call this Creed Apostolic, and to entitle it, the Creed of the
Apostles: in regard of the conformity it has with their writings. For by this
reason, the other Creeds (as that of Nice, of Ath^n^sius, and all other the
like writings) may as well be named the Creed of the Apostles; because they
contain a doctrine agreeable to the Apostles writings. Therefore say the
Doctors, it must be believed, that the Apostles did make it, and gave the same
Creed unto Christians* and that it must be believed, as being a writing
composed by the Apostles. And their proof thereof is, that they always find
since the Apostles time until now, that this Creed has been proposed in
Baptism and Catechism: as it appears by the authors which have been from
the Apostles unto us. And also that no man can name, or note any Author or
Council (but even before that Author, or Council, immediately to the Apostles
time) that Creed has been proposed in Baptism and Cat chisme, and called
among Christians, the rule of faith. And the like argument S. Augustine in many
places against the Donatists, does esteem to be firm and in^incible, to prove
and show, that something is from the Apostles.

They willingly omit to avoid ^ediousnesse, the ancient writers: as S.
Ambrose, S. Jerome, and others, who acknowledge this Creed to have been made
and received, namely of the Apostles. For the second point, the Doctors do
affirm, that the bond and necessity to believe this Creed, does not depend o^
the knowledge of the Apostolic or Prophetica^^ scriptures, nor on the
knowledge of the conformity with them. For it was made and co^^ained among the
Christians in Baptism, before there was any Apostolic writing. And in
Baptism they proposed the said Creed to be believed, before they ent^ed into
the scripture, or to speak thereof. And in the Primative Church, they examined
the scriptures whether they were to be received or nor, and the understanding
of them, and whether a doctrine were true or false by this Creed and rule of
faith; and by it likeness or conformity with the same. Ireneus, Tertullian,
and others, do teach it. And although it should so happen, that a man had never
heard but the Creed, without knowing whether there be holy scriptures or not,
he might believe the said Creed, and be a true Christian: so that he were
void of other particular false opinion. And contrariwise, if the belief of the
Creed did depend upon the knowledge of the Prophetical o^ Apostolic
scriptures, to understand and to be assured of the conformity that is therein,
as (...) as to believe it (...) none but the learned and well exercised in the
scriptures (who should be assured of the said conformity) should be bound to
believe the Creed, or should at least be assured of the truth thereof. And so
should there he very few Christians, Therefore the belle^ing of the Creed, does
not depend upon the knowledge of the scriptures.

By means whereof the Doctors do hold by tradition of the Church (...) by the
holy Ghost, that the Creed is the Apostle and that none ought to doubt thereof.
And by the same tradition it must be believed, as (...) of the Apostles of like
authority with that in their writings, although they had no knowledge of the
other scriptures. And the Doctors are sorry that they have so much declined from
answering pertinently and absolutely to these two points, which they have only
proposed to show, what faith and authority men ought to give to this Creed,
and to all other doctrine received by tradition of the Apostles, (without
Canonical scripture) which they will prove to have been left by them; by the
same mean and reason by which is showed, the Creed to have bin delivered to
the Christians by the Apostles without that they put the same in writing.
Finally the Doctors do admonish such as read this Conference, not to be
astonished, nor ma^uell at so many perplexed declinings from the true end of
the said points proposed. And do pray them to remember the conferences made by
S. Augustine, with the Donatists and Pellagians: wherein they shall find like
manner of dealing, as that of the Ministers, with whom they do confer. And for
the present Conference, refer themselves to the readers judgment.

The Resolution of the Ministers.
THe Ministers following that which before has been proposed, and always by
them maintained; and for the confirmation also of the faith of the Lady of
Buillon, say that it is uncertain (as S. Ciprien has written) whether the
Creed, called the Apostles, was made and composed by them: or else drawn or
gathered out of their doctrine: and why also it is called the Apostles Creed:
or whether it is because each of them added his part and portion thereunto: or
else whether it be because it is a mark and certain ensign of Christian
Religion. And as touching the same; that it is a thing indifferent to
salvation: in as much as it has always one weight and authority, be it that
the Apostles have written it, or that it has been faithfully gathered out of
their writings. So have also the Creeds, as well of Nice, as of Athanasius,
whereof the Church has never doubted, but that they contain a pure Apostolic
doctrine, as she has evidently declared, in ordaining that the said Nicen
Creed should be publicly proposed and published to the people, on the days
of their assembly to communicate, which at this day is yet observed in the
Church of Rome: where that Creed is read or sung every Sabbath in their
Churches. And did it not contain Apostolic doctrine, it should withstand the
59. Article of the Council of Laodicia: in which it is forbidden to read in
the Church, any thing proposed of private invention, but only the doctrine
comprised in the Canonical books of the old and new Testament, the number
whereof is there made.

The Ministers say further, that the reason and principal motive of the faith
which Christians give to the Creed, is the knowledge they have, that it is the
pure word of God, and him that teaches it, do they also maintain, to be the
word of God: as may appear by that which S. Paul writes: who after he had
proposed to the Corinthians, the 1. Cor. 15.
death, burial, and resurrection of Jesus Christ, which be the chief articles
of the Creed, and those upon which principally justification is grounded,
adds these words. That he delivered unto them, that which he received: to
wit, that Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures; and that he
was afterward buried: and that he arose again the third day, according to the
scriptures.

Jesus Christ also proposing his death and resurrection to the two Disciples,
alleged to them the scriptures, thereby Luke 24.
to assure them, saying: O fools and slow of heart to believe all that the
Prophets have spoken, ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to
enter into his glory? And he began at Moses and the Prophets, and
interpreted unto them in all the scriptures, the things that were written of
him. In the selfsame Chapter, appearing after his resurrection, even before
the Creed was made, proposing unto them his death and resurrection; to assure
them thereof, he alleged unto them the scriptures, saying: It is thus
written, and thus it behooved Christ to suffer and rise again from the dead the
third day. Whence may be inferred, that for the foundation of faith, and
assurance of the articles of the same, there is no better means then to propose
the scriptures. And although in the time of the birth of the Church, the Creed
was proposed to those that were Catechized, before the Apostles and Evangelists
had put any thing in writing: it follows not therefore that there were no
other scriptures, whereupon every article of the faith might be builded. And
Genesis. The article of the almightinesse of God, has it foundation upon the
40. Chapter of Esaias, and diverse other places of the scripture. Esaias: For the
place of his birth, upon the 5. of Micheas: and in respect of the time, upon
the 49. of Genesis, Daniel. The article of the death and of the Cross, upon
the 22. Psalm, 53. Chapter of Esaias, and 9. Daniel. The article of the
Resurrection upon the 16. Daniel, 12. The article of Joel 2. The article of the
Esaias. 2. and Micheas. 4. The article of the remissiof Ezec. The article Daniel
the 12.

By this discourse, and places of scripture quoted, it may appear to every
man, that there were clear and evident scriptures to ground all the articles
of the faith upon, before the Creed was put in writing: and that men might and
ought to allege them to those that were catechized, to assure them of that
which was proposed unto them to be believed. And it is not possible that a man
can believe, that has not first heard and understood the Word: and that is not
assured thereof, and holds it as certain, and more also (were it possible)
then things conceived and comprised by Mathematical demonstration: as it
appears by the definition of faith, when the Apostle calls it Hypostasin,
and elenchon. Heb. 11.
That is to say, the evidence of things which are not seen. The Ministers do
add, that it implies a contradiction, to call the Creed a doctrine not
written* and yet to affirm that the Apostles have written it. And they cannot
show how long it was an unwritten doctrine, and at what time it began to be
written. And the Ministers are much displeased, in that they which confer
with them, do not more propose the edification as well of those that be
present at this Conference, as of others which may see and read the Acts
thereof. For where as they might handle and decide points tending to
edification of the simple, they stay on proposing and handling some things
whereof they no way doubt: which is as much, as to prove a thing confessed, and
resolved on, and to light a candle at noonday. And they assure themselves,
that they which shall read the acts of this Conference, will not at all be
abashed, because they decline to treat of that point, whereof they be so often
required: for that (as Jesus Christ says) he that does evil, flees the light.

For conclusion, the Ministers do protest to confess and believe, that the
Creed of the Apostles, in every article thereof, is the pure word of God, and in
the faith whereof, it behooves every faithful man to stay and petseuere unto
the end. So that they would no way receive nor approve the man in their
Churches, that should deny, or ought doubted of the said articles.

Reply.
The Doctors will prove, that the doctrine of the Ministers contains points
contrary to the principal articles of the Creed. The first is against the
article of the Almightinesse of God, when as they say and teach, that God
cannot cause one body to be in two places. The second is against the article of
the creation, when as they say, that God not only permits evil and sin to
be done, but also himself does it. The third is, that one while they deny,
and an other while they confess for an article of faith, that the Virgin Marie
remains a Virgin after her childe-birth. The fourth, that Jesus Christ
descended not into hell, but by imagination, and not really. Also say the
Ministers against the said article, that Jesus Christ dispaired of his
salvation upon the tree of the Cross: that he was troubled in conscience,
fearing to be damned: and many other errors contained in this Article. Upon
which objections, they warn the Ministers to be ready to answer thereunto.

Answer.
The Ministers will be ready to answer to the slanders aforesaid.

The fifth days Dispute on Monday the fifteenth of July.
THe Ministers do require, that the request fomerly made, and now again
repeated by the Lady of Buillon, namely, that the Doctors should speedily
confer with them concerning the points of the Mass, may be registered, to the
end the occasion may be known why the Doctors do delay and go back from the
said Conference.

The Doctors unwilling to loose time, and willing to pursue the last days
agreement, according whereunto the Ministers ought to answer, touching the
errors contained in the doctrine by them preached, against the articles of the
Creed: as the Doctors have noted and proposed the same. And to enter forthwith
into the matter, they show that the said Ministers have euilly alleged Saint
Ciprian for them, to deny the Creed to be the Apostles. For S. Ciprian
doubts not, nor puts in doubt as a thing indifferent, whether it be the
Apostles or no; but shows expressly, that before they departed asunder, they
composed the said Creed: as in the Preface of his exposition may appear.

The Doctors demand further upon the article of the omnipotency, (which is
the foundation of the Supper, and the holy Sacrament) why the article of
omnipotency, being the first and principal article of faith, is not contained
in the confession, proposed by the mouth of Beza at Poissy, before the King,
and many times since, and inserted in many books?

And why they have made so many different confessions of faith, taking out of
one what they have put in: and adding (contrariwise) to others that they have
omitted. And how it happens, that the article of the Trinity, is not
expressly in the first confession of the 1564. year? which yet they do confess
in all obscurity.

Answer.
It shall appear by the last days acts, that the Ministers have required what
they yet require for the present: namely, that the point of the Mass be first
put forth to be decided: because it is the chief occasion, for which the
Conference was appointed.

And concerning that they propose touching the Creed, the Ministers never
doubted, nor yet do they doubt but that it is a pure Apostolic doctrine. Which
to every man that shall read the acts of the last day aforesaid may appear:
where (at least) in half a dozen places, they have always confessed and
repeated the same.

And that which they have maintained to be doubtful, is only, whether the
Creed were written by the Apostles themselves, or not: whereof nothing can
appear to be verified by the Doctors. And S. Ciprian himself, whom the
Doctors have produced, in his Preface does advertise the readers of the great
variety there is touching the said Creed: for as much as diverse Churches have
added thereunto diverse articles: He does also advertise them, that he follows
in his explication, the order of the Church of Aquilea. Yea and expounding the
article of the discention into hell, (of which the Doctors make so much adoo)
he specially says: that it is not in the Creed of the Roman Church, nor yet
of the Eastern Churches. Whence may be gathered the incertaintie of that
above said: and that there is no article of which men may reasonably doubt,
whether it be of the number of those which the Apostles have written, or
whether some Church has added the same: or else it must be said, that the
Apostles had written diverse Creeds. And for the difference which the Doctors
do pretend to be in the confessions of the reformed Churches, printed and
published at sundry times, the Ministers deny them, as touching the sense, to
differ one from the other: although for more ample declaration thereof, some
terms have possibly been changed. And where they propose that in some of
them the article of the omnipotency of God was omitted, the Ministers do
deny it, and require the Doctors to bring forth a copy of the confession, in
which they maintain the same to have been omitted: for were it so, it should
be falsified and corrupted. Adding that there is nothing in their confession,
doubtful or obscure: which some of the said Doctors have well declared, when
they made a form of confession by the pattern of that of the reformed
Churches, using the proper terms and sentences: unto which they added nothing
to make it vary, that excepted for which they are in difference with the
Ministers, and which they would hardly ground upon the scriptures.

Objection.
The Doctors say, that the Ministers by their denial that S. Ciprian holds
the Apostles were Authors, makers, and composers of the Creed, do sufficiently
show, how bold they are to deny things manifest. All which, they refer to
the auditory present, and to the readers of this writing. For ground of which
denial, they rest upon a simple reason: to wit, upon the article of the
discention into hell, whether it were inserted by the Apostles, or added by
others to make it doubtful, whether they are Authors of all the other
Articles. For it is, as if a man should say, it is uncertain whether Saint
John composed his Gospel, because there be John. 8.
that doubt whether the History of the Adulteress be of him. But leaving
that, the Doctors demand, whether they confess not by their doctrine, that
God by his almightinesse, cannot cause one body to be in two places: two bodies
in one place? Thirdly, that God cannot cause a body to be invisible. Fourthly,
that one body may be in one place without holding place equal to it greatness.

Answer.
All these questions are impertinent and enstranged from the confession of the
Churches: which nevertheless the Doctors have chosen for foundation of all the
Conference. Wherefore the Ministers require, that they dispute to the purpose,
and choose one article or many of the said confession, whereupon they pretend to
build their said questions.

Objection.
These questions are very pertinent to impugn the Articles of the Ministers
confession. For the question is not, of the proper words contained in the said
confession, which is not but a Summary of the faith: but the Doctors will
impugn the sense of the Articles which they do know by their proper
writings. By which they openly witness, touching the article of the
omnipotency, that God cannot do the things aforesaid. And the Doctors do
show, that it well and fitly serves to impugn the doctrine of heretics,
and for the true means to prove against them, that they receive not the holy
scripture, when they prove that they receive not the true sense thereof.

They say also, that the Ministers themselves having desired conference of the
Mass, are the cause of such questions: and the Doctors by this mean will draw
them thereunto. For this article of the omnipotency, is the chief foundation
to prove and maintain the word of God, and the real presence of the body of
Jesus Christ, in the Sacrament of the Altar. And the Doctors are abashed at so
many declinings: for when their confession is spoken of, they demand the Mass:
and when they come to the Mass, they demand their confession.

Answer.
The Ministers do abash at so many superfluous things proposed by the Doctors.
And where they say that albeit they oppugn not the words of the said
confession, yet do they oppugn the sense thereof. The Ministers answer: that
the sense cannot be known but by the words. And for this reason they wrap
themselves in a contradictio^, when as leaving the terms thereof, they say
they will confute the sense. And as for the conclusion which they will draw
from Gods omnipotency, affirming that one body is in diverse places at one
selfsame instant, the Ministers do deny that that by good consequence, can
be inferred of the omnipotency of God.

Objection.
The Doctors say, that it does well follow, God cannot cause one body to be in
two places at one selfsame instant. God therefore is not almighty.

Answer.
The Ministers deny the consequence aforesaid, and allege 2. Tim. 1.
reason; because it appears by the holy scripture, that God cannot deny
himself: and that it is impossible that he should lie. Nevertheless, it were
blasphemy to infer and Heb. 6.
conclude thereupon, that he were not almighty. For the omnipotency of God,
ought to be measured according to his will, and the things agreeable to his
nature; as teaches the Mr. of the sentences, saying: In that is God
omnipotent, wherein his power is of might, and not of infirmity. S. Jerome
writing to Eustochius, and confirming that above said, says as follows. I
will boldly say, although God can do all things, yet can he not restore and
reestablish a virgin after her fall. Saint Augustine likewise writes in the
fifth book of the City of God, cap. 10. in these words. The power of God is in
nothing lessened, when it is said, he cannot die, nor be beguiled. And a little
after, God is almighty, because there be things which he cannot do. The same
Author in the 26. of the same work, cap. 8. thus says: He that says, if God
be almighty, let him cause the things which be made, that they be not made.
Perceives not, that it is as much as if he said: if he be almighty, let him
make the things which are true, in as much as they be true, to be false.
Teodoret also in his third Dialogue, conformable to that above said, says: We
must not without determination, say that all things generally, are possible to
God. For he that so says, absolutely comprehends things good and evil,
which are contrary in themselves. And a little after, he affirms: that God
cannot sin, because it is a thing contrary to his nature. Whereupon he
concludes, that although many things there be which he cannot do (for as much
as there be many sins) yet for all that does he not cease to be almighty.

Objection.
The Doctors say, that the reasons formerly brought, do avail and serve to
show, that the Ministers do confess the antecedent, which seemed only to be
supposed: to wit, God cannot cause one body at one self instant to be in two
places, no more then he can make the things by them alleged. For to this end
do they allege them, to declare that something there is which God cannot do.
And to the present question (to wit, that one body cannot be in two places) can
they not apply them, but to show that the same is impossible to God.

And as touching the reasons alleged out of the holy scriptures: God cannot
lie, nor deny himself: these places (under correction) serve naught to this
purpose. For, as they have brought out of the Mr. of the sentences, power to
lie, power to sin, is not power, but impotencie: contrariwise rather, if God
could sin, he should be impotent and weak: and such thing also God cannot
do, for then should he repugne and destroy himself. And as touching the
examples brought out of S. Jerome and S. Augustine, that God cannot make a
virgin deflowred to be yet a virgin, or a thing done, not to be done, that
understood as the Logitians say, In sensu Composito, (that is to say, the
things being such, and so made) is true. And the reason is, for that it would
otherwise imply a contradiction. But in the question proposed, there is nothing
like thereunto: for the question only demands, whether God by his power, can
alter and change the nature and quality of things created: as whether he can
make a thing heavy and masly, abiding in it quality of weight and massinesse
(which naturally tends downward) by the only power of God, to hang in the
air: as in the holy scripture we read, that the fire which naturally
ascends, does descend by the power of God. Also that the fire naturally hot,
and burning, cools, the quality thereof (that is to say the heat) remaining
in the substance. As also that two bodies be in one selfsame place: as
appeared when our Lord did enter where the Apostles were, the the doors being
shut: or that a gross and large body, remaining in it grossness and
largeness, do pass through a place unproportionable to it greatness and
largeness, as a cable through the eye of a needle. All these examples are
taken out of the holy scripture. And if it must be, that God cannot make one
body to be in two places at once, no more should he be able to do the things
aforesaid: for, the reasons to this purpose they will afterward declare. And
it will not be found, that it has ever entered into the brain of any
Interpreter, to deny such a power: And the first that ever did openly deny
it, was first Peter Marter: and after him, Beza.

The Doctors further say, that the form of the argument which the Ministers do
use, does withstand and destroy that which God uses in the holy scripture, and
the Angel speaking to the virgin. For God ordinarily when he will assure
something impossible to nature, and which men cannot comprehend, he generally
alleges his power. And the Angel willing to make a ground of the incarnation
of our Lord, does allege in general, that there is nothing impossible to God,
in regard of the creatures, as the Angel speaks. Now so it is, that the
generality of an argument is destroyed by particular exceptions, and is made
by this mean unprofitable and forcelesse. When God then alleges in general,
that his power can do it, one may doubt thereof, and esteem the thing proposed
of God, to be of those, which are to him impossible, as well as the exceptions
by the Ministers alleged. And that should be false which the Angel says:
That there is nothing impossible to God: because men do allege and propose
many things to the contrary. To the end therefore, that God and his Angels be
maintained true in their words, it must not be doubted, but God can much more
easily change and alter his creatures, and all their qualities, then a Potter
can play with his clay, and form at his pleasure some vessel thereof.

Moreover, there is danger, that if we limit Gods power toward his creatures,
we fall to deny him his Lordship and dominion over them. For no other thing
is it to be Lord of a creature, then to have power to change, alter, and give
it such a nature and quality, best pleasing to him: as having the same in his
own power. And therefore God in Jeremy, Ier. 32.
to show that he had power to destroy and ruinate, or to maintain Jerusalem,
as seemed him good, says: I am the Lord of all flesh: is there any thing too
hard for me? Therefore the Doctors do conclude, that there is danger (if this
question be maintained, as impossible to God) that each one therein will dare
as much: alleging the same examples which the Ministers do, to exempt from the
power of God, every thing shall displease him. And when men shall produce unto
him such things out of the scripture, he may interpret the scripture in an
other sense, saying: that such a thing shall be impossible to God by the
natural sense of the words of the scripture: Even as the Ministers do change
and alter the scripture, which says that the body of Jesus Christ is in two
places. To wit, the word of the Supper, compared with that of the Ascension:
and say, that that of the Supper ought not to be understood literally: for,
that one body should be in two places, is impossible to God. So say the
Doctors, that each one will corrupt the litterall sense of the scriptures,
saying: that the thing is impossible unto God. And therefore must the
scriptures be otherwise understood. And notwithstanding it may be because it
displeases him: and yet will he bring forth the selfsame reasons and
allegations as do the Ministers, to show that all things are not possible to
God. The Doctors do again conclude, that it is better to maintain the
scripture in the truth thereof, (albeit it propose in our judgments
incomprehensible and impossible things, then to open a gap for every one, to
deprave the word of God, to raunge and subject it to his will and judgment,
under shadow of saying, that it is impossible to God: and alleging for the
same some examples. They will not omit that the Ministers, who have often
protested to rely upon the pure word of God, do allege only ancient Doctors
against the power of God, flying for aid to them, against Gods express word,
which imports, that generally without exception there is nothing impossible
to him.

Answer.
The Minister answer, that the Doctors prove not their consequence, and that
they leave it for some distrust they have (as is likely) that they are not able
to prove it. They mention but the antecedent of their said consequence: to the
confession whereof, it is not possible for them to lead the Ministers, by their
reasons and authorities alleged to weaken their said consequence: for as much
as of one particular, they infer a general: which is contrary to the rules
of Logic. And where they say that the authorities alleged by the Ministers,
nothing serve to reprove their consequence, and to show that God leaves not to
be almighty, although he cannot do any thing which does derogate to his
nature, they refer themserues therein to the said ancient authors; which for
the same end and reasons as the Ministers, do allege and propose the above
said exceptions.

Where they pretend that the authorities and sentences alleged out of the
ancient Fathers, do naught appertain to the present question: for as much as
they deny that they should be understood of other things, but those only which
do contain in themselves contradiction. The Ministers do answer, that so also
does that which they propose of a body, that at on self instant, it may be in
diverse places. For as much is it, as if they should say, that a body is, and is
not, at one selfsame time: and that a body is one, and is not one. Also that
a creature is incircumscriptible, and not enclosed within certain limits:
which happening, it should no more be a creature, but God. As may be gathered
of that which S. Basil writes in his book of the holy Ghost, Chapter 22.
saying thus: The Angel that appeared to Cornelius, was not in the same place
where Phillip was. And he that spoke to Zachary from the Altar, filled not
whiles he spoke unto him, his seat and place in heaven. But the holy Ghost is
in Habacuck, and Daniel in Babylon, and in Ezeehiel upon the flood of Chobar,
for the spirit of God does fill the earth. And the Prophet writing thereof,
says: Where shall I hide me from thy spirit? or whither shall I fly from thy
presence? Didymus in his book of the holy Ghost, confirming that above said,
says thus: Were the spirit of God a creature, his substance should he have
circumscript and limited, as have all things made and created. As then so it
is, that the spirit of God does fill the world, and is not circumscript, nor in
any place limited: thereof it follows, that he is God. Vigilius in the
disputation he wrote between Sabellius, Photius, Arrius, and Athanasius,
under the person of Athanasius, thus writes.

Thereby may it chiefly appear, that the spirit of God, is God: that he is
every where, and is not contained in any one place, as the Prophet writes:
Whither shall I fly to hide me from thy spirit? Of these places may we
conclude, that if a body be not circumscript, finished and closed in certain
limits, it is not a creature: which ought to be understood, not only of other
bodies, but of that also of Jesus Christ himself: as appears by that which
Theodoret writes in his second Dialogue, where he thus says: Then is the
body of our Lord risen, exempted from all corruption, impassible and immortal,
adorned with divine glory, adored and worshipped of the heavenly powers.
Nevertheless, albeit it be in such sort qualified, yet cease it not
therefore to be circumscript, as it was before it was glorified: whereof it
follows, that being a true body, and a creature, it cannot be in diverse
places at one instance.

Whereas they allege that the foresaid examples do nothing pertain to the
question proposed: for as much as in it, the question is only to know, whether
God can change the qualities in a substance, the substance remaining. The
Ministers do deny it, because in the question there is mention of a body,
which cannot be without hs measure. Now the measures and demensions are not as
qualities and accidents which may happen to a body, and depart from it without
corrupting thereof, (which is the nature and condition of accidents) but are of
it proper essence. So that it is impossible that a body should be a body,
which is not measured and circumscript.

The first example they produce for confirmation of their saying is, that a
massy thing (which naturally for the weight thereof declineth downward) may be
lifted on high. Whereunto the Ministers do answer, that it may be done, and
that by violent motion. But that this example naught serves to overthrow that
they have said, for as much as such things in themselves contain no
contradiction; and that they are not contrary to the essence of the thing where
they happen. For a stone which a man throws upward, does not therefore cease
to be a stone, neither by such a moving, is it not deprived of the waightinesse
thereof. To the example of the fire, they answer: that it is one selfsame
reason of light, as of heavy things: and that without any corruption of their
essence, their natural mouings may be changed by some force and violence done
unto them. And as touching that they allege of fire, which (contrary to it
nature, namely to heat and burn) refreshed the three Jews in the Babilonian
furnace: they answer, that the fire therefore was nothing altered in the
essence nor qualiries thereof: which may easily appear, in that it spared the
three Jews, and burned and consumed those which kindled the same. Whereof may
be inferred, that the cause why it did not offend them, proceeded not because
the nature or qualities thereof were any way changed, but only because the
action thereof was suspended.

And where they allege, that two bodies may be at one instant in one
selfsame place together: and for proof thereof, propose that which is written
in S. John, that Jesus Christ did enter where his Disciples were, the doors
being shut: the Ministers do answer, that it is not so in the text: but the
text shows that the Disciples being assembled in a place, Jesus Christ stood
and appeared in the midst of them. Whereof can be no way inferred, that he
entered into the place where they were, without opening of the doors, nor that
he pierced them to enter therein. And very like it is, that they were opened
and shut again, as well as those Act. 12. Act. 5.
which the Angel did open and shut again, when he was sent to deliver S.
Peter out of prison: and when likewise he was sent for the Apostles
deliverance.

As touching that they propose of a gross body passing through a straight
place, alleging the example of a Cable through the eye of a needle. The
Ministers answer, that it is ill to the purpose alleged, and is an argument
grounded upon a thing impossible. They say moreover that the Doctors have all
understood the word Camilos: usurped in the scripture, not for a Cable, but for
a Camel: as to them it is manifest, which are but meanly seen in the
antiquities of the Hebrews. And as appears by that which Angelius Caninius
writes in the end of his Caldean Grammar. And for the conclusion which the
Doctors draw from the precedent examples, it is from the purpose, and founded
upon presupposed antecedents and premises by them brought; which in the sense
they allege them for the reasons above declared, they neither have, nor will
confess unto them.

Where they say, that what the Ministers have said touching a body, that it
cannot be in two places at one instant, were it the body of Jesus Christ it
self, was never written by any of the ancient Fathers, nor proposed before
the coming of Peter Martyr, and Theodoret Beza. The Ministers do maintain
that it was. And that S. Augustine in his Epistle to Dardanus, says the same
in these terms: According to this form (meaning the corporal form of Jesus
Christ) we must not think that it is every where. And we must beware least in
establishing in him his divinity, we take not from him the verity of his
body. And elsewhere he says: That by reason of the nature and measure of a
true body, he is in one place in heaven. The selfsame thing says Therdoret
in his second Dialogue, as has been before alleged. And so does Vigilius in
his fourth book against Eutiches: where he writes as follows. If the word
and flesh be but of one nature, how comes it to pass that the flesh is not
found every where as the word (of which word it was taken, to constitute one
selfsame person and Hypostaly) is every where? for when it was on the earth,
it was not in heaven: and now that it is in heaven, surely it is not on the
earth. And so far off is it that he is there, that we attend Jesus Christ to
come according to his flesh: whom nevertheless we believe as he is the word,
to be here on earth with us.

By these and other like authorities, often found in the writings of the
Fathers, men may know that Peter Martyr and Theodoret Beza are not the first
authors of this doctrine, and that it is falsely imputed to them: for as much as
they have but drawn, and word by word, copied (as it were) the same, out of
the books of the ancient Fathers.

To that which the Doctors pretend, that the form of arguing which the
Ministers have used, affirming some things to be impossible to God, does not
derogate his omnipote^cie: overthrows the form of the argument which the
Angel speaking to the virgin, uses for co^firmatio^ of that which he declared
unto her: that is, that nothing is impossible to God. The Ministers do answer,
that it is nothing to the purpose, for as much as the question is neither of a
thing which contains in it self any contradiction, nor that is contrary to
the truth of God: which be the two matters they have alleged, and yet do
allege for the exposition of the omnipotency of God. And touching that which
the Doctors do add, that God can change the nature and quality of things,
there is no man doubts the same. But when that is done, it behooves also to
auow, that the things be changed, and that they remain not in their first
nature. And the Ministers say, that it is not all one with the thing here
proposed: for as much as the Doctors will have a thing to remain in it essence
and nature, although the essential parts thereof be changed, and altogether
extinct and abolished. Touching the limitation of the power of God toward his
creatures, there is none so presumptuous to attempt to limit the same, in
whatsoever he will: and which confesses not, that he may ordain and dispose of
all his creatures in general, as it pleases him, and as a Potter does of his
earth. And thereunto (say they) ought the authority of Jeremy to be referred:
as it appears very clearly by these Hebrew words. L^ gippale Mimmecha
col-dauar. To wit, nothing shall be hard to thee o Lord. Concerning the danger
which the Doctors pretend may come of the abouesaid answers of the Ministers,
they answer, that men of sound and good judgment will never draw thereof any
evil consequence, seeing that all this doctrine is true, and does contain no
manner of obscurity. And if any peradventure take harm thereby, it must be
imputed to themselves, and their evil understanding; whereby not only some
doctrine, but also the word of God it self, may be sometimes perverted and
corrupted. To be Tit. 1.
short, all things (as says the Apostle) be clean to those that be clean, and
polluted to those that be polluted, and have an evil conscience. And where the
Doctors allege that one may take occasion by the doctrine abouesaid, to
interpret the scriptures according to his own sense and fantasy, the
Ministers say no. And where some one would attempt the same, they say it shall
be easy to reject his interpretation, as not answerable to the rules and
analogy of faith: as the foresaid doctrine and interpretation of the Ministers
is answerable thereunto. Where the Doctors say, that the Ministers do change
and alter the scriptures. The Ministers answer, that it is a slander, which
can no way be proved against them: neither by their writings, nor by their
speeches, nor by any thing they ever said or thought. Concerning what they
add, that the scripture says that the body of Jesus Christ is in two places,
the Ministers deny it, and do say, that contrariwise the scriptures do
establish it in heaven, and nor elsewhere: according as it is written. The
heavens Act. 3. 21.
must contain him until the time that all things be restored which God has
spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophers since the world began. And where
they allege that the scripture ought not to be interpreted according to every
man's sense and fantasy; the Ministers do confess it, adding that all
interpretations ought to be examined, as S. Paul says: but that such
examination must be done by conference of the scriptures. And where the
Doctors accuse the Ministers not to have alleged any passages of the scripture
for confirmation of the foresaid doctrine, before they produced the ancient
Fathers. The Ministers do answer, that it is a false accusation: and that they
should well have remembered in the beginning of their discourse, that they
alleged to this end, S. Paul. 2. Tim. 2. Where it is said, that God cannot
deny himself. And that which is written Hebr. 6. It is impossible that God
can lie. Which places, with those they produced out of the ancient Fathers,
were not alleged to diminish ought the omnipotency of God: But rather to
establish the same; and cut off the way to many impieties and blasphemies:
which they would falsely propose and shrowde them under pretext of the
omnipotency of God, without having regard to his revealed will, whereunto we
must refer the Omnipotency.

The sixth days Dispute on Tuesday, the 16. of July.
THe Doctors object, that they have made such an argument, God cannot cause one
body to be in two places. God is not therefore Omnipotent. That this consequence
is necessary it is most manifest: without other proof, by the law of
contradiction. For according to the rule holden in all schools of Philosophy,
two contradictions cannot be true: To have power to do all things, and to have
no power in certain particular things, be contradictions. For this particular
thing, is a part of all. If the^ the Antecedent be true, of necessity the
consequence must be false, according to the law of contradiction: for they two
as contradictories cannot be true together. And notwithstanding, albeit that by
the knowledge of the terms themselves, a man might judge the consequence to be
good: nevertheless, it is plainly known by the deduction of the objection
against the answer of the Ministers, that the Doctors have proved the
consequence. The reason of the Ministers was thus: God cannot lie: he cannot
sin: he cannot cause that things made, be not made. Therefore it either
repugneth his nature, or there is repugnancie on the behalf of the creatures:
because there is a folded contradiction. Now the Doctors in their objection
have said, that there is nothing like in the question proposed: that is to say,
whether one body may be in two places. Whereupon they make such an argument,
taken from their objection, God can do all things which are not repugnant to
his nature, or where there is no repugnancie in the behalf of things created:
and that no contradiction is therein employed. But to affirm one body, may be in
two places, at one selfsame instant, is not a thing repugnant to the nature
of God, and on the behalf of the body, implies no contradiction: God
therefore can do it. Or else thus. God cannot do it: It follows therefore,
that God is not Omnipotent. And so is proposed the reason and deduction of the
antecedent and consequent. Yea and the proof of the assumptio^ or second
proposition: For they have proved there is no contradiction in saying that one
body might be in two places; and that it does not repugne the nature of GOD,
whereof the probation has been made, by example of like things. As God can
cause two bodies to be in one place, and other like reasons deducted in the
Objection.

And where the Doctors (say they) preposterously argue from a particular to a
general, It seems (under correction) they have forgotten the rules of
Lodgicke. For very certain it is, that this rule has place in affirming, and
not in denying. But contrariwise, when there is some thing affirmed in
general, and the default in particular proved, (as say Logitians) Ad
negationem particularis, sequitur negatio eius quod vniuersaliter affirmatuum
est. Likewise when there is some of a whole thing which has many parts
affirmed: and default is proved in one part, the destruction of the whole
follows. As if one should say: All the body is sound. He that should prove
one part of the body diseased, should prove this proposition [All the body is
sound] to be false.

Such is the argument which the Doctors have made (to wit): If God cannot do
one particular thing (as to cause one body to be in two places) then he cannot
do all things. Or if he can do all things, he can do that also.

They are agrieued to be sent back to their Logic. For they regarded no
other end, but to make the antecent to be granted: to wit, that God cannot
make one body to be in two places. And are very glad, to have understood the
resolution of the Ministers upon this Article: that is to say, That God cannot
cause, nor will one body to be in two places: for as much as it implies
contradiction. And where the Ministers do say, that the Doctors by their
reasons, could not thereof infer the truth of the antecedent: The Doctors
confess the same. And thereby do the Ministers also sufficiently perceive,
that the reasons they have brought, are nothing worth to the confirmation of
the antecedent, which is their resolution. But the Doctors say: that these
reasons, albeit they be naught, were to this end nevertheless produced by the
Ministers, to prove, that it was impossible to God, to make one body to be in
two places.

Concerning this Article, which begins [Touching that which they say that
the authorities, etc.] The Doctors object that the ancient Fathers never
thought to make exception of any thing, which is not subject to the power of
God. For (as it is manifest) he that says all, excepteth nothing. Therefore,
when the Scripture says, that God is almighty, it gives sufficiently to
understand, that there is no exception. And to give exception therein, should
be to contradict to many places of the word of God, and to blaspheme against
his power. But well say the Doctors, that the Fathers have interpreted the
Omnipoteucie of God: not to comprehend that which touches the perfection of
his nature, but that only which concerns the Creatures: So that there were
not on their part too apparent contradiction, and repugnancie.

Now the present question imports not, that there is contradiction for a
body to be a body, and in diverse places at one selfsame instant. For
concerning the essence of bodies, in speaking of a body having it dimensions,
as speak the Philosophers, De praedicamento quantitatis: Certain it is, that
the dimensions are of the essence of a body; but to be circumscript and
enclosed in a place, that is an accident. Which thing is showed by Philosophy
it self: For the most high heaven, according to all, is a body, and
nevertheless is it not in place according to it all. Therefore is it not an
essential thing, for a body to be enclosed in one place.

And to speak of the present matter, the Ministers should be very much
troubled to prove, that the body of Jesus Christ is in one place in heaven:
seeing it is written in the 4. Chapter to the Ephesians, he is mounted above
all the heavens: out of which, there is no place, as they speak of places, in
regard of bodies, according to nature. And were it so, that it should be
essential to a body, to be in one place (according to the rule which the
Ministers deliver) an other blasphemy would follow against the Omniporencie of
God, that God could not make a body, and place the same above all heavens. And
to speak more universally, that God could not make a body without place, and
roomth equal to it greatness.

Touching the Allegations proposed by the Ministers, of certain ancient
Authors, The Doctors do object, that the said Allegations are against
themselves: For as much as to be enclosed in a place, does not depend of the
essence of a body, nor of it measures: as appears by the authorities
produced, wherein there is mention made of Angels, which have not bodies. It is
not therefore an essential reason for the demensions of a body to be contained
in a place. And all this furniture of authorities makes nothing to the
purpose: For they tend but to show, that the natural propriety of creatures,
is different from the divine nature, as S. Basil says expressly in the place by
the Ministers alleged. And S. Ambrose in his first book of the holy Ghost,
Cap. 7. where the same Authors do declare, that God by his nature may be every
where: and the creatures by their natures, not so. But the said Authors pretend
not, that God by his Omnipotency cannot make one body to be in diverse places:
For the same Authors (or their like) when they come to speak of the power of
God in the holy Sacrament, they affirm, that the body of Jesus Christ is in
heaven, and in the holy Sacrament. And affirm, that the Angels and spirits of
the blessed, may by the same power, be in many places. As the Doctors will show
in their resolution.

Where the Ministers say, that a body must be circumscript without place,
according to the essential propriety: that has been formerly showed to be
false. And the Ministers do confound the name of body: which sometimes does
signify substance, sometimes quantity, having it dimensions, breadth, length,
and deepnesse: which dimensions be essential in a body, taking the body for a
kind of quantity: and not in a substantial body: for it is an accident. Now
certain it is, that God can separate the accidents from a body, and make a
substance without accidents: otherwise there would follow an other blasphemy:
that God could not separate the accident, from a subject and substance. And
where the Ministers say, that a stone by a violent moving, may be cast on
high, that is no answer to the question. For the Doctors do demand (for as
much as it is essential and natural to a massy and terrestrial body, in
regard of the massinesse and weight thereof tending downward) whether God by
his only power, contrary to the natural propriety of a massy and weighty
body, cannot hold and hang it up on high?

And as touching the evasion which the Ministers make from a very strong and
mighty argument against their doctrine, that two bodies may be in one place,
by the proof that is made, taken from the scripture, (not only to prove that
God can cause two bodies to be in one place, but even that he has done it)
serves nothing to cover their error, in saying that it is not said in S. John,
that our Lord did enter by Ioh. 20. 19.
the shut doors: but that he was found standing in the midst of them: where the
said Ministers have concealed and omitted this verb venit: and do stay only
upon the verb stetit. For the express text in S. John. cap. 21. 19. says:
That the doors being shut, Jesus came into the place where the Disciples were
assembled, and was there in the midst of them. They demand of them, for as
much as the scripture says, that he came thither, the doors being shut, and
that he was found in the midst of them: whether he were found in the
midst of them, and in the said place, without entering thereinto: or whether
he there entered, for as much as the text says; that the doors were shut
when he came; How they will prove by the scripture that he entered, if not by
the shut doors? For a much greater miracle should it be, to be found in the
midst of his Disciples, without being entered into the place where they were.
Too light is that shift, to say it is not written that he entered. For S.
Augustine in his book De agone Christiano, cap. 24. says thus. Nec nos
moueat quod clausis hostijs subito eum apparuisse Dicipulis scriptum est: vt
propterea negemus illud fuisse corpus humanum, quia contra naturam huius
corporis videmus illudper clausa hostia intrare. Omnia enim possibilia sunt
Deo, Nam and ambulare super aquas contra naturam huius corporis esse manifestum
est, and tamen non solum ipse Dominus ante passionem ambulauit, sed etiam
Petrum ambulare fecit. Let it not move us, because it is written, that the
doors being shut, he suddenly appeared to his Disciples; that we therefore
deny that body to have been humane, because we see it against the nature of
this body, to enter by the closed doors. For to God are all things possible.
For to walk also upon the waters, is manifestly against the nature of this
body: And yet the Lord himself not only walked before his passion, but also
caused Peter to walk.

Where it appears, that S. Augustine says plainly, that our Lord did enter
by the shut doors: and refers all to the omnipotency of God.

Moreover, the text of S. Luke, joined with that of Saint John, does show that
he entered through the doors. For no reasonable occasion had the Apostles had,
to think it was a spirit, and not a body, seeeing him before them in the
likeness of a man: but for that he was entered otherwise then a true body, and
very man could enter. That is, for that he was entered by the closed doors:
which thing a true man, and a true body in no wise can do. To say that the
doors were opened, and afterward shut again by miracle, or otherwise, should
nothing avail. For so may a true man, and a true body be there: and therefore
no cause can a man have to think it a spirit, or vain vision.

The Doctors say moreover, that all the ancient heretics and Christians, did
commonly agree, that Jesus Christ passed through: but such was their
difference, as now it is between the Ministers and Doctors. The ancient
heretics said, that Jesus Christ after his resurrection, had not a true body,
because he did works contrary to the nature of a body, which implied
contradiction to a natural body: to wit, that at one self instant, he was in
one selfsame place with an other body: as when he passed through the doors.
The ancient Catholic Christians answered, that such indeed was the nature of
a body, that it could not pass through the doors: through the body of the
virgin in his birth, without fracture: through the stone of the Sepulcher in it
resurrection: but nevertheless, that two bodies should be together, by the
omnipotency of God, implied no contradiction: for as much as it so happened in
the three cases done and recited.

The first that speaks thereof, is Iustine Martyr, in the 117. question
against the Gentiles: where he says. If a thick body be hindered to pass
through the doors, how did our Lord after his resurrection enter the shut
doors? And if it be so, why was the stone removed by the Angel from off the
Sepulcher, to the end his body might rise again? He answers thus. That even
as our Lord without changing his body into a spirit, walked upon the sea* but
by his divine power he made the sea solid to walk upon; not only for his
own body, but for that of S. Peter. So by his divine power he came forth of
the sepulcher, the stone remaining thereupon, and entered to his Disciples, the
doors being shut. Hereby we understand, that the things which proceed of
diverse virtues, ought to have the same faith. And we must know, that the things
which surpass nature, when they are wrought in it by divine power, ought not
to be measured according to the reason and propriety of nature. For this
cause, our Lord seeing his Disciples troubled at such an entry, did propose
unto them the parts of his body, and the places and marks of his wounds, to be
touched, to show he was not entered by change of his body into a spirit: but
with his body composed of it dimensions and thickness: and by his divine
almightinesse, which made all things that surpass the strength of nature.

Saint Hillary in his third book of the Trinity: But thou (says he) which
wilt search into the things insearchable, and will be Judge of the secrets of
God* and his power: I ask counsel of thee, give only a reason and solution
of this fact, to me that (...) and do simply believe in God concerning all
things, even as he has said and pronounced them? I understand that the Lord
was often present after his resurrection to he seen and known of them which
believed him not. The self-same Lord, applying himself to the weakness of out
understanding, and to satisfy the doubts of the (...) does show a secret and
a work of his almightinesse* Expound to me the^, whosoever thou art, which
wilt beeade archer of the omnipotency of God, the reason of this dee^^t The
Disciples being shut up and withdrawn together in secret, the Lord is proposed
to Thomas, to confirm his faith, according to the conditions he desired: to
wit, that he might touch his body, and prove his wounds, And for this cau^ent
behooved him to bring the true body with him, wherein he had received such
wounds. I demand then, for as much as he was corporal, by what part of the
house entered he in? For I see that the Eu^ngelist diligently expresses, that
Jesus came when the doors were shut, and was found in the midst of his
Disciples: to wit, whether he pierced the thick walls, and the great lettes
of timber between both? Certain it is, that without fiction or guile he
there entered. Let thy conceit follow and consider his entry, and thy
understanding enter into the house shut within. All thou see, is whole and
fast locked; and yet is l^ee found in the midst of his Disciples: but it is,
because all things by his almightinesse are open to him. Thou slaunderest
things invisible. I ask thee again the reason of this thing there visible?
Nothing of the wall or solid doors gave back, or made way. Contrariwise I
see that wood and stones by their nature cannot receive such an entry.

The body of our Lord was not quite vanished, to be eftsoons taken and made
of nothing. Whence then comes it, that he is found in the midst of them
without opening? Sense and speech do herein fail, and the truth of the deed,
is beyond humane reason. As then we are abused, concerning the birth of the
son of God, we lie also concerning such an entry. The deed is false say we,
it so happened not, because we cannot understand the reason thereof: and for
that our sense and iudgemenr fails, we say there is no such deed. But the
faith and belief of the deed, does convince our lying. The Lord (the doors
being shut) is found in the midst of the Apostles, and the son of God is
borne of his Father. Deny not that he thus entered, because by the infirmity
of thy spirit, thou can not comprehend such an entry.

I could amplify like deeds in all the creatures: but the Lord has well
provided for himself, to have contained us in necessity and modesty, by the
nature of our bodies. Sufficiently we show, that we would make our selves an
other God, had we power so to do. For as much as we cannot by the boldness of
our wicked will, ruinate the nature of truth, we gainsay it at least, and
contend with the word of God.

S. Ambrose in his tenth book upon S. Luke, cap. 24. says, through the
doors. S. Chrysostom upon S. John, proves by such ane ntrie, that Jesus
Christ was so borne of the Virgin, that she remained a Virgin in her
childbirth, and after, without any manner of fraction. And concludes, that
the one and the other deed proceeds from the omnipotency of God. The said
Chrysostom in his second Homily upon the Apostles Creed, says these words:
How is it that Jesus Christ entered the closed doors? etc. because such things
are above our reach, and we cannot render a reason of that miracle, we hold it
by faith.

S. Jerome in his first book against Iouinian, and in the Epistle to
Pamachiuns, against the errors of John of Jerusalem, who said, that Jesus after
his resurrection, had not a true body, because it was impossible that a true
body should pass through the doors: and that it should be in one self-same
place with an other body) answers: It hinders not, but that the nature of
the body remains, for as much as this act proceeds from the omnipotency of
God. And thus says: Tell me, thou subtle disputer, which is greater, to hang
the huge greatness of the earth upon nothing, and to balance it above the
bricklenesse of the waters: or for God to pass through a shut door, and a
creature to obey his Creator? To that which is the greater thou easily agreest,
and slaunderest that which is lesser. S. Augustine in his 13. Epistle, for an
example of the omnipotency of God, recites also this deed: to show that our
Lord was borne of the Virgin without any rupture of her body: and to declare
that the omnipotency of God is greater then we can comprehend. Againct the
Valentinians and others, which denied the true substance of the body of Jesus
Christ, for that contrary to the nature of a body, he so passed. S. Augustine
in his book called De agone Christiano, alleges the same deed. Amphilochius
and Theodoret in the 2. Dialogue, disputing of this deed against Eutiches, who
said also, that after the resurrection, the humanity of Jesus Christ was
changed into his divinity: because, contrary to the nature of a body, he so
passed through the shut doors, do answer as the others. That such an effect
imports not contradiction to the nature of a body: for as much as it
proceeded of the omnipotency of God, and not of the nature of the body. Cirell
in his 12. book upon S. John, reprehendeth those also which will measure the
miracles and works of God according to their own judgment, and the propriety
of creatures: and very sharply speaks against them. S. Augustine in his first
book against Julian, cap. 2. recyteth, That Iouinian was an heretic, because
he said, that there was fraction in the virgin in her childbirth. And so said
he, for fear of falling into the heresy of the Manachees, who thought that
Jesus Christ had not a true body, because he was borne without fraction of his
mother. To avoid then this heresy, he rather denied that the ^rgin remained a
Virgin. The like heresy is imputed to Origin, and some also allege that the
Fathers (as Tertullian) had such an opinion. By these testimonies do the
Doctors conclude, that two bodies to pierce themselves, and be in one self-same
place, by divine power does not imply any contradiction. Which places were they
well considered, they would not receive a new interpretation against the very
express word of God: seeing the text without contradiction does bear that
Jesus Christ came to his Disciples, the doors being shut.

The 4. book. cap. 17. sect. 39
How Calvin in his Institution has deptaued the sense of that place of S.
John, with other like, may plainly appear, where he says thus. That which
they eftsoons allege, that Jesus Christ came out of the Sepulcher without
opening the same, and that he entered in to his Disciples the doors of the
chamber being shut, is of no value, further to maintain their error. For as
the water served Jesus Christ for a firm pauement, to walk upon the lake: so
also ought it not seem strange, if the hardness of the stone were softened to
give him passage. And Beza in his second Dialogue against Heshusius says, that
the stone was vanished, to the end that our Lord might pass in his
resurrection: and God did afterward reform it. It follows in the text of
Calvin: As also to enter into a chamber the doors shut, is not to say that he
pierced the wood, but only that he made an opening by his divine power: so
that by a myraculous fashion, he was found in the midst of his Disciples,
although the doors were were shut. Moreover he says: That which they bring of
S. Luke: to wit, that he vanished suddenly from his Disciples which went to
Emaus, serves naught for them, and makes for our advantage. For he was not
made invisible by taking away the sight of his body: but he only vanished. As
also witnesses the same Evangelist: In walking he was not transfigured nor
disguised, to be made invisible, but their eyes were holden. Such ridiculous
and frivolous expositions are brought by Calvin and his like, to avoid
confessing, that God can make one body to be in diverse places.

And nevertheless, the proper text of the scripture does witness that two
bodies may be by the power of God, in one selfsame place. As also it
witnesses that a body having color, and before visible, by the power of God,
was made invisible, without any let to their sight that could see. As S. Luke
does confirm, saying: Aphantos Egeneto Ap'auton, Inuisibilis factus est ab
ipsis. Although there was no defect on the behalf of the Disciples. For it is
said before, that their eyes were opened, that they might know him: and
hereupon agrees all antiquity. An other act do the Doctors add, for
confirmation of the penitration of dimensions. Which is, that our Lord ascended
into the heavens, which he neither divided, nor claue asunder. Therefore of
necessity did he pierce them: as the scripture it self in proper terms
imports.

The Doctors show also to the said Ministers, that they cannot produce one
only renowned Father, having expounded these places, from whom they might
learn their so diverse interpretations. And that which they bring of the Acts
of the Apostles, where mention is made, that S. Peter came forth of prison,
naught serves to color their exposition. In which text, there is nothing
spoken of the opening of the prison doors. And it is not said (as in S. John)
that the doors of the prison being shut, S. Peter came forth: but that the
Angel came thither, when the keepers before the door kept the prison. Where
if they say, that the doors were opened to S. Peter, that agrees not with the
saying of Saint John, that the doors were shut when as our Lord entered. The
like reason brought by the Ministers out of the fifth of the Acts of the
Apostles, and for the same cause, is as unprofitable for this purpose, as the
former.

And to show clearly and evidently, that God (contrary to the natural
propriety of a body) can make a great and thick body to pass in a space and
place unequal to it greatness, largeness, and thickness. The Doctors cyted
what our Lord says in the 19. of S. Matthew: It is easier for a Cable to go
through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
heaven.

Two things have the Ministers answered unto: the one, that in the translation
we must not use Cable, but rather Camel: although nevertheless their own French
Bible of Anthony Rebulls impression, which they have brought, contains the
translation of this word Cable. And Calvin himself likewise in his Hermony of
the four Evangelists, says that to be better. But here in appears to be
truth what Tertullian against the Valentinians; and before him, Ireneus in his
first book and 14. Chapter against the Valentinians do say: That they which
separate themselves from us to go to an other school, do always invent some
new thing, that the disciples may be found more cunning then their Masters.
But well, this word [Camell] being yielded unto them, (as the Doctors doubt
not to have been expounded by Saint Hillary, S. Ierom, and others) the reason
thereof is yet more strong. For it is yet more repugnant that a crooked,
gross, and great Camel (then a Cable) should enter through the eye of a
needle. The other reason given by the Ministers is, that God cannot make a
Camel or Cable to enter through the eye of a needle: which is notwithstanding,
against the pure word of Jesus Christ, who says not, it is is impossible to
God, but rather easy to do that, and by comparison, more easy unto God, then
to make a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven: which nevertheless is
said by our Lord to be possible: not unto men, but unto God: to whom there is
nothing impossible. Whereupon the Doctors say thus, If God can do that which is
more difficult, he can do that which is more easy. Now by the text of the
scripture, it is said that God can make a rich man enter into the kingdom of
heaven, which is the more difficult; he can therefore make a Camel (or Cable)
to enter through the eye of a needle, which is more easy.

The answers of the Ministers here above confuted, tend to such absurdities
and blasphemies, that Jesus Christ by his almightinesse, could not enter
through the closed doors: that he could not come forth of the belly of his
mother, through her body without fraction: that he could not make a visible
body, to be invisible: that a gross and great body might be in a place
unequal to it: that he could not by his divine power make penetration of
dimensions: and that he could not make by the same divine power, one body to
be in two places (for it is like reason, of the last article and of the
others) albeit such things are declared in the scriptures, not only to be
possible, but even the most part of them to have been done. And the Doctors do
wonder how the Ministers dare deny such things, seeing themselves must
necessarily confess (if their doctrine of the Supper be true) that the body of
Jesus Christ is in diverse places: which they prove thus. The faithful really
receive in their souls the substance of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, by
the working of the holy Ghost, and not the bread and the wine only: or else
(as says Calvin in the 4 book, 17. Chapter, and 11. section of his
Institution) the effect and virtue of the same Sacrament.

Now the Doctors conclude thus. It is impossible for a man to receive into him
the substance of the body of Jesus Christ, but the body of Jesus Christ is in
him. But all the faithful in the Supper do receive the same into their souls,
therefore must the body of Jesus Christ be in them: and by consequent in diverse
places: to wit, in all places where their Supper is made: and likewise in
heaven. They say further, that Calvin in his Institution, the fourtth book,
17. Chapter, and 24. sect. says: That in the Supper, the power of God is
required: to the end that the flesh of Jesus Christ may pierce even unto us:
and that humane nature cannot comprehend the same. But it behooves that the
power of God do work therein. And by this mean, Calvin does admit by the
power of God, the flesh of Jesus Christ in many places: to wit, in heaven, and
in us, into whom it must pierce by the power of God. And in the tenth number he
says: That the truth signified, and represented by the signs, must be
represented and exhibited in the same place where the signs be. Which he
proves by reason in many places: to wit, that the signs must no more be
void, then the Dove was void of the holy Ghost. But as the essence and
substance of the holy Ghost was conjoined and present with the Dove: so the
flesh and blood of our Lord, before there be a true Sacrament, must be
conjoined and united with the signs. The passages are against Heshusius, and
in his book of the Supper: and upon the first of the 11. Chapter to the
Corinthians. And although the Ministers will answer: the Doctors beseech them
well to weigh and consider the text of Calvin, and of the reason he gives of
the holy Ghost. They do object further, that the Ministers in their Supper do
attribute more to the humane power, then to the omnipotency of God: yea they
do more then God can do: which is, that they brag to do a thing by their faith,
which implies contradiction: saying in their confession of faith exhibited to
the Bishops in the congregation at Poissy; That faith makes things absent, to
be present, in one selfsame instant and place. That is to say, in the souls
of the faithful, when they celebrate their Supper: which is as much to say, as
faith makes things not present, present at one selfsame instant and place.
So that to every faithful in the Supper, coming worthily thereunto, is the
body of Jesus Christ there present by the power of faith. And nevertheless it
is not there present; for they say so: and that it is only in heaven. Wherein
appears that there is implication of contradiction: to wit, present, and not
really present. And the small starting hole they told us of, that the body is
above corporally, and spiritually in the Supper in the hearts of the faithful,
can serve for nothing. For the spirituality cannot take away the substance of
the thing: and their faith cannot make a body, not to be a body: and that a
body have not it dimensions, as heretofore they have said.

Therefore howsoever they confess, that the faithful in the Supper receive
into their souls the substance of the body of Jesus Christ, will they or nill
they, must they necessarily confess, that either their faith is more mighty
then the infinite virtue and power of God: or else that God can make his body
to be locally in heaven; and Sacramentally (really nevertheless and
substantially) in the Sacrament of the Altar. Thus would the Doctors desire to
hear the Ministers upon this point: and then afterward to put their answer
in writing. And the Ministers shall never be able to show by the word of God,
that their faith can make at one instant, and one selfsame place, a thing to
be present, and not present. And one thing present, and not present by faith:
is as much to say, as that the body of Jesus Christ is in, and not in a
faithful person. And no Coduit pipe of the power of the holy Ghost should
there also be needful, to convey the flesh of Jesus Christ hither unto us from
heaven, were not the said flesh but in heaven, and notwithstanding came unto us.

And as touching the points objected by the Doctors, that Peter Martyr and
Theodoret Beza were the first which said, that God could not make one body to
be in two places: and the Ministers have willed to confirm by antiquity this
new doctrine, which they cannot name otherwise then blasphemy. The Doctors
say, they have often prayed the Ministers (that time might be spared, things
better cleared) to speak nothing from the purpose. Notwithstanding they bring
forthwith the testimonies of Fathers, to show that a body by nature is
circumscript, and cannot be naturally in many places: but those Authors say not
that God cannot do it. But S. Augustine, and others, in the places cyted by the
Doctors, touching the article of the closed doors, do rather witness, that
two bodies by the power of God, may occupy one selfsame place, which is of
like difficulty. And when they shall come to the proof of the real presence
of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, they will evidently show, that wholly
all the ancient Fathers which have spoken of that Sacrament, have not only
confessed that he could make his body to be above in heaven, and here below
in the Sacrament: but all with one accord, have declared that they believe
according to the word of Jesus Christ, that he is in heaven, and here in the
Sacrament. The Doctors demand of the Ministers, whether they have any, that
before Peter Martyr and Theodor Beza, denied such power of God. And let them no
more set forth the authorities of the Fathers, to prove that one body is not
naturally in two places. The Doctors do not marvel if the Ministers do
magnify Peter Martyr, from whom they have taken all the places they have
brought.

Concerning the Article which begins (Touching that which the Doctors
pretend, that the form etc.) The Doctors say, that this form is common, as
often as men will debate of the power of God. And they cannot be better guided
to prove it, then to follow the words of the Angel: That there is nothing
impossible to God. From the which, when a man will except something, he will
always bring, what the Ministers do bring: that there is some repugnancy of
things, whereof ensues some implication of contradiction. As did the old
heretics against the flesh of Jesus Christ; who brought always some
impossibility according to nature. And as much did they against the Article of
the Resurrection, and incarnation: as though there had been contradiction, that
God should be man, and man should be God. And it shall be always easy for an
evil spirit, to forge some contradiction in his conceit, according to the
proprieties of nature. And concerning the Article beginning (As touching that
which the Doctors do add, that God can change, etc.) The Doctors say, that the
Ministers have not well conceived their meaning: for they take for an absurd
thing, that a substance remaining affected of his qualities, can by the power
of God have effects, contrary to his qualities. As if God by his omnipotency
could not make the fire, having his natural heat, to cool, in stead of
burning, which none of sound and Christian judgment will deny.

Concerning the Article beginning (Touching the limitation of the power, etc.)
The Doctors say; that it seems by the Ministers answer, that the power of
God is limited according to his will: as much to say, as God cannot do but
what he will: which is notoriously false. For the Hebrew alleged, the
Ministers (it seems) are willing to show they are skillful therein. For such
summoning is not to the purpose, when as they stay chiefly upon the word Dauar:
which is as much to say, as one thing. But it ought not to be understood of a
thing done: they said, to be done. And such is the sense of the place ad
verbum. Shall there be any thing hidden from me? And because hard things are
hidden, and things impossible also are yet more hidden; Behold why they have
translated, Is there any thing hard (or impossible) to me* Which holy
Pagninus, and other Interpreters of the Hebrew tongue, do well declare, that the
verb [Pala] signifies to hide. The Doctors had no desire to answer hereunto,
but to make it be understood that an Hebrew word does not appaule them.
Concerning the article beginning, Touching the danger, etc. The Doctors say,
that they are words superfluous; and whatsoever the Ministers can bring, the
same may other use, and retort against the said Ministers. And where they say
it is a slander, in that they object unto them, that they corrupt the
scripture, the Doctors say, that the Ministers cannot deny but they change the
sense and gloss the words of the Supper. This is my body. This is my blood. And
with like authority, as they (under pretense of I know not what reasons) may
each one pretend to corrupt the other scriptures, and allege some
impossibilities, and contradictio^s of nature. As touching the article
beginning, To that which they add, that the scripture says, that the body
etc. The Doctors do say, that in time and place they will show what they have
objected, when as they shall treat more amply of the Sacrament of the Altar.

Where the Doctors have objected that the Ministers do not ground their
affirmation; to wit, that God cannot make one body to be in two places, upon
the express testimony of the scripture: or can thereof deduct the same. The
Ministers for all places have only brought but these: that God cannot lie: God
cannot deny himself. But the Doctors say that this consequence is naught
worth. God cannot lie: God cannot therefore make one body to be in two places:
which nevertheless the Ministers should have made such had the places produced
served to that purpose. Joined, that when it is said God cannot lie, as the
Ministers themselves have cyted, to be able to lie: is not power, but
infirmity. So that according to the true sense, it was meet so to say; God is
not weak that he can lie. Therefore God cannot make one body to be in two
places: which consequence should be ridiculous.

And where the Ministers have brought certain authorities of the ancient
Fathers, to prove there is diversity between the creatures, and Creator: and
that the Creator by nature is every where, and naturally the creatures be not
in diverse places: the Doctors reverently embrace the authority of the holy
Fathers: But to produce the said places for confirmation of a thing so well
known, and not doubted of, their travel was now needless. But the Doctors
yet attend one sole place of the scripture; or one sole testimony of the
ancient Fathers, which says: That God cannot make one body to be in diverse
places. The Doctors pray the Ministers, that with like reverence, they receive
the ancient Fathers: chiefly touching the interpretation of holy scriptures:
whose exposition (as are the places above cyted) shall be agreed upon between
them and the Ministers.

Upon request made to the Lord Neuers on the behalf of the Ministers, that he
would please to assign a day for answer, particularly to all and every
article and slanders here above proposed by the Doctors in their objection:
The said Lord ordained, that the Ministers should carry with them that evening,
one of the Copies of the Doctors objections against them; to be ready the next
morrow by noone, to answer thereunto: which the Doctors agreed unto. And made
likewise request to the said Lord of Neuers, to have leave (if it so seemed
them good) to reply to the answers that the Ministers should make. And therewith
to deliver their resolution, touching this article of the omnipotency of God.
To the end to proceed, and examine the real truth of the body of Jesus Christ
in the Sacrament of the Altar. Whereunto the Ministers added: that they also
for their parts, would deliver a brief resolution of all that which shall be
deduced by them.

The company assembled on the morrow being Wednesday, the 17. of July, My Lord
of Neuers, considering that the Doctors the day before had employed all the
time, without any left for the Ministers to make present answer to them:
supposed no less time would be needful for the Ministers to answerefully,
which had been a thing tedious and irksome. For this cause, and others by him
declared: he ordained, they should thenceforth speak by writing. And that the
Ministers should carry with them the Copy which was given them, to make
answer thereunto: and to send it unto him, signed by them, and two Notaries.
Of which he would cause a Copy to be written by his Secretary, to give it to
the Doctors, reserving the Original to himself. And in like sort would he
keep for the Ministers the Copy of that which the Doctors should send him.
Whereunto both parts submitting themselves, they disputed afterward by writing
as follows.

The Answer of the Ministers to the Objections of the Doctors, given on
Tuesday the 16. of July, 1566.
THe Ministers deny, that the consequence proposed by the Doctors, (to wit: God
cannot make one body to be in two places at one selfsame instant. Therefore ^e
is not omnipotent) is necessary: For as much as the omnipotency of God ought
not to be measured, but by the things only, which be agreeable to his will, and
are not derogate, either to his nature, or to his wisdom, or to his truth, or
to the order he established in the world. Unto which, that directly repugneth,
which the Doctors set forth: that one self same body, at one selfsame
instant, may be in diverse places. For it would follow, that a body should be a
body, without being limited: And by consequence, that it should be, and not
be, altogether. For the measures (as to be long, large, thick, and to be
bounded and limited with certain bounds) are so essential to a body, that
without that, it is no more a body. And so far of is it, that the Ministers
in so saying, do diminish the omnipotency of God: that contrariwise they
establish the same; and will not attribute to him any mutabilitie, and change
in his counsel: nor any contradiction in his will, for fear to make him lie:
which by the scripture is impossible to him.

And where the Doctors allege from the Fathers, that they have not denied the
omnipotency of God, The Ministers have heretofore showed, that they have: and
in what case it may happen. Tertullian in his book written against Praxeas,
speaking of this matter, says as follows: Surely nothing is hard unto God.
But if without judgment we will use this sentence, and interpret it according
to our foolish fantasy, we may feign all things to be of God: and say, that he
has done them: because he can do them. Now must it not be believed, because he
can do all things, that therefore he has done, what he has not done: but
enquired whether he has done it? And finally concludes, that the power of God
is his will: and his inhabilitie, likewise his unwillingness. The Doctors then,
to show that he can do it, should declare that God has willed to make a body,
which at one selfsame instant has bin in diverse places. And a marvelous
thing it is, that they impute to the Ministers, that they derogate from the
omnipotency of God, when as they do except from the same, what is contrary to
his will: seeing they themselves do confess it, and except the same things. And
that there is no other difference between the^ and the Ministers, but that they
say, that God makes one body to be in diverse places, at one self instant:
because he can do it. And the Ministers say, that he does it not, and cannot do
it: because he will not do it. For as much (as is said according to Tertullian)
the power of god is his will.

Touching the reason that the Doctors do allege in Phisosophie, to prove, that
a body, for being a body, does not therefore leave to be in diverse places: The
Ministers say, they suppose a falsehood. To wit, that quantity is accidental,
and not essential to a body. For that (to wit, that a body is measured,
bounded and circumscript) is in such sort of it essence, that without that, it
is no more a body. As S. Augustine him self, speaking of the glorified body
of Jesus Christ, says: That if space be taken away from a body, there is no
more place where it might be: and by consequence, being no part, is no more at
all. The reason of Philosophy they propose, touching the first heaven; as, that
it is not in any place: The Ministers do deny it: for to speak according to
the language of the scripture, it must be confessed that there is place even
Ioh. 14.
above the heavens. As Jesus Christ said unto his Disciples; I go to prepare a
place for you. And in the same place; In my Fathers house there are many
mansions. And else where: Ioh. 12. 26.
Where I am (taking the present time for the future) there shall my servants be
In the which sentence must be observed, that there be aduerbes of place. And S.
Augustine writing to Dardanus, expressly says: That it behooves that the body
of Jesus Christ be in some place in heaven, because it is a true body.
Moreover, in numbering of the errors sometimes condemned by the faculty of
Paris, it is expressly said: That the heaven by them called Empyreum, is the
place of Angels, of blessed spirits, and glorified humane bodies. Where the
Doctors pretend, that of the doctrine (which the Ministers maintain, that a
body cannot be without place, nor in many places at one instant) may be
inferred, that they blaspheme the omnipotency of God. The Ministers
contrariwise say, that the Doctors blaspheme his Majesty, and diminish the
same, in attributing to the creature that which appertains to him alone: to
wit, to be vncircumscript. As it appears by that which Didimus says in his
book of the holy Ghost: where he proves, that the holy Ghost is God, and not
a creature, because he is incircumscript: and that al creatures necessarily be
circumscript, and limited. As much thereof also say S. Basil, and Vigilius, and
the Mr. of the sentences in his first book. Where they confess, that the
Angels and blessed spirits be circumscript, although they be not corporal.
This reason is against themselves, and proper to prove what the Ministers have
here above maintained of bodies: to wit, that it cannot be but that they be
circumscript in some place. For by an argument from the less to the more: If
the Angels which want dimension and measure, (by their own confession) in as
much as they be creatures, be necessarily circumscript: by a more strong
reason, the bodies of men, which be creatures, and measured, shall be so
likewise.

And where they add, that the ancient Fathers have not said, that one body by
the power of God could not be in diverse places: That is contrary to the saying
of S. Augustine, in his 30. tract upon S. John, which is recited De consec:
distinct* 2. C. Prima quide^. Where, speaking of the body of Jesus Christ, he
says: namely; It behooves, that the body of our Lord, wherein he rose again,
be in one place: teaching thereby, that at one selfsame time, it cannot be in
diverse places. And touching the reason they add, taken from the Sacrament, to
prove their assertion: the Ministers say, that the fathers never understood,
nor said, that the body of Jesus Christ was in heaven, and in the Sacrament, in
one self same sort and manner: nor do they teach, that he was otherwise then
Sacramentally in the Sacrament.

And whereas in their resolution they pretend to prove, that the Angels may at
one self instant be in diverse places, when the Ministers shall have understood
their reasons, then they will answer thereunto. That which they say of a body,
it being dispoiled of it dimensions, cease not to be a body notwithstanding:
is a very absurd thing. For did it happen, that a corporal substance were
wholly dispoiled of it dimensions, it should no more be a body, but an
incorporeall substance: and of like nature as the Angels and spirits. And
although God by his power can separate the dimensio^s of a substance, without
corrupting it: yet can it not be, that they be separated from a body, without
the corruption of the same. Because the quantity and dimensions are accidents
of the substance, but not of the body: which cannot subsist without them, in as
much as they be of it proper essence.

Whereas the Doctors say afterward in their objection, that the weight in a
body, is a thing essential. The Ministers do deny it. And the reason is, that
were it of the essence of a body, and the same wanting, the body should cease
to be: Nevertheless we see, that the glorified body of Jesus Christ,
(whereunto the bodies of all the elect shall be like after the resurrection)
does not leave to be and subsist, although it be now exempted from all weight.

And as touching their alleged very strong and mighty argument: That if two
bodies may be in one self place together, one body, at one instant, may be
also in diverse places. The Ministers not granting the antecedent (under
correction) say, that the consequence is not good: and that the argument is
very weak. Adding thereto, that the Doctors have nor proved, and never can
prove by the scriptures, nor by any authority of the ancient Fathers, nor by
any sufficient reason, that which they propose in their antecedent, or the
consequent which they infer thereof to be true.

Whereas the Doctors to prove that two bodies may be together in one self
place, allege out of the scripture, that Jesus Christ entered into the house
where his Disciples were, the doors being shut: The Ministers do answer: that
it is not written, that he entered through the closed doors, but only the
doors being shut: which the ancient Interpreter has well given to
understand, expounding in one of the places of S. John, (where mention is made
of that above said) Cuum fores essent clausae. Then when the doors were shut,
Jesus came, etc. Nevertheless the Ministers say, they verily believe, and are
assured, of that which the scripture does clearly say, to wit, that the doors
being shut, he came and stood in the midst of his Disciples. But they cannot
certainly define, nor determine, which way he entered: whether it were through
the walls, or doors of wood; which Hillary himself makes doubt of in that
place of his writings, alleged by the Doctors. Howsoever it be, the Ministers
do say: that in entering, he miraculously made way. And that a body (be it the
wood or wall) did yield and give place to the body of Jesus Christ entering: or
that an opening was made unto him by the Angel, which opened and afterward
shut again the doors in a moment; as before has b^ne said. And that
howsoever it was done, two bodies were never found in one self same place
together.

Touching that they allege out of S. Augustine, in his book de agone
Christiano, that Jesus Christ entered through the doors: The Ministers deny
not, that he entered through the doors: but that two bodies only were never in
one self same place together. But if Jesus Christ entered through the doors,
that the doors at his entire gave him place, as is said.

For that which the Doctors allege touching the Apostles suspicion, that it
was a vain vision, it naught appertains to the present matter; nor that also
that they marvelled at the manner of his entry, which was miraculous: as they
ever confessed.

And touching that which they add afterward, in the opinion held by the old
heretics, of the body of Jesus Christ, that it was not a true body: because
it did things above nature. The Ministers do show them, that they little think
what occasion and foundation of their error, the ancient Fathers had
presented unto them, had they confessed what the Doctors have set forth, and
do obstinately defend of the body of Jesus Christ: that it does things, not
only above nature, but also contrary to nature: yea even contrary to the will
and ordinance of God. And there is no doubt, but such an opinion should be a
great proof for Marcion and other heretics, which have denied the true
humanity of Jesus Christ: if they should confess by the Doctors example, that
the body of Jesus Christ (contrary to the truth, nature, and essence of a body)
may be, at one self-same time in diverse places: or in one self same place with
an other body.

To that they allege of Justin Martyr: The Ministers do answer, that the book
by them alleged, is falsely attributed to him. For it there makes mention of
Origin (to wit in the the 82. question) although that Origin was more then 100.
years after him. And touching the opening of the Sepulcher, whereof there is
mention made in the place by them produced, They answer, that the Evangelist
recites clearly, that there was a great Earthquake, when Jesus Christ rose
again; and that the Angel did roll away the stone, which closed the Sepulcher.
Whereunto agrees the saying of Leo, the first Bishop of Rome, writing to the
Bishops of Palestine, where he says: That Jesus Christ rose again, the stone
which covered the Sepulcher being rolled away.

Touching the place alleged by the Doctors, out of the writings of S. Hillary;
one word there is, shall serve them for an answer. To wit, that this holy
Doctor expressly says: that Jesus Christ (to who^ all things are open (as the
Doctors have expounded the said sentence) or (as the Ministers expound it, that
he makes way every where, by his divine power) entered, the doors being shut.
For thereby also he gives to understand, that to enter into the house where
his Disciples were, he made himself way and opening. And by his writing can
naught else be concluded, but that his entry was myraculous. Concerning that
which the Doctors allege of S. Ambrose, upon S. Luke: No more can they infer
thereof, then S. Hillary has said. And they cannot conclude, neither of the
one nor the other, but that Jesus Christ entered within the house, by a divine
and miraculous power.

For that which they allege of S. John Chrysostom, touching the virgin, that
Jesus Christ came forth of her womb, her virginity and integrity no way
thereby corrupted nor defiled: yea and that she did remain a virgin before and
after her child birth: The Ministers do believe, confess, and teach the same.
And yield a reason thereof by the scripture: for as much as she never had
known man. But if thence they will infer, that in the birth of Jesus Christ,
Nula intercesserit apertio vteri: The womb was not opened. The Ministers do
say: that such a conclusion* should be against the express text of the
scripture; and of that said in S. Luke to that purpose: Omne masculinum ad
aperiens vuluam, etc. Every male that first opens the womb, etc. Joined
thereunto, that many ancient authors have written and approved it. as Origin
upon S. Luke: Tertullian de carne Christi: S. Ierom in his first Tome, Ad
Eustochiu^. Where in express terms he says: that Jesus Christ came bloody
forth of the virgins belly. S. Ambrose upon S. Luke. Whereby it may appear,
that the virgin was truly a virgin, and truly a mother.

To the authority which they bring of S. Jerome, The Ministers allege no
other thing for answer, then that which himself has said. To wit: That when
Jesus Christ came where his Disciples were, the creature obeyed his Creator.

What the Doctors allege of S. Cyril, serves nothing to the confirmation of
their purpose.

Touching the heresy in Iouinian, justly reproved by Saint Augustine: who to
avoid the error of the Manichees, fell into an other: namely, that the virgin in
her childbirth remained not a virgin. The Ministers say: that it was not
necessary that Iouinian (to avoid the error of the Manichees) should call in
doubt the virginity of Mary: forasmuch as the foundio^ of the same virginity,
is upon this, that she was never known of man.

Touching the conclusion, that the Doctors would draw from the authorities
above said, and apply them to their purpose (which was) that one body may be in
two places at one self-same instant, or that two bodies may be in one self-same
place together: The Ministers say, that it is altogether impertine^t. And that
neither by the places they alleged, nor any others that they can gather, can
they any way infer the same. Adding further, that it shall never be found in
any good Author. By means whereof, they conclude against the Doctors, that
their foundation is nothing. And that they will falsely authorize their error by
the name and title of the ancient Fathers, for fault of good understanding,
and taking the term [piercing] which some of the ancient Fathers have used;
and signifies not a a confusion, and mingling together of diverse bodies,
occupying one self same place: but only the yielding, that the one made, to
give the other passage. As we see, and have experience, that the air gives
place to a man that walks, and birds that fly. And the Ministers for
conclusion say: that, that which they maintain, and propose by their answer,
does not derogate, nor any way diminish the greatness, glory, and power of God:
but does establish the same; and much more advance it, then such prodigious
absurdities, (as those are, which the Doctors set forth, and will persuade:
without any reason or probable means) would do. For they confess, that all
whatsoever happened, both in the entry of Jesus Christ into the house where his
disciples were, and in his going out as well of the virgins womb, as of the
Sepulcher, there was the myraculous and divine power of God. But they deny,
that thereby nothing happened, which was impossible, and contained any
contradiction.

What they allege of Calvin and Beza are frivolous things: and proposed more
to slander and contradict, then to search out and make manifest the truth.

Where as they say that all antiquity, with one consent do understand by the
term Aphantos ap'aut^n; That Jesus Christ made himself invisible to his
Disciples, abiding in their presence. The Ministers for their answer, are
content to allege unto them, one only authority of S. Ambrose upon S. Luke:
who expounding these words, says: That he retired from them. And an other of
Nicholas de Lyra, which says upon this place, that it was done by the agilitie
of his glorious body, which can suddenly vanish away.

To that they allege of the piercing the heavens, when Jesus Christ ascended
thither, the Ministers do answer, that it is very like they claue a sunder, and
were opened; a when at the Baptism of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Dove
descended upon him: And when as also S. Stephen was stoned.

Touching that which they reprove in the first answer of the Ministers,
saying: that in the 12* chap. of the Acts, there is made no mention of the
opening of the prison. The Ministers do admonish them to read diligently the
text of the said place. And there they shall find, that when they had passed the
first and 2. watch, the utter gate of the prison (which was of Iro^) did open
of it own accord, to make the Angel and Peter passage.

Whereas the Doctors reply upon the answer of the Ministers, to the argument of
the Camel formerly proposed by them in their first answer: the Ministers say,
that there is nothing in their said answer, against the word of God. But that
they deceive themselves: referring to the Camel, whereof he had formerly made
mention: that which ought to be understood, but of the saving and conversion
of the rich man only. For our Lord Jesus Christ saying, that that which is
impossible to men, is possible with God: naught else pretends, but to answer
the question which the Disciples had propounded. To wit, who could be saved.
Answering whereunto, he said: that it was indeed impossible to men: who of
themselves are inclined to trust in their riches. But to God it was possible,
which could pull back or withdraw their hearts from that vain confidence.

As touching the argument which they will build upon the presence of Jesus
Christ in the Supper, (whereof they will infer, that it is in diverse places)
the Ministers confess the antecedent, and deny the consequence. For there is
no doubt, but by faith our Lord Jesus Christ is spiritually present to all the
faithful in the Supper. Whence nevertheless must not be inferred, that he is
there locally, definitiuely, no^ corporally. And whereas they say, that it is
not imaginable, the Ministers do avow the same, in regard of these which are
not taught and enlightened by the spirit of God, and have no other imagination,
then that which their natural faculty does furnish them withal. But they that
being illuminate by the grace of God, have a true and lively faith in their
hearts: it is no more impossible to represent unto them Jesus Christ crucified
in the Supper, then it was to the Galathians to represent and propose him unto
them, as present and visible, at the preaching of S. Paul: and to those
likewise of whom Saint Ciprian makes mention in his Sermon of the Supper: That
in celebrating the same, they embrace the Cross of Jesus Christ, suck his
blood, and fasten their tongues within his wounds. All which things are done by
a lively contemplation, and apprehension of faith: which is no other thing,
then the ground of things hoped for, and an evidence of those things which are
not seen: as S. Paul does define it.

Touching the truth of the thing conjoined with the signs and Sacraments: the
Ministers confess, that the outward signs are never without their effect
toward the faithful, who cannot be partakers of the bread and wine distributed
in the Supper, but that they participate therwithall, of the flesh of Jesus
Christ crucified for their sins, and of his blood shead to ratify the new
covenant which God made with his people. But if the Doctors will infer
thereof a corporal presence in the Supper, the Ministers will deny it. And
their reason is, because such a presence was not required among the ancient
Fathers: who left not for all that, to eat one selfsame spiritual food,
with all the faithful at this day: as it shall be by the grace of God, more
amply declared when the Lord of Neuers shall please to command conference of
this matter.

To that which the Doctors (slaundering the Ministers) do say, that they
attribute more to themselves, and to humane power, then they do attribute to
the power of God: when they say, that by faith they make present, the things
which be absent; seeing that God (according to the doctrine of the Ministers)
cannot make one selfsame body to be in diverse places at one instant. The
Ministers do answer, that such antitheses be foolish, and unfit for the
purpose: and that there is much more great appearance that the Doctors do
presume more of their power, and that of the other Priests of the Roman
Church, then of the power of God: for God created not by his word, but the
heavens, the earth, and the other creatures therein contained. And they in
their consecration, do attribute unto themselves, the power to create their
Creator: as is contained in their breuiarie, where the Priest says: Qui
creauit me, creatur mediante me. He that created me, is created my means of
me. And the Ministers much marvel, that the Doctors call the virtue of faith,
a humane power, seeing the great and admirable effects thereof proposed unto
us, in so many examples of the scripture; chiefly in the eleventh Chapter of
the Epistle to the Hebrews: where Saint Paul says: That the Saints, by faith,
have subdued kingdoms, etc. All which things surmount not only the virtue,
but also the capacity of humane understanding.

In that immediately following this article, there is but repetitions in the
reply of the Doctors: and many unprofitable and superfluous words: and little
or nothing of that, should be necessary to the purpose. And as they have
answered them particularly to every point which they repeat, they send them
now back to the former answers: and pray them henceforth not to serve them
twice with one mess.

Concerning the Sacrament of the Altar, as they call it: The Ministers neither
receive, nor any way approve, that their Mass (which they pretend to be a
Sacrament) is a Sacrament: and much less a sacrifice, by which remission of
finnes may be any way obtained. Yea they say, that both their Priest and
pretended sacrifice, with all the things thereof depending, are blasphemies,
and impieties: by which GOD is dishonored, all the benefit of Jesus Christ
buried, and naught esteemed: and the Church of Jesus Christ seduced and abused;
as by the pursuit of the Conference shall plainly appear. And also, that the
Ministers do no way corrupt either the sense, or the words which Jesus Christ
used in the institution of his holy Supper.

Thursday the 18. of July, in the year above said.
The reply or objection of the Doctors against the answer of the Ministers,
touching the Article of the Omnipotency of God, on Satterday the 20. of July.
THe Doctors say, that this cosequence, God cannot by his omnipotency, make
one body to be in two places at one instant, he is not therefore omnipotent: is
so good and strong, that the Ministers (without wrapping, and more and more
drowning themselves in execrable blasphemies, to the great grief and horror of
the Doctors) can no way deny the same: And besides the two blasphemies
maintained by the Ministers in their former answers, (that is to say, that it
was impossible for God to make one body to be in two places: and that it was
impossible for him to will the same) in the first article of their last
answer, they add four or five other blasphemies, out of which do flow yet
many others: besides the absurdities, falsehoods, and impostures they use to the
said Doctors. And first they set forth, that God cannot do a thing which
derogateth the order which he has established in the world. Secondly, that it
should be to establish mutabilitie, and change in the Council of God, did
they confess, that he can do any thing against the said order which he has
put in the world. And thirdly, that were it so, there should be contradiction
in his will: whereby it would follow, that he should be a liar. And for the
fourth blasphemy, that the power of God is his will: and that his weakness,
is his unwillingness. And for the fifth, the Ministers pretend, that God has
willed to make a body, which at one self instant has been in many places,
before they believe that God could do it: otherwise they intend to infer
that he had not power, and could not do it. So that the Ministers will naught
acknowledge of the power of God, but so much thereof, as he has showed by
effect. And to that purpose they allege Tertullian. All which blasphemies be
drawn out of the proper words of the Ministers first article.

Touching the first, which is, that God cannot make a thing which derogateth
the order he has established in the world: it is very apparent that it is
blasphemy by the holy scripture: which in infinite places makes mention of
the works of God above nature, which the Ministers call the order established
in the world. And in proper terms teaches that God can do infinite things,
above the order by him established in the world. Namely, that Lots wife was
turned into a pillar of salt: that a barren woman in her old age, having an
old husband, brought forth a child: that a withered Rod budded: that an Ass
spoke: that the son stayed and went back: and other more then innumerable
examples, contained in the old Testament. And as touching the new, that a
virgin brought forth a child. That a body walked upon the water, and mounted
into heaven. And generally all the miracles that Christ and his Apostles did
above nature, which is contrary to the order established in the world. And of
this blasphemy ensues an other: that God since he established his order in
the world, has not done, nor could, nor can do any miracle.

Now to prove that the scripture teaches clearly, that God can do contrary to
the order established in the world, it is written in the 50. of Esaias: Is my
hand (that is to say my power) so shortened, that it cannot help? or have I no
power to deliver? Behold at my rebuke I dry the sea: I make the floods desert:
Their fish rotteth for want of water, and dies for thirst. I cloathe the
heavens with darkness, and make a sack their covering. And more expressly in
the new Testament, where it is said by S. John: That God can of stones raise up
children to Abraham. Which place, although it may be expounded allegorically:
yet has S. John willed in the litterall sense to show, that it was possible
to God. And the diue did know and confess, that if Jesus Christ were the true
son of God, he could change the stones into bread. Which is nevertheless
contrary to the order established in the world. And it must be noted, that
there is no more impossibility that the bread should be changed into flesh
by the omnipotency of God, then a stone into bread. And therefore they which
deny this last, done by the power of God, do show to believe less the
almightinesse of God, then the devils.

The confutation of the second blasphemy, depends on the confutation of the
first. For although God, against the order established in the world, has done
many miracles (as has been before recyted) yet nevertheless there is no
mutabilitie, nor change in his counsel.

Touching the third blasphemy, which is, that if God did any thing contrary to
the order established in the world, there should be contradiction in his will,
and he should therefore be a liar. The Doctors object, that it would follow,
that the will of God should be such, never to will any thing contrary to the
order established in the world. And that God should have purposed and declared
by his word, his will to be such. For otherwise can they not know what the will
of God should be. And the Ministers do not, nor can they make it appear by the
word of God, the will of God to be such, that he will not do any thing against
the order established in the world. And it behooves the said Ministers to teach
of such a will of God, before they conclude that God made one body to be in two
places (or other thing) against the order of nature established in the world,
he should be a liar.

Touching the fourth blasphemy, which is, that the power of God is his will,
and that his weakness is his unwillingness, according to the sense which the
Ministers give it (to wit, if God cannot, but that which he will) it is an
heresy of the heretics called Monarchians, in the Primitive Church. Against
whom, Tertullia^ wrote, in his book Aduersus Praxea^, and afterward renewed
by Peter Abaillardus. And since continued by one called Wickliffe: who measured
the power of God according to his will. Which is against the express word of
God, which often declares many things possible to God, that notwithstanding he
will not do, as by that which is written in the 2. of Wisdom appears: where
mention is made, that God could send upon the children of Israel, many kinds of
affliction, to chasten the^, but he would not do it, having disposed all
things, by number, weight and measure. And that he could destroy those which
had offended, but that he would not, using mercy toward the^. And in the
Gospel, our Lord said to S. Peter, Think thou that I could not now pray my
Father, and he would send me more then 12. Legions of Angels? And
notwithstanding he would not pray for that purpose. And his Father would not
send them, although he had power to do it to the person of his son. And Jesus
Christ himself could have let his enemies from taking away his life, but he
would not. And the Father (says S. Paul) by his power could have saved him
from corporal death. But nevertheless he would not do the one, nor the
other. Notwithstanding the Ministers might say, that it was preordained: yet
the scripture says expressly, that he could do it, although it had bin
preordained. And as touching the authority of Tertullian, the Doctors are glad
that the Ministers do produce it, because it makes wholly for the truth,
against the blasphemy of the Ministers, who have omitted many words and
sentences of the said Tertullian, which served to the confutation of their
error: as by the text here inserted, may be easily judged. Nihil Deo difficile.
Quis hoc nesciat? Et impossibilia apud seculum, possibilia apud deu^. Quis
ignorant? Et stulta mu^di elegit Deus, vt confundat sapientia. Ergo inquiu^t
haeretici (Monarchiani scilicet) difficile non fuit deo ipsu^ se and patrem and
Filiu^ facere, aduersus traditam forma^ rebus humanis. Nam and Aerile^ parere
contra naturam, difficile deo non fuit, sicut nec virgine^ plane nichil Deo
difficile. Sed sita^ abrupte in praesumptiombus nostris hac sententia vtamur,
quid vis de Deo confingere poterimus quasi fecerit, quia facere potuerit. Non
autem quia omnia potest facere, idioque credendu^ est illu^ fecisse etia^ quod
non fecerit: sed an fecerit requirendu^. Potuit (ita saluus sum) Deus pennis
homine^ ad volandu^ instruxisse (quod and miluis praestitit) non tamen quia
potuit, statim and fecit, potuit and praxeam and omnes pariter haeriticos
statim extinxisse, non tame^ quia potuit, extinxit. Oportebat enim miluos esse
and haereticos: oportebat and patrem crucifigi. Hac ratione erit aliquid and
deo dificile, id scilicet quod non fecerit: non quia potuerit, sed quia
noluerit. Etenim posse, velle est, and non posse, nolle. Nothing is impossible
to God: who knows not this? And things impossible to me^, are possible to
God: who is ignorant hereof? And God has chosen the foolish things of the
world to confound the wise. Therefore say the heretics (namely the
Monarchians) it was not hard for God himself to make both the Father and the
son, against the prescribed form in humane things. For the barren to bring
forth against nature: as also a Virgin, was nothing hard unto God. Truly for
God there is nothing too hard.

But if in our presumption we so abruptly use this sentence, we may faigne
every thing to be of God: as though he will do, because he can do. We must
not believe, because he can do all things, that therefore he has done what
he has not done: but we must seek if he have done it. God could (I am sure)
have formed man to fly with wings, (as he has appointed the kytes) he has
not forthwith done it because he could. He could presently cut off both Praxea,
and likewise all heretics together: yet has he not therefore, because he
could. For it behooved there should be both kytes and heretics: It behooved also
the Father to be crucified. By this reason shall something be too hard for God,
namely that which he will not do: not because he cannot, but because he will
not. For to be able, is to will: and not to be able, is not to will. By which
text it is easily seen, that according to Tertullian, God can do many things
which he will not do: as he can make a man to fly, and does it not: destroy
heretics; nevertheless he destroys them not, because he will not, all that
he may do.

And touching the conclusion which the Ministers draw from the said place of
Tertullian, (to wit) that the power of God is his will: and his weakness is
likewise his unwillingness: The Ministers show, that they have not well
examined the understanding of that place. For Tertullian of his own judgment
says it not; (so should he have concluded against what he had said before)
but he infers the same against the Monarchian heretics, which said: That
what God could, he would do, and it was done. And for this reason Tertullian
concludes against them: that it behooved whatsoever God had not done, was to
him hard and impossible. So that (after these heretics) it was all one to be
done, and to have power to do it. And not to be done, as much as to be
impossible to God. And hereof infers Tertullian, would follow, that the
power, and the will, and the act of God, should be all one. And contrariwise,
that a thing not to be done, and to be impossible for God to do it, should be
all one: and so the power of God, and his will, all one. And his weakness, and
his unwillingness be likewise all one. Which Tertullian concludes for an
absurd thing, proceeding from the opinion of the said Monarchians heretics,
and not of his own judgment, which was altogether contrary. Wherein it
appears, that the opinion of the Ministers, is like to that of the Monarchian
heretics, refuted by Tertullian. And that the Ministers maintain such an
opinion, it is evident by that which is contained in the fifth blasphemy.

The Doctors for conclusion against the said blasphemies, do show that God can
do much more then he will do, and then he has established in the order of the
world. For otherwise, other blasphemies would yet ensue: namely, that the power
of God should not be infinite, but limited. Also that all things of necessity
should be done in this world, because God could not but maintain the
established order in the world. Which Calvin himself detesteth, saying: That
God of his omnipotency, changes and alters the order established (as
seems best unto him) and that otherwise to think, were to limit his power
and providence. Where the Ministers say in their said former article, that the
ancient Doctors of the Church have denied the omnipotency of God: it is a
manifest falsehood, and they wrong them greatly. For deny it they do not, but
interpret the scripture, which seems to deny it: and give to understand, how
it ought to be taken. So that, so far off is it, that by this scripture well
understood, exception may be given against the omnipotency of God; that
contrariwise the same is confirmed: as says Saint Augustine in the fifth book,
and tenth Chapter of the City of God. The power of God (says he) is nothing
diminished, although it be said, that he cannot die, nor be deceived: for
such things he cannot do: because, that could he do them, his power should
thereby be lessened. And concludes, that such things which be of infirmity he
cannot do, beccause he is almighty.

The Ministers in the end of the first article, use deceit toward the Doctors,
in that they affirm their difference to be, because the Doctors maintain,
that a body is in many places, for as much as God can so cause it to be: and
that the Ministers on the other part hold, that it is not in the power of God
to do it, because he will not do it. The Doctors do show, that they (for
their part) never so concluded for truth, that one true body was in two places,
because God could so cause it: but that the question was only to know,
whether God could do it, to come afterward by order, to prove by scripture
that he would do it. And they have already heretofore cyted the scripture of
the Supper and Ascension. And further added the doctrine of Calvin touching the
said Supper: to show, that the will of God is, to make one body to be in two
places, (as indeed it is) according to the express word of God. Moreover, to
this selfsame end, the Doctors have produced the scriptures of the closed
doors: of the birth of our Lord: and of the resurrection through the stone:
which are made like: and by the same reason, to that of a body in many places.
The Ministers on the contrary part, to deny the will of God, and deprave the
holy scriptures (which declares the will of God to be such, that one body be
in two places) allege nothing more instantly, then the impossibility for God
to do this.

Now, to the end that all the world may understand the present difference,
between the Doctors and Ministers, the Doctors declare, that no other
difference there has been hitherto touching this article, then to know
whether it be in the power of God, to make one body to be in two places at one
selfsame instant or no.

And for the second article, the Doctors say, that the Ministers answer not to
the purpose: for the objection was not, whether quantity were an accident of a
Mathematical body, Aut de praedicamento quantitatis, as speaks the
Philosophers) but to know whether it were of the essence and of necessity to
the quantity of a body, to be circumscript, and in one piace enclosed. And as
touching S. Augustine, by the Ministers alleged, he speaks expressly
according to the proprieties of the divine and humane natures. And well says,
that the divine, is in all places, but not the humane: because of it natural
propriety, it requires a place certain. And of this make the Doctors no
doubt, according to the said natural propriety. But the question is, to wit,
whether above nature, by the omnipotency of God, he cannot cause one body to
be without place, proportionable to it greatness, Which S. Augustine speaking,
de Ianuis clausis: not having regard to the nature of things, but to the power
of God, plainly confesses. And the Doctors would desire the Ministers to
allege this Epistle of S. Augustine, against the doctrine of Calvin, and his
Ministers, for the descent of the soul of Jesus Christ into hell, as often as
they allege the passage of the place of bodies, against the power of God,
touching the body of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament.

In the 3. article the Ministers are deceived. For after the sayings of the
Philosophers, and according to the natural reason of a body (which the
Ministers do follow) Locus est superficies Corporis continentis. Place is the
ouermost part of a containing body. Wherefore it should behoue, that were the
high and last heaven circumscript of place, there should be a body above the
high and first heaven, A quo primum Caelum contineretur. Et sic in infinitum.
Of which the first heaven should be contained. And so infinite. And moreover the
Ministers answer not to the other obiectio^s made the^ upon this article.

And as touching the passages of scripture, which they allege to prove that
there are toomthes and places above all the heavens, they captiously conclude,
and (...) with doubtfulnesse of the name of place. For in all their (...) of
the dimensions of bodies (which they have said (...) to require roomth and
place equal and (...) their bigness) it is meet they understand (...)
roomthes and places, even as the dimensions and of (...) do require the same.

And now, when they speak of place^ (...) meet they understand the^, others
then (...) be not such roomthes and places, as these wherein (...) now are: but
incomprehensible and vnimaginable places, where bodies and spirits
indifferently are, without distinction for their greatness, of certain spaces
and places corporal. And in such places, the Ministers rule is false, by which
they maintain, that a body cannot be in one place, if it be not as spacious,
as the greatness of the body. Moreover the Doctors say, that it is the manner
of heretics, to interpret the scriptures spiritually, when they are literally
to be taken: and contrariwise, to expound according to the letter, that which
spiritually and by figure ought to be understood. As the Ministers do expound
the house of Cod in the other world, literally and corporally, wherein there
are spaces, and corporal habitations, diverse and separate one from an other:
albeit it ought to be spiritually understood, for the diversity of degrees of
blessedness.

The said Doctors cannot omit, a manifest contradiction of the Ministers in
this selfsame article: wherein they pre^end, that the bodies and souls of
the blessed, are lodged above all the heavens. And yet they place the body of
Jesus Christ within the heaven.

And touching the alleged article, condemned by the faculty of divinity at
Paris: the Doctors answer, that the Ministers do ordinarily allege
authorities, pared, or euilly applied: For the Article says, that the Bishop
of Paris, having called the Faculty, condemned all those, which would place
two distinct heavens: one for the Angels, the other for the souls of men.
Which nothing pertains to the present question.

The Ministers in the fourth article do charge the Doctors, who never attribute
the propriety of God to any creature: but have often heretofore said, that to
be every where, and incircumscript, was not natural to any creatures, but to
God alone. And the Authors by the Ministers alleged (as Saint Basil, Didimus,
and Vigilius, speak no otherwise the^ of the propriety of nature, to be every
where, or not. And yet they never deny, but it is in Gods power to cause one
creature or body, above it nature, to be in two, or many places: but (as
aforesaid) when they come to the power of God, many of the old authors
confess, that it is possible with God, and that he has done the same in the
Sacrament: the answer of the Ministers is therefore to no purpose. For the
whole contention is of the power of God, and not of natural proprieties.

The Ministers in the fifth article have not well conceived the reason of the
Doctors: who allege, that the Angels are naturally circumscript, as well as
bodies: and hereby would infer, that the circumscription of place simply
depended not as of the sole and essential cause of the dimensions of a body:
as by all their said reasons, the Ministers pretend. Albeit the Doctors are not
ignorant that to put difference between the corporal and spiritual
creatures, they have accustomed to distinguish in schools, that the Angels
Sunt diffinitiue in loco, and the bodies Circumscriptiue.

In the sixth article to satisfy the Doctors, who made instance they should
produce one only place of the ancient Fathers: where it was said, that it is
not in Gods power, to make one body to be in two places. The Ministers for all
the testimonies they could have, do falsely allege a place of S. Augustine,
where it is said (as it is cyted in Gratian De consecra: distinct. 2. C. prima
quidem) that the said Saint Augustine has written, that it behooved the body of
Jesus to be in one place: whereunto say the Doctors, that it is not so couched
in the proper text of S. Augustine, which is in the 30. tract upon Saint John.
For such is the tenor in all the ancient copies of S. Augustine: Corpus
domini, in quo resurrexit, vno loco esse potest, veritas eius vbique diffusa
est. The body of the Lord, in which he rose again, may be in one place, his
truth is shead into every place. Where is not this word [Oportet] as the
Ministers cite it, having taken the same out of Gratian. And that men may know
there is no great trust to be given to the fragments of Gratian, without
recourse to the copies of Saint Augustine, in the title of Canon, these words
are there extracted out of the exposition of S. Augustine, upon the 54 Psalm.
From whence he draws the only beginning of his Canon: and yet does he not
truly cite it. The ^est of the said Canon, is taken from diverse passages of S.
Augustine. And although there should be Oportat. S. Augustine speaks after
his wonted manner, according to the propriety of a body, opposing the
divinity to the humanity: without touching the operation of Gods
omnipotency. Whereof when he makes mention, and that he speaks of the
Sacrament, he plainly affirms, the body of Jesus Christ to be in diverse
places; by the omnipotency of God. As the Doctors hope in their resolution to
deduce as well out of him, as other ancients also.

The 8. artide contains many errors, against Philosophy and truth. First,
because the Ministers make no distinction between the body they cab
Mathematical (to wit, having dimension of breadth, length, and height) and the
Physical or natural body: to wit, which is composed of a substantial form
and matter: by the union whereof, it is made a natural and substantial body.
Secondly, although the body should be without quantity, yet should it differ
from our souls separated, which be not material substances: and consequently
should it also differ from the Angels and spirits. Thirdly, the Ministers by
the conclusion of this article, do manifestly declare, that they acknowledge
not any substantial body. And where they say, that although God might separate
the dimensio^s from a substance, without corrupting the same, that such
substance should remain spiritually, as the Angels, they are deceived. For
such substance should not remain immateriall, as are our souls, and the
Angels which be not capable of dimensions: and therefore should it yet be
different from Angels and our souls.

Concerning the ninth article, the Ministers answer nothing to the purpose.
For the Doctors say not, that the massinesse and weight be essential in a
body, but to press downward, is essential to the sadness and weight of a
body. And by their objection they demanded to know, whether an earthly and
massy body, abiding in it substance and natural weight, might not by the
omnipotency of God, be hanged in the air, without falling downward, albeit it
were against it nature and inclination,

Moreover, for answer to many articles which concern the act of two bodies in
one place, and the passages of holy scripture, and ancient Authors produced by
the Doctors, (to prove that it was in Gods power to cause two bodies to be in
one only place: and contrariwise, that by the same reason it was in the same
power, to cause one body to be in two places). First the Doctors say, that the
Ministers do wrong, to deny this consequence. Two bodies by the power of God,
may be in one selfsame place. Then on the contrary part, one body may be in
two places, by the selfsame power. For as great repugnancie there is to Gods
established order, in the one, as in the other: and as great contradiction in
nature, founded upon one selfsame cause and reason: to wit, in the
limitation, and circumscription of a body. Which as it is natural to be in
place, so is it natural for it, to be in place proportioned and answerable to
it measures. And if for the number of diverse places where a body should be,
one may infer, that it should no more be a body (as implying contradiction)
by the same reason, according to one only place, where many bodies should be,
may also be inferred, that they should no more be many bodies: or that many
bodies should be one. Which would imply the contradiction as the former.

And where the Ministers deny the antecedent, which is, that two bodies may
be in one place, the Doctors to prove it, have produced the passages of
scripture, of the closed doors: the birth of the body of our Lord of the
Virgin: the going out of the Sepulcher: the passage of a Camel through the eye
of a needle: and the piercing of the heavens made by Christ in his ascension.

And for as much as the Ministers deny these acts, contained expressly in holy
scripture, and expounded by the ancient Christians, and deprave the same at
their pleasure. The Doctors estsoones upon the texts of scripture do say as
follows. First as touching the closed doors, Saint John says: That Jesus
came, meaning into the place where his Disciples were. But he came not there
without entering thereinto. For to be found in the midst of them without
entering, there should be a much greater miracle, then that he entered there
simply. Secondly it is said, Cum fores essent clausa, or Ianuis clausis. To
wit, that he there entered, the doors being shut. And there is no appearance
that the scripture makes mention of doors, rather then an other place, were
it not to show the place by which he entered. Thirdly, it is added not in
vain, that the doors were shut, without saying that any opening was
myraculously made. For it is always said, Quod venit Ianuis clausis. That he
came the doors being shut. And were it true, that the doors had bin opened
by divine power, this should be false, that our Lord entered, Ianuis clausis,
for he should have entered Ianuis apertis, howsoever they had been opened.

And to show, that the common consent of all the Auncientes have been, that
Jesus entered therein by the closed doors, the Doctors set forth four
foundations, drawn from the ancient Fathers. The first is, that all expressly
confess the miracle of such an entry to have been wrought in the body of
Jesus Christ. The second is, that such miracle was there wrought by the power
of God, above the nature of a body. The third is, that the Fathers especially
judge, that herein consists the miracle, that the body pas^ed through the
closed doors: and that so it was with an other body. And for the fourth
ground, they add, that the Apostles by reason of such entering, supposed that
the body of Jesus Christ was not a true body, but a spirit, or vain vision:
which the Ministers lightly pass over, without any answer. Now so it is, that
if by the power of God (as the Ministers will have it) an opening was made of
the doors, or any other part of the house, to give entry to the body of
Jesus Christ: then the miracle did not consist in the said body, but in the
doors, or other part of the house, which was open: and nothing had been there
against the nature of the body of our Lord: for it is not repugnant to any
body whatsoever, to enter by an opening made by miracle, or otherwise.

Be it, that Iustine was not Author of the questions against the Gentiles; yet
can they not deny, but they are of some ancient Christian, of the Primitive
Church. And the Doctors have attributed them to him, in whose name they are
entitled. And so much there is, that the said Iustine in the place alleged,
lays the miracle to have been done in the body of Jesus Christ: which (being
gross and thick) entered through the closed doors by the power of God;
contrary to the nature of a body. And therefore the Apostles supposed it a
vision: by reason of the entry made without opening, as spirits do wontedly
enter. Let the text be seen.

S. Hillary says not only, that he there entered in what sort soever it were,
by the omnipotency of God, (as the Ministers will wrest his authority) but as
if he had now to deal with the said Ministers, he repulseth and mocketh at
all their euasions and subtilties, which upon this act they imagined. Nothing
(says he) gave place, to open to such a body, and that it lost nothing of it
substance: nor by it entry was ought diminished. He adds: That the doors and
clefts were shut, and fast barred. And in this nevertheless lies the miracle,
that the true natural body of Jesus Christ, contrary to nature, by the
omnipotency of God entered into a house, close and covert, without any
opening: wherein he plainly shows, that the miracle consists in the body
of Jesus Christ. And for this let the text be viewed, which the Doctors wish to
be well examined by the Ministers.

S. Ambrose in the place cyted says: That S. Thomas was abashed, seeing the
body of Jesus Christ to enter, Per in via septa corporibus. Et quod natura
corporea per impenitrabile corpus sese infuderit inuisibili aditu. Through
closures impassable for bodies: And that the corporeal nature powered it self
by an invisible mean through an impenitrable body.

S. Chrysostom in the Homely of S. John Baptist, and in his Commentaries upon
the Gospel of S. John, expressly says: Qui intrauit per ostia clausa, non erat
phantasma, non erat spiritus, vere corpus erat. Quid enim dicit? Respicite and
videte: quia spiritus carnem and ossa non habet, quae me habere videtis.
Habebat carnes, habebat and ossa, and clausa erant omnia. Quomodo clausis
octijs intrauerunt ossa and caro? Clausa sunt omnia and intrat, que^ intrantem
non vidimus. Nescis quomodo factum sit, and das hoc potentiae Dei.

He that entered through the closed doors, was not a vain vision, was not a
spirit, it was truly a body. For what says he? Behold and see: For a spirit
has not flesh and bones, as you see me have. He had flesh, he had also
bones, and all things were shut. How entered bones and flesh, the doors being
shut? All things are shut, and he enters whom we see not entering. How it
is done thou know not, and attributes this to the power of God.

Where S. Chrysostom without difficulty, as does also S. Ambrose,
acknowledges the miracle to have bin wrought in the body of Jesus Christ; in
that he passed through the shut doors, by the omnipotency of God.

S. Jerome in the places quoted by the Doctors manifestly writes: that the
body pierced the closed doors, even as the Poets recount that the fight of
Linceus pierced the walls, to see through without opening. S. Jerome then
reasoned of the nature of a body, which the Bishop of Jerusalem (infected with
the heresy of Origin) held not to be truly in Jesus Christ after his
resurrection: because contrary to the nature of a body, he had passed through
the closed doors: wherein Saint Jerome (as the other Ancients) declares:
that it nothing derogateth from the nature of the body: because it proceeded
from a supernatural power.

And in the first Book against Iouinian he says as much: where he uses
these words: Jesus entered through the closed doors. Quod humanorum corporum
natura non patitur. Which thing, the nature of humane bodies admits not. So
that with others, he places the miracle in the body of Jesus Christ.

There is no doubt, but S. Augustine in three places (at the least) makes
express mention, that this body passed through the shut doors: and that this
was done by the power of God, above the nature of bodies: and that therefore
heretics ought not to deny the true body of Jesus Christ: besides the
passages De agone Christiano, and of the Epistle Ad volusianum, already
alleged in the book De Ciuitate Dei, he says so also.

Epiphanius in the first book, upon the 20. Heresy, and in the 2. book, upon
the 64. Heresy, against the Origenists, declares that it is but a spiritual
body: to wit, which loses nothing of it corporal substance: but changes and
gets new qualities and spiritual perfections, and meet for spirits: as to
pass through the walls without opening. And gives example of the body of
Jesus Christ, which pierced and passed through the closed doors after his
resurrection. And even so judges (as others do) the miracle to have been
wrought in the body of Jesus Christ: and that because he pierced the shut
doors, as a spirit, albeit he were a true body.

Cirillus Alexandrinus determines also (as the others) this miracle to have
happened in the body of our Lord; which by the like miracle, walked upon the
waters, against the nature of a body, by the power of God; and reproves all
them, which ought suspected by this deed, that the body of Jesus Christ was not
natural.

By all these authorities, the four grounds proposed, are true. And therefore
to corrupt the intention and faith of so many Auncientes and learned
Christians, to bring in a confusion of new Interpretations, is ouer-great
impudency. For besides the diversity of Calvin and Beza, the Ministers to
that end produce two others: to wit, that the Angel opened the door: as
though Jesus had not power himself to open it, or else had need of opening.
And the other is, that the opening was made which way he pleased. And by such
diversities, the Ministers sufficiently declare, that they know not where to
rest. And (which is worse) they could not allege one only ancient Father, for
author of their fictions, or that is contrary to all the others, from the
Primitive Church. And to allege, that the Iron gate (in the Acts of the
Apostles opened to S. Peter of it own accord, serves nothing to the purpose:
For the Doctors never denied the same: but have well said, that the scripture
spoke not of the gates of the prison: and if at the entry of Jesus Christ the
doors had been so opened, the Evangelist had as easily said it, as he said
they were shut; and as S. Luke says, that the Iron gate was opened of it self.

There is no doubt, but perverse spirits, which doubted of the truth of the
body of Jesus Christ in this world, were not of opinion touching the passage
of the doors, with other Christians. And although they thought to help and
aid themselves herewith, to support their heresies (as of all the other
miracles happened to the body of our Lord above nature) the Fathers
nevertheless have not denied this, nor others semblable acts: for fear to
give heretics occasion of error. But have declared and distinguished what was
of the nature of the said body, and what came unto it by the omnipotency of
God. And the Christians (for heresies) never abandoned the truth: albeit
heretics thereby have sometimes abused the same. Since then the body of Jesus
Christ passed through the doors without opening; sure it is, that two bodies
have been, and may be in one self same place. And hereby have the Doctors well
proved their proposition: which without scripture, or testimony of any Father,
the Ministers deny.

Concerning the Birth of Jesus Christ without fraction of the virgin, the
Doctors say, that many of the Ancients produced for the passage of the doors,
have also held, that miracle to have been wrought in the body of our Lord, and
not in the body of the virgin, but in as much as she remained in her
pureness, without fracture or opening. And for their reason, the Fathers have
alleged the scripture: Exce virgo concipiet and pariet. Behold a virgin shall
conceive and bring forth. And out of Ezechiel: Porta haec clausa erit. This
gate shall be shut. As reciceth S. Ambrose in the 80. Epistle, where a Council
is contained, wherein S. Ambrose was present: which determined against Iouinian
and other heretics, that the virginity and purity remained in her
child*birth, to the mother of God. Which thing S. Augustine in the place
alleged by the Doctors in the first book, and 2. Chapter against Julian,
repeateth. And where the Ministers say, that the virgin had not lost her
virginity, when our Lord was borne as other men: in that they are condemned
of heresy by the Fathers: which declare Iouinian to derogate her virginity,
for the like opinion as the Ministers do hold. Of whom the Doctors would
willingly demand, what miracle they acknowledge in the birth of our Lord,
touching his body, and the virginity of his mother, if he departed from her,
as other children from their mothers, as the Ministers do write. And as
touching that which they allege of Tertullian, Origin, S. Ambrose, and S.
Jerome; the Doctors say: that Tertullian and Origin held such an heresy, and
many others, which were reproved before Iouinian. And for this, were condemned
with him and his consorts. And for S. Ambrose, it is evident, that he believed
the contrary; as well by the Council where he was present: as by that which he
wrote in the book De Institutione Virginis. And therefore, where he says:
that Christus vuluam aperuerit, it must be interpreted, not that it was by
rupture or fraction, but by effect of generation, and production of his true
body, out of the womb of the virgin, by miracle and supernatural power. So
that, as the conception was myraculous, so was his birth: Et aperire vuluam, is
a phrase and manner of speaking in the scripture, to call and nominate the first
borne: howsoever he had power to be borne. And as touching S. Jerome, he
speaks nothing of the fracture, but only that the body islued out bloody,
as it was in the womb of his mother: and to be bloody, there is no
necessity of fracture of the mother.

The Doctors for conclusion of this article, would willingly demand of the
Ministers, whether they hold for an article of faith, the virginity of the
mother after the childbirth: and whether they could prove the same by the
express and unreprovable word of God written. For as much as Beza when he
pleases, makes doubt of these two points: and that the pretended reformed
religion among the articles of faith, of his diverse imprinted confessions,
recyteth sometimes the virginity of the mother of God after her childbirth,
and sometimes omitteth the same. And in some confessions inserteth not that
Jesus was borne of the Virgin Marie, but only that he issued of the seed of
Danid.

The Doctors employ for the resurrection, and issuing out of the body of Jesus
Christ through the stone of the Sepulcher, the most part of the authorities
alleged by them upon the closed doors: as the whole lecture of the foresaid
authorities, with Gregory Nazianzene, in his tragedy of the passion of our
Lord, will witness: which conioyneth (as do many other Ancients) these three
miracles happened into the body of our Savior above nature: namely the birth
without fracture of the Virgin: the resurrection through the stone: and the
entrance by the closed doors.

The Doctors add, that Calvin and Beza make conscience to say as do the
Ministers, that our Lord arose not, the Sepulcher being shut and closed: and
rather had the said Calvin and Beza fall into frivolous abfurdities, and
ridicclous expositions here before alleged, then yield to the opinion of the
Ministers. Because there is more appearance in the text of the Gospel, that
Jesus Christ was risen before the stone was rolled away by the Angel: as
therein agree the most part of ancient Christians. And by this mean also is
there occasion given, more easily to believe the resurrection of our Savior,
then if the stone had been taken away before the resurrection. For one might
more easily say, that the body had been transported and not risen again. And
the text says not, that the Angel rolled away the stone before the
resurrection, or when Jesus arose, but rather afterward: as there is great
appearance in the scripture, in reason, and all antiquity.

Pope Leo is euilly alleged by the Ministers, which well know to conceal
what is written in the Epistle by them cyted, touching the closed doors. And
they euilly allege that of the resurrection. For it is not said, that our Lord
arose after the stone was rolled from the Sepulcher. But well is it said
against the Fantasmatiques, that the substance put upon the Cross, and that
which rested in the Sepulcher, and that which arose the third day (the stone of
the grave being rolled away) is the true flesh of Jesus Christ.

By which words, Pope Leo means not to say, that our Lord was not risen,
before the stone was removed: but only shows, that the body of Jesus Christ
risen again; was a true, and not a phantastike body: of whose resurrection it
appeared by the opening of the grave. And such is the common interpretation of
old Authors touching the removing of the stone.

For conclusion of all these ancient testimonies, the Doctors are abashed that
the Ministers (seeing them so manifest, and themselves convinced, that God
cannot only cause two bodies to be in one selfsame place, but that he has
also done the same) dare slaunderouslye deprave the understanding of them,
which every man of good and sound judgment, can by the only reading find
out.

Notwithstanding the Ministers say, that the reasons taken from such and so
evident testimonies, be impertinent. So that wiah like liberty (common to
heretics) they fear not, without any text of scripture, or any place of
ancient Fathers, to interpret, that two bodies to pierce one an other, is no
other thing, then one body to give place to the other.

Of which false and licencious interpretation, the common phrase of speech
among Philosophers themselves does condemn them. And the feat example brought
of them which walk through the air beating upon them, and of Birds when they
fly, is over subtle. And whereas they boast in the said article, that in
denying that two bodies may be in one place by the omnipotency of God, or one
body in two places, they advance and magnify the power of God. As true is
that, as when in all their other errors, by which they resist the truth of God,
and blaspheme him, they ever boast to advance the glory of God. And the
Ministers must paint and cover their filthiness and deformity, with some
color of speech, to blind the simple and ignorant.

Good reason also have the Ministers not to excuse the interpretations of
Calvin and Beza, as too too frivolous and ridiculous: and prefer in the mean
time their own interpretation, though more ridiculous then those of their
Masters: wherein appears the concord between the Masters and Disciples;
all using one foundation of their religion: which is, to trust always to their
own particular and private interpretation, and inspiration: and to prefer
the same to all others. Where the Ministers say, that the body of our Lord was
not invisible to the Disciples, of who^ mention is made in the 24. of Luke: but
that his body only being nimble, he suddenly withdrew himself: the Doctors
object, that the sudden departing (whereof speaks S. Ambrose, and Lyra,)
makes not, but that the body was invisible: as signifies the Greek word
Aphantos: which signifies, not a sudden departure, but an incapacitie to be
seen and known. And so the text of the scripture is plainly for the Doctors.
Joined nevertheless, that when the old and late Divines will give examples
that Jesus was made invisible, they ordinarily allege this passage.

The Ministers also who boast, that they rest upon nothing, but the pure word
of God, (for exposition of scripture) bring their dreams, above their own
persuasion; as touching the closed doors appears. And with like liberty use
they to expound the text of Saint Paul, which expressly maintains, that our
Lord pierced the heavens. And it is likely (say they) that the heavens claue a
sunder, and were opened. And if one demand, whence they learned such an
interpretation, they answer, from the word of God, founded upon their inward
inspiration: by which, they appropriate that which is written in Saint Matthew;
that heavens were opened when the Dove descended upon our Lord. As though all
the heavens were clest asunder, and the holy Ghost had not power to descend
without the opening of them: not nothing that the scripture in many places
takes heaven for the air.

Concerning that they allege of S. Stephen, who when he was stoned, saw the
heavens open, more meet it were for the Ministers, to interpret such visions,
to be made in spirit, as there is great likelihood: else should it behoue to
confess two miracles: the one in the division of the heavens: the other in
this, that the sight of S. Stephen, not only pierced unto, but also above the
heavens: where the Ministers confess, the body of Jesus Christ to be at the
right hand of the Father, whom Saint Stephen saw, which is against the order
of God established in the would: whereby it is necessary that there be a
certain distance between the eye seeing, and the thing which is seen. And no
less hard is it, that such thing be done, then that two bodies should pierce
one an other. Nor must they forget that the scriptures oftentimes in spiritual
apparitions and visions, uses this phrase of speech, that the heavens were
opened: and yet in such case was there but a spiritual vision, and likewise
but a spiritual opening. And even as the Ministers will take the rigor of the
word [the opening of the heauens]: so should they not think it strange if the
Doctors with like rigor, take [the piercing of the heauens] especially in the
article of the Ascension: where the question is of the body of Jesus Christ,
which had already pierced more impenitrable bodies then the heavens.

And the Doctors to avoid tediousness, refer themselves to more ample
debating this point [of the piercing of the heauen] hereafter.

As touching the 28. article, where the Ministers against express scripture,
do obstinately defend, that God cannot by his power, make a Camel (or Cable)
to pass through the eye of a needle: the Doctors cannot sufficiently ma^uel,
either at the blindness of the Ministers, which seem to see nothing at
noonday: or at their obstinacy and boldness. And that the Ministers
understand not their fault, the Doctors cannot think, but that impugning the
truth, well known to themselves, they sin against their own conscience. And
God suffers that (it seems) to happen unto them, in this so manifest a
place and text of the scripture: to the end, that by this article, one may
perceive how much more bold they are, to give false senses, to scriptures more
obscure then this, and to the sayings of the ancient Christians which make
against them.

Now that the great wrong may be understood, which the Ministers do, in
denying that our Lord can cause a Camel (or Cable) to pass through the eye of
a needle: the Doctors do object, that it should be impossible with God to save
a rich man: using such argument, taken from the text of the Gospel. More
impossible or hard is it for God to save a rich man, then to make a Camel (or
Cable) to pass through the eye of a needle. But God by his omnipotency cannot
make (after the Ministers) a Camel or Cable to pass through the eye of a
needle. Therefore God by his omnipotency cannot cause a rich man to be saved,
and enter into the kingdom of heaven. The Mayor is of the scripture: The Minor
is confessed by the Ministers: and the consequence is necessary. And according
to all Philosophy, he that cannot do a more easy thing, cannot do a thing
more hard. So also without contradiction have the Ancients expounded the
present scripture: as does Origin in the Homily upon this place, saying: that
it is possible for a Camel to enter through the eye of a needle: yet not
possible with men, but with God. And the manner how such thing may be done, is
known of God, and his son Jesus Christ, and of him to whom he shall reveal
it.

Semblably Saint Augustine in the first and fifth Chapter of his book of the
spirit and letter, thus speaks to Marcellinus, whom he wrote unto: It
seems to thee absurd, when I say unto thee, that a man may be without sin:
albeit that (Christ excepted) such a one is not found. Should it seem absurd
unto thee, that a thing may be done, whereof no example can be showed? Seeing
thou doubtest not (as I think) but it never happened that a Camel passed
through the eye of a needle. And yet is it said, that with God such thing is
possible.

By the Ministers answer unto the 29. article, may easily be seen, that they
deceive and abuse their Disciples, making them believe by fair words and
writings, that they really receive in the Supper, the true body of Jesus
Christ, the same which issued from the belly of the Virgin, and was fastened
upon the Cross, for the restoration of mankind. And will make them to
understand, that they who place not with the bread and wine in the Sacrament,
(as they call it) of the Supper, but some spiritual effect only (as are the
redemption, righteousness, sanctification, life eternal, and other gifts, and
benefits, which Jesus Christ brings to his elect) diminish the excellency
and dignity of the same Sacrament, and that they be Zuinglians. But that
besides such spiritual effects, one must believe that he receives truly the
body of Jesus Christ in the Supper.

They hold nevertheless an other opinion. For when they are pressed with
arguments, and cannot defend such an imaginary and phantastike presence, they
confess by their writings, they are become Zuinglians, and return to the
spiritual presence of Jesus Christ in the Supper: which is as much to say, as
besides the bread and wine, they receive a certain spiritual effect, and not
really the body, as the Ministers do in the present answer: which thing they
make manifest, by that they cite of the Apostle S. Paul: by which citation may
be gathered, what is their opinion concerning the Supper: to wit, that the
body of our Lord Jesus Christ is not really, but by spiritual effect only in
the hearts of the faithful. For the Galathians by the hearing of S. Paul's
preaching, received not really the body of Christ crucified, but had only an
imagination of the Cross and passion of Jesus Christ, and received only the
fruit of their faith: that is to say, by this means they were justified and
sanctified before God: also the allegation which the Ministers make of S.
Ciprian, tends to this end, to show that in the Supper are received some
spiritual effects only: which nevertheless by these words, to embrace the
Cross of Jesus Christ, to suck his blood, etc. be allegorically signified.
Wherein they deny (against the intent of S. Ciprian in the Sermon of the
Supper) the real prefence of the body of Jesus Christ. The Doctors confess
that the argument they have made, is addressed to Caluinists, and not to
Zuinglians. And they supposed that the Ministers would not otherwise have
thought of this Sacrament, then Calvin, Beza, and the other Ministers, renowned
to be Ministers of the Caluinist Church, which they call reformed.

An other manner of speech used they, which exhibited the confession touching
that Sacrament, to the Bishops at Poissy, who freely confessed the body of
Jesus Christ to be really present in that Sacrament: which the Ministers in
conference with the Doctors, do now deny. And hereby the Ministers in the
judgment of the Doctors, of Caluenists, become Almanists. Wherewithal, they
that maintain the doctrine of the Church, which they call reformed, will not
be greatly pleased: seeing their principal pillars (for not being able to
answer an argument objected by the Doctors) do leave them in the business:
considering that in the answer they say themselves to be so much enlightened
with the holy spirit, which makes them understand and know all things.

Concerninig the article following, they do openly declare what their present
opinion is, touching the presence of the body of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament,
by saying that the faithful receive no more in this time of the Gospel, then
did the Fathers before, and under the law: But certain it is, that the
Fathers received not really the body of Jesus Christ, which as then was not
made. Therefore the conclusion must follow, that under the Gospel the body of
Jesus Christ is not really received in the Sacrament, which the Ministers call
the Sacrament of the Supper.

To the 31. article they answer not: as also they never could answer the
same: and they must necessarily confess, that in the power of their faith,
they do that which implies contradiction. For they maintain one thing to be
present, and not present, at one selfsame time and place. And their
spiritual (or rather phantasticke) presence, makes nothing to the purpose.
For (according to their doctrine) the body cannot be present but with it
measures, locally, difinitiuely, and corporally: otherwise the body should be
wholly abrogate and corrupted. And the manner of it being there spiritually,
would not make, that the body is not there: or otherwise they falsely say it is
present in the Supper, and abuse the world. Wherefore it is necessary, if the
body be there (yea spiritually) and their doctrine of the nature of a body be
true, that the body of Jesus Christ be corporally, difinitiuely, and locally in
the Supper. Moreover, for as much as it is absent according to their
confession: it follows, that it is not there present. And to conclude, the
Ministers say, that it is there, and not there. And for the full solution,
(without entering into the principal of the Argument) they suppose to escape,
by obiecting to the Doctors, some words of the breuiarie, which the Doctors
have not yet seen. The Ministers (they think) have found them in some
breuiarie of Monks, and remember when they were in the Covent, that they were
so accustomed to sing and say. But although such things were found in the
breuiaries, used in the Roman Church, such manner of speech might be defended,
in the sense which the Fathers have given, when they said, that the Apostles
Conficiu^t corpus Christi: do make the body of Christ, as the scripture it
self says: that they baptize, forgive sins, and save those whom they
converted: which is meant, as the Ministers of God. Who of his own authority,
and as Master, baptiseth, forgiueth sins, and justifies the faithful
persons.

Where the Ministers do marvel, that the Doctors call faith a humane virtue,
(the great and marvelous effects it works considered): the Doctors say, that
the Ministers have no great cause to marvel thereat: seeing that every work,
in as much as it is in man, and that he therein works together with God, is
judged and reputed humane. Also the scripture calls the faith of man, the
work of man. The Doctors show unto the Ministers, that after their wonted
manner, they dwell always on small things, and leave that which is principal
in the matter: being ignorant (or dissembling ignorance) where lies the
difficulty of that is handled. As they do in their answer upon the argument
proposed by the Doctors: whereby they object, that the Ministers by their faith
(call they it divine or humane) may do more then God can do: whereunto the
Ministers (without touching the point) do answer with songs.

In the 32. article, the Ministers lightly pass over many obiectious made them
by the Doctors. Whether there be superfluity, or repetition in them, or
whether they be impertinent, let the reader judge. But for this cause the
Doctors will not cease, to require eftsoons the Ministers, that they bring
some passage of the scripture, to ground that God cannot make one body to be in
two places: seeing that this consequence is ouerfoolish and ridiculous: God
cannot lie. Therefore can he not make one body to be in two places. For so
should they make their assumption. Now God has said and ordained, that one
body cannot be in two places: therefore can he not make it so to be. But never
will they instruct by the truth of the Assumption or Minor Proposition: the
contrary whereof has been sufficiently verified by many testimonies of the
scripture. The Doctors also require the Ministers to produce some Father, yea
some man, ever reputed Catholic, which has dared to pronounce, that God
could not make one body to be in two places. For full answer, the said
Ministers can bring forth none which ever has used such a speech, except S.
Augustine, but by them falsely alleged, both touching the letter, and the sense
of the letter. The Doctors will not cease to beat both into the Ministers, and
also all persons; that there is no place of scripture found, nor book of any
ancient Father, that God cannot make one body to be in diverse places.

Concerning the last article, the Doctors have resolved to show by the pure
and express word of God, expounded by common consent of all antiquity, that
our Lord did institute the Sacrament and sacrifice of the Altar, and will
teach the effect and virtue of the Mass, according to the institution and
ordinance of Jesus Christ. And will make it also to be understood, that the
Ministers have polluted and defiled the Sacrament by Jesus Christ instiruted.
And that the Supper which the Ministers maintain, is no way the Sacrament, but
a profanation of holy things, containing execrable blasphemy: whereof the
whole world ought to have horror.

Sunday, the 12. of July, in the year aforesaid.
The answer of the Ministers to the writing of the Doctors, sent to them by my
Lord the Duke of Neuers, the 22. day of July, about five of the Clock in the
enening. Anno. 1560.
THe Ministers, before they answer particularly to the objections and
slanders of the Doctors, seeing that each way, and causeless, they tax them
for blasphemers: have advised to tell them in the beginning of their answer,
that to be wronged by them, they hold it not so great an injury, nor
themselves the more blasphemers, for being so holden and reputed by them: no
more then our Lord Jesus Christ, because he was Act. 7.
so pronounced by Caiphas the high Priest, and S. St^phen, to whom the like
crime was imputed by the enemies of 1. King. 21.
truth: And Naboth who was likewise accused to have blasphemed God and the king,
albeit he was innocent. For it is the manner of all them which hate the truth,
and the light, to blaspheme that which they understand not (as thereof 1* Pet.
2.
write S. Peter and S. Jude) and to give the raines sometimes to their fury: so
that they shamelesly deny things most apparent, and confess others concerning
the same, which be strange and absurd. Which thing is seen to have befallen
the Doctors about the Ministers: whom they neither can hear attentively, nor
judge of rightly. And the full end of their purpose (it seems) is, to
contradict them indifferently in all things, and to say without any examination
or judgment, that whatsoever they produce, is blasphemy and lies. For the
Ministers speaking of the omnipotency of God, according to that they have
learned thereof, and is contained in the scriptures, have ever said, that God
is almighty, in as much as he can do (without any exception) whatsoever he
will: and that there is no power in heaven nor in earth, which is able to let,
alter, or in any manner or wise hinder the full effect and perfect execution of
his eternal and unchangeable counsels. But nevertheless, that his
omnipotency must not be stretched without any discretion or distinction, to
all the things generally which men can conceive, or in their foolish fantasies
imagine: but to those only, which neither are, nor can be contrary to his
justice, to his goodness, to his wisdom: nor consequently to his holy and
eternal will, wisdom, and truth: which is, and ever shall be, to do all
things well and wisely, with number, weight, and measure: and without that
there is any inequitie, disorder, or contradiction in whatsoever he does. All
which things being well understood and considered, will discharge the Ministers
among all good and just people, from the s^aunders which the Doctors impose
upon them, and fal^ly published, to make them odious to all the world, and
stir up public hate against them. Wherefore, to make their slanders more
like to truth: by adding and diminishing, they change and alter almost the
whole meaning of the Ministers: well knowing, that otherwise they could never
have mean to ground their slanders, nor to give any color or likelihood
thereunto: which thing shall now appear by the deduction and particular
confutation of the pretended blasphemies, objected to the Ministers, by the
said Doctors.

First the Doctors accuse the Ministers, in that they have said, that the
omnipotency of God ought not to be measured, but by the things only which be
agreeable to his will, and are not derogate either to his wisdom, his truth,
his nature: nor to the order which he has established in the world. And to
verify their accusation and slander, they break in two this whole sentence,
and take thereof but the last part only, the which they have separated from
those going before, wherewith it was conjoined expressly by the Ministers; the
more clearly to expound and show, how the omnipotency of God ought to be
known, believed, and adored of all the world. Moreover, they have not taken,
nor understood the word [Order] as do the Ministers. Whereby the Ministers
have willed to signify the estate and disposition, which God by his
providence, and eternal, and unchangeable will, has established, conserueth,
and entertaineth in all things: rightly to govern, and let that no confusion
happen in his works, even as S. Augustine has defined it in his books De
Ordine: and he himself has used the same in the fifth book of his
confessions. Which the Doctors not understanding, have reduced that which the
Ministers thereof said, to the ordinary and wonted course of nature, and to
the moving of creatures which be in the world.

And to give exception to the doctrine aforesaid, they object the miracles
which God does above nature: and thereof infer, that God does, and can do
many things against the order by him established and decreed.

Whereunto the Ministers answer; that miracles, albeit they be done beyond and
above the ordinary course of nature, yet are they not done against the order
aforesaid. For as much as all things reduced to the providence, and ordinance
of God, are well done and ordained, although that the reason and order therein,
be oftentimes unknown to men: which Ecclesi. 3.
Solomon wrote saying: God makes all things good in their season. Whereunto
may be also applied, that which is read in the book of Sentences of S.
Augustine. Sent. 283. and 284. God who is the Creator and conseruer of nature,
does nothing in his miracles which are against nature. And it follows not,
that that which is new to custom, is contrary and repugnant to reason, etc. If
the Doctors will know more thereof, let them read the two books of Order;
which this holy man composed: and that which he wrote concerning miracles, in
the fifth and sixth Chapter of his third book of the Trinity. This answer
shall serve for confutation of two other pretended blasphemies, which follow in
the objection of the Doctors.

Concerning the fourth, the Ministers for answer say, that the will of God
(after the doctrine of Divines) may in two sorts be considered: to wit,
according to that which by words, signs, and effects, is declared to men: and
according to that which is retained and hidden in himself. The one is called
the will known by signs: and the other the will of the good pleasure of God.
For the first consideration the Ministers do confess (as heretofore they have
to the Doctors) that God can do many things, which he will not do. But as
touching the other, they say: that it is equal to his power: as is also his
power (in this respect) equal to his will. According to which consideration,
the sentence of Tertullian alleged by the Ministers, and to the Monarchians
ill applied by the Doctors, ought to be understood and expounded: As all those
may judge, which attentively shall read the passage by the Ministers produced.
Who to answer one slander of the said Doctors, which accuse them to have
wronged the ancient Fathers, in saying that they excepted some causes of the
omnipotency of Cod: are yet constrained here to repeat, that which Theodoret
says thereof in the 3. Dialogues who writes as follows. It must not be said
without any determination, that all things are possible to God. For who so
absolutely says this, comprehends all things, as well good as bad, which no
way ought to be attributed to God: whereby it appears, that this good author,
and the other, before alleged by the Ministers, have not indifferently
submitted all things to the power of God: but excepted from the same,
whatsoever is contrary to his will and essence.

To be brief, but one mean there is to appease the difference between the
Ministers, who say that it is impossible for one body to be in diverse places at
one instant: and the Doctors, which affirm the contrary, to wit, that the
Doctors (without taking so long circuit) loosing so many words, and alleging
so many superfluous things, do prove briefly by one only passage of scripture,
that God wills the same.

Whether the Ministers have well or euilly alleged Saint Augustine, to prove
that a body cannot be without place and measures: and also whether they have
well or euilly said and defended, that quantity is essential to a body, and
not accidental (as hold the Doctors) they leave the judgment to the Readers
of the Acts of this Conference.

Touching that which follows in the writing of the Doctors: to wit, that
there is no place above the heavens, that Jesus Christ is not therein comprised
nor contained, that bodies and spirits be indifferently there, without any
distinction or distance of place: the Ministers say, that touching all these
points, they rather believe the scripture, and express word of God (by them
alleged) then all the subtilties and sophistries of vain Philosophy, which
the Doctors, or others can propose. Joined hereunto, that it is expressly
contained and taught in one of the articles of our faith: where it is said;
From whence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. Whereupon must be
noted, that there is [Vnde] an Aduerbe signifying place.

As touching the 4. and 5. articles, to know whether the Ministers have ought
imposed upon the Doctors which is not true, they send back the readers to the
precedent conference. And also to know in what sense, and to what end, the
ancient Fathers have been alleged by the said Ministers; which they may
easily perceive by the reading, and diligent observation of the passages and
sentences of the said Fathers there inserted.

For the 6. article, wherein the Doctors had rather confess their Canons to be
false, then (accusing their authority) to avouch that the body of Jesus Christ
is a true dody, and that to be such, it ought necessarily to be in one
certain place: the Ministers answer, that by the observation of the place of
S. Augustine, (whence the said Canon is taken) it is easy to judge, that the
word [Oportet] is there much more convenient, then that of [Potest].

To the 8. article, the Ministers answer, that a substance is not without
quantity, and whiles it is such, and so remains, it cannot any ways be a
body. And the reason is, because that of the substance, and that of the
quantity, are two diverse predicaments: under which, one selfsame thing, for
one selfsame respect, cannot be any way comprised. Moreover, Jesus Christ
alleged no other reason to show that his body was not a spirit, but that he
had members and parts, which in respect of their measures, might be handled
and touched. Whence it follows, that without this, a substance cannot be a
body. And as touching the difference which by the Doctors opinion should
remain between our souls and our bodies exempted from quantity, (if that
were possible) the Ministers say, that although they were substances both in
number and different, they should nevertheless be like, as touching the kind:
and that the one and the other should be contained under the kind of an
incorporeall substance.

The Ministers pass over the 9. article, because it is but a repetition, and
that they have largely answered what the Doctors there repeat.

To the 10. article, the Ministers answer, that the consequence whereof is the
question, cannot be otherwise defended by the Doctors, but by the rule which
says: that of one absurdity may all things be inferred. Moreover, they
complain of time, which the Doctors make them loose, by reading so many things
whereunto they have already answered, and which it seems they repeat not
for any other end, then to fill up paper, and to make men think they say
something.

For first the Evangelist says not (as the Doctors pretend) that Jesus Christ
entered by the shut doors: but only that he came, the gates being shut. So
that he speaks nothing there of the manner of his entry, nor how the doors
were opened, or other place about the house by the which he entered. And all
that which the Doctors say, cannot be grounded neither upon the scripture, nor
upon any authority of all the ancient Fathers by them alleged: which be
more against them, then with them. And for conclusion, they have no other
foundation of their saying, then their own conjectures and imaginations, and
the false interpretations which they give to the writings of the Fathers. To
the faith whereof they would gladly constrain and subject the Church: to the
end, that having laid that foundation, they might afterward build thereupon,
all the absurdities and errors they shall delight in touching the same. And
where they presuppose when Christ entered the shut doors, walked upon the
waters, and went out of the Sepulcher: that such miracles were done rather in
the person, then in the other things. Iustine writes the contrary, saying:
that without any change happened, either in his body, or in that of S. Peter,
he made by his divine power the Sea against nature, to serve him to walk. As
also S. Hillary to the same purpose says: That by his power he made all
things passeable. Whereunto likewise agrees S. John Chrysostom, attributing
all that to divine power, and freely confessing that he knew not the manner and
the fashion thereof. By means whereof, the Ministers are much abashed, that
the Doctors are so presumptuous to determine a thing which by the scripture and
Fathers has been left undecided: and wherein (as S. Hillary says wisely)
sense and words do fail, and the truth of the deed, exceeds the capacity of
humane reason. How dare then the Doctors so boldly say, that the body of Jesus
Christ passed through the doors; that there was penitration of dimensions;
that two bodies were in one selfsame place? Seeing that of all that, neither
in the scripture, nor in the ancient Fathers, there is not one only syllable:
and that (as is said) the Fathers do confess, that their understanding and
sense were too feeble to comprehend or declare the reason of such a my sterie.

As touching the birth of Jesus Christ, the Ministers repose themselves upon
the scripture, which says clearly, that the Virgin was with child, that she
brought forth, that she gave suck, and that Apertaest vulua, the womb is
opened in the childbirth. They add, that the same does naught derogate nor
prejudice her virginity and pureness, which consists in this point only,
that she knew not, not was known of any man, Moreover, they say that in
believing the same, they follow the scripture: and consequently they cannot
err, nor be heretics: nor they likewise which subject and subdue their sense
to the word of God: as in this have done the Fathers which are by them alleged.

In the following article proposed by the Doctors, touching the manner of the
resurrection of Jesus Christ, there is nothing but conjectures, slanders, and
repetitions, troublesome and superfluous, which the Ministers by their former
answers have largely satisfied.

All that which afterward follows in the writings of the Doctors, are but
injuries and scoffs, in stead of reasons and arguments: which is the last
recourse of contentious spirits: who seeing themselves destitute of reason, and
unable to give place to the truth, defend themselves by clamours and slanders.

Some reason should the Doctors have for that which they say concerning the
word Aphantos, if there followed Autois: but that which the Evangelist says
Ap'auton, shows clearly, that the interpretation of the said place, and
understanding of S. Ambrose, (where unto the Ministers agree) is better then
that of the Doctors.

As touching the opening of the heavens, the Ministers answer, that (using the
language of the scripture, which says clearly, that in the baptism of Jesus
Christ, the heavens were cloven asunder, and then opned, when S. Stephen was
stoned) they cannot fail. And to apply to the air the signification of
heaven, is a humane imagination. This also seems, should diminish the
Majesty of God, and of Jesus Christ, who is lifted up above all the heavens,
to establish so low as the air, the Throne of his Majesty. And there is no
likelihood in that which the Doctors say, touching the being of two bodies in
one selfsame place; and that which the Ministers say of the sight of Stephen,
which extended even to the heavens: for as much as the one is a miracle of the
power of God in nature, and the other a wonder against nature, and the will of
God.

The Doctors in the article following, do falsely impute to the Ministers, that
they affirmed, it was a thing impossible for God to make a Camel to pass
through the eye of a needle: for they never touched this point in their former
answers, but that part of the sentence only, where it is spoken of rich men.
Now to answer too, and resolve their objections, the Ministers say, that even
as God can save a rich man, by changing him, and emptying his heart of so much
vain trust and presumption, as is therein, and whereof being gross and
filled, he is incapable to enter into the Kingdom of heaven: so to him it is
also easy, to make a Camel pass through the eye of a needle, having
circumcised and pared off the grossness thereof, and other things which might
hinder the same to pass. * * * * * *

First, that the Supper which is celebrated in the reformed Church, is the true
institution and ordinance of the son of God.

Afterward, that the end for which it was instituted, is to assure the
faithful of the true participation which they have in the flesh of Jesus
Christ, crucified for their salvation, and in his blood shead for the remission
of their sins; and for the confirmation of the new covenant, which God has
made with his people.

Thirdly they say, that it is necessary that the bread and wine abide in their
proper substance, and that after consecration: otherwise they cannot be
Sacraments of the body and blood of Christ.

Lastly the Ministers say, that the unbelievers presenting themselves at the
Supper, by means of their unbelief, can there no other thing receive, then
the outward signs of bread and wine, and that to their judgment and
condemnation.







eternal death cancelled and abolished.

Also they say, that the separation of the Priest in the

And to be brief, the adoration of bread and wine,

Two points yet remain in the writing of the Doctors, whereof the Ministers
will admonish them. The one is, that the said Ministers have never found in the
scriptures, John, 6. Ephesians. 1.
that faith is a humane work, but that it is the work of God, and a gift which
he bestows upon his elect. The other point is, that they confess they
cannot bring forth one ancient Author, which has said in express terms,
that one body could not be in diverse places at one instant: for so much as the
contrary thereof seemed so absurd and strange unto them, and so much against
the reason and faith which all faithful people ought to have, that they never
thought such an opinion had found place in the heart of any man that was called
a Christian.

The Ministers to end this answer, say that it will much more please them, to
handle the questions aforesaid, then to dispute of the opening of doors, of
the Sepulcher, or of the heavens; as to their great grief, they have done
these days passed: and that for two reasons. The one, because that the
decyding and resolution of such questions, cannot be drawn nor gathered out
of the scripture. And the second, because it cannot much serve either to the
advancement of the honor and glory of God, or the edification and instruction
of his Church.

Thursday the 25. day of July, in the year aforesaid.
The Doctors reply to the writing of the Ministers, sent unto them by my Lord
the Duke of Neuers, the 25. day of July, about 8. of the clock in the evening,
the year, 1566.
WHere the Ministers say, that they do great wrong to call them blasphemers,
seeing thereof they are innocent, as Jesus Christ, S. Stephen, and Naboth, to
whom men falsely imputed such like crime. The Doctors say, that the Ministers
therein do imitate the good personages, the Donatists: who still complained of
the great injuries and slanders which they endured (said they) of the
Catholics; and yet men know by the histories how it was, and how much they
were like to Christ, S. Stephen, and Naboth: as may also be known the
conformity of the said Ministers, to such holy examples. As much might the
Anabaptists say to them of the Church called reformed, when they call them
heretics. And as much might and did Seruetus say, who for his blasphemies was
burned at Geneua: reputing himself happy to be judged by Calvin a blasphemer,
and to suffer for his doctrine, the pains of death. We must not therefore
believe that the Ministers are not blasphemers, because more boldly then all
other heretics, they reject the name of blasphemer: but meet it is to examine
whether their doctrine imports blasphemy or not. Now the Doctors say, that
there is no blasphemy worthy of more great execration, then to deny the
omnipotency of God: and no less it is then simply to deny that there is a
God. So that such denial importes an Atheism. For to take from God, that
which is proper to his nature, is as much to say, as there is no God. As it
well pleases S. Basil, writing in one of his Homilies, entitled, That God is
not the Author of evil. That it is no less blasphemy to say, that God is
author of evil, then to say that God is not God. In so much as to take away
from God his goodness, which to him is natural, is wholly to take away his
divinity. The like also may be said of the omnipotency, that whosoever
denies or diminishes the same, he denies also his divinity.

The question then is, to know whether the Ministers will abolish the
omnipotency of God, not in proper terms (for they seem to confess it) but
in affirming that the power of God is measured according to his will, so that
he cannot, but that which he will: and other like propositions contained in the
precedent answer of the Ministers. Whether the Doctors have proved such
propositions to contain blasphemies or no, they refer them therein to every man
of sound judgment, who shall be any thing conversant in holy scriptures, and the
books of ancient Christians: which shall also be known by the Ministers
frivolous answers in their last writing to the Doctors objections. Who nothing
marvel that the Ministers are deceived in the nature of the omnipotency,
seeing they err in the foundation, and know not wherein it lies, and why God
is called almighty. For they have learned of the scripture (say they) that God
is almighty, because he can do whatsoever he will do: and that nothing can
resist him, which is rather as a sign of the power of God. But it is not that
(under correction) wherein it consists; for knowledge whereof, it must be
considered according to it object: that is to say, according to the things
possible to be done: so that there is nothing possible which God cannot do. Now
all without any exception, is esteemed possible, wherein is found no
contradiction to be, and not to be: and that comes not by default of the
power of God (which can do all things) but of the repugnancie of the thing
which cannot be. Which the Ministers from the beginning had well said in every
answer: but for that they had answered upon some Interrogatories that the
omnipotency of God must be measured by his will, supposing to salve that
error, they are plunged in many other errors, out of which (for not consessing
to have erred) they cannot rid themselves, without falling into an infinite
number of absurdities.

Moreover, the Ministers deceive themselves when they will limit the power of
God, and not extend it to all things generally, that humane spirit can conceive
or imagine. For contrariwise, it is doubtless that the power of God is great
above all conceit, and imagination of the humane spirit, that it is infinite
and incomprehensible, as says S. Paul: God can do more then we demand or
understand. And where the Ministers say, that God only can do all things
which are not contrary to his justice, wisdom, goodness, and truth, and
therefore cannot do generally all things. It has already been showed them,
that to be able to do things contrary to the justice, wisdom, goodness,
and truth of God, was not power, but weakness. And by the selfsame reason
(as says Saint Augustine, in the place by the Doctors in their former
objection alleged) that he cannot do such things, it is an argument of his
omnipotency, and not of restraint thereof.

And where the Ministers infer, that because God cannot do such things, he
can (by consequence) do nothing; which is contrary to his wisdom, and
eternal will, which is, and ever shall be, to do all things well and wisely,
with number, weight, and measure, and without that there is any injustice or
contradiction in all that which he does. Men may see how the Ministers disguise
the matter in controversy, concealing have couched in their former writing,
touching the order established in the world, against which (said they) God
could do nothing: and the other words of blasphemy, whereof the Doctors
rebuked them, and which they durst not insert in their last answer, because
their conscience accused them, and made them know, that such affirmations could
not be maintained; and from which, they cannot escape, but in denying to have
written them, and in accusing the Doctors of slander: as if by adding or
diminishing, they had altered and changed the words of the Ministers. To be
purged of which crime, the Doctors pray, that recourse be had to their last
objection, where these words are inserted in the first article.

The which blasphemies are drawn out of the proper words of the Ministers
first article. And the Doctors refer them to the conference may be made of
their last writing, with that of the Ministers. So that if it be found (as
certainly it shall be found) that the Doctors have faithfully cyted the proper
words of the Ministers writing, which the Ministers themselves will not avouch;
it shall be known at the least, that the Ministers have hitherto maintained
blasphemous propositions, and that the Doctors therein have no way wronged
them: having pardoned their persons, being content (of the doctrine) to say
their simple opinion.

The Ministers to show that they have just cause to accuse the Doctors of
slander, say first that the Doctors have broken in two their proposition:
which was such, that the omnipotency of God ought not to be measured, but by
the things only which be agreeable to his will, and be not derogate either to
his wisdom, truth, nature, or to the order which he has willed to establish
in the world: and that the Doctors have not taken but the last part only. Who
for their purgation, say that they have always considered what was put in
difference: to wit, whether God could make one body to be in two places. And to
examine the truth of this question, before they put it in writing, they have
reduced the whole to every part of the Ministers proposition, and have thus
reasoned. God can do all things which are agreeable to his will: the which is
known (as the Ministers do hold) when there is nothing that derogateth,
either to his wisdom, his truth, his nature, or the order by him established
in the world. Now one body to be in two places, derogateth not from the
wisdom of God. For God should therefore not leave to be wise. Also it
derogateth not from his truth: for he has never said, that he could not do it:
nor from his nature. For although he should do it, he should not cease to be
God. If then there be any repugnancie, it should be, because it should derogate
from the order by God established in the world. Which was the cause that they
stayed not but on the last article. The Ministers also would not say as the
Doctors suppose) that to be able to make one body to be in two places, was a
thing repugnant, either to the wisdom, truth, or nature of God: if not, in
that they think it to repugne the order by God established in the world.
Joined hereunto, that the Ministers having put this proposition above said,
for a rule to know what God can do; when they would apply this rule to the
matter in controversy, then should they thus say: To which things, that which
the Doctors put forth (namely that one body, at one selfsame instant, may be
in diverse places) repugneth. But the Ministers have only said and written, to
which, (that is to say) order etc. For such relative cannot agree, but to the
next antecedent. Wherein is clearly seen, that the Ministers run into the
crime of slander, which they falsely object to the Doctors.

And whereas the Ministers say, that the Doctors take not the term of the
order established in the world, in the like sense, as they understand it: The
Doctors say, that they have taken the term according to the understanding
which the Ministers have thereof given: even as they have known by their words,
which they have heretofore used. For when the question was to set forth some
miracle done by Jesus Christ, against, or above the nature of things created
the Ministers have had always recourse to the common order of nature. As when
speech has been of the closed doors, of the going out of the Sepulcher, of
the womb of the virgin, and of one body in diverse places; No other reason to
contradict it have the Ministers alleged, but that it was all against the
order established in the world, touching the nature of a body: which cannot be
understood, but of the common order which is seen in nature. Therefore the
Doctors (so taking the same, as the Ministers have sufficiently declared in
their former answers, against the order of nature*) have well inferred against
the Ministers, that God could not then do a miracle, against the order
established in the world. The Doctors know, that the ancient Fathers observed
not this difference, above or against nature: as by the testimony of Tertullian
here before alleged, appears: Where it is said, that God against nature, can
make a man fly as well as a byrd. But they will not stay upon the rygor of
words, but apply themselves to the Ministers with whom they confer. Who
call it a work against the order established in the world, one body to be in
diverse places, for as much as it withstansteth the common disposition and
proprieties of bodies. And by such reason (say the Doctors) that all other
miracles ought also to be esteemed against the order in the world established:
because they be against the common disposition and propriety of nature.

And yet following the understanding which the Ministers now give of the order
established in the world, for the estate and disposition which God has
established, conserueth and maintains all things, by his providence and
eternal and immutable will, to govern all things rightly, and hinder any
confusion to happen to his works. Here again do the Ministers commit a new
blasphemy against the omnipotency of GOD: for he can wholly change,
vnchaunge, and destroy such order as he has established in the world (albeit
he will never do the same) and make a new world more perfect then this. And
were it so, that he could do nothing against this order, his power should be
stinted and limited. For he could not do but certain effects, according to
the order which he had established in the world. Which should not happen by
the repugnancie of the nature of Creatures: but in as much as God himself
should be tied. And so (against the scripture) should his hand be shortened,
and his power forced and limited: From which blasphemy, infinite others issue,
as the Doctors when occasion shall serve, have purposed to show.

To the 2. and third blasphemies which the Doctors have noted, the Ministers
say, by the new interpretation of the order of the world, in one word they have
fully answered. Which (to dissolve the arguments produced by the Doctors)
comes nothing to the purpose.

And the Ministers pass over the alleged places of scriptures, which declare
the blasphemy, and dissemble the contradiction of their doctrine, and of that
of Calvin, touching the providence of God, in respect of the order established
in the world. And the Ministers answer not to the Doctors objection, that from
the third blasphemy flow many others; least in confessing the same, they might
heap blasphemy upon blasphemy, and make their doctrine by this mean, odious
toall the world.

For answer to the fourth blasphemy, use the Ministers a distinction of the
will of God, which may two ways be considered. The first is called the will
known by signs: and the other, the will of good pleasure. The Ministers
confess, that according to the first, God can do more then he will; and not
according to the second, which is (as they say) equal to the power of God, and
is hidden and unknown to men. The which distinction if it ought to have place,
the Doctors object, that the foundation of the Ministers, whereupon they stay
the pretended truth of this proposition: God cannot make one body to be in
diverse places, is wholly destroyed. For the Ministers will have the power of
God to be measured according to his will, not according to the second, which is
hidden unto men. It behooves then, that this be taken according to the first,
by the which they confess that God can do more then he will do. Whereof it
follows, that the rule by them given to measure Gods power, is false. For it
cannot be measured by his will, seeing he can do more then he will.

Moreover the Doctors say, that the Ministers should not require the^ to prove
that God has willed that one body should be in two places, to declare that he
could do it. For the Doctors might object, that to teach that God may do
something, it needs not to prove, that he has formerly willed it. For
(according to the Ministers confession) God can do more then he will.

The Doctors add, for as much as the will of God appears not to us, but by
signs, words, and effects: and that the order established in the world,
according to his providence (as the Ministers agree) is hidden unto men: that
the Ministers cannot affirm, and show, that God has established such order
in the world, that one body may not be in diverse places. For meet it were
they should teach such an ordinance of God, and declaration of his will. Often
times have the Ministers been required, to bring one only place of scripture,
where such a will of God is manifest: and where it is said, that he cannot
make one body to be in diverse places.

As touching the place of Tertullian, the Doctors for understanding thereof,
refer themselves to every man of sound judgment: and say, that the Ministers
have ill to the purpose alleged Theodoret: and it makes more against them,
then with them. For when he writes that it must not be indeterminately said,
that God can do all things, comprehending therein good and evil; in that he
makes no restraint of the omnipotency of God: but contrariwise, does amplify
the same: in so much, that not to be able to do evil things, is both a virtue
and power, as before has been largely declared.

Where the Ministers do instant the Doctors to show, that God has willed one
body to be in two places: the Doctors answer, that these are two different
questions, whether God can do it: or whether he has willed it. And when it
shall be confessed (as it ought to be of all Christians) that the power is in
God, very easy shall it be to show the will, by the word, of the Supper, and
of the Ascension: which they of the pretended reformed religion have accustomed
to deprave, and dissuade men from, by the impossibility which they faigne to
be in God, to put one body in two places.

Also the Doctors leave it to the readers judgment, whether S. Augustine have
been cyted by the Ministers to the purpose or no. And to that which concerns
whether ihe quantity be essential to a body, or not: the Doctors (speaking of
a body as does Philosophers, namely, In predicamento quantitatis) have never
doubted but it is essential. But the difficulty is to know, whether to be
circumscript in a place certain, be essential to a body? And the Doctors
suppose they have sufficiently proved that it is not essential, but that it is
an accident natural to a body. And they verify their saying, by the
definition of a body, wherein all essential reason is comprised: and such it
is, that a body is a kind of firm quantity of three dimensions, length,
breadth, and deepenesse: where no mention is made of the circumscription of
place in the said definition.

What pertains to the question concerning places above the heaven, the
Ministers (as they are wont) do lightly pass over. And for want of good
answer, they wrong the Doctors, calling them Sophisters. And that which they
bring to confirm that our Lord is in one place above the heaven, is over
frivolous. For by the same reason might one conclude, that the divinity is
circumscript. And Aduerbes signifying place, shall be found in the scripture,
when it speaks of the divinity, as well as when it speaks of the humanity
of Jesus Christ.

Where the Ministers impute to the Doctors that they confess their Canons to
be false, it is a manifest slander. For the Doctors acknoweldge not any
Canons, but in as much as they are taken out of the Councels, and other books
authenticke: and not according as they are extracted of any particular person:
as is the polinge of Gratian: whereunto they give no credit, but as much as
that which he cyteth deserves.

For resolution of the 8. article, the Doctors send the Ministers to the
school of Philosophers, to understand, that in a predicament of substance,
there is a body, which is a kind of substance: and in a predicament of
quantity, an other body, which is a kind of quantity. And to learn them
also, that the body which is of quantity, is accidental (and not essential)
to a body of predicament of substance.

Moreover, the Ministers do err against all Philosophy, calling a material
substance, incorporall. But the Doctors will not rest upon such things, and
are much grieved that they have not to do with people better grounded in
Ppilosophie. For that, being such, they could better touch the reason then the
Ministers do.

The Doctors do maintain the consequence of two bodies in one placle, to
infer it for necessary, that one body may be in two places: for there is like
reason, and like inconvenience in the one, as in the other. And therefore if
the one be to be done, the other is possible: and so they refer it to the
readers judgments.

Where the Ministers complain of the time they have lost in reading the
reasons, arguments, and allegations, touching the closed doors, and other
articles. The Doctors say, that in the matter in question, the Ministers have
no cause to complain of ouer-great prolixitie, for fear of loosing time. And
that there is matter sufficient to spend the time withal, would they with
patience (bringing with them good will, and all passion excluded) examine the
testimonies of the Ancients, and reasons drawn from the same. But the Doctors
do well prove, that when there is any thing which presses the Ministers, then
set they a good face on the matter, and make semblance to have right on their
side. Moreover, the Doctors are much amazed, how the Ministers are so bold to
say, that Justin and all the Ancients have not placed the miracle of the
passage of the doors, in the body of Jesus Christ: seeing that Justin expressly
proposes the question, how it is possible that a thick body is not hindered
to pass through the closed doors. In the answer of which question, they
conclude the same: that for as much as such miracle was done in the nature of
the body of Jesus Christ, the Apostles esteemed it was not a true body, but a
spirit: as if the body had been transformed into a spirit: which Justin
says did not happen: but that without any change of nature, such an
operation, to pass through the closed door, was given to the body of Jesus
Christ by the omnipotency of God: and Justin says not, that any miracle was
wrought in the sea, when Jesus walked thereupon: but that by the almightinesse
which was in him, he made it walkeable, without any change of the nature,
either of his body, or of the sea: although that the miracle were in his body,
which against it nature so walked. It is not sufficient to allege out of S.
Hillary, that the power of God made passage to the body of our Lord. For he
says not that only; but adds the manner of the deed* to wit, that the body
passed without change or diminishing of it nature, and without having any
opening. But that by the operation of the almightinesse, he passed
notwithstanding, which wrought in his body, piercing the shut and closed
places: Nihil (inquit) cessit ex solido parietum: nothing ceased (says he) of
the firmness of the walls: and other like words which he brings: of which
can no other thing be understood, but a piercing of many bodies. S. Chrysostom
expressly disputes of the body, which against it nature passed through the
closed doors, as through the womb of the virgin, without fraction. And he
says not simply that he knows not wherein the work consisted (for he
describes it) but he amplifieth the power of the work: and says, that he
cannot comprehend the reason and greatness thereof, for as much as it
proceeded from the power of the incomprehensible Cod. Concerning this whole
point, the Doctors refer them to the reading of the books, without more
debating thereof against the Ministers: who think always to abuse the
ignorance of those which believe the^, denying or affirming what they think
good. And it troubles and grieueth the Doctors, that they are constrained to
repeat the former reasons so familiarly, and clearly deducted: But the
Ministers euasions so often repeated, enforce the^ eftsoons to inculeate that,
which of these articles ought to be believed by the common consent of the
Fathers.

The Doctors are abashed at the manner of the Ministers answer: who without
regard of that has been objected to them, say what they please, without
answering to the arguments of the matter proposed: As they do in the article of
the birth of Jesus Christ: In the deductio^ whereof the Doctors have brought
many testimonies of the Ancients, which hold, that our Lord (as he was also
there conceived) myracuculously issued from the womb of his mother: And that
the said Fathers did witness, such birth to have bin made without any fraction
in the body of the virgin, and condemned of heresy all those which held the
contrary. Which thing the Ministers will yet maintain, and for full answer,
affirm the same: relying (as they say) upon the scripture, and not daring to
say openly, that to cleave to their proper sense, they reject the determination
of the ancient and primitive Church. Which is very clear notwithstanding by
their answer to this article: wherein they falsely cite the scripture, as
though it contained, that in the birth of our Lord, Aperta fuerit vulua
virginis: The womb of the virgin was opened. And where they say, that such an
opening repugneth not the corporal virginity, (whereof is the question) they
belie the resolution of the ancient Fathers, which have determined of that
deed.

Whether in the Article of the Resurrection there be but conjectures, the
reading of the Doctors objection will witness. The which they may see, that
desire to know the truth thereof.

Where the Ministers do complain in the end of the article of the
Resurrection, that the Doctors do wrong and scoff them; the Doctors doubt not,
but the Ministers are sore troubled, that their subtilties and manner of dealing
are discovered: the which, did men well understand, they would not suffer
themselves so easily (as heretofore) to be deceived.

The solution which the Ministers pretend to give, because it is not Aphantos
autois, but Ap'auton is impertinent. For howsoever it was, our Lord was
invisible to his Disciples, were it by sudden vanishing, or otherwise; the
which vanishing, in a body present to perfect sight, cannot be done, except the
body be made to them invisible. And howsoever it be, the Greek Text bears
invisible and vnapparant.

As touching the article of the opening of the heavens, the Ministers as they
are wont, answer not to the purpose: For it is not said, that the heavens were
cloven asunder, or opened, when he ascended thither: as at the baptism of
Jesus Christ, and when it is spoken of the vision of S. Stephen. But the
scripture says expressly, that Jesus Christ pierced the Heavens, and not that
the Heavens were opened unto him. And the Ministers cannot forbear to slander
the Doctors, in deprauing the understanding of their writings: as is seen in
this present answer, where the Ministers faineto have understood, in that
place of the scripture, mencioning Jesus Christ to have pierced the Heavens,
that the Doctors by the name of Heaven, will have the air to be signified:
which the Doctors never thought: but have often times said, that when it
mencioneth the opening of the Heavens, by the Heavens it understands the
air: which so ought not to be applied, when our Lord is said to have pierced
the Heavens.

By such manner of answer do the Ministers think, to cause the force of the
Doctors reason to be forgotten. Who said thus: If when it is said in the
scripture that the Heavens were opened, the words ought strictly to be taken,
and truly to be understood, that the heavens were opened: It likewise behooves,
when the scripture says, that Jesus Christ pierced the Heavens, that the word
[pierced] be taken in it proper signification and strictly: which thing
directly repugneth the division or opening, as things opposed one to another.
To which reason, there is no answer given, more then ordinarily is to the
other arguments of the said Doctors.

Touching the difference which the Ministers put, between the sight of S.
Stephen, which stretched even to the height of Heaven, and the being of two
bodies in one selfsame place: and that the one is a miracle in nature: and
the other a wonder against nature, and the will of GOD. The Ministers (good
Secretaries of Gods Counsel and will) should do much, if they could teach the
Doctors, that God has willed the one, and that he cannot will the other: and
then shall there be reason for their saying, to show the difference they have
assigned between these two.

The inconstancy of the Ministers is known in the article where the Camel is
mentioned: to wit, whether God can cause him to pass through the eye of a
needle. For in the Ministers first answer, made without any distinction, have
they answered, that to make a Camel (or Cable) to pass through the eye of a
needle, was a thing impossible with God. And in the second answer do they
allege, that Jesus Christ, (in saying, that what was impossible with men, was
possible with God) no other thing pretended, but to answer the question which
his Disciples had proposed: namely, who could be saved: answering whereunto, he
said: that it was impossible with men: and that such sentence of Jesus Christ,
ought not to be understood, but of the salvation and conversion of rich men
only: which exclusive speech (when the Ministers affirm, that our Lord
saying, that what is impossible to man, is possible with God; must not be
understood, but of the salvation of the rich) clearly shows, that the
Ministers intent was to say by their answer, that our Lord meant not to
comprehend under this proposition; [That which is impossible with men, is
possible with God]: the possibility to make a Camel pass through the eye of
a needle. As if this proposition were not to be generally understood, whereof
our Lord infers this particular. It is possible with God to save a rich man.
And he himself by express words speaks generally: Omnia apud Deum
possibilia snnt. With God are all things possible. The Doctors desire, that
they which can read this present writing, would note the starting holes of the
Ministers, who wontedly avouch, and deny the errors they maintain, when they
are thereof by the truth convinced.

Now the Ministers (not daring to persist in defense, that God cannot cause a
Camel to pass through the eye of a needle) have invented a very foolish
interpretation, in confessing that God can do it, but that the means should be
in this, that God might pare off and diminish the grossness of a Camel, and
all other things which might hinder it passage there. But that gloss the Text
cannot brook: For our Lord speaks of a thing wholly impossible to men: which
should not be. For although to make and bring forth a Camel of so little
stature and bigness, that he might pass through the eye of a needle, were a
thing impossible with man, yet if God brought forth such a one, or if he did so
much diminish the greatness and grossness of a Camel, and that man might
hold the same, he might well cause it to pass. But the question is not of the
production of a Camel, or of making him great or small; but of causing him to
pass. The which (were he so little) should not be a miracle as touching the
passage, but only touching the production of such a living Creature, or the
changing of his quantity. Also in taking this name Camelus, for a Cable (as
Calvin thought best) the absurdity of this new exposition shall better
appear. For well may man so much lessen a Cable, by the detraction of it
matter, that in the end he may make it pass through the eye of a needle.
Moreover it should be easy for a man to make a needle, whose eye should be so
large, that a Cable, (yea a Camel) might pass there through. But the
scripture speaks of things impossible with man, and as they are in their own
nature. Therefore as the eye of a needle must be taken in it little and
straight quantity: so also must a Camel or Cable, be taken in it natural
grossness. And never were the Ancients so subtle, to int uent such
ingenious interpretations, as one could not read without laughter. But the
Ministers cannot escape with this goodly exposition, that one sees not
clearly, they deny the power of God can stretch so far, that it can make a
Camel in his crookedness and thickness, to pass through the eye of a needle:
but only when he shall by the power of God, be brought into quantity
proportionable to the eye of a needle, which is against the express Text of
the scripture, and against the exposition of ancient interpreters: although
that besides the litterall sense, the Camel be sometimes allegorically
expounded by them. But the allegorical exposition of that place, takes not
away the truth of the litteral se^ce, no more then the acts of Jesus Christ
cease to be true acts, albeit the interpreters expound them allegorically.
Wherein the Ministers are deceived, supposing, because they have read in S.
Jerome some interpretation besides the litteral, that Li. de vera Circoncisione
ad finem.
the comparison which our Lord in this behalf has used, was a parable, which is
false. For a true argument it is which our Lord deduceth, to show his power to
save a rich man: because this is a thing more hard, the^ to cause a Camel to
pass through the eye of a needle.

The Doctors to conclude upon this article, do eftsoons show unto the
Ministers, that of the denial of the stretching forth of Gods almightinesse,
many other absurdities, which cannot otherwise be termed then blasphemies, do
follow. Namely, that two bodies cannot be in one place by the almightinesse of
God: that GOD cannot make a body without circumscription of place: that Jesus
Christ entered not, nor could enter through the closed doors: arose not, nor
could a^^^e, without the stone were rolled from the grave: that he went not,
nor could go out of the Virgins womb, without fraction in the body of his
mother: that he pierced not, nor could pearce the heavens, without opening of
them: that he made not, nor could make a body (no not his own) invisible:
that he could not cause a Camel (or Cable) retaining it grossness, to pass
through the eye of a needle. Which things do follow the denial of his
almightinesse, and is an execrable blasphemy, and very Atheism. Behold the
enormious absurdities which they are constrained to confess, that deny the
real presence of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar; which the Doctors
pray to be well considered by the readers of this present writing.

Concerning that which the Ministers make question of in the last article of
their answer, that the Doctors do call faith a humane work, seeing that it
is of God: they ought no more to wonder thereat, then infinite other truths,
which seems strange to them because their doctrine is founded on the grounds
of error: among which, one of the principal is; That man has not free will:
that man to think well, will well, and do well, works not together with
God: against many places of scripture which sets down man co-working with
God: and for his faith and works, has of him reward and recompense. The
which, without wandering from the purpose, shall more aptly be handled in an
other place. The Doctors like well, that the Ministers do confess that the
ancient Fathers have never said, God could not cause one body to be in diverse
places: which thing is true. But the reason which they yield, why they have not
so said, is of the Ministers own forge and invention. It remains, that they
show us so much by the testimony of the Scripture concerning the same: For no
more is it therein found, then in the writings of the Fathers. Whereof the said
Ministers have been often admonished, who say they build all their doctrine upon
the word of God.

Had the Ministers in the beginning confessed the truth of the Omnipotency, or
else had they said, that they acknowledged that Jesus Christ could cause his
body to be above, and here below in the Sacrament, really and truly, if he so
would: than had it been needless to handle these former questions, which
nevertheless, are not of small consequence, as the Ministers do esteem them.
Which thing appears by the writings of the Fathers, who have diligently
handled these places, and strengthened themselves therewith against heretics:
But because the Ministers would not agree, that God can make one body to be at
one selfsame instant, in diverse places; And that if the Doctors had begun
to declare his will to have been such, that he had ordained the body of Jesus
Christ should be in Heaven, and in the Sacrament. The Ministers might have said
(as they of their sect do say) that God has not willed it, because he could
not. The Doctors had rather first entreat of the Almightinesse, then of the
will. And seeing the matter of the Omnipotency has been sufficitntly tossed,
they are determined to prove, that Jesus Christ has willed and ordained, that
his body should be in diverse places. In the probation of which thing, when
they have understood the Ministers opinion, of that they hold in their
Churches touching that matter, they will enter into the former Conference, to
the end that their travel be not in vain. For that they follow not (it
seems to the Doctors) that which Calvin and Beza hold concerning the same.
For which cause (say the Doctors) that the Ministers abuse the people: fayning
to teach that, which in the reformed Church they have wontedly done: and yet
their answer addressed to the Doctors, shows the contrary.

In that the Ministers repute themselves happy, to endure such reproaches, to
be esteemed seducers by the Doctors, let them remember, that all sects may say
as much thereof as they: whether by right or wrong, it will appear by
examination of their doctrine.

The Doctors resolution touching the article of the Almightinesse of God, in
regard of four questions by them propounded to the Ministers: which serve to
the understanding of the real presence of the body and blood of Jesus Christ
in the Sacrament.
EVery man which can patiently consider by the scriptures, beginning at
Abraham, the Father of the faithful, unto the last writing of the Apostles:
shall find, that the well spring of all infidelity has ordinarily been, to
have regard to the propriety of creatures, and common order of nature, to
contradict, doubt of, and distrust the word of God. For which reason,
Tertullian and other former Christians said well: that Philosophers, and they
that stayed upon things natural, were the Fathers of Hereticques: because the
contemplation of Nature, engendered almost all heresies: On the contrary side,
shall one perceive the almightinesse of God, to be proposed by the scriptures,
as a sharp sword, cutting in pieces all arguments which might come of natural
reasons: for a certain and final resolution to believe whatsoever is couched
and borne by the said word of God, albeit impossible and incomprehensible to
every creature: and faith to be stayed on that same power in all doubts, which
might be offered or proposed.

All the difficulty which Abraham made upon the promises of God to him, did
proceed of certain impossibilities of nature, which he saw in himself and in
his wife. And it seems he had always regard thereunto, until God used his
authority, and said unto him: I am God all sufficient. Is any thing hard to
the Lord? After this rebuke and remonstrance of God, Abraham did then forget
all consideration of the proprieties of his nature, and laid hold on this
shield of faith: which is to know, and to be fully persuaded, that God is
almighty, to whom nothing is hard or impossible. And after that, when question
was of killing his only son; albeit he had great appearance of contradiction
in nature, and in the word of God, which had been given him: to wit, that of
the seed of that son should he proceed, which should give blessing to all
Nations, and notwithstanding he must kill him before he had any lynage of his
body issued. Nevertheless he made not protestation, opposing that
contradiction of nature, and of the word of GOD, to maintain, that that which
had been said and promised unto him was impossible: but he had recourse to
the stay of faith, and of the faithful (says Saint Paul to the Hebrews)
that is to say, to the omnipotency, esteeming that God had the mean to make
true both the one and the other: namely, to cause his son to die, and rise
again, to draw from him afterward lynage and posterity: although as yet
there had been no example of the resurrection.

Likewise the consideration of creatures, and the order of nature which Moses
saw before him, made him fall into Infidelity. And God showed him his fault,
in that he would deny him the power, long time with flesh to nourish his
people: because the nature of the wilderness did not afford it: and did admonish
him to lift up his spirit to the omnipotency against nature, and there to
assure his faith. Moses said: Six hundred thousand people there are, among
whom I am: and thou say, I will give them flesh, that they may eat thereof a
month long: Shall the sheep and beeues be slain to find them? Either shall
all the fish of the sea be gathered together for them to suffice them? God
answered Moses, Is the hand of the Lord shortnea? thou shall now see whether my
word shall come to pass, or no. In like manner, as often as one shall read in
the scriptures, that the people, or other particular persons, fell into
unbelief or distrust of Gods help and succor, he shall know, that the cause
has ordinarily been, for staying upon the nature and disposition of humane
things: without sufficient apprehension of the power of God. And contrariwise,
to confirm them, that this power was set before their eyes: diverse examples
thereof have heretofore been brought out of Esaias and Jeremy.

In the new Testament, the Virgin having regard to the natural manner of
conceauing, seemed to doubt of the mean of her conception. And she said: How
shall this thing be, seeing I know not man? And the Angel answering, said unto
her: Nothing shall be impossible with God. Drawing her back from the
cogitations of natural proprieties, which is the root of Infidelity, and
exhorting her to think upon the Almightinesse of God, which is the chief
stone and rock, whereupon true Religion is builded.

Which thing considered: The Doctors for their resolution of this conference
with the Ministers, do say: that with good right has the omnipotency of God
very expressly obtained the first place, among the articles of the Apostles
Creed: as being that, by which all the other articles of faith, and the works
of God above nature, are believed and maintained, against all contradiction and
repugnancy of nature, or reason, which may be pretended or alleged: And
without the which, any article of faith, or any the works of God surpassing
nature, and contained in the scriptures, could not be defended and maintained,
against the assaults of malice, and deprivation of humane spirit: which always
tends to infidelity, and disobedience toward his God: and from his birth is
prompt and subtle to deprave and slander his word and commandment. By means
whereof (say the Doctors) that so much the more ought every Christian to
enforce himself, to hold and keep that article entire, without suffering any to
make any exception thereof, or to restrain it at his pleasure, under any
pretexts of (I know not what) repugnancies of creatures; which humane spirit
proposes, for want of understanding and comprehending the greatness of God.
For the scriptures do ever present unto us this omnipote^cy generally without
any restraint, in regard of creatures, or of the works of God. And teaches
us, that the creatures is in his hands, as the clayin the hand of the Potter,
to receive such change and form, as shall seem good unto him: without that
Esaias 45. Iere. 18. Romans 9.
they can say, Why have thou made or changed me thus! Such similitude and
words the Prophet Esaias, Jeremy, and S. Paul do use.

Moreover, the Doctors say: that men must yet less be lycensed to limit and
bound the foresaid power, according to the contradictions which in their
writings they imagine of the nature, wisdom, or eternal will of God: Seeing
that the scripture says plainly, that God can do more then we understand,
and mocketh at them which will entermeddle with the nature, wisdom, and
eternal will of God: as though they had been of counsel with him to know
thereby the decisions and ordinances, more then his own word pronounces
thereof. And S. Paul in the end constrains with himself every spirit
created, to cry out, confessing his ignorance of the power, wisdom, Romans 11.
and works of God: Oh the deepnesse of the riches, wisdom, and knowledge of
God, how incomprehensible are his judgments, and his ways past finding out.
For who is he that has known the mind of the Lord? Or who has been his
Counsailor? And an excellent saying of S. Augustine upon this point is to be
noted, who in an Epistle Advolusianum says: We confess, that God can do
something, the which in searching, we cannot find. As if he would say: to
wit, if God can do something, albeit in our natural judgment we think it
impossible: we esteem it nevertheless that it is possible: but that the
capacity of our spirit cannot comprehend the same.

The Doctors say asso, that by such liberty and means that any will exempt
what he likes from the power of God, under color of some impossibilities of
nature, or of repugnancie, after his own judgment, to the nature, wisdom,
and will of God: each one will study to feign the like, in all matters of
faith: wherein such causes may be easily invented, and well disguised. And
that it is so, from the first article of the Creed unto the last, let all the
heresies which have been there contradicted, be from time to time observed, and
it will appear, that all have held this way and method, to fight against every
article of faith, as impossible to God: respecting the impossibility of the
work according to nature, and some pretended inconveniences, against the
nature, wisdom, will, and glory of God.

The Doctors employ to this effect, the two first books of Tertullian: one
whereof is, of the incarnation of Jesus Christ: and the other, against the
Marcionists of the resurrection of the flesh: In which the Christian reader
shall perceive the like arguments of those Marcionists, endeavoring to exempt
from the omnipotency of God, the incarnation of our Lord, and the resurrection
of the flesh.

Then to conclude this point, the Doctors do forewarne every Christian, that
they add not ought to the scriptures, which speak always without any
limitation of the power of GOD toward the creatures: and to the end, to
praise the infinite power, wisdom, and eternal will of our Creator and
Redeemer: and to the end to preserve the closet of Gods secrets from every
shameless and impudent person, which of his own folly will make a law, not only
to me^, (...) of heretics. Credendo non credunt. To wit, that in believing
Gods omnipotency, they believe it not. For after they have said that no
exception is to be put unto it, on the other side they return to declare, that
it ought not be extended to every thing, which humane spi^ t can conceive. And
indeed, they will not apply unto it, but what seems good unto them: and
shroud themselves with the nature, wisdom, and eternal will of God: which to
them are unknown, and incomprehensible, as that of the Omnipotency. The
Doctors therefore do admonish all men to beware of being abused with the words
of Calvin and his Ministers: but to regard the works which they deny to be in
the power of God. The Doctors have proposed to them these four questions: to
wit, whether God can make one body to be in two places: and (contrariwise) two
bodies in one place: whether he can lodge one body in a less space then the
greatness thereof: and whether he can make it invisible. And such questions
have been specially chosen: because the principal arguments of the pretended
reformed Religion against the true presence of the body and blood of Jesus
Christ in the holy Sacrament, are founded upon the same.

The Doctors believe simply (as all other things) that the four questions are
possible to God, and have proved the same by the infiniteness of his power, by
the scriptures, which attribute unto him all power without exception, over the
creatures: and by written examples and strange my racles wrought upon their
bodies, against the nature of them. Tertullian in his book of the
Resurrection, says: To the end we may believe, that our God is more mighty
then all law and nature of all bodies: And adds: that they know God amiss
who think that is not in his power, which they in their brain cannot
comprehend. From whence it comes (as says S. Cyrill) that such wicked
spirits do reject and condemn all things as impossible, because they
themselves do not understand them.

Moreover the Doctors suppose they have sufficiently showed, as well by
express scripture, as by the expositions thereof, taken from ancient
Christians, that it was not only in the power of God to make two bodies in one
place, and one body without place equal to it greatness, but that already it
was truly done in the birth of the body of our Lord Jesus Christ: in his
resurrection: in the entry through the closed doors: and in the ascension
above all the heavens. And the Doctors have showed, that there was like and
semblable repugnancie in these deeds, as in the other: that is, of one body in
two places: which is not exempted by the scripture, from the power nor will of
God, more then the others, to judge it impossible to be done: and that there
was never Christian before our time, which dared to affirm that thing to be
impossible, and out of the power of God, although occasion was often offered to
say it, had they any way thought it impossible: as the Ministers of the
pretended reformed Religion do pretend. Contrariwife, the most part of the
ancient authors of the Primitive Church, have held it expressly to be in Gods
power to place one creature in many places: as held Saint Jerome against the
heretic Vigillantius, that the souls of the Saints might be present in many
places, with the immaculate Lamb our Lord Jesus Christ. And the question was,
whether the said souls, and spirits of the Saints, were sometimes present in
the Churches where their Sepulchers and monuments were. And so much thereof
holds S. Augustine in the 16* Chap. of the book which he wrote of the due
care of the dead: where he writes, that souls by the power of their own
nature, cannot be here below, and in heaven, or in many places: but that it
may be done by the power of God: and will not resolve whether they understand
our affairs by such a presence in many places, or by the revelation of Angels,
or other means by the power and grace of God.

Also it is certain, that in the matter of the holy Sacrament, the ancient
Fathers of the Church have acknowledged and maintained, that the body of Jesus
Christ was in many places by the almighty power of God. As does S. Ambrose
upon the tenth of the Epistle to the Hebrews: and Saint Chrysostom in his 17.
Homily upon the same Epistle. Where both two as it were in like words do write,
that although in many places there are many actions and oblations of the body
of Jesus Christ: nevertheless (having regard to the thing which is offered, to
wit, the true lamb and body of Christ Jesus) that this sacrifice in many
places offered is but one, for so much as it is but one selfsame thing: to
wit, the true lamb, and the true body of Jesus Christ, which is but one, and
abides whole in all places where it is offered. They add also, that the
oblations of him in diverse places, is not an iteration of the sacrifice of the
Cross: but in commemoration of him. So that in the sacrifice of the Mass,
they acknowledge and distinguish two points. The one which concerns the
realtie of the thing offered: and they say, that this is the true lamb, and
true body of Jesus Christ: which then remaining intierly one, is nevertheless
in many places. And the other concerns the action and oblation of such thing
by the Priest, which is no iteration, nor like action or oblation as that of
the Cross: but diverse, in remembrance notwithstanding of that was made upon
the Cross. S. Chrysostom in the third book of Priesthood, cries out saying:
Oh miracle and power of God! He which sits on high at the right hand of his
Father, is held between the hands of each one in the Sacrament. S. Augustine
upon the 33. Psalm shows, that the body of Jesus Christ in the Supper was in
two places: that is to say, in it visible place among his Apostles; and
nevertheless between his own hands. So that he himself did bear himself.
And before he concludes the same, Saint Augustine debateth how it was possible
that one person should bear his body between his hands. And after he had
showed that it was impossible for David, and cuerie creature, he descended at
last, to the divine power which was in Jesus Christ: by the which, to him alone
among all men, such miracle was possible. And to the end that men should not
deprave, nor wrest the meaning of S. Augustine, (because there is something
which after a sort is carried as though it diminished the truth) let them note
that the purpose of S. Augustine is, to show that Jesus by his almightinesse
did carry himself, which to any creature was impossible. Now had he only in
the Supper borne between his hands the figure of the Sacrament, and sign of
his body, and not his true and real body, he should have done nothing, but
what the least man might do. For each man can carry betwixt his hands, the
figure, Image, sign or Sacrament of his body, or stick it in his hat, without
miracle or supernatural power. It be houeth then, that the certain manner
which S. Augustine uses, does nothing diminish the truth: and this it is, that
between his hands he was invisible, and in a supernatural manner of being;
real nevertheless and true. S. Basil in his Liturgy with the others,
avouches the body of Jesus Christ to be in heaven, and by his almightinesse
notwithstanding to be present in the Sacrament: although the Ministers to
prove it impossible for one body, or one other creature, to be in many places,
do chiefly build upon S. Basil: but the said S. Basil, in the place by the
Ministers alleged, does expressly protest, not to speak but according to the
natural propriety. And in his Liturgy he declares, that it is not only in
the power of God to cause the body of Jesus Christ to be in heaven, and upon
the Altar; but that it is so truly done.

The Doctors to end this question of one body in many places, say: that such
matter is not only in the power of God, but that it must so be believed to be
done in the holy Sacrament, that God be not found a liar and deceiuer in his
word: whereby Jesus affirmed to his Apostles, that that which he gave with his
hands, was his true body, delivered for us. This is an argument which
Tertullian in his book of the Resurrection makes, after he had disputed
against them which denied the same to be possible with God. And it seems they
then said (as the Ministers have formerly said) that there was something by the
scriture impossible with God: to wit, that he could not lie, nor deceive: and
that thereof they took occasion to go further, and to dispute that the
resurrection was to him also impossible. So that the Ministers, because God
cannot lie, have endeuouted ^o infer, that to put one body in two places, was
impossible for him, as well as to lie and deceive. Tertullian in the end
accords with the Marcionists, and says: Rather had I confess that God
cannot deceive, and that he is only weak and impotent in deceit: to the end,
that thereby he seem not to have taught and spoken one way, and to have
otherwise disposed of the deed contained in his word. Then if he cannot
(concludes Tertullian) deceive and abuse, the resurrection must be believed,
as it is carried in his word, and not otherwise, least deceit be found in the
word of God.

The Doctors say also, they willingly confess, that God cannot lie, nor
deceive: and that it must therefore be believed, that so he has willed and
ordained the truth of the Supper, in such sort, and not otherwise, as his word
sounds and bears. Now so it is, that his word plainly and expressly bears,
that he affirms that what he gave with his hands to his Apostles to eat, was
his body, delivered for us: we must therefore believe that his word says not
otherwise then his will is, least he be esteemed a liar. And that as he says,
This is my body: This is my blood: that it is so indeed. The which the Doctors
(by Gods assistance) will declare in the next Conference, to show that he has
not only power to establish his body in the holy Sacrament: but also that he
has willed it, and so has done it.

Artictles proposed by the Doctosr for the next Conference, and others
following, according to the order of the said Articles.
ALthough, following the order of Conference touching the Apostles Creed, they
ought secondly to entreat of an other article (as the Ministers themselves in
the beginning of the Conference not only accorded, but demanded: offering the
imprinted Articles of their confession, bearing date the 1564. year, from the
first unto the last, to be examined by the Doctors.) Nevertheless, the Doctors
seeing it will not be much from the purpose, after they have entreated of the
omnipotency of God (which extends to be powerful to cause the body of
Jesus Christ to be in heaven, and in the Sacrament) in continuing that matter,
to enter into the probation of his will: they are content to show, that he
has not power only, but that also he has will: and are consequently
determined to refute all the blasphemies and heresies contained in their
Supper, which are called reformed: to the end also they be not deemed to fly
the list, touching the Supper and the Mass, as the Ministers have reproached
them. Nevertheless they protest, that their meaning is, after the conclusion
of this matter, and resolution given, to return to examine the wonderful
errors of the Ministers, which in number are many against the other articles of
the Creed: which thing the Ministers (unwilling that the Doctors should pursue
the order begun, do greatly fear, as one may see, and judge: foreseeing, that
in the next Conference, an other blasphemy would be showed them, which the
Church (calling it self Reformed) against the goodness of God, after Caluins
doctrine) maintains: to wit, that God works in the reprobate, the evil and
sin they commit: which is an execrable Atheism, and no less then the
denial of the omnipotency of God. And they that can read these Conferences
(continuing to the end of the discussion of the Ministers errors, and of their
religion against all the articles of the Creed) shall be likewise abashed to
understand the absurdities and blasphemies issuing from the same.

An other point there is yet, which inuiteth the Ministers to demand
tractation of the Supper: which is, that they have the whole matter already
squared, by many of their Sect, who have written of the same: And chiefly the
great book of Peter Martyr will not fail them. Whereby they shall be furnished
with I know not what infamous obiectio^s, and of some passages of the Fathers,
broken and depraved, or euilly applied, to impugn in show, the truth of the
body in the Sacrament. But for defense of all other their errors, the Ministers
are meanly armed: and their conscience does sufficiently witness, that by the
scripture, decision of general Counsels, and common accord of the writings of
all the ancient Fathers, (no appearance to the contrary) they are convinced and
condemned of their errors against the said Creed.

Now, to enter into the examination of the Supper of the Ministers, the Doctors
do maintain, that it is a profane eating and drinking, not differing from
common eating and drinking, but in that it is worse: that they abuse the holy
institution of the Supper of Jesus, and pollute and defile such their banquet
with all impiety, and blasphemy. They also maintain, that the Ministers do
great injury to the Sacrament of Jesus Christ, falsely to attribute to such,
their profane and polluted banquet, the name of Sacrament. And to the end that
the proof thereof be more clear, the Doctors demand of the Ministers,
whether they receive one common doctrine, received not only in the Church
Catholic, but also almost in all Sects which are separated from it: That is,
that in the confection of the Sacraments, there be two essential and
necessary things: the matter (or element) and the word?

Secondly, what word, with the Element, is necessary to make a Sacrament: and
namely, that which the Ministers do call the Sacrament of the Supper: and
whether it behooves to use certain words or no?

Thirdly, whether the word have some power or effectual working in the
Sacrament? and what, and whether it work upon something in the matter of the
bread and wine?

Fourthly, whether by the same word, consecration be made of the matter of the
Sacrament or no?

Fifthly, whether by the word consecration, be not made of the matter? to wit,
how the same consecration is made? and by what virtue the same is made?

Sixthly, whether besides the bread and wine, and the spiritual graces and
benefits of Jesus Christ, the true body and blood of Jesus Christ in their
proper substance, and not in spiritual effect only, be really received in the
Supper? And the Doctors do demand upon this article, a plain confession of the
faith of the Ministers.

They demand further, whether in receiving the bread, before taking of the
wine, they receive not by the eating of the bread, the body and blood of Jesus
Christ: or the body only. Briefly, whether they admit that which Divines call
a Concomitance of the body and blood of Jesus Christ.

They demand also, whether the Supper (over and besides the assurance which it
gives them of the participation they have in the flesh of Jesus Christ, for
their redemption) does work in them remission of sins?

Lastly they demand, whether one receives any thing by the Supper, which he
could not receive without the Supper? or whether without pain taking to go the
Supper, or being present thereat, one may as well receive the body and graces
of Jesus Christ, as if he were present at the Supper?

The Doctors will afterward debate the other articles, contained in the
Ministers last writing: for as much as the precedent demands ought to be first
examined, as grounds of other articles proposed by the Ministers.

Moreover, after the confutation of the Supper of the Ministers, and the
confirmation of the real presence of the body and blood of Jesus Christ in the
holy Sacrament, the Doctors by order, and without confusion, will clearly teach
by the pure and express word of God, that the Mass was instituted and said by
Jesus Christ, and that he commanded his Apostles to say it: which thing, then
following the ordinance of their Master, they afterward performed.

That the Mass is a true sacrifice of the law Euangelique.

That they which reject the Mass, and admit in the Church no external
sacrifice, nor Priesthood, are without the true law, without true Religion,
and therein worse then Idolaters themselves.

That the Mass avails to obtain remission of sins, favor, and grace of
God: and that it avails both for the quick and the dead.

That it is not an abuse in the Church, if the Priest in the Mass do
communicate alone, when they that are present will not communicate.

That they commit an horrible blasphemy, which call the adoration of the body
and blood of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament, adoration of bread and wine, and
falsely call such worship of the body of Jesus Christ, Idolatry.

To be short, that there is nothing in the Mass, at this day ordained and
celebrated, which in it self is not good, and holy, and agreeable to the word
of God.

The Doctors do admonish the Ministers to answer to the demands here above
written, to purpose, plainly, and by order.

Sunday, 28. of July, in the year aforesaid.
The Ministers answer to the writings of the Doctors, sent to the^ by my Lord
de Niuernois, the 28. day of July, about seven of the clock in the evening, in
the 1566. year.
THe Doctors reproach the Ministers in the beginning of their writing, that in
their former complaint against the^, they immitate the Donatists: wherein they
verify that, which the Ministers heretofore have oftentimes showed them: to
wit, that the most part of their writings are employed in repetitions,
injuries, scoffs, and inuectiues, rather then in good arguments and reasons:
And they say, that the example of the Donatists is much more proper to be
applied to them, then to the Ministers: for as much as the Donatists would
restrain the name of the Church, (which universally comprehends all the
elect and faithful, that are, and ever were): and attribute the same to the
sole company of them which follow their customs and errors: as the Doctors at
this day approve not others for the Catholic and universal Church, then they
which follow the traditions and abuses of the Roman Church. Moreover, the
Donatists did persecute them which were contrary to their doctrine, and used
violence and all cruelty against them, that they could devise: as Saint
Augustine in many places does recyte. Now what in time past has been the rage
and fury, as well of the Doctors, as of their accomplices, Priests, and
hypocritical Monks, against poor Christians, each one knows. And there is
not he, which knows not now, both by their Sermons, writings, and
conferences, what is their hate and spite against the children and servants of
God: and what pleasure should they have to root them out, were their power
answerable to their will: whereby one may judge, whether they or the Ministers
come nearer to the likeness and example of the Donatists.

And whereas the Doctors add, that the Ministers cease not to be blasphemers,
because they reject and detest the name thereof. The Ministers answer, that
the Doctors also leave not to be false accusers, because they disauow, and
deny the name. And that the effects do show of the one side and the other, to
whom such crimes and names may appertain, and be attributed.

And touching that which the Doctors in the same article say, that it is
blasphemy against the goodness of God, to impute unto him, that he is the
author of vice, and of sin. The Ministers confess it: and do add, that it
is blasphemy also against his truth, to say, that with him there is yea, and
nay: as do they, which under a color and false pretext to establish the
omnipotency of GGD, do propose, that he can cause one body at one
selfsame instant to be in diverse places: to wit, that it is, and is not.

Touching that which the Doctors afterward say, that the Ministers err in the
grounds of Gods omnipotency: for as much as they have said, that he was
almighty, because he does whatsoever he will: and that nothing can hinder, or
withold the execution of his counsels. The Ministers answer, that therein
they have followed Saint Augustines definition of the omnipotency of God, in
the 96. Chapter of his Enchiridion: where word for word he thus says: For
other cause is he not truly called omnipotent: but for as much as he can do
all whatsoever he will: and that the effect of the will of the Almighty, is
not hindered by the will and effect of any creature.

In that they consequently impute to the Ministers, that they have said the
omnipotency of God ought not to be generally extended to all things which men
may conceive and imagine in their minds. The Ministers say (under the Doctors
correction) that they said not so: but that the almightinesse of God, ought not
to be extended without any discretion or distinction, to all things generally,
which men in their foolish fantasies might forge or imagine. Wherein to each
one it may eftsoons appear, how they curtall and falsify the Ministers words
and sentences, to have means and color for their slander.

Afterward, where they affirm that it is blasphemy to say that God can do
nothing against order: the Ministers on the contrary part maintain, that to
think and say that he can do ought which is not well ordered, is to
blaspheme the wisdom, and eternal providence of God.

The Doctors pretend in the article following, that one body to be in diverse
places at one selfsame instant, is not a thing derogatorie to the truth of
God. The Ministers do maintain the contrary, that it should be derogate both
to his truth; for as much as there should be in him, (as is said) yea and nay:
and to his wisdom, for as much as in his words there should be disorder and
confusion: and by consequence to his almightinesse, because in his deeds there
should be imperfection.

And they further say, that it should not be only against the disposition and
ordinary course of nature, (as the Doctors faigne to have thought and
understood) but also against the eternal and unchangeable will of our God.

And as touching that which the Doctors, to prove that God can do something
against order, do propose that he can change and alter the order established
in the world. The Ministers confess the same: but they deny that in so doing
he should do any thing which were disordered. As (for example) all faithful
and Christian men do believe, believe, that God will renew at the last the
estate of the whole world: wherein there is nothing in the mean time which is
not well ordained, perfect, and in all points accomplished.

The Doctors in the following article, confound the distinction proposed by the
Ministers, in their answer between the will of God manifested, and that he
has hidden in himself, and is equal to his power: as the Ministers before
have at large declared. And the Doctors do falsely presuppose touching the
revealed will of God; taking that generally, which the Ministers have granted
in some particulars only: to wit, that God can do more in ceraine things,
then he has declared to will: which none doubts. As says S. Augustine in
the book of perfect Justice, that he cannot make a man to be perfect in this
world, and sanctify him in such sort, that there remain no more in him any
infirmity or imperfection; although he has never declared unto us by his
word, that he would do it: but contrariwise, that the flesh in all the
regenerate will always refist the spirit: so that all the time of their lives,
they shall be in many points imperfect. But albeit in that, and some other like
cases, God can do more then his will declares, which he has manifested to us
in his word: yet nevertheless can it not be said but that there be other
cases, wherein God has revealed his will unto us, against which he can do or
ordain nothing.

Things impossible with God. yet in these
As (for example) he has declared unto us, that he is one, that he is
immutable, incomprehensible, wholly good, wholly just, wholly perfect, and
wholly true: Against all impossibilities is his omnipotency established.
which things, (which to us are manifested and clearly proposed in his word)
impossible it is for him, ever to think, say, do, or ordain.

Now the thing proposed and debated by the Doctors, touching the being of one
body, at one instant in diverse places, is comprised in that rank, being (as
is said) contrary to the truth of God. Which shall serve for answer to the
Doctors slanders, and to all that they have proposed in this article. Likewise
in an other following article, where they say that God not only can, but will
also cause, that one body occupy diverse places at one selfsame time. That
shall be yet more impossible for them to prove, then the power aforesaid, for
which they have hitherto so much traveled in vain.

In their definition of one body in the Article following, they contradict
themselves, when they say that the measures are essential unto it: and that it
may nevertheless be incircumscript: for if it be needful that the
dimensions whereof it is composed, be finite; of necessity it follows
thereupon, that then it is finite, limited, and circumscript.

To that which they afterward say, that the reason which the Ministers have
taken of the Creed, and alleged to prove that the body of Jesus Christ is in
heaven in a place certain, is frivolous. The Ministers say; that the Doctors
show therein what reverence they bear to the word of GOD, and his spirit,
who has revealed the same unto us, and to the Apostles, which declare them
unto us.

To justify Gracian and the Canon, which the Ministers allege of S.
Augustine, by which they prove that the body of Christ must necessarily be in
a place certain, the Ministers bring yet for more ample confirmation, the 4.
book and 10. distinction of the Master of the Sentences: who recyting the
selfsame passage of S. Augustine, uses the verb [Oportet] and not [Potest].

As touching that of Iustine which the Doctors allege, to prove the miracles
which were then done; that Jesus Christ appeared in the midst of his
Disciples, the gates being shut: and that he walked upon the waters, were done
in his person. The Ministers are amazed how the Doctors do yet repeat the
same. For as much as the said Iustine (as they have before been answered)
expressly says: that when the said miracles were done, there was no change of
the body of Jesus Christ: which thing, had the miracles been done in his
person, had been necessary. In the mean time, the Ministers confess (as they
have done often) that the cause of the said miracles, and the divine power
whence they proceeded, abode in Jesus Christ. As when he healed the diseased
which touched him: and did the other miracles recyted in the Evangelical
Histories: the which were done by him, but not in him, but in the person of
them that we^^ healed. And there is great difference between such miracles,
and those of his transfiguration, and resurrection, which were wrought by his
only power, and in his proper person.

Upon the importunate repetition which the Doctors make, as well of the means
of the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ, as of the word Aphantos: The Ministers
for sparing of time, and not troubling the readers, send them back to their
former answers.

The Ministers much marvel that the Doctors to prove their pretended
penetration of two bodies, and of their measures, will ground their proof and
principal argument upon the proper signification of the term [Penetrer]. For
be it so, that they will by this French word interpret the Greek word
Dierchestas, or the Latin word Penetrare. It shall be ever impossible to
prove their pretense. And as it is also in the Acts of the Apostles, Chap. 12.
10. It is said of the Angel and S. Peter that they passed the first and second
watch. And in S. Luke. 4. 30. But they passed through the midst of them, and
departed. And in S. Io. 4. 4. Now it behooved him to pass by Samaria.

In all which passages the Doctors shall not find, that the word Dierchestai
(in the said passages alleged) can be any way applied to the penetration of
dimensions. And no more shall they prove that the word [Penetrare] which the
old Translator has used in the 2. Tymo. 3. can be reduced to their said
penetration.

The Ministers do add, that the Doctors ought not to hold it more strange,
that Jesus Christ ascending into heaven in his finite and limited body, an
opening were made for his entrance therein: then when he descends between the
hands of the Priests singing their Masses: For then (as says S. Gregory) the
heavens do open to give him passage. Although after their imagination, his body
is then separated from it measures and dimensions.

The Doctors should have contented themselves with the Ministers answer upon
the similitude and word [Camell]. For first, they can no ways prove, that that
saying of Jesus Christ upon the end of that speech, ought elsewhere to be
applied, then to the nearest member of the same: where speech is made of the
conu^sion and saving of a rich man. For the Pronowne demonstratiue [Hoc] does
clearly show it: Afterward, although that the general proposition in the end
and conclusion of the said sentence (where it is said that all things are
possible to God) extends (as the Doctors will have it) to the Camel, as well
as the rich man: yet rightly to apply the two patts of the comparison, it
behooves they confess, that as the change is necessary for the rich man to be
saved: so is it also for the body of the Camel, to cause it pass through the
eye of a needle. Howsoever that might in some sort be done, the Doctors shall
not prove, nor ever thence conclude, that two bodies can the one pierce the
other. For as much as the Doctors by their thrisestrong and powerful arguments
have not been able to conclude any of all their absurdities, nor by force of
their reasons to constrain the Ministers to confess the same: they do naught
else but exclaim, Blasphemy, Blasphemy; which is the last recourse of all
persons, who despite and gnash the teeth against the truth, and them that
maintain it, when they cannot overcome them. Would the Ministers subscribe to
the errors end abuses of the said Doctors, they should be good and Catholic
people: but because they gainsay and reprove them, they be (in their opinion)
heretics, seducers, blasphemers, and Atheists: and in so great horror do the
Doctors hold them, that it is marvel they pull not (like Caiphas) their horned
caps and hoods in pieces, in detestation of the word of God, proposed and
defended by the said Ministers, and condemned as blasphemy by the Doctors.

The Doctors have dissembled the passage of the scripture alleged by the
Ministers, to prove that faith is a work of God, which he brings forth in
the heart of the faithful, when he will work his regeneration: and incidently
speak of free will, and the merit of works. Whereunto the Ministers are well
resolved to answer; and by the grace of God, to maintain the truth of these
two points, against the enemies of his glory, when they shall be proposed to
be debated and discussed. And for the joy which they receive (say they) that
the Ministers have confessed, they have not read in any ancient Author and
express terms, that God cannot cause one selfsame body to be in diverse
places at one instant: they have no great cause thereof to rejoice: for albeit
the said Fathers have not in express terms said it: yet in terms equivalent,
in infinite places have they said and written the same.

A short Resolution of all the Answers and discourse which the Ministers have
made upon the matter of Gods omnipotency in the Conference which they have had
with the Doctors.
THe craft and subtlety of Satan from the beginning of the world has always
been, to transform himfelfe into an Angel of light, and to search some fair
pretext, to shroud and disguise himself, and under that shadow, to insinuate
himself into the Church of GOD, and there to broach his lies and trumperies.

As we all see, that under pretense to honor God, he has established all the
Idolatry which has ever been in the world: referring the adoration of
Images, the Invocation and intercession of Saints, the worshipping of
Relics, and other like impieties to the honor of God, and persuading the
ignorant that all that was done to advance the same. Likewise under pretext of
his service, has he brought in all the traditions and inventions of men, and
changed with the time, the true and lawful service of God (which consists
in the obedience of his holy will, declared unto us in his law and word) into
the observation of their commandments, and their invented ceremonies. Under
shadow and color of the Sacraments ordained by God, for the confirmation,
exercise and nourishing of the faith of the Church, there has crept in the
Mass: which is not only the ruin and total subversion of the Supper: but
also an abolishment of all the benefit of Jesus Christ: and consequently of
the faith and all true Religion. Under color and shadow of holiness, and of
chaste, shamefaste, and honest conversation, which is chiefly required in the
Ministers and Pastors of the Church, he has established single life, and taken
away from them the liberty of marriage: which has been the occasion of all
filthiness, and of infamous, stinking, and execrable whoredoms and luxuritie,
which is seen in the Papacy. Under the shadow of prayers, which men are
commanded to make one for an other: and of Charity, whereby we are bound to
succor all the needy poor: has he brought in all the suffrages which men
sing for the dead, the merits and works of supererogation, and other like
abominations. Under color of the Saboth, which God had chosen and deputed to
the sanctification of his holy name, to the contemplation of his works, in the
remembrance and preaching of his benefits and favors. He has set forth an
infinite number of profane Feasts, in which the name of God is blasphemed,
his ordinance despised, his covenant violated. But who can recount the
wickedness and abominations which are committed in these days? Under pretext
of the keys and discipline of the Church, the administration and use whereof
was given to the Ministers lawfully called, for a mean to conserve the
doctrine in it purity, and keep and entertain good order in the Church, and
to hinder the slanders which by the insolency of some might happen: has he
established a tyranny, whence is proceeded the whole dissipation of the Church
of God, the corruption of all estates: and the diminishing of the lawful
authority which God has given to Kings, Princes, and Magistrates. Some
whereof, have been wholly spoiled, as well of their goods, as dignities, by the
Pope, and the Bishops: and others so weakened, that they are in many places
constrained to bow the neck, and submit themselves to their yoke and
puissance. To be short, this may be noted and observed in all the purposes and
actions of the devil: that as he is a Serpent, so has he always ramped, and
secretly crept (as it were) under the leaves and appearance of some piety,
into the house of God, to place therein, his pretended disorder, confusion and
ruin. And we see, that now continuing and following his wonted practices, he
sets forth the omnipotency of God (which to all the world is a plausible
and favorable title) to the end, that under the luster and brightness of
such an occasion, he might dazell the eyes of the ignorant, and hold them
still in the opinion and persuasion of their errorus; which have no foundation
in the word of God. The Ministers beseech the Readers, and all those that have
the fear of God, or any zeal of his honor, to be wise, and attentive, to
weigh and discover the said subtilties and practices of the Devil: and not to
believe all spirits before they have well sounded and tried them: and that
they also approve not all the things, which under the name of God, may be
proposed unto them; and which at the first, may seem to tend and appertain
to his honor and glory: but that they remember the Apostles admonition, to
try the spirits: 1. Ioh. 4. 1.
and that they very carefully regard the end, and scope of those, which
propose unto them such doctrine. And if there be any thing wherein heed must be
taken of such cosonages and frauds, which are laid to surprise the simple; it
is needful, chiefly in this matter of the Omnipotency of God: whereof is the
present question. For the Ministers do confess, that it ought to be known,
believed, and universally adored of all creatures, in heaven and in earth.
Moreover they confess, that the faithful cannot have a better foundation, nor
better rampert to lean unto, and sustain themselves against all the
endeavors, as well of the devil, the world, and their other enemies: as also
(to be short) of all the temptations wherewith they might be assailed and
befieged.

This Omnipotency (they confess) is the hinge of the axeltree (as it were)
whereupon the world, with all it parts is turned and sustained. They confess
moreover, that the same Omnipotency is not only venerable to the Angels, and
blessed spirits in heaven, and to the elect and Saints upon earth: but also
terrible to the reprobates and devils in hell. So that the one does willingly
embrace and submit themselves unto it: and the others are constrained to bow
under it, and yield unto and obey the same.

Lastly they confess, that it is infinite, and of incomprehensible greatness,
to all creatures, as the wisdom, goodness, Justice, truth, and the other
virtues and proprieties of our God.

This is that which the Ministers believe and confess of the Omnipotency of
God: and that which they think, all Christians ought thereof to believe and
hold. Now to make good use of this Almightinesse, and to apply it as is meet:
we must judge thereof, according to his will: and of his will, according to his
word: So that we ought not to attribute indifferently to the power of God, all
things good and evil, ordered and disordered, agreeable and contrary to his
nature, false and true: But to well rule and order the thoughts and cogitations
of Gods Omnipotency, presenting themselves in our hearts: we must (for our
part) measure the same according to his holy will: and believe that it cannot
be limited, let nor hindered by any other will or power, which will or may be
opposite unto it. Which thing S. Augustine well teaches in many places; as in
the fifth book and 10. Chapter of the City of God: where speaking of God, he
says: That he is called almighty: because he does all whatsoever he will, and
suffers nothing if he will it not. Also in the seventh Chapter of the 21.
book. For no other reason but this only, is he called Almighty: that he can
do all whatsoever he will do. Also in the first Chapter of the book De
Symbolo ad Catec: Our God (says he) does all that which he will do: and that
is his Almightinesse. Also in the 119. Sermon De tempore; He is Almighty, to
do all things that he will do, and ordains to be done. These sentences, and
many other like, found in the writings of that good Father, and other
Ancients, do clearly teach us, the manner how we may well make profit of the
faith we have of the omnipotency of God: That is in bringing us back to his
will, and judging of his will, by his word, and not by the false imaginations
which thereof we may conceive in our minds: or that others would propose unto
us: As did Satan to Jesus Christ, whom he would have induced to cast down
himself headlong, under a vain trust of help from the omnipotency of God.
Even so also, the Monarchians, who under color and pretext of Gods
omnipotency, which of some miracles they gathered, would prove and establish
their heresies, and take away the personal distinction which is between the
Father and the son, saying: That God being Almighty, could therefore make
himself Father and son together. Of the Anabaptists in these last times, is
it also found, that for a vain assurance, which they put in the omnipotency of
God, hoping he could nourish them, as he did the byrds, would not labor.

Many such like more great inconveniences may happen to all those, that having
such wandering and straggling thoughts of the Omnipotency of God, will not
restrain nor reduce them to his will. And this we see is besalue the Doctors:
who willing to apprehend and measure the omnipotency of God by their own
imaginations, rather then by his will and word, are (as says S. Paul) become
vain in their imagination, and their foolish heart is filled with darkness.
And willing to behold the Majesty of God out of the limits and bounds which
he had showed them in his word, have been intrapped and overwhelmed of his
glory. And that is befalne them, which in their resolution, they themselves
have touched: to wit, that for not having taken the word of God for their
guide, nor followed the steps and paths of his holy spirit, they do err
from the faith: which (contrary to that which the Doctors do think) is not
destroyed nor overthrown by the consideration of the creatures and works of
God (which are as a myrror of his glory and divinity): but in as much as by
them we were turned away from the promises of God: by the which we are assured
of his will, and almightinesse; which does warrant and assure us of the
effects, and accomplishment of this holy will. Which may be seen and clearly
observed in them that were sent by Moses to epsy out and know the Land of the
Cananites. Two of which, (namely Joshua and Caleb) could never be withdrawn
from the trust they had in their God. For as much as turning their minds from
the consideration of all things which could make them doubt thereof, (as of the
Fortress and munition of Cities, the number, force, weapons, and experience of
the country Inhabitants) they stayed their minds in the sole consideration of
the promises which God had made unto the^. Contrariwise, the others forgetting
the same promises, and naught considering, but that which they saw before their
eyes, they fell, and caused all the people to fall with them, into that cursed
and damnable infidelity* for which they were so grieueuously punished in the
wilderness, and excluded from entrance thereunto, and enjoying of that thing,
which God had promised to their Fathers. And in the example of Abraham, whose
faith abode firm and stable, by the consideration chiefly of the promise and
will of God, as S. Paul declares. So that the consideration of Gods
Almightinesse, came after, to maintain and second that which he had of the
promise. One may see by these examples, what danger there is, to depart and
draw back, although never so little, from the word of God: by which we are
guided to the knowledge of his will. And by the knowledge of his will,
conducted to the consideration and judgment, which we ought to make and have
of his Almightinesse.

For want whereof, the Doctors are fallen into errors and raylings, which they
propose to the Ministers by their writing and conclusion of their resolution.
That is to say: that the body of Jesus Christ may be in diverse places at one
selfsame instant: which is against the faith we ought to have, and constantly
retain of the wisdom, providence, and everlasting truth of our God: and
against that likewise, which we ought to have and keep of our Lords true
humanity.

And that which they first allege of S. Jerome against Vigilantius, naught
serves for the proof and confirmation of their error. Where no other thing he
says: but that the souls of the Saints are not enclosed in a certain prison
(as dreamed Vigilantius) but do follow the Lamb whithersoeuer he goes. Nor
that which they allege of Saint Augustine in the book which he made of the
pure care of the dead. For in that book he himself confesses, that he is
incertaine of that which the Doctors do propose, and are assured. And no more
do the three authorities they allege, of Saint John Chrysostom, Saint
Ambrose, and Saint Augustine: whose sentences ought to be taken, and under
stood of the Sacrament, and not of the thing signified by the Sacrament: As in
the next conference the Ministers well hope to show.

The Ministers do much marvel, that the Doctors so draw back, and will not
(but unwillingly) enter into conference for defense of their Mass: and to
gainsay the Supper celebrated in the reformed Churches. For seeing they hold it
for the principal foundation of their Religion: and propose the same for a
mean of salvation to the whole world: (That they be not seen seducers, nor
over credulous to believe or teach an incertaine and unassured thing): they
should always be provided and furnished with reasons, to the end they might
approve, and readily defend that which they believe and say: and might convince
them also, that would deny the same: But in this, it appears to proceed of of
an evil conscience, which being timorous and fearful, flies always the
combat, and the light. It is long time since the Ministers have importuned them
to enter into the deciding and conference of these two points, and to bring
them thereunto, they have proposed unto them, that it was the end for which the
conference was appointed: which Madame de Buillon, (in whose favor it was
made) once or twice has publicly required: and that they also had often
protested, that they were not for other end assembled with the Doctors, then
to satisfy therein the said Lady of Buillon: and not to be examined by them,
as they do falsely pretend. For the Ministers have no desire to be examined of
such Doctors, being Priests: Joined, that to be taught in the points of
religion, and to know the truth, they would not choose such Masters, nor
repair unto them, and frequent their schools for that purpose. And yet
notwithstanding all the foresaid remonstrances often made and repeated by the
Ministers, the Doctors have always until now, deferred to confer of the
foresaid points: awayting (as it is likely) that some occasion should be
offered, to break off, and determine the said conference, before they had
begun to speak thereof. Albeit, had they any zeal to the honor of God, and
to the edification of his Church, they should by all means have procured that
the said two points should have been fully cleared and resolved: be it that
they would confirm and strengthen them of their part: or withdraw (as they
pretend) those of our side from their errors. For it is not much needful
hereafter to dispute of the Saints, of Purgatory, Pilgrigrimages, and other
like points: In regard of which, the most part of the world is at this day
cleared. By means whereof, as well the Doctors, as the Ministers, ought
chiefly to insist upon these two points, and to endeavor (with them) to make
them clear and to be understood of each one, and not to use Sophistries and
cauils to make them obscure, and retain thereby the simple in their ignorance:
as the Doctors endeavor to do. Who (having left of set purpose the Theses and
Articles proposed to them by the Ministers, with order and good method in
their last answers) do confusedly propose certain questions culled out of
their school divinity: ever more and more to fold up this matter: And in so
doing they withstand (as ever hitherto they have done) what so, and so often
they have protested: to wit, that they would examine the confession of the
reformed Churches: whereof notwithstanding, they have not handled one only
point in all the conference. Wherein they have showed, and yet plainly do
show, the distrust they have to be able to withstand so clear and apparent
truth; as that which is proposed in the said confession.

Answers to the Preface of the Doctors Questions.
THe Doctors, before they propose their Questions, in their Preface do call the
Supper celebrated in the refor-Churches, a profane and polluted banquet. And
in so saying, they neither shame, nor fear, first to blaspheme Jesus Christ,
who instituted the same, and is the author thereof: and then to condemn the
Apostles of Impiety, which so have celebrated and taught it: together with all
the ancient Churches which followed and observed (whiles it reremained in it
purity) the form and manner which the Evangelists and Apostles had taught, and
left by their writings. But the Ministers would willingly demand of the Lords
our Masters, that they particularly note unto them, wherein they can violate
the institution and ordinance of Jesus Christ, and leave his example, and that
of his Apostles in the celebration of the Supper? For when they will celebrate
the same, they first assemble the whole Church together: as Jesus Christ did
his Apostles and Disciples: where after their public confession of sins, and
understandingly made in the name of all, they make a Sermon to the people:
wherein according to the grace and power which God has given them, they
declare the causes, and occasions, the end, the use, the points and effects of
the holy Supper: to lift up the hearts of the people to the consideration of
the incomprehensible love which the Father has showed toward his Church, when
in favor thereof, and for the salvation of the same, he has not spared his
own son, but exposed him to a cruel and cursed death: to the end, that each
one calling to mind so great a grace and mercy, be kindled and inflamed in
the love of God: and tremble at the ingratitudes and rebellious offenses and
sins which he has committed against his Majesty: and that with the sorrow
and displeasure he has for the same, he cast himself between the arms of
his son, stretched out upon the Cross, to have thereof a general and full
abolition. And that even so, with such a faith and repentance he be prepared
to present himself worthily at the table of the Lord, and to receive the good
things which are there administered. The Sermon ended, the Minister recyteth
with an high and audible voice, and his face turned toward the people, the
words of the institution and ordinance of the Supper, together with a brief
and short declaration of the same.

That done, he denounces to all those, not fully instructed and Catechized,
that they depart: and to all them which are excommunicated, or attainted with
some sins or scandalous crimes (whereof they have made no satisfaction to the
Church) that they abstain therefrom, and pollute not the table of the Lord.
After that, the Minister goes to the table: where having taken the bread, and
given thanks to God, he breaks it, and gives it to the people there
assembled. And also presently the Cup to all them that communicate: which being
ended, he gives thanks to God, and dismisseth the people.

The Ministers, following in all these things the example and rule, which Jesus
Christ has given them, cannot imagine whereupon the Doctors have grounded that
their saying of the Supper, calling it a profane and polluted banquet. And
they cannot perceive, what they could or would reprove in all their action:
unless peradventure they will tax them for not having Aulbes, stoles, fanets,
Crosses, holy water, banners, Chisibles, tunicles, lights, Incense, belles,
singing in a strange and unknown language, Music, and Organes, holy
napkins, Aultars, Clearkes to answer: Et cum spiritu tuo, nor words addressed
to the bread and wine (which have no ears) after the manner of Inchanters, nor
the Cross and signs, nor any elevation of the bread and wine, to cause them
to be adored: nor other like aperies of man's invention, and drawn part from
Iudaisme, and part from Paganism. The observation of which things the
Ministers would make great conscience of: because they be but Idolatries and
superstitions, whereby the purity and integrity of Christian Religion, is
wholly wasted and corrupted.

Answers to the questions proposed by the Doctors touching the Supper.
FOr answer to the first question, the Ministers say; that the Sacrament in
perfection considered, consists in three things. One whereof is the Element,
which Ireneus calls a thing earthy: the other, the thing signified; called by
the same author, a thing heavenly. And the third is the word, by which the
earthy thing is deputed to signify the heavenly, and assures them of the
exhibition thereof, that with faith do present themselves to receive it.

For answer to the second question, the Ministers say; that the ordinance of
God, contained in his word, and declared by his Minister, according to his
commandment, is this word word necessary with the E^ment, to constitute the
Sacrament: and not the only low and secret pronunciation of certain unknown
words, addressed to the elements, nor any virtue which is hidden in the same.

For answer to the third question, the Ministers say, that by the word
aforesaid the signs be changed, not as touching the nature: or as touching
the substance: but as touching the use only: and that only during the action,
whereunto they serve.

For answer to the fourth question, the Ministers say, that the bread and wine
which before the action of the Supper were common, are consecrated in the
Supper: that is to say, deputed by the said word and ordinance of God, declared
by the Ministers, to a holy and sacred use: which is, to represent and exhibit
the things by them signified.

The answer to the fourth question suffices for the fifth.

For answer to the sixth question, the Ministers say, that the faithful
receive not only in the Supper, the gifts and graces of Jesus Christ, (as his
tighteousnesse, life, and the other fruits of his sacrifice) but that they
also receive and possess himself: and are made one with him, no less truly
and straightly, then the members are conjoined to the head. And they say
moreover, that this conjunction is the spring and mean of all the benefits,
which flow from the grace of God, by him into us: but they add, that this
reception must be wholly attributed to the free operation of the holy Ghost,
which makes us fit and capable to know our Lord Jesus Christ, with all his
virtues and properties: and in knowing him, to trust in him: and in reposing
our trust in him, to possess and wholly enjoy him.

For answer to the seventh question, the Ministers say, that they reject and
reprove the word Concomitance, and more also the thing thereby signified: for
as much as that has been the cause, for which the common people has been
deprived and excluded from one of the essential parts of the Sacrament:
namely, from the participation of the Cup. And they say, that it is an
attempt against the divine Majesty, to separate what the son of God has
joined together: and to deny to some of his members, that which he has willed
and commanded to be common to all. Joined, that the reason of the Sacrament
requires it: which was instituted for our spiritual nourishment. The which
(as does the corporal) consists in drink and meat. To the end then, that
there be some correspondency between them two, it behooves, that as we are fed
with the flesh of Jesus Christ crucified: So be we also watered with his blood
shead, for the remission of sins. To be short, seeing that the Supper was
chiefly instituted to show forth the Lords death: and that in his death, his
blood was separated from his body: Meet it is, that the bread and wine be
there administered, to represent the one and the other, and more clearly to
propose unto us, all the mystery of the death of Jesus Christ.

For answer to the eight question, the Ministers do acknowledge no other
cause, nor mean of remission of sins, then the grace of God, the blood of
Jesus Christ, and faith; whereby the effect of Gods grace, and the fruit of the
death of Jesus Christ are applied unto us.

For answer to the ninth question, the Ministers do say: that the faithful
coming to the Supper, do not come thither to receive there a new Jesus Christ,
with whom they had not been formerly conjoined: nor a new righteousness, which
had not been communicated unto them. And they add, that if some one did
present himself there without faith, (for want whereof he should not be
united, incorporated and engraffed into Jesus Christ, to be partaker of his
righteousness, life, and all other his gifts and blessings): that the holy
Supper in that case, should be as unprofitable to him, as is meat vnptofitable
to a dead man. But, if living by the means aforesaid (namely the grace of God,
the blood of Jesus Christ, and faith) he present himself there in such an
estate: that then the graces of God be multiplied, increased, and more and more
confirmed in him.

So that Circumcision, brought not unto Abraham a new righteousness: but
sealed and ratified that, which by the promise was communicated before unto
him. Which the faithful, knowing in what degree of virtue they be, yet ought
they not to contemn the holy Supper, nor any way to abstain from it, when
occasion and means serve them to be there: Considering, that they cannot be so
promoted nor advanced in the knowledge and fear of God, and in the faith of
his promises, that they may not yet grow and profit (in what estate soever
they be) by the means which God has therefore left and ordained in his
Church. And impossible it is, for a man having true faith in his heart, to do
otherwise; seeing he has the commodity thereof: For as much as the nature of
faith is not to apprehend the promises of God only: but also to engender, and
bring forth in the heart of the faithful, a will to obey him, and keep his
commandments and ordinances.

For answer to the first Article which the Doctors propose touching their
Mass, the Ministers say: that the Doctors do openly blaspheme Jesus Christ, to
authorize with his name, and by his example, such an abomination. And that
they also mock the Church and the world, in preaching and writing such
Impieties.

For answer to the second Article of the Mass, the Ministers say: that there
is in the Church no other sacrifice, by which men are reconciled to God, and
which makes him merciful and favorable toward them (by appeasing his wrath)
then that only and alone, which Jesus Christ has once offered upon the Cross
to his Father. The virtue whereof being eternal, to sanctify all believers,
and to obtain unto them for ever, remission and abolishment of sins: there is
no need of any other, nor that which he has once offered, be ever reiterate.

For answer to the third Article, the Ministers say: that they which approve
the Mass, and other Priesthood, then that of Jesus Christ; and will establish
for remission of sins an other sacrifice, then that he himself, with his
body upon the Cross offered, are Antichrists: and abolish (as much as in them
lies) all the virtue and fruit of the death and sacrifice of the son of God.

For answer to the fourth Article, the Ministers do allege, what S. Paul
writes, to wit: That where remission is, Hebr. 10.
there is no more offering for sin. Now so it is, that by the death of Jesus
Christ, remission has been obtained for us: as by infinite passages of
scripture appears. It follows then, that there is no more oblation for sin,
neither in the Mass, nor out of the Mass. And if there be none for the
living, less is there for the dead.

For answer to the fifth, the Ministers maintain, that the Communion is of the
essence of the Supper, as S. Paul shows in the first of the Corinthians, 10.
and 11. Chapters. And as it is carried by the Cannon it self, and other things
about the Mass.

For answer to the sixth, the Ministers say three things: First, that the
Popish Mass is no Sacrament: then that the body of Jesus Christ is not there.
And thereof conclude, that then the bread and wine there remaining, ought not to
be adored: which being creatures cannot be adored, but that they which adore
them be Idolators.

For answer to the seventh and last Article, the Ministers say contrary to the
Doctors, that there is not any thing in the Mass, which is not either
directly, or indirectly contrary to the word of God.

The Ministers for conclusion admonish the Doctors, and entreat them, not to
depart (as they have formerly done) out of the bounds of the matter, now
proposed for disputation. To the end, that these two points which are now in
debate between them, may be wholly and perfectly decyded, to the content and
edification of them that shall read the Acts of this conference.

Tuesday the 30. of July, in the year aforesaid.
A brief Reply of the Doctors, against the last Answer of the Ministers to
them, sent by my Lord the Duke de Niuernois, the first of August, about seven
or eight of the clock in the evening. 1566.
THe Doctors, after their resolution given upon the Artice of Gods Omnipotency,
were not determined to return any more thereunto: as having sufficiently
handled that matter. But the horror they have of the new blasphemies,
contained in the last writing of the Ministers, has incyted them (contrary to
their purpose) although not to reply, at the least to admonish the Ministers
and the reader of this present Conference, of the said execrable blasphemies:
which they are constrained to confess, that will not acknowledge the Real
presence of the body of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar: but dare
thereby deny the power of God himself. The consideration whereof (as the Doctors
hope) will not only confirm the Catholics in the faith of the said article:
but also (by Gods assistance) will bring back many which are strayed, separating
themselves from the Church Catholic: when they shall understand the detestable
errors and blasphemies which do follow the contradiction of the real presence
of the body and blood of our Lord in the Sacrament. Which also should serve for
the conversion of the Ministers themselves: would they without passion examine
the reasons and acts which have been proposed unto them, touching the power of
God: and sincerely judge thereof: as resisting the holy spirit, in stead of
acknowledging their errors, they are turned to all manner of reproach and injury
against them, which of good will would admonish them; and have taxed them, that
they tended not but to root them out. Which thing the Doctors never minded:
and desire not but the salvation of the Ministers, and of all those that are
separated from the true Catholic Church. Of which, their preachings shall
bear witness: wherein they ordinarily exhort the people to pray unto God for
them. True it is, that they require the extirpatio^ of the kingdom of Satan*
and the rooting out of all heresies and perverse doctrine, rather by the
preaching of Gods word, then by all other means. And they wonder why the
Ministers are so pricked against them in their two last answers: seeing they
have given them no occasion thereof, but have taken it lightly, for no other
reason, but because the Doctors have written, that many propositions set forth
by the Ministers, contained blasphemies, which they should content themselves
to deny, or to prove that there are none, and leave the judgment thereof to
the readers: without entering into such hot collar, seeing they profess to
be so much mortified, patient, and modest, that albeit one should reproach
them, they would not reproach again. They should also well remember the fair
tytles with which they honor the Catholic doctrine: as with the name of
superstition, Idolatry, impiety, abomination, and many other like: yea not
sparing the persons: calling the Popes, Bishops, and Priests, Antichrists, and
Ministers of Satan: against which reproaches, the Doctors content themselves
to show by the word of God, when occasion serves, that such tytles agree
neither with the persons, nor yet the doctrine by them preached. Now although
that the Ministers and their fury deserve a sharp reply, yet to mittigate
their so inflamed hearts, the Doctors will not answer to the injuries which
touch their persons and estates: referring the whole to the judgment of the
unpassionate readers: and will only touch the points which concern the
doctrine.

First, the Ministers do great wrong to the Doctors and their like, in
comparing them to Donatists, and falsely to impute unto them, that they tie the
Church in a certain place, (as did the Donatists) which placed it only in
Affrike. For it is manifest to all, that the Doctors know not, nor confess any
other Church, then the Catholic: which (as it name imports) has been
visible since the Apostles time, and has her spreading through the world, in
what region, country, or place soever, the faithful believing in Jesus Christ
are. Although they reverence the Church of Rome, as chief and principal among
others: as Ireneus, Tertullian, S. Ciprian, S. Augustine, and other the
ancient Fathers, have given it this honor, to confess it to be principal
and mother (as it were) of other Churches; with more just reason, may such
objection be retorted against the Ministers: who cannot say their Church to be
Catholic: having taken it beginning in our time, seen and known at Geneua,
founded upon the private opinion of one man: without that in former time one
could show such opinion to have been holden in any Nation whatsoever. Which
thing shall be handled in it order, when they shall examine the errors by the
Ministers maintained against this Article; I believe the holy Catholic Church.

Moreover, the Ministers should not have alleged the violence, cruelty, and
fury of the Donatists, against the Catholics: for such example does condemn
them, and their like. But because it does not but bring fresh to memory the
passed evils, which France has endured by the instigation of the Ministers,
for fear to incyte them further to say new injuries: the Doctors will not
dwell long upon this matter. Nevertheless, they show unto the Ministers, that
the Donatists reproached the Catholics, that they endured persecution by
them, and that to root them out, they solicited the Emperors and Magistrates
even as the Ministers do blame the Doctors. Who confess: first to desire the
conversion of all Sects, and in case they will not come to repentance, that the
Magistrates by good and holy laws may execute such punishment therefore, as
God be not so outragiously blasphemed, and the people grieved. And therein
they follow the doctrine of Saint Augustine, expressed in an Epistle, sent
Advincentin contra Donatistas. Where he confesses, that the Catholics did
persecute the Donatists: and that contrariwise the Donatists also afflicted the
Catholics: but that the persecutions were different. That those of the
Catholics were not executed but by the Magistrate, and came of charity, to
root out the evil, which hindered the peace and tranquillity public. And
contrariwise, the persecution by the Donatists, was made without authority of
the Magistrate, and proceeded of malice: which pretended but mischief and
ruin: and S. Augustine declares that the first was good, and of God: and the
second wicked, and by inspiration of Satan. And to this purpose he brings
many excellent examples of holy scripture.

This has been somewhat largely handled, to purge the Doctors of the slander
imposed on them by the Ministers: where they reproach them, that in their
preachings, writings, and conferences, they search but only to root out the
Ministers: whom they have always persecuted. And they interpret the same as
therefore proceeding from a particular hate of the Doctors against them: and
not of charity, and zeal of truth, and of the conversion, as well of the
Ministers, as of those which are seduced and abused by them. The Doctors
therein call God to witness, and do protest the contrary, and pray the
Ministers to believe them, attending thereupon the judgment of God, who is the
only searcher of the hearts and affections of men.

As touching the Article where the Ministers say that God is almighty, because
he can do whatsoever he will, had they listed to read the writings of Saint
Thomas (whose doctrine they disdain) well had they known, that this reason is
no reason. Because the Angels, and they which are blessed, conforming
themselves always to the will of God, can do all things that they will do:
and there is no creature which can hinder the effect of their will, and yet are
they not almighty. And as touching the saying of S. Augustine, in taking it so
as the Ministers do take it; The reason of Gods omnipotency is ouer-weake and
false. But to have the true understanding of this sentence, it behooves to
consider, that there is a difference between the actual will of God, and the
power of will.

For God can will many things which he wills not, nor ever will. And even so
can he will more then he actually wills: whereby they ought rather to measure
his omnipotency, then to measure it according to his actual will. And thus
must be interpreted the text of S. Augustine, that the almightinesse extends
to all things which he can will, and not according to that he actually wills.
And S. Augustine is cyted by the Ministers, being destitute of testimony of
scripture, albeit they vaunted in their former answer, to have learned this
reason by the scriptures.

In the article following, the Ministers by slander do falsely tax the
Doctors, to have cut off some words of their last writing: which will not be
found to be true. For the text of the Doctors bears these words. It is not
to be doubted, but that above all conceit and imagination of humane spirit,
the power of God is great, infinite, and incomprehensible. Where it clearly
appears, that the Doctors speak generally of all conceit and imagination,
without any exception thereof, be it of wisdom or folly. Therefore was it not
needful to express the words of the Ministers, seeing that the Doctors spoke
generally. And that which goes before does show the same: as the Ministers
have cyted it: where it is said, that the Doctors reproved the said Ministers,
because they gave some restraint and limitation of the omnipotency of God. For
as much as they would not stretch it generally to all the things which men can
conceive, and in their minds imagine. Where the words generally, and all
things do sufficiently declare, that the Doctors have willed to comprehend end
the foolish fantasies and imaginations themselves, which men may apprehend
according to humane judgment, and have willed to cut off nothing from the
writing of the Ministers: who peradventure have thought, the Doctors would not
say, that God can do all that which a foolish brain can imagine: as fearing
they would infer against them, that God then should commit some folly. Which
would not follow: For albeit that some things be esteemed follyes in the
judgment of men, nevertheless seeing they be in themselves possible, they may
be done of God; but wisely, although humane sense do judge the contrary: even
as in many judgments man is deceived: esteeming that folly, which (as says
Saint Paul) is wisdom to wards God. The Doctors then say, that 1. Cor. 5.
all things imaginable to man, are without exception to be done as touching
God: the things excepted, which imply contradiction to be, and not to be. Which
cannot be done in regard of the repugnancie coming on their part, and not by
default of the power of God. The Doctors pray them that shall be able to read
these Conferences, to note, that the Ministers are always found false
accusers, when they tax the Doctors with slander: as in the former writing
they remain thereof convinced.

The Ministers shall find themselves also false accusers in the article
following: there where they cut off the saying of the Doctors, and falsely
impute unto them, that they have written, God can do something against order.
The Doctors have well said, that it is blasphemy to say, that God could do
nothing against the order by him established in the world. Where appears the
slander of the Ministers, who have clipped the sentence, and taken away these
words [Established in the world]. In that they infer, it is blasphemy to say,
that God can do a thing which is not well ordained. It is doublesse, but to
do some matter against the order established in the world, imports not some
thing disordered: but only a mutation and change of order, without any
disorder, which the Ministers confess in their article following.

The Doctors have in great execration the blasphemies contained in the next
article. Of which the first is, that one body to be in diverse places, is a
thing derogatorie to the truth of God: for as much as in God there should be
yea and nay. So that the Ministers do say, that God should not be true, if he
caused one body to be in diverse places. And yet teach they not, nor can teach,
that God has ever said, that one body could not be in diverse places. It
impugneth the wisdom of God: because that in his works ther^ should be
disorder and confusion. Wherein they likewise confess, that God should not be
wise, if he caused one body at one instant, to be in diverse places.

The third is, that such a thing repugneth the omnipotency of God. For in such
a work there should be imperfection. So that, so far off is it (after the
Ministers opinion) that God in so doing should be almighty; that
contrariwise he should be imperfect and weak.

The fourth is, that were such a thing done, it should be against the eternal
and unchangeable will of God: and therefore God should be mutable: which
blasphemies do necessarily disgorge a manifest Atheism: to wit, that God
should not be God, if he made one body to be in diverse places at one
selfsame instant: For God cannot be but true, wise, almighty, and
unchangeable: which blasphemies the Doctors do content themselves to quote and
mark only: and to admonish what simple stuff issues from the doctrine of
them, which deny the real presence of the body of Jesus Christ in the holy
Sacrament, without dwelling upon further confutation of them: as being too
manifest, and having regard to that which Ireneus says: that some heresies
there be: which to discover, is to refute them.

In the article following, do they gainesay that which so often they have said,
that God could not cause one body to be in diverse places at one instant:
because it repugneth the order which he has established in the world. As if
God could not do otherwise, then according to the order already by him
established. In the present article they confess, that God can change and
vnchange the said order. From which confession the Doctors draw such an
argument: God can change and alter the order which he has established in the
world: and that without prejudice to his truth, wisdom, power, and
unchangeable will. Therefore can he change the order, by which he has
established (as the Ministers will say) that one body should be but in one place;
and cause contrariwise, (the order being changed) that one body shall be in
diverse places: without that the same is any way derogatorie to his truth,
wisdom, power, and will. And that by consequence, God of his omnipotency can
cause one body to be in diverse places.

As touching the article of the distinction of the will of God, the Ministers
do confound the whole: understanding nothing in the said distinction, no more
then in that which they say, that one body to be in two places, is in the rank
of things which God has declared by his word, against the which he can do
nothing. The question is first of the omnipotency of God, which is reduced to
his power, and not to his essence, and to that which he is in himself: as to
be one, wise, good: which things belong not to the matter of the omnipotency,
but of the essence in himself. Secondly, what reason is there to confer the
being of one body in one place: or to know whether God can cause it to be in
two or many places: with the essence of God, which is one, incomprehensible,
etc. seeing that such things of number, pertain to the essence of God, and
power to make one body in many places, does nothing properly belong unto it,
and is not referred unto the same. Thirdly, the Ministers say, that God by his
word haih declared his will, because he was one: which nothing serves to the
present matter. But (pardoning the Ministers such follies) how dare they
compare with the matter of Gods essence, that which is in question of the being
of one body in one, or in diverse places? seeing God has never said that he
could not do it: as he has manifestly showed all the other perfectio^s, which
pertain to the divine essence. Whereby it appears, that it suffices the
Ministers to fill up paper, without founding their saying upon solid reason.

For as much as they repute it slander, when one cutteth off some of their
words, albeit the full sense abide: the Doctors do wonder, that the Ministers
have not feared the like objections to them. But they are so accustomed
thereunto, that they cannot beware thereof. As in the article where mention is
made of the definition of a body, they pass that over in silence, which gives
solution to their difficulty. The Doctors have defined a body to be a kind of
firm quantity, of three dimensions, length, breadth, and deepenesse: which
definition comprehends the whole essence of one body, which is of the
predicament of quantity: and no mention is any way made of the circumscription
of place. The Ministers say, that the Doctors by their definition, do limit
the body, and therefore it is circumscript. But they have maliciously omitted
(as it is to be supposed) this little word [place]. For the question is not,
whether a body be lymited, or no, seeing that no man does call it infinite. But
the question is, whether it be essentially circumscript of place, so that it
cannot be a body, if it be not in place: for as much as the Ministers could
not answer to the argument of the Doctors, they have cut off that which
annoyed them.

The four next articles deserve no new reply: and therefore the Doctors send
back the readers to that which heretofore has been said. They only admonish,
that it is a great matter which the Ministers do hold, that a miracle could not
be done in the body of Jesus Christ, without change of his nature: and such
an opinion do they impose upon Instine, who has said and maintained (with the
other Ancients) that the body of Jesus Christ passed through the doors
without change of nature, albeit that the operation of the miracle, was
wrought in the nature of the body, without changing the same: but in giving it
a spiritual quality and perfection, to wit, subtlety, above the natural
qualities of a body.

With like boldness, call the Ministers the scripture of the Camells passage
through the eye of a needle, a parable and similitude: as they do that of the
Supper, and all others which withstand their errors. And the better to escape,
they say that God saves not, but changes and conuerteth the rich man: and so
cannot make a Camel to pass through the eye of a needle, without diminishing
and changing of his grossness. But the Ministers will not consider, that when
our Lord spoke of the rich man his entry into the kingdom of heaven, he put
not the difficulty in the entering of the kingdom properly, but in the
conversion of the rich man: by which, he should obtain the entry and
possession of heaven. Therefore when our Lord says, that it is more easy for
God, to cause a Camel (or Cable) to enter through the eye of a needle, then a
rich man the kingdom of heaven: he intends to compare the conversion of a
rich man (which is impossible with men) to the passage of a Camel abiding in
his grossness: otherwise, there should be no appearance of difficulty: and
our Lord would not have said, that such a thing had been impossible to men.

The Doctors say moreover, that they have not produced this place, to prove and
infer properly the penitration of dimensions: but to show, that God can make
a body to occupy place, not proportionable to it greatness: which is as well
contrary to the nature of a gross and thick body, as that one body be in
diverse places.

Where the Ministers do boast, that they are not constrained to confess any
thing of Gods works, alleged by the Doctors out of the scripture: it
follows not that the Doctors out of the scripture: it follows not that the
Doctors have brought forth vain reasons to constrain and convince them. And
for the same refer them to the Acts of the Conference. And as touching the
knowledge, whether God could do such miracles alleged, above the nature of a
body, the Ministers cannot escape whatsoever evasion they pretend, vnconuinced
(if not openly, yet silently at least) to have denied, as well the power as the
deed: For, affirming that God cannot cause one body to be in diverse places,
because it repugneth the order by him established in the world, and his wisdom
and will, which disposes all by good order; and that it was against the nature
of a body: albeit as much may be said thereof, as may truly be said of all
the other things* mentioned touching one body: and that there are like reasons:
in confessing the one, they must necessarily confess all the others, that
there is the like reason.

The Ministers unable to give any difference, and show why God cannot do the
one, and that he can do the others, have silently consented thereunto. And
although they would never confess the debt, and yeeled themselves vanquished,
as they do boast, it is no marvel: for it is the nature of heretics, to be
obstinate, and resist the truth, what reasons soever are proposed unto them.
The Scribes and Pharisees never confessed to be overcome of our Lord, albeit
his arguments were unreprovable. And albeit they that withstood S. Stephen,
had nothing to answer, yet left they not to resist the holy Ghost, which spoke
by him: as the Ministers do resist the same spirit, which speaks in the
scripture, and by the mouth of the ancient Fathers, concerning miracles done
in the body of Jesus Christ above nature. Which the Ministers do repugne, by I
know not what vain and frivolous starting holes. S. Jerome speaks well to
this purpose, Haeretici conuinci possunt, non persuaderi. Heretics may be
convinced, not persuaded. And Tertullian writes: Duritia baeretica vincenda
est, non suadenda. Heretical obduration is to be vanquished, not persuaded.

And as touching the injuries which the Ministers in this behalf do multiply
against the Doctors, in that do they imitate all the adversaries of truth, and
give testimony of the disquiet which such manner of people endure in their
minds, when their errors are showed them. Of whom the Doctors have pity and
compassion, and pray God to restore the^ to their right senses. For as much as
they know, that the conversion of an heretic, is one of the matters reserved
to the omnipotency of God.

In vain do the Ministers labor to produce store of Greek, to show that
Penetrare Caelos, does not signify to pass the heavens without opening:
because the Verb [Dierchestai] is found, for passing where there is an
opening. But the Doctors never said, that [Penetrare] or [Dierchesthai] may not
be applied to open places: or that one pearceth in opening of them: for well do
they know, that it is met with in all Authors.

They have well said, that the Ministers would infer a real opening of the
heaven, by the rigor and propriety of the verb Aperire: So might they also
infer, that the heavens were shut in the ascension of Jesus Christ, by the
verbes Dierchesthai, and Penetrare, which strictly do signify, to pearce or
pass through, without that of it self it imports an opening: albeit a man
may use the same where there is an open passage. But by the rigor of their
signification can they not necessarily infer an opening, if the opening be
not showed from some other place, by some word, or evident condition of the
thing pierced: as it is in the texts by the Ministers alleged. Now in the
ascension these words [Dierchesthas], and [Penetrare], are put for to pierce:
and no word is there added, which imports a division of the heavens. The
condition of which, nor the state of the glorified body of Jesus Christ, do
not constrain that one necessarily understand an opening to have been made,
to suffer the body of Jesus Christ to enter. Therefore did the Doctors well
reason of the rigor of [Penetrare:] as the Ministers did of the rigor of
[Aperire:] which more often is found in the scripture without signification of
the real opening of the heavens, then [Penetrare] is found in the scripture to
signify a division and actual cutting of the heavens. For Aperire Caelos, is
often found for imaginary and spiritual opening; and hardly is Penetrare
Caelos ever found for actual division of the heavens. And therefore had the
Doctors better reason to conclude, by the rigor of the verb Dierchesthai, or
Penetrare, (to pierce without actual division of the heavens) then the
Ministers had to infer the opening of them by the verb Aperire.

The Ministers in the last article object to the Doctors, that they have passed
over some places of scripture, by which it appears, that faith is the work
of God, whereunto (say the Doctors) that in some one of their writings they have
expressly confessed, that faith, in as much as it is a gift of God, it is a
work of God: but in as much as he that believes works together with God, in
believing (for Nemo credit, nisivole^s, no man believes unless he be willing)
it is a humane work. And it is not repugnant one self-same work, for diverse
causes to be a work of God, and a work of man. And where they say, that the
ancient Fathers have said (if not in proper, yet in equivalent terms) that
God could not cause one body to be in diverse places: that is false. And the
Ministers never have, nor can show the same: and contradict their last
writing. For bringing the reason, why the Fathers have not expressly said it: It
was (said they) because they never thought that such an absurdity would ever
fall into the brain of man. Which reason ought to have place, for the saying
in terms equivalent, as in express terms, since one selfsame thing is
signified as well by the one, as by the other.

As touching the rest, the Ministers never answer to the principal point,
whereof they have been so often admonished: and they efsoones admonish them,
should they a thousand times call this saying a repetition: to wit, that they
are required to bring scripture, to prove that it repugneth the order
established in the world, the truth, the wisdom, omnipotency, and
unchangeable will of God, that one body may be in two places: which thing they
cannot do: but they will answer, as they are accustomed: that is to say,
nothing. Wherein appears, that their doctrine is not founded upon Gods word,
but upon their own opinion, or particular inspiration, which cannot be but of
Satan. For it cannot be of the holy Ghost which is against the common consent
of the Church universal. And upon the same are also founded, the other
articles of their religion: albeit they disguise them, and promise Gods word to
every purpose.

A short Advertisement of the Doctors, upon the Ministers Resolution, touching
the omnipotency of God.
THe Doctors are astonished at the fashion of the Ministers, in their words and
writings. For they themselves from the beginning of the Conference, have never
had patience to prosecute and conclude one only point, without mingling other
things therewithal, impertinent to the matter in question: as shall appear by
the reading of the acts. And before their resolution made of the omnipotency
of God, they have heaped up all the articles which they could remember, and
thrown one upon an other without cause or reason. Although the Doctors at
their request, had proposed the Articles of the Supper: And after dispute of
the omnipotency of God (to make present the body and blood of Jesus Christ in
the holy Sacrament) to come orderly to show and prove, that the will of God
has been such, and that there it is. But the Doctors well understand the good
custom of all them of the pretended reformed religion: which is, to spet in
the eyes of Christians, all the articles of the Religion, and their invented
filthiness, all on one thread: to the end, that naught be determined, that
all abide in confusion, and that the Serpent glide away, having cast his
venom.

Moreover, by observation of the Ministers answers, it shall be seen and
known, that they never stay upon any certain and the same answer, but rather
of an act alleged out of the scripture: where of every question, they have
given thereunto diverse impertinent, and sometimes insufferable answers. Of
which the Doctors do admonish them that can read these Conferences, and pray
them to have regard to the same, and thereof refer them to their judgment.

Furthermore, the Doctors admonish the Ministers, that they may, or ought to
know, that all Sects of our times do cast before the eyes of those whom they
will abuse, the same beadroll of Articles, which the Ministers in their
Resolution have gathered together, to get audience against the Church
Catholic, and to bring in their heresies and errors, under the name of the
glory of GOD. Whereof they boaste to be defenders as well as the Ministers.
And therefore are they not so acceptable in their opinions and conclusions,
that the Ministers can pretend any right, to exalt the power and glory of God,
by such mingling and confounding of all matters together.

Moreover the Doctors show, that they may with better reason retort against
the Ministers, the conclusion which they pretend to infer, of the subtlety
and craft of Satan: which is (as they write) that Satan under fair show of
piety, glideth like a Serpent into the Church of GOD, to put therein disorder
and confusion: and in the end to assail God himself. The Doctors do pray each
one to consider in himself, whether the Ministers purpose be not such by their
deductions, and generally by the principal points of their doctrine. For under
fair pretext to root out some abuses and errors against the word of the Lord,
which they falsely study to persuade the world to be in the Church Catholic:
And under the shadow to preach, that they seek the advancement of the name of
the same Lord, they go about to spoil God of all his proprieties and
perfection, albeit they no more declare it, then Satan told his meaning to the
first man.

Furthermore, the Ministers abase the merit and efficacy of the blood of Jesus
Christ, and open a door by their doctrine to all vices and sins. Be it so,
the Doctors will not repeat what the Ministers have held, concerning the
omnipotency of God: because they shall fill their writings therewithal. But
so it is, that in their goodly resolution (although they suite it with seemly
words) that God cannot (after them) but so much as they please to receive of
his wisdom and will: which they disguise after their own sense, when it is
found declared in the scripture. Against the goodness of God they hold that he
is the author and worker of evil, and of sin. Against his mercy they teach,
that he never pardons, nor will pardon a man which shall maliciously oppose
himself to the knowledge of the truth: or which shall resist the same. Against
the merit of the blood of Jesus Christ, and passion of the Cross, in proper
terms have they written, that had Jesus Christ only dyed by the sorrows of
corporal death, and by the sheading of his whole blood, he had naught done,
nor profited for our redemption: if being on the Cross he had not endured in
his soul, the pains of the damned before his death: and other horrible
blasphemies contained in the atticle of the descent into hell. The Ministers do
also instruct their adherents, that murder, adultery, robbery, theft, and
every crime whatsoever, is but a venial sin to one predestinate, who is
never (say they) out of the favor of God, what thing soever he commit: and do
assure their faithful, and those of their Church to believe firmly, that they
are in grace, and predestinate, which is in plain terms (albeit the Ministers
will otherwise excuse the^) to give leave and license to commit all
wickedness, and other articles which the Doctors will verify, where the
matter shall require the same.

If the Ministers deny these points to be in their writings, and published in
their Sect, the places of Caluins books which the Doctors noted in the Margin,
will testify the same. To be brief, behold the glory of God, and of his son
Jesus Christ, whereunto tend the Ministers, by the rooting out of the pretended
impieties, mentioned in many articles of their last resolution. For brief
answer whereunto, the Doctors do say, that some things by slander of the
Ministers, are falsely imputed to the Catholic Church: that others are
expressed in the holy scripture: and others drawn from the same, and confirmed
by the traditions of the Apostles, and the universal consent of the first
Christian church: the deceits excepted which the Ministers add in every
article. And so shall it be showed and proved at the least in time and place,
if the Ministers have patience to handle in it rank every difficultiie: but if
to make their doctrine confused, they persist to mingle all together, the
Doctors do protest to mock thereat without answer. Moreover, the Ministers in
general, do rightly attribute to the power of God: and say well, that the
certain knowledge thereof, is to be taken by the scriptures, which has been
always avouched to them by the Doctors.

Very well say they also, that it is infinite and incomprehensible. But when
they come to particularities, and to show wherein the omnipotency lies and
consists, then forget they holy scriptures, and without them do measure the
same, according to the wisdom and eternal will of God: and according to the
order established in the world: and as though they remembered no more that such
power were infinite, they tie it to the condition, propriety, and natural order
of creatures: As though to make something against, or above the order,
condition, and natural propriety of the creatures, were a thing repugnant to
the wisdom, nature, and will of God. Behold the short resolution which the
Doctors can gather of the Ministers opinion, touching the omnipotency of God:
which shall appear by their writings and answers given to the said Doctors.
And as touching S. Augustine, which they produce for them, he has been
answered heretofore.

The Doctors refer them to their writings, concerning that which the Ministers
do falsely tax the^ to hold, as a sufficient argument (to infer some matter to
be done of God) to show that he has power to do it. The resolutions and
objections of the Doctors do plainly contain the contrary.

The Doctors are also falsely accused by the Ministers, as if they had affirmed
the faith wholly contrary to nature. Who have only said, that the
contradiction ordinarily made to faith, founded upon the word, comes from the
consideration of natural things, against the power of God.

Concerning Abraham, the scripture in Genesis always proposes, that he and
his wife made some difficulty touching the promise of God. And considered
Corpus suu^ emortuu^, and mortua^ vulua^ Sarae. His own dead body, and the
dead womb of Sarah: until he heard the assurance of the omnipote^cie. And S.
Paul sufficiently declares the speech of Abraham, from his first vocation,
until after such assurance, without putting distinction in the History, of
that which was before, or after such assurance: as is that which the Apostle
says, that he considered not Corpus suu^ emortuu^, his own dead body, but
rested upon the assurance of the almightinesse, and of the promise made unto
him.

The Doctors say: they have better concluded according to the faith, we ought
to have of the power of God (to make one body in diverse places) then the
Ministers have done: which have not any word of God to settle their faith upon,
and to believe that God could not do it, or that it repugneth the wisdom,
providence, and eternal virtue, or the humanity of Jesus Christ, yea the
nature of a simple body only. But concerning all that, the Ministers do trust
in their own presumption, and particular revelation, without one only passage
of scripture, whereupon they might stay their opinion. Contrariwise, have the
Doctors founded their faith (not on the power of God only, to make one body in
diverse places, but to believe the deed, and that God has so willed) on the
holy scripture: as in their Resolution is contained: with the passages of
ancient Fathers, which they to this end have alleged. Which are so plain,
that the Ministers cannot justly but affirm the same. And their starting holes
shall be co^uinced by the simple reading of the books.

For all the rest of the Ministers resolution (where are mighty injuries,
Impostures, and slanders against the Doctors) they answer nothing: having
regard to the Ministers manner of dealing. And the Doctors also do well
understand, that it should be lost labor to teach the Ministers: who more
esteem their own particular revelation, for their whole instruction, then all
the doctrine and remonstrance of the Church universal, and all Christians
together. And freely do the Doctors pardon all the injuries they have done
them, as people void of sound sense, and without judgment: which thing they
declare, by their manner of dealing.

An objection of the Supper by the Doctors, against the answer of the
Ministers.
WHy the Doctors in the beginning of the conferences have not touched the
Article of the Supper, it sufficiently appears by the first days Acts. And a
deceit it is, which the Ministers have done, in taxing them to have recoyled
from entering into that matter. For it shall be proved, as well by the offers
which the Doctors have often made, to confer by word for quicker dispatch of
the said matter: and then at more leisure to put it in writing (which the
Ministers have refused): as also by the first objections, which the Doctors
proposed touching the article of Gods omnipotency: whereby they touched the
foundations, upon which are builded the errors of the pretended reformed
religion against the real presence of the body and blood of Jesus Christ in
the holy Sacrament. And shall moreover be verified, in that the Doctors have
objected to the Ministers some arguments against their Supper, to make them
enter into the same. Unto which they have nothing answered: or so impertinently
(at the least) as one may judge by the reading of their answer, that they fled
the Lists: as yet also they do, by their last writing: hiding as much as they
possibly can, what they think of the Supper: albeit they have been admonished
to answer thereunto plainly and to purpose. Whether the Doctors or the
Ministers retire, shall be seen by effect: For albeit the Ministers will not
answer, the Doctors will not leave to advise them thereof, and to manifest to
all the world, the intolerable errors which be in the Supper, and in all the
doctrine of the Ministers: Who being demanded, dare not confess and avouch
by writing, what has been written by the inuenters of their Supper.

Now to begin to speak thereof, the Ministrrs do maintain it to be celebrated
according to the ordinances of Jesus Christ, and after the fashion which the
Apostles used, and all the Primitive Church whiles it flourished, and abode in
it purity. Whereupon the Doctors demand, how long the Ministers esteem the
doctrine of the Supper to abide in it purity? And whether the Church were not
then as pure in the doctrine of all the other articles, as of this?
Furthermore, whether since that time, there is not some place in the world,
where the true doctrine of the Supper, and of other Articles, have been
retained and conserved: and whether such doctrine has ever continued without
interruption? and in what place? and by whom has it been preached and set
forth, and from age to age? The Doctors desire the Ministers to make
declaration thereof, for that it much imports. For as much as before Calvin
put forth his Catechism, there was no memory, that such doctrine as he
taught, had been held in any Region; and the Supper was not celebrated after
the fashion and manner as it is celebrated in the Church, called Reformed.

The Doctors would willingly cheer up the Ministers, who are much disquieted
in their writing, because the Doctors have said, that their Supper differs
not from a common banquet, except in that it is worse: as being profane and
polluted.

To meet wherwithall, the Ministers have made a great narration of the whole
action of their Supper: and by fair shows, which have a form of all
godliness, they endeavor to make it very commendable, and to cover a new
nothing between two platters. And contrariwise, that they may tread under
foot and abase the thrise*precious sacrifice of the body and blood of Jesus
Christ in the Mass, by renting in pieces some show of him: as if they were
used without reason or signification, which the Ministers understand not, or
make semblance not to understand. But things ought not to be prised and
esteemed by their shows, but according to their value, nature, and truth.

Moreover, the Ministers should foresee, that all the Sects which be now in
the world against the Church Catholic, for the act of the holy Sacrament, do
use at the least, as fair show as they. And were they thereof asked, there is
not any which would not enforce himself, to prove, that it approaches nearer
to Jesus Christ and his Apostles, and the Primitive Church, then the pretended
reformed Religion does. Concerning all which, the Doctors refer them to the
writings of the Lutherans, Zuinglianists, Anabaptists, Trinitaries, Master
Alasco, and such like.

For unreasonable it is by such fair deceits, to prefer the Supper of the
Ministers, to other Sects: and to judge it good, holy, unpolluted, and
according to the word of God: but to repute it rather polluted, and defiled
with impiety: for as much as it cloaketh a lie in stead of truth, and gives
the show of piety, to impiety and falsehood.

Also the Doctors have not dispraised the Supper of the Ministers, for the
praises therein given to God, or for the confession they there make of their
sins: or the preaching (if it contained the truth), or for other preparation.
But therefore did they say it was detestable, because, against the ordinance of
Jesus Christ, it contained not, but common bread and wine: and yet that they
attributed unto it some spiritual effect, and other fair pretext of
godliness. The which is an abominable thing, and invention of Satan, who
endeavors by such manner of Supper, to abolish and extinguish the true Supper,
according to the institution of Jesus Christ, and to deprive the faithful of
the fruit, and verity of the same Supper: in causing them to give common
bread only, instead of the body and blood of our savior Jesus Christ. The
Doctors could as well recyte the evil shows, as the Ministers do recyte the
good, which be in their Supper: as the secrets, the new enterprises practiced
under color and shadow of assemblies made in their said Supper. But to the
end the Ministers reproach not the Doctors, that Priests spoke of arms, of
contributions, etc. they pass it over with silence, and refer them to the
thing it self: and will content themselves to declare some causes, whereby they
maintain, that there is no truth in the same Supper, according to the
institution of Jesus Christ: which are such as follow.

That in the Supper of the Ministers, and their like, no consecration can be
made of the matter of bread and wine which are there proposed. And that for
this cause, there is not in the same matter any change made, be it before, or
in, or after the use. And by consequence that the bread and wine in such a
Supper, cannot be but common. That no consideration is made in their Supper:
hereby appears, first, that it belongs not to all persons, to consecrate
bread and wine in the Supper: but only to those that by imposition of the
Pastors and Bishops hands, are lawfully ordained according to the succession
from the Apostles time, even unto us. Now certain it is, that the most part of
the Ministers of the Church, called Reformed, be not ordained by the laying on
of the Pastors hands, who have the power by succession from one to an other
since the Apostles. Whereof we must conclude, that such Ministers usurping the
office which pertains not to them, cannot make any consecration, and give not
by consequence but common bread and wine. Which article shall be spoken of,
when we shall entreat of the sacrifice and Priesthood. Secondly, to make
consecration of the bread and wine, it suffices not that the person be fit to
consecrate the matter: but also it is necessary, that the lawful Minister by a
certain mean, do make the consecration: to wit, by blessing, and pronouncing
of certain words over the matter proposed; even as Jesus Christ has first
observed it. And because the Ministers (albeit they were lawfully ordained, and
that they had authority and power to consecrate) use not the blessing and
pronuntiation of certain words over the bread and wine, (withstanding that
which Jesus Christ first did, and then ordained to his Apostles and their
successors so to do) they cannot take any consecration of the bread and wine,
and that in them any change happens. Whereof it follows, that they differ
not from common bread and wine, and that such a feast and banquet is but
common. And that it is blasphemy to attribute unto it, the name of Christ's
Supper. Behold, why partly the Doctors have said, that the Supper of the
Ministers is a profane and polluted banquet.

The Doctors admonish the Ministers to answer to purpose and plainly, to the
demands by them proposed, which they have not done: which is the cause that
the Doctors, least they should travel in vain, have not yet willed to impugn
their answer: summoning them eftsoons to answer what is proposed to them,
without drawing back from the Conference, which (they say) they affect so
greatly. The first demand was general for all the Sacraments: to wit,
whether the Ministers did believe, that two things were essential and
necessary, to the confection of the Sacrament: namely, the matter, or element,
and the word.

The Ministers answer, that the Sacrament in it perfection considered,
consists in three things, etc. They speak indeterminately: so that one
cannot judge, whether they understand their saying of the Sacrament, which they
call the Supper only: or generally of all, as they were demanded. Although
because they allege Ireneus, one may conjecture, that they meant but of the
Sament of the Supper.

Moreover it behooves to note, that which they add (in it perfection
considered): to have always a starting hole, when speech shall be made of the
essence of the Sacrament. The Doctors require that the Ministers answer to the
question proposed generally of all the Sacraments. For there is like reason as
touching the essence of the Sacraments in general. And that they openly
declare what things be essential, and necessary to a Sacrament, to be made a
Sacrament: without speaking for the present of the perfection of a Sacrament,
containing the essence and spiritual fruits, which be not of the essence of
the Sacracrament.

To the second demand, the Ministers answer no more pertinently then to the
first. And namely where the Doctors have demanded, whether it behooued to use
certain words for the confection of a Sacrament: and what word was necessary
for the Sacrament of the Supper. The Ministers have said, that the low and
secret speaking of certain words, addressed to the elements, was not the word
necessary to the confection of a Sacrament. But they demanded not, whether it
behooued to pronounce that word, with a low, or high voice: but the
Interrogatory was, whether there be any words necessary to make the Sacrament,
that one ought to pronounce over the matter, or in administering the matter: and
that they might be such words for the Supper. And it is not sufficient to say,
that the word, by which the ordinance of Jesus Christ is declared, is the word
of the Sacrament: but it behooves to answer, in what words consists that
word, and when it must be pronounced.

As touching the sixth and principal demand, the Ministers answer not
clearly, and to purpose: but make a captious answer: by which one may conceive
what is their opinion of the presence and participatio^ of the body of Jesus
Christ in the Supper. And so temper they their saying, that there is no
Zuinglian, nor Almanists, which confesses not thereof as much, or more then
they: To wit, that they are conjoined to our Lord Jesus Christ, and that they
possess him in the power of their faith, and by the operation of his holy
spirit, to be made flesh of his flesh, and bones of his bones, etc. But this
is far off from the demand: to wit, whether the faithful in the Supper
receive into their souls, besides all the graces spiritual (among which is
the communication with our Lord Jesus Christ) his true body and blood, really,
truly, and substantially? And whether the Ministers in the Supper make not
distinction of the substance contained and perceived in the Sacrament, with the
fruits thereof proceeding? And for more brevity, the Doctors demand, whether
the Ministers do receive, and approve, that which Calvin has written of the
Supper, and of that they receive thereof in his Catechism, Institution, and
other books.

As touching the seventh demand, the Ministers have not understood what has
been proposed to them, touching the Concomitance: For they have taken it, as
if one demanded, whether it were lawful to receive the Sacrament under one
only kind or no. Which was not as then put in question. But such a
difficulty was proposed to them: namely, whether in their Supper, when one
has received the bread, before he receive the wine, he do participate of the
true body of Jesus Christ, without he be partaker of his blood, until he
have taken the wine: or having eaten the bread, whether he has received the
body and blood, before he take the Cup? To which demands, to avoid vain
blotting of paper, the Doctors admonish the Ministers to answer, without
wandering, and to render open confession of their faith. And that the Doctors
may know, what doctrine they ought to impugn or approve.

As touching the articles of the Mass, the Doctors reserve them to their
proper place: which is of the sacrifice of the body and blood of Jesus Christ.
After it shall be known and proved that they be present in the Supper and holy
Sacrament.

The fourth of August, the year above said.
The Ministers answer to the writing of the Doctors, sent unto them by my Lord
the Duke de Niuernois, the morning, being 7. of August. 1566.
THe Ministers leaving aside whatsoever is superfluous, and from the purpose in
the writing of the Doctors, as be their repetitions and rehea^salls:
dissembling also their injuries and accustomed scoffings, (by which they much
more prove the hate they bear to the truth, and the Ministers, then the
questions by them propounded) will only stay on the points which seem to
require some answer.

The Ministers first say, that they taxed not the Doctors to have restrained
the Church in a certain place, but to a certain company, and to the
traditions given, followed, and by the same approved. And they magnify God,
that the Doctors do now acknowledge the Catholic Church to stretch through
the world: and that it is not enclosed in the bounds and limits of the
authority, and traditions of the Roman Church: which the Ministers confess
to have been then much esteemed of the ancient Fathers, when errors, abuses,
and vices, did not as yet there abound, as since they do. But now that all
things almost are there corrupted, as well in manners, as in doctrine: and that
nothing is there more odious, then the word, the light, the truth, and the
power of God. The Ministers do say: that as the state of the same Church has
been changed, so ought to be also the esteem and reputation in which it
has been: adding thereunto, that in whatsoever degree of honor she has been
formerly lifted, she has not nevertheless been esteemed by the Fathers for
the universal Church, nor her Bishop for universal Bishop: As by that which
Saint Jerome wrote thereof to Euagrius: and by that which concerning the same,
was determined in one of the Cone. 3. C. 26.
Counsels of Carthage, appears.

And as touching the reformed Church in France, the Ministers do not say, that
it is the universal and Catholic Church, but only a member of the same: And
that it has it foundation, not upon the opinion or authority of men: but upon
the doctrine and writings of the Prophets and Apostles. Moreover, as touching
the protestations of Charity and zeal, whereby the Doctors fear to be
forced unto Inuectiues and pursuites which they make against the Ministers, and
other the faithful, by the example (as they say) of Saint Augustine, and other
Bishops, which in time past solicited the Magistrates against the Donatists:
their proceedings and fashion which they have, and still do use toward the
said Ministers, and faithful, do evidently declare, that with false tokens
they shroud themselves by these examples. For as much as the Catholics, whom
they allege, exhorted the Magistrate to use all moderation and mildn^sse
toward the Donatists and other heretics; and to assay all means to reduce
them, before they came to the rygor of pains and judgment. And further, they
endeavored to contain and repress the fury of the people, and to hinder their
open violence upon them. Whereas they contrariwise, do stir up against the
Ministers, the people and Magistrates, by slander and false imputations* and
by all other fashions and means they can invent for this purpose.

Touching the Omnipotency of God, and the definition thereof, which the
Ministers have proposed, drawn and extracted out of the books of Saint
Augustine: the Doctors in their last writing, produce no new thing, to cause
them leave the ^ame. For that they allege of the Angels, which can do
whatsoever they will, and by that means should be almighty as well as God (if
the abouesayd definition of his Omnipotency had place) is an example from the
purpose, and which cannot prove that there is in the Angels any such power, as
in God. For certain it is, that their will and power depends elsewhere, and
that God rules over them, to change, suspend and hinder them as he pleases,
and as he can do in all other creatures. Which none can say of God, without
blasphemy. Howsoever it be, If the Doctors will reprove the definition of Gods
Omnipotency proposed by the Ministers, they deal not with them, but with S.
Augustine: For as much as the said definition was word for word copied out of
his writings.

The Ministers do marvel, that after they had so amply declared to the
Doctors, what they thought of Gods Omnipotency, and showed, that it stretched
not indifferently to all things which men in their foolish fantasies, may
conceive or imagine: the Doctors will eftsoons harp on that string, alleging
that God can do wisely, what fools do foolishly imagine. For manifest it is,
that fools can imagine many things which are impossible to God. As for
example, that there is no God. Psalm. 14. and 53. That he is corporeal, as
thought the Anthropomorphites. That the world is eternal: as thought the
Peripatetiques. That there was two beginnings: as taught the Manichees. All
which things, can no way without blasphemy be attributed to the Omnipotency
of God. But that which more contenteth the Ministers, is, that our Masters,
after so long and sharp combat in this Article, and so often crying
blasphemy, when the said Ministers proposed the truth thereof, are constrained
in the end to accord with them, and follow the interpretation and restraint
which the Ministers themselves had given touching the Omnipotency of God: as it
appears by a sentence of their last writing, whereof the words are such. The
Doctors say: That all things imaginable to man, are possible to be done with
God, without any exception: but of those things which imply contradiction, to
be, and not to be. What reason then is there, that for the things (whereof the
Ministers and Doctors agree, that they ought to be excepted out of Gods
omnipotency) the Ministers in excepting them, be held for blasphemers, and not
the Doctors, which say and confess the selfsame thing? Now this proposition
that a natural body (yea that of Jesus Christ) is in diverse places at one
selfsame instant, is in the rank of things which imply contradictio^: as it
has bin already sufficiently proved. Therefore the Ministers conclude, that the
omnipotency of God cannot be referred and extended thereunto.

The Doctors do afterward charge the Ministers with four horrible
blasphemies (as they say) grounding themselves upon that which the Ministers in
defending that one body could not be diverse places at one instant) have said,
that it repugned the truth, wisdom, and omnipotency of God. Which thing, the
said Doctors find so strange, and far from reason, that they would not
vouchsafe to stay to refute it: thinking it was unworthy of answer, and that
it sufficed to have recyted the same. Whereunto the Ministers answer* that it
is a very easy and ready mean, to rid them speedily of all the difficulties
wherein they find themselves wrapped, to say, that it is a blasphemy, and
unworthy of answer.

The Doctors yet make instance to the Ministers, and say: that it behooves
them to show by the word of God, that one body cannot be in diverse places at
one instant. Whereunto the Ministers ef^soones answer; that it is for the
Doctors to prove the contrary by one text of scripture: to wit, that one body
may be in diverse places at one selfsame instant: seeing that they are
proponents in this Conference, and the Ministers respondents: and that
nevertheless, they have heretofore showed them by lively reasons, drawn from
the scripture, and the essential proprieties of God, from. the nature of
bodies, and the authorities of Fathers: that the thing in question was wholly
impossible.

And touching the argument which they thus make, God can change the order which
he has established in nature. Therefore can he also cause that one body at one
instant be in many places. The Ministers deny the consequence, and yield
reason thereof: for as much as such a matter should not only change the order,
but should wrap up also a contradiction: the which, by the confession of the
Doctors themselves, is excepted out the omnipotency of God. The Doctors in the
article following, do but reproach the Ministers, for they confound and obscure
what had been clearly proposed by the Ministers, in their last writing. By
means whereof, let them make (if they will) more large an answer, and expound
themselves better. Where the Doctors accuse the Ministers to have maliciously
concealed the word [place] in the matter of circumscription of a measured body:
the Ministers say, that it was not needful to add that word expressly there.
For as much as there is no man so ignorant, who (having understood that a body
is circumscript) but does presently infer, that then it is comprised in a
place certain.

As touching the Camel, if they be not contented with that already said
thereof, then let them read what Saint Jerome has thereof written, in his
first book against the Pelagians: who expounding the words of Jesus Christ,
says as follows. In this has the Lord not said, that it may be done: but
has compared one impossibility with an other. For as a Camel cannot enter
through the eye of a needle: so the rich shall not enter into the Kingdom of
heaven. Now if thou can show that the rich man there enters, it will also
follow, that the Camel may pass through the eye of a needle. And allege not
unto me Abraham, and the others, which we read in the old Testament to have
been rich, and which being such, were entered into the kingdom of heaven,
because they (well using their riches, and employing them to good works) have
by that mean ceased to be rich. Behold what S. Jerome writes. The^, as it is
necessary (after the saying of S. Jerome) that for the salvation of the rich
man, there be a mutation and changing in his heart; yea and that he cease to
be rich, to the end he may enter into the kingdom of heaven: so also it
behooves, that there be a change in the Camel, and that he cease to be such:
that he may be made to pass through the eye of a needle.

As touching the article following, the Ministers say, that by the grace of
God, they may discern the light from darkness, and falsehood from truth. Which
is the cause, that they cannot approve, neither the arguments, nor conclusions
of the Doctors, touching the being of one body in many places at one instant:
being well assured by good and certain testimonies of the scripture, that all
whatsoever the Doctors will prove, not elsewhere proceeds, then from the
spirit of error and falsehood. Which will retain by that mean, the impiety and
Idolatry, which he has formerly established in the world, to the ruin
almost of all Christendom.

As touching the verb [Dierchesthai] the Doctors find themselves much hindered
to save their penetration: which they can no way found upon the proper
signification of that word: as has been showed them by the passages produced
unto them, not upon any authority of the scripture.

To that which the Doctors allege (to prove that faith comes in part of our
selves, and not wholly of God) that Nemo credit nisivole^s, (to wit, that none
believes but willingly) the Ministers answer: that (under our Masters
correction) it is naught to the purpose: for as much as this will and consent
is of God: who works in the faithful, both the will and the deed. Which
thing S. Augustine in one of his Epistles, very well teaches, where he says:
That when God calls men to salvation, he finds not in them any good will at
all: but that he works and creates it in their hearts, if he will find it
there. And that of S. Paul which the Doctors allege, that we are coworkers
with God, serves nothing for their purpose: For the Apostle speaks not there
but of the Ministry. And meant no other thing, then what he writes thereof
more clearly in the 2. to the Corinths, in these words: 2. Cor. 5.
We are Ambassadors for Christ: as if God exhorted by us. And touching that
which they add, that none of all the ancient Doctors ever taught, that one
body could not be in diverse places at one selfsame time: The Ministers say
yea. As they have showed in their former writings, where the passages of S.
Augustine, Ad Dardanum: and in the 30. tract upon S. John, and others have been
alleged.

The Ministers answer not but to two points only, of all that the Doctors
have touched in their advertisement. The first is, that their Sermons, their
writings, their discipline observed in their Churches, the censures which they
pass for scandalous offenses therein committed, the care which they, and the
Superintendents have, to discover, reprove and correct them: the pain which
they take to reform whatsoever is disordered, and the public prayers, which
in all places they make to these ends: defend them with all good people: and
justify them against the slanders of the Doctors. The second is, that the
Doctors in their said advertisement are deceived, in that they have said, that
Abraham doubted of the promise. Which is wholly contrary to that which the
Apostle in the 4. of the Romans thereof writes. Where, in these proper terms
he says: And he nothign doubted of the promise of God through unbelief, but
was strengthened in the faith, and gave glory unto God.

For answer to the Doctors last Objection, made (as they say) against the
answer given by the Ministers to their former Question, upon the matter of
the Supper* Although the said Doctors, do faigne not any way to affect delaie
in the Conference and Dispute of the Supper, and of the Mass: yet can they not
persuade any person of any judgment, that they have not hitherto retired, and
do yet draw back from entering thereinto. For notwithstanding some requests
presented by Madame de Buillon and the Ministers, some declaration which my
Lord the Duke of Niuernois has made therevppon, of his will and desire to
bring them thereunto: yet by all the means aboue-sayd, has it not been
possible to obtain of them, that (all other things set apart) they would in
good earnest, confer with the Ministers of the two points aforesaid.

Which thing the Ministers perceiving, and not desiring to depart from them,
without conference first had thereof: have often protested to dispute no more
with them, till these two Articles were first decyded and resolved. And to this
end proposed certain Theses by order and good method, as well of the one as
of the other: to the end they should well advise what in the said Theses, they
would gainsay and withstand.

The Doctors having dissembled the same, in stead of pursuing of them, do
propose other frivolous and unprofitable questions, taken and drawn from their
School divinity.

And although the Ministers had just occasion to grieve, that their Theses were
omitted by the Doctors: nevertheless, to the end they should have no more
shadow nor color of delaie, the Ministers have also answered to their last
questions. But now in stead of following their Answers, and impugning of them,
if any way they could: they propose again new questions, no less absurd and
frivolous then the former. Whereby each one may evidently know their
hypocrisy and dissimulation. And that pretending a willingness to confer of
the two foresaid points, they do in the mean time, what in them possibly
lies, to draw them from the Conference thereof: to the end, it may break
off, before that this matter be cleared. By means whereof, the Ministers for
conclusion, and resolution of all the Conference, determine by Gods grace, to
couch briefly by writing, and in the clearest manner they can, all what God
has taught them concerning the same; and what they have learned thereof by his
word: as well to satisfy the debt and bond which they have to God, and his
honor, to obey my Lord of Neuers, and Madame de Buillon: as lastly, for the
contentment and edification of the whole Church.

The Conclusion and resolution of the points, as well of the Supper, as of the
Mass, containing a declaration of that which the Ministers believe concerning
the same: and teach thereof in their Church by the word of God.
THe end and chief felicity of men, is to Psalm. 37. 28.
be conjoined with God, and to abide in him: For as much as it is the only mean
by which all their desires can be contented and satisfied: and by the which
also, their minds and hearts can be plainly freed and delivered, from the hard
and cruel bondage of sin, and of all the passions, greedy desires, fears
and distrusts, which do assail 1. Cor. 13*
them. Which was the cause, why S. Paul places perfect beatitude, and entire
repose of the blessed in this: that God 2. Cor. 6.
is all in all in them. But for as much as men be naturally corrupt and wicked,
and contrariwise God in all perfection, is pure and holy: the difficulty is to
know and choose the mean, by which they may approach unto him. Seeing that
there is no society between light and darkness, nor any communion between
righteousness and unrighteousness. In them cannot this mean be found: by
reason, that of themselves they are wholly unable, and vncaple to relieve
themselves from the misery and curse, into which they be cast headlong.

So that, being blind of understanding, they cannot know their own good: nor
seek it, being rebels and hearthardened: and therefore of necessity must they
go out of themselves, and seek the above said mean in Jesus Christ: who was
given them of the Father, to be their righteousness, 1. Cor. 1. John. 14.
Ephesians. 3.
wisdom, sanctification, redemption, way, life, and truth. Then rests it now
to know, how they may be united and conjoined with him. The Apostle does
teach us, that the same is done by faith, by which Jesus Christ dwells in our
hearts, and abides in us: so John. 17.
that he and we are made one, and he and his Father are one.

Now, there are two principal causes of this faith, the one outward, and the
other inward. The inward is the holy Ghost, who is called the spirit of faith:
for as much as he is 2. Cor. 4. 13.
the Author thereof, and creates and brings it forth in the hearts of men:
mollifying and disposing them to receive with all obedience, the word and
promise of God, which is preached unto them by the faithful stewards, and
Ministers of the same.

Romans 10.
Which word, is the outward cause of faith. And as the same faith grows, and
rises by degrees, even so does the union which we have with Jesus Christ, and
by his means with God: until (as says S. Paul) we all meet together in
Ephesians. 4.
the unity of faith, and knowledge of the son of God, unto a perfect man, and
unto the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ.

The increase of faith is wrought by the working and power of the holy spirit,
who was the first beginning and author thereof: and afterward, by the
continuance of the word purely preached and denounced: and finally by the
lawful use of the Sacraments, ordained as seals for the certainty and
confirmation of faith, and assurance we have of the foresaid conjunction with
God through Jesus Christ, and of the participation of all the good things,
grauntes, gifts, graces, and blessings, which by his favor are purchased and
gotten for us. As of the remission of sin, of our regeneration, of the
mortification of the flesh, and the lusts thereof. To signify which things,
and more amply assure us of the exhibition and enjoying of the same, Baptism
was ordained of God: to the end, that in the water which is powered upon our
bodies, and in the promise of God which is thereunto added, we may behold (as
it were with our eyes) the invisible grace which God vouchsafes us, to wash
and cleanse us from our spiritual filthiness, and to fanctifie us, and make
us new creatures: As also to further assure us always of life eternal, and
make us grow in the hope we have thereof, by the participation of the flesh
of Jesus Christ, crucified for our redemption, and of his blood, shead for
remission of our sins: the bread and the wine are distributed unto us in the
Supper, by the ordinance of Jesus Christ.

But as the Ministers acknowledge, that there is a union, and sacramental
conjunction between the outward sign, and thing thereby signified: so (say
they) on the other side, that between them two, there is such a distinction,
that the one ought never to be confounded with the other: nor the spiritual
thing in such sort fastened to the corporal, (which represents the same)
that the one without the other, cannot be received: or that the two by
necessity be always inseperably conjoined together. Whereof it follows,
that they err, which will have the bread in the Supper to be changed into
the substance of the body of Christ Jesus: And they likewise which will have
him to be conjoined, and corporally united thereunto. So that whosoever
receives and takes the signs, (be he faithful, or unfaithful) takes and
receives forthwith the thing by them signified. Which error, with the most
part of others happening in this matter, proceeds of not well comprehending
nor conceiving what it is to eat the body, and drink the blood of Jesus
Christ. Which thing ought not to be understood, in sort as corporal meats
are taken and eaten, but after a spiritual manner only: as is declared in the
sixth of Saint John: which in this consists; that Jesus Christ dwells in us,
and we in him: and is done by the faith we have in him: as teaches S.
Augustine in the 25. tract upon S. John, saying: Why preparest thou the belly,
and the tooth? believe, and thou have eaten. And in the third book and 16.
Chapter de Doctrina Christiana: where he says as follows: When Jesus Christ
says: except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye
have no life in you. It seems that he commands to commit some great
offense. It is therefore a figure, whereby we ought to understand no other
thing, but that it behooves to communicate with the passion of the Lord: and to
retain in our memory, that his flesh was crucified and wounded for us.

The eating then of the flesh and body of Jesus Christ, is no other thing, then
a straight conjunction and union we have with him: which is made by the faith
we add to his promises. Even as by the mutual promises made and received
between man and woman, the marriage is concluded, and settled between them.
And although being so conjoined, they be sometimes by some occasion separated,
and removed the one from the other, as touching their bodies, yet for all that,
do they not leave to be one flesh, and one body, by means of the society and
matrimonial familiarity which is between them. In like case, albeit that
Jesus Christ (with whom we are conjoined and united by the faith and trust
which we have in him, and his promises) be as touching his body, resident in
heaven, we yet abiding upon the earth; and that by means thereof, there is
great distance and space between him and us, as touching his body: that
nevertheless hinders us not, to be flesh of his flesh, and bones of his
bones: that he is not our head, and we his members: that he is not our
husband, and we his spowse: that we be not of one self same body: that we
be not engrafted into him, that we be not clothed with him: that we abide
not in him, as the boughs and buddes in the Vine. And there is neither
distance of times, nor places whatsoever it be: there is no difference of
times, which can hinder such a conjunction, and that the faithful eat truly
his flesh, and his blood. For as the ancient Fathers, albeit they were two or
three thousand years before Jesus Christ dyed, yet left they not to
communicate in his flesh crucified, and to eat the same spiritual meat which
we eat, and to drink the same spiritual drink which we drink. The
faithful also which are come twelve or fifteen hundred years after, leave
not, what place soever they be in, to participate (as did the Fathers) in the
same meat, and in the same drink, which they have done. And no other
difference there is between the eating of the Fathers which were before the
coming of Jesus Christ, and of them that have followed him, but the reason of
more or less: that is to say, that there is in the one, more ample and
express declaration of the good will of God toward us, then in the other.
Whence must be concluded, that from the beginning of the world unto the end,
there never was, nor shall be other conjunction between our Lord Jesus Christ
and his Church, then spiritual: that is to fay, wrought by the spirit of God.
For even as there is but one faith in the Fathers and in us, which respects
always on the one part and the other, our Lord Jesus Christ: so are we not
also otherwise conjoined with him, then they have been. As then it is so, that
the Fathers have had no other society nor communion then spiritual: It
follows thereof, that we also are not, nor can be otherwise, then spiritually
co^ioyned with him. Nevertheless it is not said, that we and the Fathers are
not flesh of his flesh, and bones of his bones: and that all together, do not
partake as well in his humanity, as in his divinity. But that which we say
is: that all this participation which we have in him, is by the operation and
virtue of the holy Ghost: which thing, Christ Jesus in S. John, speaking of the
mean of this conjunction, teaches clearly, when he says: The Ioh. 6. 1. Cor.
10.
things which I speak unto you, are spirit and life. And S. Paul also, when
he says: Our fathers did eat the same spiritual meat, and drank the same
spiritual drink. Now when we speak of this spiritual eating, common to us,
and to the Fathers: it must not therefore be thought, that we reject the holy
Supper of the Lord, or any way think that the same use of bread and wine is
superfluous: no more then the use of the water in Baptism. For our Lord
knowing the blockishnesse of our understandings, and the infirmity and
weakness of our hearts, and through the pity he has of us, willing to
help and remedy the same: has not contented to have left us the ministry
of his word, to assure us of the participation which we have in his flesh, and
in his blood, and in all the good things thereon depending: but has also
willed to add thereunto, the signs of bread and wine, which he has as seals
to his word, to seal in our hearts, by the use of the same, the faith we have
of the foresaid conjunction by his word. So that it sufficed him not to have
contracted a covenant with Abraham, by the word and promise which he made unto
him: but added moreover thereunto the sign of Circumcision, as a seal, for
more ample confirmation and assurance of the said covenant.

To the end then, that each one may understand what is the Supper of the Lord,
and what the Ministers do thereof believe and teach: it is meet to consider
and acknowledge in the same, three things. First the ordinance of the Lord
contained in his word, and declared by his Ministry, according to his
commandment: by which this holy cerimony has been ordained and established
in the Church, for the edification and entertaining of the members thereof:
which thing must be diligently observed, to have it in that honor and
reverence as appertains; and not to place it in the rank of other
ceremonies, which have no foundation nor reason to authorize them, but the
only will and tradition of men. Nevertheless heed must be taken, that by the
institution, and ordinance, whereof we make mention, we understand not, a
certain pronuntiation of words, or any virtue which is hidden in the same: as
do the Priests of the Roman Church: who by ignorance and superstitious opinion
which they have, think to have consecrated, and transubstantiated the bread
and wine in the Mass, by the virtue of five words: Hoc est enim Corpus meum.
For this is my body, breathed and pronounced over the Elements. Wherein they
are greatly deceived and abused: for as much as the word which is the formal
cause of the Sacrament, is not a word simply said and uttered, but a
declaration of the institution and ordinance of God, made by the Minister,
according to his commandment: and a preaching of the death of Jesus Christ,
and of the fruit thereof: by which, the hearts of the hearers are lifted up
unto the contemplation, and meditation of his benefit, and their faith stirred
up and inflamed in his love: and where the same shall not thus be done, it must
not be thought, that the Elements be Sacraments. As S. Augustine in the 80.
Tract upon Saint John, in these terms teaches: Whence comes this virtue to
the water, that in touching the body, it washes the heart, saving that it is
done by the word: not because it is pronounced, but because it is believed?

This word is the word of the faith which we preach. Romans 10. 9.
This (says the Apostle) to wit: If we confess with our mouth, that Jesus is
the Lord, and believe in our heart, that God raised him from the dead, we
shall be saved. And continuing his speech, he adds in the end these proper
words: to wit, This word of faith which we preach, is that (doubtless) by
which baptism is consecrated, to the end it might wash us.

Of this, as before, do the Ministers infer two things. The one is, that the
word of consecration is not (as is said) a simple pronuntiation, but a public
and manifest declaration of the institution and ordinance, and of the whole
mystery of the death of Jesus Christ. The other, that the signs and Elements
consecrated, are not changed as touching their nature and substance: but only
as touching the use and signification: and that only, during the action
wherein they do serve. For to consecrate the signs (as the water in Baptism,
and the bread and wine in the Supper) is no other thing, then to depute and
make them serve to an holy and sacred use, by the public declaration of the
ordinance of God, made to this end: and not to change them as touching their
nature and substance. The which (vanishing away, and being abolished) there
should remain no more of the sign, nor (consequently) of the Sacrament. Even
so then, as the water in baptism, after consecration, abides water, without
that the nature or substance thereof in ought changes or alters: So also
the bread and wine in the Supper, remain as touching their substance, such
after consecration, as they were before: else should there not be Analogy,
nor mutual agreement between the sign, and the thing signified. For what
comparison or conformity is there between the accidents of bread, and the
truth of the body of Jesus Christ? Seeing that the accidents of bread, as the
whiteness and roundnesse, destitute of their substance, (as the Sophisters do
falsely imagine) could not nourish, nor sustain the body: and by that mean,
should not be proper to signify, that the flesh and blood of Jesus Christ do
nourish and sustain our souls.

This then must be holden for a thing resolved, that the bread and the wine
abide in their substance: which thing is clearly proved by that which Jesus
Christ (speaking of that he given his Disciples to drink in the Supper)
calls it, namely: fruit of the Vine. Which cannot Math. 26.
be applied to accidents, but ought necessarily to be understood of wine in it
proper substance. Also 1. Cor. 21.
by that which Saint Paul says: calling the Elements of the Supper three
several times bread and wine: yea after they have been consecrated. Also by
that which he says elsewhere: We which are many, are one bread 1. Cor. 10.
and one body: for as much as we are all partakers of one selfsame bread.
For there he will teach us by the comparison of bread and wine, he proposes
unto us, that as it is composed of many grains, so pasted and mingled
together, that one cannot distinguish nor separate one from an other: So also
ought all the faithful in the Church to be so conjoined and united together in
one selfsame body, that it seems and appears, they are members one of an
other. Now very foolish and from the purpose should this comparison be, if the
bread which we eat in the Supper, and upon which this comparison is founded,
were not true bread. Also by that which Gelacius Bishop of Rome, writing
against Eutiches says: The Sacraments (says he) which we take, is a thing
divine: and nevertheless does it not cease to be substance and nature of
bread and wine. Also by that which writes Theodoret in his first Dialogue, and
in these proper terms: The Lord has honored with the name of his body and of
his blood, the visible signs which do represent them: nevertheless without
changing the nature of them, but only adding grace to nature. The same Author
in the second Dialogue, speaking likewise of the bread and wine, which are
distributed in the Supper, says as follows: After sanctification these
mystical signs depart not from their nature: for they abide in their proper
substance, form, and figure. By means whereof, one sees and handles them
after consecration, nor more nor less then he did before. Also by that which
says S. John Chrysostom, writing to the Monk Cesarius, whose words are such.
In the Supper we call that which is presented bread, before it be sanctified:
and after sanctification thereof, by the divine grace, and mean of the
Minister, it has no more the name bread, but of the body of the Lord:
nevertheless, the nature of the bread is there still remaining.

By the passages aforesaid, as well of the holy scripture, as of the ancient
Doctors, and others, which might be yet alleged for this purpose, it
appears, that the bread and wine in the Supper abide always (as has been
said) in their proper nature and substance, as well after consecration, as
before. And it must not be doubted, that the faith of the ancient Church has
not ever been such: and that transubstantiation was not settled nor holden in
the Roman Church for an Article of faith, until the time of Innocent the
third.

To gainesay and reject whatsoever has been said touching the nature and
substance of signs, which remain after consecration, the adversaries of this
doctrine do ordinarily allege, that which Jesus Christ says, speaking of the
bread in the institution of the Supper: Take eat, this is my body: And resting
upon the natural, and proper signification of the words, they obstinately
defend, that the substance of bread vanishes in the consecration: and that
there remains no other substance, but that of the body of Jesus Christ. The
reason thereof is, because they observe not the figures and manner of speaking;
which be ordinary and usual in the holy scripture, always, and as often as
the matter of the Saments is questionable. For then the name of the things
signified, is ordinarily attributed to the signs, which do signify and
represent them: as the name of a covenant is attributed Genesis 17. Exodus 12.
to Circumcision: because it was deputed to signify and confirm the same.

Tit. 3.
The Lamb, for like reason, is called the Passover: and Baptism, the washing
of regeneration: not because they be like and semblable things, as the signs
and mysteries signified by them: but for the conformity that is between them,
the signs (as says Saint Augustine) take oftentimes Epist. 23.
the name of the things which they represent. The error then comes, because
they take and understand the fashions and manners of figurative speeches, as if
they were proper and natural.

Now that this kind of speaking: Take ye, and eat ye, This is my body, is
figurative, it appears by that which our Lord Jesus Christ adds after the
Cup, saying: This Cup is the new Testament in my blood, which is shead for you.
Where he calls the Cup, Testament, and new Covenant in his blood. Wherein it
behooves necessarily to confess, that there is a figure, and that without the
same, they cannot well understand, nor fitly interpret the said passages: For
it is a thing manifest, that a covenant (which is a contract and bargain
between parties, made and conceived under a certain promise and word) is not
wine. And nevertheless it is so called by figure: for as much as the wine
which is distributed in the Supper, and as the seal, by which the said
covenant is sealed, and the faith thereof confirmed. By such, and like manner,
this sentence [This is my body] which is as much to say, as this is the new
Testament in my body, which is given for you, must bevnderstood and expounded.
For as by the effusion of his blood, the new Testament was confirmed: so was it
also by the death of his body. And a better Interpreter of the words of Jesus
Christ, then Jesus Christ himself, must not be sought for. For certain it
is, that what he has said of the Cup, is as it were a glass, and clear and
familiar exposition of that he had more briefly and obscurely said of the
bread. This also is proved by that which S. 1. Cor. 10.
Paul says: The bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of
Christ? which is a manner of figurative speech. For as much as (to speak and
understand properly) the bread, which is a corporeal and material thing, is
not the Communion which we have in the body of Jesus Christ, which is a
spiritual and invisible thing. And nevertheless it is so called, because it
is the sign thereof, to represent it unto us, and to assure us of the same. As
commonly we call the signed and sealed Letter, which contains the declaration
of the last will of a man, his Testament: although it be not his Testament, but
is properly the declaration, which he has verbally made of his said will. But
it is so called, because it is the instrument and testimony thereof.

Now, as the scripture and ancient Fathers, as well to recommend and advance
the dignity of the signs, and to hinder thereby the contempt of them: as for
the agreement and likeness which is between the signs, and the thing
signified, have sometimes attributed the name of the same things signified, to
the signs which represent them: and speaking of signs, have used figurative
speeches. At some other times also have they spoken of them properly, to take
away all occasion of abuse thereof, and to hinder that in taking the signs
without any distinction, for the things by them signified, men should attribute
to them the effects, which appertain not but to the things only which they
signify. Of these two diverse reasons, and manners of speaking, examples there
are, as well in the scriptures, as in the ancient Fathers. Of the first, we
have an example in Circumcision, when it is called by figure a Covenant. Genesis
17. 13. And of the second, is there likewise an example in the 11. verse of the
same Chapter: where Circumcision is properly called a sign of the Covenant.
Another example there is, of the first manner of speaking which is figurative,
in Exodus 12. 11. where the Lamb is called the Passeo-uer of the Lord. And of
the second manner of speaking which is proper, the example i^ in the same
Chapter and 3. verse, where the blood of the lamb is named a sign. In like
manner and sort, when in the scripture mention is made of the Supper, sometimes
is it there spoken of bread by figure. As when it is called the body of Jesus
Christ: or the Communion of the body, as before has been said: and sometimes
is it also taken properly, as 1. Cor. 11.
when it said: Whosoever shall eat of this bread. Also, Let every man then
prove himself, and so eat of this bread. The like diversity in two manners
of speaking, is oftentimes found among the ancient Fathers, in the matter of
the Supper: For sometimes they speak of bread by figure, calling it the body
of Jesus Christ. As Saint Ciprian, when Sermon: de Caen^ dom.

Epist. ad Rustic. Hom. 6. ad pop. Antioch.

Hom. 45. in John. Hom. 27. in 1. Cor. Hom. de Encaenijs. 5 Hom. 26.


he says: that the body of the Lord is taken with filthy hands, and his
blood drunk with a profane and polluted mouth. And when he says elsewhere
that we suck his blood, and fasten our tongues in the wounds of our Redeemer.
And S. Jerome, when he says: that Euxuperius Bishop of Tholoze, bare the body
of our Lord in a little Oziar Pannyer, and his blood in a Glass. Saint
Chrysostom also, when he writes: that Jesus Christ does not only suffer
himself to be seen, but also to be touched and eaten: and that the toothe be
fastened in his flesh, and touched with the tongue. And Saint Augustine: With
what care take we heed, when the body of Jesus Christ is administered unto us,
that nothing thereof fall from our hands to the earth.

All which, with their semblable Sentences, are figurative: and there is no
doubt, but to well and fitly interpret them, they that read them ought to be
taught, that in the same, the name of the thing signified, is applied to the
signs which do signify the same: which thing may easily be gathered out of
other sentences, and passages of the said Ancients: where speaking properly of
the bread and wine, distributed in the Supper: they call them signs Lib. 4.
Cont. Marcion. Lib. 2. Epist. 3.
and figures. As Tertullian: Jesus Christ (says he) took bread, gave it to
his Disciples* and made his body: when he says: This is my body: that is to
say, a figure of my body. And Ciprian: by the wine, is showed the blood of
Christ. Also in the Sermon which he made of the Supper of the Lord: As often
as we do this, we whet not the teeth to byte, but we break and distribute
the holy bread in true faith: By the which we distinguish the divine and
humane matter. Also in the Sermon he made de Chrismate; The Lord has given
with his own hands bread and wine upon the table, on which he made his last
meal with his Disciples: but upon the Cross, he gave unto the soldiers, his
body to be wounded, to the end he might so much the more deeply imprint the
truth in his Disciples: and that they should expound to the people, how the
bread and wine were his body and blood: and how the Sacrament agreeeth with the
thing, for the which it was instituted. And also how a Sacrament is made of two
things, and therefore is named with two names, and one selfsame name is given
to that which signifies, and to that which is signified. In liturg su^ Psa. 3.
and cont Adamant. ca. 20.
And Saint Basile: We propose the figures and patterns of the sacred body and
blood of Jesus Christ. And Saint Augustine: The Lord feared not to say: This is
my body: when he gave the sign of his body. Also the Lord received Judas to
his Supper, wherein he commended and gave to his Disciples the figure of his
body. And Chap. 26. in Math.
Saint Jerome: After he had eaten the Pascall Lamb with his Disciples, he
took bread, which strengthens the heart of man, and passed to the true
Sacrament of the Passover.

To the end that as Melchisedecke had done before in his figure, he should
also represent there his true body. S. Ambrose: Lib. 4. de sacram. Chap. 5. in
Psa. 22.
This Sacrament is a figure of the true body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Chrysostom: He has prepared this table, to the end he might show us daily
the bread and wine in mystery and similitude of the body and blood of Christ.
And sometimes it happens, that one Doctor in this matter expounds an other.
As one may perceive it in the conference of two passages: the one of S.
Augustine already alleged: and the other of Tertullian, in the book De
Corona militis: where he says: We very hardly suffer any thing of our bread
and wine to fall upon the ground. And in stead of that which S. Augustine says
to the same purpose, he says: (as has before been recyted) we carefully
regard, that nothing of the body of our Lord, fall upon the ground.

Now as in diverse passages the ancient Fathers (as has bin declared) have
used the two foresaid manners, speaking of the Supper, now by figure, now simply
and properly: so it is sometimes found, that in one selfsame place these two
manners of speaking have been usurped in their writings. As in a Canon of the
Council of Niece, where it is said: It was thus concluded of the table of the
Lord, and of the mystery which is thereupon: that is to say, of the worthy
body and blood of Jesus Christ. At the table of the Lord, we ought not to abide
tied here below to the bread and wine, which be there proposed: but to lift up
our hearts on high by faith, and meditate, that on this holy table, is proposed
unto us, the Lamb of God, which takes upon him the sins of the world; which
is sacrificed of the Priests, and not slain. And in communicating truly with
his precious body and blood, we ought to believe that these things be signs of
our resurrection. Whence we may see, how the Fathers in one selfsame place,
have spoken properly, calling bread and wine, the signs and Elements, which be
presented in the Supper: and also by figure, naming the same signs, the Lamb
of God, which takes upon him the sins of the world.

By that which is said, touching the said two manners of speaking, they which
read the scripture, and ancient Authors, ought to be admonished, carefully to
regard, that for default of well distinguishing the places, where the said
speeches are usurped, they do not confound them: taking that which ought to be
understood by figure, as if it were spoken properly: and that which is said
properly, as if it were understood by figure. And it behooves them always to
remember in the reading, as well of the scripture, as of the ancient Fathers,
what S. Augustine has written in his book De doctrina Christiana. We must
beware (says he) that we take not a figurative speech, according to the
letter: For hereunto must that be referred which the Apostle says: The
letter kills: and the spirit gives life. So that to understand that which is
spoken by figure, as if it were spoken properly, is fleshly wisdom. And in
the end of the Chapter he has one memorable sentence: namely, that it is a
miserable bondage of the soul, to take the signs, for the things signified:
and not to be able to lift up the eye of the spirit above the corporal
creature, to draw eternal life.

To come to the third part of the Supper, which is the spiritual and heavenly
thing, represented and proposed there unto us, as well in the Elements, as in
the whole action: the Ministers say, that it is Jesus Christ crucified, and
offered on the Cross to God his Father, for the whole and perfect expiation,
and satisfaction of all the sins of the world. And that to make us enjoy the
fruit of this sacrifice, and to apply unto our selves the righteousness,
forgiveness of sins, life, the grace of God, and all other favors and
blessings, which by the same sacrifice, have been purchased and obtained for
us: the word and Sacraments have been left and ordained for us, chiefly that of
the Supper: wherein, as in a picture, we behold Jesus Christ suffering for us,
the pains and sorrows of death, paying our debts, cancelling and adnulling
the handwriting which was contrary to us: bearing upon him our malediction,
to free us from the same: and by his obedience reconciling us to God his
Father, and appeasing his wrath toward us. All which things are represented
and assured unto us in the Supper: when with a true faith we present our selves
there, to celebrate the same.

The Supper then was not ordained to be a propitiatory sacrifice (as the
Doctors do teach, and as they falsely believe in the Roman Church) but to be a
Sacrament, to the end to renew and always conserve the memory which we
ought constantly to retain of the death and sacrifice of Jesus Christ. Now,
between a sacrifice, and a Sacrament, there is great difference. For as much
as in a sacrifice, we present our oblations unto God: and in a Sacrament, God
contrariwise offers and communicates unto us, his graces and gifts. Also in
a sacrifice for sin, there is the death and effusion of the blood of the Host
and sacrifice, and not in a Sacrament: but the only perception and applycation
of the fruit and effects of the sacrifice. In the Supper then, Jesus Christ
is not again sacrificed: but the fruits of his obedience, and merit of his
sacrifice are there distributed and received by the faithful.

Of the reasons aforesaid, do the Ministers conclude, that it is blasphemy and
sacrilege, to call the bread of the Mass, of a Romish Priest, a wholesome
host. And if for proof thereof, they would allege the Fathers, in whose
writings is found, that they call sometimes the Supper an oblation and
sacrifice: The Ministers answer, that first it naught appertains to the
Mass of the Priests: between which and the Supper, there is no agreement. And
afterward, that what the Fathers have said, they never understood it of the
propitiatory sacrifice: by which remission of sins is gotten and obtained.
And they have never believed nor thought, that there was any other sacrifice to
appease the wrath of God, and obtain reconciliation and agreement between him
and men, then the only sacrifice of Jesus Christ, made by him alone, one only
time upon the Cross. Three things then in brief, do the Ministers say:
first, that there neither is, nor can be other sacrificer of the new Testament,
then Christ Jesus.

The reasons are, because there is none but he, of whom it has been said: Thou
art a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedeck. Also there is none but
he, to whom may agree, and be fitly applied the conditions and essential
qualities of a sacrificer, and the sacrifice: Which are, that the Priest be
holy, innocent, without spot, separated from sinners, and made higher then the
heavens: which needed not to offer daily sacrifices, first for his own sins,
and then for the sins of the people. Also there is none but he, which is, nor
could be Mediator between God and men: which could satisfy the divine
justice: which is capable to bear and sustain the wrath of God: which could
tame and conquer death: which by his death, and proper blood, could work the
confirmation of the new Testament: and which (to be brief) could in favor
and contemplation of his merits and dignity, obtain of God remission of
sins, and the other graces needful for them which trust in him, and
instantly desire him.

Secondly the Ministers say, that there is no other sacrifice for sin, but
that of Jesus Christ: That he is the only Lamb which bears the sins of
the world: that there is nothing but his blood, whereby our filthiness is
washed: To be short, that God takes pleasure in no other sacrifice nor
oblation: and that he requires no other burnt sacrifice nor offering for
sin. And that therefore Jesus Christ (as it is written of him in the roll
of the law) is come, to do and accomplish the will of God his Father.

Thirdly, they say of the sacrifice of Jesus Christ, that it was one only, and
once offered by himself: without that it was ever needful afterward to
repeat and reiterate the same, considering the perfection and virtue thereof,
by which sin is abolished, and absolute and eternal sanctification obtained
to all the elect: as it appears in the 9. and 10. of the Hebrews. By means
whereof, no less blasphemy it is, nor a thing less contrary to the doctrine
and meaning of the Apostle, to approve the repetition and reiteration of the
sacrifice of Jesus Christ, then the plurality of sacrifices for sin. And if
the Doctors would (as they wontedly have) to disguise and color such an abuse,
show forth their distinction between the propitiatory and applicatory
sacrifice, saying* that the Priests pretend not in their Masses to sacrifice
Jesus Christ for other end, then to apply the merit of his death to those, for
whom they celebrate the same. The Ministers answer, that in so doing, they
should attribute unto Jesus Christ, more then they do: because all the fruit
of his sacrifice comes unto us, by the application thereof. As healing
comes not so much by the confection and preparation of the medicine, as by
the application of the same.

Furthermore, the Ministers would willingly demand of our Masters, by what
mean the benefit of the death of Jesus Christ, was applied to the Fathers
before his coming, seeing that as then they did sing no Masses? Well sees
every man of any spirit or judgment, that such distinctions are frivolous,
and only invented to obscure the truth, and dazell the eyes of the simple and
ignorant. For Jesus Christ who has offered the sacrifice, is he himself,
which applies the same unto us, by his spirit, his word, and his Sacraments.

To return then to their former speech, and declare why the Fathers have
called the Supper, and all the action thereof a sacrifice. It behooves to note,
that there are many sorts of sacrifices in the Supper: As the sacrifice of a
contrite Ps. 51.
heart, offered by public confession of sins which there is made. After the
sacrifice of our body, there offered Romans 12.
by public prayer, which follows the said confession. Thirdly, the sacrifice
of praise there offered, when they sing Psalms after the confession and
prayer. After comes the preaching of the Gospel, (which is called a
sacrifice, Romans 15.): then the confession and prayers ended, the Minister
presents himself to the people, to preach unto them the word of God. The
Alms (which Phil. 4. Heb. 13.
is an other kind of sacrifice) was heretofore brought forth in the Supper by
the faithful: which would thereby testify, not only their remembrance of the
graces and benefits of God: but also their love and desire they had to relieve
the necessities of their poor neighbors. Besides all these Sacrifices, there
are yet in the Supper two particular sacrifices, whereof mention is made in the
writings of the Fathers. The bread and the wine which were chosen and taken of
the Alms, brought thither for the poor, and were consecrated: that is to say,
deputed and appointed to the holy and sacred use of the Supper. The other is
the memory of the death and sacrifice of Jesus Christ, celebrated and repeated
in all the action of the Supper. The which, for this reason is called a Chap.
10.
Sacrifice by S. John Chrysostom, upon the Epistle to the Hebrews, when he
says: We make not every day other Sacrifice, then that of Jesus Christ. But
rather (says he correcting himself) we make the memory of that Sacrifice. S.
Ambrose calls it the memory of our redemption: To the end, that we
remembering our Redeemer, may obtain of him increase of his graces in us. S.
Augustine yet proposes it more clearly, under a comparison which he brings
of the days of the passion, and resurrection of Jesus Christ: which he thus
Epist 23.
applies: when the Feast of Easter approaches, we use often times this manner of
speech: To morrow, or within two days, we have the passion or resurrection of
Jesus Christ. That cannot properly be understood of the day wherein Jesus
Christ suffered death (which is long since passed): but only of the memory of
his death, which is solemnized and celebrated, as this day, every year. A
little after, to appropriate his comparison, he adds: Jesus Christ, has not
he been one only time offered in himself? And nevertheless in the Sacrament
of the Supper, not only on Easter day, but every day also, is he offered to
the people. Also elsewhere: Contra Faust lib. 20. cap. 21.
The flesh and blood of this Sacrifice, were before the coming of Jesus Christ,
promised by the figures of Sacrifices. In the passion of Jesus Christ, they
were given and offered in truth: And after the Ascension of Jesus Christ into
Heaven, they are celebrated by the Sacrament of remembrance. Of these and many
other like passages, one may deduct, that the Fathers have often called the
Supper a Sacrifice: by reason that in the same, the memory of the Sacrifice of
Jesus Christ is renewed and celebrated.

The name of Sacrifice, is by the Ancients often also applied to the Alms,
which the faithful brought forth in the Supper. As by Justin Martyr in the
second Apology: by S. Augustine in the 20. chap. of the 20. book Cotra Faust:
by S. Ciprian in the book de Elimosina: by S. John Chrysostom, Hom. 46. upon
S. Matthew. Which thing may also be verified by the Cano^ of the Mass it self,
where it is said: We offer to thy majesty part of thy gifts and benefits:
which ought to be referred to the Alms of the faithful, which the Minister in
the name of the whole Church offered to God. They have sometimes also called
the prayers there made, Sacrifices. As S. Ciprian upon the Lords Prayer. And
Eusebius in the 7. of the Ecclesiastical History. Tertullian in the 3. book
against Marcion: where, alleging that written in Malachy, [of the clean
offering], which ought to be made unto God, from the rising of the Sun, to
the going down of the same, says: that ought to be understood of the Hymns
and praises of God. Which S. Jerome (expounding the passage aforesaid) does
also confirm.

For conclusion of this matter, the Ministers say: that all the passages of the
books of the Fathers: wherein mention is made of Sacrifice, in the speech of
the Supper, ought to be referred to one of these kinds aforesaid. And that it
shall never be found, that they have said or written, or yet ever have thought,
that there was any other sacrifice Jesus Christ the only sacrifice
propiciatory of the new Testament.

The Sacrament improperly termed a Sacrifice; ^y reason of the co^currence of
these 5. Christian Sacrifices therein: namely: Contrit^o^, Mortification,
Praises, Alms and celebration of the memory of Christ. Every member of Christ's
Church a Priest.


propiciatory, then that alone, which Jesus Christ in his own body once
offered upon the Cross for our redemption. And that by means thereof, it is
certain, that in the Christian church, he ought to be acknowledged, the priest
of the new Testament. And as touching the other sacrifices, namely: of a
Contrite heart: of the Mortification of the flesh: of Praises and Alms: and
of the showing forth, and memory of the death of Jesus Christ: they say, that
it generally belongs to all the Church to offer them: And that there is no
faithful, nor any member in the whole body of the Church, which in this
respect, is not a Priest. As says S. Peter in the 2. Chapter of his first
Epistle. And S. John in the first Chapter of the Apocalips. And that we ought
for this cause, to offer in the Supper such Sacrifices unto God: As appears
by the same Cannon of their Mass, by them euilly understood, and applied to
the Sacrifice, which they pretend to make of the body and blood of Jesus
Christ; where it is said: For the which, we offer unto thee: or who offer unto
thee, etc.

Our saying of the Sacrifice, that it is common to all the Church, to offer
unto God, Sacrifice of praise: ought not to be slanderously interpreted: as if
we would confound the Ecclesiastical Ministry, with the said Priesthood; and
by that means, overthrow and disturb the order of the Church: attributing to
each one, authority and power to govern the same. For we know well, that the
callings be different among the people of God: And that it is needful, there
be in the Church, Pastors, and Doctors, and other Ministers (as Deacons and
Elders) to well guide and edify the same: as well by the daily preaching of
the word, as by the careful and diligent execution of other things which
concern their charges. But it behooves notwithstanding, to distinguish such
callings which be particular, from the Priesthood aforesaid: which ought to be
general, and common (as is said) to the whole Church.

It shall now be easy for all them, which will diligently observe the things
here before discovered, and showed The Mass is a corruption and ruin of
Christ's institution in his Supper.
forth by the word of God, to understand and judge, that the Mass, such as is
now celebrated in the Roman Church, is a whole corruption and overthrowing of
the institution of the Supper, which Jesus Christ made, and left in his Church.
So that it should be now impossible to acknowledge therein, one only trace or
mark of it first ordinance. For of a Sacrament which Jesus Christ left in his
The end of Christ's institution in the Sacrament, abolished by the Mass.
Church, to edify and entertain the same in a present memory of his death,
have they made a sacrifice; whereby the remembrance of that of Jesus Christ,
has bin wholly buried and interred. And herein is there a marvelous thing,
and worthy to be well marked. That is to say, that that which appertains not
but to the son of God The Priest in the Mass most impiously usurps the
proper offices of Christ himself.
only, and was impossible for any other but him to do: as to sacrifice for sin,
to reconcile men unto God, to appease his wrath toward them, and to make
intercession, to obtain for them his favor and aid; the Priests do attribute
to themselves. And that which to them was lawful, and commanded, and also
possible and easy to do: that is to say, to solemnize the memory of Jesus
Christ, and in taking and breaking, distributing and eating of the bread, and
drinking the wine, to show forth his death: they have wholly cast aside. So
that one may say, that the Priests do What Christ in celebration of his Supper
has commanded, that the Popish Priests in their Mass neglect: and what Christ
has not commanded, and is impossible for any but himself to do, dare they
attempt to do.
nothing of all that which Jesus Christ did, and commanded to be done in the
Supper. And that which he did upon the Cross, and that he never commanded man
to do, the Priests dare enterprise, and will do the same.

The errors and abuse, as well of Transubstantiation, as of the Priesthood, and
expiatorie sacrifice, and of the repetition, of the same, which be the
principal parts, and as it were the foundations of the Mass, have been
heretofore confuted, and sufficiently convinced by the word of God: and by the
reasons which have been alleged in the declaration of the parts of the Supper.
And nothing more remains to cast down this Idol, but to show, that that
which is in the Mass, (besides the abuses aforesaid) is not better, nor better
founded upon the word of God. For the adoration which there is made of the
bread and wine, is an Idolatry, condemned and accursed of God. And it is not
like, that Jesus Christ (instituting the Supper) would not have ordained it,
that S. Paul (recyting this institution, as he had received it of the Lord)
would not have taught it: and that the ancient Church would have omitted the
same, had it been a thing wherein God had been any way honored.

Afterward, the separation of the Priest from the people, is directly contrary
to the Article of the faith, of the Communion of the Church: and to the end,
for which the Supper was ordained, which is to confirm and entertain due
society among the faithful, and to bind them always more straightly one to
an other. And none can say, but that it is an intolerable presumption, and a
manifest contempt and disdain of the residue of Gods people. And a plain
mockery is that which the Doctos allege to excuse and cover such a sacrilege:
to wit, that the Mass of the Priests cease not to be good, when those that
are there present will not comunicate. For first it is forbidden them to eat
alone in the Supper. And a Supper it is not, where there is not a Communion: as
Saint Paul teaches, reproouing the Corinthians, because they departed one from
an other in 1. Cor. 11. 20. 21.
the celebration of their Supper. When (says he) ye come together therefore
into one place, this is not to eat the Supper of the Lord: For every man, when
they should eat, takes his own supper before. And teaching in the end of the
Chapter, the form which they ought to hold, he says unto them: Wherefore my
brethren, when ye come together to eat, tarry one for another. Furthermore,
often times it happens, that there are not in their Mass, but the Priest and
the little Clarke, which answers him: whom they will not receive to
communicate with them. Also, how can they excuse the Masses which are sung in
Monasteries: where the people are forbidden to communicate with the Monks,
which celebrate the same* Moreover, it is ordinarily seen in great Parishes of
this City of Paris, and elsewhere, even upon the days that the people
Communicate; that they are separated from the Priests, who do their business
apart, and will not vouchsafe to feed and communicate with them upon one table.
Also, what communion is there between the Priests and the people, seeing that
in stead of breaking in the assembly, one selfsame bread, (to the end that
all the partakers thereof, should be by that mean conjoined and more
straightly closed in one body) each one has his own particular: the Priest,
one more great, and the people, one less? Seeing also that the Cup is not any
way distributed to them? Furthermore, what duty do the Priests, to inuit and
exhort the people, to communicate with them? yea the Bishops themselves? who
would at this day repute it great shame to communicate with crafts-men, and
other inferior people.

To conclude, had the Doctors well noted the custom of the Fathers, which
caused the Cathecumenians, and others there (not prepared to communicate) to
depart the place where the Communion was celebrated: and that likewise which S.
John Chrysostom says thereof: they would shame to defend such an abuse and
impiety, as is that of their Mass. And that the people may not be ignorant
of that, which these In Epist. ad Ephesians. Sermon. 3.
holy Doctors thereof says, we will translate the same, word for word. It is in
vain that the daily sacrifice is made: It is in vain that we abide at the
Altar; there is no person which there communicates. I say not this to the end
that ye communicate in any sort soever; but that ye yield your selves worthy
thereof: Art thou not worthy to communicate? so art thou not worthy to pray.
Also a little after: If some one were called to a banquet, should wash his
hands, and sitting at the table, should not eat, nor taste ought of the meats
which should there be served: should he not dishonor and wrong him that
invited him? had it not bin better he had not come there? Even so it is with
thee. Thou art come, thou have sung the Psalm with the rest of the people:
thou have confessed that thou wast of the number of the worthy, in not
departing with them which are unworthy. How then abidest thou, and do not
perticipate of the table of the Lord? Thou say I am unworthy. I answer
thee, that thou art so: whereby also unworthy of the Communion of prayers.

Thirdly the gobbets and offalls of Gospels and Epistles, the Symbol, prayer,
and other pieces of the scripture, brought all confused, and not hanging
together, said and proposed to the people in an unknown language (against the
express commandment of God, and without any edification of the congregation)
is no other thing, then a vain usurpation of the name of God, against the
express prohibition which he has made thereof. And such robes are too
straight and short, to cover the shame and filthiness of the Mass.

Fourthly, what an execrable abuse is it to say, that the Mass serves to
obtain remission of sins; not only for the quick, but also for the dead?
And that the Priests (passing yet further, not to forget, or leave any
blasphemy behind) do divide their host into three parts: faigning one part to
be for them in heaven: an other for them which are on earth: and the third for
them in Purgatory. For the Sacrament which is not ordained but for
confirmation of the faith of the word: extends not further then the
Ministry, nor the Ministry further then this life. As then it is so, that
they which are in heaven, and they likewise whom they feign to be in
Purgatory, are dead and departed from An excellent note to prove the Mass a
shifting forgery
this world: we must necessarily conclude, that as the word cannot be preached
to them, so also the Sacraments cannot be administered to them. And if they be
not administered to them, that they can profit them nothing.

The end of the Resolution.
Answers to the last objections proposed by the Doctors, touching the Supper.
THe Ministers say, that many things there are in the said objections,
impertinent to the matter in question: as that they demand, how long the
doctrine abode in it purity, touching the Supper, and the other articles of
Religion. Whereunto they answer, that from the time of the Apostles
themsemselues, there were heretics and Antichrists: as Ebion, Cerinthus, Simon
Magus, the Samaritanes, and others: who by their errors* and heresies, went
then about to pervert the Aposto lique Churches, and corrupt the pure doctrine
which was therein. Wherevntothe Apostles, by all possible ways, did manfully
oppose themselves: reuoking and ever reducing all things to their first
institution, and foundation of the pure word of God: as we see, did S. Paul
toward the C^rinthians, and Galathians: whose Churches, although he had well
planted and watered, were nevertheless corrupred in his life time, as well in
manners, as in doctrine. And to that which the Doctors demand, how long after
the decease of the Apostles, continued the purity of the doctrine and Religion
in the Church of God, as well in the Article of the Supper, as in others: the
Ministers answer, that so long time it there continued, as the word of God was
followed and preached.

To that which the Doctors say afterward, (traducing the Supper celebrated in
the reformed Church) that the Ministers abuse those that are there present,
naught else giving them, but nothing between two dishes: the Ministers
answer: that this blason much better fitteth the Doctors, then them, because
they present not to them whom they have summoned to their Masses, but accide^ts
of indivisible waves, and the sight only of the forms of bread and wine to
feed them withal.

A little after do they call their sacrifice of the Mass most precious:
whereupon the Ministers grant that they have reason so to exault it: and to
attribute thereunto, so precious and magnificall a title, for the great
revenues and riches, which this precious sacrifice has brought unto them:
whereof may well be said, that it has been unto them a fleece, and golden Mine,
more abundant then ever was that of Jason; or all the Mines of the East. In as
much as they have made the world believe (and chiefly the founders of Abbayes,
Priories, and other benifices) that their sacrifices, were vaileable to them
for the redemption, remedy, and health of their souls. Afterward, without
all shame do the Doctors call the Supper of the Lord detestable, because there
is naught therein offered (say they) but common bread and wine. Whereunto the
Ministers answer, that in their Supper is truly presented bread and wine to
the people; which after consecration, abide in their substance, as before: but
they deny that therefore the said bread and wine be common: by reason (as
heretofore has been amply declared to the Doctors) that by the preaching of
the Gospel, and recytall of the ordinance of God, both the one and the other
is changed (as is said) touching the use, but not touching the nature.

To that wherein the Doctors do charge the Ministers, to make insurrections,
conuenticles, coniurations, conspiracies, and secret practices against the
state of their Prince, under color and pretext of their Supper; the Ministers
answer, that the same was not to impugn their doctrine, but rather shamelesly
to despite and slander them. And that the fidelity of those of the reformed
religion, has been known and proved, to the expense of their blood, and loss
of their lives. So that the King and his Council, by his Edict, has declared
them to have been very faithful and well affected subjects to his Majesty.
And we must not marvel if the Doctors thus slander the reformed Churches;
for as much as the Christians in all times have bin accused of like crimes, by
the enemies of the truth. As it appears by the Apology of Tertullian, and
the book of S. Augustine, de Ci^itate Dei: by the Tract of Saint Ciprian
against Demetrius: and by the book of Arnobius, which he wrote against the
Gentiles.

But the Ministers much marvel, how the Doctors are so ill advised, to allege
the suppers celebrated in the reformed Churches, to verify their accusations;
seeing that the same at this day, being throughout publicly done, in the eyes
and presence of them that will behold them: there is nothing therein hidden,
and whereof each one (if he will) may not easily be informed. But this is the
zeal and great charity of my Lords our masters (whereof they have heretofore
protested, and that by invocation of Gods name) which so transporteth them to
slander, without shame or show, those whose justice in that matter, shall
answer for them before God and men.

Touching that which the Doctors ^^erwards say, that in the Supper of the
Ministers, no consecration is made, of the matter of bread and wine, which be
there proposed. The Ministers do confess, that the bread and wine which be
truly in their Supper, are not consecrated in sort as the Doctors pretend to
consecrate them in their Mass: For so they approve not such a consecration.
But yet do they maintain, that there is in their Supper, consecration of the
matters aforesaid, in sort, as they in their articles, and resolution have
heretofore very largely declared.

The Doctors for proof and confirmation of that aforesaid, do add, that it
belongs not to all persons indifferently to consecrate the matter of the
Sacraments; but to them only, which are ordained by the laying on of hands of
the Roman Bishops: whereunto the Ministers for answer, say, that the first
point, they confess: and also (as elsewhere they have said) that calling is
necessary to such a purpose. But they deny unto the Doctors notwithstanding,
that this calling is the imposition which they pretend: and the Ministers
assure themselves, that their calling is more lawful, and better founded, then
is that of the Doctors.

Whereas the Doctors propose in the article following* that the Ministers have
not answered them clearly enough to their liking, touching the parts of the
Sacrament, and of the word required for the consecration of the matter, which
therein is. The Ministers answer, that there is no doubtfulnesse, obscurity,
nor any inuolution in their writings, saving that which the Doctors will find
therein: the judgment whereof, the Ministers refer to the upright readers.
And yet they hold it not more strange that the Doctors find their writings
obscure, then did Saint Paul, that his Gospel was hidden and covert, to them
which perished. And in whom the God of this world had blinded the minds.

To that of the presence of the body of Jesus Christ in the Supper, for which
the Doctors require of the Ministers, a more large declaration, then that they
have given in their former answer.

The Ministers say, that they have the^evnto clearly answered, albeit the
Doctor^ be not satisfied with their (...) whereat they nothing wonder, knowing
well it is not their custom to be contented if one yield not to them what they
demand, and desire. Which the Ministers have not determined to do, much less
to exceed in their answer the limits and bounds of the scripture* be it in this
article of the Supper, or in others: but rather to follow, as near as possibly
they can, the phrase and manner of speaking of the same. By means whereof, for
full answer, the Ministers acknowledge no other eating of the flesh and blood
of Jesus Christ, be it in the Supper, or out of the Supper, saving that which
Jesus Christ himself declares in the sixth Chapter of Saint John. Whosoever
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life. Also, He that
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwe^leth in me, and I in him. Also: As
the living Father has sent me so live I by the Father* And he that eats me,
even he shall live by me.

To the last Article, which is of Concomitance, the Ministers answer, that the
demand of the Doctors was not so hard but that they had well conceived it. But
they dissembled the same, because they would not loose time to speak and write
of such dreams. And they well thought that the Doctors were subtle enough, to
understand that in their denying Transubstantiation, it was not to pro^e their
Concomitance. Now for their satisfaction, they add, that they will know no
more then that which Jesus Christ himself has taught in his word. That is to
say, that in the Supper to participate in his flesh crucified, and blood shead
for the remission of sins, it behooves to take and eat the bread, and drink
the wine which be administered, without any way dividing or seperating the same.
Which thing is also forbidden by the Canons, De Consecr. Did. 2. C. Cu^ omne
Crimen.

Finished on Wednesday the 14. of August, in the year aforesaid.
This writing being sent, the Ministers went shortly after toward my Lord of
Neuers, to show unto him, that they for their part, had largely treated of this
matter: but they well perceived, that the Doctors by their frivolous and
impertinent questions, hitherto sought not, but to pass away the time, without
ought doing in the decyding of the Supper, and of the Mass. And albeit they
feigned* that such demands did serve for a preparatiue to this dispute: yet was
it to no other end, but not to enter thereinto at all: and to hold things in
suspense, until length of time should begin to be troublesome: and by that
mean, all should break off. That his lyking might be to make the Doctors
understand, that without turning this or that way, they should come to end the
difference: refuting that which the Ministers had maintained of the Supper, and
supporting that which they had condemned in their Mass. Which thing he
promised them to do. Of which promise, began the Ministers to hope thence
forward for some profitable matter, and serving to the edification of the
Readers, and rooting out of the greatest abuse and error that is in the Roman
Church. Nevertheless, shortly after was it bruted through the City, that
Doctor Vigor was fallen into a very dangerous disease, and whereof was no hope
he should hast^ly recover: which made the Ministers fear, that they were
frustrate of their hope. And yet more did they fear, when they understood,
that the Doctor de Saints, was the same time departed from Paris, and gone
toward Monsieur the Cardinal of Lorraine. For they could not otherwise
presume, but that they should make a long and unprofitable abode at Paris: not
having wherewithal to employ their time. Considering* they were not there but
by accident: to wit, that de Spina was come thither, to pass further, and make
a voyage into Aniou and the other, who was Minister of the Church of Orleance,
was lately come forth of prison, where he had been brought, in the Month of
June next precedent, upon a false accusation, suborned against him by the
enemies of Gods Church, which charged him to be author of a pernicious and
wicked book, written against the obedience, due to Kings and Princes.
Therefore was it very hurtful for him to so^ourn^ so long a time, in a City,
whither he came against his lyking.

For these causes, they purposed to return toward my Lord of Neuers, to show
unto him, the things aforesaid: and tell him, that De Saints (who might have
stayed and joined some other with him in the stead of Vigor) was departed
thence, without making it known when his return would be: that it was not
reason, they should stay there, being incertaine of that which they had to do:
and considering that their Churches had need of them, to execute therein their
charges: and that they desired the same. Notwithstanding, in the end they found
it better to suffer an inconvenience, and to abide there, until my Lord of
Neuers departed from Paris: as in the end of the Month of August he should go
to his own land called Co^lomiers. For seeing the Doctors were then absent,
(the Lord of Neuers being departed) the Ministers could do nothing: not having
whom to write unto, nor with whom to confer.

These remonstances being liked by the said Lord, he gave them leave to depart
by writing, signed, Lodouico de Gonzague: and below, Varin: Secretary. Dated
26. of August: wherein were declared the occasions, here before touched, and
remo^strance of the Ministers* with promise made by the said Lord, to cause the
answers which the Doctors would make, to be brought unto them. And that by the
mean of Monsieur de Buci, S. George, who was charged with this business.
Also, the Ministers promised to be ready, were it to return to Paris: or else
to answer from the place where they should be, as often as the Doctors should
write.

These things thus done and passed, the Ministers returned presently after;
supposing to have some speedy news from the Doctors. But they have attended,
and yet do attend, without that there has been any appearance thereof. And
they understood nothing of that matter, saving that many several writings were
afterward cried and sold through the City of Paris. In the tytles whereof,
some found mean to enterlace the word [Conference], to make show unto the
world, that it was something, touching the former disputations. And such a
subtlety indeed was not without great profit to the Printers. So great desire
had men to know the truth of the thing. For contentation of whom, we have
thought meet, to bring to light what was done concerning the same: reserving to
another time, to publish what the Doctors (when they shall do it) shall write
against it: and what the Ministers also will there unto answer, if they can
recover the same.

In the mean time shall each one be admonished to make profit of that which is
here contained. And to pray the Father of lights, to shead more and more the
brightness of his spirit upon his Church, to the true understanding of his
holy word: for the restoration, and advancement of the spiritual kingdom of
Jesus Christ his son, our Lord. So be it, the 8. of November, 1566.

FINIS.
A brief Table of the titles of the Acts of the Disputation.
THe Preface containing the occasions of the Dispute following.

The first day of the Disputation, which was Tuesday the 9. of July, 1566.
touching the assurance one ought to have of the word of God: and of the mean
to know what is the word of God: and to discern between the books of the
Bible: to call the one Canonical, and the other Apocripha.

The second day, being Wednesday, the 10. of July, touching the same matter:
with the resolution of the Doctors, concluding, that it is by the authority of
the Church, that the holy scripture is known to be the word of God: And the
resolution of the Ministers to the contrary: That it is the spirit of God
which seals and imprinteth the assurance thereof in the hearts of the elect.

The third day, being Thursday, the 11. of July, containing the demands and
answers upon the Creed of the Apostles: and why it is so called.

The fourth day, being Friday, the 12. of July: comprehending the resolution of
the Doctors: concluding, that it is by the tradition of the Church* that one is
assured of the Creed of the Apostles: And that of the Ministers, tending to
this: that it is known by the conformity which it has with the holy
scriptures.

The fifth day, being M^nday, the 15. of July: where is the beginning of the
disputation of Gods Omnipotency: under the covert whereof the Doctors do
ground four points, contained in the 63. Page. On this Omnipotency, and the
points above said, the disputes following: as well by word as by writing, were
continued.

The sixth day of the Dispute, Tuesday the 16. of July.

The Ministers answer to the objections of the Doctors, (...) Tuesday the 16.
of July.

The reply or objection of the Doctors, against the answer of the Ministers,
touching the article of Gods omnipotency, on Satterday the 20. of July.

The answer of the Ministers to the writing of the Doctors, sent to them, by
my Lord the Duke of Neuers, the 22. of July, about five of the clock in the
evening* the year, 1566.

The reply of the Doctors to the writing of the Ministers, sent to them by my
Lord the Duke of Neuers, the 25. day of July, about 8 of the clock in the
evening, the year, 1566.

The Resolution of the Doctors, touching the article of the Almightinesse of
God: in respect of the four questions proposed by them to the Ministers. Which
serve to the understanding of the real presence of the body and blood of Jesus
Christ in the holy Sacrament.

The articles proposed by the Doctors for the next, and other conferences
following, according to the order of the said articles.

The answer of the Ministers, to the writing of the Doctors, sent to them by
my Lord the Duke of Neuers, the 28. of July, about seven of the clock in the
evening, the year, 1566.

A brief resolution of all the answers and discourses which the Ministers
have made upon the matter of Gods omnipotency, in the conference which they
have had with the Doctors.

The answers to the preface of the Doctors questions.

The answers to the questions proposed by the Doctors, touching the Supper.

A brief reply of the Doctors against the last answer of the Ministers, sent
to them by my Lord the Duke of Niuernois, the first of August, at 7. of the
clock in the evening. Anno. 1566.

A brief advertisement of the Doctors, upon the resolution of the Ministers,
touching the omnipotency of God.

The objection of the Supper by the Doctors, against the answers of the
Ministers.

The answer of the Ministers, to the writing of the Doctors, and to them sent
by my Lord of Niuernois, Wednesday morning, the 7. of August. Anno. 1566.

The conclusion and resolution of the points, as well of the Supper, as of the
Mass, containing the declaration of that which the Ministers believe, and
teach in their Churches, by the word of God, concerning the same.

Answers to the last objections, proposed by the Doctors, touching the Supper.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page a* line 20. For some others, read any other* Pa. 6. li^ 1. next after
prayers, read thereof. Pa. 26. lin. 7. for therefore, there. Pa. 35. li. vlt. for
a it appears, as it appears Pa. 39. li. 20* for O^d, God. Pa. 48. lin. 31.
Or whether there any, Or whether there be any. Pa. 70. li. 13. After it may be,
put in [only] Pa. 71 li. 11. but those, then those. P. 73. li. 2. put out not.
Pa. 74 li. 3. Angelius, Angelus, Pa. 74 li 29 Hypostali, Hypostasy, pa. 78. li.
33. antecent, antecedent, pa. 80 li 37 without place, with place. pa. 83. li.
29. diverse virtues, a diverse virtue. pa. 84. l. 30* within, [with him] p. 85.
li. 36. Pamachiuns, Pamachius. p. 86. li. 27. Cirell, Cyril. pa. 87. in
margin, Sect 39. Sect. 29. pa. 88. li 17. read in the margin. Hebr. 4. 14. pa.
89. li 22. put out is. pa. 91. li. 29. spirituality, spiritualitie* pa. 92. li.
16. Theodoret, Theodor. pa. 92. li. 21. things better cleared, and things
better cleared. pa. 94. li. 2. summoning, ^ytation, li. 5. these words [they
said to be done] should be in the margin, and not in the text. pa. 103. Lin.
25. the term piercing, the term of piercing, pa. 105. Li. 16. these, those,
pa. 110. Li. 11. that God made one, that if God made one, pa. 111. Li. 15.
Aerilem, sterilem. pa 114. Lin. 33. speaks, speak. Ead. Lin. 36. p^ace,
place. pa. 115. Lin. 33, dimensions and of bodies, dimentions of bodies pa. 116
Lin. 12. Cod, God, pa. 119 Lin 28, the contradiction, the like contradiction,
pa. 120 Lin 10 clausa, clausae. pa. 121 Lin 24. Imagined, Imagine, pa. 122. Li.
10. octijs, ostijs, pa. 126 Li. 22. into, in, pa. 127 Lin, 11, Fantasmatiques*
Fantastiques, Lin 1^ wicith, with, pa. 129, Lin 7, that heavens, that the
heavens, pa. 136 L. 34, inequitie, iniquity. pa. 139. L. 1, of, for, pa. 140.
Lin 33. number and different, number and fashion different, pa 151. Line 7
withstansteth, withstandeth, pa. 155. lin 7. placle, place, pa. 156. Line 24,
Cod, God, pa. 16^. Line 4, deprivation, deprauation, pa. 173, Line 34,
scriture, scripture, pa. 180, Lin 34, words, works, pa. 183, Lin 34, but they,
but he, pa. 191, Lin 23, pure care, due care, pa. 195, Lin 7, fanets, fanels,
Lin 2^, imperfection, in it perfection, pa. 196, Lin 25, reception, receiving,
pa, 200, Line 6, Artice, Article, pa, 202, Line 34, vincentin, vincentium, pa.
207, Line 31, upon solid reason, upon any solid reason, pa. 209, Line 33,
Albeit, if, pa, 219, Line 22. they, read it, pa, 220, Line 26, spoke, speak,
pa, 2^2, Marg: Psalm, 37, ^3, Marg. 1 Cor: 13, 1 Cor: 15, pa. 233 Line 10, and
he, as he, pa* 237 Line 12, has as seals, has put as seals, pa. 240 Line 24
for the name bread, read the name of bread. Pa. 250. Margin, right under Cap.
10. read Hom. 17.


